THE SCRIPTURE-TERMS OF CHURCH-UNION, With respect to the Doctrine of the
TRINITY: CONFIRMED By the Unitarian Explications of the Beginning of St. John
's Gospel; Together with the Answers of the Unitarians; to the Chief Objections
made against them: Whereby it appears, that Men may be Unitarians, and Sincere
and Inquisitive, and that they ought not to be excluded out of the
Church Communion.

WITH A POSTSCRIPT, Wherein the Divinity of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost,
according to the Generality of the Terms of Scripture, is shown, not to be
Inconsistent with the Unitarian Systems.

Most Earnestly and Humbly Offered to the Consideration of those, on whom it is
most particularly incumbent to examine these Matters.

By A. L. Author of the Irenicum Magnum, etc.

LONDON: Printed, as abovementioned, to be communicated to learned and
inquisitive Persons, and those who are most obliged to inquire into these
Points.

Some TEXTS, Authorizing the Subject of this Writing.
PRove all things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Be ready to give an Answer to every Man, that
asks you a Reason, etc 1 Pet. 3.15. Whereto we have attained, let us walk by
the same Rule, Phil. 3.16. To the Law, and to the Testimony, etc. Isa. 8.20.
Search the Scriptures, John, 5.39. Let us follow after the things which make
for Peace, Romans 14.19. That I might by all means Save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. Let us
not therefore judge one another any more, Romans 14.13. What I tell you in
Darkness, that speak you in Light; and what ye hear in the Ear, that Preach ye
upon the House tops, Matt. 10.27. Overcome Evil with Good, Romans 12.21. To him
that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is Sin, Jam. 4.17. Who hold
the Truth in Unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. Whosoev^^ shall be ashamed of Me and
of my Words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when (...) ^^^eth in the
Glory of his Father, Mark, 8.38. They are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ,
Phil. 3.18. Is a Candle to be put under a Bushel? Mark 4.21. Relieve the
Oppressed, Isa. 1.17. We ought to obey God, Acts 5.29. Choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasu^^^ of Sin for a
season, Hebr. 11.25. If the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the
Ditch, Matt. 15.14. In Understanding be Men, 1 Cor. 14.20. They began to make
excuse, Luke 14.18. Wherefore when I came, was there no Man? Isa. 50.2. They
came not to the Help of the Lord, Judge. 5.23. I pray God, that it may not be
laid to their Charge, 2 Timothy 4.16. God has chosen the foolish things of the
World, to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 1.27. Truth fails, and he that departs
from evil makes himself a Prey. And the Lord saw it, and it d^spleased him
that there was no Judgment. And he saw that there was no Man, and wondered that
there was no Intercessour, Isa. 59.15.16. Whosoever shall not hear your words,
verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and
Gomorrha in the Day of Judgment, than for them, Matt, 10.14, 15. Now they have
no Cloak for their Sin, John 15.22. Let us therefore fear, lest a Promise being
left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short of it,
Hebr. 4.1. I speak as to wise Men, 1 Cor. 10.15. Whether in pretense, or in
truth; Christ is Preached, Phil. 1.18. He therefore that despises, despises
not Man, but God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. O that the Salvation were come to Israel! Ps.
14.7. We hid our Faces from him, Isa. 53.3. Blessed be he that comes in the
Name of the Lord. Ps. 118.26. God has made him both Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36.
The Son can do nothing of himself, John 5.19. The Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand, John 3.35. That at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow, -- to the Glory of the Father, Phil. 2.10, 11.
The TITLES of the CHAPTERS.
I. THE Occasion and Design of this Paper. Page 1. II. The Socinian Explication
of the Beginning of St. John's Gospel. p. 3. III. A Continuation of the
Socinian Explication of the Beginning of St. John's Gospel. p. 10. IV. The
Arian System. p. 15. V. The Answers of the Unitarians, to the Chief Objections
commonly made against their Expositions in general; and, first, the Answer to
the Objected Antiquity and Universality of the Trinitarian Sentiment. p. 18.
VI. A Continuation of the Answer, to the first Objection. p. 25. VII. A Farther
Continuation of the Answer, to the first Objection. p. 31. VIII. The Conclusion
of the Answer, to the first Objection. p. 46. IX. A Second (general) Objection,
against the Unitarian System, Answered. p. 50. X. A Third (general) Objection
stated, consisting of Four Branches. p. 60. XI. An Answer to the first Branch
of the Objection. p. 65. XII. An Answer to the second Branch of the Objection.
p. 69. XIII. An Answer to the third Branch of the Objection. p. 79. XIV. An
Answer to the fourth Branch of the Objection. p. 88. XV. The Inferences most
incontestably following from the whole foregoing Discourse, and the
Gospel-Terms of Communion. p. 96. A Postscript. p. 104.
A Table of the Chief Matters, Treated of in each Chapter.
In CHAPTER, I. THAT the Design of this Book is not to set up the Unitarian
Sentiment, but to vindicate and assert the Generality or Latitude of the
Scripture Terms of Church Communion, with respect to such (most intricate)
Points of Speculation. p. 1. That there are some things expressed in a great
Generality, and left extremely Obscure, in Scripture, on purpose to try (both)
our Industry and Sincerity, and our Charity, Christian Prudence and Moderation.
p. 1. and 2. That the Unitarian Controversy is of that Nature, that Men may be
Unitarians, and sincere and inquisitive; and that the Unitarians therefore
ought not to be excluded out of the Church Communion. p. 2. and 3.
In CHAP. II. In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God,
explained. p. 3. 4. 5. The reason of Christ's being called the Word. p. 5. In
what sense Christ the Word is called God, or a God. p. 6. etc.
In CHAP. III. The Creation by this Word, explained. p. 11. 12. The Word was
Flesh, explained. p. 12. 13. The remaining Verses explained. p 14. 15.
In CHAP. IV. The Proofs of the Arian System. p. 15. The Arian Notion of the
Word; viz. That thereby is meant the Chief Officer or Minister of God, the
first and most excellent Creature, a most sublime Spirit, in some respect like
the Holy Spirits or Holy Angels and Archangels, but yet of another kind than
they, and surpassing in excellency all other created Spirits, being
extraordinarily united to and assisted by the Divine Wisdom and the whole
Godhead; that this Divine Spirit is as it were the Mouth of God, or his
Word-bearer, and that, in process of time, taking Flesh of the Virgin Mary, by
the Power of God, it became the Soul of the Messiah. p. 15. 16. The Arian
Notion of the Creation of the Material World by the Word, and the Spirit, or
(according to some) the Holy Spirits, under God. p. 16. 17. That Christ in his
Agony was strengthened by an Angel, is no Argument against the Arian System. p.
18.
In CHAP. V. That the Authority of some Heathens, who spoke somewhat like the
Anti-Unitarians, does not credit the Trinitarian Cause, and can be made no
Argument against Unitarianism. p. 19. 20. That the Jews never held the Doctrine
of three Persons in God. p. 20. etc. The objected Passages, in Pliny's Letter,
and in a Dialogue ascribed to lucian, considered. p. 23. 24.
In CHAP. VI. That few of the Ante-nicene wrote, and it was not impossible for
them to deviate from the truth, and therefore it is certainly (...)
preposterous Way to seek to be tried by the Writings of the Fathers. p. 25. 26.
That several Books of the Primitive Writers most credibly were suppressed,
which favored the Unitarian Sentiment. p. 27. That of the few, remaining,
Ante-nicene Writers, it is credible that some are corrupted, and that some are
suppositious. p. 28. etc.
In CHAP. VII. That, nevertheless, it still appears, that the generality of the
Primitive Christians were really Unitarians, Nazerenes, Arians or Semi-Arians.
p. 31. etc. Some Chronological Remarks, or the Times in which some of the Chief
of the Ante-nicene Fathers lived. p. 36.
In CHAP. VIII. That the prevailing Sentiment of the Nicene and Post-nicene
Doctors, is of no weight against the Unitarians. p. 46 etc.
In CHAP. IX An Answer to this Objection, That the Work of Redemption, and what
the Scripture ascribes to our Savior, seems inconsistent with the Unitarian
System, it being impossible even for the most innocent and the most excellent
Creature, to reconcile God with those that have forfeited his Favor, to know
the Hearts, to forgive Sins, to govern the Universe, to raise the Dead, to
judge the World, and to do whatsoever the Father does. p. 50. etc. An Appendix
to the IXth. Chapter; being a Consideration of the Controversy, concerning the
Invocation of Christ. p. 56.
In CHAP. X. The stating of the third, and last, general Objection, (which
consists of four Branches,) to this effect: That the Unitarians their too much
leaning to Human Reason is the Cause of their Error, wherefore they should
consider, that Reason, though an excellent Light and Guide so far as its Province
and Capacity extends, is, in some most sublime Points, short-sighted and blind,
and consequently an incompetent Judge; then they might discern, that the
Unitarian Interpretations, besides that they imply most unlikely Assertions,
are forced and unnatural, and so remote from the obvious Import of the Words,
that it is not to be conceived the generality of Christians, when they read the
Scripture, can find out such Interpretations, and imagine that it is to be
understood in that Sense, and therefore it is incredible that that is the true
Meaning thereof; moreover, in opposition to all Reasonings, it is to be
observed, that there are many Texts of Scripture, which make up a strong
Evidence of the truth of the Trinitarian Sentiment, whereas, in fine, the Texts
that the Unitarians allege seem not express and positive for their System. p.
60
In CHAP. XI. That the Unitarians do not lay the whole or chief stress of their
Cause upon Arguments drawn from Reason: yet, very justly, on the other hand,
they think like all Protestants, that Reason ought not wholly to be slighted.
p. 66. etc.
In CHAP. XII. That none of the Unitarian Assertions are incredible, and that
their Interpretations are rational, and agreeable to the style and current of
Scripture and therefore natural and obvious enough p. 69. etc. Some further
Considerations concerning the Creation attributed to Christ in Scripture. p.
71. etc. What is to be understood by the Holy Spirit, more largely shown;
something also very particular specified, concerning what may be the Nature of
what the Scripture calls the Word, and the Creation. p. 73. etc.
In CHAP. XIII. That it is possible, and easy and warrantable, to understand in
an Unitarian sense all the Texts which the Trinitarians allege for their
Sentiment. p. 79. Some further Considerations, concerning the Worship and
Invocation of Christ. p. 80. etc.
In CHAP. XIV. That several Texts of Scripture are most express and evident,
for the Unitarian System. p. 88. etc.
In CHAP. XV. That, from the whole Dissertation, and the Gospel-Terms of
Communion, these four things are the least that can be inferr^d, in favor of
the Unitarians. p. 96. 1. That the State of this Controversy is such, that Men
may be Unitarians, and be very sincere, pious and inquisitive; and that if
Unitarianism be an Error, it is not a damnable and intolerable one, or a
Heresy. p. 97. 2. That, in our Terms of Church Communion, with relation to this
most abstruse and intricate Subject, We ought to keep to the Generality of the
Expressions of Scripture, and not to make any Public Determinations and
Impositions, which would drive away the Unitarians out of our Communion. p.
100. 3. That therefore, First, in the Public Service, We ought to address the
Current of our Prayers to God in general, in the Name and through the Mediation
of Christ, in the conclusion of them beseeching God to hear us, and grant us
our Requests, for the sake of his Dear Son, our Blessed Lord, Savior and
Redeemer; and so, when We address some Ejaculations to Christ, We ought in
general to address to him as to our Mediator, most highly exalted, and assisted
by the Divine Nature dwelling in him, as aforesaid: Secondly, in our Public
Service likewise, and the Terms of Church-Union, We ought to be content with
the Apostles Creed, which is worded in a Generality agreeable to that of
Scripture: Thirdly, no Subscription or Assent ought to be required of
Clergymen, in this Matter and its dependents, but to the Expressions of the
Scripture it self, or to Terms that agree to the Scripture-Generality, the
Clergy-Mens Declaration being admitted of and accepted, that they solemnly
subscribe and assent to any of those things, proposed to them, but so far as
they are agreeable to the Generality of Scripture. p. 101. 4. That this
Generality, in Terms of Church-Union, is a Safe Method, in so intricate a
Matter, and is incontestably Sufficient, all being certainly worshipped, when
in general God is prayed to, that is to be adored with Supreme Worship, and the
Mediatory Honor due to our Savior being paid him, when our Petitions are put
up in the Name of Christ, as our Intercessor and Redeemer, most beloved of God,
exalted at God's Right Hand, and in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwells. p.
102.
In the Postscript. I. That the strongest Arguments for the Divinity of
Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, are not inconsistent with Unitarianism. p. 104.
II. An Inquiry, Whether the Unitarians may join in Communion with a Trinitarian
Church? Of the Reasons of both sides of which Query, the Governors of the
Church are humbly desired to give their Opinion. p. 107. III. That what is
in^e^r'd from the Unitarian Arguments remains in force, and that it is an
indispensible D^^^ to pro^^ss and establish the Gospel Terms of Communion, and
to keep to the seeming Generality of Scripture for Terms of Church Union, with
relation to this Doctria, though the Trinitarians and some Unitarians should
opine that the Unitarians may with a good Conscience join in Communion with the
Trinitarians, and even though there were in God what might truly be called three
Persons. p. 108. Some Extracts out of Bishop Taylor's Liberty of Prophesying.
p. 111.

The End of the Table.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end.

Amen.
The ERRATA; And some few ADDITIONS.
PAGE 14. Line 43. after Mysteries add or designedly intricate Texts, which
either are sufficiently illustrated elsewhere, or the exact and full knowledge
whereof in all particulars is not indispensibly necessary. P. 24. L. 32. after
understanding it. add Perhaps by the Divine Word and Spirit, many Christians
then understood the Influences of two Divine Powers. P. 25. L. 33. for those
read these. P. 31. L 29. f. admited r. admited. P. 32. L. 10. f. to be Christ
r. to be the Christ. P. 34. L. 33. after implying, add (as the said Doctors
imagined, who, as was noted in the 26th. Page, held the Trinity of Plato and
that of the Gospel to be the same,) P. 34. L. 43. after seeming add to them. P.
35. L. 10. after peculiarly add and virtually. P. 35. L. 19. after and add as
was said. P. 47. L. 14. f. anther r. another. P. 74. L. 2. after things. add
Whatever Iniquity is committed in the World, it is through the Suggestion of the
Devils. Yet there is more Evildone in the World, than Good; though undoubtedly
there is a greater Number of good, than of bad Angels. Then, surely, at least
all the Holy Angels may suffice, to suggest the good Motions that are
necessary, in order to the Good that is done upon Earth. P. 83. L. 43. after
said, add In Sum. If the Scripture says in one Place that Christ is our
Mediator and exalted by God and made Lord, and in another that his Name is to
be called upon; is it not evident, that, joining those Places together, the
result thereof is, that We are to call upon Christ, as upon our Mediator,
exalted by God and made Lord? (Acts 2.36.) P. 85. L. 18. after observes, add
many of. P. 103. L. 41. after Reason. add But if Semi-Arianism be taken to
differ essentially from THIS System, it will appear to be encumbred with
insuperable Difficulties; and if it absolutely exacts the Use of the
Scholastic Trinitarian Terms, it will, as much as the Scholastic System, be
contrary to the Generality of the Terms of Scripture. P. 107. L. 32. after etc.
add Does it not seem contrary to the due Seriousness of Prayer, to address
distinctly to the Divine Wisdom, as to a distinct Person, in these terms, O GOD
the SON; as if the Divine Wisdom were the SON of another Divine Person?

THE SCRIPTURE-TERMS OF CHURCH-UNION, etc.
CHAPTER, I. The Occasion and Design of this Paper.
THE Apostle's Injunction (alone) of Proving all things, does Apologize for and
Justify the following Undertaking. The Design whereof, as will appear, is not
to set up the Socinian or Arian Sentiments, but further to Vindicate what on an
unshakable Foundation I have heretofore asserted concerning the Necessity of
Moderation with respect to these most Intricate Controversies, and to confirm
the Scripture-Method of Union which I have Pleaded for in "the Apology for the
Irenicum Magnum.

No Man can say, that there are no Difficulties in the Holy Scriptures, or that
there are there no Articles obscurely delivered. For who is he that will
pretend he Infallibly understands every thing spoken of in the Bible? If any
should ask, to what purpose the Scripture should make mention of such Matters,
as are supposed so very Obscure and Difficult, that it is not safe nor prudent
Magisterially to make express Determinations concerning them; I have answered,
that probably it is, to prove our Sincerity and Industry, (to try whether we
will take the Pains seriously and diligently to consider what Measures in
reason are here best to be followed in such Intricate Cases,) and so to
exercise our Humility and our Moderation. Undoubtedly these Obscure Matters
will be more fully discovered hereafter, and it seems God judges it will
suffice that we be then most clearly informed of them.

It is an ancient Saying, that the Holy Scripture is like a River, which a Lamb
may wade, and wherein Elephants may sometimes be forced to swim. That is to say;
Those that desire no other but to work out their Salvation, as the case is with
men of ordinary Capacities, may compass their design in the use of God's Word,
for they will find therein very clearly whatsoever is absolutely Necessary for
them: But the greatest Scholars, that would fain know every thing, and that are
bound to inquire as far as they can, will often be at a loss and shall not find
themselves able to dive to the bottom of several Particulars, though they be Men
of the sharpest Wit, as well as of the deepest Learning; witness especially
many Passages in the Apocalypse or Revelations. Wherefore it is evident, such
difficult Matters ought not to be Magisterially determined, not though in their
true Sense: The taking of them determinately in such a Sense, ought not to be
imposed, or made part of the Terms of Communion. For these things being so very
Difficult, Sincere and Inquisitive Men may mistake and differ about 'em, what
seems then sufficiently clear to one sometimes seeming otherwise to another,
and no one having right to decide Magisterially in such Cases more than
another; and it is credible, if the explicit knowledge and belief of these
things had been Indispensibly and Universally necessary, God would have
revealed them more distinctly and expressly.

The Apostle has this Expression, tho I understood all Mysteries. Which is an
evident Argument, that there are Mysteries in Religion, which the eminentest
Christians may misunderstand, or not know how to determine. And in the 14th. of
the Romans the same Apostle shows, that good Men may doubt, and be of different
Sentiments, in some Cases.

Now what do I propose as then fit to be done, but what the Apostle there
expressly enjoins, and is manifestly agreeable to the charitable and moderate
Temper of Christianity, and to the essential and avowed Principles of
Protestants?

I say, that in most abstruse and intricate Points, about which sincere and
inquisitive Persons may mistake and differ, we must not judge and reject one
another, but must unite in the utmost Generality of the very Expressions of
Scripture. The Reasonableness and Necessity of which Method of Union I have
evinced, in the (aforementioned) Irenicum Magnum, and it is Apology.

If it be asked how it shall be known, who are sincere and inquisitive Persons,
or what Points are so abstruse and intricate; I answer, that must be judged of
by the Arguments of the different Parties. And hereby I infer, that
Trinitarians and Unitarians ought to bear with one another, and so to order
their Terms of Church Communion as not to be a Stumbling Block to or as not to
fright away either of them, because actually both of them bring so considerable
Arguments in behalf of their Opinions, that it is obvious sincere and considering
Persons may not always be able to satisfy themselves which Side is most
infallibly or most credibly Certain; and, after all, when God is worshipped,
all is incontestably adored that is the Object of Divine Worship: We are
expressly commanded but to Pray directly to God in the Name or as the Disciples
of Christ, who hope to be heard for the sake of Christ and through his most
acceptable Intercession; and certainly as for Christ's Humanity, it being a
Creature and the Mediator between God and Men, it is to be honored with a
Mediatory or Inferior Honor, As for the rest, (which, then, if rightly taken,
would be but a Speculative Difference,) the Trinitarians, with seeming good
cause, are persuaded, that their Reasons are not despicable: And in the
Apologia pro Irenico Magno it is shown, that the Unitarian Arguments are far
from being inconsidorable. I do therefore conclude for Mutual Forbearance, and
Union upon the General Terms aforesaid. For upon the Evidence of both Sides, I
conceive, that this is a Controversy, in which Men without being Faulty may
mistake.

But against this my Sentiment, some Object, that that cannot be, because some
Texts of Scripture seem most Express against the Unitarians, and particularly
the Beginning of St. John's Gospel. It is therefore very just to consider what
the Unitarians say to those Texts. I might content my self to refer the Reader
to their Brief History, a Shilling Book, to be had at most Booksellers, wherein
the several Texts of Scripture, Objected to them, are Explained, from Genesis
to the Revelation. But in farther Vindication of my Proposal of the
Scripture-Method of Church Union, I am willing to give here an Ensample of the
Unitarian Explications, to show what they Answer in general to the Objection
from this Topic. And, because the Beginning of the Gospel of St. John is
commonly reckoned to be most Decisive against them, I have particularly pitched
upon that, to represent most evidently that even here they want not something to
say for themselves that is probable enough, tho it be not pretended that the
Controversy is thereby wholly cleared from all manner of Difficulty. They that
approve not that things be thus offered to be considered, run to the implicit
and slavish Faith of the Romanists, and take away that Liberty, which not only
the Principles of Protestants allow of and recommend, but which is necessary to
debate and examine difficult Matters, and to attain with rational assurance to
the Truth.

CHAP. II. The Socinian Explication of the Beginning of St. John's Gospel.
ST. John begins thus his Gospel. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God. etc. The Socinians esteem, that the
Primitive Christians understood these terms according to this System.

Verse, 1. In the Beginning. The Christian Economy being founded upon the
Mediation of Christ, (on the account of his being appointed thereunto, and of
his being a Man perfectly Innocent, and Obedient, even unto Death,) and not
only Fallen Men being granted to the Messiah, but all Creatures in Heaven and
Earth being subjected unto him, upon the Conditions of his Undertaking; the
Reformation, or New-Modelling of things, by that Illustrious Dispensation, is
compared to the Old Creation described in the 1st. Chapter of Genesis. If God
had not resolved to have sent a Redeemer, and if the New Covenant had not taken
place of the First Establishment, the Race of Mankind had perished. Therefore
the Saving it is figuratively represented as Creating of it anew, by the
glorious Performance of the Blessed Jesus, the Lamb in God's Prescience and
Foreordination Slain from the Foundation of the World. For when Adam fell, God
made a Resolution to send a new Man, assisted of the Spirit without measure,
directed in all points by the Eternal Wisdom what to do and suffer to make a
Reparation to the Divine Authority and to obtain the chief place in God's
Favor, and on consideration of his perfect Obedience and undeserved Sufferings
constituted the King of Men and Angels, and exalted to a Participation of the
Divine Power, always ready to work for him at his holy Request, that he might
be enabled to Save to the uttermost those that truly Repent and Turn unto God.
Wherefore God made a Gracious Promise to our First Parents, and from that
moment admitted them to Repentance. But though these were the Effects of God's
Resolution of sending Christ into the World, and even then the Gospel began in
some measure to dawn nevertheless the grand Operation and Manifestation of it
was not then made, Christ was not yet Born, and consequently not Personally
entered upon his Office. The First Age of the World therefore, though it was the
beginning of the New Covenant granted upon Christ's account, yet is not
expressly reckoned here as the beginning of Christ's Economy. That is taken
properly to commence many Ages after, when the Savior of the World was come in
Person, to do the will of God, and to Reform and New-model all things. Then it
is that there is represented as it were a New Creation made. Our Evangelist
sais, at the 3d. Ver. of this Chap. that all things were made by Jesus Christ.
Which the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews thus expresses; By his Son God
made the Worlds, Heb. 1, 2. And in the 5th. Verse of the 2d. Chapter of the
same Epistle, as in all the four Gospels, it is declared what those Worlds
were, and what that Creation was. Seeing then that the Christian Economy is
ushered in under the Image of a Creation, it is no wonder that the Evangelist,
alluding to the History of the Old Creation, begins his Gospel as Moses does
his First Chapter of the Genesis by these Words, In the beginning.

But it incontestably appears, by the 1st. and 2d. Verses of the 1st. Chapter
of St. Mark's Gospel, what that beginning was; Namely the beginning of Christ's
Dispensation, which is there shown to have begun when the Messiah was
introduced into the World by his immediate Harbinger John the Baptist. The
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God; As it is written in the
Prophets, Beho^d, I send my Messenger before thy Face, etc. Besides that our
Evangelist had seen St. Mark's Gospel, as well as those of St. Matthew and St.
Luke, we know the same Holy Spirit that dictated to the one, inspired also the
other, wherefore we must explain one Place of Scripture by another. And we are
to consider that St. John is writing the History of the Gospel of Christ. We
may therefore be sure, that by the beginning here spoken of is meant the
beginning of the New Dispensation that succeeded the Mosaical Economy, and
that that New Dispensation began by the Preaching of the immediate Forerunner
of the Savior of the World. For, we see, St. Mark calls that the beginning of
the Gospel. And thus it is evident St. John begins his History by our Savior's
Instalment or his Entering into his Office, which was at that time, when John
the Baptist was Baptizing, and when our Savior, being Thirty Years Old, was
Baptized of him.

The Word. The same term often denotes several things. By the Spirit, for
instance, several things are signified. In like manner, by the Word several
things may be implied* What here may be particularly meant thereby, we are
carefully to consi^er. If every thing be duly weighed, it will appear that our
Evangelist, to go on with his Allusion, calls the Author of the New Creation by
the Name of the Instrumental Cause to which the Old is attributed; Heaven and
Earth being represented in the First Chapter of Genesis as created by the Word
of God. And he had warrant enough to extend the Allusion so far, and to bestow
that Title to our Savior; seeing it was not unusual to give it to the Chief
Officers of Princes, (See Grotius, De Jure Belli et Pacis, Lib. 2. Cap. 8.. 5.)
and seeing the Heavenly Messengers of God, sent to execute his Commandments
upon Earth, were known to the Jews under the Name of his Word. ( Ps. 107.20.
Wisd. 18.15, 16. Which last is the Angel, by whom God smote the Firstborn of
Egypt, and who is called the Destroyer, Exodus 12.23. which Name appears to be
the Designation of the Office of an Angel, 1 Chronicles. 21.12. The Author of the
Wisdom of Solomon calls him the Almighty Word of God, according to his most
eloquent and figurative Style, not only to denote the Eminency of that Angel,
who was one of them that stand before the Divine Throne, but also to declare
his Swiftness and Ability in the executing his Commission, and to illustrate
the Fierceness of his Errand. Philo calls the Angels Logous, the Words of God,
as Dr. Allix himself observes) There is nothing more common in Scripture, than
to put the Abstract for the Concrete; as, we see, our Lord Jesus Christ
constantly calls himself the Way, the Truth, the Life, meaning, that He shows
the Way to Salvation, that He teaches the Truth, that He procures Eternal Life
to all them that will obey Him. By the same Figure He is called the Word, that
being as much as to say, that He is He who brings the Word of God concerning
the Eternal Gospel, and who is commissionated to do and to declare the Will of
God with respect to the Reconciliation of Fallen Mankind. Thus Origin (in Joh.
1.) interprets it. Seeing Christ is called the Light by reason of his
Enlightening the World, it is plain He is called the Word upon the Account of
his Office, etc. See the Accounts, why Christ is called the Word, judiciously
given by Pasor, in his Manuale, upon the word Logos, and by Beza, in his
Annotations, on this First Verse of the First Chapter of St. John's Gospel,
where he observes that Nazianzen and dustin give the same Reason with Origin,
why Christ is called the Word, or God's Word-Bearer by excellency, or the most
Eminent Minister and Executor of God's Commands.

Was. The Word was in the beginning of the New Economy: That is to say; While
John the Baptist was Preaching to the Jews, Christ was then in the World, and
was then the Person whom God intended and took for his Chief Word-Bearer.

And the Word was with God. This designed Ambassador of God, and Interpreter of
the whole Will of God, in whom the Divine Wisdom and Authority did most
Eminently reside, and most Conspicuously shine, who was all his Lifetime most
Extraordinarily Inspired and Assisted of the Holy Ghost, and of whom it was
foretold before his Nativity that He should be a Prince and a Savior, that He
should Save his People from their Sins, and that of his Kingdom there should be
no End, the World having been created for him, that thereby God might be
glorified^ this most Illustrious Person was, upon the Entering on his Office,
caught up to the Highest Heaven, that He might behold the Glory to which he was
called, that He might converse with God in the eminentest Place and with the
brightest Circumstances of Glory, that He might there be most Solemnly endued
with the Divine Wisdom and Power, and that He might there have the Honor to
receive immediately from God his Commission, and to be most particularly
taught, by God Himself, what he was to do and suffer, and how much reason there
was for him constantly to undergo and perform all this. (See John, 12.49, 50.
John, 8.38. John, 6.51. etc.) Thus, In the beginning, the Word was with God;
whether both in his Body and Soul, or with his Soul only, it matters not, for
the Mind properly is the Man. The Spirit of the Holy Jesus was then taken up
into the Highest Heaven. For he sais himself expressly, John, 3.13. that no Man
before Ascended up to that Heaven but He who came down from thence, even the
Son of Man by excellency, who was in Heaven, or had been caught up into Heaven.
For every one that understands the Original knows, that the Participle which
here our Version has Translated is, may as well be Translated was. And
accordingly it is thus Translated by Beza, Erasmus, Camerarius, and others on
the Place, John, 3.13.

And the Word was God. And this Holy and Immaculate Person, that was to be the
Great Messenger of the Gospel and the Author and Procurer of Salvation, was
then Installed in his Office. He was then Ordained, and Sanctified, and Sent
into the World. He was Solemnly constituted the Messiah. He was appointed the
Chief of the Chief of the Archangels as well as of the rest of the Angels. He
was made partaker, as much as possible, of the Divine Nature, and particularly
of the Divine Wisdom, and Divine Power, on certain conditions; only his fuller
communicating to others the Divine Spirit, was reserved to his actual Reigning
in Heaven, after his Resurrection and most Glorious Ascension. In a word, He
was declared to be, upon the performing of his Undertaking, the Heir and Lord
of every Creature. He was then, on these Terms, Proclaimed God's First
Minister. He was thus, even then, made a Prince, a Lord, a Sovereign, acting
for God, and by God's Commission. And that is what the term, God, often
signifies in Scripture. That most Noble and Glorious Name is there given to
Persons, commissionated by God, in most eminent Stations, not only because they
are God's Chief Ministers, but because, acting for and as it were in the stead
of God, they do in some measure represent Him. We see Exodus 23.21. that the
Angel, that conducted the Children of Israel, had that High Name and Dignity;
for, says God, my Name is in Him.

There is nothing more common in Scripture than for those Beings to be said to
be what they represent, as also what they are figured by. As Christ sais, that
He is the Door and the true Vine, and that the Consecrated Bread is his Body.
So Angels and other God's Messengers are said to be God, and are called
Jehovah. See Genesis 18.1. etc. Genesis 19.13. compared with the 18th. 24th. and
29th. Verses. Genesis 31.11. and 13. Exodus 3.2.4. and 6. Exodus 4.16. compared with
Exodus 7.1. Exodus 14.19. and 24. 1. Sam. 3.21. etc. (Bishop Tailor, in his Sermon
on 1. Sam. 15.22. observes, it is a Saying of the Jews, that Apostolus cujusque
est quisque, every Man's Messenger is himself, or is said and may be said to be
himself, and must be censed and reck'ned as himself.)

The Names of some of the Chief Angels are God, or the Great God; (which shows
that God is the same with Prince or Sovereign, such as was said:) As; Gabriel,
which signifies the Mighty God; and, Michael, which signifies Equal to God, or
Like the Highest. Agreably to which Denominations, the Samaritans thought they
might give to Simon Magus the Name of the Great Power of God, because probably
they conceited him to be assisted of some Mighty Angel. Act. 8.10. This Man is
the Great Power of God. The Superior Angels are called Gods, by Clemens
Alexandrinus. Strom. L. 5. P. 598. The whole Army, sais he, of Angels and Gods
is subjected to the Son. Whereby, as by many other Passages, it appears, the
Primitive Christians thought it not repugnant to Christianity, and the
Scripture-stile, to call others Gods besides Almighty God.

The Title of God is particularly given to some Men in Scripture. Exodus 7.1.
Moses is said to be God, or a God to Pharaoh, because he was sent on a
wonderful and extraordinary Errand to him by God, and was enabled to save and
to destroy him. Behold, sais God there to Moses, I have made thee a God to
Pharaoh, and Aaron thy Brother shall be thy Prophet.

This Text may put us in mind, or cause us to observe, that (as we shall see
was remarked by Eusebius Pamphilus, De Ecclesiastie. Theolog. Lib. 2. Cap. 17.)
St. John's Expression which we are considering should not be rendered the Word
was God, but the Word was a God; there being no Article here before the Term
God, (as there was in the foregoing Sentence where it was said that the Word
was with God, which Sentence therefore should have been Translated was with the
God by excellency, or the Supreme God, the Sovereign of all.) This Passage of
St. John would appear more easy to our Apprehension, if instead of the term God
we did read Lord, or Sovereign, because in the Style of our Modern Languages we
are not used to appropriate the Title of God to any Creatures as the Scripture
does, but are only wont to give the Appellation of Lord, in common, though in
diverse Senses, to God and to some Great Men in Authority. Thus then we may
conceive the First Verse of St. John's Gospel to run, according to its true
Signification. In the beginning of the New Economy, while John the Baptist was
Preaching the Baptism of Repentance as the immediate Introduction of the New
Dispensation, the Messiah himself was then in the World; And the Messiah was
with the Lord, as Moses was with the Angel in the Mountain before the giving of
the Law; And the Messiah was then constituted a Sovereign Lord, or the Chief of
those Princely Ministers and High Officers who have the Title of Lord or God
communicated to them, though in an Inferior Sense to what it imports when it is
attributed to the Eternal and Supreme Lord of all. And the Word was with the
God, and the Word was a God.

Our Savior himself observes, John 10.34. that the Title of God was given to
Men in the Holy Scripture: Is it not written in your Law, I said, Ye are Gods?
If He called them Gods, unto whom the Word of God came, (or to whom God gave a
High Commission,) and the Scripture cannot be broken; say ye of Him whom the
Father has Sanctified and Sent into the World, Thou Blasphemest; because I
said, I am the Son of God?

We must needs then ever remember, that the Style of Scripture differs from
ours, and that we must not Interpret every thing according to the Sound of
Words, but consistently with the whole Scripture and the clear notions of
Reason. Verba non Sono sed Sensu sapiunt, is an excellent Rule, and a Sentence
of St. Hilary's, quoted in Bishop Taylor's Second Sermon upon Tit. 2.7.

A notable Example of the Title of God being given to Men is that of the 45th.
Ps. at the 6. and 7. Ver. where the Author of this Psalm addresses himself thus
to Solomon, upon his Marriage with Pharach's Daughter, and his being declared
King or Heir of the Kingdom by his Father David. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever
and ever: Thou love Righteousness and hate Wickedness; wherefore, O God,
thy God has vnointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows. Here
Solomon is expressly called God. It is undoubted that this Psalm in a mystical
Sense is applicable to the Messiah, and to his Spiritual Marriage with the
Church. But the mystical and secundary does not take away the first and literal
Sense. And it would be most Unreasonable to pretend that this Psalm has no
literal Signification. It appears to be the usual way of the Holy Spirit, under
the Old Testament, to Shadow the things pertaining to the Christian Economy by
real Acts or literal Events then verified or belonging to those times under the
former Dispensations. And accordingly we find all the reason in the World, to
ascribe a literal Sense to this prophetical and mystical Psalm, and to
understand it primarily or originally of the said Wedding of King Solomon. We
find it has always been generally so understood. We find it as sitting for that
Solemnity as it could be supposed to have been if it had been made for it; and
we see it is entitled a Song of Love, or a Wedding Poem. The Prince is
represented as having his Title newly conferred upon and assured to him, and as
being preferred before his Fellows or Brethren, by his God or King. This suits
very well with Solomon's Case, and with the Secinian System. But it is
inconsistent with the Trinitarian Notions, as much as the Trinitarian
Interpretation is repugnant to the Truth of the Divine Unity. For if there be
but one God, can it be said to Him thy God has, etc? If the term God be here
taken in the most eminent Sense of it, there are two Supreme Gods; the one
spoken to, and the other spoken of and said to be the God of him that is spoken
to; and so a Supreme or Eternal and Infinite God has a God that is his
Superior, or, which implies the same thing, has a God that is his God and that
confers Honors and Benefits upon him; which is an Absurdity, no less than that
of supposing two absolutely Supreme or Essential Gods. Besides, a God, in the
most eminent Sense of the word, cannot be said to be anointed. For either his
Deity is not true, (or not truly perfect in it self, and so not absolutely
divine,) or else it is all-sufficient, and can need no anointing. Even a Man
Personally-United with God, if that were possible, cannot be supposed to be
anointed with the Assisting Spirit, seeing he cannot need it; for such a Person
must needs have in himself all that is Great and Necessary. Howbeit, it is the
God that is here spoken to: Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, etc. And
God, in fine, has no Fellows. Nor even has a God-Man Fellows, except there be
more God-Men, as there were more Kings Sons besides Solomon. For all these
reasons, therefore, those words of this Psalm cannot be understood as the
Adversaries of the Unitarians would understand them; and it does then appear,
that another is called God, besides the Supreme God. And so it is to no purpose
here to Object, that we do not read of any Children by Pharaoh's Daughter, and
that the Kingdom was not of long continuance in Solomon's Family, as we suppose
is here promised. First, these might be the Psalmists Wishes, which were very
natural on that Occasion, and seemed requisite, ex Epithalamii lege, says
Rivetus. But besides that, there are frequently in Scripture Conditional
Promises, even when the Condition is but Tacitly understood and not expressed.
And thus it might be promised to Solomon, that his Throne would be for ever, or
that the Kingdom would be of a very long Continuance in his Family, in Case he
and his Children remained true to their Duty. ( Ps. 132.13.) In like manner
Pharaohs Daughter might here be promised many Children, who would have been
accounted Great Lords and Princes in all the Land of Judea and in all the
Coasts of Israel: And the Reason why that Promise took no effect, might be
because she revolted to the Idolatry which undoubtedly she had abjured at her
Marriage. At the 10th. and 11th. Verses, the Psalmist addresses himself thus to
the Queen: Hearken, O Daughter; forget thine own People and thy Fathers House;
so shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty. Does not this Exhortation appear
very Suitable to a Princess come out of an Idolatrous Family? And at the same
time does it not hereby appear, that She is Married to a Prince in whose
Country Idolatry was not the National Religion? What Country that was, is
evident. And it is added in the following Verse, that the City of Tire, famous
for her Rich Trading, would bring Presents to the Queen. Which Suits well with
Solomens prosperous Reign. It must then be Unreasonable to suppose, that this
Psalm has not a literal Sense, or that that is not the literal Sense thereof,
which so well Suits with it, and which, as was observed, has always been
reputed to be its primary meaning by the Generality of the best and most
learned Interpreters in all Parties. There is therefore visibly all the Reason
in the World to believe, that it is Solomon that is here called God. And why
should any (though but the least number) among the Trinitarians be so averse to
own it; or what need is there to be at so much pains to put that matter out of
doubt? Are not Great Men, in other Places of Scripture, said to be Gods? I have
said, ye are Gods, Ps. 82.6. Ps. 138.1. and 4. etc. Why then should not Solomon
here be called God, that is, a Sovereign Prince, acting for God, by Gods
express Commission to that purpose, and so in some measure or in some respects
representing God. Have we not seen that our Savior himself observed it, that
they are called Gods unto whom the Word of God came? ( John. 10.35.) And at
what occasion did our Savior make that Observation? That also, to the purpose
before us, is well worth the being noted. It was when the Jews reproached to
him, that he Equalled himself to God, and, as they judged, made himself the
Most High God. And now what does he Answer to that Charge? Does he say, that he
was literally the Eternal God, and that a Second Divine Person was incarnate in
him; or does he leave any Room for any such conceit, or rather does he not
expressly obviate and refute it? This is manifestly the whole meaning of his
Answer. Why should you think, that I make my self the Most High God? Is it
because I am called God, or the Son of God? And don't you know that in your own
Law it is written of some Great Men, I have said ye are Gods and the Sons of
the Highest? Were those Men therefore to be reputed Homousian Sons of God, or
of the same Essence with the Father? No. Neither am I therefore any more to be
thought so. If we take not that Answer and Reasoning of our Savior's in this
Sense, it seems we make of it a mere Shuffling, and an Equivocating Discourse,
nothing to the purpose, and absolutely unworthy the Gravity of the Speaker, as
seems obvious upon an impartial Reading of the Text. John 10.33, 34, 35, 36.
The Jews answered him, Saying. For a good Work we Stone thee not, but for
Blasphemy, and because that thou being a Man, make thy self God. Jesus
answered them, Is it not Written in your Law, I said, Ye are Gods? If He called
them Gods, unto whom the Word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be Broken:
Say ye of Him whom the Father has Sanctified and Sent into the World; Thou
Blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?)
Howbeit, it does here suffice us, that we see there is no necessity to take
always the term God in the most eminent Sense, seeing that some Men in the
Scripture style are called Gods. For if we can take that term in an inferior
sense when applied to Men, we can show that there is a great deal of Reason to
understand it in that sense when appropriated to our Savior, who is the Word
or High Officer of God, and Chief Interpreter of the Divine Will, and who, as
to his Person, and Being, and Constitution, was in all things like unto us, yet
without Sin. Heb. 2.17. and 4.15. (It is to no purpose therefore for the
Trinitarians, to allege any Text where they think Christ is called God, unless
they can expressly show, that he is the Supreme God, actually equal to and of
the same Essence with the eternal God, and that the Father is not greater than
he.) I shall only add, concerning the aforesaid Answer of our Savior's that,
if he had been the Most High God, it seems, he dissembled it, at an occasion
that required the speaking it out; or else, as was said, it seems, there can be
shown no connection or coherence in his Reasoning. For so it would run,
according to the Trinitarian Exposition. Jesus answered them, are not some Men
called Gods in Scripture? How can ye then say of Me, that I Blaspheme, because
what I say, implies, I am the Most High God?

CHAP. III. A Continuation of the Socinian Explication.
BUT it is time to go on to what remains to be explained of the beginning of
St. John's Gospel. We have done with the First Verse, wherein it is generally
thought there lies the greatest Difficulty. In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God. That last Clause, the Word was
God, may seem to most of us the hardest expression; that was of speaking not
being usual with us, as was observed. But at the same time we have seen, that
the Scripture calls Kings and Great Men Gods: I have said Ye are Gods. We have
no reason therefore to think it strange, that the Messiah, the Highest Officer
in the World, the Prince of Men and Angels, and the King of Kings, should be
also honored there with the most Illustrious Title that was ever given to any
in the most eminent Station, and be accordingly called God, or a God, or
Sovereign Lord. The Scripture called them Gods, unto whom the Word of God came.
John, 10.35. That is to say, those whom God made his Chief Officers, and to
whom God gave Commandment and Commission to act in some measure in his stead.
Thus it appears Christ might well be called God; (the Mediatory Kingdom of the
Universe being given ^im, or he being made the Sovereign of all under the
Father:) Which being set into so great a light, we need but to paraphrase a few
Verses more, and give some reasons for our Exposition of one Expression or two
therein.

Verse 3. All that concerns the Establishment of the Christian Economy, and of
the Christian Church, (which is the New Creation,) has been dene by Christ, and
by his orders and procurement. Here on Earth, having Preached the Doctrine of
Repentance by his immediate Precursor and by his other Ministers, (as he had
even done in some measure before his Birth, by the Prophets and Patriarchs, for
it was upon his account that God sent them, the Messiah being before them in
God's Decree, and they being therefore to be looked upon as the Messiah's
Officers, and what the Officers do being to be ascribed to him in whose Name or
in whose Stead they act,) and himself having fully declared the nature and
intendment of the Gospel, He offered up himself as a Sacrifice for our Sins to
God; and thus, having laid the Foundation of his Church, confirmed his Doctrine
by his Resurrection and innumerable Miracles, and Commissionated his Apostles
and Chief Disciples, (all which may be called the Building of his House, which
he purchased with his Blood,) He left this World. Being alcended into Heaven,
He New-modelled things there too by his Presence. He ordered and disposed them
on a new foot and in a new manner. For, being exalted at the right hand of God,
He took possession of his Dignity and Authority of a Sovereign Prince in the
Heavenly Places. Angels were there then no longer God's Chief Ministers, but
were then most particularly subjected unto the Lord Jesus Christ; and He
appointed them their Stations, or confirmed them in their Places and Offices,
and He daily gives them orders and commissions, as he sees best, for the
Service of his Church and the Government of the Universe. (Yet it is not to be
forgotten, that Christ is but a Mediatory or Subordinate King, having not his
Kingdom of himself, but from the Father, and by the Fathers gift; wherefore the
Honor to be paid to Christ is not direct or ultimate, but Inferior and
Mediarory, to the Glory of the Father; Christ, though a Sovereign and the King of
a Creatures, being the Father's Substitute or Sub-delegate, and acting in the
Father's Name, and by the Father's Power and Wisdom: And therefore, he thus
representing God at the Head of the Universe, we accordingly honor him, and
worship the Divine Wisdom and Power in him.)

Verse 4. In him was Life. God was with him, directed and assisted him, and
dwelt in him. By him, then, Life was procured to fallen Mankind. And the Light
of his Doctrine, of his Works and Miracles, and of the Spirit, or Divine
Inspiration, dwelling in and communicated by him, was the Life of Men: He
brought Immortal Life to light through the Gospel; And God gave him Power to give
Eternal Life to his Obedient Disciples.

Verse 9. That was the true Light, which, coming into the World, lights all
Men, Jews and Gentiles. Our Savior, when he appeared in the World, did not
design to instruct a particular Nation only, but purposed to set up such a
Light as might shine to the utmost Parts of the Earth.

Verse 10. This Great Messenger of God appeared among Men, and Men were as it
were a new Created by him, for He Redeemed the Race of Mankind with his Blood;
yet the generality of Men perceived not that that Illustrious Person was Him
whom God did set forth for their Savior. Men loved Darkness rather than Light,
though it was so abundantly and so mercifully offered them.

Verse 11. He came unto his own, etc. If God had not intended to have given a
Savior to Men, as was said, He would have destroyed this World; but having
resolved, in the case of Man's F^ll, to provide a Redeemer, God had this
Intercessor in his eye and mind when He created our Heaven and Earth, (and some
understand in that Sense those expressions, that in the beginning the Word was
with God, that from the beginning this illustrious Messenger was designed to be
the Messiah, to be the Sovereign of the Universe, to be the great King most
eminently representing God, and the general Governor, for God, and in God's
stead, at God's right Hand, and that therefore God made this World by him, that
is to say, for him, and so by him intentionally, the business of his
Dispensation, to the highest Glory of God, being the final Cause of the
Creation of this World:) and accordingly when our Savior let upon his Office,
God, upon the Conditions of his Undertaking, gave Mankind to him, to be saved
and reformed by him, particularly those that had some good dispositions, and
primarily and especially the People of the Jews. These were then his own, most
peculiarly.

He made them: As it is said, in the foregoing Verse, he had made the World,
(or the World was made by him) in that he preserved them and all the World by
his Undertaking; seeing that, without it, after Adam's Fall, Mankind had
perished, like the fallen Angels. He ought then truly to be considered as the
Maker of Men, or as the Person from whom all fallen Men held their Life and
Being. And therefore without doubt, fallen Men, and among them the Jews in
particular, his Countrymen and the special People of God, may well be called
his own.

And his own received him not. These Men, to whom were given the Divine
Oracles, and among whom Christ was born, and lived, and did mighty Works, and
was baptized and proclaimed the Messiah by John the Baptist and by the Ho^y
Ghost; these blind and sensual Men, liked him not; they thought his Doctrine too
pure to be a Religion fit for them, and his Person too mean and despicable to
be their Deliverer. Thus the World knew him not and received him not,
notwithstanding all the Attestations of Heaven that this was their Maker, their
Savior, and the Mighty Prince that God designed them.

Verse 14. And the Word WAS Flesh. So we must render it, and not was made. It
is the same Expression that is used at the beginning of the 6th. Verse, where
it is said, There WAS a Man sent from God. If the Trinitarian Sentiment was not
impossible concerning three eternal and supremely Divine Persons, as it
expressly seems to be, yet it could not truly be said, that God was made Flesh.
But the Trinitarian Sentiment appears to imply many express Contradictions. It
seems therefore every way against Reason to render this Text as the
Trinitarians do. It must then be Translated as we have done. For, as was
observed, the term does bear that Sense.

The Word was Flesh. Flesh; that is to say, a mortal Man encompassed with all
the infirmities, or appearing in the low form and meanest circumstances, of
Human Nature, (not implying Sin.) See Hebr. 2.14. Mark. 13.20. Genesis 6.12. Deuteronomy.
5.26. Jerem. 12.12. 1. Cor. 15.50. That is then it seems of somewhat a greater
force and significancy than if the Evangelist had barely said, that the Messiah
was a Man; the saying that He was Flesh, being as much as to say, that, as to
his Nature and Being, he was but a Man, an ordinary Man, like other Men, a very
Man, or true Man, made up of Soul and Body, subject to Want and Temptation, to
Hunger and Thirst, and to all the like Frailties and Accidents of Human Nature.
(By the last quoted Texts it appears that this is imported by the term Flesh,
which in the Oriental Languages is a proper expression to that purpose, though in
our Tongue, like many other Scripture Phrases, it seems odd; but we ought to
remember, that the Bible was not originally written in English; we must
therefore carefully attend to the style of the Scripture, and explain one Place
by another, that we may understand it right.)

But though it be certain the Messiah, the Prime Minister and Chief Messenger of
God, was a poor mortal Man, subject to the Pains and Sufferings incident to
Humanity, from which miserable state and wretched circumstances, being
perfectly innocent, he might have been exempt, but to which, for the sake of
Men and for the Redemption of Mankind, he freely subjected himself; yet, as the
Evangelist at the same time does here observe, he was not without some
conspicuous and most illustrious. Rays of Glory, the Glory of being owned by
God for the Messiah, the Glory of bringing and procuring the most excellent
Revelation, and the Glory of working as great and as many Miracles as he
pleased, and when he pleased, such a Glory as declared that the Father dwelt
constantly in him, and as bespoke him to be the great Messenger or divine Word,
and the only-begotten or most beloved Son, of God. Such a Glory was seen in
him; as the Glory of the Son of God, or as a Glory worthy of the Son of God by
excellency. Nevertheless, to all other outward appearances and circumstances,
he was content to be as the meanest and most contemptible Men. And the Word was
Flesh.

Now it was very pertinent to the Design of the Evangelist, to use that
expression. For it seems to be his chief Aim, to show that Christ the Word was
but a Man. It is commonly thought, that he wrote his Gospel purposely to oppose
the Heresies of Cerinthus. We are told, ( Iren. L. 1. C. 25. and Eusebius. L. 3.
C. 25.) Cerinthus maintained, that Jesus, born of Mary, was not the Word or
Christ, but that the Christ, or the Logos, that is to say, the Word, the Divine
Messenger, or Wisdom, or Proclaimer of the Wisdom of God, was an Hypostasis, or
real Person, subsisting of it self, an Eternal and Divine Substance, different
from Jesus, but dwelling in him while he was on Earth, and working wondrous
Works by him. Now in opposition to this, St. John asserts that the Word was
Flesh, was truly a Man, and but a Man, a frail mortal Man, like other Men, though
indeed the most dignified of all Creatures, as he declares at the First Verse,
where he calls him a God, which is the Highest Name that Cerinthus gave to the
Word. Well; says St. John, the Word was a God, but then this God was but a Man,
though he was the Son of God, the Prince of all Creatures, and the designed Lord
of Men and Angels.

The Word was a God; and the Word was Flesh. That is then as if the Evangelist
had said: The Gnostics call the Word a God; so do I too; but at the same time
I declare that the Word is such a God as is but a Creature, and is no other but
the Man Jesus, who was God's only begotten Son, being born of a Virgin by the
Power of God, and who was anointed with and constantly assisted by the Holy
Spirit. This is the Christ, and the God Word. Those then are mere Fables, which
the Gnostics and Cerinthians hold, of the Christ his being an I know not what
uncreated Logos, and Divine Hypostasis, proceeding out of the Bythos or Abyss,
and ordered by the Father to dwell in the Man Jesus.

After all, it is not absolutely certain, whether St. John wrote against
Cerinthus. We have not so much as the Assertion of any one of the Ancients for
it, before St. Je^om. And as for Cerinthus his Opinions, though it may be that
some of 'em were extraordinary bad, yet we know nothing of them but by the
report of his Adversaries. And it is no new thing for such, to give but an
indifferent and imperfect account of the Sentiments of those that differ from
'em, and to raise Stories disadvantageous to them, which good Men, such as was
Ireneus, took afterward upon trust. Howbeit, we see that St. John decares the
Word to be the Man Jesus Christ, and in many Places of his Gospel shows him to
be a Creature. And, if Ireneus was well informed himself and has informed us
right, Cerinthus held this erroneous Opinion, that the Word is a real, eternal,
Divine Person, and consequently that there are more Divine Persons than one.
Those of Ireneus his Party, most probably, found fault with Cerinthus, because
(besides his Superstition for the Law) he had not the same Notion of the Word,
that they had. Cerinthus, it seems, believed the Word to be a real Divine
Person, equal to the Father, as the real Trinitarians do. And probably Ireneus
was an Arian, or at most a Semi-Arian. What Grotius says of the Occasion of St.
John's writting this Gospel, may be seen in his Annotations: The Unitarians,
consistently to their System, may hold all, that he there says of the Word.

Verse 15. John the Baptist bare witness of him, saying, This is he of whom I
spoke, He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he is before me. As
if the Baptist had said. Though, then, this Man, (as it is at the 30th. Verse,)
that comes after me, enters upon his Office but when I have almost done mine;
yet he is called to an Higher Office and Dignity than mine, for he is my
Superior, my Lord, and my Prince; he is the Messiah, the Savior of the World,
a most Holy Man, the Son of God, the designed Sovereign of the Universe; and I
am but his Servant and Harbinger.

Whereas the Vulgate has translated, This WAS he of whom I spoke, Beza shows
there is no reason but that it may be rendered, This IS he. In like manner, we
need not read he WAS before me, but he IS. Thus it runs more naturally. This is
he of whom I spoke, or said, He that comes after me, is preferred before me,
for he is before me.

Is preferred before me. That is then, is preferred to an Higher Office and
Dignity than mine. Which saying the Baptist explains (though somewhat obscurely,
as are expressed all the like Mysteries, on the infallible understanding of
which most credibly Salvation depends not, and which seem intended to try our
Humility and Moderation as well as our Attention and Industry) by adding.

For he is before me. Before me. Or, as it is in the Original, Protos mou,
Princeps meus, My Primate, the designed Head and Savior of the Church, and
Lord of Men and Angels. And this explains and particularizes, or intimates, how
Christ's Office is greater than that of the Baptist's. See Erasmus and Grotius
upon the Place.

Verse 18. Which is in the Bosom of the Father. Or which WAS, or has been,
namely, when, immediately before his entering on his Office, Christ was taken
up into the Highest Heavens, See John, 3.13. Sometimes that Phrase, to be in
the bosom, signifies to be most Dear. See Numb. 11.12. Deuteronomy. 13.6.

By these remarks and hypotheses, the Socinians conceive, the beginning of St.
John's Gospel is made plain and intelligible. And they believe that by the same
means, by using the like care and attention, all the other Texts, which the
Trinitarians object, may also be made to appear consistent with the Unity of
God, with the whole Scripture, and with Reason.

CHAP. IV. The ARIAN System.
THE Arians do not much dislike the foregoing Exposition, excepting that they
are persuaded it is short as to these Particulars, in that the Socinians do not
hold our Savior's Soul to have prae-existed before its Conception, and,
consequently, do not admit it to have been an Instrument in the first Creation
of the World: But the Arians maintain both these Points. It is true, say they,
the Word, the Son of God by excellency, is a Creature, (though most intimately
assisted of God, which the Socinians do not deny;) Christ is a true Man, made
up of a Body and Soul only, and not of an absolutely eternal Hypostasis also,
or infinite Person, of the same numerical Essence with the Father: But then,
say they, this Man's Soul was not only before Abraham, but even was the first
Created Spirit. ( John, 17.5.) For so the Scripture calls him expressly the
Firstborn of every Creature, or the Beginning of the Creation of God, and
terms him by eminency the Image of the invisible God; Col. 1.15. Revel. 3.14.
etc. Moreover it is asserted, that by him God made the Worlds; Heb. 1.2. And
St. John says positively, that without him was not any thing made that was
made; John, 1.3. Which expressions seem too extensive, to be restrained to the
New Creation only. All things then were made by him.

And therefore the Firstborn of every Creature must be so transcendently
Excellent, as incomparably farther to surpass originally all Men and Angels in
Excellency of Nature, Wisdom and Power, than they surpass the meanest of the
Brute Beasts. In a word, the Arians believe, that that Holy Spirit, whom the
Scripture calls the Firstborn, (and who in process of time was made the Soul
of the Messiah) is originally as Perfect a Being, and as like unto God, as
Divine and Almighty Power could produce, and as can possibly be imagined,
salving the Unity of God; seeing it is said he had a Part in the Creation of
the World, in which God most efficaciously assisted him, and it is represented
as the highest Liberality to Mankind that God gave his Son to Redeem Men. The
Arians then say, that the First-Bern is Om^^^ousian, or as like the Divine
Essence, beside that he is as much assisted by the Divine Nature, as it is
possible for a Creature to be. And they believe he was produced in the Duration
of Eternity, and before Time, that is to say, before the Creation of the World.
And in that sense, like the Semi-Arians, they will not scruple to say, that the
Firstborn is Eternal, so it be remembered that he was made, and that he is not
an uncreated Being, it being impossible there should be two uncreated Beings,
or two Gods in the proper sense of the word: But the Firstborn is a God next
to God, and as Eternal as it is possible for the Excellentest Creature to be.

If it be asked, how the Firstborn could be Instrumental in the making of
Angels; (...) may be answered, that a Part might be assigned to him therein,
that we know not (...) has been held by many, that the Souls of Men are
produced by the Parents. I^ so, it cannot be thought impossible, but that God
might have endued the most excellent created Spirit with Power to Produce other
Spirits. But perhaps Angels have fine Vehicles, which are Part of their Being,
as a Human Body is Part of a Man. And then the Firstborn might be assisting in
the preparing of these Vehicles, when God had Created the Substance thereof.

When the Firstborn was created, then was also another eminent Spirit (or
other eminent Spirits, according to some Modern Arians) produced, but inferior
to him, and called in Scripture the Holy Spirit. Thus far the Arians hold. It
may be that by this (or these) last, not only an Archangel, (or the Archangels,
1. Tim. 5.21.) but the whole Body of Angels, is to be understood; for they
often seem to be meant, when the Scripture speaks of the Holy Spirit: And, if
so, they also were instrumental in the Creation of the World, as well as the
Firstborn, though not so eminently as he, but under him. Which does not import,
that the Angels or the Firstborn produced Creatures into being out of Nothing.
But, the Chaos being created or prepared by Almighty God, then, for reasons not
perfectly known to us, God thought good to set the First born, and the Holy
Angels, in their several stations, to work upon it, and He directed and enabled
them to concur with Him in the disposing and setting of it into a regular frame
and beautiful and convenient order. (It is now the constant course of Nature,
that Creatures produce other Creatures. A like Power then, in an incomparably
higher degree, might undoubtedly be given by God to incomparably more excellent
Beings. It may be said that by the Sun all things in the World live and grow,
and that without him no living thing subsists or can subsist. And could God
create no intelligent, spiritual and invisible Beings, Superior to the Sun in
Power and Virtue? Why should we think the Material Sun to be God's Ne plus
ultra, or his powerfulest and excellentest Creature possible?) Thus then the
Holy Spirits of God, and, among the rest and in the Chiefest Place, that Most
Excellent Spirit which afterward took Flesh of the Virgin Ma^y, and was the
Soul of the ever Blessed Jesus, and next after him that Holy Spirit who is the
Chief of the Angels, or the select Angels, sat and moved upon the Face of the
Waters, and helped to give the Chaos a Motion and to hatch it into a World. It
is certain that God alone might as easily have done all this, as with the
concurrent Assistance of his Son, or Chief Minister, and of his Angels. But it
may be He had a mind thereby to exercise their Talents, and to try their
Obedience, Assiduity, Diligence, and Faithfulness in his Service. Probably it
adds to the Happiness of virtuous and holy Spirits to be doing something in the
service of God. It is also possible God would cause them to have a hand in that
Work, to endear the whole Creation to them, and them to all rational Creatures
according to the natural Duties of Gratitude. What has cost us some labor we
commonly have a great affection for, witness the love of Mothers to their
Children. It cannot then but be a great satisfaction to the Holy Spirits to
look upon Men as in some measure their Production as well as their Pupils. That
will naturally give them an extraordinary tenderness for Mankind. Now there is
a Pleasure in Love, and in doing good. And that the Holy Angels might not want
that rational, solid and durable Pleasure, God, according to this System,
thought good to employ them in his Works. It is then no Argument that God could
not employ them therein, because He is himself All-sufficient thereto, being
Almighty. Though God can easily do all things alone, and is properly the only
Creator, yet we daily see that He makes use of Instruments, or Means and Second
Causes. We have then no reason to stagger at that assertion of the Scripture,
that by and with that Holy Spirit that was born of the Virgin Mary, God had
made the World or drawn Order out of the Chaos, and disposed all the Parts of
the Universe in their due Places and Frame.

Though that Holy Spirit was the First born of every Creature and a most
excellent Image of God, yet, immediately after that he was produced, before the
being of Time or the Production of Angels and of the Material Creation, it may
be that God created many more Spirits of almost a like Kind and Dignity, or
incomparably above the Angelical Nature, and that the Soul of the Messiah had
then no Superiority besides that of Order over them, but these were in a manner
or in other respects equals, subject only to God, and equally Superior to the
Holy Angels, an equal number of the Angels and inferior Spirits being put, when
created as they were afterward, under those principal Lords, or Gods according
to the Scripture-stile. But when the Lord Jesus was become Man, and especially
after He had shed his Blood upon the Cross and was risen from the Dead and
ascended again into Heaven, then He was made the Prince and Sovereign, under
Almighty God, of all Archangels, as well as of all Angels and of all other
Creatures. It seems necessary to suppose that then began his Superiority over
all the sublimest Angels and all Creatures, because the Scripture represents
that as the Reward of his Obedience, and of the constant and faithful
Performance of his Undertaking. So that if there were no created Spirits of
almost the like Excellency with him, yet, from the very beginning that there
were Angels, there might be many Archangels, which were not wholly subjected to
him, though of a nature very much inferior to his, but had, like him, an
immediate access to God, and were then accountable to God alone, although at the
first, at their Creation, God had left it to the Firstborn to appoint to each
of them their Office and Station. Perhaps the Socinian Exposition is here to
take place, as to the Creation of Dominions and Powers by our Lord Jesus
Christ: and the Firstborn inherited not the Dominion till after the
Performance of his Undertaking for Mankind. And perhaps the Eternal
Continuation of Glory, was the Reward proposed to Christ.

These things may exactly be some of these ways, for ought any body knows. And
there is no reason to look upon the Arian System as incredible, upon the
account that during the Agony which our Blessed Savior underwent, a little
before his Passion, an Angel was sent to strengthen him. Creatures may sometime
need to be put in mind of those things which they already know. We daily see
that good Men are much comforted and edified by the Exhortations of other Men
like themselves, and sometimes inferior to themselves. Our Savior was become a
Man, and was then under such streights as are most dreadful to Human Nature. He
wanted therefore external Assistances, the Powers of his Spirit being depressed
to the Measure of a Human Soul at its Incarnation. But it was afterward raised
above its former Grandeur, being exalted to Sir at the right hand of God.

The first Verses of St. John's Gospel, and the other Texts relating to our
Lord Jesus Christ, are very easy and intelligible, being taken in a Sense
agreeable to this System. But as to the Holy Spirit, it may be the Scripture
means chiefly thereby the Holy Inspiration and an Influence of the Power of God.

CHAP. V. The Answers of the Unitarians, to the Chief Objections commonly made
against their Expositions in General; and First the Answer, to the Objected
Antiquity and Universality of the Trinitarian Sentiment.
THE Trinitarians urge, that all the Unitarian Expositions may in general, and
all at once, be confuted by this one consideration; That theirs is the old,
prevailing Sentiment. To evince which, besides the Writings of the Fathers
since the Council of Nice, and some Passages out of the Ante-nicene, they quote
Pliny's Letter to Trajan, wherein he acquaints him that Christians Sang Hymns
to Christ as to a God, and Lucian's Philopatris, where mention is made of the
God of Christians his being one in three and three in one. Now, say the
Trinitarians, it hereby appears that ours is the Primitive Doctrine, and that
it is most credible it is agreeable to the true sense of Scripture, it being the
general Sentiment of the Disciples of the Apostles, and their Successors in the
following Ages.

And, further to evince the Antiquity, Universality and Credibility of the
Trinitarian Doctrine, some add; that the ancient Jews and the Heathens have
believed a Trinity in Unity: to which purpose they quote Plato, Philo's Works,
the Cabbala, or Tradition, delivered from Father to Son since the time of
Moses, and the Chaldaick Paraphrase, wherein the Word of God seems to be
represented as a Person. To all this the Unitarians answer, in the following
Particulars.

(1.) The Jews have never held the Doctrine of three Persons in God: And as for
the Authority of the Heathens, it cannot much credit the Trinitarian Cause.

(2.) The Passages, in Pliny's Letter, and in the Dialogue entitled
Philopatris, are incontestably invalid Arguments.

(3.) No very considerable Argument can be drawn out of the Ante-nicene
Authors, because they were but few that wrote, and it was not impossible for
them to deviate from the Simplicity of the Gospel.

(4.) Many excellent Works of the Primitive Writers have been suppressed and
destroyed, which were most express for the Unitarian Sentiment.

(5.) Of the few remaining Writings, that are ascribed to the Fathers of the
first three Centuries, it is very credible that some are corrupted and some
supposititious.

(6.) Howbeit, it still in a great measure appears, that the generality of the
Primitive Christians were Unitarians, and even that the generality of the
remaining Authors of the first three Centuries were far enough from being of
that Opinion which now is called Orthodox, it being evident that they incline
more to the Unitarian than to the Trinitarian Sentiment of the latter Ages.

(7.) The prevailing Sentiment of the following Ages is of no weight against
the Unitarians.

(8.) The Prevalency in general of an Opinion is no Argument, that it is
agreeable to Truth and acceptable to God.

(9.) The only Authority therefore, that we can and ought to rely upon, is that
of the Bible.

(1.) The Jews have never held the Doctrine of three Persons in God: and as for
the Authority of the Heathens, it cannot much credit the Trinitarian Cause. The
Unitarians readily grant the Trinitarian Sentiment to be Heathenish, seeing it
effectually sets up a Plurality of Gods, or several supremely and really Divine
Persons: And they think it very probable that at first some Christians took
this Doctrine out of Plato's School, whose Philosophy was generally studied and
admired, though perhaps the original meaning of it as to this Point was little
understood or considered by the generality of his Disciples. For there is much
reason to believe that Plato, and those of the same Sentiment with him, who
believed but one God, at first personalized the essential or chief Attributes
of the Deity, to accommodate themselves to the Theology of the Heathens, to
hide and take off the Odium of their own Notions of the Divine Unity, which
otherwise would have been looked upon as next to Atheism, wherefore they would
seem to hold more Divine Persons or more Gods than one, it being reckoned
essential to Religion to own a Plurality of Gods: These Philosophers therefore
so reasoned about the Divine Attributes, as if they really held several
distinct Gods. Indeed it is very credible, that many of 'em afterward were
induced to Error by those Expressions, and Philosophized so high about them
that they lost themselves and understood not what they said. But as for Plato,
it is very likely that he meant by his several Persons but the several
Attributes of the same Divine Being; only he was willing to vail his Sentiment,
for fear of exposing himself to Socrates his fate, having no mind to suffer for
his Opinion. This appears in his Letters to Dyonisius, wherein he tells him; It
is difficult to find out the Father of the Universe, and when you have found
him it is not lawful to divulge it to the People. -- I shall then speak of this
subject enigmatically, that every one may not be able to understand me. He sets
up therefore a Trinity above all other Gods or Angels, and; as may be gathered
from his Cautiousness, from his Sentiment and that of Socrates of one God, and
from the Current of his Expressions, by this Trinity he understood infinite
Goodness, infinite Wisdom, and infinite Love or Power; but, to wrap up his
Doctrine under mysterious terms, he represents this Trinity as being three
Divine Hypostases or Persons: He says, the first is the Origin of the other
two; the Good Being or the first Principle is the Father of the Reason or
Wisdom, which he has begotten and made and produced, (and, so, it might be
considered by some as a Creature God, and the Firstborn of the Good Being;)
and the Love or Power is the third most excellent God, and the second
Production of the Good. This Theology, most obscurely expressed, Plato's
Followers have explained according to their own Imaginations, till they made it
by their Explications still more obscure and more unintelligible. But of what
Authority are these Philosophical Fancies and Heathenish Mysteries? Though it
seem to some that they may be accomodated to some Expressions in Scripture, yet
there is no reason to interpret Scripture by that fanciful and fantanstical
Rule, as is well observed by Beza, who calls those Philosophical Conceits
Platonica Deliria, in his Annotations on John, 1.1. Whether or no some Heathen
Sages before Plato, may then have had the like thoughts and design with him, so
that he was in some measure but an imitator of them; what is that also to
Christians? What if Parmenides had learned of the Pythagoreans, and Pythagoras
of Pherecides, the Notion of three Hypostases, so that the accommodation of
Polytheism to a dissembled Unitarianism was perhaps older than Plato by an Age
or two? And what if the Authors of this Theology, whoever they were, took these
Hypostases to be real Deities? Ought such an Egyptian Darkness to be of any
weight with Us? And can we make it a Question, Which is the best; either to
regard these Heathenish Philosophical Whimsies, or to be guided by the clear
Light of Reason and the most express Texts of Scripture? After all, the
Platonic Cant is so obscure, that, for ought that can be pretended to the
contrary, all that Platonism implies of a Trinity, may amount to no more than
Semi-Arianism or even Arianism.

As for the Opinion of the Jews. Though it be certain that the People of God were
Unitarians, yet it is not impossible but that a few of their Metaphysick Wits
might Philosophize after the way of Heathen, and be infatuated with Plato, and
conceive, as well as many Christians, that those strange and admired
Speculations might agree with Scripture, and be reconciled with the Doctrine of
the Unity of God. But of what consequence is the Particular Fancy of three or
four Visionaries to the whole Body of the Jews? Because these wanderers strayed
aside from the Simplicity of Religion, and preferred the arbitrary Notions of a
vain Philosophy before it; does it follow that the generality of the Jews were
Platonists?

As for Philo, Eusebius conjectures, and Photius expressly affirms, that he was
a Christian; if so, it must be a Platonic Christian, or kind of Semi-Arian.
Some then have thought it not impossible but that this Philo, whose Works we
have, is not he who went on the Embassage to Caligula, but is another Philo of
the Second Century: Neither do they think it impossible but that the Monks may
have very much corrupted his Writings. Indeed it seems improbable that a Jew
should have written all that is attributed to Philo. Howbeit, it suffices that
he was a Platonist, and had a great many extravagant Notions. See Mr. Nye's
Second Letter to a Peer, p. 66. etc.

After all, the Platonists, as was observed, are very obscure. And some
contend, that all that Philo says of a Trinity, amounts not above Arianism. See
Sandi. Hist. Eccl. enucl. Lib. 1. Secul. 1.

But what do we say of the Cabbala, or Traditionary Knowledge delivered from
Father to Son since the time of Moses? Why, in good earnest; what can we say of
it, but that it is a Chimera, a rabinnical Legend, a pharisaical Device, to
deceive the People, and make every thing pass as Sacred that the Doctors
please. All Protestants look upon Tradition, as a most unsafe and uncertain
Means of transmitting from Age to Age Divine Truths, and as no fixed Rule of
Religion. And we see Our Savior never mentions the Jewish Tradition but to
oppose it. After all, it can never be shown that the Cabbala asserts a Trinity
of Persons in God. Ever since that Doctrine has been broached, the generality of
the Jews have expressed the Offense they have taken at it, and have made it an
Objection against Christians. Origin says, that, though he had often disputed
with the Jewish Rabbis that were of most esteem, he never saw any of them
approve this Doctrine, that the Word is God, or a God, (in the Platonic or
Trinitarian Sense.) And he asserts, that it is not the Opinion of the Jews,
that the Messiah, whom they expect, is to be a God, or a Divin Person, but they
believe he is to be a mere Man, and an Earthly King. Con. Cells. L. 2. p. 79.
and L. 4. p. 162. See Bull. Judic. Eccl. p. 170. And in Mr. Nye's 2d. Letter to
a Peer, p. 50, 51, 52. you may see some more Quotations to the same purpose out
of Justin Martyr, St. Athanasius, and others. Indeed some Jewish Books treat
very mysteriously and sometimes almost unintelligibly of the Names and
Attributes of God. Howbeit, the Authors never meant thereby so many Divine
Persons, or any more than one such Person, the Jews all along strongly opposing
the Doctrine of more Persons than one in God. As for the manifestly forged
Writings of some Christians, they are not to be attributed to the Jews. See Mr.
Nye's 2d. Letter, p. 53. You may see his Account of the Cabbala, in his 3d.
Letter. p. 100. etc. Maimonides determines this Matter in these words; There
are some things, says he, in which Jews, Mahometans, and Christians, do agree.
-- But the Mahometans and Christians have diverse Doctrines, that are peculiar
to themselves; the Doctrine (for instance) of the Trinity is proper to
Christians, and to defend it they have been obliged to invent some very
singular Principles. More Nevochim. Part. 1. Chap. 71. Mr. Nigh has several
other Quotations to the same import, as also Vorstius in his Bilibra veritatis.

But what do we say to the Chaldee Paraphrase, which often mentions the Word of
God, and represents him as a Person? We say, perhaps it is not exactly known
what Philosophical Notions Onkelos and Jonathan might have, who were the
Authors of that Paraphrase; it may be they were Platonists, and accommodated
some of Plato's expressions to the Jewish Sentiments; howbeit, we do not doubt
but that all which they say of the Word is consistent with the Unitarian Sense,
and we are certain that (as we have shown) the Body of the Jews were
Unitarians. The same Expression then, in an Author, may sometimes be taken in
diverse Significations. The Word of God may sometimes signify the Message, and
sometimes the Messenger of God; sometimes the Command it self, and sometimes the
Person that carries the Divine Command to Men; sometimes a Divine Influence or a
Divine Virtue, the Wisdom and Energy of God, or his Inspiration, (figuratively
represented as a Person) or his Will and Decree, and sometimes a Creature in
Office and Dignity, an Archangel, a Minister of God, or one who acts for God,
and by God's Commission, and who in some measure represents him. By these
Observations it is easy to explain in an Unitarian Sense all the Places, where
the Chaldee Paraphrasts mention the Word of God. Probably they thereby commonly
understand, in speaking of God, the Wisdom of God attended and set forth with
Command and Authority in acting, which Word or Authority God sometimes
communicates in different manners or measures to some Creatures: And therefore
sometimes by the Word of God, they understand a Creature; for instance, at the
1st. Verse of the 110th. Psalm they give that Name to Solomon, because the
Kings of Israel were God's Deputies; and perhaps they interpreted that Verse,
like some other Places, of the Messiah, to whom it is applicable, and who, as
they expected, was to be a Temporal King of the House of David. No reason can
be assigned, why they could not give that. Title in that sense to the Messiah,
(holding him only as a Creature) though sometimes they gave it to some of God's
Attributes. Dr. Allix fancies that Philo actually personalized one of the Divin
Attributes, namely, the Divin Wisdom, whom he called the Word of God. Yet, as
we have before remarked, the Dr. himself observed, that Philo calls also Angels
in the Plural the Words of God. ( Philo. De Migrat. Abrah. p. 415.) The same
Title then may be given, both, to God, (or some Divin Influence or Divin
Virtue,) and to some Creatures, who act for God, and who peculiarly represent
him, and in and by whom he extraordinarily manifests his Wisdom and Authority.
What belongs to God may be accomodated, or figurativly attributed, to such
Crearures. And it is incontestable, that by the Word, in speaking of God, and
by the Divin Spirit, or the Breath of his Mouth, may be meant the Actings or
most eminent Manifestations of his Wisdom and Power.

As for such expressions as these in the Old Testament, O God I have waited for
thy Salvation, when they are accommodated to the Messiah or the times of the
Messiah, they may import no more than this, O God I have waited for thy Succor,
or the Deliverance of thy People from the Power of their Enemies, by the means
of thy Victorious Messenger, the Great King of Israel. Howbeit, the Messiah,
acting for God and being a King, might be called God, as well as Solomon, Ps.
45. and with much greater reason.

We cannot better conclude this Article than with two Observations in Dr.
Bull's Book, Judicium Ecclesiae. In the first Ages of Christianity, it was a
great Controversy between some Christians and the Jews; whether the Messiah,
according to the descriptions given of him in the Old Testament, is to be God,
or a Man only? Those Christians believed, He is represented in the Old
Testament, as God, or a God; the Jews, as a mere Man. Judic. Eccl. p. 15, 16.
And at p. 21. the Dr. adds, Our Savior puts this Question to the Pharisees;
Whose Son is Christ? They answered, says the Text, the Son of David. But if
Christ, says our Savior again, is the Son of David; why then does David call
him Lord? The Evangelist remarks hereupon; they were not able to answer him a
word. But had they known any thing of the Divinity of the Messiah, the Solution
of the proposed Difficulty had been most easy and obvious to 'em. We may then
conclude, the Jews believed only that the Christ was to be a Great King in this
World, but not a Great King in the next, and much less did they imagine He
should be God in a Superior Sense than this, whether in the Arian or
Tritheistick Sense. So that the Generality of the Jews were as certainly
Unitarians, as the Generality of the Heathens were Polytheists. And as for the
Conceits of the objected Philosophers, we have seen that their Speculations are
of as little Importance and Authority, as they are mysterious and uncertain,
obscure and unintelligible.

(2.) The Passages, in Pliny's Letter, and in the Dialogue entitled
Philopatris, are incontestably invalid Arguments. The Passage in Pliny's
Letter, so much objected to the Unitarians, is, that, he says, Christians, in
their Meetings, Sang Hymns to Christ, ut Deo, as being a God. To this the
Unitarians give the following answers. First; it is probable that Passage is
corrupted, and instead of ut Deo we should read et Deo; for so it was in the
Copies in Tertullian's time. Tertul. Apol. adv. Gentes. C. 3. And then the
Meaning being that Christians Sang Hymns to Christ AND to God, that is so far
from implying that they held Christ to be God Almighty himself, that it shows
the contrary, Christ being there distinguished from God. And his being joined
with God, in Hymns Sang to both their Praise, argues no more his being God
himself, than it would argue that Jael is God, because she is blessed as well
as God in the same Psalm of Praise. Judge. 5.2. Praise ye the Lord for the
avenging of Israel. And at the 24th. Verse, Blessed above Women shall Jael be.
Deborah also her self, the Composer of this Hymn, and Barack, the Governors of
Israel, and the Princes of Issachar are praised at the 7th. 9th. 12th. and
15th. Verses. Thus in the 5th. Chapter of the Revelations, Men and Angels are
represented Singing Hymns both to God and Christ, saying, Blessing, Honor,
Glory, and Power, be unto Him that siteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever. Worthy is the Lamb, that was Slain, to receive Power, and
Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor and Glory, and Blessing. And the
four and twenty Elders said, Worthy is the Lamb, for he was Slain, and has
redeemed us to God by his Blood, etc. Which, by the way it may be observed,
shows what incontestably Christians ought to do, viz. (though not to address
direct and ultimate Prayers, yet) to Sing Hymns, in Honor, to Christ; which may
be looked upon as the true Interpretation of Ps. 72.15. (spiritually
accommodated to Christ,) besides that there is no doubt but that the Angels and
the Holy Spirits in Heaven may daily present Requests and Petitions to Christ,
concerning particular Men and Churches; and when Christ is seen, he is to be
addressed unto by Men, as their Savior, and their Sovereign under God.
Moreover, the generality of the Unitarians ever held, that Christ is to be
Worshipped, and Prayed to, as the Mediator of the New Covenant, and the
Vicegerent of the Universe, constantly assisted with the Divin Wisdom and
Power, to the Glory of the Father, according to God's appointment.

Secondly; reading Vt Deo, that may signify, either as being God, or as being a
God, and as if he were God, that is, were held God, or a God. If the former;
that might be Pliny's own mistaken Conjecture, that because he understood
Christians Sang Christ's Praises, he therefore imagined they took him for the
Supreme God. But indeed it is most unlikely that this was Pliny's Meaning; for,
being used himself according to the Heathen Rites to Sing Hymns to others
besides the Supreme God or (supposed) Supreme Gods, it seems he could not upon
this account conclude that Christians believed Christ to be God Almighty
himself. It seems therefore he could only mean, that Christians Sang Hymns in
Praise of Christ, as believing him to be A GOD. By which Phrase the Heathens
themselves knew 'twas not necessary to understand the Supreme God. For as the
Scripture calls some Creatures Gods, so the Heathens, though groundlesly, yet,
often, gave that Title to several whom they knew and owned to be Created
Beings. And in Chap. 2d. we have seen that Christians in those times made no
difficulty to do the like, where (whether now right or wrong is another
Question) they thought they had warrant from Scripture to give that Appellation
to some glorified Creatures; and therefore there is no doubt but that, since
many of them gave it to Angels in an inferior Sense, they much more gave it to
Christ, the Sovereign of all Angels as well as Men, though they believed him to
be but such a dignified Creature.

If Pliny's Meaning was, as it is not impossible but that the Expression may
import, that Christians Sang to Christ, as if he were held God, or a God; that
is quite contrary to what Trinitarians would have him to attest. For then it is
as if he had said, that Christians Sang to Christ, as if they had believed him
to be God, or a God, which yet, according to this, it should seem, they
believed not. But most probably not this, but the foregoing, was Pliny's Sense,
if we must read VT Deo, namely, as to a God, or as to one whom they held for a
God.

As for the Dialogue entitled Philopatris, wherein mention is made of the God
who is Three and One, One and Three; the best Critics own it not to be a
Dialogue of Lucian's, as the Translators themselves observe. We have many
instances of several Treatises, joined, either by chance or out of design, to
some Authors Works, that yet belong not to that Author. It may then very well
be, that that Dialogue is much later than Lucian. But if it were Lucian's, what
could the Trinitarians infer from thence, but that there were then some
Christians that believed a Platonic Trinity, and that Lucian was acquainted
with some of them, or had confusedly heard of that strange Doctrine, and took
occasion to mention it? Yet the original Meaning of that Mystery might be, that
Christians looked on the Son and Spirit as Divine or most Sublime Persons next
to God, and one or as one with God, being of the like Nature or of the like
Affections with Him, and being, together with Him, above all Angels as well as
above all Men, whereby, however, was constituted but one Divine Government, the
Holy Scripture owning properly but one God, and the Primitive Christians so
understanding it. Howbeit, it is reckoned that Lucian flourished about the middle
of the Second Century. And the Unitarians own, that the Evangelical Doctrine
concerning the Divin Unity was then begun to be corrupted. On the other hand,
Trinitarians will not, cannot, deny, but that Vnitarianism was professed at
least by many Christians from the beginning of Christianity. Wherefore the
Trinitarian Plea of Antiquity appears vain, unless it could be shown that the
Unitarian Doctrine was not allowed of in the earliest times of the Church, and
was not the Sentiment of the Apostles themselves.

CHAP. VI. A Continuation of the Answer, to the First Objection.
(3.) NO very considerable Argument can be drawn out of the Antenicens Authors,
because they were but few that wrote, and it was not impossible for them to
deviate from the Simplicity of the Gospel. Therefore certainly it is a
preposterous Way, to seek to be tried by the Writings of the Fathers. Good
Christians, as Origin observes, (Pref. Operis contra Cells.) reckoned, in those
Primitive times, that Christianity was better taught and defended by an
innocent and exemplary Life, than by a multitude of Writings. Which shows, that
they esteemed the essence of Christian Religion to consist, not in abstruse
Notions, or strange Mysteries, and many Points of Speculation, but in plain
Doctrines, (few in number, easy to be remembered, if Men would have been content
with them, and worthy of all acceptance,) and in natural Precepts, agreeable to
right Reason, approved to every Man's Conscience, and but a new Transcript and
Confirmation of the Light of Nature. They were persuaded, that Sincere
Repentance, according to the tenor of the Gospel, and Holy Living and the
Habitual Practice of Virtue, proceeding from a Principle of Faith that God is,
and that through Christ He will reward them that diligently seek him, and will
render to all Men according to their Deeds, was the Way to Heaven and the Sum
of Christianity. They thought it not necessary therefore to write many Books,
looking upon Christianity but as Natural Religion revived and confirmed by
Christ, or by God in and by the Ministry of Christ, with the addition only of
the two Sacraments and Praying to God in the Name of Christ, as our Mediator
and Intercessor, the Procurer and Chief Minister of the Covenant of
Reconciliation, the Head of the Church, the Savior of Men, and the Governor of
the World, to whom all Power was given for the Administration of the Universe
under God, and who is constantly assisted by the Spirit of God, which he has
the privilege to communicate to his Disciples, as it is sufficiently declared
in the Writings of the New Testament. Christian Religion, thus conceived and
understood, is soon taught and learnt, and therefore needs not many Glosses and
Comments, according to the Oracle in Jeremiah, 31.34. And it seems the
generality of the Primitive Christians had this Idea of Christianity as may be
shown by the Relics we have of them, or even by the Writings of their
Successors though those went farther. ( The same God, who gave the two Covenants,
is He who gave Philosophy to the Greeks. Clem. Alex. Strom. L. 6. Our Faith is
agreeable to the Common, Innate, Notions of all Mankind. Origin. Contr. Cells. L.
3. The Law of Nature is the Chief of all Laws. Id. Ib. L. 5. The Dispensation
of the Gospel, is the Restoration of the Primitive Religion, which was in force
before the Law of Moses. Eusebius. Them. Ev. L. 1. C. 6. The Religion which we now
call Christian, is the same with that since the beginning. Aug. Retract. L. 1.
The Sacrifices, that God requires of us, are an upright Heart, a pure Mind, and
a clear Conscience. -- These are our Sacrifices, these are our Mysteries, Min.
Fell. Octav. See Dr. Cave's Primit, Christianity.)
There were therefore, after the inspired Writers, but very few (and most of
those either too great Admirers of Human Learning or Fanciful Men) that then
wrote, as appears from them that remain, and as cannot with any reason be
denied.

And it was not impossible for such as these to deviate from the Simplicity of
the Gospel. The generality of the Primitive Christians were plain and
illiterate Men, who contented themselves with the Writings of the Evangelists
and Apostles, and stuck to them as their only Rule. These were not like to
become Innovators. They studied only how to acquit themselves of their Duty,
and prepare for Martyrdom, to which they were daily exposed. But when Learned
and Fanciful Men embraced Christianity, especially those who had been Disciples
to the Heathen Philosophers, they soon looked for new Mysteries in the Gospel,
and supposed they made great Discoveries therein by the means of their
Philosophy, which they always had in great esteem. They accomodated therefore
as much they could the Expressions of the New Testament to their Philosophical
Systems. And thus the Mysteries of the Platonic Trinity, were by degrees
introduced among Philosophizing Christians. These are not bare Conjectures.

Dalaeus, in the 1st. Chapter of his 1st. Book De usu Patrum, gives a List of
the few Primitive Writers, that we have, whose Works are Genuine and
Incontestable: But, even making the Catalogue as it is commonly made, yet the
generality of them, that were Heathenish Converts, prove to be Philosophers,
that always retained a high veneration for their Philosophy. It Is well known,
they were professed Platonists to the end, and therefore it is no wonder if in
some measure they accommodated Christianity to the Philosophy of Plato.

Justin Martyr said, that the Opinions of Plato are not remote from those of
Jesus Christ. And the same was affirmed by Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin,
Tertullian, and the rest of the Platonic Fathers, who expounded the beginning
of St. John's Gospel by Plato's most obscure Notions of his Logos or Second
God. See Le Clere's Lives of Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea,
etc. p. 28.29.84.85. etc.

Men that were such admirers of the Heathenish Philosophy, were easily disposed
to think that St. John's Meaning was much the same with their Philosopher's
Sentiment, when they perceived some Likeness between their Terms. It is not at
all strange therefore, if they introduced some change in the Christian Doctrine,
especially considering that their Interpretations seemed to make for the Glory
of Christ and the Honor of Christianity, which without doubt in its native
Simplicity appeared to Pagans to be too mean, and too much destitute of Sublime
Mysteries.

In Circumstances less favorable for Novelty than these, Alterations are soon
made in Religion; witness the speedy Corruption of the Children of Israel, who,
after a few days that Moses had been absent from them, and they being still
under the conduct of his Brother Aaron, fell to Idolatry. Thus, as Hegesippus
testifies, the Apostles were no sooner departed, but manifold Errors mightily
spread. (See Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. L. 3. C. 26.)

What a weak thing then is it for the Trinitarians, to stop their ears to the
Dictates of Right Reason and to several Texts of Scripture which are express
against them, and to pretend that we ought to be determined by the fanciful
Writings of a few fallible Men, most of whom came some considerable while after
the Decease of the Apostles*

The Church of England, since the Reformation, has had several Learned Writers,
and in these late times especially. If any of their Works remain a thousand
Years hence, we may (humanly) suppose, in case the Doctrines therein contained
continue to be liked, it will be the Writings of Pearson, Stillingfleet,
Cudworth, Tillotson, Burnet, Scot, Cave, Towerson, and some few others of the
like kind. But what should we think of our Posterity, if they then pretended
that the way to find out the Original Meaning of our Articles concerning
Predestination and Free Will, would be to interpret them by the Sentiments laid
down and established or intimated in most of these Great Men's Books?

Thus we have observed, that in the first three Centuries not only few
Christians wrote in comparison of what they have done since, but it was not
impossible even for them considerably to alter the Primitive Sentiments or the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

(4.) Many excellent Works of the Primitive Writers have been suppressed and
destroyed, which were most express for the Unitarian Sentiment. The
Trinitarians themselves regret many of those Writings of the Primitive
Christians of the first three Centuries, which appear to have been suppressed
and destroyed. Dalaeus, in the first Chapter of his first Book De usu Patrum,
acknowledges, that, though there were but few that then wrote, yet the greatest
part of those few Writings have been lost, through the injury of Time, or the
Fraud of Men, presuming that those Books were not to be preserved that were not
altogether or near enough agreeable to their Sentiments. Such were, says he, the
five Books of Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, the Apology of Quadratus, the
Apology of Aristides, the Works of Castor Agrippa, the five Books of
Hegesippus, the Works of Melito Bishop of Sardis, the Works of Dyonisius of
Corinth, of Appollinaris of Hierapolis, of Pinytus the Cretian, of Philippus,
Musanus, Modestus, Bardesanes, Pantaenus, Rhodo, Miltiades, Apolloninus,
Serapion, Bacchylus, Polyerates, Heraclius, Maximus, Hammonius, Trypho,
Hippolites, Julius, Africanus, Dyonisue Alexandrinus, and others.

If we had had left us such Writings as those of Hegesippus, or any
Ecclesiastical History of some professed Unitarian, either senior or but
contemporary to Eusebius, no doubt we should hear of several other Writers, who
expressly taught Vnitarianism, besides those mentioned by Dalaeus; like
Theodotion, Aquila, Symmachus, Paulus Patriarch of Antioch, Theodorus of
Byzantium, Artemas, Apollonides, Hermophilus, Lucianus, and others; seeing the
Jewish Converts, as shall be shown, appear for several Centuries to have been
Unitarians, and it is credible not only that the Gentile Christians likewise
were so originally, but also that the generality or greatest part of them
continued such for some time, even when the Alterations began to be made, till
the rigid Platonists made use of all manner of violence to extirpate the Truth.

Howbeit, the Critics, who have written impartially concerning the Ante-nicen^
Fathers, are of opinion that the Writings of about 200 of them are lost, for
about 20 others, some of whose Works have been preserved, we may say such as
they are, though, probably, not such altogether (as we shall observe) as they
originally were. And they impute this Loss to the Errors, which they suppose
were contained in those Books, and which the Trinitarian Party, when they were
become the strongest and were thoroughly settled, thought sit to Suppress as much
as they could.

H. Valesius, in his first Note on Eusebius. L. 5. C. 11. speaking of the
Hypotyposes of St. Clemens, (concerning which, Photius had observed that they
are full of Arianism, as that the Son is but a Creature, and such like,) notes
hereupon, that not only the Hypotyposes of Clemens, but the Works of
Hegesippus, Papias, and other Primitive (Ante-nicene) Fathers, were, for the
Errors abounding therein, slighted, and lost. Which is in effect to say, that
the too visible and express Agreement of the generality or greatest part of the
most ancient Fathers and Doctors with the Unitarians, was the Cause that their
Writings have been destroyed.

The Trinitarians cannot but know, that the Arians offered to be tried by the
Tradition and Fathers of the first three Centuries, and that Athanasius
declined it, as Bishop Tailor in particular confesses, in his Book, entitled,
The Liberty of Prophesying, Sect. 5. Numb. 3. p. 85. 4 to. (His Authorities may
there be seen.) And, in Chap. 7th. we shall see, from a Quotation out of
Eusebius, that the other Unitarians appealed also to the Tradition of the first
two Centuries.

Now does n't it become Trinitarians well, to make a bustle about Antiquity, as
if the Catholic Church in all Ages had unanimously been against the Unitarians.

The Unitarians indeed were at length overpowered by the riotous, and violent.
Platonic Christians, who at last did in a great measure Philosophize away
Christianity. Yet there is not the least grounds to imagine, that the Writings
of the Unitarians deserved to be slighted. For the Trinitarians themselves,
that had seen their Books, own, that the Unitarians were Men of great and
extraordinary Learning. See Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. L. 5. C. 28. The World, no
doubt, might now be expermentally convinced of it, as we before said, had we
all the Writings of the ancient Fathers of the first and second Centuries, such
as the Writings of Papias, the Book of Melito Bishop of Sardis entitled Of the
Creation and Birth of Christ, the History of Hegesippus, and the Works of those
other Doctors, some of whom we have seen named in the List which Dalaeus
collected out of Eusebius and Tertullian and Jerome, and who in all probability
were for the most part of the same Sentiment that Arius maintained afterward,
by reason whereof it is likely, as was shown, their Books were finally
suppressed by the Nicene (Platonic) Trinitarians, and their followers, as no
doubt it was begun by the other (violent and rigid) Platonists that were before
the Council of Nice.

That Hegesippus was incontestably Unitarian, and what the Consequence of it
is, see an English Pamphlet, entitled, The Judgment of the Fathers concerning
the Doctrine of the the Trinity; Opposed to Dr. Bull's Defense of the Nicene
Faith, p. 41. etc. The only Objection is; that Eusebius does not reprove
Hegesippus for being an Unitarian. But it may be observed, that Eusebius, though
he professed the Nicone Trinitarianism, was a Semi-Arian, and favored the
Arians; and perhaps he thought good to excuse Hegesippus, notwithstanding what
he himself professed, as several learned Men in the Church of Rome defend
Jansenius, at the same time that they openly abjure Jansenism.

(5.) Of the few remaining Writings, that are ascribed to the Fathers of the
first three Centuries, it is very credible that some are Corrupted and some
Suppositious. For instance, the Shepherd of Hermas and the Epistle of Barnabas,
in Easecius's time, were reckoned to be Supposititious. ( Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. L.
3. C. 25.) And Dalaeus has particularly concended, that the Epistles of
Ignatius deserve no credit. Indeed those Sentiments have been thought by some
(and in particular by the Socinians) to have been foisted therein, which the
Semi-Arian Fathers did afterward openly maintain^ Yet some contend that those
Writings expressly contain the same Doctrine that was originally Apostolical, and
afterward defended by Arius when it had been disguised by the Platonists.
Howbeit, it is certain those that had either particular Opinions of their own,
or particular interests to serve, made often no scruple to forge some Writings
favoring them, which, in order to gain them the more credit, they ascribed to
some Great Men. Several Apocryphal Books were put out under the Apostles's
Names. How much more then, says Dalaeus, would they make bold with others? Nay,
he observes that the Fathers themselves have been guilty of such Frauds. See
the third Chap. of his first Book De usu Patrum.

And you need but read his following Chapter, to see that the genuine Writings
of the Fathers have been corrupted. St. Jerome complains of the Impudence of
Copists in corrupting of Books. ( Ep. 28. ad Lucin. T. 1. p. 247.) And yet he
owns, that himself, in translating Origin, omitted what was noxious or
dangerous, that is, what suited not to his own Sentiments, and says that St.
Hilary and others did the like. You may see the Quotations, and many more
Allegations to the same purpose, in that Chapter of Dalaeus, where he quotes
Epiphanius his Saying, that the Catholics scrupled not to correct or put out
some things in the Scripture it self, fearing the use that the Heretics might
make of those Passages. Dalaeus determines not whether Epiphanius spoke true or
not herein, but he infers from thence that those ancient Catholics would have
made no difficulty, to correct in like manner as much as they could the
Writings of the Primitive Fathers, where they widely differed from the
Sentiments that had prevailed, and where those that were reckoned Heretics
might have found too undeniable Authorities for their Opinions. After this, can
those be blamed, who will be determined by nothing but the Current of Scripture
and the most incontestable Axioms of Reason.

Such Catholics as Dalaeus represents to us, we may think, made no great
scrupse to invent Stories that might favor them, or to give easily credit to
such though upon the weakest Grounds, and to use such like shifts to defend what
they took for Truth; Witness the Book of Hermas, and what Jerome owns of
himself, and of the freedom he thought in such cases lawful to take. A Man,
says he, argues as he pleases. He may make a show of presenting you with Bread,
as says the Proverb, and all the while he may hold nothing but a Stone. He may
say one thing, and think another. Consider the Arguments made use of by
Origenes, Methodius, Eusebius, Appollinaris. They are often forced to allege
many things, which they did not believe, but which were necessary to support
their Sentiments. I say nothing of the Latin Authors, Tertullian, Cyprian,
Minucius, Victorinus, Lactantius, Hilary, lest I should seem to accuse others
rather than defend my self. ( Ep. 50. ad Pamm. T. 2. p. 136.) When I write my
Books, says he, I call for my Copist or Amanuensis, and I often dictate the
thoughts of others that I have read, though I don't believe 'em my self, and
sometime don't very well remember their Sense. ( Ep. 89, ad Aug. T. 2. p. 304.
and 525.

After this, found your Faith, not on Scripture and Reason, but on a History
concerning Simon Magus related in Epiphanius, or another concerning Cerinthus
which Irenaeus had heard, Those Stories, or Traditions, after all, might be
true, and not prejudice the Unitarians, as it might easily be shown. For the
Unitarians do not believe, as Cerinthus is reported to have done, that a Divin
Person, and that distinct from the Father, dwelled in Jesus; Besides, he is
said to have had many other grievous errors. If it were true therefore, that
St. John would not be in the same Bath with him; what is that to the
Unitarians? And if Simon Magus believed three Divin Manifestations, or Powers;
why should it be thought that he believed nothing that is true? But if he
asserted three distinct Divin Persons, as Dr. Sherlock thought must be inferred
from. Epiphanius his monstrous Story, that he pretended he was both the Father
and the Son, and affirmed his lewd Woman Helena to be the Holy Ghost; why may
we not think, he might be, among corrupted Christians, the first Founder of the
Dr's Notion, or that which now passes for Orthodox, that is that of the
Platonists and Realists? It may be, indeed, Simon Magus pretended that the
Father and Son were manifested in and by him, etc. But if it be as Dr. Sherlock
would have it, the Matter is of no importance to Us, but rather concerns the
Platonic Trinitarians. For those ancient Fathers Ireneus and Eusebius, who
evidently incline more to the Unitarians then to the Scholastic Trinitarians,
assert that Simon Magus was the Father and Author of all the Heresies, and
particularly the Homousian. (See Sandi. Nu^l. L. 1. Secul. 2. De Gnostic. Iren.
L. 1. C. 20. and 30. L. 4. C. 58. Eusebius. H. E. L. 11. C. 13.) Howbeit, pin who
will his Faith, on Simon Magus, or Cerinthus his Sleeve, who, if not
misrepresented, were thorowpac'd Platonists, or even Improvers of Platonism.
Yet the Stories themselves, reported concerning their Heresies, may perhaps
want a little Confirmation, considering the Humor of some of those times, as we
have seen, and what Eusebius ( H. E. L. 1. C. 1.) testifies, that he had a
World to do to compile his History, finding so little Light in any Writing
before him, the continual Persecutions having caused that Confusion as to the
Ecclesiastical History, the generality of Christians contenting then themselves
with the Writings of the New Testament.

Dalaeus, toward the beginning of the fourth Chap. of his said Book, seems to
intimate, that we have nothing much to be relied on but the Holy Scripture;
which, says he, has always been preserved with much greater care than other
Writings; which all Nations have learned; which all Languages have translated;
and which all Sects have retained, the Heretics as well as the Orthodox, the
Schismatics as well as the Catholics, the Greeks and Latins, Muscovites and
Aethiopians, etc.

We may then conclude this Article, with this Reflection: It is altogether
incredible that the Scripture has been materially corrupted; but it is highly
probable that the Writings of the Doctors may have been considerably changed
and altered.

CHAP. VII. A Farther Continuation of the Answer to the First Objection.
(6.) HOwbeit, it still in a great measure appears, that the generality of the
Primitive Christians were Unitarians, and even that the generality of the
remaining Authors of the first three Centuries were far enough from being of
that Opinion which is now called Orthodox, it being evident that they incline
more to the Unitarian than to the present Trinitarian Sentiment. When the rigid
Platonists were become for the most part the Masters and the Strongest, sometime
before the Council of Nice as well as after it, they expressed a blind and
furious Zeal for their new Notions, concerning the Son or Word, and showed as
much as they could their ill will to the Ancient Christians the Unitarians, and
to those Churches and Parties that retained the Primitive Doctrine of the
Gospel. They, therefore, (and that was the least harm they did them) called
them by several Nicknames, as Nazarens, Ebionites, Mineans, Alogi, and the
like.

The Jews had begun in the Apostles's time to call the Christians, that were
among them, Nazarens, and Mineans, (which last signifies Heretics or
Sectaries, and the other is a Denomination from Our Savior whom the
Unbelievers in derision called the Nazarene) as it appears, Act. 24.5. and 14.
The Jewish (and most ancient) Christians were also, as some think, called
afterward, by the Platonists, Ebionites, which signifies the Poor, either, as
some pretend, from a Man named Ebion who (they say) was a great Denfender of
them, or because they were the ordinary and poorer sort of People who preserved
the longest the Primitive Doctrine and could the most hardly be brought to
relish the Notions of Platonism, or, as Eusebius asserts, because the
Platonists accused them to have but poor and low Opinions of Christ. In fine,
among the Gentile Converts, the Maintainers of the Primitive Doctrine were, by
some, called Alogi or Alogians, as if they believed not Christ to be the Logos
or the Word, because they believed not an eternal Word like Plato; and it is
said, that some of these Gentile Christians received not at first the Gospel of
St. John, as the generality of Christians admited not presently some other
Books of the New Testament, particularly St. John's Revelation, and the Epistle
to the Hebrews which generally for 400 Years was not received as Canonical. It
is too usual to go from one extreme to another; and it may be therefore that
some of those Gentile Converts, who saw the absurdity of Plato's Polytheism and
were told that Plato's and St. John's Expressions were the same and exactly
agreed, imagined that this was a counterfeit Piece of the Platonists and
Cerinthians, to uphold their Divin Hypostasis distinct from the Father, and so
at first gave not themselves leave to consider and examine what might be the
true Sense of St. John's terms and the Intention of his Gospel. Howbeit, the
Platonists in process of time hated and defamed the Unitarians, not merely for
what might have been amiss among some of them, but in general for their being
Unitarian Christians. And, in that, they followed the Jews, who from the
beginning persecuted the Christians, and gave them what reproachful Names they
could, some of which always remained to the Jewish Converts, that is to say, to
those Christians who originally came from among the Jews, who were not
generally vitiated by the Philosophy of Plato, and whom therefore, as we have
said, the Platonists called by the same Names that the obdurate and unbelieving
Jews had given them, namly, Nazarens and Mineans.

Now, it appears; that these Nazarens, Mineans, Ebionites, and the Jewish
Christi^^s, were taken to be much the same; and that they, and the Alogi, were
Unitarians, were from the beginning, were most numerous, and continued a
considerable Party for several Centuries, till they were in a great measure
destroyed and extirpated by the most violent Persecutions of the Platonists.

Crigen says, that all Jews, who own Jesus to be Christ, are called Ebionites.
(Contr. Cells. L. 2. p. 56.)

Theodoret attests, that the Nazarens honor the Lord Christ, only as a Holy
Man ( Haeret. Fab. L. 2. C. 3.)

Epiphanius writes, that the Nazarens and Ebionites held the same Heresy. (
Haeres. 30. C. 2.) It is not impossble, but that Epiphanius, as well as Origin,
and other Platonists, confounded with the Ebionites the other Jewish
Christians, who generally did not platonize, but followed the true Unitarian
System, whether we suppose it to be that which was maintained by Arius, or that
which is now known under the Name of Socinianism.

St. Jerome acknowledges, that the Jewish Mineans, vulgarly called Nazarens,
were to that Day over all Orient. (Ep. ad August.) There indeed was the Seat of
the Jewish Christians.

And from the 24th. Chapter of the 3d. Book, and the 25th. of the fifth Book of
Eus-bius his Ecclesiastical History, it may further be gathered, that these as
well as the Gentile Unitarians were the Successors of the Primitive and First
Christians, and were defamed only by the Malice of the Platonists. Yet all this
Evidence is from the Testimony of professed Enemies, there remaining now no
other Authors, that expressly treat of these things.

As for the Alogi, their very Nickname bespeaks them to be Unitarians.
Epiphanius is the first, who gave to them the Name of Alogi. Before him, they
were simply called Christians. Epiphanius speaks of them, as the ancient
Unitarians of the Gentile Converts.

But we have, above all other Evidences, an express Testimony of the Faith of
the Primitive Christians, in their Symbol, justly called the Apostles Creed,
which manifestly is altogether Unitarian. For it is a Profession of Faith in
one God, that is the Father Almighty. And every thing that is there said of the
Lord Jesus Christ, is the Description, not of an eternal God, but of a Creature
or Human Person highly exalted by God. And of the Holy Ghost no more is said,
but that it is a Holy Spirit, or a Holy Breath or Holy Inspiration. The
Compilers of the Creed pretended to know no more of it. And it is a Generality
which the Unitarians highly approve of, but which hitherto the Trinitarians
seem not to be pleased to stick to. If they were to make a Confession of their
Faith, they would not express it as it is here; or, if they did, we would
readily agree with them. To believe in, is a Phrase that signifies no more than
to believe; for the Creed teaches us to believe in the Holy Catholic Church,
as well as in the Holy Spirit and in one God the Father Almighty. As for the
Antiquity and Authority of this Creed, we have the unanimous Opinion of the
Fathers, as it appears in their Writings and as is observed by Ruffinus in
particular who flourished in the Year 360, that it was compiled by the College
of the Apostles, with the Concurence and Consent of the 120 Disciples,
(mentioned in Acts, 1.15.) who assisted them in their Councils. And it seems to
be referred to, in Romans 6.17. Romans 12.6. 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 1.13. Jude. 3.

In truth, the Divine Providence might well think it self not concerned, to
preserve any other Evidence of the Authority and Antiquity of the Christian
System, but this, besides the Holy Scripture.

Yet we have moreover the Epistle of St. Clemens, or Clemens Romanus, to the
Corinthians. That is that Clemens, whom St. Paul not only calls his
Fellow-laborer, but of whom he says that his Name is written in the Book of
Life. Phil. 4.3. This Clemens, being Bishop of Rome, wrote that Epistle to the
Christians of Corinth, in the Name and by the Order of his Church. And this
Epistle is so avowed a Piece of Antiquity, that the Trinitarians dare not
disown it. Howbeit, the most learned Trinitarian Critics, such as Bishop
Usher, Petavius and Huetius of late, and Photius of old, (see Sandi. Hist.
Secul. 1.) acknowledge that Clemens appears therein an undoubted Unitarian;
speaking of our Lord Jesus Christ just as the Unitarians do and no otherwise,
as we see, for instance, even in these words of the 58th. Chapter, God the
Inspector of all things, the Father of Spirits, the Lord of all Flesh; who has
chosen our Lord Jesus Christ, and us by him; grant to you Peace, Long
Suffering, Patience, through our High Priest and Protector Jesus Christ: by
whom be Glory and Honor and Majesty unto God, now and for evermore. Now let
the Trinitarians seriously consider, whether they would thus express
themselves, to teach what is to be believed, concerning God, the Father of all,
and concerning our Lord Jesus Christ. (See Sandius's Hist. Eccl. for more
express Evidences of St. Clemens his Vnitarianism.)

There are also the Recognitions, which though perhaps by Mistake attributed to
St. Clemens, yet are very ancient, there being a Passage taken out of them in a
Fragment of Bardesanes, preserved in Eusebius his Praep. Evang. L. 6. C. 10.
They are so evidently agreeable to the Unitarian Sentiment, that they are
confessed so to be by the Trinitarian Critics. For a further illustration of
all these particulars, see the aforequoted Pamphlet, The Judgment of the
Fathers, etc.

As for the other, remaining, Ante-nicene Writings; tho they appear to begin to
platonize, and proceed to do so more and more by steps, and some of them doing
it in a pretty high degree, (those that asserted the rigid Unitarian Doctrine,
or even that Sentiment that Arius afterward was condemned for, thus being in
time in some measure suppressed,) yet generally they are far from the Opinion
that is now called Orthodox, and they incline more to the Unitarian System then
to the Trinitarian Sentiment of the latter Ages.

For, first, they generally believe not the Holy Ghost to be God, or a God in
an eminent sense like Him whom they call the God Word, or the Word whom God
produced before all things, whom God was pleased to make a God or Sovereign
next unto Him, and whom they suppose God employed, as his Minister in Creating
the Holy Spirit and Angels, and as his Chief Officer in the Creation of all
other things.

Secondly, then, they by no means represent the Divine Word or Son as actually
equal to God, but as an inferior God, distinct from and subject to the
Principal God who has no God above him; and they represent him not as a
Necessary Being, that was generated from all eternity, but as being created of
the Divine Substance, by the mere good Will and arbitrary Pleasure of God,
immediately before the Creation of the World. Indeed they generally seem to
make the Duration of Time to commence at the Creation of the World, and so
suppose that what was done before the Creation of the Material World belongs
not to the Duration of Time, but to the Duration of Eternity: Nevertheless, as
was said, they hold not the Son to have been from all Eternity; for they assert
that once he was not, and they hold that he had a beginning. Yet, according to
them, he may be termed eternal, in that he existed in God from Eternity, and
was produced in that Duration which was before the Creation of the World. In
like manner, they reckon him to be equal to God, or (rather) like to God, no
otherwise than as he is a most excellent Being that most eminently acts for and
represents God and was created out of the Substance of God, whereas it seems
they most generally hold that other Creatures were made out of Nothing.

They represent the Son to be created out of the Substance of God, as the
Expression of our thoughts by Speech is created out of our Thoughts. But they
offer their Philosophical Speculations for the most part as Conjectures, and
not as Articles of Faith. Especially at first they were pretty sparing and
moderate therein. Howbeit, the unfathomable Depths of Platonism (as it was
taught in those Days, and which was then by too many philosophizing Christians
imagined to be in a great measure reconcilable with Christianity and near the
same thing with it) made that these poor Fathers, often, knew not well,
themselves, or seemed not to know, what they said, nor whereof they affirmed.
Yet, from the whole, it seems, it may be collected, that generally these
Platonists inclined to that Opinion which afterward was called Semi-Arianism.
As was said, they generally own, that the Son was not from all Eternity, and
that he is not Equal to the Father: Yet, the Platonic Metaphysics, which the
Heathenish World at that time highly admired, as the sublimest Philosophy and
the most rational Theology, and which these Doctors not only followed before
they were Christians, but also, when converted, accomodated as much as they
could to Christianity, it seems, at least, implying, that the Second Person of
the Trinity was created out of the Substance of the First or Chief God, and the
Third out of the Substance of the Second, yet so as that, tho the Third Person
of this Most High Trinity was not so Excellent as the Second, nor the Second
but of an Inserior Divinity neither, howbeit bearing the Name of God, and
therein particularly surpassing the Third Divine Person, these two Persons,
nevertheless, (which, though Inserior to the Chief God, were Superior to all the
other Gods, or Angels,) remained most intimately United, not only with one
another, but also with the First Person of this transcendent Trinity, insomuch
that these three, being thus United, and being of a like Substance, might be
said to be one Thing, or as one Being; Platonism, I say, seeming at least to
import somewhat like this, these Platonizing Fathers therefore by degrees
philosophized among Christians much after that way, as much as can be conceived
by their expressions. Indeed, all Creatures may be said in some sense to be
united to God, and to be in God; for in him we live, and move, and have our
Being. Nay, in some sense all Creatures may be said to have been in God from
all Eternity, at least potentially, though not brought forth or produced from all
Eternity, but only when Almighty God created this Universe. And even some of
these Philosophers, and among them Tertullian particularly, expressly asserted,
that mere Creatures, in particular Human Souls, were made out of the Substance
of God. Howbeit, Platonism implying that the Son and the Spirit are above all
other Creatures, the Platonists generally held that the Son at least or even
the Son and the Spirit are most peculiarly of the Substance of God, were most
peculiarly in him, and were most peculiarly united to him, so as that wherever
the Son went, and whatever he did, God as it were had always a strict hold of
him, and wrought with, in and by him. Nevertheless, as was said, they
represented the Son and Spirit as Distinct and Inferior Beings, so that they
owned the Father to be properly the Supreme Being, and to be the only Person
consequently that is properly God, or a God in the eminent Sense of the word
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and, in a word, all the
Primitive Doctors that were converted out of Heathenism, had been taught
Platonism; and, when they were become Christians, they openly professed, in
all-their Writings, that they were still great admirers of that Philosophy, and
they maintained that the Christian Trinity and Plato's Trinity was much the
same. Thus they introduced Platonism in the Christian System, accommodating the
one to the other as near as they could. Justin Martyr, it seems, particularly
began openly to Platonize; and the rest followed after him. And then they for
the most part represented the Platonic Trinity very like Arianism, any of 'em
at most making it Semi-Arianism, and so, that the generality of Christians
might, it seems, mistake it for Arianism, the good Fathers, either purposely or
otherwise, expressing themselves very obseurely in a most Obscure Matter though
some more Platonically than others. These, in comparison of those that
followed, were Moderate Platonists, and scarce any or but few went further in
the 2d. Century, or at least till toward the end of the 2d. Century, whereas
afterward, it seems, there arose among Christians several violent Opinionists
and sierce Semi-Arians, and then many rigid, and thorowpaced, or very
heathenish Platonists, true Polytheists, that perhaps went even farther than
Platonism it self, and maintained much the same Notions, concerning the Son,
that are laid down in Dr. Sherlocks Books. Not but that in the beginning of the
4th. Century, at the time of the Council of Nice, there were a great many of
the most Learned Bishops that were still Semi-Arians, and several but Arians,
most credibly according to the Doctrine that anciently was chiefly in vogue,
before Semi-Arianism was established by Justin Martyr.

The Semi-Arians, or Mildest Platonists, like the Arians, defended the Unity of
God, by saying, that the Father only was the Supreme or Principal God, and that
God the Word was not only Lesser than he, but also Subject to him; wherefore
they concluded, it might truly be said, that, in Heaven and in the whole World,
there is but One Godhead, or but one God, though there be God the Father, and God
the Son, as in a House where there is a Son Subject to his Father it may be
said that there is but one Government, one Mastership or one Master, the one
not being essentially different from the other when both of them perfectly
agree. This is so well known to have been the sense of the generality of these
Ante-nicene Fathers whose Writings have in some measure been preserved, as well
as of many since, that it is needless to take much pains to prove it. Howbeit,
it will not be improper to give here some Instances of it. And, first, for the
convenience of some Readers, it may be useful to make these Chronological
Remarks.

Justin Martyr flourished about the 130th. Year after Christ's Nativity.

Hegesip^us and Irenaeus, about the Year 170.

Victo. Bishop of Rome, about the Year 190. And Zepherin, his Successor, about
the Year 200.

Tertullian, about the Year 210.

Origin, about the Year 230. Novatian, and Dyonisius Alexandrinus, within a few
Years of that time.

Arnobius, whose Disciple was Lactantius, about the Year 295.

The famous Council of Nice, was held in the Year 325.

These few Observations sufficing for the Purpose in Hand, we may now proceed
to aver what we have said concerning the Sentiment of the Ante-nicene
Platonists; to which end we may consider these Passages out of the Writings of
those of them who were most learned and esteemed in their Generations.

Dalaeus, (toward the middle of the fifth Chap. of his first Book De Us. Pat.)
not distinguishing Semi-Arianism from Arianism, opines, that it is impossible
to clear St. Justin from being an Arian, that Father asserting, that the God,
who appeared to Moses and the Patriarchs, was the Son and not the Father,
inasmuch as the Father never changes Place, neither comes up nor down, and no
Man therefore ever saw the Father, but the Son only has been seen, who is the
Father's Minister, and a God also by the Father's Will. Now, says Dalaeus, is
not this to attribute to God the Son a Nature and Being different from that of
God the Father? Nay, he might have added, is not this also to ascribe to him an
inferior and a precarious Being?

As the same Justin Martyr says to the same purpose in other Places; God in the
beginning, before all the Creatures, (that is to say before all the other
Creatures, or mere Creatures, and immediately before the Creation of the World,
for that is the strain of these Platonists,) generated of himself a certain
Rational Power, one while called the Son, another while Wisdom, an Angel, God,
Lord and Word. For he may be called by all these Names, both because he
Ministers to the Will of the Father, and was voluntarily Begotten of the
Father. ( Colloq. cum. Tryph. p. 221.)

We account the Son in the Second Rank, and the Prophetic Spirit in the Third
Order. ( Apol. 2. p. 47.) At the 43d. Page of this Book, he puts the Prophetic
Spirit in the same Classis with the good Angels, and indeed names him after
them; which shows, that he took him to be one of them. We Honor the Father,
and the Son, says he, and the Host of the other good Angels, who accompany and
resemble him, together with the Prophetic Spirit. Which seems to be as if he
had said, We Honor also the good Angels, and in particular the Prophetic
Spirit, who is one of them, and their Chief.

Irenaeus (who even was a Disciple of the Contemporaries of the Apostles, his
Master Polycarpus having been a Disciple and Companion of St. John, and of some
others that had seen the Lord, and who was, himself, as well as Polycarpus,
generally in great esteem among Christians, though every one knows he was also a
follower and great admirer of Plato) speaks much to the same purpose. The
Church, says he, dispersed through the whole World, has, both from the Apostles
and their Disciples, received that Faith, which is in one God the Father
Almighty; and in one Jesus Christ the Son of God, incarnated for our Salvation;
and in one Holy Spirit, who by the Prophets published the Dispensations of God.
-- Jesus Christ is our Lord, and God, and Savior, and King, according to the
good Pleasure of the Invisible Father. (advers. haeres. L. 1. C. 2.) He, who
has no other God above him, is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. (Ib. C.
19.) And in speaking of that Saying of Christ, that he knew not the Day and
Hour of Judgment, he says; The Father is above all things; for the Father, says
Christ, is greater than I: Wherefore in knowledge also, the Father is declared
to have the Preeminence. (Ib. L. 2. C. 49.) The Apostles would not call any one
of his own Persor. Lord, but him that exercises Lordship over all, even God
the Father, and his Son, who has received from the Father the Lordship of all
the Creation. (Ib. L. 3. C. 6.) The Apostles confessed the Father and Son to be
God and Lord, but neither named any other God, nor confessed any other to be
Lord. (Ib. C. 9.) I invocate thee, O Lord, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who art the only true God, above whom there is no other God, who rulest over
all, and do, in domination, besides our Lord Jesus Christ, rule also over the
Holy Spirit. (Ib. C. 6.) By these Passages it appears, that Irenaeus held the
Father alone to be God in the most eminent sense of that word, and the Son to
be Lord and God under the Father, but the Holy Spirit to be neither Lord nor
God. Yet he might hold the Holy Spirit to be above the Angels, and it is
probable he understood thereby what the Unitarians do. These Matters being left
in a great Generality in Scripture, the Fathers explained them as they thought
best. That liberty of inquiry and examination must be allowed of, so those
explications and interpretations be but offered as Opinions and Conjectures,
but be not Magisterially imposed by any Man on other Men. For, to follow the
Design and Intention of Scripture, Christians must Unite in the Generality of
the Terms of Scripture, as we see it in the Apostles Creed. If these Measures
had always been observed, Platonism had done but little harm. It seems that
Platonism made the Platonizing Fathers differ from the strict Unitarians, and
Arians, I mean, the Ancient and Primitive Christians that held the Sentiment
that Arius revived or improved. For it seems he believed, after them, that the
Word, like other Creatures, was made out of Nothing. But, it seems, Plato, as
after him his Christian Disciples, (of the Number of whom Irenaeus seems to
be,) taught that the Word was created out of the Substance of God.

Dalaeus observes, in the last quoted Place of his aforesaid Book, that
Tertullian (though the most thorow-stitcht Platonist of his time) had much the
same Thoughts, and held, that God the Father produced the Word out of himself
and made him his Son, but that the Father is the whole Substance and the Son a
Portion and Derivation of that whole.

In another Place, the same Tertullian says expressly, that there was a time
when the Son was not, ( Adv. Hermogen. C. 3.) and it seems that by the Holy
Spirit-he means only the Virtue and Power of God. ( De Praescript. C. 13.)

Novatian says, that the Holy Spirit is less than Christ, ( De Trin. C. 24.)
moreover that once the Son was not, and that before him was nothing besides the
Father. ( C. 11.) Whereby he positively asserts, that the Father alone is from
all Eternity, and consequently that the Father alone is God in the eminent
Sense of that word. Which is very different from the Sentiment of the rigid
Platonists and the present Trinitarians, who hold the Son and Holy Spirit to be
from all Eternity as well as the Father, and to be equal among themselves and
coequal with him, as it is in the Creed of Athanasius. Now those that do not
assert the Son and Spirit to be eternal, and consequently not to have a
necessary Existence, nor unlimited Perfections, nor unborrowed Powers, or
Powers that they have not received freely from another, may very well pass for
Unitarians; seeing they make not the Son and Spirit to be God like the Father,
but the Father's Creatures.

Dalaeus, in the Place we last quoted, remarks that those expressions, which
afterward were so much found sault with in Arius, were used by these
Antenicene: be mentions Dionysius Arexandrinus, who expressly calls the Son the
Father's Workmanship, which is the same as to say, the Father's Creature. They
expressly say, that the Father Made the Son, and they even use the very term
that the Father Created him. Nay, Dalaeus, in the same Place, forgets not to
take notice, that the 80 Platonic Bishops, who, at the latter end of the 3d.
Century, (so violently) condemned the famous Patriarch of Antioch, yet at the
same time did expressly declare, that the Son is not of the same Essence with
the Father. Now therefore, by the Acknowledgement of the Trinitarians
themselves, the Post-Nicene Trinitarians cannot with any Modesty pretend, that
the Ancients were of the same Opinion with them; and consequently there can be
nothing more vain, than for them to plead Antiquity.

Origin, like the foregoing Authors, not only called the Son a Second God, (
Contr. Cel. L. 5. p. 258.) but a Creature, and the oldest of the Creatures. (
Ib. p. 257.) And in his First and Second Books concerning Prayer, he has so
many Arguments against Praying to any but the Father, and so blames those that
would also direct their Prayers to the Son, plainly calling them Fools for so
doing, that it clearly appears, that, according to him, the Supreme or true
Divinity belonged to the Father only. This is so notorious, that many have
believed, that Origin was of the same Opinion that Arius afterward was of; and
Epiphanius did well observe, that in many Places Origin makes the Son and Holy
Spirit to be of another kind of Godhead, or of another Nature and Essence,
than that of the Father. ( Epiphan. adv. Haer. L. 2. T. 1. p. 531.) Now, since
so ancient, so renowned and learned a Doctor, as Origin, was of this Sentiment,
that alone is a sufficient Argument, that the Notion of the present
Trinitarians was not then known to be the Apostolic Doctrine, that at least the
Tradition about that Point is uncertain, and consequently that the
Determination thereof ought not to be sought for by this Means. Indeed, in
reason, so Abstruse and Intricate a Matter ought to be Magisterially determined
by no Means, if they are not attended with greater evidence; but every one must
be allowed to judge the best he can for himself, and Men must Unite in the use
of the terms, and expressions, themselves, of Scripture, if they appear to be
susceptible of a great Generality, and perhaps designedly indeterminable, and
if there lie invincible Difficulties, and unanswerable Arguments, not to say
Demonstrations, against the (Platonic) Trinitarian System. Howbeit, as we
shall further see, the Scripture must be owned to be the only Rule herein to be
sought to, besides the clear and incontestable Dictates of Reason; and the
Trinitarians, if they be sincere, must acknowledge, that their Plea of
Antiquity is vain and frivolous. None but Quacks can talk at Dr. Sherlock's
rate, that the whole Catholic Church in all Ages has been of his Sentiment, or
of the Sentiment of the present Trinitarians; and that the Unitarian
Controversy may be decided by the Judgment of the ancient (Ante-nicene)
Authors, whose Writings have in part been suffered to come to our Hands. It
appears evidently, that the Ante-nicene were not of the Opinion that is now
termed Orthodox. To evince which Position of ours, it is indeed superfluous to
add many more Proofs, after what we have alleged out of these most ancient and
famous Authors. I shall therefore only add two or three Passages out of the
following Writers, which, though not altogether so ancient as the foregoing, yet
come not so much short of it as to deserve to be wholly unregarded. They were
very eminent and learned Men. It cannot be doubted but that they knew what
Doctrine, in, as well as sometime before, their time, was held as Orthodox, and
was required in that rigorous Age to be held as such. And it is credible they
would not have publicly asserted any thing in these Matters, that would then
have drawn upon them the Censures of the Church, in the Communion of which they
flourished, and in which they were desirous to be in great esteem.
Nevertheless, it does appear, their Opinion, as well as that of the
afore-quoted Authors, is very different from that of the present Platonic or
Scholastic Trinitarians. For instance, then.

Arnobius declared, in the Treatise he wrote to inform the Gentiles with the
Truths of Christianity, that Christians did indeed hold Christ to be a God, but
inferior to the Father, and a lesser God than He who alone is the Almighty God.
Christ, says he, is a God, who, in the form of a Man, spoke to the World, by
the Command of the Principal God. ( Adv. Gent. L. 2. p. 106.) The Almighty God,
who is the only God, at length sent out Christ. (Ib. p. 120.) How could he have
taught more plainly, or more expressly, that the Father alone is the Almighty
God, and the only God, or the only Person that is God in the eminent sense of
that word? Not but that he might hold both Christ and the Holy Spirit to be
also Divine Persons. But it is evident he reckons them to be of an inferior
kind, seeing he denies them to be the Almighty, the Principal and Only God. He
makes them therefore Creatures, though created Gods, whether or no created out of
the very Substance of the Almighty God. He comes then very near to Arianism, if
he be not altogether Arian. He looks upon the Almighty Father, as the only
Fountain of all Being and Perfection, and as able, not only to produce other
Beings, but to communicate to whom he will immense or vast Perfections and a
Divine Nature, though inferior to his, because there can be but one Infinite and
Almighty Being: Wherefore all Creatures, though never so Divine and Excellent,
can have but limited Perfections, and must ever remain subject to the Almighty?
Now who does not see, that this is to assert but one God properly so called, or
but one who is the Almighty God, the Principal or Supreme God, and the Only
God? And is not that Vnitarianism?

Besides, though Justin Martyr said, that in the 2d. Century the Holy Angels were
worshipped (particularly, it may be, by some Platonists) Arnobius declares that
in his time Christians thought it sufficient to worship God, even God the
Father, the Principal God. Howbeit, says he, to discharge the Worship of
Divinity, the Chief God is sufficient for us: (I say) the Chief God, the Father
and Lord of all Things. In him we worship whatsoever is to be worshipped. For
we have in him the very Head of Divinity, from whence the Divinity of all
Divine Things whatsoever is derived. If the Platonic Trinitarians had always
kept strictly to this Generality in their Terms of Communion, there needed have
been no Disagreement nor Division.

It is evident that in the second and third Centuries, after that Justin Martyr
and the other converted Philosophers had introduced their Platonism in the
Christian Religion, the Primitive Unitarians were indeed commonly vilisied and
opposed, but yet the Platonists kept not all alike at the same distance from
these, but somewhat differed among themselves, and allowed of that difference;
not being then agreed how much justly of Platonism was to be admitted or held
necessary, nor knowing how to determine a Matter that seemed so obscure and
abstruse. The Nature of the H. Ghost especially was then left undetermined. The
generality not only of the old Christians, but even of the new Platonic
Doctors, owned him to be but the Power and Inspiration of God, or else took him
for an Archangel, and a created Spirit like the other Angels, but above all the
Angels. And therefore if there were at those times any rigid Platonists that
had much the same Notion that the present Trinitarians have of the H. Spirit.
they contented themselves covertly or modestly to assert or intimate their
Opinion, but durst not and could not attempt imperiously to condemn those that
were not of their Sentiment. We see, the generality of the Ante-nicene agree,
that the H. Ghost is not God, though some call him a Divine Person, but none of
them would have made difficulty so to have called any Angel; those that called
him the Power of God, as Irenaeus and others, yet expressly affirmed that he was
not God, and so it seems took him not to be a real Divine Person, or a real
Divine Being, but an Act, or an Influence and Inspiration of the the Divin
Power, or an Archangel, or both, or they knew not what. And those that
positively called him a Creature, were not censuredeven by the highest
Platonists of those times. And as touching the Nature of the Son or Word of
God, it seems that then Semi-Arianism did most prevail among the Doctors, even
perhaps from the 2d. Century; but yet till the Council of Nice the (supposed)
ancient Doctrine afterward called Arianism was allowed of in the Church, at
least in a great measure, and generally for a good while approved before. For
most probably many of those ancient Writings, that were supressed after the
Council of Nice, (as containing a Doctrine that was then in a great measure
grown out of Date, though the avowed Works of the most excellent and learned
Bishops of the Church) asserted the Scriptural Sentiment for (it seems) at
least the like to which Arius was condemned at Nice. And we see that several of
those Ante-nicene, that have been permitted to come to our hands, so express
themselves that they may be taken for Arians. Howbeit, it suffices us if they
generally appear to be but Semi-Arians. For then it is evident the present
Trinitarians cannot justly plead Antiquity.

The celebrated Writings of Lactantius are a further Testimony to what I have
said, concerning the State of the Platonic Trinitarianism in the Church before
the Council of Nice. He asserts, that God, before he set upon this ourious Work
of the World, begat an incorruptible and irreproveable Spirit, that he might
call him his Son. Although God produced, also, for his Service, infinite others,
whom we call Angels; yet he has vouchsafed to give the Name of Son but to his
Firstborn. (Instit. L. 4. C. 6.) And because the Son was faithful to God, and
taught Mankind that there is one God, and that he alone is to be worshipped,
neither did ever call himself a God, because he had not discharged his Trust;
therefore he received the Dignity of a Perpetual Priest, and the Honor of a
Sovereign King, and the Power of a Judge, and the Name of God. (Ib. C. 13.) Now
when any one has a Son, whom he entirely loves, who notwithstanding dwells in
the House, and under the Governing Power of his Father, although the Father
grants him the Name and Authority of a Master; yet, in the terms of Civilians,
here is but one House, and one Master. So this World is but one House belonging
to God; and the Son and the Father who inhabit the World, and who are of one
Mind, (or of like Affections and perfectly agree,) are as One Government or One
only God; the One being as the Two, and the Two as the One. And no marvel,
since the Son is in the Father, because the Father loves the Son, and the
Father is in the Son, by reason of his faithful Resignation to his Fathers
Will, and that he does nothing but what the Father Commands him. This evidently
declares in what sense the Father and Son are to be understood to be One God or
One Mind and One Spirit, Namely, inasmuch as they are of one Mind, they are
therefore as if they were but one Spirit, or but one Person and one God. Yet,
according to this, they really are Two distinct Beings, and Two very unequal
Spirits. For the Son has freely received all from the Father, and is ever
Inferior and Subject to the Father, and was produced then when God was going to
set himself upon the Creating of the World, and consequently is not from all
Eternity. The Father then is the First and Principal God; and the Son is a God
of a lower kind. If this be not pure Arianism, as it may be taken and seems to
be, all that it can amount to is at most Semi-Arianism, which indeed very
little differs from Arianism, for both Systems hold the Son to be God but in an
Inferior sense, and assert the Father alone to be the one only true God though
the Semi-Arians esteem that the Son was Created out of the Fathers Nature or
Substance, whereas Arius and those that are exactly of his Opinion, as was
said, conceive that the Son, though immediately produced by the Father, was
Created out of Nothing, and only differs from other Creatures, in that he is
more Excellent than they all put together, was Created by the Father alone, and
is set by the Father over all created Beings.

As concerning the Person and Nature of the Holy Spirit, Dalaeus, in the Fourth
Chap. of his Second Book De usu Patrum, remarks, after St. Jerome, that
Lactantius expressly asserts the Holy Ghost to be but a Creature and not to
partake of the Deity ( Sandius brings many Instances, to prove that both
Lactantius and all the other forementioned Authors were even of Arius his
Sentiment, and not they only, but also generally the remaining Ante-nicene
Writers.)

All these Authors, which we have quoted, were undoubtedly most learned and
deservedly esteemed in their Generations, and are now generally esteemed still
by all Christians, and indeed they may be accounted the Chief of the
Ante-nicene whose Writings have been preserved: (We may also rank among them
Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea, as well as Lactantius, since he Flourished sometime
before, as well as since, the Council of Nice, and appears to follow wholly the
Sentiments of Justin Martyr, when not awed by the Nicene Tyranny;) so that the
then current Ante-nicene Doctrine may be known in these Writings.

Concerning these Matters, (therefore,) we may remark, Eusebius expresses
himself to this purpose. He that is beyond all things, the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Governor of all things, how many, and of what
quality soever they be, even of the Holy Spirit himself, yea further of the
Only Begotten Son also, is deservedly styled by the Apostle the God that is
over all, and he only may be called the one God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ: But the Son is the Only Begotten God, who is in the Bosom of the
Father: And the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, is neither God, nor Son; for he has
not received his Production from the Father like the Son, but is one of those
things which were made by the Son. (De Ecclesiast. Theol. L. 3. C. 6.) If John
had conceived the Father and the Son to be one and the same thing, he would
have said, that the Word was the God, with the Addition of the Article; which
not doing, he evidently teaches us, that he is the Prime God who is the Father
of the Word, and that the Word was not that very God, but yet that he also was
a God. (Ib. L. 2. C. 17.)

This is the Current Doctrine of the Old Ante-nicene Platonists concerning the
Son and Holy Ghost. Eusebius, like the other before him, expressly asserts that
the Holy Ghost is not God; and it is visible, he says no more of the Son than
at most what is agreeable to Semi-Arianism. That was, it seems, what the
generality of the Primitive or Ancient A^te^nicene Platonists meant by the
Divinity of the Word, and for the not coming up to which they opposed the
Ebionite and the Nazarene Unitarians. Eusebius, in the 25th. and last Chap. of
the 5th. Book of his History, quotes a remarkable Passage of an Author (a
Platonizing Christian) who had written upon that account against the most rigid
Unitarians. The Passage is to this effect.

The Unitarians pretend, that the Apostles and all the Ancients held the very
Doctrine, concerning the Person of our Savior, that is now maintained by the
Unitarians; and that it is but only since the Times of the Popes Victor and
Zepherin, that the Truth has been adulterated and discountenanced. This would
be credible, if, first, the Unitarian Doctrine were not contrary to Holy
Scripture; and if diverse before Victor and Zepherin had not contended for the
Divinity of the Lord Christ, Namely, Justin Martyr, Miltiades, Tatianus,
Clemens of Alexandria, Irenaeus, Melito. To whom we may add the ancient Hymns
or Psalms, wrote from the beginning by the Brethren; which speak of Christ as
the Word of God, and attribute to him Divinity.

Upon this Famous Passage, these Remarks may be made. 1. Whereas these Ancient
(rigid) Unitarians said, that the Primitive Doctrine was adulterated in the
Times of Victor, their Meaning without doubt was not that before him there was
never a Platonic Christian, but only that the Platonic Christians then
prevailed, and grew violent and began to discountenance the Truth.

2. All those Writers, whom this Author, or Answerer, and Antagonist of the
rigid Unitarians, mentions as the Ancientest Assertors of the Divinity of the
Word after the Platonic System, were, except Justin, but Contemporaries to
Victor and Zepherin, or after them. (As for those Hymns which he speaks of, we
shall see that no stress can be laid on them, or that they conclude nothing
against the Unitarians.) Hereby then the Novelty of the Platonic Christianity
appears, seeing no vouchers for it can be produced before Justin Martyr; and it
is therefore evident that what the Unitarians said could not be disproved, that
the Times of Victor and Zepherin were the Fatal Epoche of the violent
Opposition and Oppression of Vnitarianism, seeing that the Crowd of fierce
Antagonists then began, and it cannot be shown, that the Unitarian Doctrine was
before then persecuted and discountenanced, or that it was not, during all the
first Century, the current Doctrine of the generality of Christians.

3. It is probable that some of the Writers whom that Author opposes to the
Unitarians, were but of that Sentiment which was afterward so unjustly
condemned in Arius: Why else had their Writings been suppressed by the
Platonists? Perhaps, also, by the Word and the Spirit they understood two
Divine Powers, or Influences, which God communicates in diverse manners and
degrees. It was easy for the philosophizing Doctors, following Plato's Notions
and accommodating them to the Expressions of Scripture, by those two Powers or
Influences to understand so many Persons or Hypostases, and so to alter
insensibly the Primitive Doctrine; which if they had not done, they would not
have suppressed the Writings of their Predecessors, but they judged that to be
the only way effectually to compass their design.

4. As to those Hymns or Psalms in question, which, he says, spoke of Christ as
the Word of God, and which attributed to him Divinity, nothing can from thence
be concluded against the Unitarians, for the following reasons. First, taking
those terms in a right sense, the Unitarians will by no means deny that Christ
is the Word of God, and that Divinity may be attributed to him. We have seen
that very eminent Doctors among the Primitive Christians called the Angels
Gods; much more then might they give that Name to Christ. It would indeed have
been something to the purpose, if that Author could have pleaded, that those
Psalms, of which he speaks, ascribed to Christ the same or an equal Divinity
with that of the Father, or expressed that he was absolutely Eternal, and of
himself Omniscient, like the Father. But merely in general their attributing
Divinity to Christ, decides nothing, not only considering the improper way of
speaking of those (though so early) Times after the Apostles, but also
considering that the Scripture gives the Name of God to some Creatures. And in
Chapter 5th. we observed, the Unitarians ever thought it their Duty to Sing Hymns
in Honor to Christ. Howbeit, Secondly, that Author produces no grounds for the
Authority of those Psalms which he mentions. He only affirms that they were
wrote from the beginning by the Brethren; but that is precariously said,
without any Proofs. If he had had any evidence for his assertion, no doubt he
would have offered it, and would, thereby, (if that could have done it,) have
convinced or confounded the Unitarians. But surely it was not fit for them to
take things upon trust. Satan, then chiefly, made it his particular business,
by his Emissaries, to bring in what confusion he could by forged Writings. If
those Psalms had not been spurious and counterfeit, the Authors or Primitive
Abettors of them had been named. It is probable that these were the Psalms that
were censured by the Church of Antioch, as new and dangerous. See Eusebius's
Eccles. Hist. L. 7. C. 29.

5. The Assertion of the Unitarians, that Victor and Zepherin were the first
Oppressors of Vnitarianism, is undeniably confirmed by this consideration, that
the Platonists, before those Popes, looked even on the most rigid sorts of
Unitarians as their Brethren, suffered those among them, and owned them as
Christians, who not only believed Christ not to have pre-existed before his
Conception in his Mothers Womb, but who also held that he was a mere Man,
begotten like other Men, and that Joseph was truly his Father, God, as they
thought, having only removed, for that once, some Obstacles which hindered the
Virgin from being a Mother. Notwithstanding the reputed grosness of this Error,
we see that Justin Martyr, the Patriarch of the Platonists, acknowledges that
it is not destructive of Christianity. For he thus argues with Trypho the Jew.
If I do not demonstrate that Jesus did pre-exist, and according to the Counsel
of the Father endured to be Born a Man of like Affections with us, being endued
with Flesh, it is just and fit to say that I am mistaken in this only, and not
to deny that he is the Christ, if he appear to be a Man born of Men, and to
have become the Christ by Election. For there are some of our kind, who confess
him to be the Christ, yet hold him to be a Man born of Men. To whom I assent
not; no, not though very many of the same Opinion with me should speak it, etc.
(Col. cum Tryphon. Jud. P. 207.) One may perceive how wary or artificial Justin
here is in his Expressions, as if most Christians in his time were already
Platonists. It is credible that they were not the greatest number who held that
Jesus was Joseph's Son; it is certain many of the Ebionites were of another
Opinion; ( Eusebius. L. 3. C. 24.) most probably, the generality of Christians
believed, like our Socinians and the rest of the present Christians, that
Christ had no other Father but God; and if that was the Apostles Sentiment
which Arius afterward defended, at least we may imagine that it did then still
prevail with many. But Justin, as we have seen, seems to have held something
more than this, though very different from the Nicene, or Post-Nicene Platonists;
and it is not impossible, not only that his Sentiment was confounded (or
generally taken for much the same) with that which afterward Arius was of, the
which it is credible was then (in Justin's time) the most current Standard of
Orthodoxy, but also that several others Platonized then like him, a little
above Arianism. Nevertheless Justin dares not be too positive for his Opinion,
he proposes it only as probable, and he insinuates that very many were not of
his Sentiment; which, one would be apt to think, implies that most Christians
differed from him, or that he somewhat differed from them, for it seems he
speaks like one whose Party is not most prevailing. We may refer it to the
present Trinitarians; whether they do talk at that rate? He owns, not merely
the Arians, but the very Mineans, for his Fellow Christians. And indeed he
does, like those who complain that their Sentiment is not generally followed;
he appeals to the Rule: To whom, says he, I assent not; though very many should
speak it; for we are commanded, by Christ himself, not to hearken to the
Doctrines of Men, but to such things as are taught by the Sacred Writers, Yet,
as I have said, probably there were still many Arians, and I do also believe
several others besides Justin probably began then with him to Platonize; but it
is not doubted but that he was the highest Christian Platonist of that time, if
he went beyond Arianism, which even some take to be Platonism, and the top of
it, but that is commonly rejected as undervaluing the Platonic Mysteries:
Howbeit, there is not the least appearance that any Platonic Christians went
then any further than what we call Semi-Arianism, It cannot be but that the
Unitarians knew and owned that Justin and some others then were of that
Opinion, if it was indeed so. And truly it matters not how many then sided
therein with Justin. For, howsoever that be, it suffices us that the strictest
Vnitarianism was not then condemned, as intolerable in the Church, or as
inconsistent with Christianity. And that appears incontestably from Justin's
Words. Therefore the Unitarians might well say, that the Truth was not yet
publicly adulterated, in that it was not yet magisterially condemned, which we
do not see it was before the (prevailing, and violent, Semi-Arian) Popes Victor
and Zepherin, according to the Plea of the Unitarians. And indeed they might
have added, that the Semi-Arians themselves were but a kind of Unitarians.

All the Authority, then, in fine, that remains for our Author to have recourse
to, is that of the Holy Scripture. And there the Unitarians are ready to join
issue with him, as shall be shown.

It were now needless to add any thing more to what has here been said, to show
that the generality of the Ante-nicene Writers (as much as may be gathered by
the Writings of them, that have been thought fit to be preserved or that have
been permitted to come to our hands) were at most but Semi-Arians, if not
Arians, or stricter Unitarians, as incontestably many of them were. ( Eusebius
himself will generally pass for a kind of Unitarian, whatever be said or
pretended to the contrary.) If the Reader desires to see further Proofs of
these Points, I refer him to Gilbert Clerk's Ante-Nicenismus, and the two other
Tracts annexed to it. But this truth is so notorious, that it even forces an
acknowledgement from the generality of the learnedest Trinitarian Critics,
such as Erasmus, Dalaeus, Petavius, Huetius, etc.

These Learned Men manifestly show, that Arius was not the Author of the
Sentiment which he defended against Alexander and his Party at the Council of
Nice, but that it was much the same, or exactly the same, with what the
generality of the Ante-nicene Doctors had taught. See, for instance, what
Sandius, in his Nucleus or Hist. Eccl. enucleata, quotes, on that Subject, out
of Petavius; the Place may be found, in looking, Petavius, in the Index. So
that it is certainly a true remark, that when Alexander and some of the Nicene
and Post-Nicene Doctors call Arianism an unheard of or new Doctrine, they speak
it oratorio more et per exaggerationem, as Petavius expresses it, that is, by
way of exaggeration and after the manner of Orators, whose Figures by being too
lofty sometimes decline from the Truth. We have seen, in our 6th. Chapter, by a
Quotation of Dalaeus out of St. Jerome, that the good Fathers, who are so much
admired, and whom some would take for their Rule, were not wholly exempt from
such Figures. And therefore that they might call Arianism a new and strange
Doctrine, it was enough that themselves and some of their Party had been taught
Semi-Arianism, or one Step farther, by their Platonic Tutors.

It appears then, that, if we will follow in this Matter Vincentius Lirinensis
his Rule, we must be content to stick to the Generality of the Apostles Creed.
For, besides the Generality of the Scripture it self, the Apostles Creed (which
incontestably was given for the Rule of Union, as well as for the Summary of
Religion which every one is obliged to endeavor to understand aright to the
best of his Power as he shall answer it to God) is, as to these Matters, the
only Standard which all Christians have always agreed in. As Bishop Tailor
observes, in his 2d. Sermon. on Tit. 2.7. The Catholic Church has been too
much and too soon divided. -- Yet in things simply Necessary God has preserved
us still unbroken. For all Nations and all Ages have received the Apostles
Creed. All Christian People, then, in all Ages, having only agreed, as I said,
in the Generality (or the Expressions themselves) of the Apostles Creed; that
must needs therefore be sufficient; if God has preserved us unbroken in things
simply Necessary, or if nothing is to be judged absolutely Necessary but what
all have always agreed in. Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus. Is it not
indeed sufficient, to the great Purposes of Christian Religion; to know,
concerning God, that He is All-Wise, All-Just, All Good, Almighty; to know,
that Christ is his Son, and the H. Ghost his Spirit, by way of eminency; and to
know, that Christ died to Redeem us and turn us away from our Sins, that it is
the H. Spirit of God that Suggests good Motions to us, that all those Societies
where the Institutions of Christ are observed and celebrated, and where the
pure Word of God is Preached, are true Parts of the Universal Church, that we
shall all Rise from the Dead, and that God will reward all Men according to
their Works? Is not this, to know God, and Christ? And have all Christians
always agreed in the Super-induced Platonism? Even Monsieur Jurien owns, (and
indeed who can deny it, that will deal sincerely, and has inquired into the
Matter?) that the Ante-nicene Fathers held not the Son's Eternal Personality,
nor his Equality to the Father. ( Lettr. Pastor. Vol. 3. Let. 6.) After-Ages
then, which broached these Tenets, can no more plead Tradition, than they can
reasonably be supposed to have infallibly mended the Primitive Faith. And this
leads us to the next thing to be spoken to.

CHAP. VIII. The Conclusion of the Answer, to the First Objection.
(1.) THE prevailing Sentiment of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Doctors is of no
weight against the Unitarians. And that particularly for these Reasons.

1. The Men that followed the Sentiment then prevailing differed from the
Doctrine even of the foregoing Platonists, as well as the rigid Unitarians, as
appears from what has been alleged in the last Chapter. There we have seen, it
was the current Opinion of the ancient Platonists, as well as of the strictest
Unitarians, not only that the Holy Ghost is not God, but also that the Son is
not the God that has no other God above him, has not consequently the same
Essence with the Father, and is not Eternal and Omniscient like him. What
pretense then can the Nicene and Post-Nicene Doctors, or their Disciples, have
to plead Antiquity and Universality, and to tell Us that upon that account We
ought to submit to their Sentiment? Some think that the Nicene Creed imports
very little or no more than Semi-Arianism. Howbeit, whether or no the Nicene
Platonists went further than the remaining Ante-Nicene Writers or than most or
any of them, it is evident that the Post-Nicene are gone beyond the Ante-Nicene
or Semi-Arians; and thus it is evident the Doctrine is varied from that of the
Ante-Nicene Platonists, and consequently it is in vain for the present
(Scholastic) Trinitarians to pretend to Antiquity or Tradition.

2. We plainly see what led the generality of the Nicene Doctors into farther
Error; Namely, the too much leaning to Plato, and more and more following, or,
as they might imagine, improving, his Conceits, if they went farther than the
Ante Nicene. Many of the Ante-Nicene, for two Ages before, had begun to
Platonize, as we before observed. And what was so unhappily begun by the
Christian Platonists, or Converted Philosophers, was still (it seems) carried
to a greater excess, in process of time, by the Men in Authority, and their
Followers, at least in point of rigidness and violence. Howbeit, all the
Unscriptural Niceties and Terms of Art of the suppo'd Orthodox are found in the
Philosophy of Plato, or it is Followers, (which those Fathers professed to
admire:) Can we then question from whence they drew 'em? (See Le Clerc's Life
of Eusebius, p. 69. etc.) Some think it very clear, that the Semi-Arians are
the true Platonic Trinitarians. And some esteem, that Plato's Orthodoxy goes
yet farther, and that Dr. Sherlock's or the Nicene or Post-Nicene Notions are
true Platonism. Howsoever it be, when Men had overshot themselves, they might
easily go further.

3. It is notorious, that the most part of the Nicene Doctors were
uncharitable, (and consequently unchristian,) revengeful, violent, and
ambitious Prelates, who sought nothing but to do spite to one another, to
impose imperiously upon one another, and to put one another out of their
Places. Now are not the Decisions of such Men to be much valued! And are not
such Men fit to dictate to others, and to exercise Dominion over the Conscience
of their Fellow Servants! They did so much intimidate those that followed the
ancient Doctrine, and even the Emperor himself, that for the most part these did
wretchedly prevaricate. Are those the Ways that Christianity prescribes? Or is
not this the Method to suppress the Truth, and maintain what wants good
Arguments to support itself by?

4. For the same reasons the Judgment of the Post-Nicene Fathers is altogether
insignificant. Those whom fallible Men condemn as Heretics, may be the true
Orthodox; and those who pass for and style themselves Orthodox, may be
erroneous, and may mistake in most abstruse Matters. Howbeit, the Nicene Popes,
and their Followers, domineering in the Church, as if they had been infallible,
got their Determinations backed with most severe Edicts, insomuch that it was
made no less than Death but to keep any Unitarian Writings. Thus Christians
taught one another Cruelty, and, though but just escaped themselves out of the
Heathenish Persecutions, they inhumanely Persecuted one another. No wonder then
if for the most part they led one anther, as Mules are driven with stripes;
especially considering the plausible Pretense, that this Zeal was for the
honor of Christianity. Such Measures are rightly exposed in these Words of Dr.
Whichcot. All those of a Party are bound to one Opinion, and to believe as
their Party believes. Therefore I except against those that have blindly gone
on without Consideration. For these have not acted by the Guidance of Human
Reason. Select. Sermon. p. 24.

5. What right had these Men, or any of them, to set up for Universal or
Magisterial Judges of abstruse Controversies? Who gave them Authority to decide
for other Men, and to lord it over their Faith? What title had they to straiten
the Terms of Union, and to exclude out of the Church all that dissented from
them in those at least most nice and intricate Speculations? Who commissionated
them to invent and impose, herein, new Words and Decisions, or new and
magisterial Creeds? Who ordered them to determine Magisterially to their own
Fancies the Generality of the comprehensive expressions of Scripture?

6. Notwithstanding the violence of the rigid Platonists, their novel and
unscriptural Decisions have not been constantly and universally submitted to,
but there are still and there have always been many Unitarians. There were many
good Bishops, at and after the Council of Nice, that could by no means be
prevailed upon to renounce their Faith; and their Constancy encouraged
multitudes of others to adhere to the ancient Doctrine. Not only the generality
of Christians even then were so far from holding the Holy Ghost to be God, that
the prevailing Platonists at Nice durst not determine it; but also Gregory
Nazianzen himself once owns that if they of his Party had commonly Preached
that Sentiment it would have caused confusion in the Church and scandalized
good Christians: See Petav. De Trin. L. 2. C. 7.. 2. (why could they not as
well have carried the condescension one step farther; and then all had been
well?) and we see Hilary calls the Holy Ghost but the Gift, which he prays not
to, but asks of the Father: But, moreover, maugre the extremest Severities
procured by the Nicene Fathers against the Unitarians, the Doctrine of Christ's
being a Creature remained still rooted in the Hearts of so many Christians,
that about some 20 Years after Constantine's Death the whole Christian World,
as St. Jerome expresses it, appeared to be Unitarian. Then good Gregory
comforted himself, and his few Auditors, with these Reflections; The Unitarians
have the Churches, but We Trinitarians are the Temples of God; they have the
People, but the Angels are with US; my Flock indeed is little, but they hear my
Voice. Sermon. 35 against tho Arians. But indeed the Unitarians had not only the
People, but they had also the Priests and the Bishops. Vnitarianism, the
ancient Doctrine, or that which since the proceedings against Arius is called
Arianism, was confirmed and established by ten several Councils. And that of
Rimini was the most Numerous Assembly of Bishops, that ever met tope her. Not
only several Princes and Kings and People for many Ages have been Unitarians,
but some Emperors also were converted to Vnitarianism. But those that succeeded
them, and that had been brought up in the Trinitarian Sentiment, not only made
use of the most violent Means to change the Face of Religion, but could never
be prevailed with to examine, themselves, the Merit of the Cause, witness
Theodosius the Great. Thus Prejudice and Inconsideration being arm^d with the
utmost or most obstinate Cruelty, it is no wonder if Error spread. By the like
Means, the Truth of the Reformation in these late Ages has been wholly
extirpated in Bohemia and Spain, and is now at the last gasp in France.
Nevertheless, as Sandius has shown, there have been all along many Unitarians
in several Parts of the World. And there are still to this Day many Unitarian
Churches in the Mohammedan and Pagan Dominions, and some in Transylvania,
Hungaria, Sclavonia, and Illyricum. The very Nestorian Churches in Asia and
Africa are so numerous that it is thought the Nestorians are more in Number
than all the Protestants in the World, or than all the Members of the Church of
Rome. Now even the Nestorians are reputed to be a Branch of the Arians or the
Ebionites, or near akin to them. See Sandii Nucl. p. 118. 119. and Jurieu's
Pastor Let. Vol. 1. p. 157. But particularly see what Sandius notes of the
Christians of St. Bartholomew, and of those of St. Thomas, and of St. James,
(so called because originally converted to Christianity by those Apostles,) and
of the Abyssins, the Armenians, Maronites, Copts, etc. who are Unitarians, or
agree with the Arians, and are reck'ned to be in greater Number even than the
Nestorians. Howbeit, these Considerations are not absolutely essential to the
Matter in hand. For

(8.) The Prevalency in general of an Opinion is no Argument, that it is
agreeable to Truth and acceptable to God. Witness the Universal Prevalency of
Heathenism of old, and even the great Prevalency of Mahometism. (Which shows
that God will try, but not force Men.) If you ask then the Unitarians where are
their Churches, and where they were in such or such an Age, they need not reply
otherwise than by asking again these Questions, Where were the Churches of the
true Religionists in the times of Noah, of Thara and his Son Abraham, of Elias,
and of the general Degeneracy of the Children of Israel, and all the while that
the generality of Christians, incontestably, and even according to the
Sentiment of Protestants, were defiled with many Corruptions and Superstitions
and Idolatries? The true and pure Church of God, Protestants must own, was at
those times in a manner Invisible, shut up within the Walls of a few Private
Families, exiled out of the Places of great Concourse, and driven into the
Wilderness. The People of God then indeed was but a little Flock. And why might
it not likewise be so, when the Unitarians were oppressed, were but few in
number, and were reduced to great extremities? A Thousand Years in the sight of
God is but as one Day. God may think fit to permit the Wicked and Violent to
persecute his People for many Days. Hereby he tries his Elect, he punishes
their Sins, he trains them up for Heaven through the suffering of Affliction and
Contempt, he blinds a vicious World, but at last he will show that he can draw
Light out of Darkness, and that the Strength of Hell shall not be able to
prevail finally against his Church, for God in his own time may call her from
her Exile, may redeem her from her Captivity, and make her shine as the Sun,
and then the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord as the Waters
cover the Sea. And it is certain, there is and can be no Prescription against
the Truth.

The Prevalency then of the Trinitarian Sentiment, for any of the past Ages
since the Apostles, can be no Argument against the Unitarians. We read, in the
Second Chapter of Judges, at the 7th. 10th 11th. and 12th. Verses, that the
People of Israel served the Lord all the Days of Joshuah, and all the Days of
the Elders who outlived Joshuah, and who had seen all the great Works of the
Lord that he did for Israel; but that, when all that Generation was gathered
unto their Fathers, the next Generation knew not the Lord, and the Children of
Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served other Gods, and provoked
the Lord to anger. And why could not a like Defection happen, immediately or
soon after the Decease of the Apostles? Even in the time of the Apostles there
were Heresies. And we see it is the Complaint of the earliest Doctors, that the
Apostles were no sooner departed but Christians corrupted themselves apace. And
if it was so, that ought afterward to be no Prejudice against the Truth. As
Bishop Tailor well observes in his 22d. Sermon. When a Truth returns from
Banishment by a Pestliminium, if it was from the first, though the holy Fire has
been buried or the River ran under ground, yet we do not call that new; since
Newness is not to be accounted of by a proportion to our short lived Memories,
or to the broken Records and Fragments of Story left after the Inundation of
Barbarism and War, and Change of Kingdoms, and Corruption of Authors; but by
its relation to the Fountain of our Truths, etc. Thus it is evident that the
Objection of the Trinitarians, founded upon the pretended Antiquity and
Universality of their Sentiment, is absolutely Unreasonable. And therefore We
must conclude that Controversy, with this Consideration; Viz.

(9.) The only Authority that We can and ought to rely upon, is that of the
Bible. As Mr. Chillingworth excellently well says, the BIBLE only is the
Religion of Protestants. I see plainly, says he, Fathers against Fathers, Popes
against Popes, the same Fathers against themselves, Councils against Councils,
etc. What Method then to judge of the Truth can We take, but that which even
St. Austin proposes? Contr. Maxim. L. 3. C. 14. We ought not, says he, to
object to one another either the Council of Nice or that of Rimini, but We are
to consider the Matter by the Scripture it self. Dalaeus in the first Chapter
of his first Book De usu Patrum quotes a Passage out of St. Cyprian, importing,
that when the Channels or Streams of the Ecclesiastical Tradition seem confuse,
or broken and corrupted, we must have recourse to the Spring or Fountain's
Head. Every Man's Reason, that considers, will tell him, that there are no other
Measures then to be taken, there being no later Prescription to be taken
against the Truth. And God himself expressly sends us thither. Isa. 8.20. To the
Law, or the (Divine) Testimony: If they speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no Light in them. But as for the Fathers, it is evident that
no stress can be laid on their Authority; for, as the learned Daleus shows in
his Book of the Use of the Fathers, they all had Errors, and differed from one
another in several weighty Particulars, and often differed from their own
selves, being unsettled and inconstant in their Notions, not knowing their own
Mind, one day holding one thing, and another time asserting the contrary. This
may be a Sign, that they searched after the Truth, like other Men, as well as
they could; (which is very commendable, and is every ones indispensible Duty:)
But it is not the Character of those, who are infallible, and who must
implicitly and absolately be followed as our Rule.

CHAP. IX. A Second (General) Objection, against the Unitarian System, Answered.
THE next Objection, on which the Trinitarians commonly lay great stress, is,
That the Work of Redemption, and what the Scripture ascribes to our Savior, is
above the Capacity of a Man, it being impossible for a Creature, to become the
Object of Worship and hear the Prayers of Men, to make Satisfaction for Sins or
reconcile God to these that have forfeited his Favor, to know the Hearts, to
forgive Sins, to govern the Universe, to raise the Dead, to judge the World,
and do whatsoever the Father does.

In answering this, this Reflection cannot but be premised; that it is
lamentable, Men are usually so careless as not to inform themselves rightly of
the Sentiment of those whom they condemn, or are so unsincere as not fairly to
represent it. But most certainly this is the Case here. As for my part, I
absolutely take party neither with the Socinians nor with the Arians, but think
it presumptuous to determine expressly a Mystery which the Scripture has left in
a great Generality. Howbeit, I see plainly, and am fully persuaded, that the
present Objection is wholly groundless, and does not in the least invalidate
either of those Systems; for it is founded on an (either wilfully or otherwise)
erroneous and mistaken Supposition, as if the Arians or Socinians held our
Savior to be a mere Creature, or a mere Man. Surely it is a Point of Justice,
and a Duty of Christian Charity, not to misrepresent the Cause of any Party,
but to endeavor to take it in the best Sense, and put upon it the favourablest
Construction possible. But the quite contrary is done in this Objection. The
Unitarians therefore answer it thus.

According to our Sentiment, Christ, in the business of Salvation or
Redemption, is not left to work with the bare Strength and Capacity of a Man,
but is commissionated of God and by him constituted in Authority, constantly
enlightened and influenced by the Holy Spirit, and directed and assisted by the
Divine Wisdom and Power dwelling in him. For we hold, agreably to the
Scripture, that (the Father assisting, acting and dwelling in his Son, by his
Inspiration and the Influences of his Power and Wisdom,) the Fullness of the
Godhead, inhabiting in him, by its constant concurrence enables him to perform
all that he is appointed to do. Christ therefore, in the Execution of his
Office, is not to be considered as a mere Creature, but as a Creature in and by
which God works, and which acts for God, and most eminently represents God, and
is most intimately possible one with God. There is no Unitarian but holds all
this; believing that by the said Means there is as strict an Union betwixt the
Godhead and Christ as there can be betwixt God and a Creature. This is
particularly what the Arians mean, in giving the title of God to our Lord Jesus
Christ. And this especially is what the Socinians intimate, by their seemingly
strange Saying, that Christ was made God, Homo Deus factus.

What Advantage then over the Unitarians have the Trinitarians. by their Notion
of the Incarnation of a supposed Second Divine Person? Can any thing be done by
a Man supposed Hypostatically or Personally United with a Second Divine Person,
that cannot be performed by a Man in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in
the manner aforesaid? Since it is the Godhead, dwelling in Christ, that does
the Mavelous Works, can he not do whatsoever God pleases, and whatsoever God
can do?

And indeed what can the Trinitarians mean by their Term of the Hypostatical
Union of a Divine Person with Christ's Human Nature, but this In-dwelling of
the Godhead in the Man Christ Jesus? Dr. Sherlock, at the 210th. and 211th.
Pages of his Answer to the Bishop of Gloucester's Book, gives the true
Description of the Trinitarian Notion of the Incarnation in these Words. The
perfect Wisdom and Goodness of our Savior was not mere Human Nature, though as
innocent and perfect as Human Nature can be in this World; but the Divinity
dwelling and acting in Human Nature, influencing and guiding all its Motions,
as the Soul governs the Body; for this is a true Notion of a God Incarnate,
that God lives and acts in Human Nature, and is the Principle of all its
Actions and Motions.

And is there any thing here that the Unitarians do not hold? Do they assert,
that Christ did any thing without the Divine Motions, or without God's Guidance
and Acting in him? They firmly believe, that the Man Christ Jesus readily and
willingly assented to the whole Will of God, and that God constantly assisted
him, and thus wrought in and by him all the Supernatural Works that Christ did.

What color of reason then have the Trinitarians to pretend, that the Work of
Redemption surpasses the Capacity which the Unitarians ascribe to Christ? It is
plain, that, since the Unitarians assert that God constantly influences and
guides, assists and acts in and by Christ, (which it seems is the Sum of what
the Trinitarians themselves hold, which expressly is all that the Scripture
teaches of the Union between God and Christ, and which most certainly suffices
to empower Christ to do whatsoever God can do,) the Dispute and Quarrel here of
the Trinitarians with the Unitarians is altogether groundless and
unwarrantable. We have all the reason imaginable to love God with all our Soul,
and to be eternally thankful to his Divine Majesty, for thus addressing himself
to us miserable Sinners, wonderfully speaking and acting in and by his Son
Christ Jesus to reconcile the World unto himself, and enabling him to Save to
the uttermost all those that come to God through him.

As was said, this is all that the Scripture expressly teaches us concerning
this Matter. The Scripture represents God doing all things for Christ, upon his
request. The Trinitarians therefore cannot justly find fault with the Doctrine
of the Unitarians concerning our Savior's Person. But the Unitarians are
bound, to reject what the Trinitarians add thereto not only without express
Authority of Scripture but contrary to the clearest Light of Scripture and
Reason.

Although God by the Influence of his Divine Wisdom and Power dwells in Christ,
and is represented as constantly assisting him and acting in and by him, yet
the Scripture no where says that God (or the Father) and Christ make but one
Person. It cannot be imagined, and the Trinitarians themselves do not assert,
that by God's dwelling in Christ is meant any more than God's constant guiding
and assisting him. Now it no way follows, that because a Son wills all that
his Father wills, and the Father constantly guides and assists his Son,
therefore the Father and the Son are but one Person. But it is evident, that,
the Father being an intelligent Being, and the Son a distinst intelligent Being
from the Father, the Father and the Son must necessarily be two Persons. For a
Spirit, as long as he exists, cannot but have always in himself, distinctly
from all other Spirits, what constitutes a Person, and can say some things of
himself distinctly from others. Thus, how strictly soever God and Christ be
United, Christ can say of himself that he is a Creature so many Ages Old, and
God can say that he is Self existent and never had a Beginning. Now here are
two he is, or two l's, and consequently 2 Persons, for these are Personal
Pronouns, and each of them denotes a distinct Person.

And the Scripture is so far from asserting God and Christ to be one Person,
that it constantly distinguishes Christ from God. Indeed, in the
Scripture-stile, a special Messenger and Representative may bear the Name of
him whom he most especially acts for and represents. And Christ may moreover be
termed a God in an Inferior Sense, as Kings and Princes are called Gods in
Scripture. He may also be called God, inasmuch as a Divine Influence most
intimately dwells in him. But the Scripture not only no where says that Christ
is literally the same God with the eternal God, (or is the Whole of the
Father,) but it teaches the contrary. For it all along represents Christ as a
Man in whom God dwells, and whom God exalts to the highest Dignity over all
other Creatures. And Christ himself expressly says, that the Father is greater
than be. Which manifestly imports, that though God dwells and acts in him, yet God
is distinct from him, and still keeps the Supreme Authority to himself,
reserving to himself the Power to act in him when or so far as he pleases, for
he was not pleased, for instance, to enable him to dispose wholly of the Gifts
of the Spirit till after his Ascension, and he had not revealed to him when
should be the Day of Judgment, but kept to himself the Times and Seasons, etc.
Thereby then it appears, that Christ is but a Man acting for God, and to that
end assisted of God, as was said; though the Trinitarians generally will not
allow him to be truly a Man, but only a Human Nature, which is but an imaginary
Shadow of a Man. When they call him God-Man, they mean only a Divine Person
united with their General Conception of a Human Nature that has no real
Subsistence, which is not truly a Man. For, as the Bishop of Gloucester
excellently well observes, ( p. 63d. of his Reflections upon the late
Examination of the Discourse of the Descent of the Man Christ Jesus from
Heaven,) to say that the Man Jesus has no Subsistence of his own, is to say
that he has no other Subsistence than an Accident has in union with the
Substance to which it belongs; and this makes him inferior to any Man God ever
made. Nay, this actually unmans him. (Therefore the Bishop rightly calls this
monstrous Doctrine Scholastic Gibberish.) Whereas the Scripture not only never
calls Christ a God Man, but in a great many places calls him a Man, ( John
8.40. John 1.30. Acts 13.38. 1 Timothy 2.5. etc.) and expressly says, that, as to
his Person and Human Circumstances, he was in all things like unto us, Sin
excepted. ( Hebr. 2.17. Hebr. 4.15. 1 Cor. 15.21.) Now if he be a Man he has a
Subsistence of his own, for so has a Man; and if he has a Subsistence of his
own, he cannot be supposed to be united to the Godhead, and to be a God, but as
the Unitarians hold he is, Namely, inasmuch as God constantly guides him and
acts in and by him in the High Station in which He has placed him, (which,
after all, the Trinitarians, as we have seen, own is all they mean by the
Incarnation or Personal Union;) and so it is most incontestably evident, that
notwithstanding the Difference that the Trinitarians make between Them and the
Unitarians, they can give no reason for their pretense, that according to the
Unitarian System the Lord Jesus is Vncapacitated for the Work of Redemption.
And if he were So according to the Unitarian, from what has been said it
manifestly appears he should as much be So according to the Trinitarian Scheme.
For both found his Capacity upon the In-dwelling or Assisting Godhead in him.

To this the Trinitarians reply, that except the Godhead and the Man Jesus
Christ were supposed to make but one Person, Christ could not be said, as be
is, to do those things, which none but the Divine Power does. Therefore it must
be inferred, that this one Person, Christ, is God-Man, and implies a Divine and
a Human Nature Personally-united together. For the Scripture attributes the
Miracles of our Savior to his own inherent Power, and his Revelations and
Prophesies to his own Personal Knowledge. For it is said, that he knew what was
in Man, that he rebuked the Wind and the Sea, that he will raise the Dead at
the last Day, etc.

To this Plea the Unitarians answer, that, by the same reasoning, when our
Savior promised his Disciples ( John 14.12,) that They should Do greater Works
than those he had done, the Trinitarians cannot avoid concluding, that they
should do those Miracles by their own Power, and that they should then be
considered as indeed Personally-united with the Godhead. But cannot the
Trinitarians consider, that Men may be said to do those things, which are
effected by the Means and Helps which they make use and can dispose of? Is not
a General said to take a City, which his Army storms at his Orders? Is not a
Physician said to do a Cure, that is effected, with God's Blessing, by the
Remedy he has prescribed? In like manner may not Men be said to do those
things, which are wrought by the Power, which God has invested them with, or
granted them the disposal of? To come then to the objected Particulars.

Christ works Miracles, raises the Dead, forgives Sins, and does whatsoever the
Father does, by desiring God to do these things, at his request, which the
Father allows him to ask and to expect of him. Therefore, all things
whatsoever, that he sees or knows the Father does or can do, and that are
requisite to the fulfilling the Work of Salvation, Christ begs the Father to do
them, and, the Father doing them at this his most beloved Son's Intercession,
Christ is censed or reckoned to do them. The way that all Intelligent Beings Do
those Things that God has put in their Power, is by Willing them, and Using the
Means which God or Reason has shown they may be effected by. For instance; For
a Man to move his Hands or Feet, his Soul needs but to will it; to nourish his
Body, he must take the things, and apply them, as God has appointed to that
end. Now, it seems, all the Means which God has appointed for Christ to do
whatsoever the Father does, is to know them, to know the Father will do them
for him, and to desire them of the Father. For though it be said, that Christ did
and is to do most wonderful Works, yet the Scripture is very far from saying
that he does them of Himself, or by his own Power. Himself says the quite
contrary. John 5.19. The Son can do nothing of himself. John 14.^0. The Father
that dwells in me, He does the Works. Matthew. 12.28. I cast out Devils by the
Spirit of God. And John 11.41, 42. Father, I thank thee that thou Hear me
always. How could Christ have declared more expressly, that he does not the
Supernatural Works by his own Power, but by the Means which have been said,
Namely, By knowing that the Father will do them for him, and By desiring the
Father to do them by his Divine Power and by what Means He pleases to use?
Seeing that the Father has promised our Savior to hear him always, he may
truly say, that all things which the Father has are his. And therefore it is
certain, that not only there never was such another Prophet as Christ, but also
that he is the most Excellent and most Dignified Creature that can be. But yet,
we see, it does not follow, that, because he does what none but God can do, he
is therefore hypostatically united with a Divine Person, and, that, distinct
from the Father. The Scripture shows us, How Christ does all Supernatural
Things; he himself tells us, he desires the Father to do them, and the Father
always grants his requests, and does what he desires; and he desires nothing
but what he knows the Father will grant; and the Father has promised, and
constantly gives him, whatsoever is necessary for the Discharge of his Office.

Christ then may truly say, that as the Father has Life in himself, or at his
disposal, so has he given to the Son to have Life in himself. For as the Father
does all things by Willing them, so Christ does all things by Desiring them. As
God has put Power in the Natural Sun, to vivify all Seeds in the Earth; so he
has, in an infinitely more excellent way, invested Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, with Power to quicken the Dead. But still the Power of the Lord
Jesus is the Divine Power. And we see, that, as we have said, God makes Christ
to be Partaker thereof. So that as the Father has Divine Power in him; so has
He given to the Son to have Divine Power in him; insomuch, that when the Father
has shown him a Miraculous Thing, the Son can do the same likewise, by the
Assistance of the Divine Power, which dwells in him, and which he constantly
has the use of, by Willing and Asking, or affectionately Desiring.

Thus; Christ knows the Hearts, by the same Means; by the Divine Power that is
in him, or annexed to him, and that reveals them to him. (See the Brief History
of the Unitarians, on John 2.25. and Revel. 2.23.) So that; as Dr. Sherlock
himself says, at the top of the 196th Page of his last Book; the Knowledge of
Christ is from the Father's dwelling in him. And by that Means, Christ Governs
the Universe, and will Judge the World.

As to Christ's Efficacy in obtaining Forgiveness for all those Sinners, whom
he persuades and excites to forsake their Sins and to become Obedient and New
Creatures; it is the strangest thing in the World to imagine, that God cannot
grant that (which is altogether agreeable to the Propensions of his own Nature)
to his most beloved Son, even upon that Act and Submission of his, which argues
the most perfect Obedience, and makes the most solemn Reparation to the Divine
Justice and Authority.

As Dr. Whichcot expresses himself upon this Subject, Pages 62 d and 63 d of
his Select Sermons; We are in the hands of him that is Primarily and Originally
Good: And He will certainly commiserate every Case, so far as it is
compassionable. Now the Case of a Sinner is compassionable, if he be Penitent.
God might then surely accept of Christ's Sacrifice as as sufficient Atonement,
seeing that it so fully confirms God's Hatred to Sin and his Good Will to those
that Obey him, and is consequently the powerfullest Motive and the likeliest
Means to engage those for whom that Sacrifice is offered, and who are not yet
incorrigible, to forsake their evil Ways, to accept the Offers of Grace, and to
be reconciled to God. Christ's Death is the fullest Confirmation of God's Good
Will to those that obey him, seeing that upon the account of his Son's perfect
Obedience He has exalted him to the highest Glory, even of being Partaker of
the Divine Nature and Power. And it is also the fullest Confirmation of God's
absolute Hatred to Sin, seeing He would not pardon the Sins of Men without this
Consideration and Condition, that he, who was Innocent and the most Perfect and
Excellent Creature, and pleaded for the Fallen Race of Mankind should, as their
Advocate, suffer in their stead, expiate their Sins with his Blood, and thus
exhibit a most solemn Demonstration of the Demerit of Sin. But this no where is
represented in Scripture as a perfectly equivalent Satisfaction in the most
rigorous sense. And neither Scripture nor Reason show, that God can Pardon but
upon such Terms. (See the aforesaid Sermons of Dr. Whichcot, Page 301, etc. on
Act. 13.38.)

As the Bishop of Gloucester observes, at the 85th and following Pages of his
aforesaid Reflections on the Book of Dr. Sherlock against him; Christ's
meriting of God the Father cannot be understood in the highest sense of
meriting, as we may merit of one another; that is, by doing acts of Kindness
and Beneficeace from mere Good Will, or no antecedent Obligation to the Person
to whom the Kindness is shown. It Is nothing but the wretched Popish Doctrine of
Merit, that has made it an offensive word in relation to God. But taking
Meritum and Mereri in the Fathers sense, there is no offense to be taken at it,
as respecting God: For they meant no more than having a right to be rewarded by
him, from the performance of that Obedience or Service to which he has annexed
the reward by a most gracious Promise. But as it is impossible to do God
Almighty a Kindness or Benefit, so I cannot understand how the Son of God
himself could, in this sense, merit of his Father the Redemption of Mankind:
since he did or suffered, by virtue of the Union, nothing but what the Will of
his Father obliged him unto. Lo, I come, said he, to do thy Will, O God. And
his perfectly complying with this Will, was his meriting our Redemption of his
Father, as He willed to make him the Author thereof upon that Condition. And
therefore Mr. Calvin says well, Totum Meritum Christi pendet a Voluntate
Divina. Now, will any Man say, that Christ, as Man, did not thus merit?

Then by the most wonderful Submission and Self-Resignation of the Man Christ
Jesus, who was most Innocent, to the dreadful and undeserved Death of the
Cross, God's absolute Authority over his Creatures was most highly vindicated,
after Adam and his apostate Offspring had woefully eclipsed the Glory of his
Sovereignty, and the Authority of his Laws. This Second Adam, by the sinless
and most perfect Obedience of his Life, was an high Vindicator thereof; but his
enduring most inexpressible Torments, (which he did as Man,) and dying the most
cursed Death of the Cross, as our Sacrifice, did God the Father as high Honor,
in the Face of the Sun, as all the Sins of Mankind, put together, could do him
Dishonor. And by this means this Sacrifice became Satisfactory, so as that God
would, for the sake thereof, grant Terms of Pardon and Reconciliation to Fallen
Mankind, since He now saw it most agreeable to all his Attributes to do so. Thus
far this Learned Prelate.

In Sum; in Answer to the whole Objection. Christ is the Excellentest Creature
possible, and the most like unto God, and the fittest to be an Instrument in
the Hand of God; and God entirely loves him, and continually communicates to
him the Use of the Divine Power and the Assistance of the Divine Wisdom, and
the Fullness of the Godhead constantly dwells in him, and in his State of
Humiliati^n he received the Holy Spirit without measure and not in small
portions and by intervals like the Prophets, and all the Angels and Archangels
are wholly subjected to him as their Prince, and incessantly attend his Orders,
God being willing to make him as Great as a Creature can be made, and God in
fine is as much United to him as it is possible for God to be United with a
Creature, God remaining still a distinct Being, and the Creature a distinct
Person; And the Unitarians hold, that such an excellent and dignified Creature
as this, can obtain of God and can perform any thing, that is to be performed
or obtained, and they do not conceive what more than this the Trinitarians can
reasonably think to be requisite.

It may be observed, that according to the Unitarian System our Lord Jesus
Christ is a more precious and worthy Being than all other Creatures together;
that, yet, not only the word, Satisfaction, is no where in Scripture, but also
that it is not the Notion of Sacrifices and Attonements to make a full
Compensation; that under the Gospel the Acts of Piety and Obedience which are
most acceptable to God are figuratively called Attonements or Sacrifices, (as
Almsgiving, Praying with fervor, Mortifying carnal Affections, which is
termed the offering our Bodies in Sacrifice to God;) and that by many Places of
Scripture it appears that this expression, to redeem, signifies to deliver from
some Evil, and to put into a better State. See Exodus 6.6. and 15.13. Luke 1.68.
Ps. 49.7, 8, 15. and 111.9. Luke 2.38. etc.

An Appendix to the IXth. Chapter.
THERE remains but one Article to be here considered, to give a particular and
full Answer to every Branch of the Objection mentioned in the beginning of this
Chapter. It is this; that, according to the Ideas which the Unitarian System
gives of Christ, it seems, he cannot be supposed to be able to hear the Prayers
of Men, or to be a proper Object of Worship. But this will particularly appear
to be a groundless and unnecessary piece of Wrangling, if these Considerations
be duly weighed.

1. There are diverse Kinds of Worship, according to the Nature of the Subject
to whom it is to be paid. (See Grotius on Revel. 19.10.) All that the
Trinitarians can ascribe to Christ, in following the Scripture, consists in
reverencing him, to the Honor of the Father, as the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and, under God, the Universal Monarch, acting for the Father, in whom
the Father dwells, whom the Father most extraordinarily assists with his Divine
Wisdom and Power, to enable him, in his Mediatory Kingdom, to govern the
Universe and save to the uttermost those that come to God through him, and with
whom consequently the Divine Nature is as intimately United as possible. (The
Trinitarians acknowledge, that the whole Person of Christ is the Mediator of
the New Covenant, and consequently it seems incontestable that the whole Person
of Christ is to be honored as Mediator, or with Mediatory and Subordinate
Honor, having received Kingdom, Power, and Godhead, from the Father, and
acting for the Father.) Now thus, and according to all these and the like
respects, the Unitarians worship the Lord Jesus Christ, and no otherwise; even
as one who is appointed to be honored to the Glory of the Father, as one who
is exalted to the highest Dignity in the Universe, and as one with whom the
Divine Nature is as intimately united as possible, so as that he is enlightened
with the Divine Wisdom, and he disposes of the Divine Power and Inspiration, as
of his own, it being made his, by his Union to the Divine Nature, and by the
Father his dwelling in him, or by the Divine Assistance and Inspiration without
measure attending him, always conducting and illuminating him, and thereby
exalting his Spirit to the highest Pitch of Grandeur, Wisdom, and Power, and
making him in the most eminent manner possible one with God.

2. The Unitarians thus holding the Lord Jesus Christ United and Assisted with
the Divine Nature, the Trinitarians cannot justly pretend, that the Unitarian
System represents him as unable to perform any thing, which by the Trinitarian
Notion of the Incarnation he may be supposed to be capable of; seeing the
Unitarians hold, that he, without measure, (according to the Scripture Phrase,)
is illuminated with the Divine Wisdom, and disposes of and is assisted by and
enjoys the Divine Power as his own: so that he may hear Men, and succor them.
It appears nevertheless, as was said, incontestable, that (his Kingdom, as was
observed, being but a Mediatory Kingdom, or his Reign being but a Government
under God, subject to and directed by the Father, so that the Father is still
to be considered not barely as jointly ruling, but as literally the Supreme
Ruler) the Lord Jesus Christ cannot reasonably be addressed to but as Mediator,
or as the Vicegerent of the Universe, and consequently is to be worshipped but
with a Mediatory or a Subordinate Worship. Wherefore the Body of the Prayers
ought not to be addressed to him, (as they are in the Litany;) but the Father
generally is to be Prayed to, in the Name or through the Mediation of the Son:
And some Ejaculations, and (particularly at the end or beginning of the
Service) a short Address may be offered to the Son, to beseech him, to
Intercede for us, to have Mercy upon us, and to assist us with his Grace. And
according to the Unitarian System the Lord Jesus Christ can be thus addressed
to and worshipped. This Subject, concerning the Worship of Christ as Mediator,
(or as a Man exalted to the High Honor with which it has pleased God to dignify
him,) is fully treated of by Limborch, in his Theologia Christiana, Lib. 5.
Cap. 18. The Author of the Humble Inquiry, at P. 15th. and 16th. of that Book,
observes, this Doctrine, concerning Christ's Human Nature being capable, to know
what passes upon Earth, and so to see and hear and assist Men, is so far from
being (with any justice or reason) to be by the Trinitarians objected to the
Unitarian System, that the greatest part and the most Learned of the
Trinitarians agree with Socinus in this Point. For the Schoolmen, both
Thomists and Scotists, and the Lutherans, generally, ascribe this Universal
Knowledge to the Man Jesus Christ. And of the Modern Reformed Divines, that
Author quotes Mr. Baxter, Dr. Goodwin, together with a worthy Divine of the
Church of England who wrote a Book called The Good Samaritan, asserting, that
an Angel might be capable of Ruling the Universal Church on Earth; [now a Human
Soul in a gross and fleshy Body is an Angel shackled, and straightened in a dark
and close Dungeon, where he cannot exert his Powers and Faculties, no more than
an Infant can reason like a Philosopher, but the Impediments being removed a
Human Spirit is (wise and free and powerful) like an Angel, and knows as he is
known, and perhaps can direct the Course of the Sun, or move the Globe of the
Earth, as easily as a Child can a Tennis-Ball;] that the Man Jesus Christ as
easily inspects the whole Earth as we can view a Globe of an Inch Diameter;
that he Intercedes particularly as Man and cannot be thought to Intercede in a
Case if he do not know it; that the Human Understanding of Christ takes in all
Occurrences which concern his Church; that like the Sunbeams He pierces into
every corner; and that as a Looking-Glass wrought in the form of a Globe
represents the Images of all that is in the Room, so the enlarged Human
Understanding of Christ takes in all things in Earth at once. (The Unitarians
would only add, that Christ does this, by the Affistance of the Divine Nature,
dwelling in him, and both enlarging and inlightning his Understanding. And
indeed if Christ acting in God's stead at the Head of the Universe represented
not God, to the Glory and Service of God, and by God's Appointment, and if the
Divine Nature, the Divine Knowledge, Power and Authority, dwelled not in the
Man Jesus Christ, as the Unitarians hold; their Worship of him would be a kind
of Idolatry: That is to say; if the Father, by his own Appointment, was not
worshipped in Christ, in whom incontestably He most eminently dwells; or, which
is the same, if Christ was not appointed by God, to be worshipped, to the Glory
of the Father; to which end it is necessary, that the Father should make him
partaker of his Nature and Power, as has been said; for though the Foreknowledge
of Christ be not Universal, and though at sometimes he feels greater Influences
of the Godhead dwelling in him than at some other times, yet he must always
receive sufficient Influences thereof to enable him to discharge the Parts of
his Mediatory Kingdom; and the Godhead, by a Divine Power, which is an
Influence of the Father's, must constantly refide in and be as intimately as
possible United with Christ, to make him the most eminent Divine Schechina, and
to capacitate him to represent, as he does, and act for, the Father, at the
Helm of Government over all things, so that, being such a Representative of God
as neither is nor ever was the like besides Him, He truly exhibits God, and the
Divine Majesty, dwelling in him in a most extraordinary manner.) In a word, We
hold that no other is of himself God, or properly and eminently God, Eternal
and Almighty, but the Father. And we own no other for Inferior Gods, but such
as are truly so, according to the Divine Order and Appointment: And we honor
them accordingly. But God only We worship with properly Divine Worship.
Howbeit, We worship God mediately or relatively in the Person of his
Representative, and Chief Officer, Jesus Christ, who, under God, is the
Sovereign Prince, and Great Lord, or God, or Universal King, who acts most
eminently for God, that God may be honored in him, and who is appointed
thereto, to be honored, and bowed to, or worshipped, to the Glory of God. And
so we may truly and allowably worship God, immediately in his own Person, and
mediately in the Person of his Lieutenant and most eminent Representative
appointed thereunto, that God may be worshipped in him, in the extraordinary
Honor that is paid him.

3. The Unitarians unanimously hold, that indeed we constantly are to bow the
knee to and worship the Lord Jesus Christ, in offering our Petitions to the
Father in his Name and through his Mediation, but that it is not necessary to
address our selves otherwise than thus to him, and that this is sufficiently to
call upon his Name in Prayer. And in the most ancient Lyturgies extant, there
are but very few words addressed to Christ. Which shows, that originally
Christians addressed the current of their Prayers to the Father: excepting
when, in a Vision, they saw the Lord Jesus Christ, and heard him speak to them;
which St. Paul acquaints us happened to him once in the Temple, 2 Cor. 12.8.9.

4. It cannot indeed, reasonably, be denied, but that, when God in general is
Prayed to, and these Prayers are put up in the Name of Christ; then, both, the
Mediatory Honor due to our Savior is thereby paid him, and all is Supremely
Worshipped that is to be Adored with Supreme or Direct and Ultimate Worship.
Our Lord assures his Disciples, that whatsoever they shall ask the Father in
his Name, the Father will give it them. John, 16.23. No more then can be
absolutely needful. In a word, the Unitarians honor the Godhead above all
things, and the Man Jesus Christ above all other Creatures. What can the
Trinitarians do more? Or what can they in this Worship justly reprehend? Both
Christ and the Holy Ghost will nothing but what the Father wills, and they
will all that the Father wills: Manifestly therefore it is sufficient to
address to the Father; the Government of the Universe is but one Government;
though God be the Supreme, and though Christ have a Sovereignty over all Creatures,
yet, considering the Subordination and Good Order, and considering the perfect
Agreement of their Wills and Affections, there is as it were but One Sovereign;
but the Father is alone in himself the One only true Sovereign, the Sovereign
properly and eminently; all own He sustains the Chiefest Part in the Supreme
Majesty, Authority and Government.

CHAP. X. A Third (General) Objection, consisting of Four Branches.
THE last General Objection, which the Trinitarians commonly reckon to be
decisive against the Unitarian Interpretations and System, may be conceived as
comprising these Particulars, and may be Summarily expressed in these Terms.

The Unitarians their too much leaning to Human Reason is the Cause of their
Error, wherefore they should consider, that Reason, though an excellent Light and
Guide so far as its Province and Capacity extends, is, in some most sublime
Points, short-sighted and blind, and consequently an incompetent Judge; then
they might discern, that the Unitarian Interpretations, besides that they imply
most unlikely Assertions, are forced and unnatural, and so remote from the
obvious Import of the Words, that it is not to be conceived the generality of
Christians, when they read the Scripture, can find out such Interpretations,
and imagine that it is to be understood in that Sense, and therefore it is
incredible that that is the true Meaning thereof; moreover, in opposition to
all Reasonings, it is to be observed, that there are many Texts of Scripture,
which make up a strong Evidence of the truth of the Trinitarian Sentiment,
whereas, in fine, the Texts that the Unitarians allege seem not express and
positive for their System.

All these things are put together in one Objection, because they depend of or
expressly support one another; the Intendment of the Argument being to convince
the Unitarians that they hearken too much to Reason and too little to
Scripture. This Objection then is properly made up of these Four Branches,
which if the Reader pleases he may consider as so many distinct Objections, and
which are so considerable that they very much deserve to be illustrated and
carefully weighed, to understand the utmost force of them.

(1.) That Reason, though an excellent Light and Guide so far as its Province and
Capacity reaches, is, in several mysterious Instances, short-sighted and blind,
and consequently an incompetent Judge.

(2.) That the Unitarian Interpretations imply some most unlikely Assertions,
and are, besides that, forced and unnatural, and so remote from the obvious
Import of the Words that it is not to be conceived the generality of Christians
can understand the Scripture in that Sense.

(3.) That there are many Texts of Scripture, which, even taken asunder, but
especially being put together, make up a strong Evidence for the Trinitarian
Sentiment.

(4.) That the Texts, which the Unitarians allege, seem not express and
positive for their System.

(1.) That Reason, though an excellent Light and Guide so far as its Province and
Capacity reaches, is, in several mysterious Instances, short-sighted and blind,
and consequently an incompetent Judge. The generality of Men attribute either
too little or too much to Reason. Howbeit, if things be calmly and very
carefully considered, it will be found that We ought to keep to a Mean betwixt
these two Extremes.

Reason is to the Mind, what the Eyes are to the Body. None but the Blind can
think that the Eyes are of no use to judge of Material Objects. Nevertheless,
if we should take no other Counsel but that of our Eyes, we could not avoid the
being deceived in several Instances.

The same must be said of Reason. Undoubtedly it is a noble and excellent
Faculty. By a right use of it, We may credibly demonstrate the Being of a God,
the Duties of Holiness and Virtue, the Futurity of Reward and Punishment, and
all the eternal Truths of Natural Religion.

Notwithstanding all this, it is certain those have not thoroughly considered the
most obvious things, who do not discern, that in many Cases Reason is not only
at a loss, but directly leads us to Error, actually representing to us several
things as false, contradictory and impossible, which yet we may be sure are not
such.

We see then by experience, that there can be nothing more unreasonable and
unsafe than this Resolution, To believe Reason in nothing or to believe it in
all things.

If we were to trust our Eyes at all times or else at no time at all, We must
be forced to deny our being sensible that the Sun Shines when in its greatest
Splendour, or We must be confident that all Sticks are Crooked when part in
Water, as they seem then to be, and that all Towers are Round, because they
appear so, at a certain distance.

Every Man knows, that there are some Means, to be assured when We ought, and
when We ought not to credit our Eyes. In like manner, it cannot be doubted but
that there are some Rules, whereby, if We carefully attend to them, We may be
satisfied when our Reasonings are true and certain, and when not. (If these
Rules were set into the greatest Light possible by considering Men, that could
not but be an excellent Means to detect manifestly all dangerous Errors. Then
it might be shown, that Transubstantiation need not be believed, though the
Trinity may.) For instance.

We see by experience, as was observed, that our Eyes deceive us, when, for
instance, they will judge of the nicest Circumstances of Objects at a great
distance from Us. And therefore We find it rational not to determine our
Judgment, concerning these Particulars, without further Evidence. But if
credible Persons assure us, that, to their certain knowledge, that Tower, for
instance, is Square, which at a distance appears Round, We do not at all esteem
it irrational, but most agreeable to Reason, to credit them, before, or rather
than, the present Judgment of our own Eyes.

Likewise, concerning our Spiritual Eyesight. There are undoubtedly several
mysterious or sublime Matters, above the reach of Human Understanding. There
are several things, which expressly appear to be impossible, which yet We are
sure are certainly true.

We have, before, supposed that there are many such things. To give now some
Instances of them; There are Demonstrations against the Possibility of Motion,
holding that there is no Vacuum; and, holding a Vacuum, there are other
Demonstrations against it: And yet there must either be a Vacuum or no Vacuum,
and whether there be a Vacuum or no, We actually see there is Motion.

In like manner, We are sure, there must be such a thing as Eternity, and it
must either consist of an eternal Succession of Moments, or else it must be an
eternal Instant without Succession, the whole Eternity always present, without
any part of it past or to come; yet, which of the two ways We hold, We find
therein express and most manifest and unavoidable Contradictions.

We meet likewise with evident Contradictions and Impossibilities, whether We
assert Matter to be divisible infinitely, or whether We suppose the contrary;
and yet it is plain there can be no Medium, but it must necessarily be either
the one or the other.

There are many such Cases. Now, what can We say to such things, but that they
are mysterious, and that, so far as they are so, they are above our Capacity to
judge of them, or to determine our selves about the contrary Contradictions
concerning them?

But suppose a competent and credible Judge should certify to us which side the
truth lies; so far as that Judge should appear to be a good Judge, it would be
rational to assent to his Declaration, notwithstanding the Contradictions which
our Reason finds in the Subject.

If such a Judge, for instance, should tell us, that Matter is divisible
infinitely, that Eternity is a perpetual Duration without Succession, and that
there is no Vacuum, it would be irrational not to believe him. Our own Reason
in such a Case shows us, that, seeing we are credibly assured he knows these
things, not only better than We, but perfectly well, it is reasonable to submit
all our Difficulties to his Testimony.

It is then most evident, that in some Cases the most express Contradictions
ought not in Reason to hinder our belief. For We believe that Matter either is
Divisible infinitely or is not Divisible infinitely, though it is well known
there are manifest Demonstrations against either of those Systems. We firmly
believe there is such a thing as Eternity, though which way imaginable soever We
conceive it to be, We find therein unavoidable Contradictions. We believe, that
either there is a Vacuum or no Vacuum, though either seem absolutely Impossible.
And if We knew an infallible Judge in these Matters, We would believe him, and
should think We ought in Reason to believe him, whether he told Us there is a
Vacuum or told Us there is no Vacuum, etc. It appears therefore, that not only
We are ready to believe, but even that we actually believe, in some Cases, what
evidently seems to Us to be contradictory and impossible.

Not that what is truly contradictory can be supposed to be possible. But, We
must own, some things may seem to Us to be truly contradictory, which really
are not so: And, therefore, if a Judge, credibly known to be infallible, should
tell us that that is not contradictory which seems to be so to Us, We ought in
reason to believe him.

Now, wherein is it likely We may sooner be puzzled with seeming Contradictions,
than in the most sublime and incomprehensible Subject, the eternal, the
infinite, the necessary, and divine Being? And who in reason can be thought a
more credible and competent Judge of these things, than Almighty God Himself?

We are sensible, that in some Cases We must believe some things to be true,
which yet, after all our best reasonings and inquiries, exprefly seem
contradictory and impossible. And shall We not believe the Trinitarian System,
because of some seeming Contradictions, though God Almighty should assure Us it
is true? What reason can there be for such a Dealing; or how can We reconcile
it with our own, avowed and incontestable, Measures, in many instances?

The Rule of Reason, then, undoubtedly implies; that We are to follow what
(after the best search We are capable of) appears the most evident,
notwithstanding all the Difficulties which otherwise the greatest Credibility
may seem to be attended with; and that there can be nothing more credible, and
no greater or surer Evidence, than the assured Testimony of the Infallible God.

Thus We may reconcile together those excellent Directions of Holy Scripture,
in Understanding to be Men, to prove all things, and to judge, (1 Cor. 10.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1 Cor. 14.20.) and yet not to lean to our own Understanding. (
Prove. 3.5.) That is, not to stick to our own imperfect Imaginations, but to
consider most exactly what Right Reason after the most sincere and careful
atention leads Us to, and inviolably to follow that.

The Unitarians therefore are unreasonable, to seek any excuse not to believe
the Trinitarian System, if it be taught in the Word of God. And those
Trinitarians take more trouble than needs, or than can be effectual, who
content not themselves to prove the Doctrine of the Trinity out of the
Scripture, but attempt to reconcile it to Reason. There can be nothing more
reasonable than to believe, when God speaks, whatever Difficulties our own weak
and shallow Imaginations may find in the Subject Matter of the (otherwise
credibly attested) Divine Revelation. But some Trinitarians, as well as the
Unitarians, seem to labor under this Prepossession, that Men are to believe
nothing of what God tells Us, unless it can be shown to be free from all
Difficulties, or unless all the Objections be answered that Human Reason can
make against it. Let it but be proved that God has said a thing, and then, though
it be attended with never so great, and many, seeming Contradictions and
Impossibilities, it suffices Us to hold that it is a Mystery, which We are to
believe so far as We can find that God has revealed it. Here it is, most
evidently, our reasonable Service, to sacrifice our Human Understanding to
Divine Faith. But this is a Point, which the Unitarians seem not to have duly
considered. Yet they might easily observe, that God has sown Difficulties in
most things in this State of Imperfection and Probation, to make Men both
humble and diligent or religiously industrious, and to try or manifest who will
be sincere and careful in the Momentous Inquiry and Search after the Truth,
which incontestably is of the greatest Concernment to Us to weigh as it
deserves. The not attending to the right use of Reason herein, is what makes
Men not only Unitarians, but Deists, and even Atheists. Some will believe no
Spirit, because it seems a Contradiction that what is not Material should act
upon Matter. They believe no God, but hold the World to be of itself, because
they do not conceive that Something can be made out of Nothing, nor are able to
imagine how it is possible that what is absolutely Immaterial should produce
Matter, and because they do not see or understand with what Tools as well as
with what Materials God made the World. And some reject Revelation, on pretense
that there are Prophecies in Scripture, and God is in it represented as
Concerning himself with Men; whereas if he did so, they think, he would not
permit Evil if he could hinder it, and it seems to them to be a Contradiction
to foresee certainly Future Contingencies. This shows Us, that We ought to be
truly humble, and not wise in our own conceits, and that if We will not expose
our selves to Error, concerning Sublime Matters. We are not rashly to determine
those things to be impossible, which to our Reason seem most strange and
wonderful. This is the First Branch of the Trinitarian Argument. The Second is,

(2.) That the Unitarian Interpretations imply some most unlikely Assertions,
and are, besides that, forced and unnatural, and so remote from the obvious
Import of the Words that it is not to be conceived the generality of Christians
can understand the Scripture in that Sense. The Unitarians, to avoid the
Difficulties of the Trinitarian System, run to other seemingly as great
Difficulties. What can, for instance, seem more impossible, than those
Assertions, that a Creature can perform the Office of a Creator, (which, at
least, one would think, is to set up two Gods, one Superior and one Inferior,
besides the Holy Ghost,) or that the most excellent Creature, as like God as
possible, and in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwells, can ever need the
Assistance and Ministry of Angels, by the Holy Spirit, or the Spirit of God,
meaning both the Chief and under him the whole Body of Angels; or that, by the
Spirit understanding the Divine Power and the essential Virtue and as it were a
Property or a Faculty of God, Christ, a Man, and a Creature, should have the
Pre-eminence over it, and be named before it, and be honored above it? If
these things are unaccountable, what do the Unitarians get by their differing
from the Trinitarians?

Then, the remoteness of the Unitarian Interpretations may in particular be
argued by these Instances. When the generality of Christians read these Texts,
that the Word is God, and that by him all things, whether in Heaven or Earth,
were made and created; is it likely that it will come into their minds, that
thereby is meant, that all things were New-modelled by Christ, or that
supposing that all things were created by him, yet he is but a Creature that
bears the Name of God? If these Senses are so far from being obvious, that we
may imagine they can scarce so much as enter into the thoughts of any ordinary
Christians; is it credible that they are the true Meaning of those Texts? For
can We think the Holy Writers have so expressed themselves, as that it should
not be possible for the greatest part of Men to understand them? We may then be
confident,

(3.) That several Texts of Scripture, whether put together, or taken asunder,
amount to a firm Evidence of the Trinitarian Sentiment. Besides those
aforementioned, these seem express, which call Christ by way of eminency the
Son of God, and which not only show that Christ may and is to be Prayed to, but
declare that God will have Men Honor the Son even as they Honor the Father.
Which, it seems, after all that the Unitarians have said concerning the Worship
of the Man Jesus Christ, is an invincible Demonstration that the Son is God,
like the Father. In fine, the Trinitarians esteem, all these Arguments may also
be strengthened, by the following, and last, proposed Consideration.

(4.) That, it seems, there is no express Text, for the Unitarian Doctrine, or
against the Trinitarians. If the Unitarians will confute the Trinitarian
System, let them produce any decisive Text for their Sentiment; thereby they
will incontestably show, that all the Texts, which the Trinitarians allege,
must be understood in the Unitarian Sense; but this the Trinitarians do defy
the Unitarians to do. This is so weighty a Consideration, that Dr. Sherlock
thinks sit to inculcate and repeat it a great many times, in his last Book,
entitled, The Scripture-Proofs of our Savior's Divinity explained, etc. To
this purpose, for instance.

Page, 47. How harsh and unusual soever the Expositions of the Unitarians might
appear, I should allow them to be very Reasonable, had they first well proved,
that Christ is but a Creature, [that is, in the Unitarian Sense,] and not the
eternal and almighty God himself; for that alone would be reason enough to
attribute nothing to him, which cannot belong to a Creature.

Page, 50. We must understand Words in a proper and natural Sense, where there
is no apparent reason for a Figure; and here is none to take figuratively, as
the Unitarians do, these words, God, and Son of God, when applied to Christ,
unless they think fit to assign his being a mere Creature: Which indeed would
be a very good reason, could they prove that Christ is but a Creature.

Page, 55. Could any Text be produced, that proves Christ to be but a Creature,
[that is, the Dr. must mean, as was before remarked, but such a Creature, as
the Unitarians hold, as most eminently acts for God, represents God, and is
assisted of and united to God, according to the Unitarian System,] it would put
an end to this Controversy, and either excuse or justify all their other
Interpretations of Scripture, how harsh soever they might otherwise appear.

Page, 58. The whole Controversy may be put upon this Issue, if they can
confute ours, or establish their own Interpretations of Scripture, so as to
prove ours to be necessarily false, and theirs consequently necessarily true,
etc.

CHAP. XI. An Answer to the First Branch of the Objection.
TO the Four Branches of the foregoing Argument, the Unitarians answer in these
Four Particulars.

(1.) The Unitarians do not lay the whole stress of their Cause upon Arguments
drawn from Reason; yet, very justly, on the other hand, they think, like all
Protestants, that Reason ought not wholly to be Slighted.

(2.) They maintain, that none of their Assertions are uncredible, and that
their Interpretations are rational, and agreeable to the style and current of
Scripture, and therefore natural and obvious enough.

(3.) It is possible, and easy, and warrantable, to understand in an Unitarian
Sense all the Texts which the Trinitarians allege for their Sentiment.

(4.) The Unitarians produce several Texts of Scripture, which seem express and
most evident for the Unitarian System, it manifestly appearing that they are
not susceptible of any other tolerable Sense, or that they cannot tolerably be
reconciled to the Trinitarian Sentiment, so that if Men do not own and discern
the force of them, it seems it must be either because they make no attention to
them, or because they are moved and acted by Passion, blinded by Prejudice and
Partiality, and resolved not to acknowledge the Truth.

(1.) The Unitarians do not lay the whole stress of their Cause upon Arguments
drawn from Reason; yet, very justly, on the other hand, they think, like all
Protestants, that Reason ought not wholly to be Slighted. If this Subject be
duly considered, it will be found that Protestants and Unitarians do not differ
in Principles concerning this Question, What Use of Reason ought to be allowed
in Matters of Religion? Now if it be so, there can be nothing less pertinent
than to make a Dispute about it, or to pretend a Difference where there is
none. It is as if a Papist should make long Harangues to Protestants, to prove
that Scripture is the Word of God, that God cannot be supposed willing to
deceive Men, and that therefore we must heartily assent to and firmly believe
whatsoever is contained in the Bible. Why, Man! What Protestant is there that
knows not this, or that denies it? Protestants profess to believe the Holy
Scripture, as much, to the full, as any Member of the Church of Rome does.
Pretty, then, make no Controversy about that Matter. But if thou will do any
thing to the purpose, show that Protestants reject some Doctrines certainly
taught in God's Word. In like manner, Unitarians maintain that a Protestant is
out of the way who Quarrels with them about the Use of Reason, and they
challenge him to show that they make any other Use of it than Protestants
themselves make in Matters of Religion. So that whenever Protestants Quarrel
with the Unitarian Principles with relation to this Point, they deviate from
their own Rule, and accuse their own Measures, than which nothing can be more
unreasonable and unwarrantable. Either make not Use of the Principle, or
Quarrel not at a like Use of it. If, after all, you think, that Unitarians make
a different Use of Reason, (I say, a different Use, in Kind, and Extent,) or
ascribe more to Reason, than Protestants do; then, in God's Name, show it, and
don't declaim against or invalidate your own Principles; play not at fast and
loose, or sometime hold the same Principles of Reason, and anon reject them and
dispute against them. This is what the Unitarians answer in general. But more
particularly they represent.

The Unitarians do not lay the whole stress of their Cause upon Arguments drawn
from Reason. For a Proof of this, the Reader may be referred to Crell's Book
Touching One God the Father, where there are many Arguments from Scripture for
one taken from the Topic of Reason.

If the Unitarians did not appeal to Scripture, and offerred not to put the
Controversy upon that Issue, and were not willing to be decided chiefly by
that, but proposed wholly to set the Divine Revelation aside, and resolved only
to hearken to what Human Reason can inform us of the Matter controverted; the
Trinitarians would have some grounds to blame them, and to assert that they
gave too much to Reason. But the Unitarians expressly acknowledge, as well as
the Trinitarians, both, that Reason's Sphere and Reach is not unlimited, that
there are many Truths above Reason and attended with inextricable Difficulties
and encumbered with seeming Contradictions, and that therefore what is credibly
demonstrated to be is not to be rejected upon the account of such
Reason-Objections as these, where Reason is short and does not see clearly and
distinctly; and, then, expressly, the Unitarians do hold, that in Matters of
Revelation the Holy Scripture is primarily to be consulted, and followed, as
the Supreme Rule. What will then the Trinitarians have, or what can they
require more, and what is there here that they can justly blame? It is true,
indeed, that hereby the Use of Reason is not wholly discarded. For,

On the other Hand, the Unitarians think, like all Protestants, that Reason
ought not to be wholly Slighted. For, indeed, what Reason shows clearly and
distinctly, no Man in his Senses, that duly considers, will contemn it or
reject it. And, in reason, We ought not, lightly, to take any Thing in a Sense,
that seems contrary to Reason, when there is no absolute Necessity for it, or
when that Thing may be taken in another Sense. It is certain, that Protestants
allow as much to Reason, and hold that Scripture is to be understood
consistently and agreably to these Natural Principles, so that when the Words
of Scripture in their literal Signification imply something manifestly contrary
to Reason, they must be taken in any other Sense that they may be susceptible
of. In short, Protestants doubt not but that the whole Scripture perfectly
agrees with Right Reason, and therefore they take it as much as possible in
Senses evidently agreeable to Reason, and they expressly reject those Senses
which are plainly inconsistent with it. Upon that account, all Protestants
hold, that We must necessarily make Use of Reason in interpreting of Scripture,
if We will understand it right. Accordingly, they consult and use Reason, both,
in expounding the Text of Scripture, and in drawing the natural and necessary
Consequences from it. And agreably to these just Measures, they take in a
Figurative Sense those Texts, which according to the Literal Sound of the Words
manifestly appear to our Reason to be unworthy of God and to be expressly
contrary to Reason. Upon that account, they understand figuratively, for
instance, that Saying of our Savior's, that the Bread of the Eucharist is his
Body, and that except We Eat his Flesh and Drink his Blood we cannot have
Eternal Life, as also those Expressions which ascribe to God a Body or bodily
Parts, the Saying of Moses that God labored and rested, the Term which imports
that Jeptha Sacrificed his Daughter, etc.

Now the Unitarians desire not to make any other Use of Reason. But then they
maintain, that by no means they ought to be hindered to make the like Use of
it, that Protestants so justly do, or so justly plead for, for instance, in the
Controversies with the Church of Rome. What Reason shows clearly and
distinctly, they esteem, ought not to be unregarded. They hold, therefore, that
We are not rashly to understand or interpret Scripture in Senses manifestly
contrary to Reason, when (especially) that Scripture appears susceptible of
some other Sense. And they affirm, that this is nothing but what is not only
most evidently just and rational, but also expressly agreeable to the Protestant
Principles and Practice, as has been shown, So that, We must needs conclude,
God surely will not take it ill, but on the contrary He cannot but require,
that We should thus reason, or make use of Reason and Consideration, as the
Unitarians here would do, so as to have some regard, and make some inquiry,
Whether things agree or disagree with the Common Notions of Human Understanding.

Indeed, where Reason does not see clearly and distinctly, seeming Difficulties
ought not to be looked upon as wholly conclusive; and, most particularly,
Difficulties then ought, in reason, to be reck'ned of no weight, against a
thing which manifestly or most credibly appears to be. But the Unitarians
assert, (as has been shown in the Apologia pro Irenico Magno,) that this is not
the Case with the Trinitarian Doctrine. They humbly represent, that the
Trinitarians cannot say, that the Doctrine of three Persons in one God is most
credible and manifest in it self, nor incontestably express in Scripture. But,
the Unitarians assert, on the contrary, it is most clearly and distinctly
evident, that that Doctrine is inconsistent with several Texts, as well as
implies many most express Contradictions and manifest Impossibilities.

The Trinitarians then have no just grounds, to compare this Point, with some
Things that are Incontestable, or absolutely out of our Sight. For though the
Whole of God cannot be perfectly comprehensible, yet in general some things of
God may be clearly discerned, and therefore God is unanimously acknowledged in
that sense to be an Object of Reason, and all Parties affirm or deny some
things of God upon the account of their being evidently agreeable or disagreable
to Reason: There is no reason, consequently, why the same Measures should not
be followed, with respect to the Trinitarian Controversy; And plainly then that
is very unreasonable which the Trinitarians so earnestly desire, that no
account at all should be made of the so many, so express, and so obvious
Contradictions and Impossibilities which appear to be implied in the
Trinitarian Doctrine. If they were only obscure and uncertain Difficulties, and
if the Trinitarian Doctrine were most manifest and certain or unavoidable, and
not contradicted by any Scripture-Evidence, the Unitarians would be to blame to
insist on this Plea of Reason: But, as was said, the Case will be found to be
quite otherwise, if it be duly considered; And if so, the unjust and
unreasonable Measures that are taken, will be a Shame to the present, and a
Wondering to future Times.

The Arguments of the Trinitarians, in fine, are not infallible, which import,
that some certain and incontestable Truths are encumbered with any most express
and unavoidable Contradictions. It is certain that some Truths are above Reason
to give an account How they are, (and those are true Mysteries,) but it does
not follow that they are contrary to Reason. It were indeed the greatest Folly,
upon any Difficulties, to deny any Thing which manifestly appears to be. But if
the Manner or the Things concerning those Difficulties were rightly stated and
understood, they might appear to be free from Contradictions; for real
Contradictions cannot be true. It is Men's rash Judgment, then, that concludes
a Truth to be attended with Contradictions, when really it is not so. I doubt
not but that those Systems, if duly considered, may be vindicated from
Contradictions, which assert, that there is no Vacuum, that Matter is divisible
infinitely, that Eternity consists in a perpetual Succession of Moments. It is
true We are not to lean too much to our own Understandings, or to be stiff to
our Prepossessions and Imaginations without sufficient knowledge of the Cause
and without due examination. But then, on the other hand, it is known, We are
bid in Understanding to be Men, and to prove all things to the best of our
power, that is, those things especially that concern our eternal Welfare. And
by that means God tries our Sincerity and our real Concernment for the most
momentous Matters. We must not then reject the Use of our Reason.

It is indeed certain, and evident, those are faulty and criminal, who, when
Religion and Revelation are so well proved and credibly attested and confirmed,
dispute either of them, because they do not know how things were created, and
with what Instruments God made the World, (as if He needed any,) or because
they do not understand how God can forsee Events, and why He permits Evil. No
wise Man will agree, that these Difficulties expressly imply unavoidable
Contradictions. And all good Men will grant, that the grossest Solution of
these Objections renders the Infidels utterly inexcusable. Now what considering
Christian will say, that the said, or any the like, Objections are absolutely
unanswerable? The most difficult Objections incontestably are those of Spinoza
and Bail. Yet we see them answered, the one by the most Reverend Archbishop of
Dublin in his Book De Origin Mali, and the other by the Famous Dr. Henry More
in the Second Part of his Metaphysics. There are some Answers to those
Objections, which need not take up above two Sheets, and to which the Infidels
can not reply with the least color of Reason. As to the rest, the Reader may
be referred to the 12th. Chapter of the Apologia pro Irenico Magno, which
comprises a general Answer to the Objections against the Use of Reason. Yet
certainly it is not necessary, that all Difficulties against Religion should
expressly be answered. It is undoubtedly sufficient, that it be solidly proved,
and that it appear most rational and credible. And when we are assured that God
says any thing, we may rationally believe it, and ought in reason to do so,
notwithstanding any seeming Difficulties, inferior to a stronger and clearer
Evidence. Howbeit, on the other hand, that the Inferiority of such Difficulties
be most fully evinced, the essaying to resolve Difficulties, as much as
possible, ought by no means to be discouraged. For, if things be duly
considered, Religion will then be sufficiently vindicated and illustrated; and
otherwise it may often be sadly misrepresented and corrupted, as well as
wretchedly exposed to the Calumnies of the Infidels.

CHAP. XII. An Answer to the Second Branch of the Objection
(2.) THE Unitarians maintain, that none of their Assertions are incredible,
and that their Interpretations are rational, and agreeable to the style and
current of Scripture, and therefore natural and obvious enough. It Is certain,
on the one hand, the Trinitarian Tenets are most strange and unintelligible,
and, on the other, the Style of Scripture, like that of all Eastern Languages,
is most figurative. Now, (this being duly weighed, and it being withal
considered that Reason is a Divine Light that ought not wholly to be slighted,)
if some constraint is to be made, either to some Difficult Expressions that may
be taken with the help of a warrantable Figure in an accountable Sense, or to
the Common Notiont of Mankind that cannot be reconciled with the literal or
first seeming import of those Expressions; what course in this Case is it most
pious and rational to take? The Trinitarian Objection it self, (implying that
what is incredible is to be rejected,) decides the Matter. The chief Instances,
of the pretended Remoteness of the Unitarian Interpretations, are particularly
concerning the Unitarian Expositions of Christ's Creating all things, and in
what Sense the Word is said to be God, etc. Now to the latter the Unitarians
observe, that, if we will understand that Text aright, we must not determine
our selves about the Sense of it before we have considered what the Scripture
elsewhere teaches, as well as Reason, concerning this Person that is here
called the Word, and that if it appear that thereby a Creature is meant, as
even according to them it evidently does, then there can be no difficulty in
explaining the Title of God which is attributed to the Word, but we must
necessarily take it in an Inferior Signification, in which it may be applied,
and we find it is sometimes in Scripture communicated, to a Creature,
especially our Savior himself (accordingly) warning us that some Creatures in
Scripture are called Gods, John, 10.34, 35. Angels in the Original are termed
Gods, Ps. 8.5. etc. And it was common among the Heathens to give that Title to
others beside those whom they accounted the Supreme Gods. The giving then of
that Title to some Creature, in an Inferior Sense, was not at all
unintelligible, either to Jews or Gentiles. Indeed, one of the Designs of
Christianity was to inform the Pagans, that there are not many Gods, in the
supreme or proper Sense of that word, but only One such God, to whom alone
Divine Worship is due. But the Gospel never intended to signify, that there are
not many, in Heaven and Earth, that may be termed Gods in an inferior Sense,
according to the Scripture as well as the Gentile-Stile. If St. Thomas directed
his Speech to Christ in that exclamation, My Lord, and My God; he might mean no
more than if he had said, My Prince, and My Sovereign! The Trinitarians own,
that, by the Word, in the beginning of St. John's Gospel, is meant Christ. Now
Reason it self shows us manifestly, that we must not take Christ to be the
Supreme God. For Christ is a Man, and was always owned to be but one Person;
but God is a distinct Spirit, and consequenly a distinct Person, for an
intelligent Being, whether Divine or Human, has all that is requisite to the
constituting of a Person, and so cannot always but be a distinct Person; two
Spirits then must needs be two Persons: And therefore Christ, being but one
Person, and being known to be a Human Person or a Man, cannot in reason be
imagined to be the Most High God. And there cannot be more than one Person in
God, for God is always spoken of and to in the Singular Number by Pronouns that
imply a Person, etc. Now the Scripture speaks to us as to Men, who are bound to
make use of their Sense and Reason, and for a trial thereof Figurative
Expressions are sometimes employed. But, besides all the Considerations flowing
from the T^pick of Reason, the Unitarians, as is to be observed in the Fourth
Particular, show by diverse unanswerable and express Arguments taken out of
Scripture, that Christ is a Creature, and is not literally the God Almighty
himself, but only his Chief Minister and Representative, and the most excellent
and most dignified Creature, in whom God most extraordinarily and most
intimately dwells, and in and by whom God most wonderfully works. And therefore
if by the Word, in the beginning of St. John's Gospel, should literally be
understood God himself, or some Influence of the Divine Nature as it were
incarnated with or constantly dwelling in and assisting the Man Christ Jesus,
it would not follow, that Christ is literally the Supreme God himself, or that
there are more Persons than one in the God head.

As to the Creation attributed to Christ, it is sufficiently evident it must be
understood of such a Creation as a Creature is capable of, if Christ appear to
be a Creature. Prophets, God's Creatures and Ministers, are said to do
Supernatural Works and raise the Dead, though it be not they properly that do
such things, but God, by them, at their presence, at their streching out of
their hand, at their word or request, and the like. They do not the Miraculous
Work by their mere Strength, or by their own Power, but by a Divine Power thus
inherent in them, or annexed to them, accompanying and assisting them, and
working at their desire; and yet they, themselves, are said to do the Work. For
instance, in Mat. 10.8. Our Savior bids his Disciples Heal the Sick, Cleanse
the Lepers, Raise the Dead; and in John, 14.12. he tells them, that they should
do most wonderful Works: now, incontestably, that signifies, that God would do
those Works by them, or that they should do 'em by God's Assistance, or with
the concurrence of the Divine Power working at their desire. In like manner,
the Firstborn might Create the World, or might be said to Create the World;
and God might be said to Create the World by him, as it is said that by the
Hands of the Apostles were many Signs and Wonders wrought, Acts 5.12. God was
pleased to work by those Hands, which of themselves were not able to do these
Miracles, but were enabled to do them by the concurring Assistance of the Power
of God annexed to them or accompanying them. To Raise the Dead, or Cure the
Blind, is as well above Natural Power, as to Create the World; though to Create
the World be more than to Cure the Blind, and though a Creature which Creates the
World, or which may be said to Create the World, has a greater Concurrence of
the Divine Power annexed or united to him, than one that only Cures the Blind.
(Howbeit, certainly, a Creature which so represents God, as to be Worshipped
with God, though but as the most highly dignified Creature possible, must
undoubtedly be infinitely more united to the Godhead, than one which only does
some Miracles, or than any Prophet or Apostle, before whom it is not lawful to
bow the Knee, or on whose Name it is not lawful to call.) Moreover, we must
consider, it is undoubted and most obvious, that often in Scripture by Creating
is only meant disposing, or modelling, fashioning, and setting in order. (
Ephesians. 2.10. and 4.24. etc.) There is then not only no reason, why the Creation
attributed to Christ (even if it were the First Creation) should not be taken
in that Sense; but there may be an absolute necessity it should be so
understood, if Christ appear to be a Creature, though never so intimately united
to the God head: And, so, that is then obvious enough to those who will
diligently attend to the Style of the Scripture; and it is not God's
intendment, that any others should come to the true knowledge of it. (See
Bishop Taylor's 2d. Sermon on Tit. 2.7. He that will understand God's Meaning,
must look above and below, and round about, etc.) The Secret of the Lord is
with them, who fear him, and who consequently do what they can to know exactly
his Law and revealed Will. (Will any say, that there are not some Expressions
in Scripture, to be understood in as seemingly a far-fetched Sense, as any
given by the Unitarians?) If Men mistake when they have done what they well can
in their circumstances to be informed aright, it is credible that God will
judge that a pitiable Case, so they be humble and moderate, and be not violent,
magisterial, and imperious, and do not pretend to impose their Sentiment on
others, but be willing in abstruse Matters to unite in the Generality of the
Terms of Scripture. In that manner, the most ignorant, not being so through their
fault, may be safe. But God has not left the Scripture into tho hands only of
unlearned and unthinking Men, immersed in and mostly taken up with the concerns
and businesses of this Life. Though all Christians are bound in some measure to
search and meditate upon the Scriptures, God has set up an Order of Men, whose
particular Vocation is to assist other Men as much as possible in the right
understanding of the Divine Revelation. And surely no possible Means ought to
be neglected, which are Subservient to that great end. And if these Means were
freely, calmly and impartially used, (which would be if Ministers were fairly
to represent the Reasons Pro and Con in Difficult Matters, without deciding,
condemning, and imposing,) then all necessary Truths would soon be discerned,
and it would therefore easily be made to appear to all Christians what may be
meant by the Creation attributed to Christ in Scripture, or how far the
understanding of that Point is necessary, and in what Generality this and the
like ought to be lest.

The Chief Instances, then, which the Trinitarians give, of the pretended
incredible Assertions, implied in the Unitarian Expositions, are these: That a
Creature could perform the Office of a Creator: And then, That one in whom the
Fullness of the Godhead dwells, should need the Assistance of Angels; and, on
the other hand, That a Creature should be more honorable than, and should have
the pre-eminence over, and be named before, the Power of God, by the Holy Ghost
understanding an Influence of the Divine Power or the Divine Inspiration.

That a Creature could perform the Office of a Creator. Even at most, upon as
good grounds, the Trinitarians might make the same Difficulty, against Men
producing other Men, or the Sun causing the Seeds of things to grow unto
Perfection and into a beautiful Order. Indeed, the Sun is not properly a
Creator, nor are Men properly Creatours, but they are Instruments in the Hands
of the Creator. God is pleased to make use of them, in the effecting of those
Works; but, all the while, He concurrs with them, as well as prepares the
Subject for them: He not only provides the Matter and Means, and endues the
Instruments with a fit Capacity, but He also upholds and assists them, and
works with as well as by them. In like manner, the Unitarians observe it is not
said that the Word is the Creator or Maker, but that by him God made the
Universe.

When the Word was created, (or that most excellent Person which is the most
express Image of the Divine Wisdom, and is therefore in that sense called the
Wisdom of God,) the first Being which God then produced, and which, with the
Instrumental Concurrence of the Word, He fashioned and perfected, was
(according to the most illustrious Unitarians) another very eminent Creature,
which not only for distinction-sake, but also for his excellent Perfection and
the designation of his Office, was called the Holy Spirit and the Power of God.
But though the Word had a part in the fashioning or modelling of him, or in the
medial and instrumental pouring vital or spiritual influences upon him, yet he
had so little share in the Work, in comparison of that which God had in it,
that not the Word himself, but God only, is to be reckoned as the Producer or
Maker of that Holy Spirit. And for the same reason, God only is called the
Author of all the other Creatures, though both the Word and the Holy Spirit had a
hand, together with God, in the drawing of them out of the Chaos. God prepared
the Chaos, and, having created the Word, and by the Word the Spirit, by the
breathing and moving of the Spirit he gave Motion to other Creatures that were
set into a sit Order to that end. Yet all Creatures and even the Holy Spirit,
are said to belong to the Word, because in the creating of them God designed to
Subject them all to the Word; and, accordingly, they were all Subjected to him,
from the beginning, though then so only as Servants are Subject to a Son in his
Minority in his Father's House, whereas after Christ's Passion, and Exaltation,
they were Subjected to him as to the Master of the House himself, or as to a
Son com to Age to whom the Father commits the Government of the House. If by
the Word, in the beginning of St. John's Gospel, be to be understood not only
the First created Spirit, but also a Divine Virtue and Influence united to and
assisting that most excellent Creature, it is easy to conceive that the Word
might be Instrumental in Creating the Chaos, or the World out of the Chaos.
Howbeit, nothing in Scripture or Reason contradicts the System, implying, that
the Chaos is an eternal Emanation of God; that it is a confused Mixture of
(unactive) Material and Spiritual Natures; that Creating is the putting some of
them in a certain Motion and Order; that all Spiritual Creatures have a
Material Vehicle; that, the Material Vehicle being prepared, God, with what
sometimes is called his Word and what is called his Breath, forces into it some
Portion of the Spiritual Nature scattered in the Chaos; that what the Scripture
sometimes also calls the Word, (that is the Soul of the Messiah,) and the Holy
Spirit, (thereby then meaning a Creature,) are the largest Portions of the
Spiritual Part of the Chaos that God ever put together; and that the Word and
Holy Spirit being created, God made use of them to Create, or Breath upon, and
Put into a fit Motion and Order, the rest of the Creatures.

By the H. Spirit then (so far as that title may be applied to other beside
God) may be understood the Chief of the Elect Angels, or of the Seven
Archangels, (1 Timothy 5.21.) which are represented immediately surrounding, and
standing before, the Throne of Glory, Rev. 1.4. Most probably, such a glorious
Creature, as incomparably surpasses all the other Archangels in Excellency of
Nature, is then primarily to be understood by the H. Spirit: Yet it may be
also, that the whole Body of Angels under him, and consequently every Angel,
may sometime be thereby meant. For the term, Holy Spirit, may be a Collective
Word, implying then several Holy Spirits, or all the Holy Angels; every Holy
Angel being a Holy and Pure Spirit: And what all the Subordinate Angels do, at
the Command of their Chief, is reck'ned as done by him, who (when he has
received the Orders of the Word) divides to them their Tasks, and originally is
the Holy Spirit, or Holy Angel, by excellency; and, so, in that respect, these
Works are represented as performed by One Holy Spirit, and the whole Body of
Holy Angels is then reputed as if it were but One Holy Angel; as, in speaking
of what is done by Devils, the Scripture mentions but One of those Impure
Beings, as if there were but one such, ( the Evil One, or the Unholy Spirit,)
what all the Devils do being ascribed to their Chief, who Commands and Directs
them in all things.

Howbeit, there is no reason why we may not think, that One Immense Spirit,
next to God and the Word, may not be supposed to do all that is attributed to
the Holy Spirit. For the Excellency of the Holy Spirit may be so great, as to
have incomparably greater Powers and Perfections than all the Angels and all
other Inferior Creatures put together, and even almost to equal the Word except
in Dignity. One Sun and One Moon pour their Influences effectually upon all the
Seeds and Creatures in the World. And do we think that God could not frame an
excellent Spirit, or two excellent Spirits, so powerful, as to be able to do
the like to all Human Spirits on Earth, and to shine upon them all, and
enlighten and guide them, and suggest good Motions to them, and watch alone
over them, if not with the Concurrence also of other Angels, (which yet cannot
be doubted of,) as Spiritual Stars in comparison of those other most excellent
Spirits?

Yet all these Holy Spirits are but the disposing Instruments and Ministers of
the Divine Power, which, at their working, together works by and with them. The
Word has the disposition of the Divine Power, of that which is his particular
and ordinary Attendant, and even of that which God himself immediately
exercises, and of that also the disposition of which is given to the Holy
Spirit and to the Angels. For the Word, having received that Privilege, has
made the Holy Spirit partaker of a vast Share of the Divine Power above all
Angels, according to this System. And to every Angel, according to his Station,
is alloted likewise by the Word's Appointment, Authorized thereunto by God, a
certain Portion of the Administration of the Divine Power, which always
accompanies them, and concurrs with them at their Working, and which properly
does the Wonders, or the Chiefest Part of them, in the effecting of
Supernatural Works. They are as it were but the Bearers of the Divine Virtue,
or the Disposers of it, which God entrusts to them, because in that Employment
they reap the glory and delight of Serving God and of being Instrumental in the
good of Others. They dispose therefore of that Portion of Divine Power, as they
dispose of their own Faculties. (That which was alloted to a Prophet, was
called his Spirit. 2 Kings, 2 15. and 5.26. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.) But the Word,
especially since his Exaltation, has the Disposition of the Divine Power (as
was said) of all the Holy Angels, whom he sends whenever he will on Errands
to do what He pleases; and so he is said to have received the Spirit without
Measure, whereas no Prophet before him had (and that but at sometimes) the
Share but of an Angel, or at most the Assistance it may be of two or three
Angels and the Power accompanying them or annexed to them. That by the Holy
Spirit something like this ( Viz: some Angel or Angels, together with a certain
Concurrence of God's Acting or a certain Influence of the Divine Power) is to
be understood, and not altogether and expressly God himself or a literally and
properly Divine Person; is evinced by the Unitarian Arguments in the Brief
History, in the Apology for the Irenicum Magnum, and in Crell's Book Of one God
the Father.

It is certain, that, in Job, 32.8. the Spirit, and the Divine Inspiration, are
manifestly put as Synonyma, or as Terms that imply and explain one the other;
(the Original Words, Rouak in the Hebrew, and Pneuma in the Greek, being
undoubtedly susceptible of that Sense, not only signifying Spirit, but properly
signifying Breath, or Breathing, which is likewise the import of Afflatus, the
Expression, Metaphorically also, used, in Latin, to imply Inspiration, which is
represented as a Spiritual Breathing, or a certain Acting of the Divine Power
figured by Breathing.) And, on the other hand, in John, 1.32. compared with
John, 1.51. Acts. 8.26.29.39. Revel. 8.3. compared with Romans 8.26. and several
other Places, the Spirit, and an Angel, or the Angels, ( John, 1.51. Hebr. 1.7.
compared with Acts, 2.3, 4.) are also put as the same or synonymous terms. From
whence it seems it follows, that by the Spirit we must understand; the Divine
Inspiration carried and communicated by the Means of a Holy Spirit, or Holy
Angel; that is to say, an Acting and Influence of the Divine Power communicated
to or performed on some Men at the Presence and Acting of an Angel; or which is
the same, a Holy Angel, acting, according to the Direction of the Divine
Inspiration, and together with the Assistance (and a certain Instuence) of the
Divine Power.

Thus the Spirit is, both, a Creature, and not a Creature; an Angel, and also
the Spiritual Breath of God, or a certain Virtue of God, or an Influence of the
Power of God, which is Something belonging to the Father, or a certain Acting
of the Father, but appears not, and need not be concluded, and in reason cannot
be thought, to be a particular and real Divine Person distinct from the Father:
As by the Word is understood, both, the Firstborn, (the Word-Bearer, and the
Chief of all Creatures,) and a Divine Word, or an Influence of the Father's
Wisdom and Divine Nature, dwelling in and as intimately as possible united with
the Firstborn.

(The Father, according to these Notions, may then truly be said, to be the
whole Godhead or the only true God, and to know alone all things; but then, by
the Influences of his Divine Word and Spirit, he may manifest to others what He
pleases, and that when he thinks fit, and properly it is not the Father that is
Incarnate but his Word; which is agreeable to Scripture as well as Reason. And
the Spirit may be said by a Figure, to search the things of God. See Crell's,
Touching One God, etc. Book, 1. Sect. 3. Chap. 14. And indeed who besides God
should know or search the things of God but the Divine Inspiration, or they to
whom it is revealed by the Divine Inspiration? In the Form of Baptism, and in
the Creed, the Word and the Spirit may well be mentioned, after mention made in
general of the Father, though they be not Divine Persons distinct from the
Father, but be certain Influences of the Divine Perfections, or certain Actings
of the Father by some Powers or Virtues belonging to his Nature. The Form of
Baptism thus implies, that thereby we are Consecrated the Disciples of God, our
Father and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Disciples of the Word
communicated to Christ who has Redeemed us by his Doctrine and by his Blood,
and in fine of the Holy Inspiration also which Confirms the Gospel and
Sanctifies the Soul of true Believers. And, in the Creed, we profess this
Belief. Evidently, herein is no Tautology, nor any thing Superfluous. For the
Father and his Influences, or God and the most eminent Actings of his Powers,
are things distinct. And those Actings and Influences are not therefore known,
though the Father be, and though they belong to the Father. And though they were
Necessarily in the Father, it would not be Impertinent to particularize them,
after having made mention of the Father. As after having said that there is a
Sun, it would not be irrational to add that we believe and know the Sun
produces Light and Heat. Otherwise indeed what could the Trinitarians
themselves plead, for mentioning the Son and Spirit after the Father, when they
hold that the whole Son and Spirit are wholly in the Father, and that the
Father cannot be without them? Now according to our System, the Spirit implying
an Influence and an Acting of the Divine Nature, those may well be said to be
the Temple of God in whom the Divine Inspiration resides, though the Divine
Inspiration be not a Person, or not a Person distinct from the Father. Indeed
though the Divine Inspiration were only the Acting of an Angel commissionated and
directed by God, Christians in whom the Impiration works might then also be
truly said to be the Temple of God, and not of the Angel, because the Angel
works not for himself or on his own account, but as sent and ordered by God and
Christ, and then, according to the Jewish Phrase, Apostolus cujusque est
quisque; as when an Ambassador Wedds a Princess in his Master's Name, She is
not thereby Married to the Subject, but to the Prince that sent him. And the
Angels may be called by way of eminence the Breath of God, inasmuch as they
proceed from him, as our Breath does from us; or most probably inasmuch as they
carry the Influence of the Divine Spirit or Power, as God's-Word Bearer is
called God's Word inasmuch as he carries the Commands of God, and both acts by
Gods' Power and Wisdom, and represents and exhibits God's Majesty and Authority
dwelling in him.)

It has been necessary to make all these Digressions, particularly concerning
the Holy Spirit, further to illustrate the Arian System, concerning the Holy
Spirit's Nature and Person, as well as that of the Word, in order to show ^^^st
evidently, that though the Word and the H. Spirit were Instrumental in the
Creation of the World, yet the Arians need not be understood to make three
Creatours properly, nor three Gods, according to the groundless imputation of
the Platonic and Scholastic Trinitarians.

Not but that the Word might and did from the beginning bear the Title of God,
in an Inserior Signification, even if it were but inasmuch as he represented
God, and commanded in God's stead or in God's Most Supreme Authority to the
Highest Creatures next to Him; (to settle which Honor upon him, and extend it
in the Highest Degree, and so to continue it to him, in the Economy of the
Gospel, God required this Condition of him, that he should freely undertake the
Redemption of Mankind; for otherwise Mankind had perished, and consequently the
Firstborn, though he had continued as he was, remaining Innocent, should not
have had Men for his Subjects:) Howbeit, the Arians do not say that the
(created) Word is eternal, and infinite, and self-existent, or self-moving, nor
consequently that he has all Perfection, or any Perfection and Power, of
himself; now, every one knows, this is the Description of him who is literally
and properly God, and this belongs only to the Father, and therefore with the
Apostle it may well be said, that though there be many who are called Gods in
Heaven and Earth, yet the Unitarians or true Christians do hold but One who
literally is God; all, which may be (...) be God, belonging to the Father.
Nevertheless, the Word not only most eminently Representing God under the
Economy of the Gospel, but being most (...) United with the Godhead as has
been shown, (an Influence of the Fathers (...) Virtue constantly dwelling in
him, so as to become in a manner Part of his (...)) in that Sense probably he
may also bear the Title of God, and may very (...) so, though there be no other
Divine Person but the Father.

And God Almighty, then in the (...) all by the Ministry and by the Mediation,
or at the Request and upon (...) the Word, as also the Word doing all in the
Name and Power of God, (...) he Word does herein is truly censed or reputed to
be done by God, and what God does also in that respect may be said to be don by
the Word. For Instance. If God directs the Word to send one of his Angels on a
certain Errand, both God and Christ may be said to have sent that Angel. If God
says that He will com shortly, meaning in the Person of his Word and Divine
Schechina, it follows, that, though Christ says also that he will com shortly,
yet, God and Christ (the Word of God by excellency) need not be confounded
together. Which Title, the Word, was originally given him, as was intimated, in
that he was designed to direct or signify and carry the Commands of God to the
Creatures immediately under him, in order to have the Will of God every where
notified, and put in execution accordingly. So God says by him, Let this be
don, and it is don, himself showing the Example of Obedience, and doing what is
incumbent upon him, God having shown him what is to be don; for, the Matter,
for instance, being prepared, and God working first thereupon, the Word, then,
with the Divine Assistance, does all that he sees the Father do, and he sets
the Angels a doing all that they are enabled to perform. And so, in the
beginning, the Work was effected, in disposing the Chaos into the Beauty and
Order and Regularity of a World, the Word being the General under God. And what
could be Impossible to such a Creature, assisted of God, as has been said?

It is to be noted, that, not the Word, but the Holy Spirit, is called the
Power of God; because, since the Creation, it is by the Holy Spirit that
ordinary Miracles are commonly wrought: So that properly or chiefly the Office
of the Word now especially is to command, and that of the Holy Spirit or of the
holy Angels is to execute.

After all, there is nothing so express in Scripture, concerning this intricate
Subject, but that many may opine that the Socinian System, concerning the Holy
Spirit, or the Manner of the Creation attributed to Christ, may be the truest.
Nevertheless, it is certain, several Passages seem very much to favor the
Arian Hypothesis, and there is nothing in it that is absurd, or in it self
incredible and apparently impossible. As to the other Instances, which the
Trinitarians give, of the pretended unaccountable Assertions held by the
Unitarians, they are much easier than the former to be accounted for, and have
indeed but little difficulty in them.

The next Instance is, That one in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwells,
should need the Assistance of Angels. The Answer to this is, that the
Unitarians do not say the Godhead needs the Assistance of Angels, but only (for
diverse reasons, some of which have before been intimated) is pleased to make
use of their Service. And it cannot become the Trinitarians to find this
strange, seeing they hold Christ to be personally-united with the Deity, and
yet they know the Scripture in many Places teaches that the Angels minister to
him and are employed by him, an Angel assisted and strengthened and comforted
him in his Agony, and when he was apprehended he said that if he would have
resisted he would have made use of the Protection of Angels, of whom he might
presently have had more than twelve Legions for the asking. It seems indeed
unaccountable, that a God Almighty (or a Person that were God Almighty) should
employ Angels in his own Defense. But the Indwelling of the Godhead in Christ
makes him not properly and literally to be the Almighty God, but only imports
that God in every respect illuminates him and assists him, by what Means He
pleases, and as far as is Necessary for the discharge of that most eminent
Office, of Redeeming Men, of Declaring and Performing the whole Will of God,
Governing the Universe, and at the helm of the World Representing God and
Acting in the stead of God. This Indwelling of the Fullness of the Godhead,
therefore, hind'red not but that Christ sometimes might not Know some things, and
(when it pleased God, in the time of his humiliation, particularly, when for
that while he was for the most part divested of the Glory which he had before
the Creation of the World) might have occasion for the Ministry and Assistance
of Angels, though probably it was he, as was observed, who at first assigned to
every one of the Angels their Share of the concomitant and concurrent Divine
Power, which, especially since his Exaltation, as we have said, they employ
according to his Directions.

As to what is in fine pretended, that it seems mavelous, that a Creature
should be named before, and should be said to have the pre-eminence over, the
Power of God, by the Holy Ghost understanding the Influence of the Divine Power
and Divine Inspiration; it must be remembered, both, that by the Divine
Inspiration or Influence of the Divine Power the Unitarians do not understand a
Person but a Property or an Act, and that, agreeably to the express Doctrine of
Scripture, they hold that Christ is made partaker of the Fullness of the Godhead
in the manner we have spoken of before, and just now have further specified, so
that, for Desiring the Father, he may at any time Dispose of the Divine Power
and Inspiration, and does actually dispose thereof as is said, according to
what he pleases to ask it of God, and therefore the Holy Spirit is represented
as proceeding from the Father by the Son, and the Holy Spirit is said to be
Christ's. Now it is not strange, that the Disposer should be mentioned before
the thing disposed of, as it is in the Form of Baptism. There is then no need
to insist any longer upon this. And so we have don with the second Particular,
importing that the Assertions of the Unitarians are not uncredible, and that
their Interpretations are rational, and agreeable to the style and current of
Scripture, and therefore natural and obvious enough. And this, together with
the following Particular, being considered, the Trinitarian Sentiment will
appear to be wholly groundless, and incontestably therefore altogether
incredible. For indeed is it likely, that, Christianity for many Ages having
been altered in many weighty Points, the present Trinitarian (at least
seemingly impossible and contradictory) System has all this while remained the
same that it was from the beginning, and by the hands of the Platonists and
Scholasticks has passed pure and undefiled?

In Sum. When some Texts seem susceptible of two Senses, the one more literal
but expressly irrational or contradictory and impossible and manifestly
inconsistent with other Passages and the Current of Scripture, and the other
more strained or figurative but agreeable to the Scripture-Stile and
reconcilable with Reason; which of the two Senses do the generality of
Christians and in particular Protestants commonly prefer in their
Interpretations? They unanimously hold, as a standing Rule by which the
Scripture is to be interpreted that it may be rightly understood, (as was shown
in the last Chapter,) That We are to reject that Sense which is manifestly
absurd and inconsistent with express Texts, and are then to hold by that which
is reconcilable to Reason and Scripture, though somewhat more remote from the
Sound of the Words. And indeed it would evidently be most unreasonable to
follow other Measures. We ought then, most incontestably, constantly to prefer
that Interpretation which is consistent with Scripture and Reason, before that
which is inconsistent with both. And this Consideration leads Us to the next
Particular.

CHAP. XIII. An Answer to the third Branch of the Objection.
(3.) IT is possible, and easy, and warrantable, to understand in an Unitarian
Sense all the Texts which the Trinitarians allege for their Sentiment. To
evince the truth of which Proposition, we shall consider those Texts which are
mentioned in the Objection, and instanced in, as the strongest for the
Anti-Vnitarian Cause; and as for the others, we shall refer the Reader to the
Brief History of the Unitarians, or (even) to Grotius his Annotations, but
especially to the Works of the Fratres Poloni.

The Texts instanced in, for the purpose aforesaid, are those, which either
call Christ the Son of God by way of eminency, or show that Christ may and is
to be Prayed to, and declare that God will have Men honor the Son even as they
honor the Father.

As to the Texts, which call Christ the Son of God by way of eminency, an
Observation of Dr. Sherlocks will go a great way to give a light into that
Matter. These are his words, at Pages 71st and 72d of his Book against the
Bishop of Gloucester. That which entitles Creatures to the natural relation of
Sonship to God, is to receive their being from God, in the likeness and
resemblance of his own Nature: Thus Angels are called the Sons of God, and so
is Adam, who was immediately formed by God in his own Image and Likeness; And
thus some think that Christ, who was as immediately formed by a Divine Power in
the Womb of the Virgin as Adam was of the Dust of the Earth, is for this reason
called the Son of God. (See Luke 1.35, where that reason is expressly given of
Christ's being called the Son of God.)

The Unitarians to this Observation will in particular add, that no Creature
was ever made in so great a Likeness and Resemblance of the Divine Nature nor
designed to so high a Dignity as Christ was, and that this particularly is the
reason why Christ is called the Son of God by way of eminency, besides that He
is actually God's Only-Begotten Son, as we did observe from Luke 1.35. This is
a plain, and a rational, and, after all, an unexceptionable account of the
Matter; and therefore what Dr. Sherlock adds thereupon serves only to show,
that the Scholastic or Platonic Trinitarian Sentiment of Christ's Sonship is
impossible. For this is certain and undeniable; and yet, if the Platonic or
Scholastic Sentiment were true, this could not be allowed of, according to
that System, for he says that System implies, that, there being but one Son in
Christ, it is Heresy to hold that Christ is the Son of God in any other sense
than by an Eternal Generation.

Christ, as we have seen, is called the Only-Begotten Son of God, because he is
the only Person whom God caused to be born of a Woman without the help of Man:
And in that sense he is God's Only Son, as well as in this respect that he is
the only Lord whom God has placed at the head of the Universe, and to whom he
has subjected all Creatures; For Sovereigns and Kings are called the Sons of
God, ( Luke 1.32. John 1.49. etc.) as is shown in the Introduction of Dr.
Patrick's Witnesses of Christianity, and this is the Only Sovereign and King
who is constituted the Lord of all other created Lords and Kings, in which
respect he is like to God, which we have (not well) translated equal to God, as
also in respect of the exercise of the Divine Power in working the greatest
Miracles whenever be pleased and whenever he will. Some People are apt to
imagine, that even God being called the Father, is a valid Proof of more Persons
than One in the Divine Nature. But seriously do they think, that the Samaritan
Women, and common Soldiers, were acquainted with the Scholastic or Platonic
Trinity? Yet these speak of a Son of God, ( Mat. 27.54.) and to the other our
Savior speaks of the Father as of Somewhat intelligible to them. ( John 4.21.)
Conclude we then, that by the Father we must understand God the Common Parent
of his Creatures, and that by the Son or a Son of God in general we must
understand a Child of God, a good Man by excellency, or one extraordinarily
beloved of God. Act. 4, 27.

As to the Texts, which are said to show that Christ is to be Prayed to;
(nothing need absolutely be added to what has been represented by the
Unitarians upon this Subject; howbeit, the Reader is to be reminded,)
Unitarians give a very fair account of these Texts; for it is evident that
those Texts either import that Believers are now denominated by the Name of
Christ, and look for Salvation through his Redemption and Mediation and plead in
that Name with Almighty God in daily Prayers, or else they set forth only the
Wishes of zealous Souls in a pious Discourse or Epistle, and not in the
Solemnity of a regular Prayer, or they are instances of Men asking some favor
of Christ when he was seen present and appeared to be spoken to, or they may
incontestably be interpreted in another Sense than that which they are alleged
for; as the 15th. Verse of the 72d. Psalm which literally is spoken of Solomon,
and which in the Version of the Psalms in the Common Prayer Book is translated,
Prayer shall be made unto him, but in the Version in the Bible thus, Prayer
shall be made for him. In a word, no one Text can be produced, expressly
requiring, that generally Christians here upon Earth since Christ's Ascension
should directly Pray to him in Heaven, and should not fail to do it regularly
and constantly.

Indeed, as was said, the Generality of the Unitarians hold that Christ may be
Prayed to, though not as being expressly or properly God Almighty himself, (
Christ, as Grotius observes, on Col 1.16. being properly a Man,) yet as being
our Intercessor with God, and as being the Vicegerent of the Universe, and the
Mighty Prince, who most eminently represents God, who in the stead of God and
next to God commands to all Creatures, who under God disposes of all things and
can do all things, in whom God dwells, who is most intimately united with God,
and whom God continually directs and assists.

What the Papists groundlesly pretend and assert of the Saints in Heaven, and
of the Holy Angels, is incontestably true of Christ. He is our Mediator with
God, and, we may think, seeing God dwells in him, he sees in God all things
necessary for him to know. Howbeit, undoubtedly, it is sufficient to Pray in
his Name to God; because, in so doing, we recommend the subject of our Prayers
to him, founding all our Expectations on the Acceptableness of his Mediation
with God; and, at the same time, we discharge our Duty to God, acknowledging
that our Mediator and Mediatory King holds all his Power and Sovereignty in
Subordination to God, and from God's Bounty and Munificence. ( The Lords Supper
is a Feast upon Christ's Sacrifice, a Commemorating of it with Thankfulness,
and a Renewing of our Engagements in the Gospel Covenant with Almighty God, in
order to our partaking of the Merit of Christ's Death, which we humbly present
to and plead with God in that Holy Solemnity. But this does not necessarily
imply a direct and proper Worship of or Prayer to Christ, but only a Religious
Address to God through Jesus Christ. The Feasts upon the Sacrifices were Common
both among Jews and Gentiles; but they did not imply an Adoration of or Prayer
to the Victim that had been offered. Here indeed it would undoubtedly be most
proper to Sing Hymns in Praise of Christ; but it is certain this Solemn
Festival does not absolutely require express Prayers to Christ.) There being
then no express Injunction for Men directly and constantly to Pray to Christ,
and certainly therefore it being not absolutely necessary, it follows that in
our Terms of Communion we may content our selves to direct the Body or Current
of our Prayers to God in the Name and through the Mediation of Christ, and to
address a few short Ejacularions to Christ as has been said. And thereby
certainly We both make that Distinction betwixt God and Christ that is to be
made, and acquit our selves of our Duty to each of them in this Matter. For
hereby we acknowledge the Father to be the Chief Director, the Fountain of
Wisdom and Power and Honor, the Eternal Lord, of himself God and King, and
always sitting the most Supreme at the helm, and most principally steering the
Universe; and we acknowledge the Son to be both our Mediator with God, and the
Associate to the Empire of Heaven and Earth, or the Universal Governor under
God, and constituted King of Men and Angels, commanding to and disposing of all
Creatures, as he is directed by the Divine Wisdom, and assisted by the Divine
Power, dwelling in him, annexed to him, and intimately united with his Soul or
Spirit.

No more can be shown to be required of us. And it cannot but be very
unreasonable to find sault with the Unitarians, for this Worship which they pay
to our Lord Jesus Christ; or to declaim against them, as Idolaters, for serving
such a Creature, and putting their trust in such a Man.

It is evident, the Unitarians do not look on our Lord Jesus Christ as a mere
Man; and they have good reason to esteem him as a Creature that is Able to
Save, seeing the Scripture represents him as such a Creature as is sufficiently
endued with Divine Power to that end.

And do not the Trinitarians believe Christ to be such a Creature? Do they not
believe Christ to be a Man? Do they not confess, that Jesus Christ is come in
the Flesh? (1 John, 4.3.) That this Jesus was a Man approved of God, by
Miracles, which God did by him? ( Acts, 2.22.) That this Man, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, (1 John, 2.2.) was set forth to be a Propitiation, ( Romans 3.25.)
bare our Sins in his own Body, (1 Pet. 2.24.) and shed for us upon the Cross
his most Innocent Blood, through which we have Redemption, ( Ephesians. 1.7.) by
which we are redeemed to God, ( Revel. 5.9.) and by which we are washed, (
Revel. 1.5.) and sanctified? ( Heb. 13.12.) Do they not believe, that this Man,
after he had offered that Sacrifice, sat down at the Right Hand of God? ( Heb.
10.12.) That him, who was Slain and who Hanged on a Tree and whom God Raised
from the Dead, has God Exalted to be a Prince and a Savior? ( Acts, 5.31.)
That this Man, because he continues for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood;
wherefore he is Able also to Save them to the uttermost, that come unto God b^
him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them? ( Heb. 7.24, 25.)
That through this Man is Preached the Forgiveness of Sins? ( Acts, 13.38.) That,
having been Obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, therefore God has
given him a Name which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every
Knee should Bow? ( Phil. 2.9, 10.) Do not the Trinitarians believe, that as the
first Man Adam was made a living Soul, so the Second Man, the last Adam, who
was formed by God and had God only for his Father, has been made a quickening
Spirit, Power thus having been committed to him to raise the Dead and do all
that God does? (1 Cor. 15.45.) Do they not, in fine, know, that God will judge
the World in righteousness, by that Man? ( Acts, 17.31.)

And will the Trinitarians renounce that Man, their Savior; and reject their
Lord, their Judge, their Redeemer? Will they slight this Man, will they not
honor him, whom God has appointed to reign with himself, whom the Angels
worship, and who, because he was Slain, has been accounted worthy to receive
Power, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing? ( Revel.
5.12)

If they think it not unfit, to honor this Man, to reverence this Man, to bow
the knee to this Man, as God has appointed it; then they serve a Creature, and
worship a Creature, and consequently use an Inferior religious Worship, as well
as the Unitarians. Let them not slander the Unitarians, then, for thus acting;
and let them not impute it to them as a fault, thus to honor the Man Jesus
Christ, to the Glory of the Father, who could make such an Excellent Creature
as this, and could so highly Dignify and Exalt that Creature.

The Children of Israel at the same time Worshipped God and King David, and
were blameless. (1 Chronicles. 29.20.) And shall Christians be blamed for worshipping
God and the King whom God has set over the Universe, when Men every Day fall
down before Earthly Kings and ask Petitions of them?

The Unitarians worship the Lord Jesus Christ as such a King, to the Glory and
Religious Service of God; not barely as a King, but as such a one to whom all
Power is given in Heaven and Earth, ( Matt. 28.18.) Would you then think it
unfit, to call upon such a Prince, or to ask Grace and Salvation of Him, for
the sake of his precious Death and Passion? Or do you think that He, to whom
all Power is given, and the Spirit without measure, and in whom the Father most
intimatelydwells, is not able to know your Wants and to hear your Requests? To
worship Christ, is then in some measure to worship God; since Christ not only
is a God, or Sovereign, the King of Heaven and Earth under God, and not only
acts most eminently for God, so as most eminently to represent God; but Christ
is the true Schechina, the Divine Nature constantly dwells in him, and all
Power is given unto him; He is then hon'red to the Glory of God, by God's
Order, and (so) God, as was said. is worshipped in him: There is then but one
God, properly, that is religiously worshipped, though Christ be called God, and
be worshipped to the Glory of God. (In all the Dominions of Great Britain and
Ireland, there is but one Sovereign, though a Subject in the Isle of Man bears
also the Title of Sovereign, and though the Viceroy in Ireland represents the
Sovereign and be honored as the Sovereign.)

Indeed the Unitarians that did not Pray at all to Christ, when they owned him
to be the Governor of the World under God, had not sufficiently weighed the
last quoted Text, of Mat. 28.18. (where all Power is said to have been given to
Christ,) nor had fully considered, that the Father, who dwells in Christ, can
enable him to do all things, and that, therefore, now at least, Christ is such
an excellent Creature, (as the Arians hold him to have been from the beginning,
namely) as has, himself, incomparably more Perfections and Power, than all the
other Creatures together. They needed then no more have doubted that Christ can
Know and Supply the Needs of Men, in the Rank and Order that He is set, than
they would have questioned that a Mother can Take care of her Family. I know
not therefore that there be now any Unitarian, that do not Pray to and Worship
(the Savior of the World, the Lord of Men and Angels,) the Man Jesus Christ,
in the manner I have specified, namely, in a subordinate degree to God,
honoring him as the King of the Universe under God, and as be, that governs
and disposes all things under God's Direction, as well as mediates for Men and
intercedes with God, who is still to be held and ever must necessarily be looked
upon as the Supreme. ( Unitarians then can no more be accounted Idolaters for
thus worshipping Christ, than Irish-Men can be said to be Rebels for honoring
their Viceroy as they do.)

Christ then being thus Called upon, nothing is ascribed to him that is
inconsistent with the Unity of God; a Man is not Worshipped as God, but as
assisted of God, and most highly exalted by God; and Trust is not put in a mere
Creature, but in one abundantly assisted of the Divine Nature: That is,
therefore, ultimately and properly, to put our Trust in the Godhead dwelling
in Christ. And the Unitarians account the Worship of Christ a Religious
Worship, no otherwise than as it is intended and appointed to the Glory of the
Father, as Christ's acts for God at the Helm of the Universe, and as the Divine
Nature assists him, dwells in him, is as intimately united with him as possble,
and is made in a manner Part of his Being.

And is it not thus, that the Trinitarians themselves adore God, and worship
Christ? (And then where is the Great Difference, or the Great Fault and Defect
of the Unitarian System?) Would they adore God, as the Human Nature of Christ?
Or would they (the Trinitarians) worship Christ's Human Nature, as God? The
Unitarians worship or honor the Man Jesus Christ, as the most Dignified
Creature, and as most intimately United to God; and God, as the Supreme Being.
The Trinitarians cannot reasonably do otherwise. And they cannot deny, that to
honor Christ, (as has been said the Unitarians do,) is to honor God, and not
to give his Glory to Another. Indeed, to honor a Being that God has not
appointed to be honored, is to dishonor God. But, incontestably, to honor
one whom God has commanded us to honor, to the Glory of God; is to glorify and
serve God in that Particular, and so to worship God: And God, dwelling in
Christ, as he does, as has been shown, is honored and worshipped in Christ, by
his own Appointment, as already said.

As to John, 5.23. declaring it to be the Will of God, That Men should honor
the Son, even as they honor the Father; an Equality of Honor is no more
necessarily to be imagined to be intended and required here, than an Equality
of Perfection in those Words, Be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in
Heaven is perfect, Mat. 5, 48, or an Equality of Fear and Trembling before
mortal and earthly Masters as before the King of Men and Angels in this Text,
Servants be Obedient to them that are your Masters according to the Flesh, with
Fear and Trembling, in Singleness of your Heart, as unto Christ. Ephesians. 6.5.

The Sense of this Verse of the 6th. of the Ephesians is, that as we would
stand in aw before the King of Kings, so, in proportion of the Subordination,
Servants ought to demean themselves before their Masters. The Sense of the Text
of the 5th. of St. Matthew is, that as God is truly perfect, so we ought
effectually to strive to be perfect with that Perfection which our Natures are
capable of. And, in like manner, the Sense of the 23d. Verse. of the 5th. of St.
John is, that as we honor God, we must also honor his Deputy and Vicegerent,
though nevertheless the one as (properly) God's Chief Minister, as was said, and
the other as (expressly) the Almighty himself. The Kings of England may use the
same Phrase, to declare it their Will and Pleasure, That the Subjects in
Ireland should honor the Viceroy, even as they honor the King. But that does
not imply, that the one must absolutely be taken for the other, and
consequently that is not to give the Supreme Royal Glory itself to the Viceroy,
no more than to honor Christ is to give expressly God's Supreme Glory to
Another, as the Arians do well observe, besides that the Saying that God will
not give his Glory to Another, may signify, that He will not give it to be
disposed of, (that He will not give the disposition of it to Another, or that
He will not give to Another that Glory which is peculiar to Him of disposing of
religious Honor, and appointing Rites of Religion,) or that He will not give
or impart a Sublime (Heavenly) Honor to Strangers or Aliens from Him, neither
will give his Praise to Idols, that is, He will not patiently suffer, or allow,
that Men should make to themselves Objects of Religious Service at their
Pleasure like the Heathens, and that the Religious Worship which is properly
and ultimately due to Him should be paid to Unfit Beings, to Stocks and Stones
or to Demons, which are not truly (in any, holy, scriptural, sense) Gods,
being neither the Supreme God, nor Sovereign Officers of God, commissionated
with Power and Authority thus to act for God, so as most eminently to represent
god, and, so, to receive a Suitable Honor, appointed to terminate ultimately
to God: So that God then does not give properly the Religious Honor to
Another, though He commands us to bow the Knee to the Man Jesus Christ, as we do
to God. If He pleased, He might set Angels over Us, or any Good Spirits, and
command Us to bow to them, and ask and receive Graces of them, though his Holy
Nature cannot permit him to give any such Glory to his Enemies, or ever to
allow that Impure Spirits be sought to and reverenced. That could not redound
to God's Glory, or the Good of his Creatures; whereas the other might. (See a
Passage of St. Gregory's, quoted in the 1st. Part of Bishop Taylor's Sermon, on
Ps. 86.5. where St. Gregery observes, that Angels were Worshipped under the Old
Testament. But, if so, yet, to be sure, not only that was not a Divine Worship,
but even that Worship, so far as it extended, was for the sake of, and
terminated to, God, whose Immediate and Highest Officers and Messengers the
Angels then appeared to be; and, so, that hindered not but it might truly be
said, that God alone was properly Worshipped.) The Text, Gal. 4.8. which we
translate doing Service to them which By Nature are no Gods, may be translated,
doing Service to them which TRULY are no Gods, (yet it is the same, if we
read, Of their Nature,) whether Supreme, according to the proper and eminent
sense of the word, or Inferior, of God's creating and constituting, according
to the Scripture-Stile. See Grotius on the Place. Certainly, we are expressly
Commanded in Scripture, to Serve the Man Jesus Christ ( Phil. 2.9.) Yet,
incontestably, the Man Jesus Christ properly is a God but in an inferior
sense. We are then, without doubt, to serve the Man Jesus Christ as such a God,
appointed and dignified by the Supreme and Eternal God, ( Act. 2.36,) and we
are to serve the Supreme God, as absolutely being the Supreme God, or as Him
who is of himself God and who (consequently) is God in the most proper and
eminent sense of that word.

Howbeit, this does not imply that Christ is not as intimately united with the
Divine Nature as possible. For all Power is given him in Heaven and Earth, and,
acting for God in the highest Post, he represents God at the Helm of the
Universe. But a Creature cannot thus represent God, and govern the World, and
have all Power given it; except God be with it, and assist and direct it, so as
that that Creature have the enjoyment and disposition of the Divine Nature as
of it is own Being, whereby it is Power and Understanding being enlarged it may
in a high measure Know and Act as God. And accordingly, as Sandius observes,
the Unitarians held, from the Beginning of Christianity, that an Influence of
the Divine Nature was incarnated in and most strictly united with the Man
Christ Jesus. So that Christ is not Worshipped, neither is God's
Representative, or the Father's Universal Vicegerent, merely as he is a
Creature. A mere Creature cannot comprehend in it is Thoughts and under it is
Care the whole Universe, and can never be such a Representative of the Father's
at the Helm of the Universal Government. Nor can a mere Creature be Worshipped
by all the Creatures in the Universe, as Christ by God's Appointment is to be.
It seems, God neither can nor will be thus represented by any Creature as a
Creature. Christ then is God's Representative, and is Worshipped, in his
Mediatory Kingdom over the whole Universe, Inasmuch as an Influence of the
Divine Nature most intimately Dwells in him, Assists and Directs him, and
Works in and by him, and Inasmuch as the Divine Majesty is Conspicuous in
him, and As by his Intercession and by the Merit of his Death and the Virtue of
the Covenant of Grace and of his Union with God and his Exaltation he Disposes
of the Divine Power in the Gospel-Oeconomy.

A mere Creature may have a vast Honor and Power; but not like that which
appears in Christ in his Government of the Universe. Whereas God has given us
two Eyes whereby we may perceive three or four Objects at a time at a certain
distance, and two Ears which may imperfectly discern some few (several) Sounds
also at the same time as the Sounds of certain (several) Voices and of some
Instruments, and two Hands by which we may take hold of several Particies of
Matter and strike ten Strings at a time and move a certain Mass and steer a
Ship, and but a narrow Understanding according to the present Needs and the
Capacity of our bodily Organs; God might give a freer Carrier to our Spirits,
and endue us with more noble and vaster Capaeities, and give us two hundred or
two hundred thousand Hands and Ears and Eyes, and enable our Souls to use them
all fitly in reference to so many several Objects in the same instant, and
consequently vastly enlarge the Natural Understanding in order to it is forming
at the same time so many Thoughts and Conceptions. It may be that an Angel, or
a Human Soul, in a Spiritual Body, has greater Capacities than we conceive, and
is all Hands and Eyes and Fars and Tongues, and can clearly discern and hear
and discourse and act upon a whole Nation. But, after all, a finite Creature,
with the mere Strength of a Creature, cannot comprehend the Universe. Therefore
an Angel or a Human Spirit cannot have all Power given him, except God be with
and in him in the manner aforesaid.

Likewise, God may set up particular Kings in particular Places, and give them
vast Dominions, and oblige their Subjects to be uncovered in their Presence and
to bow the knee before them. But, in order that at the Name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of Things in Heaven and Things in Earth, and Things under the
Earth, and that Christ may be enabled to receive these Homages and to govern
the Universe and dispose fitly of all Creatures; it is necessary that the
Divine Majesty and Power and Wisdom be with and in this Man in the manner
aforesaid.

Thus all the Lines of a Circle terminate to an individual Point in the Center.
A Spider, circumscribed by and fixed in a Place, teaches of its self no further
than that Place; but when it has weaved it is Web, it may by the Means of those
wonderful Threads act at a Distance from it is self and above it is own Power. A
Man with a Telescope pierces the Skies, and discovers undiscerned Stars. All
this and infinitely more is the Divinity to the Man Jesus Christ. He is in the
Center of God, and the Godhead is to him an infinite Circle, all the Lines
whereof as far as is necessary act upon him and uphold him, and so he acts
thereby. The Influence of the Divine Nature, dwelling in Christ, and extending
it self all over the Universe, is the mighty Telescope whereby Christ sees all
things, and the infinite Web by which he is enabled to act every where. And
this acting is to be ascribed to him, as well as to God, or the Father, and to
him, in this respect, primarily, or chiefly, inasmuch as God does all things,
in the Christian Economy, upon Christ's Account, and at his Desire. Indeed,
Christ wills nothing but what God wills: But, then, God is pleased and willing
now to do many things for the Sake of Christ, and through his Mediation, which
He would not have done, if it had not been for his Undertaking, and his free
and wonderful Condescension and Humiliation for the Race of Mankind, and the
Merit of his Death, and the Covenant of Grace purchased by his Blood, and his
continual Intercession at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Thus, God and
Christ are to be considered, and sought to, and honored, and worshipped; and
the Distinction, that is to be made between them, is evident. God is of himself
God, and his Dominion is ever the most Supreme, and thus He is to be
Worshipped. And Christ receives all things of God, and his Kingdom is a
Mediatory Kingdom, and he is thus to be Worshipped. And this is the Primitive
and Scriptural Notion of Christ's Divinity.

The Heathens were particularly Criminal in these 3 respects. (1.) They set up,
of their own Heads and without any Warrant or Command, some Mediators and some
Symbols and Schechinas, which they worshipped, with likewise devised and
strange Rites, and they made the Chiefest Part of their Religion to consist in
the Worship of these, they had such a vast Number of them. (2.) They set up
many Supreme Gods. Yet (3.) They passed by the true God, and worshipped
Creatures, and many of them Most Vicious and Wicked Creatures, for their
Supreme Gods. Which is the Meaning of Gal. 4, 8, and Romans 1, 25. Whereby
Religion became perfectly corrupted and unfit to purify Men, and actually did
as much harm as it was designed to do good. Wherefore God would be owned for
the Only true God, and required to be Served and Obeyed as such, and (so)
willed that Men should not introduce any thing in his Service, but what they
had express Warrant for, from Him, either by the Light of Nature or the Light
of Positive Revelation. And that is the Meaning of Deuteronomy. 6, 13. and Matthew. 4,
10. But all this hinders not, but that, though God is the Only Absolute and
Independent Being who Only is to be Served as such and who Only is to be
Worshipped with Ultimate or Divine Worship and who Only is the Fountain of
Honor so that None besides Him ought to be Honored but Those whom He Honors,
yet, for all that, Others, besides God, may, when God pleases, be Served and
Honored, in an Inferior Degree, Relatively and in Obedience to God, and so to
his Glory and He may appoint a Mediator through whom We may come to Him. Ephesians.
2.18. John 20, 31, Phil. 2.11. God requiring it in order to his Glory, and so
it being done to that intent, that is actually to glorify God, and so is not to
give his Glory to Another but to Himself, Himself Only being ultimately served
thereby. See the (aforequoted) 18th Chap. of the 5th Book of Limborch's
Theologia Christiana,. 10. and an Unitarian Pamphlet, entitled, A Vindication
of the Worship of the Lord Jesus Christ, P. 23, etc. We may then incontestably
Serve and Honor our Lord Jesus Christ as our Mediator and Mediatory King, as
was said, though God Only is to be Served and Honored as the Most Supreme and as
the Eternal Fountain of Honor.

At the 11. Ve. of the 2. Chapter of the Phil. as we have intimated, the Apostle
shows expressly how that Matter ought to be distinguished, when he says, that it
is God's Will we should honor and worship our Savior, and subject our selves
to him, and own him as our Lord, viz. to the Glory of God the Father. So that,
as was said, it is evident the Honor we are to give to Christ, is a Mediatory
or Inferior Honor, and is not ultimately to terminate on him, but on the
Father, for whole Sake and at whose Command the said Honor is paid. Howbeit,
though the Worship of Christ be not properly the Most Supreme, yet it may be
termed a Divine Worship, in that Sense that Christ is said to be God. (We must
needs then observe, with St. Hilary, concerning the difficult or figurative
Expressions of Scripture, that they are to be understood with Reason, or in a
reasonable sense. V^rba non Sono sed Sensu sapiunt. Thus we may understand, how
Christ is God, how we are to Call upon his Name, and how he is to be
Worshipped.) All Sovereigns are jealous of their Honor; the Sovereigns of
Great Britain would not endure that Wro-would of their Subjects should have
Guards, or should be served Kneeling: Yet they freely allow it to their
Lieutenant or Deputy, because the Glory of it terminates to them. For though the
Lord Lieutenant be honored with a like Honor with the Sovereign, yet it is
paid him particularly upon the Sovereign's Account, in Honor to Him, and in
Obedience to his Commands who has so appointed it. And thus the Scripture
teaches We are to Honor our Lord Jesus Christ, as one to and upon whom the
highest Dignity, Glory and Power, that can be bestowed upon one in Commission,
has been in that manner conferred and granted, Namely, to the Glory of the Donor
and Disposer of it. And this leads us to the last Particular, that we have
undertaken to speak to, which is this.

CHAP. XIV. An Answer to the fourth Branch of the Objection.
(4.) THE Unitarians produce sev^ral Texts of Scripture, which seem most
express and evident for the Unitarian System. I shall here mention but these
few, referring the Reader, for the rest, to the Apologia pro ^^enico Magno, or
to Crell's Treatise Touching one God the Father, in which Books may be found
Several of the most select Arguments out of Scripture, besides also several
taken from the incontestable Principles of Reason, all which of both sorts are
there fully enlarged upon, and do seem manifestly and unanswerably to evince
the truth of the Unitarian Doctrine.

I. The first Argument I shall mention, shall be the last quoted Passage of the
2d Chap. of the Philippians, where the Apostle declares, that We are to own
Jesus Christ as one exalted and made Lord, and that we are thus to honor him,
to the Glory of God the Father: So that, as was said, the Honor we are to pay
to Our Lord Jesus Christ is not to terminate ultimately on him, but on the
Father, for whose Sake and at whose Command the said Honor is given to the
Lord Christ, upon the account of his Exaltation as the inestimable Reward of
his Obedience, and upon the account of the most High Commission granted to him
by God. Now who does not see, that this invincibly demonstrates, that properly
Christ is not God himself* For if he were literally God Almighty himself, it
would be absurd, not to adore and honor him for himself ultimately; for that
would imply, that the Divine Nature is not to be honored for it is own sake. It
were in vain to alledg, that the Trinitarians hold the Son has received his
Divine Nature from the Father, and that so they may also worship him to the
Glory of the Father. They say, that the Son had the Divine Nature eternally,
and not by a free Gift, but by absolute Necessity, and that it is the same
numerical Divine Nature and Essence with that of the Father, so that he is as
much God, and is as necessarily so, as the Father; from which Principles
therefore it would need follow, that the Son should be honored ultimately for
himself, or, which is the same, should be honored with properly Divine Honor,
as well as the Father. Then, if things had been so, the Apostle should have
said, We must honor Christ's Human Nature, or the Man Christ Jesus, to the
Glory of God the Son. But the Apostle does not present us with any such
Notions. But he tells us, that Jesus Christ is to be owned as a Lord, and the
greatest Lord, under God, and is thus to be honored, to the Glory of God the
Father. What can be more express? If the Son be literally God Almighty, he
cannot be exalted any higher, and he must needs be honored ultimately for
himself, with (Supreme) Divine Honor. But, says the Apostle, the Father
exalted him, etc. Whereas, if the Son had been himself literally God, his whole
Person must needs have sat necessarily at the Helm of the Universe, as well as
the Person of the Father, and it could not have been otherwise, except a Divine
Person could have ceased to be properly Divine, that is to say, except God
could have been annihilated. Now, the Reader may please to make an application
of this, as well as the following Arguments, to Dr. Sherlock's Rule, mentioned
before, and by which he owns this Controversy is to be tried.

II. The Second Argument shall be that, which the Dr. at the 197th and
following Pages of his Book, entitled, The Scripture Proofs of our Savior's
Divinity explained and vindicated, has carefully pointed out to us, and taken
great pains to prepare for us, and make us sensible of it is great weight. And
indeed it seems a most express and decisive Argument. It is that which is
grounded on the 36th Verse of the 24th Chap. of St. Matthew, to which the 32d
Verse of the 13th of St. Mark is parallel; the import whereof is, That, Christ
declaring he did not know what God knew Namely, when should be the Day of
Judgment, it follows necessari^y and most manifestly that he is not God himself.

The Dr. in the Place aforequoted, represents the force of the Argument in
these words. There is an obvious Objection against the perfect intuitive
Knowledge of our Savior, from what he himself tells us concerning the
Destruction of Jerisalem, etc. -- For were he true and perfect God, of the same
Substance with his Father, he could be ignorant of nothing.

Now how does the Dr. solve this Objection, as he calls it? The common Answer
to this, says he, is, by distinguishing between the Knowledge of Christ, as
God, and as. Man: That though as God he knew all things, yet there were some
Secrets for some time concealed from his Human Nature.

Well! Does the Dr. know of some better Solution? No. Is he then very well
satisfied with this common Answer? No. He neither likes this, nor can tell what
to say more satisfactory. These are his words. "The common Answer to this, is,
etc. as was said in the foregoing Paragraph: "And this," says he, must be the
true Answer, or I know not how we shall find a better; and yet it seems very
hard, that the Son, who is but one Person, though he have two Natures, should be
said not to know that, which he did know, whether he knew it as God, or as Man.
This I confess is a Difficulty, and always will be so, while we know so little
of this Personal Union, that is to say, of the Union of the Godhead with the
Man Christ Jesus. But then, Dr! if we know so little of it, why do you call it
a Personal Union, and that of an eternal Son, or an eternal Person, with the
Spirit of Christ? But since you are pleased to call it so, you must stand to
it, and must not pretend to evade, by saying you know not how far it goes, or
what communications the Human Nature of Christ receives from its Union with the
Godhead. This is not the Point, nor is it at all to the business in hand, from
which you ought by no means to be suffered now to flinch away, when it
manifestly appears to be against you and invincibly shows the solidity of the
Unitarian Sentiment. For you have said, and the Trinitarian System expressly
asserts, that the whole Son is but one Person, and therefore, though you know not
exactly how great are the Communications of the several Parts betwixt
themselves, which constitute this one Person, yet you must own that those
Communications must needs go so far as to make of it but one Person. (Even all
that pass for Orthodox, among the Trinitarians, acknowledge, that Christ is but
one Person and but one Son.) Now the business is to consider, Whether any thing
can be in general terms denied of one Son, or of one Person, which yet is true
of some Part of that Person? And the Unitarians maintain, that, upon the
considering of it, this ought not to be found a mere Difficulty against the
Trinitarian System, but an irrefragable Argument of the truth of the System of
the Unitarians.

The two following Considerations are the utmost that the Dr. offers, in order,
as he says, to give a light to this Matter; in so much that if both of them are
invalid to solve the Difficulty, it will appear that the Unitarian Argument is
demonstrative and irresistible.

1. The first Reflection is this. That, notwithstanding the Union, the Divine
and Human Natures are two distinct Natures in Christ; and therefore he may be
ignorant of that as Man, which he knows as God. Now supposing that Possible
with the Dr. yet this makes nothing at all to the purpose of the Trinitarians,
except our Savior had thus expressed himself: The Son, as Man, does not know
that thing which you desire him to inform you of, and therefore, as Man, he
cannot inform you of it, and, as God, he will not tell it you, though, as God he
knows it very well. But every one, who can read our Savior's words in the
Evangelists, may soon see whether they bear any such distinction.

2. The 2d. Reflection, more to the purpose, is, That the God incarnate, that
is to say, Christ, being but one Person, whatever belongs to either Nature, may
truly be afformed of his Person, with respect to that Nature to which it
belongs, though it be not true of him, with respect to his other Nature; and,
thus, therefore, (infers the Dr.) if Christ, as Man, was ignorant of any thing,
which he knew as God, he might truly be said, not to know, what he did not
know as Man: this (says the Dr.) is universally owned. Now, Dr. this is a gross
Mistake, and, most notoriously, your inserence is absolutely wrong, and is so
far from being universally owned, that it is indeed owned by no body in the
World that considers, but the contrary is held by all Men.

It is true, that what belongs to any Part of a Person, may be affirmed of that
Person, with respect to that Part to which it belongs, though it be not true of
him, with respect to his other Parts. For instance. If a Man be Wounded in the
Arm, it may truly be said of that Man, that he is Wounded, though he be not
Wounded in the Head nor Leg. In like manner. If Christ be both the Supreme God
and a Man. Personally-United, he may be said in general to know that, which he
knows as God, though as Man he know not that thing.

But because what belongs to any one certain Part of a Person, may be affirmed
of that Person, with respect to that Part to which it belongs, though it be not
true of him with respect to his other Parts; it does not follow, that what does
not belong to one certain Part of his, may in general terms be denied of his
Person, when yet it truly belongs to some other Part of him. That is so far
from being to be inferred from the former way of speaking, that every one knows
it to be false, that what truly belongs to one Part of a Person, may in general
terms be denied of that Person, upon the account that it belongs not to some
other Part of his. Though a Man be not Wounded in the Head or Leg, it will not,
in general terms, be said that he is not Wounded, when actually he is Wounded
in the Arm. Such a denial, upon this mental reservation that the Man is not
Wounded in the Leg, would be looked upon as a shameful Equivocation and an
express Lie. And would the Dr. ascribe to his Savior such a way of reasoning,
when he makes him dery his knowing, what yet, according to the Trinitarian
System, one of his Natures knew? If this be not a Demonstration, the Unitarians
think there are no Evidences in the World, and it is impossible to discern what
are manifest Arguments, what not. And therefore the Dr. they think, should not
barely have said, as he does, that there is something which seems very hard in
his common Answer; but he should have dared expressly to affirm, that it is
altogether very invalid and impertinent. Let the Reader himself judge of it, by
considering the manner how our Savior expresses himself in both the
Evangelists.

Of that Day and Hour, knows no Man, (or no Body, or no Person, for it is in
the Original, None knows of that Day and of that Hour,) no not the Angels that
are in Heaven, nor the Son, but the Father. Mark, 13.32. And, at the 36th.
Verse of the 24th. of St. Math. but my Father only.

(If the Reader please to see any more than what has here been said upon these
Texts, he may be referred to the 24th. Chapter of the Apologia pro Irenico
Magno, and to the 9th. Chap. of the 2d. Section of Crell's 1st. Book Touching
one God the Father, in both which Places the Argument, taken from those
Passages of Scripture, is more at large treated of and most fully illustrated.)

Here is then what Dr. Sherlock desired, (Page 55th. of his aforequoted Book,)
Namely, a Text, that proves Christ to be properly but a Creature, such as the
Unitarians hold him to be. After this Argument, the Unitarians do not think any
other to be very necessary. I shall therefore in a manner but mention the
following, without much enlarging upon them.

It need only be added, concerning the present Argument, that Crellius takes
notice of the other Answers to it, and that they most visibly appear to be such
that they who insist upon them do most evidently show, that they are
obstinately resolved to defend an old Prejudice, and that they will by no
reasonable Means be persuaded to acknowledge the Truth, which disposition
cannot but be criminal.

To say, for instance, that Christ, considered as God as well as Man, said that
he knew not the Day of Judgment, in the same sense that St. Paul said of
himself, (1 Cor. 2.2.) that he determined not to know any thing among the
Corinthians, save Christ Crucisied; is it not to declare that those Men will
take hold of any Evasion, rather than yield? For does not that expression of
St. Paul, that he determined not to know, show manifestly the difference
betwixt his Assertion and our Savior's, who says expressly that he knew not the
Day of Judgment, and that none but the Father knew it? The Expression of St.
Paul, which we have rendered, determined, may be translated, judged or
condemned, and so Erasmus has interpreted it, as if St. Paul had said, (to
declare that actually he did not rely on the force of Eloquence, but on the
Power it self of the Gospel, which he knew was attended with sufficient
Evidences, without setting it forth with the Ornaments and Advantages of an
Elaborate Oration, as he might have done, which declaration is incontestably
the scope and whole intent of the Apostle's reasoning,) I have condemned my
self to be among you, or, I have judged it fittest to be among you, as knowing
nothing but Christ Crucified, lest the Testimony of the Cross and Sufferings of
Christ and the Demonstration of the Spirit should be thought insufficient
Evidences, therefore when I came unto you, I came not with excellency of
Speech, but barely contented my self most simply to set before you the
Testimony of God. The current of the Discourse shows, that St. Paul did not
deny his knowing any thing besides Christianity, but only asserted that he
judged a Demonstration of all his other Learning unnecessary, in comparison of
that, and in order to the end which he proposed to himself, namely, the
Conversion of the Corinthians; wherefore, according to our Version, he
determined to be, or determined to appear, as knowing nothing else but Christ
Crucified, and wholly neglected to make a show of his Eloquence. It is
undeniably evident, that this is his meaning. But it is as evident, that there
is no such restriction in our Savior's expression, and that he fimply denies
his knowing at all the Day of Judgment, and expressly asserts that none but the
Father knew it. This Argument, it seems, therefore, will remain to the end of
the World such a one as the Dr. desired, a positive Proof, that Christ properly
is not God Almighty himself: And the Unitarians hold, that, to deny it, is to
fly wilfully in the face of Evidence. For, as to the Knowledge of that Day, the
Son puts himself into the same rank with the Angels and all other Creatures,
and says that he knows it no more than they; which is as express a denial of
his knowing it, as it is possible to be.

To this Head, and for a further Illustration of this Argument, we may add the
Saying, in the first Verse of the first Chapter of the Revelations, that God
gave that Revelation to Jesus Christ. For by those words it appears, that Jesus
Christ had not that Revelation of himself, and consequently that Jesus Christ
is not the Supreme God, though yet he be God, or a God, and God's Representative
in whom the Father in an extraordinary manner dwells, as was said.

If that Person, designed or signified in Scripture by the Name of Jesus
Christ, were literally the Supreme God, that Verse would bear this Sense, that
the Supreme God gave to another Person who is also the Supreme God a Revelation
which he had not till then that it was given him; otherwise, if he had it
before, it needed not to have been given him: On the other hand, if he had it
not, it is plain this is an indigent God, not the same with the Giver, and
consequently not the Supreme God.

To this some answer, that this Person received the whole Godhead from all
eternity from the Father, and therefore whatever he enjoys at any time, or
whatever knowledge he has, he may be said to receive it from God, there, by God,
meaning the Father. But we reply, this visibly is precariously said. For if
from all eternity Christ had all knowledge from the Father, what occasion was
there for taking notice here that he had this particular knowledge from God?
There appears not to be here any particular reason for it.

Therefore the last refuge is in the distinction of the two Natures. And so
either the Meaning is, that the Father gave that Revelation to the Man Christ:
(But then we reply, that was not necessary, if another All-knowing Person was
hypostatically-united with that Man:) Or else it only remains the Meaning must
be supposed to be, that the Second Person of the Trinity gave that Revelation
to the Man Jesus Christ. To this we reply. The Name Jesus Christ denotes the
whole Person; and, according to the Trinitarians, that Person implies the
Supreme God as well as the most highly dignified Creature; and therefore God
then could not be said simply, or in general terms, to give any thing to Jesus
Christ.

III. The Unitarians do very much wonder, that any one who has read the
Scripture should ask for a Text, where it is taught that Christ is not
literally the Almighty God himself; seeing that in Two Hundred and Seventy
Three distinct Passages of the New Testament Christ is expressly distinguished
from God. Whence rationally we ought to infer, that Christ is not literally and
expressly that God from whom he is distinguished, and that therefore when he is
called God it must be understood in an infeferior Sense, according to the
Significations, we have mentioned, in which that Title is used: As in a Country
(as it is in France) where the King's Eldest Son, when he is spoken of either
singly or together with other Princes or Lords, is by way of eminency called My
Lord; it is obvious, that, then, another Lord (who is also, though in an inferior
sense, called My Lord, but not simply, or as by a distinguishing character, but
as by a common title to which is and must be added something to notify the
Person spoken of, or who at least is never simply styled My Lord when spoken of
together with the King's Eldest Son,) being thus distinguished from My Lord, or
from Him that is called My Lord simply and by way of eminency, then, I say, the
other Lord is thereby declared not to be that My Lord himself, the King's Heir,
but an inferior Lord. What the Trinitarians then here say, that the Title of
God though most particularly and eminently appropriated to the Father, as it is
in Scripture, does not exclude other Persons, thus expressly distinguished from
him, from being the same God, not only is a mere begging of the question, and
is without grounds, but is expressly contrary to all reason. That Subtersuge
therefore of the Trinitarians is wholly vain. And indeed did St. Peter suppose
that Cornelius knew of the Evasion of the Trinitarians, when, preaching the
Gospel to him, he distinguished, in the current of his Discourse, Christ from
God? Acts, 10.36.

IV. At the 19th. Verse of the 5th. of St. John, our Savior himself tells us,
that the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do. Now, in
good truth, could one, that were literally the Almighty God, say this
concerning himself? Can the Almighty and All-Wise God be supposed able to do
nothing, but what he must be taught how to do it? Surely it were a monstrous
Supposition, to reckon He needed to be taught any thing. Whereas, if God's
Only-Begotten Son be not properly God Almighty himself, but the Word Incarnate,
(according to the Arians,) such as we have described, who from the beginning
was a God in the highest signification of the inserior senses in which that
title is used in Scripture, and who is assisted of God in the manner we have
declared, it is very rational and true to say of him, that he cannot do the
Divine Works of himself, but that he does them only as he is taught and
assisted by the Father to do them. To which agrees, what he says, at the 10th.
Verse of the 14th. Chapter of the same Gospel; the Father, (not a Second Divine
Person,) that dwells in me, he properly does the Works, inasmuch as it is he
that assists me to do them: And, accordingly, Christ declared, that, though he
had a vast Power even then granted him and was enabled to do mighty Miracles,
yet God (the free Donor and Disposer thereof) had reserved infinitely more
Prerogative to himself, and the Disciples were not to doubt but that God, from
whom Christ had all that he had, was still greater than he. John, 14, 28.

V. In like manner, a Person, that were literally the Almighty God himself,
could not say to the Father, (as Christ does, John, 17.5.) Glorify thou me with
thine own self, with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was. For,
whatever the Trinitatarians may say or think of it, a Person that were
literally the Almighty God, could no more be at any time without his Glory,
than he could ever be without his Nature and Essence, or could cease to exist.
For the Highest Glory is inseparable from the Supreme God; for as he exists
necessarily from all Eternity, so he is necessarily All-Perfect, and
consequently All-Glorious. But the Word, being such as we have described,
having received all his Perfection from the mere free Bounty of the Father, and
holding the Height of his Glory precariously from the Hand of the Supreme God,
and as but during the Pleasure of the Almighty; this Sublime Creature then, I
say, that is called the Word, might be divested of the greatest part of his
Glory for a time, and be reduced to and contracted into the Narrowness and
Lowliness of an Innocent Human Soul, for the Undertaking and Performance of a
peculiar Office, during which, considering the Anguish and Difficulties
attending it, this Person may well be supposed to groan and long for that
excellent and inestimable Glory and Happiness, which he enjoyed with God before
the World was, being then glorified and dignified with an extraordinary and an
eminent and intimate partaking even of the Divine Nature, Sovereignty and
Power, which, in becoming Man, he in a great measure actually deposited into
the hands of God, (to receive again, indeed, afterward, with Interest,)
whereas, as was said, it is impossible for the Almighty God at all to deposite
at any time his Perfection, Power and Glory. See the afore-quoted Treatise of
Crellius, Book 1st. Section 2d. Chapter 18th. on the Argument, That all things
are given to Christ from the Father.

VI. The last Argument of the Unitarians, which I shall now take notice of, and
that also briefly, (considering all that has been said here and elsewhere,) is,
That it is expressly declared, in several Places of Scripture, that the Father
Only is the Supreme God.

John, 17.3. This is Life eternal, to know thee only, (Father,) to be the true
God, and Jesus Christ to be thy Messenger. It is evident that that must
necessarily be the Construction of the words For the Adjective Only, when it is
employed to exclude other Subjects from the partaking of the Predicate, belongs
to the Subject, and not to the Predicate. Now it is incontestable; (seeing the
Reason of the Thing, and the Scope of the Argument; that is, the Resolution of
these grand Articles, Namely, Who is the true God; And, Which is the Way to
eternal Life?) and indeed it is agreed by all; that in this place the word,
Only, is employed to exclude other Subjects from the partaking of the
Predicate. Wherefore all others, besides the Father, are hereby necessarily
excluded from being the true God. For if all others were not so, then none
could be supposed to be hereby excluded; and so the reasoning would be
insignificant. See Crell, in the beginning of his afore-quoted Treatise.

Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all, who is above all. The Father only is that God who is
above all, or who is properly the True and Supreme God.

1 Timothy 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man
Christ Jesus. That it is the Father only who is that one God, is then evident;
in that Christ is opposed to that one God: And the Mediator between God and
Men, is said to be a Man, and not a God-Man. See Crell, on that Text.

1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one God, the Father. (To which Place we may
join the 9th. Verse of the 3d. of St. James's.) That one, then, who is properly
the God, is the Father, of whom are all things. And, under him, there is but
one Universal Lord, by and for whom the Father prepared all things, that this
most God-like Lord might be at the Head of them, to the greatest Glory of the
Father, the eternal, and Supreme, the only Wise, (perfectly, and in himself,)
and the only one, the true God. See 1 Timothy 1.17. compared with Romans 15.6. and
16.27.

1 Timothy 1.17. Unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be
Honor and Glory for ever.

Romans 16.27. To God only Wise, be Glory, through Jesus Christ.

Romans 15.6. With one Mind, and with one Mouth, glorify God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So Jam. 3.9.

Thus we see the Unitarians not only show some most express or expressly seeming
Contradictions in the Platonic or Scholastic Trinity, (which Contradictions
cannot be denied to be most express unless it can be shown expressly and
invincibly that they are not such,) but they also produce several Texts, which
appear most express and evident for the Unitarian System. Upon which account,
they think, they are the more authorized, and incontestably warranted, to
consult also as they do in this Matter the Light of Reason, which, as was said,
furnishes them with several unanswerable Arguments of the Impossibility of the
Scholastic or Platonic Trinity of real Divine Persons in one God (as may be
seen in the Apologia pro Irenico Magno,) and, consequently, of the
Reasonableness of the Unitarian System and the Unitarian Interpretations. They
reckon, that the Arguments taken from Reason, and those taken from Scripture,
do very much strengthen one another. Howbeit, they chiefly insist on those
taken from Scripture, as appears from that Treatise of Crellius, which has been
so often quoted.

Here then it is very fit to remember Dr. Sherlock's Words, which we quoted
before, and which are to this purpose: That if any Text be produced, which
proves Christ (properly or in his own Person) to be but a Creature, this ought
to put an end to the Controversy, and either excuse or justify all the
Unitarian Interpretations of Scripture, how harsh soever they may otherwise
appear, etc. The Scripture-Proofs of our Savior's Divinity explained. P. 55.

I leave it to the Reader to sum up the Evidence, (it being so obvious, and
easily done,) and shall only show what follows, most incontestably, from the
whole, including the Arguments for the Gespel-Terms of Communion, handled in
the Ireni^um Magnum, and particularly in the Apologia pro Irenico Magno, where,
as was said, there are also Arguments, as here, and in Crell's Book, against
the Trinitarian System, which I find no where satisfactorily answered, and
which appear indeed most express and unanswerable. Howbeit, it is my most
earnest desire, to be rightly informed, and to see the Truth set into the
greatest light.

CHAP. XV. The Inferences most incontestably following from the whole foregoing
Discourse, and the Gospel-Terms of Communion.
FROM the whole, these four things do most incontestably follow, as the least
that can be granted to the Unitarians, by Protestants that impartially consider
the Arguments treated of in the foregoing Discourse, and in the Apologia pro
Irenico Magno.

I. That the State of this Controversy is such, that Men may be Unitarians, and
be very sincere, pious and inquisitive; and that if Vnitarianism be an Error,
it is not a damnable and an intolerable one, or an Heresy.

II. That, in the Case of this most abstruse Controversy, we ought, in our
Terms of Communion, with relation thereunto, to keep to the Generality of the
Terms of Scripture, and not Magisterially determine this Matter any farther
than that Generality, nor force or fright away the Unitarians out of the
Church-Society, but ought to regulate our Public Service, and our Terms of
Church-Union, according to the utmost Generality of the Expressions of
Scripture, so as that Unitarians may without Scruple join with Us therein;
seeing the Gospel-Terms of Communion, and the Principles of Protestants,
require this Moderation, and enjoin that Method, in reference to such Points,
as are so very difficult and intricate, that sincere and inquisitive Persons
may be at a loss and may mistake about them.

III. That, therefore, First, in the Public Service we ought to address the
Current of our Prayers directly as well as ultimately to God in general, in the
Name and through the Mediation of Christ, in the Conclusion of them beseeching
God to hear us, and grant us our Requests, for the Sake of his Dear Son, our
Blessed Lord, Savior and Redeemer; and so when we address some Ejaculations to
Christ, we ought, as has been shown, in general to address to him as to our
Mediator or Mediatory Governor, and Sovereign, in whom the Fullness of the
Godhead so dwells, as abundantly and constantly to assist him in the Discharge
of his Mediatory Office, whereby he both acts for God and represents God, and
is in some sense God: Secondly, in our Public Service likewise, and the Terms
of Church-Union, we ought to be content with the Apostles Creed, which is
worded in a Generality agreeable to that of Scripture, and ought not to think
other Creeds necessary or expedient, which are artificially framed on purpose
to depart from that Generality, and are encumbered with Human Decisions and
Magisterial Impositions: Thirdly, no Subscription or Assent ought to be
required of Clergymen, but to the Bible it self, and to Doctrines expressed in
the Words of Scripture, or in Terms that agree to the Scripture-Generality, the
Clergy-men's Declaration being admitted, that they Subscribe and Assent to the
things proposed to them, but so far as they are agreeable to the Generality of
Scripture. These Three Points not only follow necessarily from the 2d.
Inference, but are implied in it; and we rank them on a distinct Head, only
that the Principles in general which are the Grounds on which these Particulars
are built, may first be more distinctly observed to be necessarily deducible
from the First Inference and from the Gospel-Terms of Communion, and that then
it may distinctly be considered what Particulars necessarily follow from those
Principles, that the said Particulars may upon those demonstrated Grounds be
firmly established.

IV. That, among all the other incontestable Reasons, for this Generality in
the Terms of Church-Union, this is one, which follows from the First and Second
Inferences, and deserves a distinct rank, Namely: that this Method is the
safest, in a Controversy at least to be owned by all considering Trinitarians
to be most intricate: and that incontestably it suffices to Pray to God in
general, to satisfy to the Duty of Praying to the Godhead; God in general
including the whole Godhead; so that, when God in general is directly and
ultimately Prayed to, all is certainly worshipped that is to be adored with
Supreme Worship: and when our Petitions are put up in the Name of Christ, the
Mediatory Honor due to our Savior is thereby paid him, being thus addressed
to as the Mediator of the New Covenant, in whom the Fullness of the Godhead
dwells, as was said.

I. That the State of this Controversy is such, that Men may be Unitarians, and
be very sincere, pious and inquisitive; and that if Vnitarianism be an Error,
it is not a damnable and an intolerable one, or a Heresy. This follows from the
high Probability (at least) of the Arguments for Vnitarianism, to say no more
of them; for, after all, upon mature consideration, these Arguments seem to be
express, and unanswerable; and on the other hand it seems, that a Solution is
given to the Chiefest Objections of the Scholastic or Platonic Trinitarians.
Howbeit, this at least cannot be denied to be a most difficult and intricate
Point. And admitting, that the Unitarian System has no higher evidence than the
other, and is encumbred with as great Difficulties, (to which Sentiment I have
often, for a great while, been most inclined, even since I began to write on
this Subject, esteeming it to be God's will and intention that we should for
the most part suspend our judgment about it, and indeed it may with great
appearance of reason be judged the fittest not to be too decisive in so
mysterious and abstruse a Matter;) yet no advantage can thence be taken against
the Unitarians, and every Trinitarian, that carefully and sincerely considers
the Unitarian Arguments, seeing they are so weighty and considerable, must at
least grant that they are such, that Men may take them to be good Arguments,
and yet be very Honest, hearty Lovers of God, and to the best of their power
Inquisitive, and that, consequently, if Vnitarianism be an Error, it is not a
damnable and an intolerable one, or a Heresy. For is it credible, that God will
assign the dreadful Torments of Hell; for an Error, which good Men, who
sincerely and diligently seek to know his Will and to practice it, cannot avoid
taking for a Truth? God punishes nothing but what has some Wickedness in it, or
some Pravity and Malice. Now what Malice or Wickedness is there, in being
sincere, and seeking most carefully to understand the real Meaning of the
Scripture? No Men do account innocent Mistakes punishable, in most difficult
Matters, in which honest and diligent Persons may err. And shall we think God
harder than Men? Far be that thought from any Christian! The Gospel is a benign
and a gracious Economy, and we are in the hands of the Father of Mercies. We
may then be sure, that God will not impute unavoidable (and therefore pitiable)
Errors. Wherefore the most rigid Trinitarians, that will impartially and
attentively consider the Unitarian Arguments, must needs discern, that, if
Vnitarianism be an Error, yet it is not a damnable one, and consequently not an
intolerable one, nor therefore a Heresy.

Gal. 5.19, 20. The Apostle declares that Heresy, taken in an evil Sense, (for
in general it signifies a Sect, which includes some particular Sentiment,
whether good or bad,) is a Work of the Flesh, that is, is the Attendant and
Product of Wilfulness and Wickedness. And therefore, from what has been said,
it manifestly appears, that Vnitarianism cannot be a Heresy, in that Sense,
though it were an Error; seeing that, if it be supposed that it may be an Error,
yet it cannot but be owned it has so many Arguments of Credibility, and looks
so much like a Truth, that inquisitive Men may very honestly mistake about it,
if indeed they err when they take it for the very Import and real Sense of
Scripture.

Tit. 3.11. The same Apostle expressly says, that those that are Heretics, in
being so, sin wilfully, and are condemned of their own Conscience, being
perverted by some evil consideration, knowing that they do not sincerely what
lies in them toward the acknowledgement of the Truth, and it being in their
power to consider and discern that their Tenets are not right, but favor Vice,
and are suggested by the Flesh. So that a Heresy is a criminal and wilful
departing from some Evident Truth, for the gratifying of Sensual Inclinations.
Such was the Heresy of the Nicolaitans, who (as it is thought) would have Women
to be Common. Such was the Heresy of the Gnostics, who made Religion to
consist in Speculation and the Knowledge of Mysteries, and who held that it was
lawful to dissemble the truth to avoid Persecution. And such is the Heresy of
those, who, possessed with a domineering Spirit, and a hasty and imperious
Temper, drive away from their Communion, by Human Decisions, those that differ
from their Sentiment, in Matters that are most Difficult. This is a
Schismatical Heresy.

But there is no such thing in the Sentiment of the Unitarians, if it be an
Error. It is far from gratifying the Flesh. It does not indulge a careless and
lazy humor, averse to consideration, and making Men willing to follow others
blindly any whether, so they may but enjoy their ease and pleasure. But it
exposes Men to trouble. And it is grounded on Arguments, that manifestly appear
rational, and apt to persuade those, who are sincere and inquisitive, and who
fear and love God. Moreover Vnitarianism does not require of any Christians,
nor does impose upon them, any thing against their Conscience, or necessitate
them to dissemble their Sentiments. For it is not Magisterial, and Imposing;
Unitarians, in Mr. Chillingworth's words, proposing the Bible, that is, the
Generality of the Expressions of Scripture, for Terms of Church Communion. And
that Vnitarianism does not cause Men to be absolutely wanting in any essential
Part of Religion, is implied in this consideration, that it is attended with so
much Evidence and Credibility, that Men, as has been shown, may be Unitarians,
and be guiltless and without crime; it being not to be thought, that God has
made any thing absolutely essential to Religion, wherein sincere and
inquisitive Persons may mistake. For when Men, out of a Principle of Piety, do,
in all Particulars, and even in the most intricate, what they can, to be
rightly Informed, and to discharge their Duty; what can a Good God exact more?

According to the Natural Ideas of God, the Tenor of the Gospel, and the
Principles of Protestants; Whatsoever is indispensibly Necessary must needs be
Ciear and Discernible to all that are sincerely Inquisitive. And, after all, it
cannot be denied, but that the Unitarians acknowledge those weighty Points,
which are absolutely requisite, to move us to love and obey God and Christ. For
in general they believe, that Christ according to God's express Will is to be
loved and worshipped on God's account and to God's Glory and as most intimately
united with God, that the Spirit belonging to Christ (which Christ disposes of,
which He communicates to his Disciples, and whereby Christians are sanctified)
is the Spirit and Power of God, that God dwells and acts most eminently in
Christ, and that Christ is in the highest Station of the Universe, all Things
being Subjected to him, the Father only excepted, to whose Praise and Service
all Dispensations are designed ultimately to tend, (as all own,) and who
efficaciously directs and assists Christ in his Sovereign and Universal
Government, whereby Christ rules and acts as God, and according to his Desire,
and the Laws he has enacted and established by the Covenant of Grace, thus
appearing not as being a Subject, but as being the Sovereign, together with the
Father, in this illustrious Economy, the Effect and Fruit of which will last
for ever, and the Honor and Glory whereof will eternally crown the Lord Jesus,
so that he shall to all Eternity be most intimately United to the Father, and,
when he shall particularly commit and deliver up the Universal Administration
of Government into God's hands, when all his Subjects shall have attained to a
Sinless Perfection and shall become Subjects to the Laws of a most Perfect
State, even then he shall retain the title of Sovereign, he shall always be the
next to God, and, though himself Subject to God so as that he shall live under
God's peculiar Government and that all Creatures under him shall be under such
an Economy with respect to the Father as Adam was and as therefore may in that
respect be termed the Law and not the Gospel, he shall remain World without end
the Prince and Head of all Men and Angels. The Unitarians therefore believe
Christ to be most highly exalted and dignified, and to be most intimately
partaker of the Divine Nature, infinitely more eminently than Joseph was made
partaker of the Egyptian Majesty and Government together with Pharaoh, when
Pharaoh told him, See I have set thee over all the Land of Egypt; thou shall be
over my House, and according unto thy Word shall all my People be ruled; only
in the Throne will I be greater than thou; and when, accordingly, Pharaoh took
off his Ring from his Hand, and put it upon Joseph's Hand, and arrayed him in
Princely Apparel, and made him to ride in the Second Chariot which he had, and
they cried before him, Bow the Knee; and so Pharaoh made Joseph Ruler over all
the Land of Egypt, and he swore to him that he should be the Disposer of War
and Peace, and that all things should be managed, according to his Desire, and
by his Laws and his Orders. Genes. 41.40. etc.

This first Inference then is incontestable; That Men may be Unitarians, and be
very pious and sincerely inquisitive. If any body will deny it, let him show
that the Unitarian Arguments are frivolous, contemptible and insignificant.
Till then, We shall be obliged to hold, that Unitarians are accopted of God.
This is one of those four things, which seem to be the least that can be
granted, and concluded, from the Unitarian Arguments. The Second Inference,
which, with the two other, is of the like nature with this, is now to be
considered, and is to this effect.

II. That, in our Terms of Church Communion, with relation to this most
abstruse and intricate Subject, We ought to keep exactly to the Generality of
the Expressions of Scripture, and not to make, beyond it, any Public
Determinations and Impositions, which would drive away the Unitarians out of
our Communion. This necessarily follows from the first Inference, particularly
considering the Nature of the Gospel Terms of Communion.

If the Unitarian Sentiment has so very considerable and weighty Arguments,
that pious and inquisitive Men may, sincerely and without any crime on their
part, take it to be the true Meaning of Scripture; We cannot Magisterially
determine that Controversy to the Scholastic and Anti-Vnitarian Sense, by any
Human and Unscriptural Impositions, without rejecting out of our Communion
those whom God receives. In doing which, we manifestly transgress the express
Injunction of the Apostle's, Romans 14, 1, not to reject those who may be
accounted to be weak in the Faith, in such a case, that, notwithstanding their
supposed weakness and error, it appears they may still be acceptable to God.
Indeed the Apostle wills not, that such be admitted expressly to dispute in the
Church about doubtful Matters; howbeit, it is evident on the other hand, what he
enjoins can imply no less than this, that the Terms of Church Communion be
regulated in that Generality, that no Public Determinations and Impositions be
made, as would drive away those who may be accounted to be weak in the Faith in
such a case as this. Otherwise, how can We be said to receive them? The Apostle
therefore thus argues, at the 4th. Verse of this Chapter; Who art thou that
judge another Man's Servant? To his own Master he stands or falls, yea,
he shall be holden up. And at the 13th. Verse he concludes the Argument in
these words; Let us not then judge one another any more; but judge this rather,
that no Man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brother's way.
(See Bishop Wilkin's two Sermons on Romans 17.17, 18.)

These are manifestly and incontestably the Gospel-Terms of Church-Vnion; and
this is all that I plead for, and no Protestant can with any color of reason
refuse these Terms, consistently to the Principles of the Reformation.

(According to these Principles, what Right had Athanasius, or the Nicene, to
make and impose New Creeds; to judge Magisterially for all the Members of the
Church; to determine Magisterially the Generality of Scripture; to straiten the
Terms of Communion, in Matters at least most abstruse and intricate; and thus
to break the Church's Union in pieces?)

We hold, that the Scripture is a perfect and sufficient Rule; that there is no
living, public, magisterial Judge of Controversies; that the Church-Governors
are not to exercise dominion over the Faith of their People; that they are not
infallible; that every one is bound to examine, and is to be allowed the
Judgment of discerning. (See Bishop Wilkins's aforequoted Sermons.) Now what
follows from these and the like Principles, but that, in most abstruse and
intricate Matters, We must not make public Determinations and Impositions, but
must then strictly keep to the Generality of the Terms of Scripture, as is
shown in the First and Second Chapters of the Apologia pro Irenico Magno?
Otherwise, it is most palpably evident, We expressly contradict our own
Principles; We allow not to the Church Members the liberty to judge for
themselves; We reckon not the Expressions and Generality of Scripture to be a
sufficient Rule of Union, but imagine We can devise one better and fitter; We
act, as if We were infallible, and were the Magisterial Judges of
Controversies, and, not contenting our selves with the Terms of Scripture for
Terms of Union, nor being content to set the Truth on its own Bottom, We run
the hazard, since We may err, of fighting effectually and criminally against
God, in crushing the Truth, in eternizing Error, in taking away the Key of
Knowledge, and at least in oppressing the Consciences of those whom God
accepts, and in being the Cause of endless Schisms and Divisions.

It follows then, (according to the 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. 2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Thessalonians.
5.21. 1 Cor. 10.15. Romans 14.1. and 13. Phil. 3.15, 16. etc. and consistently to
the 6th. Article of the Church of England, and to all the abovesaid Principles
of Protestants.) That, in our Terms of Church Communion, with relation to the
Unitarian Controversy, We ought to keep exactly to the Generality of the
Expressions of Scripture, and not to make, beyond it, any Public
Determinations and Impositions, which would drive away the Unitarians out of
our Communion. Hence therefore We must necessarily infer.

III. That, First, in the Public Service, We ought to address the Current of
our Prayers directly as well as ultimately to God in general, in the Name and
through the Mediation of Christ, in the conclusion of them besecching God to hear
us, and grant us our Requests, for the Sake of his Dear Son, our Blessed Lord,
Savior and Redeemer, and so, when We address some Ejaculations to Christ, We
ought in general to address to him as to our Mediator, or Mediatory Governor,
and Sovereign, in whom the Fullness of the Godhead so dwells, as abundantly and
constantly to assist him in the Discharge of his Mediatory Office, whereby he
both acts for God and represents God, and is in some sense God: Secondly, in
our Public Service likewise, and the Terms of Church-Vnion, We ought to be
content with the Apostles Creed, which is worded in a Generality agreeable to
that of Scripture: Thirdly, no Subscription or Assent ought to be required of
Clergymen, in this Matter and its Dependents, but to the Expressions of the
Scripture it self, or to Terms that agree to the Scripture-Generality. For if
We do not take these Measures or do not follow this Method, if we do not stick
to this Generality in all Terms and Acts of Church-Union, and do not content
our selves, with a general Profession that Christ is God, and with the
Scriptural-Terms and Expressions; we both act rashly and unjustly, in a most
intricate Matter, and We drive away the Unitarians out of our Communion, not
receiving them without they think in these difficult Points exactly as we do,
and submit to our Decisions, and profess the eternal Generation, three Persons
in one Godhead, and the Equality of the Son and Spirit with the Father; which
is to judge for others in a most abstruse and obscure Subject, and to require
of them, as Terms of Union, to act against their Conscience, as the generality
of them believe, and be hypocrites, and utter lies, and grossly equivocate, in
the greatest Solemnities of Religion; whereby many Souls may be caused to
perish, for whom Christ died. (See The Consequences of the Modalists System.)
The Athanasian and Nicene Creeds are too express, or particular, and
magisterial, for so subling Speculations, left in so great a Generality as we
see these are in Scripture. We have no right, therefore, to set up such
magisterial and imperious Terms of Communion, (according to the Protestant
Principles,) as it appears from what has been said; but We are necessarily
obliged to keep to the Terms of Church-Vnion that we have here described;
seeing it appears, that We are to receive the Unitarians, and not to drive them
away out of our Communion, it being incontestable, upon impartial
consideration, that the Unitarian Controversy is of that nature, that Men may
be Unitarians, and be very sincere and inquisitive, and consequently not to be
rejected, and it being to be remarked that the Generality of the
Scripture-Terms is sufficient and safe; from the whole it being necessarily to
be inferred in the last place.

IV. That this Generality, in Terms of Church-Vnion, is a safe Method, in so
intricate a Matter, and is incontestably sufficient; all being certainly
worshipped, when God in general is directly and ultimately Prayed to, that is
to be adored with Supreme Worship, and the Mediatory Honor due to our Savior
being paid him, when our Petitions are put up in the Name of Christ, as our
Intercessor and Redeemer, most beloved of God, and exalted at God's Right Hand,
and so is addressed to as the Mediator of the New Covenant as was said. In most
intricate Matters, that certainly cannot but be most safe, which is subject to
the least Inconveniences, and which is in some measure sufficient. And
incontestably it is sufficient to worship God with Supreme Worship; for all
that is God is Worshipped, when God in general is Worshipped. Wherefore the
generality of the Reformed Churches content themselves to address their Prayers
in general to God. And some of the most Learned Trinitarians maintain, that it
is not lawful to do otherwise, but that formal Addresses to different Most
Supreme Persons, in Divine Worship, set up different Objects of Supreme Worship.

For the same reasons, in the Public Terms of Union, a general Profession of
the Doctrine of the Trinity, in the general Expressions of Scripture, is both
the safest, and is certainly sufficient. And all this does even necessarily
follow from the 1st. and 2d. Inferences. For there it appears, that God
absolutely requires no more, for Terms of Union. What God therefore is content
with to that end, is to that end incontestably safest as well as sufficient: so
that if Men, instead of taking upon them to be Magisterial Judges, would have
stuck to the Latitude and Generality of Scripture, for Terms of Agreement and
Union, all had been well.

We must needs then own, that the Scripture-Expressions, to be adhered to in
Terms of Church-Vnion, at least will suffice to all the indispensibly necessary
ends of Salvation; and that, consequently, it is sufficient in general to know
and believe, that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit and Inspiration and Power of
God, and that Christ is the Only-Begotten Son of God, in whom the Fullness of
the Godhead (that may be communicated and that is an Influence of all the
Divine Perfections) most intimately dwells, and that he is in some sense God.
It is evident, that this System furnishes the same Motives to love God and
Christ, and to practice the Precepts of the Gospel, that the other System does.
For if one Divine Person with the Influences and Assistances of his Wisdom and
Power be supposed to do, together with Christ, all that belongs to our
Salvation; have we the less reason to be thankful to God and Christ, and to
hearken to the Gospel-Injunctions, than if we supposed three Divine Persons, or
called God three Persons? It is as effectual therefore to the ends of
Christianity, to hold, that the Spirit is the Power of God, and that Christ
most eminently acts for God, and is most intimately united with God, by the
means of the Divine Influence dwelling in him, so that when Christ is obeyed
and loved, thereby God is actually loved and obeyed, Christ being thus looked
upon, both, as most excellently and most extraordinarily representing God, and
as being in some sense God. Many Trinitarians do expressly assert, that the
Second Person is but a continual Acting of the Father. Why may not the same be
said of the Holy Spirit and Inspiration? Or why may not the Word and the Spirit
be styled Influences, as well as Acts, of the Father? Howbeit, We may certainly
very fitly conclude this Subject, with the Words of the late Dr. Sherlock, at
the 7th. Page of that Book of his, entitled, The Present State of the Socinian
Controversy, where, concerning the (human, and unscriptural) Expressions, three
Persons, Of the same Substance, Essence, and the like, he has this judicious
remark; The Catholic Faith does not depend upon the use of these terms, for it
was before them. Now, this is all that I plead for; that these and the like
unscriptural terms be not looked upon as necessary for Christian-Communion, but
that Christians may be so reasonable and just as to Unite in the Generality of
the Expressions of Scripture, which, it is evident, God has judged sufficient,
since He thought fit to use them, as He has done, that is, in the Generality of
which they appear susceptible. Incontestably, then, it is neither Necessary, nor
indeed, consequently, Safe, nor Just, in such most Intricate Matters, to go
beyond the very express Words of Scripture, in Terms and Acts of
Church Communion. (Besides; Are not the Tares as well as Wheat to be suffered
in the Church, by Christ's Order? Math. 13.30.) The Scripture-Latitude must
needs therefore be THE TERMS OF UNION. We need not and ought not to be more
express, or determining, and imposing, than the Scripture.

Though the Person of Christ were not fully known, yet, notwithstanding that
there is no other Name by which Penitent Men are Saved, He may be the Savior
of all them in every Nation who do righteousness, and for his Sake God may
accept of their sincere Repentance and Obedience. As Amyraldus judiciously
observed; if a Prince has been graciously pleased to ransom a Captive, or pay
the Debts of a Poor Prisoner, that Redeemed one is not the less ransomed and
made free, though he do not perfectly or exactly know all that belongs to the
Person by whom he is redeemed; all that is reasonably and indispensably
requisite being that he should do what he can to know his Benefactor, and that
he should be in a hearty disposition to express his Gratitude for the Benefit,
to the best of his power, according to the Knowledge he can get thereof.

In the Revelations, 19, 12, We find it is said, that our Savior has a Name,
which no Man understands but He Himself. Why then should We be so Decisive,
Magisterial and Imposing, as if We certainly and infallibly understood all
these Mysteries? As we cannot reasonably imagine that we infallibly understand
the most difficult things, we ought not in reason to pretend to determine and
judge for other Men in the most abstruse and intricate Matters. Howbeit, it
seems the Semi-Arian System is much the same with, or not essentially different
from, this, of the Father, or God, and his two Powers, and Influences or Acts.
And it seems, this is reconcilable with Scripture and Reason. God grant Us all
to do our Duty, in this Inquiry, and in all respects, that We may discern and
follow the things absolutely Necessary to Peace and Salvation!

A POSTSCRIPT.
Wherein it is farther considered, That the Arguments for the Divinity of
Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, at most, seem not to be inconsistent with the
Unitarian System, or to destroy the Necessity of keeping, with relation to this
Doctrine, to the Generality of the Expressions of Scripture, for Terms of
Church Communion;

Wherein also it is inquired, Whether the Unitarians may with a good Conscience
join in Communion with a Trinitarian Church? Of the Reasons of both Sides of
which Query the Governors of the Church are humbly desired to give their
Opinion.

FROM the whole, it seems that these three Points deserve a particular
Consideration.

I. It should be considered, that the Arguments for the Divinity of Christ, and
of the Holy Ghost, seem not inconsistent with the Unitarian System.

II. It should be inquired, Whether the Unitarians may join in Communion with
the Trinitarian Church?

III. We should consider, that what is inferred from the Unitarian Arguments
remains in force, and that it is an indispensable Duty to profess and establish
the Gospel-Terms of Communion, and to keep to the seeming or apparent
Generality of the Expressions of Scripture for Terms of Church-Union, though the
Trinitarians and some Unitarians should opine that the Unitarians may with a
good Conscience join in Communion with the Trinitarians, and even though there
were in God what might truly be called Three Persons.

I. It should be considered that the Arguments for the Divinity of Christ, and
of the Holy Ghost, seem not inconsistent with Vnitarianism.

For though by the Holy Ghost and the Word the Divine Nature be taken to be
implied, yet it follows not that the Father is not the whole Godhead. Nay, the
Scholastic Trinitarians themselves acknowledge, that the Father implies the
whole Divine Nature. Consequently, whatsoever is properly and literally Divine
belongs to the Father, and is a Property or Act of his Essence; seeing that it
belongs to the Divine Nature, and it is owned the Father implies the whole
Divine Nature. St. Basil agreably to this ( Tom. 1. Page 778. Paris. 1638.)
calls the Divine Word and Spirit the two Hands of God; founding that Expression
on Ps. 19.1. and 102.25. compared with Ps. 33.6. Hands or Arms are the same,
speaking of a Spirit: And we see mention made of the Arms of God, Deuter.
33.27. J^b. 40.9. Ps. 98.1. Isa. 51.5. etc. Howbeit, in speaking of God, who is
a Spirit, or a Spiritual Being, it is evident it must be owned, thas these
Expressions are but Figurative. All then that the Arms or Hands of God can
imply, must be some Powers, and Properties, or Acts and Influences, that belong
to God. Now, by God the Scholastic Trinitarians themselves understand the
Father, (or Him whom the Scriptures, and particularly the Books of the New
Testament, ordinarily or frequently style our Father, as well as in general the
Father, meaning the Common Parent of Men, more particularly the Father of
Christians, and most especially the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as all
agree.) And, then, as was observed, the Scholastic Trinitarians acknowledge,
that the Father implies the whole God head. Our Savior is express, that the
Father dwells in him, and does the Works in him. Joh. 14.10. And the Apostle
teaches us, that Christ is to be honored to the Glory of the Father. Phil.
2.11.

All therefore that is meant, and that appears can be meant, by the Divinity of
Christ, or the Hypostatick Union, is, that the Divine Nature is so intimately
united with the Soul of the Man Jesus Christ, (as the Human Soul is with the
Body,) that the Divine Influence, or Divine Indwelling, in him, and
particularly the Divine Wisdom, constantly illuminate, conduct and assist
Christ, so as to enable him, to represent God at the Head of the Universe and
to perform all the things necessary for such a Representative of God to do; so
that what belongs to God may be said to be Christ's, (all in kind, though not all
in all degrees,) who sees and honors Christ may be said to see and honor God,
and what God does at Christ's desire may be said to be done by Christ, who
procures it to be done by the Godhead dwelling in him, as a Human Soul, simply
and merely by desiring, procures of the Body, with which she is united, to do
many Actions, that she wills, and that God has subjected to the Soul's Will
and Power. Holding then that some Texts of Scripture in some sense import the
Supreme Divinity of Christ, yet it can never be proved, or with any color of
reason pretended, that they necessarily imply any more than this. For there are
invincible Arguments against the being of more than one real Person in God; and
by a Figure, common in Scripture and in all Languages, Personal Acts may
reasonably be attributed to Divine Wisdom, or to a Divine Influence, though it be
not a distinct Person, but a Property or an Act of the Father. (Even Charity is
represented as a Person, 1 Cor. 13.1. And God is said to send forth his Mercy,
Ps. 57.3.) Supposing then that by the Word, in the beginning of St. John's
Gospel, be meant the Divine Wisdom, produced forth and shown in the Old and New
Creation, (as it is even interpreted in the Brief History;) in that case, it
must necessarily be supposed to be said by a Figure to be incarnate, meaning
that it rested upon, in an extraordinary and most ample manner, or most
intimately dwelt with, and constantly assisted and illuminated, the Man Jesus
Christ, as if it had become Part of him, or were his own Soul. Christ, then,
the Son of God, is a Divine Person, in that he is a Man assisted and inhabited
by a Divine Influence, or Divine Virtue.

And holding that some Texts of Scripture assert the Supreme Divinity of the
Holy Ghost, it does not follow that thereby is meant any thing else than the
Divine Inspiration, or an Influence of the Divine Power, (either Directing or
Wonder-Working,) that is commonly annexed to, and, so, communicated to Men by,
the Chief Archangel, and (under him) some Select Angels, or the whole Body of
Holy Angels, as a healing Virtue was sometimes annexed to, and communicated by,
the Waters of Jordan, etc. (2 Kings, 5, 14, 13, 21. John, 9.6. Acts, 19.12.)

Now, then, though the Divine Wisdom and Power be God himself, that does not
destroy the Unitarian System, or necessarily imply more than one real Person in
God. (For if the Holy Spirit is also a Person, it is as it implies an Angel
assisted by the Divine Power; as the Divine Word is a Person, meaning thereby
the Man Jesus Christ inhabited by the Divine Nature.) We have seen that the
Unitarians themselves, in that Sense, acknowledge the Supreme Divinity of
Christ and of the H. Ghost; by the Divine H. Ghost meaning the Divine
Inspiration annexed to and communicated by the Angels; and by the Supreme
Godhead of Christ meaning in particular the Divine Wisdom and Sovereign
Authority and Influence of the Divine Power dwelling and acting in and with
Christ.

From which it does not follow, that the Unitarians make the Angels or some
Angel to be God, though Christ be. For they do not hold, that the Godhead in any
respect is most intimately United with any Angel, or that the Dignity, Majesty,
Authority, and Wisdom, as well as Power, that is, the Fullness, of the Godhead,
dwells in any Angel, so as that God be in an Angel to be therein Worshipped, as
in a Schechina or appointed Token and Symbol of the Divine Presence; no Angel
being constituted to represent God at the Head of the Universe, as Christ is,
nor what belongs to God being said to belong to any Angel, who is but a
Servant, as it is to Christ, who is made the Lord of all.

No Angel then can be said to be God, though Christ may, as the Unitarians
acknowledge: And yet they hold, that, as was said, the Divine Power, as well as
the Divine Wisdom, may be said to be God. Now, is it not the Safest here, to
stick to that which is Incontestable and Sufficient?

And is it not Sufficient to acknowledge, that by the Divine Word may be
understood a Divine Power, Virtue or Influence of the Father; that the Divine
Spirit likewise is another Influence or Virtue of the Father; that the Divine
Word is most intimately United with the Firstborn, the Word-bearer, or Soul of
the Messiah; that this Virtue of the Father is so much made Christ's own,
enjoying it as much as his own Soul or his own Reason and Power, that it may be
looked upon as Part of his Being, and as always having been even from the
Beginning of the World Part of his Being, so that the Messiah may be said to
have made all things, inasmuch as all things were made by that Divine Virtue of
the Father, which from the beginning, as was said, was most intimately United
to the Soul of the Messiah; that the Messiah is to be honored, as the Mediator
of the New Covenant, exalted to the Government of the Universe under God, and
as the most Glorious Schechinah, in whom the Father most intimately dwells by an
ineffable (though not visibly impossible) Virtue or Influence, and in whom the
Father is thus willing to be Worshipped; and that the Divine Spirit, whether or
no residing in or accompanying some Archangel or any Angels, (though
incontestably not requiring to be Worshipped in any of the Angels, nor
devolving any kind of Divine Worship to any Angels, as to the Sovereigns of the
Universe, nor making a Schechinah of any of the Angels,) is that
Mitacle-Working or Sanctifying Virtue of the Father, which dwells in Christians
as its Temple, (or the Father's Temple, whose Virtue the Spirit is,) and which,
with the Divine Word, was instrumental to the Father, in making all things; as
Fire is instrumental to the Apothecary in the preparing of all the Compositions
in his Shop, or as Heat and Light are the Instruments by which the Sun operates
all things and benefits all the World?

If the Father implies the whole Godhead, as the Trinitarians unanimously own,
it cannot then bedenied but that the Unitarians acknowledge and worship the
whole Godhead, And, as I conceive it, the Unitarians assert, that they worship
Christ so much upon the account of the Divine Nature Dwelling in and most
intimately United with him, that otherwise they would not altogether ^^^ship
him as they do. It follows therefore, that, on the Unitarian part, the
Difference cannot be thought to be essential or fundamental, or that the
Unitarians cannot truly be said to deny the Divinity of Christ, or of the Holy
Ghost. For as touching the Holy Ghost, it cannot be denied but that a Divine
Virtue and Inspiration may be meant thereby. And as concerning what the
Scholastic Trinitarians mean by or assert of the Divinity of Christ, the
Unitarians own that that Divine Nature, which is most intimately United with
our Lord Jesus Christ, does truly belong to the Eternal and Almighty Being, so
that in that sense Christ may be said to be God, though properly the title Christ
denotes the Man that was born of the Virgin Mary, as Grotius shows on Col.
1.16. and Math. 1.16. The Difference then here is only a Verbal Difference, the
Meaning of both Parties at the bottom being in this respect the same; for when
the Trinitarians say that Christ is Almighty God, they do not mean that the Man
is literally the Almighty, but that the Divine is most strictly United with the
Human Nature. And this the Unitarians will not deny. It Is certain, the
Primitive Unitarians did not deny it, as was before said. Then,

II. We are to inquire, Whether the Unitarians may not join in Communion with
the Trinitarian Church? By three Persons in one God, (which term, Persons, the
Trinitarians themselves own to be here not only unscriptural but even very
improper,) may not the Unitarians mean, as some do, three Considerations of the
Divine Nature, (for instance, Divine Mind, Divine Wisdom, Divine Power,) which
are a kind of Modal Persons, which may be in the same Subject, as Tully says
that a Man may sustain diverse Persons?

The Reason for the Affirmative is: that for Peace-sake We must be made all
things to all Men, so far as there is no Divine Law or Prohibition against that
which We condescend to; ( Ephesians. 4, 3;) and that there is no Law against the
terming the Divine Wisdom and Power Persons, meaning Modal Persons.

The Reasons for the Negative are these particularly. Not only, by the three
Persons, the Trinitarians generally mean not such Modal, but rather Real,
Persons, so that to mean such (supposed or pretended) Modal Persons would be a
piece of Dissimulation; but even this term disguises the Christian Religion,
and is contrary to the Gravity and Solemnity of the Divine Worship, etc. The
Scripture no where enjoins us to address Prayers to God the Inspiration, or to
assert a Divine Person by the Name of God the Holy Ghost. Though the Holy Ghost
be taken to imply an Influence of the Divine Virtue, yet God the Holy Ghost,
and the Inspiration a Divine Person, certainly are not Scriptural Terms. And
the Unitarians generally believe, that in such intricate Matters, and
particularly concerning the Object of Worship and the making Something
distinctly an Object of Worship, We must not go beyond express Injunctions.
According to Scripture, they worship Christ to the Glory of the Father, as was
said. And in particular they ultimately worship the Father, for his giving the
Divine Inspiration. The Governors of the Church are humbly desired, to give
Publicly their Opinion of these and the like aforementioned Reasons; this
undoubtedly being a Subject, that deserves all the illustration, that,
according to the Obligations of Christian Charity, they can give to it. Though
all that is possible ought to be done for Peace-sake, yet, on the other hand,
nothing ought to be done against Conscience, and though some of the Unitarians
might condescend to most of the Scholastic Trinitarian Expressions, yet they
cannot generally approve them.

III. What is inferred from the Unitarian Arguments remains in force, so that
it is an indispensible Duty to profess and establish the Gospel-Terms of
Communion, and to keep to the seeming and most manifest and apparent Generality
of the Expressions of Scripture for Terms of Church-Vnion, though the
Trinitarians and some Unitarians should opine that the Unitarians may with a
good Conscience join in Communion with the Trinitarians, and even though there
were in God what might truly be called three Persons. For,

(1.) If there be Somewhats in God that may be called three Persons, (which
yet, indeed, seems absolutely, both, impossible in it self, and not expressly
implied in Scripture, but contrary to many Texts,) yet, not only that Doctrine
seems absolutely unintelligible, but certainly it is most obscurely revealed
and but drawn from most intricate and uncertain Deductions; and, on the other
hand, the Unitarian Arguments, against the calling any thing in God three
Persons, are incontestably such that Men may be sincerely inquisitive and
really think them to be solid. Upon such most abstruse Difficulties, We ought
not to act rashly, and condemn or reject sincere and inquisitive Persons. God
cannot be supposed, indispensibly to require of every one to believe
explicitly what he has left so difficult and obscure, nor consequently to have
allowed any one to determine this Point Magisterially, so as to make the
Determination of it a necessary Term of Church Communion. Then it follows, it
is God's Will, that, as has been said, in Terms and Acts of Church Union, we
should content our selves with the Expressions and Generality of Scripture:
And, so, the Human Imposition of the Athanasian and Nicene Creeds, and of
Publicly Praying to the Holy Ghost, and in Public Assemblies and
Church Service using the term three Persons, is a piece of Presumption and
Spiritual Tyranny and Oppression. The Scripture says not expressly, that the Son
and Spirit are equal to the Father, etc.

(2.) The Generality of the Scripture-Terms, as was shown, is undoubtedly
sufficient. For, though God might be said to be three Persons, yet not only it
cannot be thought, as has been remarked, that, under the benign Economy of the
Gospel, God has made that indispensibly Necessary, which at least seems so
intricate and obscure, and about which sincere and inquisitive Persons may
mistake; but, besides, as was also before observed, when God is worshipped, is
not all adored, that is the Object of Divine Worship? The Trinitarians own,
that the (unscriptural) term, Persons, is used so improperly of God, that what
is meant thereby is most unaccountable, and perfectly incomprehensible. Now
that is an invincible Argument, that that term is not necessary. The Unitarians
do not deny the Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature. Supposing then, that
by the Divine Word and Spirit be meant Somewhats, more then Wisdom and
Inspiration, (as the Unitarians, who are not for determining in such obscure
Matters, will not contradict but that it may be so,) yet seeing that that,
whatever it be, is absolutely unknown and unintelligible, it concerns Us not to
ascribe Names to it, and cannot be indeed the Subject of our disquisition.
Howbeit, at least, we should take care not to advance any thing, concerning
these Matters, that appears inconsistent with any Text, but should rather stick
to that which is safe and sufficient: And, it is certain; the Scripture no
where says we should Pray to the Holy Spirit in particular; and it expressly
sets forth Christ as the Mediator betwixt God and Men: so that it is
incontestably sufficient to come to God through the Mediation of Christ, and to
honor Christ as the Mediatory King under God, though united to God as intimately
as possible, as was said. For though all things are subjected to Christ, yet it
is, to the Glory of God the Father, and to the end that God may be most
glorified, and may most universally and illustriously reign in and by and through
Christ. So that, in making Christ the King of Kings, or the Universal King
under God, and the Head of the Church, God did not abdicate the Government, or
divest himself of his Majesty, but still remained ever the Most Supreme, and
reserved to himself to direct Christ, and to favor his Intercession, and to
receive through him the Homages of Men, Christ doing all in the Name of God. And,
accordingly, the Apostles directed their Prayers to God, ( Acts, 4, 24, etc.)
and commanded the Faithful to address themselves to him, ( Phil. 4, 6,) through
Jesus Christ, (as it is in the following Verse, Phil. 4, 7,) that, in his Name,
and through his Mediation, they might obtain their Requests of the Father,
(according to Christ's Promise, John, 14, 13, and John, 16, 23, that what they
should pray for to the Father, in his Name, he would second by his
Intercession, and so would do it for them, that the Father might be glorified
in the Son. For our Savior says expressly, in John, 16.23; Whatsoever ye shall
ask the Father in my Name, He will give it you.)

(3.) The Arguments, for the Scripture-Terms of Church Union with respect to
such most intricate and abstruse Matters as the Platonic or Scholastic
Speculations concerning the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, are evermore solid and
invincible, and (as was observed) a contrary Method is wholly inconsistent with
the Principles of Protestants, which import; That the Scripture is a sufficient
and the only Rule, That there is no living Magisterial Judge of Controversies,
That Particular Christians are in such a case to examine and judge for
themselves, etc.

(4.) Many sincere and inquisitive Persons may scruple other Terms, than these
which are incontestably good, sufficient, and the only warrantable ones, for
Terms of Church Communion, in such abstruse and intricate Matters. And, as was
shown, it is certain, the term, three Persons, is unscriptural, and
consequently cannot be absolutely necessary. Wherefore surely Christian Charity
obliges us, not to hazard unnecessarily, in such difficult Matters, the
Destruction of those Souls for which Christ died. Therefore it certainly
follows, both; that the Scholastic Trinitarian Determinations and Impositions
are contrary to God's Will; and that it is an indispensible Duty to profess and
establish the Gospel-Terms of Communion, which are stated and pleaded for in
the Irenicum Magnum, and in the Apologia pro Irenico Magno.

Though some Unitarians (considering an Influence of the Divine Nature dwelling
in Christ, and an Influence and Act of the Divine Power implied in the Holy
Spirit or Holy Inspiration, and considering we are exhorted to keep as much as
we can the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace) should carry Christian
Condescension so far, as (by their Presence, sometime, in the Religious
Assemblies, for Peace-Sake, till these things be duly weighed) to bear with
the Use of some of the Scholastic Trinitarian Terms; yet, that is at least so
nice a Point, that many conscientiously may with great color of reason
absolutely scruple them, and all Unitarians are obliged to express openly their
dislike of those (in their opinion) at least dubious Terms and rash
Expressions, and to appear and profess not to repeat some of them, and not to
assent to them, in the Religious Service: (which Condescension indeed, upon
mature Consideration, seems even generally to be more than is wholly
warrantable; particularly, one would think, with respect to the Litany, and the
Athanasian and Nicene Creeds, according to what has hereupon been said; so that
the Afternoon-Service only can well seem tolerable to them; and indeed it is
generally reckoned to be no less than Hypocritical Temporizing, for any
Unitarian to carry the Condescension farther:) therefore even the Trinitarians
themselves, who are persuaded of the (evident and incontestable) Reasonableness
and Necessity of the Gospel Terms of Communion, are bound to protest against
the imposing of those said Scholastic Terms, (deviating from the
Scripture-Latitude,) not only as an unnecessary Burden, but as a grievous and
unwarrantable, a pernicious and cruel Oppression, perfectly contrary to the
Moderation of the Gospel. For has not God intended, there should be one
Catholic Church, and Communion of Saints?

In a word, the Scripture-Terms are the only Just, and Charitable, and
Necessary Terms of Church Communion. And they are a fit Means of Peace: For, so
you establish no other Terms of Church Communion but such as are agreeable to
the Scripture-Generality, you may lay any Penalty on express Disputings in the
Religious Assemblies.

These Terms of Church-Vnion then, both, are the Scripture-Terms, and the only
Terms of Communion that are agreeable to the fundamental Grounds of the
Reformation, or to the incontestable Principles of Protestants, and to Reason
and Moderation, and they are the fit and only possible Terms for all
Christians, that own the Scripture for their Rule, to Unite in: And the
Unitarian Arguments are so considerable, that it must be the highest Temerity
in the World not to be willing to stick, in Acts of Communion, to the ( Safe
and suficient) Generality included in those Terms. So that to reject these
Terms, is not only to run the greatest Hazards to oppress the Truth and injure
those who are approved of God, but it is expressly to be guilty of the greatest
Mischiefs, of disfiguring Christianity as if it had no Means of Union,
hindering the growth and efficacy of the Gospel, and being the Cause of endless
Schisms and Divisions. These Matters are set into so full and incontestable a
light, that to slight and resist so great Evidence cannot but be of the
greatest Consequence to the Souls of them that are therein concerned. It is
credible, God has preserved the World and this Generation for the Sake of this
great Light, (most illustriously adorning the Gospel,) so great a Light, that
against it the Gates of Hell shall never be able to prevail, and it will never
be possible for all the Powers of the Adversaries of so evident Truths to
answer these unanswerable Arguments. Now then, incontestably, Peace is
presented upon just Terms, by this Method, which therefore should be most
carefully considered. For if the righteous be oppressed, God notes all things
in his Book, and Great Plagues are denounced against rejecting a great Light
and injuring those that are accepted of God. May We all take effectual
Measures, to avoid God's Judgments, and to obtain his Mercy and Eternal
Salvation!

I thought here to have finished this Postscript; but it may, perhaps, not be
unfit to advertise, that, since the writing of it, I have accidentally met with
a small Pamphlet, (a 6d. Book,) wherein these Terms of Communion in some
measure are likewise pleaded for. I recommend it therefore to the Reader's
perusal. It is entitled, The Moderate Trinitarian, etc. By Daniel Allen.
Printed for Mary Fabian, at Mercers-Chappel in Cheap Side, 1699. Therein it is
Inquired, Whether (and Shown, That) the Trinitarians and Unitarians may
communicate together; so that no Practice ought to be enjoined, for Terms of
Communion, contrary to the Latitude of Scripture, seeing it is therein that the
Trinitarians and Unitarians may Unite.

But (not only to put my self in the company of a more known Person, but more
especially seeing Men commonly regard more, or slight the less, an Opinion
which they see held by one who is generally esteemed most Eminent for Learning
and all good Qualities,) I ought not to omit observing, that the famous Bishop
Tailor incontestably establishes these Terms of Church Communion, in that (for
the main) admirable Book of his, entitled, The Liberty of Prophesying, which
indeed I have had the misfortune to be but very lately acquainted with. That
the Scripture-Terms of Communion, which I have been pleading for, are therein
implied. I think may sufficiently appear by these few Quotations out of it.
(That which I have, is the 4to. Edition, 1647.) I shall sometimes abridge the
words, but without altering the sense.

If a Doctrine be not so revealed but that wise and good Men differ in their
Opinions, it is a clear case, it is not inter Dogmata necessaria simpliciter,
etc. ( The Epistle Dedicat. P. 15.16.)

It is observable, that the restraint of Prophesying, imposing upon other Men's
Understanding, and lording it over their Faith, came in with the retinue of
Antichrist, that is, as other Abuses and Corruptions of the Church did, etc. (
Ib. P. 18.)

Let not Men be hasty in calling every disliked Opinion by the Name of Heresy.
( Ib. P. 29.)

The Lutheran Churches, the Zuinglians, the Calvinists, the Socinians, the
Anabaptists, the Ethiopian Churches which are all Nestorian, differ from
others* Where then shall we six our Considence, or join Communion? To pitch
upon any one, is to throw the Dice, if Salvation be to be had only in one of
them, and that every Error be damnable. We have therefore no other help in the
midst of these Differences, but to be all United in that Common Term, which is
the Medium of the Communion of Saints, that is, the Apostles Creed, an honest
endeavor to find out what truths we can, and a mutual permission to others
that disagree from our opinions. I am sure this will secure us, but I know not
any thing else that will. ( Ib. P. 33.)

If Men must be permitted in their Opinions, and Christians must not persecute
Christians, there is as much reason to reprove all those oblique Arts, ungentle
and unchristian, and destructive of Learning and Ingenuity; as Burning or
Suppressing the Books and Writings of those of different Sentiments, forcing
them to recant, etc. It is a strange Industry, used by our Forefathers. Of all
those Heresies which gave them battle, we have absolutely no Record or
Monument, but what themselves who were their Adversaries have transmitted to
us, etc. ( Ib. P. 34.)

Of the same consideration is Mending of Authors, not to their own mind but to
ours. ( Ib. P. 35.)

I am not sure that such an Opinion is Heresy, neither would other Men be so
sure as they think for, if they did consider it aright, and observe the
infinite deceptions, and causes of deceptions in wise Men, and in all doubtful
Questions, and did nor mistake Confidence for Certainty. ( Ib. P. 39.)

It is of geatest consequence to believe right in the Question of the Validity
or Invalidity of a Deathbed Repentance, and the consequences of the Doctrine of
Predetermination are of deepest and most material consideration; and yet these
greatest Concernments, where a Laberty of Prophesying in these Questions has
been permitted, have made no distinct Communion, no Sects of Christians. ( The
Liberty of Prophesying. P. 3.)

Salvation is in special and by name annexed to the belief of those Articles
only, which have in them the indearments of our services, or the support of our
confidence, or the satisfaction of our hopes. ( Ib. P. 8.)

The Apostles, or their Contemporaries and Disciples, composed a Creed, to be a
Rule of Faith to all Christians; which Creed, unless it contained all the
entire object of Faith, and the foundation of Religion, it cannot be imagined
to what purpose it should serve; and it was so esteemed by the whole Church of
God, etc. ( Ib. P. 9.)

But if this was sufficient to bring Men to Heaven then, why not now? If the
Apostles admitted all to their Communion that believed this Creed, why shall we
exclude any that preserve the same entire? ( Ib. P. 11.)

Neither are we obliged to make these Articles more particular and minute than
the Creed. -- For although whatsoever is certainly deduced from any of these
Articles made already so explicit, is as certainly true, and as much to be
believed as the Article it self, yet because it is not certain that our
deductions from them are certain, and what one calls evident, is so obscure to
another, that he believes it false; it is the best and only safe course to rest
in that explication the Apostles have made. ( Ib. P. 12.)

But if we go farther, besides the easiness of being deceived, we relying upon
our own discourses, (which though they may be true and then bind us to follow
them, but yet no more than when they only seem truest,) yet they cannot make
the thing certain to another, much less necessary in it self. And since God
would not bind us upon pain of Sin and Punishment, to make deductions our
selves, much less would he bind us to follow another Man's Logic as an Article
of our Faith. ( Ib. P. 13.)

For it is a demonstration, that nothing can be necessary to be believed under
pain of Damnation, but such Propositions of which it is certain that God has
spoken and taught them to us, and of which it is certain that this is their
sense and purpose: For if the sense be uncertain, we can no more be obliged to
believe it in a certain sense, than we are to believe it at all, if it were not
certain that God delivered it, etc. (Ibid.)

[Here, to these words, I would only add, that this Generality may suffice, at
least, for Terms of Church-Vnion; and that Men are answerable to God, Whether
or no they do what lies in their power, to understand every Article as well as
they can. Howbeit, certainly, fallible Men are not Magisterially to prescribe
in most intricate Matters, or make then their Deductions a Rule, to other
Christians. Perhaps the Apostles themselves knew not all Mysteries, or
understood not perfectly all the obscure Expressions which they had written
when they were inspired; as the Prophets did not always fully conceive the
whole Meaning of all their Prophesies and Writings. How should this
Consideration then humble Us, and keep Us from a decisive, magisterial and
imposing Spirit!]

And this also I affirm; although the Church of any one denomination, or
represented in a Council, shall make the Deduction or Declaration. ( Ib. P. 14.)

Particular Churches are bound to allow Communion, to all those that profess
the same Faith upon which the Apostles did give Communion. (P. 262.)

To refuse our Charity to those who have the same Faith, because they have not
all our Opinions which we overvalue; is Impious and Schismatical, etc. (Ib.)

The Arians and Meletiant joined against the Catholics: The Catholics and
Novatians joined against the Arians. Now if Men would do that for Charity which
they do for Interest, it were handsomer and more ingenuous. (P. 263.)

Men would do well to consider whether or no such proceedings do not derive the
guilt of Schism upon them who least think it, and whether of the two is the
Schismatic? he that makes unnecessary and inconvenient Impositions; or he that
disobeys them, because he cannot without doing violence to his Conscience
submit to them? (P. 265.)

He that is most displeased at another Man's Error, may be as much deceived in
his Understanding. (P. 266.)

The word Heresy is used in Scripture indifferently, etc. (P. 18.)

The further the Succession went from the Apostles, the more forward Men were
in numbering Heresies, and that upon slighter and more uncertain grounds. (P.
32.)

I am willing to believe their sense of the word Heresy was more gentle than it
is now. (P. 39.)

They whose Age and Spirits were far distant from the Apostles, had also other
judgments concerning Faith and Heresy, than the Apostles had. (Ibid.)

In all the Animadversions against Errors by the Apostles, no pious Person was
condemned, no Man that did invincibly err, or bona mente; but something that was
amiss in genere morum, was that which the Apostles did redargue. (P. 22.)

If a Man mingles not a Vice with his Opinion, though he be deceived in his
Doctrine, his Error is his Misery, not his Crime; it makes him an Argument of
weakness and an object of pity, but not a Person sealed up to ruin and
reprobation. (P. 24.)

The Epistle of Constantine to Alexander and Arius, tells the truth, and chides
them both. -- The Emperor calls their Different a vain piece of a Question, and
a fruitless Contention. -- For though, says he, the Matter be grave; yet, because
neither necessary, nor explicable, the Contention is trifling. -- Christians
should not fall at variance upon such Disputes; considering our Understandings
are not all alike, and therefore neither can our Opinions in such mysterious
Articles, etc. (P. 45.)

This Letter was by Socrates called a wonderful Exhortation, full of grace and
sober councels; and such as Hosius himself, who was the Messenger, pressed with
all earnestness. (P. 46.)

The Apostles, who best understood these Mysteries, thought it not fit to use
any words, in their Creed, but the words of Scripture; to show us, that those
Creeds are best which keep the very words of Scripture, and that that Faith is
best which has the greatest Simplicity. If the Nicene Fathers had done so too,
possibly the Church would never have repented it. (P. 47.)

Concerning the Symbol of Athanasius. -- Nothing there but Damnation and
Perishing everlastingly, unless the Article of the Trinity be believed, as it
is there with curiosity and minute particularities explained. -- Yet I dare not
say all that are not persuaded of them, are irrevocably damned; because citra
hoc Symbolum the Faith of the Apostles Creed is entire, etc. (P. 53, 54.)

[ Indeed, as was observed; Who gave Authority, to fallible Men, to make and
impose New Creeds, or Magisterial Determinations, in these abstruse Matters?
See what this learned Prelate says, on the account of the Miracles wrought by
the A^ians, in the 1st. Part of his Sermon, on John, 9.31.]

If it were considered concerning Athanasius Creed, how many People understand
it not, how contrary to Natural Reason it seems, how little the Scripture says
of those Curiosities of Explication, and how Tradition was not clear on his
side for the Article it self, much less for those forms and minutes; it had not
been amiss if the Final Judgment had been left to Jesus Christ, who is
appointed Judge of all the World, and who will judge righteously, knowing every
truth, etc. (P. 54.)

After this Passage, no more need be added; (I shall only point to Page 59,
Line 28, etc. P. 60, L. 10, etc. P. 61, L. 11, etc. P. 63, L. 16, etc. P. 66,
L. 9, etc. P. 67, L. 35, etc. P. 68, L. 8, etc. P. 78, L. 35, etc. P. 82, L.
33, etc. P. 84, L. 1, etc. P. 85, L. 18, etc. P. 86, L. 2, etc. P. 87, L. 13,
etc. P. 99, L. 30, etc. P. 103, L. 36, etc. P. 121, L. 35, etc. P. 123, L. 9.
etc. P. 124, L. 25, etc. P. 157, L. 6, etc. P. 160, L. 36, etc. P. 161. L. 32,
etc. P. 165, L. 4, etc. P. 192, L. 4, etc. P. 195, L. 24, etc. P. 262, L. 8,
etc. P. 263, L. 34, etc. P. 265, L. 5, etc. P. 266, L. 2, etc.) but for the
rest, I refer the Reader to the Book it self, which I earnestly recommend to
his serious perusal.

May it please the Lord Jesus to have Mercy upon Us, and to assist and save Us
by his efficacious Intercession and by his Grace, for the Sake of his most
precious Death and Passion, that We may not lose the Blessed Fruits of it, but
may all become his true Disciples and be of the number of his Redeemed ones,
being filled with his Holy Spirit, and abounding in all Christian Virtues!

And may Almighty God, in his infinite Compassions, for his beloved Son Jesus
Christ's Sake, our Blessed Lord and Savior, grant every sincere and
inquisitive Christian, to discern and follow, so far as is necessary, the Ways
of Truth, as well as of Righteousness; that, walking in the Paths of Peace and
true Piety and Holiness, We may serve God acceptably all the Days of our Life,
and in the end obtain the Salvation of our Souls. Amen!

FINIS.

