A RESOLUTION OF Certain Queries CONCERNING SUBMISSION TO THE Present
Government.

The QUERIES, I. Concerning the Original of Government. II. What is the
Constitution of the Government of England? III. What Obligation lies on the
King by the Coronation Oath? IV. What Obligation lies on the Subject by the
Oaths of Supremacy, etc. V. Whether if the King Violate his Oath, and actually
Destroys the Ends of it, the Subjects are freed from their Obligation to him?
VI. Whether the King has Renounced or Deserted the Government? VII. Whether on
such Desertion the People, to Preserve themselves from Confusion, may admit
Another, and what Method is to be used in such Admission? VIII. Whether the
Settlement now made, is a Lawful Establishment, and such as with a good
Conscience may be Submitted to?


By a Divine of the Church of England, As by Law Established.

Licensed, April 8th, 1689.

J. Fraser.

London: Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin in the Old Bailey, 1689.

The INTRODUCTION.
THERE is no doubt but the imputation of Disloyalty will, as the Viper that
came out of the fire and fastened upon St. Paul's Hand, be fixed on the Church
of England from the Dissenters of all sorts; The Clamor is already very loud,
Where is the Loyalty of the Church of England? Which though ad homines it might
well be Answered, by demanding, Where is the Loyalty of the Papists? Whom the
King had so far obliged, as to put them into the most considerable Offices of
the Nation, excluding better Subjects; yet none of them, though they were well
Armed, and in great numbers, ever struck a stroke to defend the King against
the Assailants, although by their mischievous Counsels they had reduced him to
those unhappy Circumstances. And the other Dissenters, who pretended to be
great numbers, and to have so great a Zeal for His Majesty, for the favors
granted them by the Indulgence, and share in the Government, as with their
Lives and Fortunes to assist him, yet were most forward to unite against him.
But what have the Clergy done, to incur the Note of Disloyalty? Did they enter
into an Association against the King? Were they called in Convocation to
declare their Judgments as to the present juncture of Affairs? Did they not as
long as the King remained in his Kingdom obey him in all things Lawful,
according to their Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience? It could
not be expected that they should take Arms, or expose their naked Bodies to the
Invaders Sword. They kept their Stations, as their Duties to God and the King
obliged them, committing themselves to God, and waiting for his Salvation. And
methinks when the Bishops and Clergy were accused for Disloyalty by some for
not obeying the King in reading his late Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
which they could not do with a good Conscience, and were generally applauded
for such Refusal, they should not now be decried for keeping to the same Rule,
of not doing such things, for which their Consciences (till better informed)
will condemn them. But we are now brought into a great strait, in which our
Adversaries will by all Arts imaginable endeavor to keep us, and which way
soever we turn, they will turn it to our Ruin, if it be possible. If we comply
with the present Establishment, they will rob us of our Reputation and
Faithfulness toward the People committed to our Charge, as if we had misled
them, and taught them those Doctrines, which we our selves never intended to
practice. If we comply not, they judge us Men worthy to be deprived of our
Livelihoods, and with our Families to be exposed, as in the late War, to
Sequestrators, and new Committees: These are no groundless Jealousies, but real
Fears, and in some degree matters of Fact; for almost in every Parish there are
Persons of different Persuations, and if the Minister pray for the present King
and Queen, according to Order, one part of the Mobile condemn him for an
Apostate from his own Doctrine, and a Rebel. If we keep to our Liturgy, which
by Oath we are bound to do, (and though we have as yet no Order regularly
transmitted to us for altering any of those Prayers) there is another Party
threaten to knock us on the heads, and great Affronts have been offered to
several Conscientious Ministers on both these occasions. What then shall we do
to extricate our selves from these Mazes, which are daily enlarged, and become
more dark and difficult; for it is not the case of a few Bishops or private
Ministers only, but the case of the Church of England, which if our Enemies can
divide in this, they will easily destroy us, and not us only, but the whole
Interest of the Protestant Churches abroad, whose welfare much depends upon our
Union and Agreement in this Nation. It therefore concerns us all seriously and
sincerely to enquire after the due measures of Obedience to our present
Governors, that doing our Duties according to the Commands of God, and the
Dictates of a well-inform'd Conscience, we may stop the mouths of such as are
opened against us, and ready to swallow us up. I shall at present only consider

The Objection against the Church of England, which is, That she has Deserted
the King contrary to her Oaths, her own Doctrine for Passive Obedience, and
their Declaration for Non-resistance, (viz.) That it is not Lawful on any
Pretense whatsoever, etc.

Answer, 1. That the Doctrine of the Church, as to the present Juncture, is not
known but by their Determinations in a Convocation duly called: for what some
of the Clergy do act or declare, is not to be imputed to the Church. In the War
raised against Charles the First, some of the Clergy, as Sibthorp and Manwaring
stretched the Prerogative too high, others, as Marshal and Calamy (all which
pretended to be of the Church of England) depressed it as low: But neither of
these Extremities could be charged on the Church which kept in a middle way.
And under the late King some were of the same Opinion with Sibthorp and
Manwaring, as the Bishops of Chester and Oxford; others refused to comply so
far as to publish his Declaration: what the Church would have done in
Convocation, is a Non constat.

2ly, As to the Doctrines of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, which were
not so generally taught; but others did declare, That those general Rules might
admit of just Exceptions, and had certain tacit Conditions and Qualifications
in them, which in case of great alterations in the Affairs of Government, would
appear to be necessary and justifiable; and they suppose that if such a case as
ours now is, had been thought of, or proposed, it would certainly be excepted
or provided against. And they think it fit that the condition and circumstances
of the Times wherein such Doctrines were published, ought to be considered, for
from the Reign of Q. Elizabeth we lived under Protestant Princes governing by
Laws, and Defenders of our Faith, who though they erred from the Laws and the
Honor of the Church in some lesser matters, as the necessity of their Affairs
and Counsels persuaded them, yet as to the Fundamentals of both Laws and
Religion, they resolutely adhered to them; yet was there in the People such a
ferment of Rebellion infused by Malcontents persuading them of great danger
both to their Religion and Laws, that the People were always ready to take fire
from the sparks of groundless Fears and Jealousies, and at last broke forth
into such a flame as well nigh turned the whole Nation into Ashes: and this was
done against a Prince who as much abhorred Tyranny and Popery, as any of his
Subjects could; it was therefore necessary that when after twenty Years
Confusion we were brought (as by a Miracle) to settle on our first Foundations,
the strictest Rules and Doctrines for Obedience should be inculcated to the
People. Thus by an (...) when a Stick is crooked we bend it to the contrary
part to bring it strait; and the Rule is generally approved, Imquum petas ut
aequum feras; To demand more than is due, that we may not receive less. See his
Sermon on Ephesians. 5.4.
It is observed by Dr. Barrow, that both Moral and Political Aphorisms (though
delivered in general Terms) do need Expositions, and admit Exceptions, else
they would clash with Reason and Experience: The best Masters of such Wisdom
interdict things apart, by unseasonable or excessive use to be perverted, in
general forms of Speech, leaving the Restrictions which the case may require or
bear, to be made by the Hearers or Interpreters discretion, whence many
seemingly formal Prohibitions are to be received only as sober Cautions. So far
that Learned Doctor. So Bishop Usher's Sentences delivered in general terms are
not always intended to be taken in their full latitude, but to have their
commodious restrictions according to the quality and nature of the matter in
hand, P. 5. of the Power of Princes. And in dangerous Causes, Abundans cautela
non nocet, which may serve as a reason for our pressing the Duties of
Non-resistance and Passive Obedience in such dangerous times as we lived in, in
such general terms. And if we should collect all that the ancient Fathers have
said in the heat of Controversies and Disputations, or in their Panegericks and
Invectives, and compare them with their Dogmata or Opinions, when they wrote
their mature Judgments of matters of Faith and Doctrine, we might find them to
contradict themselves more then the present Church does contradict herself in
these Doctrines of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience. Thus for instance, St.
Augustine disputing against the Pelagians, who defended Free Will, wrote as if
he had been a Manachee, and defended an irresistible Fate; and when he disputed
against the Manachees he seemed to be a Pelagian, and to defend Free Will. And
those who are Predestinarians in their Writings, in their Sermons to the
People, agree with the Arminians: And the Church of England, which ever since
the Reformation taught the Doctrine of Non-resistance in any case whatsoever,
have yet manifested their Judgment, that this general Rule may insome cases
admit exception, as by the Assistance given to the Scots, French, and Dutch
Protestants in defense of their Religion and Liberties, as hereafter mentioned
may appear. God himself reversed the Sentence denounced in general terms
against the Ninevites upon their performing of the tacit Condition of
returning from their evil Ways, and yet there was no variableness in God: And
if there be any such tacit Conditions in the Laws and Declarations of Men, (as
is confessed by many wise and good men) the sense of such Law and Declarations
may differ from the letter when the state of Affairs does alter; for if it had
been foreseen that a King should arise that would exercise Arbitrary Power, and
subject the Kingdom to the Pope, destroy the Religion and Properties of the
Subjects (a case so odious and improbable that it could not well be supposed)
the Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience would not have been pressed
to those ends) which were intended to the contrary,) viz. to make way for
Popery, and Tyranny, and Confusion, Tempora mutantur non nos; We adhere to our
first Principles still, for, Levitas non est destituere si aliquid novi
intervenerit eadem mihi Omnia praesta, and idem Sum.

3ly, But as to matter of Fact, let it be inquired what have the Clergy acted
contrary to those Doctrines: While the King continued in the Government, they
continued their Obedience, even when their Liberties and Properties were
actually taken away, and their Lives were at stake. Since the King's departure,
they have been under restraint, and an impossibility of defending him, whom the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, and his own Army had generally deserted, and
joined with the Invading Army; Hitherto then they have been Passive; but the
grand inquiry is, How they ought to behave themselves under the present
Circumstances, (the present King in vindication of his Queen's Right, which was
otherwise desparate, and not to be recovered by Petition or Bill in Chancery,
got full possession of the Kingdom, and by a National Consent in Parliament
they are declared King and Queen) Whether our Allegiance be due to the late
King, or the present Power under whose Protection we live and enjoy our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties which were so near to be lost. Some men of great
Reputation for Learning and Piety, think themselves obliged by their former
Oaths: And the present Government think they cannot be secure till the Clergy
are obliged to them by new Oaths, the refusal whereof may draw on Suspension
and Deprivation, to the undoing not only of themselves and Families, but the
Established Church at home, and the Protestant Interest over all Christendom,
if any Wars or Divisions should be occasioned by such Refusal: for Prevention
of which, I earnestly entreat my Brethren the Clergy to lay aside all
Prepossessions and Prejudices, and seriously to consider the Answers given to
the following Queries, which the Author has collected from St. August. l. 3.
Concerning Order says, there are two ways of resolving Doubts, either by our
own reason or the authority of the most learned. Nam qui consiliis pollet nihil
ipse, nec audit Suadentes alios, nullos homo vivit in usus.
the Writings of men of great Integrity, Learning, and Experience, partly for
his own satisfaction, but mostly for the satisfaction of others whose welfare
is as dear to him as his own, that yiedling due Subjection to the King and
Queen, and all that are now in Authority, we may lead a quiet and peaceable
Life in all Godliness and Honesty.

The Original of Government in General.
GOD is the Fountain of all Government, being not the Author of Confusion but
of Peace, and has established Order among all his Creatures; in the Angelical
Nature he has constituted several Orders, Angels and Archangels,
Principalities, Powers and Dominions; in the Celestial Bodies, the Sun to rule
by Day, and the Moon by Night, and one Star differs from another Star in
glory. And when he made the first man, he gave him dominion over all the works
of his hands, he was to rule his Wife, and she to live in subjection to him,
and when he became a Father, his Children were to yield him obedience. And when
the Families of the Earth were multiplied, so that one Father or Family could
not claim Authority over the rest, and considering the great corruption of
Nature, it was impossible but Violence and Injustice would be practiced,
Mankind saw a necessity of setting up one Common Father over many Families, to
suppress Violence, redress Injuries, and distribute Justice. To this purpose
Mr. Hooker, l. 1. c. 10. Two Foundations there are which bear up Public
Societies, the one a natural inclination, whereby all men desire a sociable
life and fellowship; the other an order expressly or secretly agreed on touching
the manner of their union in living together; for if when there was but one
Family in the World, the means of instruction, Humane and Divine, could not
prevent shedding of Blood, how could it be but when Families were increased,
each providing for it self, strife, contention and violence must grow among
them? To take away such mutual Grievances, Injuries and Wrongs, there was no
way but only by growing unto composition and agreement among themselves, by
ordaining some kind of Public Government, and by yielding themselves subject
thereunto, that to whom they granted Authority to Rule and Govern, by them the
Peace and Tranquillity of the rest might be procured -- No man might in reason
take upon him to determine his own right, therefore strife and troubles would
be endless, except they gave their common consent to be ordered by some whom
they agreed on, without which consent there was no reason one man should take
on him to be Lord or Judge over another -- and over a multitude of Families;
impossible it is, that any one should have complete power, but by consent of
men, or immediate appointment of God. All public regiment of what kind so
ever, seems evidently to have risen from deliberate advice, consultation and
composition between men judging it convenient and behoofful. And (the
corruption of Nature presupposed) the Law of Nature does necessarily require
some kind of regiment; and men saw, that to live by one man's will, became the
cause of all men's misery; this constrained them to come to Laws, wherein all
men may fee their Duties, and know the Penalties of transgnessing them. And
though wise and good men are fit to make Laws, yet Laws take not their
constraining power from those that make them, but from the power which gives
them the strength of Laws. And by natural Law, the lawful power of making Laws,
whereto all Societies are subject, belongs so properly to those entire
Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate of what kind so ever, to exercise
the same of himself, and not either by express Commission from God, or
Authority derived from their consent, upon whose persons they impose Laws, is
no better than Tyranny; Laws they are not, which public approbation has not
made. So far judicious Hooker, in as evident a manner as any demonstration in
Euclid, to which add that observation of Mr. Seldom.

Seldom de Jure Not. l. 1. c. 8. p. 106. By permission of Nature, it has been
granted, that whatsoever has been by men joined in society, limited,
forbidden, or constituted, that they are bound to keep, who have so consented,
according to the Conditions and Qualifications with which it is prescribed,
even as many as have, and as they have given their consent. But whence is it
they are so bound? from the Authority of a Deity, (i. e.) of man's Superior,
even in those things the rise of the obligation is derived, and therefore from
some heads of the obligation of the Law of Nature. Lod. Vives, on St. Aug. de
Civitate Dei, l. 4. c. 5, 6. takes notice of the first words of Justin, (viz.)
That in the beginning the rule of Nations was in the hands of Kings, whom not
popular ambition, but their moderate carriage, approved by the good, advanced
to that height of Honor, on which he gives this comment, That the People
elected those Kings to themselves, to be Guides, Governors and Overseers of the
Public Interest, and they were not compelled to take such a one as happened any
way to them, neither did Nobility or the seeking of a party carry it, every
man's own private good, with the good of the Public, was so dear and near to
him, that it made him to make choice of none but the best. And it is observable
from Livy and other Roman Historians, that their five first Kings were chosen
by the Senate and People, and that Tarquinius Superbus was by them deposed.
Neque enim ad jus regni quicquam praeter vim habe bat ut qui neque populi jussu
neque patribus autoribus regnavit, to which that of Juvenal agrees, speaking
of the People, Satyr 10. Qui dabat olim Imperium fasces legiones omnia. In our
Nation, when the Romans invaded the Land, the People chose Cassibilane their
King. On the death of Hardicanute, the third Danish King, they chose Edward the
Confessor; and on the death of William the Conqueror, they chose William Rufus,
and of four that succeeded the Conqueror, not one had the right by neerness of
descent.

It is objected against this Opinion of Electing our Governors, That the
People, having no power over their own lives, cannot give that power to any
other.

Answ. It is not the People that confer this power, but God, who by his Law
has given this power to all supreme Magistrates, That he that sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed. The People are only a Medium of
conveying this power of the Magistrate to a particular person, God is the
Author of the Magistrates power, to which the punishment of Murderers is
annexed; for the general Rule is, That the Magistrate shall bear the Sword for
the punishment of evil doers; and Capital punishment is in some cases just, the
People only apply this general Rule, and determine the power to be in such a
particular person, for the terror of evil doers; so that though I, being a
private person, have no power over my own or another man's life, yet the
Magistrate has by the Institution of his Office from God. St. Paul, Acts
25.11. says as much, If I have done any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to
die.

The Ordinance of Government is from God and Nature, but the Species of it,
whether by one or more, is from Men, and the Rule for administration, is by
mutual agreement of the Governor, and those that are to be governed, from
whence probably that which by St. Paul is called (...), God's Ordinance, as to
Government in general, is by St. Peter, 2.13. called (...), a Humane
Constitution, as to the particular Species, for so the Supreme Power is called,
whether to the King as Supreme. As for the Patriarchal Constitution, and a
Lineal Descent by proximity of Blood, it is so near to an impossibility of
finding out the right Heir to the first Father of a People, that we must let
that alone for ever. And as for Conquest, Grotius, l. 1. c. 4.. 16. says, He
that does usurp a Government, and afterward enters not into a Compact with the
People, (as it is evident William the Conqueror did, who also pretended a right
prior to his Conquest) nor is there any trust reposed in him, but his
possession is maintained by force; the right of War does in this case still
continue, so that it is lawful in all things to deal with him as with an Enemy.
And l. 1. chapter 4.. 7. N. 3. It is to be observed, says Grotius, That men did
not at first unite in civil Communities by any Command from God, but
voluntarily, and from the experience which they had, that private Families were
unable to resist any foreign force; from hence grew Civil Power, which St.
Peter therefore calls a Humane Ordinance, though elsewhere it is called a
Divine Ordinance, because God did approve thereof, as suitable and convenient
for the good of Mankind, but when God approves of a Humane Law, he must be
supposed to do it as Humane, and after a Humane manner.

Concerning the Rise of our Government, which is the Second Query, I shall
search no farther than the Reign of William, called the Conqueror, who in truth
disclaimed that Title, pretending a right to succeed by a Grant from King
Edward, and an Oath of Harold, who swore to preserve the Kingdom for him after
the death of Edward; King Edward being dead, many of the Nobles invited William
to take the Crown, but Harold, contrary to his Oath, assumes it; whereupon he
resolves to vindicate his Title by the Sword, the Pope sending him a
consecrated Banner, and approving his Title, and shortly after his landing,
slays Harold in battle, and marching to London, is proclaimed King; and crowned
by Aldred, Archbishop, taking the Coronation Oath, which was enjoined by King
Edward, and is the same in substance with that which is still administered, and
in the Title of his Laws, made in the fourth Year of his Reign, he styles
himself Heir and Cousin to Edward the Consessor, Spelman's Councils, p. 619.
and confirmed all St. Edward's Laws. And his Son Henry declares his Father's
Title thus, Qui Edvardo regi Haereditario Jure successit, Seldom ad Eadmerum,
p. 211. Henry the First, his Son, abolished the Norman Laws, which his Father
added, as Cook in the Proeme to l. 3. of his Reports. Afterward the Barons
threatened King John to seize his Castles, if he would not confirm their Laws,
which they did until they got the Magna Charta.

It appears then, that our Government is not an Absolute Monarchy, such as that
of the Turks, and the ancient Emperors of Rome, whose Wills declared by Edicts,
had the force of Laws, as is evident from, 1. The Manner of Making Laws, the
Legislative Power being divided between Prince and People; And, 2. The Mutual
Oaths and Obligations that pass between the Prince and People, and because Quas
vulgus eligerit.
no Laws oblige the Subject, but what are agreed on by Prince and People in
Parliament. 3. Nor can any Money, without their consent, be raised. And
whatever Laws have been thus made in former Ages, and stand unrepealed, do
respectively oblige both Prince and People in future Ages. So that when Laws
are thus made, it is not in the power of Prince or People to annul them, but by
the same Authority by which they were made; by which it appears, that the
Legislative Power, which is a chief Property of Sovereignty, is not solely in
the Prince, yet may he pardon the Persons of some Offenders, and remit the
Penalties in some Cases, wherein Salus Populi Suprema Lex, which Maxim, as it
leaves in the Prince a power of dispensing with the rigor of the Law, as he
shall see it expedient for the public good, so it leaves also in the Subject
a liberty upon just occasions, (as in cases of great exigency, and for
preventing of such hazards and inconveniences as could not be foreseen or
prevented, and might prove of noisome consequence to the public) to do other
wise than the Letter of the Law requires. See Sanderson's Case of the Liturgy,
p. 170. for which he gives this reason, (viz.) It may well be presumed, that
the Law giver, who is bound in all his Laws, to intend the safety of the
Public, and of every Member thereof in his due proportion, has no intention
by the observation of any particular Law, to oblige any person who is a member
of the Public to his destruction or ruin, when the common good is not
answerably promoted thereby. Upon which ground it is generally resolved by
Casuists, that no Constitution (merely humane) can lay such obligation on the
Conscience of the Subject, but that he may, according to exigency of
circumstances, do otherwise than the Constitution requires. This leads me to
the Third Querry.

The Third Query, which is concerning the Obligation of the Coronation Oath,
and the Oaths taken by the Subjects, of which I shall speak jointly, because
the Obligations are relative and reciprocal.

There cannot be a more solemn Oath than that which is taken by our Princes at
their Coronation, to which the Prince is obliged as to the Matter of it before
his Coronation, as well as the Subject is bound to the Prince, though not not
crowned; the Prince is our natural and liege Lord, as we are his natural and
liege Subjects, (i. e.) according to Law.

The Oath, as I find it taken by King Charles First, of blessed Memory, is this:

Quest. Sir, Will you grant and keep, and, by your Oath, confirm to the People
of England, the Laws and Customs to them, granted by the Kings of England, your
lawful and religious Predecessors, and namely the Laws, Customs and Franchises
granted to the Clergy by your glorious King St Edward your Predecessor, or
according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel established in
this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the
ancient Customs of this Realm?

Answ. I grant and promise to keep them.

Q Sir, Will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement entirely, according to your
power, both to God and Holy Church, the Clergy and People?

A. I will keep it.

Q. Sir, Will you, to your power, cause Law, Justice, and Discretion, in Mercy
and Truth, to be executed in all your Kingdoms?

A. I will.

Q. Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs, which the
Commonalty of this your Kingdom have; And will you defend and uphold them to
the Honor of God, so much as in you lies?

A. I grant and promise so to do.

Our Lord the King, we beseech you to pardon and grant and preserve to us, and
to the Churches committed to our Charge, all Canonical Privileges, and due Law
and Justice. And that you would protect and defend us, as every good King ought
to be a Protector and Defender of the Bishops and Churches under his
Government.

A. With a willing and devout Heart, I promise and grant my part, and that I
will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches committed to your charge,
all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice, and that I will be your
Protector and Defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom by right ought to protect and defend the Bishops and
Churches under his government.

Then the King arises, and is led to the Communion Table, where he takes a
Solemn Oath, in sight of all the People, to observe the Premises, and laying
his Hand on the Book, says, The things which I have before promised, I shall
perform and keep. So help me God, and the Contents of this Book. Now an Oath
being a high Act of Religion, and called the Oath of God, invoking him as a
Witness and Surety for the performance, and a Revenger in case of
Transgression, ought not (but as Medicines) to be taken but in cases of
Necessity, with good Advice, and great Sincerity, especially in such Solemn and
Public Oaths, the violation whereof the very Heathen do abhor. And what the
Laws of the Church and People are, the Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and
the Statutes of Parliament do show; to all which the Prince is sworn, and
thereupon the People declare their acceptance of him, and some Subjects of all
Orders do him immediate Homage in the Name of the rest. And by the Laws of God
and Men, those things that are Solemnly Sworn to, on express Conditions
mutually agreed on, do equally oblige both Parties.

The Subjects Obligation is expressed in several Oaths, the most considerable
are those of Supremacy and Allegiance; from each of which the Person sworn is
under a double Obligation; first and primarily to the matter of the Oath which
concerns both Prince and People, which they are sworn to defend: And
secondarily, to the Persons specified in the Oath, whose Interest it is to
defend the same, (viz.) the King, his Heirs and Successors. The Oath of
Supremacy was framed to assert the King's Supremacy, in Opposition to the
Usurpation of the Pope, wherein we promise, To bear Faith and true Allegiance
to the King, his Heirs and Lawful Successors, and to our power to assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc. granted or belonging to the King's
Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm. This Oath was brought into Form by King Henry VIII. And the
Parliament then declared, That it was a Declaration of the Ancient Right of the
Crown, which does not at all exclude the Right of the Subject, because the
admission of that Usurpation would certainly bring the Subject under the Yoke
of Popery and Slavery, which by this Oath they are bound to their power to
resist, as they did in the Reign of King John, and several other Kings, of
which hereafter.

In the Oath of Allegiance, we swear, to bear Faith and true Allegiance to His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and him and them will defend to the utmost
of our Power against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever made against his
or their Persons: And do our best endeavor to disclose to His Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies, which we shall
know or hear of to be against him or any of them. And we also Swear, That
neither the Pope of himself, nor by any other means with any other, has power
to Depose the King, or annoy his Countries, or to give License to any of them
to bear Arms, to raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to His
Majesty's Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects,
within His Majesty's Dominions.

Concerning these Oaths it is observable, First, that they were both intended
to preserve the King and his Subjects from the Usurpations of the Pope and
Church of Rome, contrary to their Ancient Rights, which were opposed and
resisted not only by many of our Kings which were themselves Papists, but by
the Nobles and Commons when their King would have submitted to them. And if
they who were Papists did so resolutely defend themselves against Popish
Usurpations of a Pecuniary and Temporal concern, much more ought we, when not
only our Liberties, but our whole Religion, as Protestants, is invaded.
Secondly, That by these Oaths we are bound to defend them to the utmost of our
power against all such as shall offer any Violence or Hurt to His Majesty's
Person, State, and Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects. Thirdly,
Because it is mentioned in the Oath, that these Privileges were granted or
annexed to the Crown, (viz.) by the first Constitution, agreed on by Prince and
People. Fourthly, Because it is said, that neither the Pope of himself, nor by
any other means with any other, (which may infer, although the King himself
should join with him, as King John did) may do violence or hurt to the State
and Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects; from whence I inferred,
that the Subjects were primarily obliged to the matter of the Oath, and then to
the King's Person, because the King in Person may join with the Pope to do
violence and hurt to the Subjects, in which case the Oath binds the Subjects to
the utmost of their power to defend and maintain their Rights and Privileges,
which for their better Security were granted or annexed to the Crown, not for
their utter subversion; and it is incredible that any Prince would oblige his
Subjects by Oath, to which he himself has sworn also, or that he would expect
the performance of it from his Subjects, which he himself with all his power is
resolved to vacuate and destroy. And in such a case we must recur to the Law
and Dictates of Nature for preservation of our selves and the common welfare
against unfaithful and cruel Men; for there is such a Law Prior and Paramount
to any particular Constitution, and for the end whereof all Government was
instituted; this is always accounted inculpata tutela, so Natural and
Necessary, that it cannot be annulled by any Civil Constitution. Et qui se cum
defendere possit occidi permittit illum damnari posse non aliter ac si seipsum
occidisset, he is a Felo de se, guilty of Self-murder. And doubtless if it had
been proposed to the Lawmakers, whether they intended to oblige themselves to
assist and defend the King's Person in case he should join with the Pope and
French King to set up the Inquisition, and bring in French Dragoons, they would
never have enacted such a Law; and therefore we may presume they never intended
such Obligation. Fifthly, That we are bound to preserve them to the King and to
his Heirs and Successors, and him and them to defend to the utmost of our power
against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against
his or their Persons, their Crown, or Dignity. Supposing then there be an
Attempt made to deprive the Heir Apparent of the Right of Succession, there is
an Obligation on the Subjects not only to disclose and make it known to such
Heir and Successor, but him and them to defend to the utmost of our power. To
this purpose Bishop Tailor says, second Vol. p. 137. Where the right of
Succession is in a Family by Law or Time immemorial, no Prince can prejudice
his Heir, or the People committed to him, for it cannot without consent be
alienated, because Persons cannot be disposed of as Slaves or Beasts; so that
in this (and some other cases) the King loses his Authority, and then the
force of the Obligation cease also. And how good an Opinion the Ancient
Clergy and others had of the Peers and People that fought in defense of the
Magna Charta, and against the Usurpations of the Popes, may appear by the
Writers of that and the succeeding Ages concerning Simon Montfort. The
Chronicle of Meilrois, lately Printed by the Bishop of Oxford, p. 231. says,
Occubuit cum multis ex magnatibus Anglicis qui venerant ad bellum ut certarent
pro justitia Angliae, cujus post modum Justitiae infallibile signum fuit crebra
miraculorum exhibiti diminutus exhibita circa Hugonem summum Angliae
dispensatorem and Simonem de Montfort, qui occubuerunt pro justitia decertentes
and idio nonnulli eorum meruerunt a deo miraculorum exhibitionem, of which
Miracles they give diverse instances. And long after these Writers, which lived
in the time of the Barons Wars, Polidore Virgil, who lived in the days of Henry
VIII. gives this Testimony to Simon de Montfort, p. 317. of the Basil Edition,
Inhaesit hominum mentibus constans opinio hunc (Simonem de Montfort qui ob
patriam and jus jurandum (for it seems they were under the like Oaths) vitam
amisissent interiisse Martyrem id quod and vita sanctitas non patitur negandum,
jam tum fueri qui ejus memoriam ut dici cujuspiam colere ceperunt compluresque
id fecissent cui Regis iram non perti muissent. For if the Prince do evidently
violate not only the Coronation Oath, but act contrary to the tenor of the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and actually subject the People to that
Jurisdiction and Usurpation, against which they are sworn, what is the extent
of that Clause in the Oath of Supremacy (viz.) To our power to assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, and Authorities granted or beloning to
the King's Highness, etc? Doubtless they that granted them, and by Oath are
bound to assist and defend them being granted, may oppose such as attempt the
destruction of them, when not only the King's Prerogative, but the Peoples
Religion, their Laws, and Liberties are assaulted, and in a way to be utterly
ruined: And Treason may be committed against the Government as well as against
the King; and also the King's Eldest Son. It is well known how resolutely our
Ancestors in the darkest times of Popery (being themselves Papists) did defend
the Nation against the Encroachments of the Church of Rome, when their Kings
would have parted with this Right, which they affirmed he neither could nor
should do, and in defense of them they were prodigal of their Lives.

Query. Whether these Premises being undeniable, the Subjects that according to
their Oaths did timely endeavor (the case being otherwise desperate) to
vindicate as well the Right of the Crown to the King, his Heirs and Successors,
as their own Religion and Liberties, did not act according to their Oaths and
Duties, not by resisting their Prince, but by defending the Succession and
themselves against such Instruments as acted contrary to the tenor of those
Oaths. If Judges, Juries, etc. had performed in their several places as the Law
and their Oaths obliged them, the King might have kept his Throne: We have a
Maxim in Law, That the King can do no wrong, because he is supposed to do all
things by his Ministers, and they to act all according to the Law: But when a
King shall choose such Ministers as will act against the Laws, and defend them
therein, there cannot be a greater wrong done to the Subject.

5. In Answer to your Fifth Query, which concerns the mutual Obligations
between the Prince and the People by virtue of these Oaths and the Declaration
hereafter mentioned. It is to be considered (as Bishop Sanderson says in the
Case of the Engagement, p. 90.) That Allegiance is such a Duty, as every
Subject, under what form of Government soever, by the Law of Nature owes to
his Country (primarily) and consequently to the Sovereign Power by which that
Commonwealth is governed, (who is Caput Communitatis) as is necessary for the
preservation of the whole Body. And speaking of the Obligation of Laws (which
will hold also in the case of Oaths,) That if the intention of the Lawgiver
should be understood precisely of that particular, actual, and immediate
intention of the Lawgiver in making a particular Law, it will not hold true in
all cases, but there is to be supposed in the Lawgiver a more general
habituate and ultimate intention of a more excellent and transcendent Nature
than the former, which is to have an influence into and an overruling Power
over all Laws (viz.) an intention by the Laws to procure and promote the
Public Good. The former intention binds where it is subservient to the
latter, or consistent with it, and consequently binds in ordinary Cases, and
in orderly Times. But where the Observation of the Law by reason of the
conjuncture of Circumstances, or the iniquity of Times (Contingencies, which no
Lawgiver could either certainly foresee, or if foreseen, could not
sufficiently provide against) would rather be prejudicial than advantageous to
the Public; or is manifestly attended with more inconveniences and sad
consequents to the Observers, than all the imaginable good that can redound to
the Public thereby, can in any reasonable measure countervail; in such case
the Law obliges not but according to the later and more general intention
only. Even as in the Operations of Nature, particular Agents do move ordinarily
according to the proper and particular inclinations; yet upon some occasions,
and to serve the ends and intentions of Universal Nature (for the avoiding of
something which Nature abhors) they are sometimes carried with motions quite
contrary to their particular Natures; as the Air to descend, and the Water to
ascend, for the avoiding of vacuity.

Concerning the Coronation Oath, I shall add here what Bishop Tailor l. 3. p.
144. says, That a Prince's swearing to govern by Laws is very ancient, of which
he gives diverse instances, and says, Kings are bound by natural Justice and
Equity, without Oaths, to do so, for they are not Kings unless they govern, and
they cannot expect Obedience unless they tell the measures by which they will
be obeyed; and these measures cannot be any thing but Laws, which are the will
of the Prince, which when published to the People then they are Laws. If Kings
be not bound to govern the People by Laws, why are they made? By what else can
they be governed? By the will of the Prince? The Laws are so, which are
published that wise men may walk by them, and that the Prince may not govern as
Fools or Lions, by chance or violence, and unreasonable passions, Ea quae
placuerunt servanda, says the Law, l. 1. de Pactis. If this had not been the
will of the Prince, it had been no Law, but being his will let it be stood to.
And p. 143. Whatsoever the Prince has sworn to, to all that he is obliged not
only as a single person, but as a King, for though he be above the Laws, yet is
he not above himself, nor above his Oath, because he is under God, and he
cannot dispense with his Oath and Promises in those cases in which he is bound:
Although the King be above the Laws, that is, in cases extraordinary, and
matters of Penalties, yet is he so under all the Laws of the Kingdom to which
he has sworn, that although he cannot be punished by them, yet he sins if he
breaks them. And p. 149. he says, The Prerogative of Kings is by Law, and Kings
are so far above their Laws, as the Laws themselves have given them leave. And
p. 143. The great Laws of the Kingdom do oblige all Princes, though they be
supreme: The Laws of the Medes and Persians were above their Princes, as
appears in Daniel: And such are the Golden-Bull of the Empire, the Salic and
Pragmatical Sanctions in France, the Magna Charta and Petition of Right in
England. That great Emperor C. de Legibus l. 4. Digna vox est Majestatis
regnantis legibus allegatum se principem profiteri. A Sentence worthy of the
Majesty of a Prince to profess himself tied to his Laws.

Pareto legi quisquis legem Sanxeris, was the wise saying of Pittacus. And the
distinction of the Directive Power of the Laws and the coersive, is futilous;
for a Directive Power is no power, and a Law does not only direct but oblige.

Thus the Emperor Theodosius, Tantum mihi licet quantum and leges licet.
Augustine l. 4. c. 4. De Civitate Dei, Quid sunt Regna nisi magna latrocinia
remota justitia quae est legum effectus. The intention of the Coronation Oath
is to oblige the King not to invade the Rights of the Subjects and the
Established Clergy; and it is sworn to the Bishops by whom the Oath is
administered. And St. Aug. Epist. 225. says, Expectationem eorum quibus Juratur
quisquis decipit non potest non esse perjurus: Whoever deceives the expectation
of him to whom he has sworn, is guilty of Perjury. It may be said that by the
Church and Bishops the King might intend such as were of the Roman Communion;
but the express letter of the Oath is contrary, (viz.) With a willing and
devout heart I promise and grant that I will preserve and maintain to you, and
the Churches committed to your charge, all Canonical Privileges, and due Law
and Justice, and that I will be your Protector to my power, by the assistance
of God, etc. To this Evasion St. Augustine gives a check, Epist. 224. Quacunque
art verborum quis juret Deus tamen qui Conscientiae testis est ita hoc accipit
sicut ille cui juratur intelligit: By whatever art of words any one swears,
God who is Witness of the Conscience, does so take it as he to whom he swears
does understand it. And Bishop Sanderson blackneth such a practice with the Sin
of Perjury: Alterum perjuris Genus est ubi recte juraveris non sincere agere
sed novo aliquo excogitato commento (salius tamen verbis) vim juramenti
declinare and evadere, Praelet. 6. de Juramento s. 7. Such a practice is
contrary to the qualifications of an Oath, Jer. 4.2. Thou shall swear, The Lord
lives in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness: And in a Prince that so
swears, the Nations shall bless themselves, and in him shall they glory: But
how can they hope that he will punish Perjury in others, that is guilty of it
himself? To this I shall only add what Grotius says l. 2. c. 14. s. 4. de Jure
belli, That Promises fully made and accepted, do naturally transfer a right,
and this holds as well in Kings as in private men. Their Opinions therefore
that hold that a King promising without a good cause, is not obliged, are not
to be allowed. It was nobly done of Henry the First, when the Pope offered to
Absolve him of his Oath, answered, Who will ever trust another, when they see
by my example, that an Absolution can make void the highest Bond of Faith. See
Eadmer's Hist. p. 126.

And where there are mutual Stipulations between Parties, with Conditions
expressed, if either Party fail in performing the Condition sworn to on his
part, the other Party is not bound to perform what he was sworn to: So Bishop
Sanderson, p. 177. de Jurament. If Caius swear to give Titius an hundred Pounds
on condition that Titius assign to him such a parcel of Ground at a certain
day, which Titius refuses to do, Caius is disobliged.

And p. 216. De Cons. A Subject is not ordinarily bound to obey a Law that is
very grievous to the certain ruin and destruction of himself and Family,
unless some great Necessity or public Danger do appear. And p. 202, he shows,
That when the subject matter of the Oath cease, the Obligation also cease;
as when the state of Affairs between the time of swearing and of performing
the Oath is so changed, that if he that swore could have foreseen such a
change, he would not have sworn: As if a Father swear never to alter his Will
wherein he had made his Son to be his Heir, and afterward his Son attempts to
poison him, the Father may appoint another Heir notwithstanding his Oath; the
reason is because the root of the Obligation, which gave occasion to the Oath
being taken away, the Obligation also is taken away. And it is a Maxim in the
Civil Law, Cessante Causa cessat Lex; Grotius, l. 2. c. 5. n. 17. thinks no
question, but a King by a long continued permission may warrant a People to
recover their Liberty on a presumption that the King has left it to them,
Grot. l. 12. c. 4. n. 14.

Bishop Andrews gives us these short, but useful Rules concerning Oaths, 1. If
what we swear to, be simply evil, the Rule is, Ne sit Sacramentum pietatis
vinculum impietatis. 2ly, If it hinder a greater good, then, Ne sit sacramentum
pietatis impedimentum pietatis. 3ly, If the Oath be simply made, yet it does
Subjacere civili Intellectui; as Jer. 18.7, 8. where God speaks conditionally
of plucking up and destroying a Nation, If that Nation turn from their evil
ways, I will repent of the evil, etc. The Conditions may exclude the event, and
the Oath remain good; So that if the Prince to whom we swear do wholly pervert
the end of the Oath, and require us to act contrary to the ends for which we
swear, we are not obliged to obey him contrary to our Oaths.

These things premised, will lead to a full understanding of the Declaration
required in the Act for Uniformity, viz. I do declare that it is not lawful
upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, etc. i. e. This is
only a declaration of a Man's private Judgment, according to the best
information which he has at present; nor can any man suppose that the position
which is indefinite can reach to every Kingdom, and therefore may be false as
to such Kingdoms, (viz.) that of Poland, where in some cases Resistance is
permitted, and in our Nation where the Laws are made the measure of the King's
power, because as Baldus Confil. 1.245. says, Clausula deplentitudine
potestatis semper intelligenda est de potestate bona and Laudabili.

2ly, It may be dubious (or rather out of doubt) because it is possible for a
King exuere Regis personam, as in case of Resignation, Desertion or great
Distraction, such as the late King of Portugal, who in his Madness slew diverse
Subjects; and in such cases Nature dictates that we may vim virepellere, as
David defended himself against Saul. And the Deposing of the King of Portugal
was approved, as by other Nations, so by the English particularly.

So that this Declaration though in general terms, may admit of exception, (as
other such Declarations do, as when I declare according to the fourth
Commandment, That it is not lawful to do any manner of work on the Sabbath Day)
yet Periculum vita tollit Sabbatum, and such cases of necessity may happen as
may make some kind of Work lawful to be done on that day. And it is a good Rule
in Law and Equity, that Omnia dicta quantum vis universalia equitatem admittunt
interpretem: So when I declare according to the Apostle, That Children ought to
obey their Parents in all things; the exception against things sinful is
understood. And if a King in his Lunacy, committing several acts for the
Destruction of his innocent Subjects may be restrained, so may such a Prince,
Qui Sobrius ad evertendam rempublicam accedit; If our Promise confirmed by
Oath, be grounded on a condition whereto it related, that condition not being
performed, makes the Promise void, L. 2. c. 13. n. 16. Gr. de J. Belli. Or if
the quality of the person cease, the Oath sworn to that person, in relation to
his quality, does cease also, L. 2. c. 13. n 18. Every Contract though sworn,
is to be understood with this reserved condition, That matters continue in the
same state, but not if they be changed. A wise Man, says Seneca, changes not
his Resolution, all things continuing as they were at the time that he made it;
nor can he be said to repent, because at that time no better Counsel could be
followed than that he resolved on, L. 2. c. 16. n. 27. Eadem mihi omnia praesta
and idem sum.

3ly, Nor can a man declare it to be a traitorous position in some cases
(though he himself do abhor it in other cases) to take up Arms by the King's
authority against his person, or against those that are commissioned by him,
because such Commissions may be granted to persons that by Law are disabled to
take such Commissions, or the Commissions may be forged, as in the late Irish
Rebellion, or they may be extorted from the King, being under the power of his
Enemies, and in fear of his life; such was the case of Edward the 5th, when
Richard Duke of Gloucester seized on his Person, raising a War, and granting
Commissions in the King's Name. Suppose that his Mother, Queen Elizabeth, who
had then the Broad Seal brought to her by the then Archbishop of York, had
raised another Army, to free the King from the Usurper's power, could this
either justify the Duke and his Party, or condemn the Queen and her Adherents?

And what has happened, may happen again: As in the Case of Ireland, where
Commissions are granted to Papists, who are unqualified, Query, Whether it may
not be lawful for the Protestants of that Nation to defend by Arms such as by
those Commissions assault them, for the destruction of their Religion, Laws,
and Liberties? So that notwithstanding this Declaration, if there be Laws and
Oaths, and certain contingent Cases, whereof the Subject that makes the
Declaration is ignorant, which do allow a defense of the Crown, Religion, Laws,
and Liberties; such defense may be lawful, notwithstanding the Declaration, as
in case it should happen that the King wholly deserts and renounceth the
Government.

Which leads me to answer your Sixth Query, Whether, it being granted, that the
King's being studiously bent on the Alteration and Subversion of the Government
established in Church and State, do amount to a Renunciation of the Government?

After that Grotius had urged all the Arguments he thought of for
Non-resistance, he thought fit to admonish his Reader of something, lest he
should think, that he had offended against that Law (of Non-resistance) when
indeed he had not, and the Admonitions are these:

First, Such persons as are under compact with the People, if they offend
against the Laws, may be restrained by force; And if a King abjure his Kingdom
and desert it, all things are lawful against him as against a private person;
for which he quotes Barclay, who was the greatest assertor of Monarchy, who
says, If a King alienate his Kingdom, or subjects it to another, he loses it;
Grotius his words are, Si Rex reipsa tradere regnum aut subjicere moliatur quin
ei resisti in hoc possit non dubito nam aliud est perium aliud habendi modus
qui ne mutetur obstare potest populus id enim sub imperio comprehensum non est.
Seneca l. 3. Controvers. Et si parendum in omnibus patri in eo non parendum in
quo efficitur ut non sit pater. And Barclay says, A Kingdom may be lost, if a
King be carried on to the destruction of the People; Consistere enim non potest
voluntas imperandi and voluntas perdendi.

Again, If the King have one part of the Empire, and the People another, the
King attempting to destroy the Peoples right, a just force may be opposed, and
this (says he) I think to have place, although it be affirmed, that the power
of War (or Militia) is in the King; for that is to be understood of foreign
War, for he that has right, has power to defend that right. Grotius on Hester
8.11. concerning the Edict which Mordecai procured for the Jews to defend
themselves, says, Jus naturae munit authoritate Regia, supposing they might
have done it by the Law of Nature.

And on those words of his, Si Rex hostili animo, etc. has this Note, Jo.
Major, in 4 Sentent. says, Non posse populum a se abdicare potestatem
destituendi Principis si in destructionem vergeret.

So Bilson, p. 520. If a Prince submit his Kingdom to a Foreigner, or change
the Form of the Commonweal, or neglecting the Laws established by common
consent, to execute his own pleasure, the Lords and Commons may join and defend
the Laws established. From whence I argue thus, that Prince who studiously
alters the Form and Constitution of his Kingdom, as suppose from a mixed and
limited Monarchy, to an absolute, destroys the Species of Government, qua
talis, and so loses it; for the introduction of the new Form, is the
destruction of the old; but a King that declares, (and acts accordingly) that
he will govern absolutely, and requires his Subjects to acknowledge his
absolute power, does ipso facto, destroy that Species of a limited Monarchy
which he had, therefore he loses that Monarchy. And what was acted in
Scotland, and intended to be acted in England, is sufficiently known, and a
full confirmation of this Argument. And it is the judgment of Grotius, that he
that openly in word or deed professes himself an enemy to the whole Nation,
(and the major and better part may carry that denomination) is in that very act
presumed to abjure and renounce the Government of it; for if such a Prince
should proceed to execute all his ruining Designs, he would leave none of his
People over whom he might reign.

To these, I shall add another Argument, viz. That a Prince or People may yield
up themselves to a prevailing power, as the men of Capua and Collatia did to
the Romans, and so lost all their authority. And that our King did so, may
appear by disbanding his Army on the approach of the present King, and
submitting himself to his Guards: And as King Agrippa, said to the Jews.
Intempestivum est nunc libertatem concupiscere, olim ne ea amitteretur certatum
oportuit; He ought to have defended his Dominion while he had it, it is too
late to require what by dedition and dereliction he has given up.

4. There are in Laws, as well as in Oaths, Casus omissi, and tacit exceptions,
which the greatest prudence of men could neither foresee, nor sufficiently
prevent; nor indeed were it a point of prudence so much as to name them, being
things odious, or rarely contingent, as the case of a King's being lunatic, or
otherwise incapable of the Administration of his Office, which our Laws have
not provided against. Bishop Sanderson, p. 41. De Juramento, mentions these
four. Si Deus permiserit, quoad licet, salva potestate Superioris Rebus sic
stantibus. 1. If God permit, as in the 4th of St. James.

So that if Caius swears to Titius, to pay him at London, on the Calends of
January, a Sum of Money which he owes him, but is at that time confined to his
Bed by a grievous Disease, or in his Journey is robbed of his Money by Thieves,
in this case he is not guilty of perjury, because Rei impossibilis nulla est
obligatio, there is no obligation to a thing impossible; and because all things
are subject to the Divine Will and Providence: therefore in every Oath, by a
Common Law, this Clause is to be understood, unless God shall otherwise
dispose. For this he quotes the Gloss. ad quest. 22. c. 2. B. Paulus, In omni
voto vel Sacramento intelliguntur hujusmodi generales conditiones si Deus
voluerit si vivero si potero.

2. Another Condition to be understood, is, if it be lawful, because there is
no obligation to unlawful things; as if a man swear to observe all the Statutes
and Customs of a Corporation, he is bound to observe such only as are lawful
and honest.

A 3d Condition is a Salvo to the power of a Superior, as when a Son swears to
do a thing that is lawful in it self, but his Father being ignorant of the
matter, commands another thing, the doing whereof hinders the Son from
performing what he had sworn, the Son is not bound by that Oath, because by the
Divine Law, he is bound to obey the command of his Father; the reason is,
because the act of one man ought not to prejudice the right of another.

The 4th Condition is, if things continue in the same state wherein they were,
as when a man swears to return a Sword that he borrowed, and the person of whom
it was borrowed, grows furiously mad, he is not bound to restore it. So Seneca,
l. 4. de Ben. c. 35. Tum fidem fallam si omnia eadem sint me promittente. Si
mutentur fidem meam liberat.

It is highly reasonable to presume, that such cases may happen, which if the
Lawgivers could have foreseen, they would not have made or passed into a Law;
and therefore it may be presumed they will not exact obedience to it.

Dr. Sanderson, p. 166. de Cons. When the Law forbids that to be done, which
the Subject cannot omit without sin, or commands that to be done, which he
cannot do without sin, such a Law does not bind; for, 1. Rei illicitae nulla
est obligatio, as when a Prince commands the Worship of a false God, Prior
obligatio praejudicat posteriori. The obligation to preserve the Common Welfare
is prior to our Allegiance to the present Governor.

Falkner, in his Book of Christian Loyalty, speaks as much for the unlawfulness
of Subjects taking up Arms against the King as can be said, p. 372, etc. yet p.
542. he proposes the case, Whether if a Supreme Governor should, according to
his own Pleasure, and contrary to the established Laws and his Subjects
Property, actually engage upon the destroying and ruining a considerable part
of his People, they might not defend themselves by taking Arms. And he
instanceth in the Paris Massacre, where about 100000 were slain in cold blood,
most of which were innocent persons, never accused or tried by Law, which he
says, was such a cruelty as can scarce be paralel'd under Mahometism; And he
grants, that if ever such a case should happen, it would have great
difficulties. Grotius (says he) thinks, that in this utmost extremity, the use
of such defense, ultimo necessitatis praesidio, as a last refuge, is not to be
condemned, provided the case of the common good be preserved. And he seems to
grant, that this may be true, upon this ground, (viz.) that such attempts of
ruining, do, ipso facto, include a disclaiming the governing those persons as
Subjects, ( i. e. according to Law) and consequently of being their Prince or
King, and so the expressions in the Declaration, that it is not lawful on any
pretense whatsoever, etc. would be secured. Now p. 529. he quotes Barclay, l.
3. c. 16. p. 212. saying, that a Prince, seeking the ruin of his People, is no
longer King. Se omni dominatu and principatu exuit atque ipso jure sive ipso
facto Rex esse desiit, l. 6. c. 23. With whom he joins Grotius, l. 1. c. 4. n.
11. Si Rex vere hostili animo in exitium totius populi feratur, to resist such
a one, is not to resist a sovereign King, but him who cease to be such,
Consistere simul non possunt voluntas imperandi and voluntas perdendi quare qui
se hostem totius populi profitetur eo ipso abdicat regnum. And, p. 531. Falkner
says, On yielding such suppositions, (to be true) I shall grant the Answer
given to be true. To this purpose speaks Grotius, l. 1. c. 4.. 7. n. 2.
treating of Resistance, This Law seems to depend on the intention of those who
first entered into Civil Society, from whom the right of governing is
transferred. Now if such had been asked, whether they intended to impose a Yoke
equal to Death upon all that should resist the Tyrannies of a superior
Magistrate, upon any account whatsoever? I know not how they could willingly
answer in the affirmative; for what in this case Charity would recommend, that
may be received as a Law.

7. But another Query is, Whether the King, being destitute of the assistance
of his Subjects, leaving the Land in confusion, two Armies being in its bowels,
has vacated the Government, and so it is necessary, that some other, to avoid
Anarchy and Confusion, be appointed to succeed? To this I answer, 1. That the
King, even before his leaving the Kingdom, had deserted the Government; for it
is undeniably affirmed by Civilians, whose practice is agreeable, That nolle
habere, and renunciare, are terms equivalent, as when a man conveyeth an Estate
with a Charge and Encumbrance upon it, he that will not accept of the Estate
with the Encumbrances and Charge, though he would gladly enjoy the Estate,
does, in the judgment of the Law, and in all Equity, renounce his Title to it;
for he must accept it modo and forma debitis, or not at all; whence I thus
ground my Argument, He that is not willing to hold the Government of England,
as constituted with certain Limitations and Conditions annexed, does
constructively renounce it. But the late King was not willing to accept or hold
the English Government as constituted and limited, Ergo, the sequel of the
Major is clear, because Onus transit cum emolumento, and both Law and Equity do
preclude a right to the one, without the other; an entrance into the
Government, without the observance of the Condition, modo and forma, is so far
from giving a right to it, that it is a renunciation of it. And the Minor is as
clear, because it is not possible for a Popish Prince, such as ours was, to be
willing to govern the English Nation, without one or more Popish Priests,
without many Papists in Office, Civil and Military, and without subjection to
the Pope of Rome, and holding correspondence with him. So that if it should be
demanded of the King, (which yet needs not the having sufficiently declared the
contrary) whether he would accept of the Government, as by the Laws and
Statutes against Papists is provided, his refusal is a renunciation. And of
this we have had plain demonstrations: The King declaring to the Scots, that he
had an Absolute Power, and practicing the same in England, by entertaining the
Pope's Nuntio, setting up of Popish Bishops, imprisoning the Protestant
Bishops, entertaining Jesuits and Papists in his Privy Council, and chief
Offices, Military and Civil, the Charters generally taken away, Magdalen
College emptied of its Students, to make way for Papists, these were manifest
indications of the subversion of the Government; for as Aristotle, l. 5o.
Polit. n. 112. Tyrannus efficitur qui vi dominatur, Regnum est Imperium
voluntate Civium delatum at si quis vel fraud vel violentia Dominatur
manefesta Tyrannis est, andl. 3. n. 87. Reges solum volentibus imperant si
nolentibus imperatur regnum esse desinit. So that the King having first
deserted the People, and lost their affections, and for this and other causes
deserted the Kingdom, and left it in confusion, giving order to his General to
disband his Army without Pay, many of which were Papists, and known Enemies to
the Nation, from whom they feared great mischiefs to themselves; There being
also another Army in the Nation which became successful, it was highly
necessary that the Nation to avoid utter ruin, should by their
Representatives freely chosen, convene, to consult and agree upon a fit person
for the administration of the Government; and whereas the person that headed
the prevailing Army, was by good Providence married to the Heir apparent of the
Kingdom, if he not only by his own merit in preserving the Crown, which
otherwise had been lost, but by Marriage of the right Heir, and with her and
the Kingdom's consent be chosen to a Consortship in the Administration of the
Government, it is no more than what Necessity and Right did require.

Nor is it more than what was done in the Case of Henry the Seventh, who having
overthrown Richard the Third in Battle, was in a Parliament called by him,
acknowledged their King; of which I shall give you the History as related by my
Lord Bacon, p. 10. of his History, which may serve as a President to authorize
what is now done, and leads me to the Eighth Quere, to which I shall answer
first Historically, and then Rationally in Justification of the late
Proceedings.

The Coronation of Henry the Seventh was on the 30th day of October 1485, and
on November the 7th the Parliament met, in which (without respect to his
Queen's Title, whose Coronation was deferred till almost two years after, (when
danger taught him what to do) he obtained that the Inheritance should rest,
remain and be in the King and the Heirs of his Body, not mentioning his right
Heirs: so that the Entail seemed rather a personal Favor to him and his
Children, then a Disinherison of the House of York; and this being obtained, he
married the Lady Elizabeth on the 18th of January, which was celebrated with
greater Triumph and Demonstrations of Joy and Gladness, than either his Entry
or Coronation, which the King rather noted than liked; and he showed himself no
very indulgent Husband to her, though she were Beautiful, Gentle and Fruitful.
So great an Enemy he was to the House of York, that he caused Sir Will. Stanly,
who had saved his Life, and set the Crown on his head in Bosworth-field, to be
executed for saying, That if he were sure that young man Perkin Warbeck were
King Edward's Son, he would never bear Arms against him.

This Case seems much more unjustifiable than ours, for here the King and
Parliament did not only set the Crown on the head of the Conqueror, but
intailed it on his Heirs, without respect to the right Heir, whom he had not
yet married, and for ought they knew, never intended; of which his strange
carriage toward that good Lady, whom he confined to live with the Queen
Dowager, her Mother, in London; but he kept Edward Plantagenet, the Son and
Heir of George Duke of Clarence, close Prisoner in the Tower, might give the
Nation just cause of suspicion, that he intended to Reign by his own Title, as
Heir of the House of Lancaster, or as Conqueror, without any respect to the
Title of the House of York; And he intended (faith the Lord Bacon) that it
should be so believed, for to the Act of Parliament he added the Pope's Bull
for confirmation.

But in our Case much more Justice, Wisdom, and Moderation did appear; the
Title of the right Heir being united to that of our Deliverer, and the Crown
intailed on the right Line; the present Administration being by consent, and in
the name of the King and Queen, which was not observed in the Case of Henry the
Seventh; and the consent of the Princess Anne being also obtained, who has now
a nearer prospect of the Crown than otherwise she could have hoped for.

Nor is the making of the Convention a Parliament without a President, for in
the year 1660, when General Monk had summoned several Members in the like
manner, but not so free, there being many of the King's Party excluded, yet
they were made a Parliament by the King, notwithstanding any want of the King's
Writs, Anno Car. 2di, 12o.

And as to the Rational Part of the Answer, let it be considered, That a Nation
must unavoidably run into Confusion, unless such a means may be used; for
suppose the Royal Line should be extinct, there can be no fitter means to
settle a Government, than by such a Convention duly chosen, and the Agreement
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, who want only the Royal Writ to Summon
them, and that not being to be had, the Nation may do what is in their power to
prevent that Confusion which the King's deserting them, and carrying with him
the Broad-seal, leaving two Armies in the midst of the Nation, by reason
whereof it might in a short time have been as ill with us, as it is now with
our distressed Brethren in Ireland, made necessary; and Necessity has no Law
superior to it.

This therefore may be an Answer to those that object against the too great
have in proceeding to a Settlement, before a Parliament could be regularly
called by Writ, for considering the great Destraction of the Nations, and the
ill Circumstances wherein this and the Kingdom of Ireland were: The delay of a
speedy Establishment, might have unsettled us for ever; for the King having
either deserted the Government, or being driven from it, and another being
fully possessed of the Kingdom, the common Safety would soon be destroyed if
either the prevailing Power should be resisted, or some person not be admitted
for the Administration of Justice, and Prevention of Violence: As when a Ship
master forsakes his Ship in a Storm, and his Mate thrusts himself into his
Office, to guide the Ship, if the Mariners will not presently obey him, as long
as he guides the Ship toward the Harbor, the Ship must likely perish, and the
Mariners in it: Or if the right Master should be utterly disabled by Sickness
or Destraction to perform his Office, may not another assume his Office by
consent of the Mariners? It Is King James the First's saying, The King is for
the Commonwealth, and not the Commonwealth for the King: The end is always
accounted more noble than the means. And unless it should be granted, that a
King in plenary Possession ought to be acknowledged and obeyed, I cannot see on
what ground our Savior commanded Tribute to be given to Caesar, or the Apostle
enjoined Subjection to the Higher Power.

The Powers then in being, being such as usurped on the Senate, and were set up
as Emperors by a part of the Souldiary, their best Title being the Approbation
of the Senate, Ex post facto: The Usurpation of Julius Caesar is too well known
to need a Relation; and that could not give a sufficient Title to Augustus
against the Claim of the Senate: the Argument of our Savior for paying him
Tribute, was, because the Money bore his Image; as also the Money in the days
of Julius Caesar bore his, and so may be an argument for paying Tribute to any
Prince whose Money is current in a Nation. But this will be more evident by
considering who was the Prince in being when the Apostle wrote his Epistle to
the Romans, which was either Claudius Caesar or Nero: and the most credible
Historians inform us, that on the death of Caligula, the Consuls and Senate
advised how they might restore their Commonwealth to its ancient Freedom, taken
from them by the Caesar's; but being too slow in their Resolutions, because of
Dissentions among themselves, it happened in the interim, that Claudius having
hid himself, being frighted with the news of Caligula's death, was discovered
by a common Soldier, who knowing him, saluted him Emperor, and led him forth
to his Fellow Soldiers, with whom he remained a part of the night, Minore spe
quam fiducia, says Suetonius, the Consuls and Senate then sitting in the
Capitol consulting for their common Liberty, sent for him by the Tribune of the
People, to have his Advice therein; the Soldiers and People assembled, desired
that one might be forthwith named for their Emperor; on which Claudius took
courage, and promising Rewards to the Soldiers, being also pitied by the
People, who thought him designed to suffer punishment, they saluted him
Emperor. Tacitus gives alike relation of Nero his Successor, Annal, l. 12.
That Agrippina his Mother concealing for a time the death of Claudius, kept the
Palace Gates shut, and pretended great kindness to Britanicus the eldest Son of
Claudius, until she had contrived to make Nero Emperor; and having gotten the
Prefect of the Bands then on the Guard to her Party, sends out Nero,
accompanied by Burrhus to the Guards, where while some expected Britannicus to
follow, the Prefect and Soldiers, to whom Rewards were promised, saluted Nero
Emperor. Now one of these thus advanced to the Empire, by the Soldiers, was
undoubtedly the Emperor then in being, when the Epistle to the Romans was
written, to whom Obedience is required for Conscience sake, as to the Ordinance
of God; if it be replied, that the Senate did afterward confirm them in the
Empire, that will not vary the present Case, the present King and Queen being
also confirmed by Parliament.

That which has been said, leads me to consider these Scriptures which seem to
confine our Obedience only to the lawful Powers, yet some learned and good men
have given such a sense of them as may raise a doubt, whether they speak of a
King de Jure only, or de Facto; and if of a King de Jure only, then of such a
one as is a Minister for the public Good only.

For a right understanding of those Scriptures of the New Testament which speak
of Obedience to Magistrates, as Matthew. 22.21. Romans 13.1. 1 Peter 2.13. We are
to consider the occasions of inditing them; that of our Savior was occasioned
by such as accused him for any Enemy to Caesar, that he would make himself a
King, and sought by this question to ensnare him, which our Savior perceiving,
he only demands to see a piece of the Money with which they traded; and finding
Caesar's Image on it, conceived him to be the Magistrate then in power,
commands to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Moreover, the Jews
having from the beginning been governed by one of their Nation, and, as they
boasted, never in Subjection to any other, thought it an Usurpation in any to
exercise Dominion over them, which made the Roman Power very jealous of them,
there being at that time great expectation of a Prince that should Govern the
World; and the frequent Seditions and Rebellions of that Nation against their
own and the Roman Magistrates, increased these Jealousies; Judas of Galilee
having made a great Insurrection, and the Christians being called Galileans,
were thought to be of the same Spirit.

And as for the Gentiles that were converted to Christianity, to which they
were invited partly by the Privileges of their Christian Liberty, that they
should not be the Servants of Men, and partly by the Apostles Prohibition of
going to Law before Unbelievers, some weak, and others licentious as the
Gnostiks, would acknowledge no Magistrates; and as St. Chrysostom observes,
some of the Galileans would rather die than pay Tribute to the Romans. St.
Chrysostom has diverse observations on this 13 Romans very considerable; first
he stops the mouths of such as did object, that the Apostle did abase his
Christian Brethren, by subjecting them to Earthly Princes, for whom the Kingdom
of Heaven was prepared: To this the answer is, That the Apostle did not so much
subject them to those Princes as to God, who appointed them. Then he raises a
question, Is every Prince then ordained of God? I say not so, for I speak not
now of any Prince, but of the matter itself: for that some should command and
others obey, this I call the Ordinance of God; and he explains his meaning by
the instance of Marriage, that the Man and Woman are joined by God, (i. e.)
Marriage is God's Ordinance; not that all such as cohabit as Man and Wife are
joined by God, but only such as are married according to the Laws of Wedlock:
Thus the Apostle does not say there is no Prince but of God, but there is no
Power but of God. And on v. 5. for Conscience sake, he thus comments, (...);
That they might not be ungrateful to their Benefactors. So St. Chrysostom from
whose Comment we may observe, that although Government be God's Ordinance, yet
the person in Government is not always so; he only is God's Minister, who does
administer the Government for the common Good. 2. That we owe Subjection to the
person invested with the Government, who takes care for the public Welfare,
for Conscience sake; (i. e.) as an acknowledgement of the Benefits that we
partake of under his Administration of the Government: Nor does it appear, that
our Savior, Mat. 22.21. did determine that Caesar was the Supeme Power de
Jure; for if in a private case he refused to decide a controverted right, Who
made me a Judge or Divider over you? Luke 12.14. much less is it probable that
he intended to determine such a public case. And that the Apostle had no other
respect but to the person in possession of the present Power, may be doubted
from what follows:

As for the Observation of some Critics, that the word (...) is constantly
used for a Person in Lawful Authority, we find it otherwise; for St. Luke,
speaking of the power of darkness, (i. e.) the Devil, Luke 22.53. his words are
(...) (i. e.) the power of the Devil. Nor could the Devil derive a Lawful
Authority, as he could, if this word would bear it, when speaking of the
Kingdom of the World, he says, (...) all this power will I give thee; as if he
had power to set up an universal Emperor over the World. And St. Luke is
observed to have written most exactly agreeable to the Greek Idium of any of
the Evangelists. So that it cannot be inferred from this Scripture, that the
Persons then in Power were rightful Magistrates. Grotius de Jure Belli, p. 93.
c. 4. 20. In re controversa Judicium sibi privatus sumere non debet sed
possessionem sequi sic tributum solvi Caesari Christus jubet, Matthew. 22.20.
quia in possessione erat Imperii and nummus ejus habuit imaginem: From whence
it follows in the judgment of Grotius, that our Savior's Command to pay
Tribute to Caesar, was grounded on his being in possession of the Empire. And
if this be so, as I cannot from the Command of our Savior, Matthew. 22. or from
Romans 13. see any Reason to the contrary, it will follow, that it is our Duty in
licitis and honestis to yield Obedience to the present Powers. Michael Salon,
an eminent School-man, is of the same Opinion, That the Romans possessed Judea
by Tyranny, when our Savior enjoined the paying of Tribute, Q. 60. Art. 6. de
justitia and Jure; where yet he affirms, That the Catholics of England were
bound to obey the just Laws of Queen Elizabeth, whom he calls an impious Woman.
Besides, I think it will be a very difficult Task for any Man to show where the
word (...) is applied to any Person that is out of the Possession of the Power,
seeing it ordinarily signifies the Person that is actually in possession of
the Power. For thus the Apostle speaks of the Powers that are in being, (...),
and to them he says we must be subject, not only for fear of wrath, which
implies that we ought to prevent our Ruin, to obey the Power that is in
possession. But then the Question is, how this obliges the Conscience, when
the Subject is formerly obliged to a Prince de Jure? Now the Rule for directing
Conscience, is the Word of God, and if that do enjoin Obedience to the Prince
in possession, the Subject may safely yield it, and ought to do it for
Conscience Sake. Puffendorf is of the same judgment, p. 1009. de Jure Gentium,
where he says, That the Senate and People of Rome were deprived of their
Ancient Right through fear or want of strength, not by approving the Dominion
of the Caesar's. (So Emanuel Thesaurus says, that the People of Rome under
Tiberius, did tempori seraire non Regi.) And it is well known (says he) by what
means the ancient Caesar's invaded the Empire; yet St. Paul, Romans 13. attributes
(...) Authority to them to whom Obedience is to be yielded for Consciencesake,
as our Savior also Commands to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar 's.
On which occasion also he mentions that Statute of Henry VII. which
indemnifieth those Subjects which acted under the King in being. And he adds a
Sentence from Nicetas Choniates, nec Imperatorem qui absit quaerendum, nec qui
adsit pellendum esse. So that I think the Cases in the 22 of Matthew. and Romans
13. may satisfy Conscience as to our present case; for if those Caesar's who
were then in Possession, were to be obeyed for Conscience Sake, even then when
the Right did belong to the Senate, then we may also obey the King now in
being, though there be another to whom it is supposed the Right of Government
does belong, without wounding our Consciences.

Now if the present Power be God's Ordinance, we must obey for Conscience's
sake; for if we believe that God has an overruling Providence in the
Government of the World, to set up one, and pull down another, though we see
not a Reason of the Alterations that are made, yet we must believe that there
are great and just causes, and such as are directed to good ends, especially
where it appears that God by such Revolutions brings Order out of Confusion;
and the changes that are made, are effected more visibly by the Counsel of God,
than Conduct of Man. Another Rule of Conscience is the Glory of God, that which
tends most to the advancing of God's prescribed Worship, the purity of his
Ordinances, a sound Faith, and holy Life, we may with a good Conscience submit
to. It is a saying of Polycarp, when he was near his Martyrdom, We owe all due
Obedience to Princes and Potentates, yet not so as thereby to endanger our
eternal Salvation. The Law of Charity is another Rule of Conscience, which as
it obliges us to do good unto all men, so more especially to them that are of
the household of Faith, for whom we should lay down our very lives, that we may
prevent their misery and destruction. St. Paul could wish himself accursed from
Christ for his brethren and kinsmen, according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. And what
he suffered and did for his Brethren according to the Faith of Christ, appears
as by his great Afflictions, so by his ready compliance in the case of
Circumcising Timothy, Acts 16.3. because of the Jews which were at Lystra and
Iconium, though he were of a Persuasion that Christ could profit them nothing
that were circumcised, seeing that such became debtors to do the whole Law. And
Acts 21.23. when St. James and the Elders informed him, that the Jews would be
offended by his teaching them, that they ought not to Circumcise their
Children, nor to walk after their Customs; he was persuaded, lest he should
offend them, to purify himself, and in the Company of others to go into the
Temple, to show that he kept the Law. From whence we learn, that it is out Duty
to part with many Opinions of our own, not absolutely necessary to Salvation,
for the propagation of the true Religion. I speak not this as if it were Lawful
to do any evil that good may come of it, which the Apostle utterly condemns,
but only on supposition that the late King has rendered himself incapable of
the Government, and that the present King and Queen (considering the
Circumstances wherein we were) are regularly advanced to the Government, that
we ought to pay our Allegiance to them. The Question whether Humane Laws do
bind the Conscience, is much discoursed of by Divines, who resolve, that they
do not bind the Conscience immediately by their own Authority, but mediately by
virtue of the Command of God, who enjoins Obedience to the Higher Powers: But
then if the matter of the Law be unjust, or if it be not for the Public Good,
which is the end of all Humane Laws, they are not Obligatory to Conscience; for
the Rule for Conscience in things Political is the Public welfare: So the
Ancient Roman Law, Salus Populi Suprema Lex, which is the same with that of the
Apostle, He is the Minister of God to thee for good, (i. e.) not for thy
Private Good only, but for the Public Good, attending continually on this very
thing, (i. e.) the Public Good, wherein thy Private Good is concerned; for the
Laws do not respect this or that particular man's case, but the Common good;
and good Laws may be grievous to this or that particular Man in some cases,
which yet highly conduce to the Public Welfare, and better is a private
Inconvenience than a public Mischief. Those Laws therefore that tend most to
the Public welfare, are the Rule of Conscience in Political Affairs. And for
the same Reason that when a Magistrate makes a Law against God's Law in
Religious Matters, it does not bind the Conscience: For the same Reason, when a
Magistrate makes a Law against the Public welfare, it does not bind the
Conscience in Political Affairs: The Reason is, because the Magistrates Power
is derived from God, and God has limited and determined that Power for the
Public Good as its great end, and such Laws as are contrary to that end, have
no Authority, nor do oblige the Conscience. It is truly said, that some things
are commanded, because they are good; other things are good, because they are
commanded: Now our Obedience to Governors is good, because it is commanded; but
a respect to the Public welfare in all Laws is commanded, because it is the
chief good and end of Government, and so is Prior and Paramount to all Politic
Laws; and hence it is, that the Casuists do resolve, that Humane Laws do not
bind the Conscience when things grievous and intolerable are commanded. But
then the Question will be, Who shall judge whether the Laws made are conducing
to the Public Good or not, when not only the Magistrate, but the
Representatives of the People have pre-judged it, and therefore past it into a
Law? Answ. There are few Laws, like those of the Medes and Persians,
unalterable; what was for the Public Good at the time of making the Law, may
afterward, on the alteration of Times and Accidents, prove to be otherwise; and
when the Reason of a Law cease, the Obligation of it cease also as to
Conscience. There was a Law made against the use of that pernicious Weed of
Hops (as the Law terms it) because it was thought prejudicial to the Health
of the Subject; and though the Reason of the Law might be good as to some
particular Men, Yet long Experience taught, that the use of Hops was more
beneficial to the Public; and therefore though that Law was not repealed, yet
the use of Hops was continued: Now the Question is, whether such Brewers as
continued the use of Hops against the Statute, did sin or not in so doing? If
they did not sin, it was because their Consciences were not obliged by that
Law; if they did sin, then the breach of a mistaken and erroneous Law is a sin,
and damnable, which is a very hard Sentence.

But Secondly, Although the greater part of the People with their Legislators
may judge the Laws made to be for the Common good, yet every Man must judge of
his own Actions, in reference to those Laws, whether they be agreeable to the
Common good or no, for the greater number in Councils may err, there is no
Infallible Judge in Civil or Religious matters: If then the Lawgivers may err,
or my Conscience tells me that they do err, I am not bound to do what they
Command by a blind Obedience, but to use my private discretion, in enquiring
whether the thing enjoined be for the Public good or not; for if I am allowed
to use the judgment of my private discretion in Religious matters, why not in
Civil? Men are not to go as Beasts where they are driven, much less to act
contrary to their Reason and Judgment, which makes them worse than Beasts, who
will follow their Senses unless they are hindered by force; so that I am not
bound to obey a Law merely Humane for Consciencesake, when I judge that Law
contrary to the Public welfare, but I must submit to the Penalty, if I cannot
honestly avoid it. But if a Magistrate that is obliged to govern by Laws, do
resolutely set himself to destroy those Laws, and ruin not only the generality
of his Subjects, but his own Crown and Dignity, we are not bound in Conscience
to obey such a Magistrate, because of a prior Obligation to preserve the
public welfare, which was the end of Government, and to which the means are
subordinate. It now remains, that having proved that Scripture and right Reason
to be the Rule of Conscience for our Obedience both to Magistrates and their
Laws in foro interno, that I do also prove, that a respect to the Public good
(not being contrary to any Law of God) is our Rule for Obedience, in foro
externo.

One chief Law imprinted by God on the Reason of Mankind, is the conservation
of it self, and for that end vim vi repellere, to repel Force by Force, for
which end Mankind were taught to live in Societies, and establish Rules and
Laws for the Common Safety; therefore homines conspirantes in communem
utilitatem, are the Subject Matter of a Commonwealth, this being the end of
all Societies; no Civil Constitution can annul this Bond of Nature: So
Panormitan, Quando jus Civil aliquid disponit contra jus naturae standum est
Juri naturae. So also when the Law makes provision for such things as the
Lawgivers foresee, and afterward some things happen which could not be
foreseen, and new Reasons and Accidents appear contrary to those Laws, here
Nature, as a common Parent and Protector of Justice and Necessity, alters or
adds to the Law; as when Sextus Tarquinius ravished Lucretia, though there were
no established Law against that particular sin, yet Nature it self directed a
severe Punishment: And when the Pharisees pleaded their Vows to the Corban, in
bar to relief of their Parents, which is a Law of Nature, our Savior
pronounced such Vows null. Bishop Tailor, p. 296. proves, That the Law of
Nature cannot be dispensed with by any Humane Power: 1. Because God is the
Author of it. 2. Because this Law of the preservation of the Common welfare is
as necessary to the support of Societies, as Nourishment is for the support of
their Bodies. 3. Because Natural Laws are the dictates of Natural Reason; and
no man has power to alter Reason, which is an Image of the Divine Wisdom, and
therefore unalterable. As to the Law part, the Act 11 Hen. 7. c. 1. says, That
it is not reasonable, but against all Laws, Reason, and good Conscience, that
Subjects going in War with their Sovereign Lord (for the time being) should
lose or forfeit any thing for doing their Duty and Service of Allegiance; and
it was Enacted, That from thenceforth no Person attending on the King for the
time being, and doing him true and faithful Service of Allegiance in his Wars,
should in no wise be convict or attaint of High Treason, nor of other Offense
for that cause, but to be for that Service utterly discharged of any vexation,
trouble, or loss. The Lord Bacon, p. 144. of his History of Henry VII. gives a
Reason of this Law; For that it was agreeable (says he) to reason of State,
that the Subject should not enquire of the justness of the King's Title or
Quarrel; and it was agreeable to good Conscience, that whatever the Fortune of
the War were, the Subject should not suffer for his Obedience. The Spirit of
this Law was wonderful Pious and Noble, being like in matter of War to the
Spirit of David, in matter of Plague, who said, If I have sinned, strike me,
but what have these Sheep done? Neither wanted this Law parts of prudent and
deep foresight, for it did the better take away occasion for the People to
busy themselves to pry into the King's Title, for that however it fell, their
Safety was provided for. Besides, it could not but greatly draw unto him the
love and hearts of the People, because he seemed more careful for them than for
himself.

The Lord Cook, p. 7. in the Third Book of Institutes, on the word Le Roy,
speaking of Treason, says, That the Act for Treason is to be understood of a
King in possession of the Crown and Kingdom, for if there be a King regnant in
possession, although he be Rex de facto only, and not de Jure, yet is he King
within the purview of this Statute. And the other that has Right, and is out
of possession, is not within this Statute: And if Treason be committed against
a King de facto, and not de jure, and after the King de jure comes to the
Crown, he shall punish the Treason against the King de facto; and a Pardon
granted by the King de jure, that is not also King de facto, is void. It is the
Opinion of all Lawyers, that in rebus dubiis melior est conditio possidentis.
Judge Hales gives the same sense of that Statute, in his Remarks on the Pleas
of the Crown, Chapter of Treason.

Now both these were great Lawyers, and wrote under such as were Kings de jure,
and in peaceable times. The Argument then is this: If Treason may be committed
against a King in possession, or de facto, and not against the King de jure,
being out of the possession, then I owe Allegiance to the King in possession,
and not to the King out of possession, though King de jure. The Rule of the Law
is this, I owe Allegiance to him that gives me Protection, whether I live at
home under a King de facto, or live as a Stranger abroad under one that is a
King de jure. I owe Allegiance unto each while I am under their Protection; for
thus in Calvin's Case, Seventh Book of Cook's Reports; one Shirly a Frenchman,
and some Subjects of the King of Portugal, having conspired with Lopez for the
death of the Queen, were Indicted for acting contra Legiantiae suae debitum,
against their due Allegiance, and were found Guilty, and Executed. And this the
Law calls a local Allegiance. When Cities and Soldiers are taken in War, they
may, to preserve their Lives, swear to the Conqueror never to bear Arms against
him; by which Oath the condition of their former Prince is no way made worse,
for had they refused such an Oath, they should have lost their Lives, which by
this means being preserved, they may be in a condition to serve their Prince in
any thing else but in fighting against him who spared his Lise. Besides it is
well known, that many good and wholesome Laws were made by such as were Kings
only de facto, not de jure, which are still in force with us as they were with
the Subjects that lived in their several Reigns; whence it follows, that we owe
and ought to yield Allegiance to the King de facto, and observe his Laws, and
to Pray for him as King. On the Deposing of Richard the Second, in a Provincial
Synod in Canterbury under Henry the Fourth, whose Title was only de facto, it
was decreed, that Prayers should be made pro ipsius and Regni salute, as he had
desired. And Arundel, then Archbishop of Canterbury, tells the King, that the
Clergy did pugnare precibus and sacrificiis apud deum pro victoriis ei
obtinendis. Aethelwolfe, Anno 854. was made King while his Elder Brother was
living, yet Elston and Swithon, Bishops, prayed solemnly for him: So the
Bishops prayed for Will. Rufus, his elder Brother living. St. Anselme also,
though banished by Henry the First, did him Homage, and prayed for him. And
although our five first Kings, beginning at William the Conqueror, came
irregularly to the Crown: The first by Conquest, the second and third while
their elder Brother lived, the fourth reigned when his Predecessor had a
Daughter living, which was Maude the Empress; the fifth while his Mother, the
right Heir, was living, yet were the stated Forms of Prayers still continued in
the Ancient Missals respectively.

Nor can we well be excessive in our deference to those who under God have been
the chief Instruments of the Common Safety; for if the Law of Nature, which
obliges every particular person to self-preservation, and much more to the
preservation of the Public Welfare, (in which case we may vim in repellere) be
prior and paramont to any subsequent Law of a more private concern, we of this
Nation, which were so near to destruction, had all reason imaginable, to secure
our selves against such violent and illegal attempts as were made, not only
against our selves, but against the whole Protestant interest throughout all
Europe, having such dreadful instances of Persecution in the neighboring
Nations of France and Piedmont; for the Question is not, whether we should
choose Sin rather than Affliction, in which case the Apostle has determined,
that we may not do evil, that good may come of it; but whether of two temporal
evils, the least is to be chosen, or whether, when we are left without a
Governor, we should set a Bramble over us, to rent and tare our flesh, or the
healing Olive, under whose branches we might set down in peace and security. It
is very observable, what God says concerning Jehoiakim the wicked Son (of a
good Father) Josiah, Jer. 22.15. Shall thou reign, because thou closest thy
self in Cedar? did not thy Father eat and drink and do justice and judgment,
and then it was well with him? But thine eyes and thy heart are not but for thy
covetousness to shed innocent blood, and for oppression and violence to do it,
therefore thus says the Lord concerning Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah King of
Judah, they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah Lord, or, Ah his Glory.

I shall therefore leave it to the serious consideration of my Brethren,
whether it be more eligible, to pray for them in our Liturgy, who have
preserved us in the free use of it, or for such as would have taken it from us,
and imposed the Mass book and Legends, instead of that and the Scriptures, by
which we should have been reduced to this dilemma, either we must obey, to the
violation of our Conscience, or, for our disobedience, we and our Families must
be utterly destroyed.

If yet upon consideration of what has been here said, and what our own
judgments may add, we are still in aequilibrio, and do doubt to whom the Title
of the Crown does of right belong. I doubt not but the Law of Charity to our
selves, our Families, and love to the Protestant Religion, may be of great
weight to turn the Scales, and warrant our resolution in a case so doubtful.

Bishop Sanderson, Praelect. 5. p. 176. puts this Question, When any one takes
the Government on him, having by force driven out the lawful Prince, or so
straightened him, that he cannot pursue his right, which is invaded, not on a
doubtful right, but by manifest wrong, what shall a good Subject, that has
sworn Allegiance to the oppressed Prince, do in this Case? His Answer is, It
seems to me, that it is not only lawful for a good Subject to obey the Laws of
the Prince in being, and to do what he is commanded, modo non sit factu turpe
aut injustum, if the thing be not in it self evil or unjust. But also, that if
the condition of humane affairs require it, there may be a necessity of
obeying, or he may be judged to fail of his duty; and whereas he had said, that
Laws made by him that wanted lawful power, did not bind in Conscience, he
answers, that these things are not repugnant, because though the Subject be
bound to do what the Law requires, yet he is not bound to that Law, but to
himself and his Country. The Obligation is annexed to the Law that concerns
himself and is truly a Law, which he thus explains: Seeing it is the duty of a
pious and prudent man, to consider not only what is lawful, but what becomes
him, and may be expedient to others, a good Subject may be bound to do that for
the welfare of himself and fellow subjects, to which by Law he is not bound,
which obligation arises from the duty he owes to himself and to his Country,
that Wars and Rapines may be prevented, and we may live peaceable under them,
without violating the Faith we owe to the rightful Heir. But then he raises
the Question, Seeing no man can serve two Masters, especially of contrary
interest, how can we please the one, without displeasing the other? His Answer
is, It may be presumed, that the rightful Prince will consent, because the
Subject herein does not so much serve the Possessor as the Commonwealth, the
safety whereof no less concerns the injured Prince, than the present Possessor,
and probably more, for as the true Mother of the Child had greater tenderness
of its life than the pretended Mother, so the true Prince may be presumed to
have a greater regard to the welfare of the People, than the Usurper.

Claudian to Honorius.

Tu civem patremque geris tu consule cunctis
Non tibi, nec tua te moveant sed publica vota.
As a Mariner is supposed to intend the guiding of his Ship to a safe Harbor,
and a Physician to intend the Health of his Patient, so is a Prince presumed to
intend the prosperity of his People, which is the great end of Government.

Bishop Bilson goes farther; speaking of the Roman Cruelties, says, They are
such as are able to set good men at their wits end, and make them justly doubt,
since you refuse the course of all good Laws, Divine and Humane, whether by the
Law of Nature they may not defend themselves against such barbarous blood
suckers. For whatever is attempted on us without Law, is force, and we may, vim
vi repellere, as in the case of a Sheriff taking possession on a Judgment; if a
Prince should commission armed men to oppose him in the execution of his
Office, he may lawfully resist them, and the Law does indempnifie him; the
Princes Private Will cannot make void his Public Will, formerly declared and
published in his Laws.

This has been the sense and practice of our own and other Protestant Nations;
of our own in the Case of the Queen of Scots, who brought French Forces into
Scotland, to withstand the Reformation, endeavored by the Nobles: the Clergy
of England gave a Subsidy of 6 s. in the Pound, to defray the Charge of that
War, and call it, her using all prudent and Godly means, 5 Eliz. chapter 24. and
chapter 27. The Temporalty call it, The princely and upright preservation of the
Liberty of the Realm and Nation of Scotland from eminent Captivity and
Desolation. And for abating Hostility and Persecution within the Realm of
France, there were Forces sent under the Earl of Warwick to New Haven, to
assist the French Protestants, which was then accounted a Godly and prudent
means to abate Hostility and Persecution, practiced against the Professors of
God's Holy Gospel. And in the 35 of Eliz. chapter 12. was another Subsidy granted
by the Clergy for the Queen's Charges, in the prudent and needful prevention of
such Attempts as tended to the Extirpation of the sincere Profession of the
Gospel both here and elsewhere. And Chapter 13. the Temporalty gave this Reason for
their Subsidy. Besides the great and perpetual Honor which it has pleased God
to give your Majesty abroad, in making you the principal Support of all Just
and Religious Causes against Usurpers, besides the great Succors in France and
Flanders, which we conceive to be most Honorable in regard of the ancient
League, the Justice and Equity of the Causes, etc. And in 39 Eliz. chapter 27. they
say, This Land is become, since your Majesty's days, both a Port and Haven of
Refuge for distressed States and Kingdoms, and a Rock and Bulwark of Opposition
against the Tyranny and ambitious Attempts of mighty Usurping Potentates. And
in 43 Eliz. chapter 17. The Clergy say, Who has, or should have a livelier sense
or better remembrance of your Majesty's Princely Courage and Constancy in
advancing and protecting the free Profession of the Gospel within and without
your Majesty's Dominions, than your Clergy? And we cannot doubt but they would
have acted the same thing for their own Preservation, which they approved and
encouraged others to do.

The Protestants of Saxony and Lantgrave, being seven Princes, and Twenty four
Cities, declare, That the Emperor was reciprocally bound to them as they to
him; and that he had dissolved their Obligation of Allegiance by casting them
out of their Possessions, and endeavoring to destroy their Religion, which
unjust Attempts have not God for their Author: Nor are we otherwise bound to
Caesar than on his performing the Conditions on which he was created Caesar,
Sleidan, lib. 18. The Magdeburg Divines affirm the same, Sleidan, l. 22. Where
the Laws and Constitutions of a Government allow of a defense, the Gospel does
so too, for it does not alter the Laws of a State; which may be an Answer to
what is urged from Romans 13. for the Obligation of all Subjects is such, as the
Laws under which they live do require. The Oath of the Subjects of the King of
Poland has this Salvo in the Oath of the King; Quod si Sacramentum meum
violavero incolae Regni mei nullam nobis obedientiam praestare tenebuntur. In
Richard the Second's time, the Parliament declared in a Statute of Praemunire,
That the Crown of England has been so free (i. e.) from the Encroachments of
the Pope) at all times, that it has been in no Earthly Subjection, but
immediately subject to God in all things touching the Regalty of the Crown; and
God defend (say they) that it should be submitted to the Pope, and the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm be by him defeated and avoided at his pleasure in
perpetual destruction of the Sovereignty of the King, his Crown and Dignity,
and of all the Realm; and therefore they declare, That they and all the Liege
Commons of the Realm will stand with their Lord the King and his Crown and
Regalty in the cases aforesaid (viz. purchasing of Bulls from Rome, executing
Judgments given in that Court, Translating of Bishops, etc.) and in all other
cases attempted against him, and his Crown, and Regalty, in all points to live
and to dye. And they pray the King, and him require by way of Justice, to
Examine all the Lords in Parliament, as well Spiritual as Temporal, severally,
and all the Estates of the Parliament, how they think of the causes aforesaid,
which be so openly against the King's Crown, and in derogation of his Regalty,
and how they will stand with the King in upholding the Rights of the said Crown
and Dignity. And we find by a Letter of King John's to the Pope, That if the
King would, yet the Barons would not submit to King or Pope in those cases. How
contrary to this Statute of Praemunire did they act, that instead of a strict
enquiry after such as endeavored to subject the Nation to the Usurpations of
Rome, did closely and particularly examine both Lords and Commons, whether they
would submit to the introducing that Usurpation, and upon their Refusal, were
presently discharged of their respective Offices, and excluded from the
Prince's favor: Was not this to subvert a Fundamental Constitution of the
Government? And by that Act, to incur a Praemunire. Carpzorius, an approved
Author, de Capital. Caesarea, says, c. 1. p. 15. There is no King or Supreme
Prince in the Christian World, whose Power some certain Compact made with the
several Orders of the People, may not restrain and limit, and which are not
bound by the Capitulation. Reinkinck says the same of the Emperor, de Reg.
Secul. l. 1. Class. 3. p. 76. That Caesar the Head of the Empire, is bound by
the Laws; and how should the King of England be above all the Christian Kings?
It was too much for him to aspire to be like the most Christian King. Henry the
First acknowledged, That if he would (submit to the Pope) his Nobles would not
permit it. And the Lords and Commons under Edward the First, signified to the
Pope (concerning his claim to Scotland) that they neither ought nor would
permit it, although the King should attempt it. And under Henry the Third, it
is recorded, That if the King and Nobles should agree to it, yet the Commons
would not permit the entrance of Adomer, the Pope's Legate, into England.
Bodmin, treating of the King of France (says) Principem contra leges nil posse,
and rescriptis ejus nullam rationem haberi debere nisi aequitate perinde and
veritati consentanea sint. Bracton, of the King of England, says, Rex est sub
lege quia Lex facit Regem. This Bracton, who lived in the Reign of Henry the
Third, was of the judgment, That the Barons had a power to restrain the Kings
Exorbitances, lib. 3. chapter 26. Rex habet superiorem deum item legem per quam
factus est Rex, item Curiam suam (viz.) Comites and Barons suos. The Barons
proceeded in their Wars on this Principle, That they had a power to restrain
their Kings from subverting the Laws and Religion established. And what Opinion
the Religious Men of that Time had of those Wars, may appear by the Opinion
that the Chronicle of Mailros had of Simon of Monfort, of which I have spoken
before. This may suffice to resolve the Conscience in respect of the Law.

Thus have I given an Account of the Judgment of many learned Men concerning
the Queries proposed. How far they may prevail with others I cannot presage.
But I plainly perceive, that many very learned and good Men are yet of another
Opinion; and indeed there are many very difficult Arguments, both from
Scripture and Laws, which by the several Interpretations given of them by
learned Men of this and former Ages, may confirm them in their prejudices.
Therefore my humble Request to them that are yet unsatisfied, is, That laying
aside all Prejudices, they would maturely consider of the Arguments Pro and
Con, and after diligent Enquiry, and hearty Prayers, follow the dictates of a
well-informed Conscience, -- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti si non his utere mecum.
In the mean time let the Apostle's Rule be observed by the Parties of
different Persuasions, Romans 14.1, etc. which he gives in the Chapter
immediately after the Rules for Obedience; Him that is weak in the faith,
receive, but not to doubtful disputations, for one believes that he may eat
all things; another, who is weak, eats herbs. Let not him that eats despise
him that eats not: And let not him that eats not despise him that eats.
Who art thou that judge another man's servant? Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind.

POSTSCRIPT.
THE Arguments that have been proposed, may prevail with some persons to alter
their Judgments concerning their Obligations to the late King, and if so, they
will be sensible of the necessity of transferring their Duty to the Established
Government, which they may do with all cheerfulness and confidence of
Acceptance and Favor; for their present Majesty's cannot but judge, that they
who were so conscientiously Dutiful to the late King, while he kept his Station
among them, though he industriously sought to Ruin them as to their Civil and
Religious Interests, and were doubtful how they might Desert him when he had
abandoned and deserted them; I say, they cannot but judge, upon their engaging
to be true and faithful to them who have redeemed them from Slavery and Popery,
and have adventured all their Substance, and their very Lives, that they might
secure to them their Laws, Liberties and Religion, which doubtless they will
make their chief business, because it is their interest so to do.

As to such who having weighed these Arguments, are yet in Aequilibrio, and
doubt whether the late King or their present Majesty's have the better right;
in such a case a man is to act according to his reason and discretion; and then
though he may be mistaken, yet his mistake is pardonable; now his discretion will
teach him to recollect all the inconveniences and Miseries that will most
probably follow on his refusal to submit to the present Government, if he still
adhere to the interest of the late King, and he should prove successful, then
in all probability he will intail Popery and Slavery, not only on himself and
Family, but on the whole Nation for succeeding Ages, and on the Protestant
Nations throughout all Europe; whereas if he live in due Obedience to the
Established Government; in conjunction with the Body of the Nation, and study
to be quiet, and to do his own business, following Peace and Holiness, all
those Evils may be prevented, and the Lord will bless our Sion, and we may see
the good of Jerusalem all the days of our Life; yea, we may see our childrens
children, and peace upon all the Israel of GOD. These Considerations ought to
turn the Scales which hung in equal balance before. To such a doubting person
I shall propose this Case; Suppose a person that has been given to Quarrels
and Brawels found dead, and some wounds and bruises found by Inquest on his
body, whereby it is presumed that he was murdered, and a Neighbor of his, a
person of a sober and peaceable conversation, being known to have been in his
company near the time and place where he was found dead, is arrained for the
Murder, but no Evidence of the matter of Fact produced against him, only some
probable Circumstances, the question is, whether a Jury man that has only some
Circumstances to guide him in his Verdict, may find such a person Guilty of
that Murder, which if he do, he may draw the Guilt of shedding Innocent Blood
on himself, and undo a Neighbor's Family; I think an Ignoramus would be more
justifiable than a Sentence of Guilt. Where the case is dubious, we should
choose that part which infers the least danger, in case we should err, as
Aristotle says, and thence he concludes, It is much better to Absolve the
Guilty, than to Condemn the Innocent. And, Minus malum rationem induit boni. In
rebus dubiis pars tutior eligenda. I know that Bishop Sanderson in his
Judicium, Ox. p. 44. has determined, That when a King is hindered from
protecting his People, (Culpa non sua sed aliena nec voluntatis defectu sed
potestatis.) for want of Power, we are not freed from our Allegiance, but in
case there is not only a defect of Power to protect us, but a plain declaration
of a Will to destroy us, this will plainly overthrow that determination, as the
Bishop himself has in other of his Writings done: Ubi desunt judicia incipit
bellum. And it is to be considered, that the Bishop wrote this in the Case of
Charles the First, from which this of James the Second differs toto caelo.

To those that are not yet reconciled to the now Established Government, I
shall offer these Considerations:

First, Whether the present King had not a just cause for Invading the Kingdom.
Secondly, Whether having Invaded it, and obtained a full and peaceable
Possession by a general consent of the People, he has obtained a rightful
Title. The Causes that do justify the Invasion are these: 1. The Vindication
of his Lady's Title, which was in a manner endeavored to be ravished from her
by a Prince whose Birth was so much suspected, and whereof the Nation was so
generally convinced. 2. The Invitation of the Subjects, Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, with many Commons, groaning under an Arbitrary Power, Popery and
Slavery, for which cause many Lords and Commons had left the Kingdom, and
sought protection from the present King, and came in with him. 3. The present
King was made the Head of the Protestant Party by those Princes who undertook
the Defense of the Reformed Religion against the Popish Princes that had
confederated to root it out; and a better method could not be taken, than to
begin with England; where, if the designs for Popery had succeeded, the
Protestant Cause had been almost desparate, which is now in a hopeful way of
Establishment: These Causes are so sufficient to justify the Invasion, that I
think no good Protestant will doubt of them; and as little doubt can be made of
the second Consideration, that he who on such just Grounds Invades a Kingdom,
and having gotten a full and quiet Possession, is by the general Consent of the
People accepted and declared their King, has a lawful Right and Title, for
first, Ubi desinunt judicia incipit bellum; and as Law Suits, so War, may be
waged for prevention of Injuries not yet done; As Livy says, Justum est bellum
quod necessarium est and pia Arma quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes;
When it is manifest our sitting still will make our Condition worse, we may
adventure on the danger of War. The War was begun by the French King and his
Confederates against the Prince; England was like to be in the Confederacy by
what the King acted and endeavored against the Protestant Religion: And, Tune
tua res Agitur.

This is the first Cause that Justifies the War on the present King's part; the
second Cause is, the Recovery of the Right which his Lady and himself had to
the Succession, which was in a manner taken from them; Grotius de Jure Belli,
l. 2. c. 1. sect. 2. De rebus repetendis, proves this at large in a
considerable Paragraph to which I refer the Reader: And of this I shall give
but one or two Instances among many in the Scriptures. Abraham's War on the
King of Elam who had spoiled Sodom, was just, Genesis 14. And so were the Wars of
Israel against the Assirians and other Nations that invaded their Dominion, and
would have kept them from them, of this there can be no doubt; nor can,
secondly, the Vindication of a People oppressed by their Prince, against the
Laws of God and the Land; if a Father seek the destruction of an innocent
person, his Son may piously restrain his Father from that act which would not
only ruin the innocent in this World, but himself in the World to come. So
that this War for the asserting the Title of the Prince and Princess to the
Crown, and for the defense of our Religion, against the Confederacy of Popish
Princes to extirpate it, (which is matter of Fact) may appear most Just; for
though Religion may not be propagated by Arms, yet it may be defended where it is
Established by Law, against foreign Powers that conspire the destruction of
it: Grotius l 2. c. 25. n. 4. approves a War on behalf of Confederates, For he
that does not repel an Injury from his Confederates if he can, is as much in
fault as he that does the Injury. He commends Constantine for making War on
Maxentius and Licinius who persecuted such of their Subjects as were
Christians, only for their Religion.

Grotius l. 2. c. 20. n. 39. Injuries begun only, are not to be vindicated by
Arms, unless the matter be both very weighty, and be already proceeded so far,
that from what is already done, either a certain mischief, though not yet what
was intended, has already befallen, or some extraordinary danger do threaten
thereby. If an Enemy has once assaulted me, and comes armed with a resolution
to kill me, I am not to tarry till he comes within reach of me, and receive his
Weapons upon my naked breast, but seasonably to prevent him.

And l. 2. c. 25. n. 8. Those Princes who are free, may make War for themselves
or others: And though we should grant, that Subjects might not take Arms for
their own Defense against their Prince, no not in case of greatest necessity,
(which yet is doubted even by those whose purpose it was to defend Regal Power)
yet it follows not, that other Princes may not take Arms in their defense; that
which is unlawful for one to do for himself, by reason of a personal
impediment, may be lawful for another to do for him.

As in Affairs of the Church the Bishops are said to take on them the care of
the Universal Church, so beside the care of their particular Dominions, Kings
assume the general care of Humane Societies. Seneca resolves, Bello a me peti
potest qui a mea gente sepositus suam exagitat. And Cicero, That War should be
undertaken only that we may live in Peace, and not be injured.

It will be objected, That God will take care of our Religion, Deorum injuriae
diis curae and perjurium satis habet deum ultorem.

Answer, So it may be said of other Sins which God will punish, yet the Laws
are justly executed on the Offenders by the Magistrate, as all grant.

And if it be objected, That such Offenses are punished not so much as
committed against God, as for the damage done to men.

Ans. It is observed, that not only such Offenses are punished by men, as are
directly committed against other men, but such as by consequence may be
prejudicial to others, as Self-murder, Sodomy, etc. for though the principal end
be to procure God's favor, (by punishing such Crimes) yet it is done also to
prevent the influence and notable effects on Humane Societies. See l. 2. c. 20.
n. 44.

It may be farther objected, That if we wholly forsake the King, we shall
justify the Rebellion against King Charles the First, who was charged with
designs of bringing in Popery and Arbitrary Government, Illegal Impositions,
Evil Counselors, etc.

Ans. I suppose the Objectors that are so tender of committing any act of
Disloyalty against King James the Second, will by no means approve of what was
done against King Charles the First; but they are afraid of the reproach and
scandal, as if they did allow of that by doing the like. But the Case is
extremely different, the one King being a well-resolved Protestant, the other a
seduced Papist; Charles the First gave as great assurances of his constancy in
the Protestant Religion, by taking the Holy Sacrament publicly, and purposely
for the satisfaction of his Subjects, by disputing for it against Papists, by
charging his Children against it a little before his death, and even then
giving a full Testimony of dying in it: But James the Second, contrary to his
Education, and his Royal Father's Charge, deserted that Religion, espoused
Popery, and resolved to introduce it to his Kingdom, which he deserted rather
then he would forego that design: His Father lost his life to preserve the
Church and the Established Religion, which King James industriously sought to
destroy, and in fact he had destroyed the Government Established before he
deserted the Kingdom. 2ly, There was a great disparity in their actions; though
Charles the First was unhappily forced from the full Administration of the
Government, and Protection of his Loyal Subjects, yet he kept within the
Kingdom, and endeavored to assert his and his Peoples Rights, not by the Sword
only, but by many Treaties and gracious Condescentions, such as satisfied all
sober persons even among his Adversaries, as by their too late Votes on that
behalf appeared: He did not declare that he was Absolute, and expected
Obedience to his Commands, without any Reserve; he did not Imprison his Bishops
only for Petitioning in a matter of Conscience, as James the Second, and the
Enemies of Charles the First did; Fears and Jealousies, or very light
Impositions on the People for urgent Necessities, were made the Ground of the
War against Charles the First; but real and intolerable Greivances, such as
the Subjects could not bear, nor knew how to remove. 3ly, There is a great
disparity in the adverse Parties, Charles the First was opposed by his
Subjects, James the Second by a free Prince to assert a just Right; the better
part of Charles the First's Subjects adhered to him, and dyed for him, and at
length the whole body of the Nation being convinced of the Injustice of the
War, recalled Charles the Second to succeed his Father: And I hope no man will
compare the Benefits we have received by the present King's proceedings, with
the Mischiefs that we endured, and expected greater not only from the Usurpers
on Charles the First, but the transactions of James the Second. And such
persons do as surely deserve, as they will draw on themselves that Popery and
Slavery which they abhor, who are not satisfied with that happy Deliverance
which they now enjoy, and by their Thankfulness and Obedience to God and the
King, may be confirmed to them and their Posterity; so that I am well
persuaded, that they who engaged against Charles the First, were highly
criminal, and that they who (since James the Second deserted the Kingdom) shall
engage for him, are really peccant.

The second Consideration is, Whether the King having on these grounds begun a
War, and gotten quiet possession of the Kingdom, and by the People
(acknowledging the Right of his Lady to the Succession on the Vacancy by
Desertion) are proclaimed King and Queen, have a just Title, and such as we
ought to swear Allegiance to As to the Vacancy of the Government, I have said
enough already, and all will grant, that if a Crown be Forfeitable, ours was
forfeited: Now in case of this Vacancy, the Right of Succession by our Laws is
in the next Heir, which is the present Queen, and that she ought immediately to
succeed, (because by a Maxim in our Laws, the King never dies) and the sole
Administration is to be in her, and therefore it is objected, That we cannot
swear Faith and true Allegiance to any other. Answ. Seeing all Oaths and Acts
that oblige the Subjects are in the name of the Queen as well as of the King,
we pay our Obedience where it is due; and this may satisfy the Conscience of
every one, as to our present Condition at least, until there be a separation
made. And if the sole Power should be devolved on the present King, the consent
of the next Heir being obtained, to whom is the Injury done? Not to the
Princess Anne, for velenti non fit injuria; not to the People for the same
reason, they having expressed their consent; but this has its President in the
Case of Henry the Seventh, as is already said.

If in discussing the Right of Succession, a question do arise concerning the
Primary Will and Intention of the People at the first Institution of a Kingdom,
it is not amiss to take the Advice of the present People, (i. e.) of the
Nobles, Clergy, and Commons, as Cambden says, of England, Anno 1571, 1572.
Grotius l. 2. c. 7. n. 27. And the Equity of it seems apparent, that he who
redeemed the Crown may wear it by consent of the People, and the consent of the
right Heir; nor can the People be blamed for joining in such consent, because
it has been thought a Duty in Gratitude, that such Heroes as have vindicated a
People from Thraldom, and become great Benefactors to them, have been by
consent of the People acknowledged their Kings. So Aristotle Polit. l. 3. c.
10. n. 89. And in such a juncture of Affairs, the whole Protestant Cause lying
at stake, the Kingdom of Ireland being possessed by Papists, and many Divisions
in our own Nation, there is need of more than the Authority of a single person.
The Act of 13 of Eliz. asserts it to be in the Power of the Parliament to alter
or limit the Succession. And as to matter of fact, such alteration has been
made, for in the Cases of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, the Succession was
altered, because one of them was Illegitimate: Again, Quod fieri non debuit
factum Valet; The necessity of Affairs that enforced it, may speak much in
defense of it; As Josephus says of the Jews submitting to the Roman Emperors,
That having submitted to them, they ought not to make resistance. And if by
tract of time, an Empire which was unjustly acquired, may justly be submitted
to, because of an implicit Consent of the People to such an Empire, I see no
cause but the express actual Consent of a People, to a Prince, may justly
oblige them. Such a Consent of the Senate and People to the Roman Emperors,
was the ground of our Savior's Injunction for paying Tribute, and of the
Apostles requiring Subjection to them: And so we may conclude, as Hushai did, 2 Samuel 16.18. Whom the LORD and this People, and all the Men of Israel shall
choose, his will I be, and with him I will abide.

FINIS.

