NOTITIA HISTORICORUM SELECTORUM, OR Animadversions upon the Ancient AND Famous
GREEK and LATIN HISTORIANS.

Written in French by the Learned FRANCIS LA MOTHE LE VAYER, Councellor of
State to the present French King.

Translated into English, with some Additions By W.D. B. A. Of Magd. Hall, Oxon.

OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, For RIC. DAVIS,
Anno Dom. 1678.

To the Right Honorable JAMES EARL OF DONCASTER Eldest Son to the most noble
Prince JAMES DUKE OF MONMOUTH And Beaucleugh.
My Lord,
YOUR Lordship whose Greatness is to be in Arms, will know how useful a virtue
Ambition is, and forgive my pride who desire to be the first who shall lay
something at Your feet. This Treatise was written to instruct the present
French King when Dauphin in the choice of History, and to recommend to him the
Ancient Writers, who must needs be the best, because they treat of the Ancient
virtue. Your Lordship is the hopes of our Age, and it is the interest of all
that Your tender years should be seasoned with the Love of that Noble study, in
the Greek and Roman Historians. Your Lordship will see what you have to do to
be a Hero, but Your Lordship cannot have a better example of Greatness than
Your Princely Father, who is bold in War, calm in Council, temperate in Peace,
and who like Scipio, is a perfect Commander in the very Spring of his Youth,
but this is too great a Subject for me though none more admires his Virtues,
and more firmly beleives Your Lordship will succeed to all his Glory, than

My Lord Your Lordships most devoted humble and most obedient Servant W. D.

THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR.
I Find my self obliged write a Preface, to give a reason for the order I
observe in the choice of those Historians, whereof I treat. For many persons
till they shall have considered of it, may well wonder, that I make no mention
of some very famous Authors, who are often ranked amongst the Historians. As
Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius, Philost^atus, and Eunapius, of the Greeks, and
Cornelius Nepos, or Aemilius Probus of the Latins, with some Writers of
particular lives, such as Spartian, Lampridius, and others, who compiled the
Volume usually called Historia Augusta. It is certain that most of them did
write very well of the times which they describe, and that the reading of their
books, where we can have no better recourse than to them, ought not to be
neglected. But because none of them compiled a perfect body of History, that
came to our hands, (if it be true that the Chronicles of Cornelius Nepos are
entirely lost;) my design would not allow me to comprise them in this book,
wherein I only pretend to examine those Writers, who have left us more
Universal Histories, and from whom the Laws of History may be best collected. A
true and regular History comprehends much more than the single narration of any
life whatsoever; And I thought I had reason to reject the writers of the
Historia Augusta, for if I had put them in the place where they were to be
inserted, they would not have contributed to my purpose; All that Large Volume
being rather a cold and lifeless Carcass, than a body of animated History, as
it ought to be: The judgment of many of the Learned in that behalf, is suitable
to his opinion who calls them in his Preface, Historiae Dehonestamenta. For
there is nothing to be gained by reading of them in relation to the rules of
History, unless it be in a contrary sense, as by the sound of those bad Players
upon the Flute, which Ismenias made his Scholars to hear, that they might
avoid the faults they observed in his playing. If it be objected that by
omitting these, I might as well have refrained from Suetonius, and Quintus
Curtius, who wrote only Lives; it is easy to show by the inequality of their
labors, to those I decline, that they merited the place they have in this
work. For as to the last, I have not so much considered him as a Writer of the
Life of Alexander the Great, as an Historiographer of that great change and
Translation of the Empire of the Persians, to the Macedonians. And as for
Suetonius, the succession he has left us of twelve Emperors in the space of an
Age and more, puts such a difference between him, and those who only published
separate Lives without any coherence, that the Learned unanimously confer on
him, the Title of an Excellent Historian.

We ought not moreover to esteem all as Historians, who have given the Title of
History to their works, Pliny that wrote the Natural History, cannot properly be
taken for one; And the same may be said of Aristotle and Aelian, though they
compiled Histories of Animals. And if the word Historian were extended as far
is it would reach, Lucan, Silius Italicus, and many other Poets might assume it
in regard of the subject matter of their Poems; upon which nevertheless we have
not thought it convenient to make the least reflection, For we find so little
relation between History and Poetry, that as the one cannot be without Fable,
the other is inconsiderable without truth; and it would be unreasonable not to
make a distinction between things of so different a nature, which have scarce
any thing in common except the double sense of words.

Neither let it be thought strange to see the number of Greek Historians which
I examine, exceed that of the Latins. Which is to be imputed, either to the
injury of time that prevailed more over the latter than the former; or to the
different Genius of the Nations, which gave that advantage to the Greeks, that
although the Roman Empire was after the Grecian, yet the Latins were not so
accurate in writing History, as the Greeks. For we have found some of their
Historians worthy of great consideration even in the time of the Emperor
Justinian, whereas those who wrote in Latin with reputation, do not go beyond
the age of the ^ntonines, where all the Critics with a common consent place
the Old age of Latin History. Yet I have made it descend a little lower, to
place after Justin, Ammianus Marcellinus, who though a Grecian wrote his
History in Latin, in the time of Julian, Jovian, Valentinian, and Valens, where
it ended. If I had not confined my self to the Historians of the first Class
only, I might have made the number of the Latins equal to that of the Greeks,
and deduced History writ in the Roman Language, to Justinian's time, by the
addition of Jorn^naes and Cassiodorus; as I have done the Greeks by my
Reflections on Proco^ius and Agathias. But in the design I had to gather the
necessary precepts to write History well, from the Reflections we might make
upon such of the Ancients as cultivated it with most skill and reputation, I
was content to examine the principal of them, imitating in some manner those
Pirates, who often let Vessels that are light and of small burden pass, to
fall upon the most laden, as on those where there is more to be gained.

Having in some manner justified my proceedings, it is reasonable that I should
acknowledge the great assistance I received from diverse persons who favored my
enterprise. The Two Du Puys were the first who persuaded me to it, and
according to their natural goodness, (which so many Scholars find by daily
experience) assisted me with Books out of three Great Libraries, to wit, the
Kings, that of Monsieur de Thou, and their own. It is certain that the first
could never fall into better hands, and though as all men know it is very
considerable, yet it receives at this day its greatest ornament from their
judicious conduct, whose presence does even animate the books contained in it.
Neither were they content to give me all the help that way I could desire; but
as it is said of Socrates, that he performed the Office of Midwife to the
spiritual deliveries of the most worthy men of Greece, I should be very
ungrateful not to confess, that I am indebted to their Learned conferences, for
all that is good in this Treatise. This comparison, and their backwardness
hitherto in setting out any thing under their own names (although their works,
when exposed to the eye of the world, will meet with an Universal approbation)
puts me in mind of a thought of Pliny the Younger, Ep. 25. l. 7.
on the subject of one of his friends. He says, that they who, though full of
Learning and merit, are nevertheless silent, demonstrate a greater strength of
wit, than many others who cannot forbear to prostitute what they know; Illi qui
tacent hoc amplius praestant, quod maximum opus silentio rever^ntur. In the
next place I must acknowledge the great assistance, I have received from the
Library of the most Eminent Cardinal Mazarin by the means of his Learned
Library Keeper Monsieur Naude, who was pleased to add to the effects of his
ordinary humanity, those of an Ancient and most perfect friendship. As for some
Authors who have anticipated me, in printing of works upon the same subject I
hope I shall not be accused of ingratitude toward them. I have cited Sigon^^s,
^ossi^s, and Balthazar Bonifac^us, who wrote and censured before me the Greek
and Latin Historians* and if I have taken something from them, as it could not
be avoid^d, I did it not like a Theif or Plag^ary, nor without adding something
of my own, which a candid Reader might well expect from a Treatise succeeding
so many others, but with this advantage at least, (as far as I know to be the
first of this nature, that has been seen in French.

I am not ignorant that my work is not of the number of those which please many
people. They that prefer Fabulous Stories before true Narratives, and Romances
before Roman History, will not find content here. I consider herein the
excellent ways used by the Ancients, to instruct us faithfully and
satisfactorily, in those passages of the world which were worthy to be Recorded
to posterity. And thoughts are herein displayed in such a manner, that without
giving a precise judgment, as coming absolutely from me, I leave, without
partiality, free liberty to all men, to contradict my opinions. But though many
perhaps who are short-sighted, will yield freely to those who have better eyes
than themselves, yet very few refer themselves to others in what concerns the
Operations of the mind, wherein every one thinks he is clear sighted, and no
body will acknowledge a Superior. Let not therefore what I expose here but as
doubts grounded upon some appearances of truth, be taken for resolutions. My
friends know why I wrote them. And my comfort is whatever happens, the Labor
was as an honest diversion to me. And if it be true, as Clemens Alexandrinus
asserts, Lib. 1. Strom.
that our Souls are of the nature of Wells, from whence we must always draw
something, to make their waters more wholesome and pure; I do not repent of a
trouble which has been so profitable to me, and which at least has kept my
better part from corruption for want of exercise. To conclude, I should
willingly use in favor of this writing, the same prayer to God, which
Apollonius made to the Sun, when he undertook those long voyages, which
Philostratus describes upon the credit of Damis. Addressing himself to that
great Star, which he held to be the Visible God of Nature, he asked him the
favor to find through the world, the most honest men. If my book were so happy
to have no others to deal with, it would be no small advantage to it. But if
its destiny is otherwise ordained, I must suffer patiently what cannot be
avoided by those who expose any thing to the public.

The Greek Historians.
HErodotus. Page 1. Thucydides. p. 15. Xenophon. p. 26. Polybius. p. 33.
Diodorus Siculus. p. 46. Dionysius Halicarnasseus. p. 58. Josephus. p. 69.
Arrian. p. 83. Appian, p. 93. Dio or Dion Cassius. p. 104. Herodian. p. 116.
Zosimus. p. 126. Procopius. p. 135. Agathias. p. 156.
The Latin Historians.
CRispus Salustius. p. 165. Julius Caesar. p. 180. Titus Livius. p. 188.
Velleius Paterculus. p. 201. Quintus Curtius Rufus. p. 206. Cornelius T^citus
p. 216. Lucius Annaeus Florus. p. 228. Suetonius. p. 234. Justin. p. 240.
Ammianus Marcellinus. p. 248.
IMPRIMATUR,

March. 29 1678. JOH. NICHOLAS Vic. Can. Oxon.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF HERODOTUS.
ALTHOUGH there have been many Greek Historians, who preceeded Herodotus; he is
allowed to be the most Ancient of those whose Works have been preserved to our
time. Pherecydes, Dionysius, Milesius, Hecateas, Xanthus Lydius, Charon of
Lampsacum, Hellanicus, and some others are indeed mentioned to have written
Histories before him: but their writings have been so long lost, L. 1. de leg.
and 2. de Orat.
that Cicero, in his Book de Legibus, acknowledged Herodotus to be the Father
of History: and in another place, for his excellency, he styled him the Prince
of Historians.

They reckon no less than one and twenty Ages from his to ours, for he lived
about four Hundred and Fifty years before the Nativity of Christ: Hellanicus,
and Thucydides were his contemporaries; and they differed so little in Age,
that, L. 15. c. 25. Noct. Act.
as Aulus Gellius reports, Hellantus was but twelve years elder than Herodotus;
and Thucydides but Thirteen years younger. Suidas, Photius, and Marcellinus,
relate a circumstance, which-justifies this, in respect of the two latter: they
write that Herodotus reading his History, in a great Olympic Assembly of all
Greece, Thucydides, (who was then but very young) could not forbear weeping to
hear him: which obliged Herodotus to tell his Father, that he esteemed him very
happy in having a Son, who showed, so early, such a great affection to the
Muses.

I do not affirm by this expression of Herodotus, that he then called the nine
Books, he composed, by the names of the Daughters of Parnassus. L. de scr. hist.
The most probable opinion, and which Lucian seems to uphold, is, that those
Books received their names from the learned, rather than the Author: and we
find many other writings to have been dignified with the like Title, which did
not deserve it so well as these. Dion the Rhetorician composed nine Books,
which were called the Nine Muses, as we learn from Diogenes Laertius. And the
same Author assures us, that the obscure productions of Heraclitus his brain,
In Bion. and Herac.
of which Socrates made no difficulty to confess, that he hardly understood any
thing, were honored nevertheless with the name of the Muses. We read moreover
in the Library of Photius, A Book so called.
that one Cephaleon had compiled an Epitome of History, from Ninus to Alexander
the Great, in nine Sections, divided also between the Nine learned Sisters;
though in a different order from that of Herodotus. Noct. Act. l. 1. c. 25.
And that Aurelius Opilius, quoted some where by Aulus Gellius, who from a
Philosopher, became a Rhetorician, Suet. de ill. Gram. c. 6.
and from a Rhetorician, a Grammarian (so degenerate he was) did not forbear to
do the like, in a Treatise of his, consisting of Nine Books: And few that
converse in ^ooks are ignorant, Photius Sect. 61. de Aesch.
that as the three Orations of Demos^henes his Competitor, had the names of the
Graces, his Nine Epistles received those of the Muses, being the most
illustrious, which could be given them.

But from this inscription of the Muses, some have not forborne to accuse
Herodotus, of being too great a Lover of Fables, and of having made a History,
so Poetical, in favor of the Companions of Apollo, that there is seldom any
truth sound in it. This Faction reproaches him of all the strange things he has
writ, and which have been most doubred of: and insinuates that those words of
the Latin Satyrist, which tax Greek History: -- and quicquid Graecia mendax
Audet in Historia, Juven. Sat. 10.
etc.


Were meant of him, and even Casaubon thought, that Herodotus his relations,
had made his detractors invert, the word delirare, taking for an Etymology,
that which is perhaps, but a simple allusion.

But as he has had accusers, so he has not wanted persons to undertake his
defense: Aldus Manucius, Joachim Camerarius, and Henricus Stephanus have writ
Apologies for him: and the long voyages, as well to the North, as the South,
and the East Indies, which have been made in our days, have very much
justified his writings, to show us that an infinite number of things, that he
writ by the relation of others, and whereof he likewise doubted very much, are
now found to be true. He declares in his Melpomene, on the Subject of those
Phenicians, whom King Necus embarked in the red Sea, and who returned to
Egypt, more than two years after, by the Pillars of Hercules; affirming, that
they had in some of the Coasts of Africa, the Sun on the right hand, that he
could not in any wise believe them; though it is now evident by common
experience, that they could not return from the Erythrean Sea into the
Mediterranean, (as they did,) without doubling the Cape, now called the Cape of
Good Hope, and without having, in that place, the Sun on their right hand, and
their shadow on their left (they being beyond the Tropic of Capricorn.) In the
following book of Terpsichore, he makes those Thracians Liars, who said, that
the Country beyond the River Ister, was full of Bees, for this weak reason,
that Bees cannot live in places so cold as those must needs be. Yet few are
ignorant in our days that Muscovy is full of them, that they often people
whole Forests, where these little Animals, sometimes by their labor, nourish
Bears of an excessive magnitude, which inhabit therein. With the like fear of
being mistaken, he doubted whether he should believe, In Euterp.
that the Isle of Chemnis floated upon a Lake of Egypt, because he faw it not
move, and that it was improbable that an Isle should swim upon water. But not
to speak of the fabulous Symplegades, or Cyaneans, we read that both the
Plinies, Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Theophrastus, and Seneca have witnessed,
that such are found in many places, and that they have seen some in their
agitation. There are some near St Omers; in one of which the Arch Duke
Albertus, and the Infanta of Spain his Duchess, were entertained at a dinner.
And it is no strange thing to the Scotch, to see one of this nature, in their
Lake of Loumond, affording very good pasture ground. L. pen. parag. 2 dig. de
acq. rer. dom.
In fine, their existence is so certain, that the Lawyers Paulus, and Labeo
disputed of the right of their Soil, the first being of opinion, that none had
property in them. Who would not have taken for a Fable, that which the same
Herodotus mentions, in another place, of certain Thracian Women, who contended
among themselves, after the death of their Husband, Iaitio Terpsic.
who should have the Honor to be killed upon his Grave, and buried with him?
If the Portuguese, and other relations had not discovered, that it is a custom
practiced in all the Coast of the Malabares, and almost through all the East,
for Women to cast themselves, of their own accord, and in emulation one of the
other, into the flaming funeral Piles of their deceased husbands.

But as we may perceive by these examples, that Herodotus did hardly ever
expose for certain those things, which he did not perfectly know; though they
were found true, long after the age in which he lived: so we must observe, that
he has been very careful to condemn that which he judged to be manifestly
false, when it appeared to be against the ordinary course of Nature: even so in
his Thalia he laughed at the pretended Arimaspes, who had but one ^ie, and
stole the Gryphons gold in the North. In Melpomene, the following Section, he
does not more favorably deliver the Tale of the Aigipodes, or Goat-footed men:
not what he had read of the Hyperboreans, who sleep six Months of the Year:
though this may probably have respect to the long Nights of those people, who
live under the Arctick Circle, and who pass almost half the year, without
seeing the Sun, whilst they are very near the Pole. When he writes a little
after of one Abaris, who run over all the Earth, without eating, and with an
Arrow, which served him instead of a Pegasus, he relates it as a Fable which
was very famous in his time: but in the same Book, he protests against the
common belief, that there were men, Neighbors to the Scythians, who made
themselves Wolves once a year, and resumed after some days, their human form:
one cannot then say, that he has indifferently mingled truth with Fables,
without distinguishing them; nor that he was a Liar, though he often rehearsed
the Fables of others, which the most exact Laws of History do not forbid: nay
those very Laws oblige us to report the rumors which have been current, and
the different opinions of men, (as he well observed in his Polyhimnia on the
Subject of the Argians) by an Advertisement which may ferve for all his whole
History. Add to this, that Herodotus having been a most Religious observer of
the Divine Worship, of which he made profession (if one may say so of a Pagan)
there is little appearance, that he would charge his conscience with so foul a
crime in an Historian, as false relation: for it appears that he respected so
much the things he thought Divine, though he was an Idolater; that he would
never reveal those Mysteries, which the religion of his time forbad to be
published; although an occasion presented it self in many places of his works.
And one may observe in his Urania, how he makes all the successes of the Naval
fight, wherein Themistocles overcame the Army of Xerxes, to agree with the
Oracles which preceeded, whereof, he affirms, each prediction to have been
punctually accomplished: therefore one, that was so great a friend to Altars,
ought not to be suspected, of having betrayed truth in favor of impostures,
which were no less infamous, or detested in his time than in ours.

Nevertheless though much may be said in his defense; and though he may have
been often slandered, by those whom ignorance, or envy have animated against
him, we find two Authors of so great authority, who have censured him (without
speaking of Harpocration, who made a Book, purposely to defame him) that one
can scarcely pronounce him innocent.

Plutarch is the first, who testified a mavelous resentment, to see Boeotia
his Country so ill used (as he thought) by Herodotus; and the Thebans charged
with an infamy, altogether insupportable, on the subject of the Persian War.
This, he said, was the motive, which induced him, to compose that little
Treatise of the malignity of Herodotus, where he accuses him, of having
maliciously taxed the honor, not only of the Thebans, and Corinthians: but
almost of all the Greeks, to oblige the Medes; and raise the glory of his
Country higher, in the person of Artemisia Queen of Halicarnassus, whose
Heroic actions, in the battle of Salamin, he so exaggerates, that this Lady
alone makes the greatest part of his Narration. Plutarch confesses that, it is
one of the best writ, and most charming pieces that can be read: but adds that
in that agreeable sweetness, Herodotus makes men swallow the poison of his
detraction: and he compares the malignity, which he imputes to him, to
Cantharides covered with Roses. Some write that Plutarch's invective is
accompanied with so much heat, and appears so full of animosity, that he seems
to have all that ill nature himself, with which he endeavors to asperse his
Adversary. But I have too much veneration for that worthy Master of Trajan,
Plutarch was Trajan's Preceptor.
to be fully satisfied with such an answer: and, to say the truth, it is hard
to consider, how Herodotus speaks of Themistocles, especially in his Urania
(where he accuses him of Rapines, and Intelligence with the Persians) without
having at least some suspi^ion of that, which Plutarch delivers for most
certain.

The Second Author of very great importance produced against Herodotus, is Dion
Chrysostomus, who though he was not in particular the Instructor of an
Emperor, does not perhaps deserve less respect than Plutarch, since besides
that he was probably as deep in the affection of Trajan, as the other; by whose
side Suidas witnesses, that he ha^s been often seen in his Chariot: He passed
his life in the instruction of mankind, Traveling through the world, where he
pronounced, in the midst of the greatest Assemblies, those excellent Orations,
which we have of his, to draw men from vices, and to imprint even in their
hearts (if he could) a violent love of Virtue.

We see in his Seven and Thirtieth Oration, that he brings Herodotus to the
Corinthians, to receive from them a recompense for the Greek Histories he had
composed, and wherein they were extremely concerned: He had not yet (says
Dion) falfified them: and because the Corinthians declared that they would not
purchase honor with money, he changed (as was evident) the relation, of what
passed in the Naval Fight of Salamin, accusing Adimantus General of the
Corinthians, of flying in the beginning of the battle, and betraying by that
means the common cause of all Greece. Dion adds a little after, that he could
not allow of what Herodotus has left in writing upon that subject; the public
Epitaphs, and Inscriptions of Sepulchers, erected by the consent of all Greece,
in the Isle of Salamin bearing testimony against him; and he recites part of
the same Epigrams of Symonides the Poet, with which Plutarch used to convince
Herodotus of prevarication, so that the Authority of his Philosophical
profession, joined with so many Monuments, which seem unreproachable, may
reasonably at this day divide our minds in a difference, which those of the
Ancients could never decide.

However after the loss of so many other Histories, is is certain that
Antiquity has left us nothing more instructive, or ingenious, than the Nine
Muses of Herodotus: they contain, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus has well
expressed, the most memorable passages in the world, during Two Handred and
Forty years, beginning from the Empire of Cyrus, first King of Persia, and
continuing till Xerxes his Reign, in whose time he lived, as Photius and
Diodorus Siculus inform us: but the last was mistaken, when he writ that
Herodotus his History extended from the taking of Troy by the Grecians, to the
Reign of Xerxes; which would involve more than Seven Hundred Years. Diodorus
his error proceeded, from our Historians speaking a little in his Preface, of
that Fabulous time; and what was uncertainly reported in his life time of the
Relics of Troy: But there is no reason to make Reflections on so small a
matter, and which does not properly belong to his History. But it may not be
improper to insert a brief account of the Subject, of each of the Nine Books of
our Historiographer, for the clearer illustration of the order of this History.

His First relates the passages in the Kingdom of Lydia, from Gyges to
Croesus, and the minority of Cyrus, with the Commonwealth of Athens, and
Lacedemon.

The Second describes Egypt, and the successions of their Kings.

The Third, the History of Cambyses, and the Election of Darius Hystaspes.

The Fourth, the unfortunate expeditions of Darius into Scythia.

The Fifth, the state of Athens, Lacedemon, and Corinth, in the time of Darius
Hystaspes.

The Sixth, the Original of the Lacedemonian Kings; the Wars of Darius with the
Greeks, and the battle of Marathro.

The Seventh, the expedition of Xerxes into Greece, with the battle of
Thermopile.

The Eighth, the battle at Salamis.

The Ninth, the Battle at Plataea, by which the Persians were expelled Greece.

His Style is rather sweet, large, clear and easy, than high, concise, and
pressing; as that of Thucydides. Dionysius Halicarnasseus who compared these
two Historians together, does almost always allow the advantage to Herodotus:
His Dialect (which was a fashion of speaking, peculiar to each Country where
the Greek tongue was used) is altogether Ionick. And there is found so much
resemblance between him and Homer, that the Sophister Longinus assures us in
his Treatise of the Height of Eloquence, that none, but Herodotus perfectly
imitated that Prince of Poets. and that he alone is (to use his term) (...), so
that it is usual to advise those, who will profit in the understanding of
Homer, first to read Herodotus, to the end that the Prose of the latter, may
prepare an easy access to the Poesy of the former, by the affinity of style
between them. Samos, was the place where Herodotus formed himself to the Ionick
Dialect, and compiled his History (before he retired with a Colony of Athenians
into Thurium, a City of that part of Italy, which was then called Great
Greece) for Suidas his opinion, conformable to this, is more followed, than
that of Pliny who holds that Herodo^us chose the time, Not. Hist. l. 12. c. 4.
and place of his voluntaty exile, to enterprise so great a Work: in which he
is very erroneous; for he had compiled his History long before this retirement,
as is recorded in the Chronicles of Eusebius. It is true he was born in
Halicarnassus, a City of that part of Greece, called Doris, a Region confining
on the Meleans, and because his illustrious birth had engaged him in the
expulsion of the Tyrant of his City, he retired into Thurium, where he died,
according to the opinion of many; there being even some, as Plutarch writes,
that make this place, where he was buried, to be the place of his Nativity. It
is not asserted by all, that the book of Homer's Life, which follows the Ninth
Muse, was composed by Herodotus; but whoever is the Author of it, it is very
ancient, and makes the labor of those men ridiculous, who even at this day,
take great pains to pretend to something more certain, and considerable than is
there writ, touching the Country of Homer. But this matter concerns not his
History, which was happily preserved, notwithstanding the Epitomy of one
Theopompus, whom Suidas mentions: for Justin is accused (though so great an
Author) of having been the cause of the loss of Trogus Pompeius his History:
and the loss of part of the works of Livy, is imputed also to Lucius Florus, by
the Epitomys which both have made, of these great works, which probably had
been preserved, but for their abbreviations.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF THUCYDIDES.
AS those that search for Springs, or conveyers of Water, whom the Latins call
Aquileges, take it for a good Augury, if they see smoke arise out of certain
grounds in the Morning; because it is one of the signs, which makes them hope
to find therein some good, and abounding Springs: so they who understand best
the nature of our Souls: rejoice when they observe, in our tenderest years,
earnest desires of learning; and certain transports of ardour in the pursuit of
Science, from whence they draw almost assured conjectures of the merit of our
minds, and of their future excellence: upon such a conception was founded the
predictions of Herodotus, mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, when he observed
Thucydides moved even to tears, by hearing him recite his rare Treatise of the
Muses, in one of the most celebrated Assemblies of Greece. He took that for a
sign of the growing greatness of his Genius: and as a Thorn pricks, as it
grows, he judged that so extraordinary an emotion, in his tender Age,
proceeding from so rare a Subject, would produce one day something memorable,
and be followed by those ag^reable watchings, and disquiets, which give
Immortality to the learned of Mankind. Thucydides lived about Four hundred and
Thirty years before the Incarnation of Christ Anno Mundi 3520. and as he was a
person of illustrious Birth, and a great Fortune, added to the excellency of
his Indowments, he had no temptation to betray truth, in what he was to deliver
to posterity; and though some have censured the manner of his writeing few ever
questioned the truth of it.

He was rich, and of Royal extraction, but his opulency was augmented by his
Marriage to a very rich Wife, a Daughter of a King of Thrace: and being very
curious to have perfect intelligence of affairs; in order to the compiling of
his History, he employed great sums of money to procure memorials comperent to
his design, not only from the Athenians, but the Lacedaemonians also; that out
of his collections from both, the great Transactions of that might be the
better, and more impartially discovered; as a Monument to instruct the Ages to
come, for he intituleth his History (...). Which signifies a possession for
Everlasting. It comprehends the Peloponnesian War, which lasted one and Twenty
years: for though some Writers make it to continue six years longer, yet
others, and perhaps the more judicious observers do make, what follows in the
succeeding six years after our Historiographer had ended his work, to be rather
the consequences of that War, than truly a part of it: but what was deficient
in the affairs of those years, was since supplied by Theopompus, and treated on
by Xenophon, who begins his History, where Thucydides ended. There are some
Critics, that do not believe his Eighth Book (according to the ordinary
division) to have been written by him: some ascribe it to his Daughter: others
to Xenophon, or Theopompus: but the more discerning part believe the contrary.

When the Peloponnesian War began to break, out, Hobbs in the life of
Thueydides.
Thucydides conjectured truly that it would prove an argument worthy of his
labor; and it no sooner began, than he began his History; pursuing the same
not in that perfect manner, in which we now see it; but by way of Commentary,
or plain Register of the actions and passages thereof, as from time to time
they fell out, and came to his knowledge: but such a Commentary it was, as might
(perhaps) deserve to be preferred before a History written by another: hence it
is very probable, that the Eighth Book is left the same it was, when he first
writ it, neither beautified with Orations, nor so well cemented at the
transitions, as the former seven Books are. And though he began to write as
soon as ever the War was on foot; yet he began not to perfect and polish the
History, till after he was banished, and why he did not refine his last Book
equal to the rest, is not known; for he ourlived the whole War as appears by
what he relates in his fifth Book, where he says, he lived in banishment
Twenty years, after his charge at Amphipolis, which was in the Eighth year of
that Wat, which in the whole, by the largest computation lasted but seven and
twenty years.

It is hard to judge, whether the method and disposition of the History, or the
Style of it, be most to be praised; since he has in both showed himself so
great a Master, that none that have writ since, have exceeded him in either. As
to the disposition, we shall in this place only observe, that in his first
Book, he has first, by way of proposition, derived the State of Greece from
its Infancy, to the vigorous stature it then was at, when he began to write:
and next declares the causes both real, and pretended, of the War whereof he
was to write: In the rest, in which he handles the War it self, he follows
distinctly and purely the order of time throughout, relating what came to pass
from year to year, and subdividing each year into a Summer, and a Winter. The
grounds and motives of every action he sets down before the action it self,
either narratively, or in the form of deliberative Orations, in the persons of
such, as from time to time bare sway in the Common Wealth. After the actions,
when there is just occasion, he gives his judgment of them, showing by what
means the success came, either to be furthered, or hindered.

His style is better discovered, by what the most excellent of the ancient
Writers have expressed of it, than by my Pen. Cicero, in his second Book de
Oratore, writes thus; Thucydides, (in my opinion) in the art of expression,
exceeded all that went before; for he so abounds in matter, that the number of
his sentences, does almost equal the number of his words: and in them he is so
apt, and so concise, that one cannot discern, whether his words do more
illustrate his sentences, or his sentences, his words. As for his Dialect, it
is purely Attick, and Photius judges, that as Herodotus should be a rule to
such as would be perfect in the Ionick style: so Thucydides is the most
excellent example, one can propose to himself, of a language purely Attick. He
is reproached nevertheless, of having too much affected the reviving of ancient
words, which were, even in his time, obsolete, and of having likewise taken a
liberty to compose new ones; which has contributed much to render him sometimes
so obscure, that even his contemporaries complained, that he was in some places
scarce intelligible to his readers. But Marcellinus, who described his life,
has writ in his defense, that he affected obscurity, and rendered himself
purposely not intelligible, that he might be only understood by the learned:
yet this obscurity is not found in the narratives of things done, or in the
description of places, or of battles, in all which he is most perspicuous, as
Plutarch testifies of him. In the Characters of men's humors, and manners, and
applying them to affairs of consequence, it is almost impossible, not to be
obscure, to ordinary capacities, in what words soever one deliver his mind. It
therefore Thucydides in his Orations, or in the description of a (...), or
other thing of that kind, be not easily understood; it is of those only that
cannot penetrate into the nature of such things, and not from his intricacy of
expression.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus observes, that Herodotus has great advantages over
Thucydides, in the choice of the Subjects whereof they both treated; for the
extent of the matter treated of by the first, is more diffused; and therefore
seems more agreeable then that of the latter. His aim is to relare all the most
memorable things, done by the Greeks, and Barbarians, during the space of two
or three hundred years, which comprehends so many great actions, so various,
and worthy to be known, that the relation of them cannot but be grateful to the
reader. Whereas Thucydides has shut himself up, almost to the space of seven
and twenty years, which is not only a very narrow compass; but also the most
unfortunate, he could choose in all the Greek History: which contains few
memorable actions, and those grievous to have been recorded to posterity. The
same Dionysius finds much fault with the order, Thucydides uses in the
distribution of his matter, representing, by half years, all that happened in
diverse places; without mingling the successes of the Winter, with those of the
Summer, so that he is found to leave things imperfect, to pass to others, which
make the memory of the former lost, when he proceeds to continue the History to
the following half year. And Monsieur de la Mothe le Vayer, our Author,
improves this reflection of Dionysius; certainly (says he) there is nothing
troubles the mind more than this interruption; and he never reaps any profit
from an Historical narration, who does not end the things he treats of, till he
has jumbled together an infinite number of actions. This is good (continues he)
in nothing but Romances, where this artifice is purposely used to render their
faults less apparent; but truth loves to show it self altogether and entire,
which Herodotus knew how to practice incomparably better than any one. He never
leaves an event, till he has represented it as far as it extends, and when he
has fully contended the curiosity of his Reader, he passes so well to other
successes; or as the Rhetoricians say, uses such due and fit transitions, that
the mind is carried on, not only without resistance, but even with pleasure and
transport. But Mr. Hobbs, who has more curiously than any, considered the
History of Thucydides, very fully answers these objections: To the first he
says, that the principal and most necessary office of him that will write a
History, is to take such an argument, as is both within his power well to
handle, and profitable to posterity that shall read it: which he says
Thucydides has done better then Herodotus. For Herodotus undertook to write of
those things, of which it was impossible for him to know the truth: but
Thucydides writes of one War, the beginning and conclusion whereof he was
certainly able to inform himself: and by propounding in his proem the miseries
of it, he shows it was a great War, and worthy not to be concealed from
posterity; for men profit more by looking at adverse events, than on those that
are prosperous.

To the second, namely the order of distribution, he says, whoever shall read
the History of Thucydides attentively, shall more distinctly conceive of every
action this way, than the other: and the method is more natural; for as much as
his purpose being to write of one Peloponnesian War, he has this way
incorporated all the parts thereof into one body, so that there is unity in the
whole; and the several narations are conceived only as parts of that. Whereas
the (...) way he had but sowed together many little Histories, and left the
Peloponnsian War (which he took for his Subject) in a manner unwritten; for
neither any part, nor the whole, could justly have carried such a Title.

The same Mr. Hobbs, who mentions many other objections of Dionysius against
Thucydides, and fully and learnedly answers them; does arraign him for his
censures, as done rather to purchase glory to himself in the action, than to
instruct Mankind. For having first preferred Herodotus: his Countryman a
Halycarnassean, before Thucydides, who was accounted, even by himself, the best
of all Historians that ever writ: and then, conceiving that his own History
might be thought, not inferior to that of Herodotus, by this computation, he
saw the honor of the best Historiographer falling on himself; wherein he has
manifestly misreckoned in the opinion of all the learned.

Thucydides has the advantage, of having first thought upon the animation of
History, that was before a body languishing; which appears in his exact
Orations, composed in all the three sorts of Oratory; the demonstrative, the
deliberative, and the Judicial: Herodotus had attempted the same thing; but he
was content to use some oblique speeches, and those almost ever imperfect,
never proceeding so far as Thucydides, who, in this way of writing, left
nothing to be objected against by the severest Orators. And it is said that
Demosthenes was so well pleased with his History, that he took the pains to
transcribe it Eight times.

By the consent of all he has the glory of not mingling Fables, with his true
Narrations. If he is constrained to say a word of Tereus King of Thrace; and
Progne in his Second Book: or if in describing Sicily, in the beginning of the
Sixth, he finds himself obliged to speak of the Cyclops, and Laestrigones, as
Ancient Inhabitants of a part thereof, it is so lightly: that the Dogs of Egypt
touch not so hastily the water of Nilus, whose Crocodiles they fear, as he
passes nimbly over a fabulous circumstance, to avoid the least entrance of a
lie into his writings. And yet he has not been so happy, to be without the
reproach, of not having always spoken truth: for Josephus affirms that he was
taxed of having falsified his History in many places: but at the same time he
accuses all the Grecians of imposture; and if one observes the commendation, he
gives him afterward, of having been the most exact, and cautious of all his
Countrymen, in compiling a History; it will appear, rather to proceed from the
capricious humor of his Sect, than the demerit of an Historiographer: for as
he was a Jew, who made it his business to discredit all Pagan History, he
thought he ought to say something, to the prejudice of Thucydides, when he had
spared none of the rest. I shall add here, that Thucydides did not only lay
down in his History all sorts of Orations, as we before observed; but took the
liberty to insert Dialogues, as that betwixt the Athenian Generals, and the
Inhabitants of the Isle of Melos, which comprehends a great part of the fifth
Book to the end. But those, that have an aversion to digressions, have no
reason to hare them in this Author, who touches them with great Art; as
amongst others the conspiracy of Harmodius, and Aristogiton, in the sixth Book,
which may justify many other excursions, or like Sallies, that are often
censured with two little reason: and notwithstanding all his defects, the most
judicious of the learned yield him the prize of Eloquence: and not one of the
Ancients deny him the glory, of having seconded Pindar, in the Grandeur and
Majesty of expression.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF XENOPHON.
XENOPHON does not owe the fame, he has had so many Ages, to History alone; for
Philosophy and Arms have contributed to it: and I believe that, for these three
Qualifications, he may be as well termed Ter Maximus: For Hermes was so called,
because he was a King, a Priest, and a Philosopher.
Trismegistus, as Hermes the Egyptian; since he is universally acknowledged,
to be a very great Captain, Philosopher, and Historiographer. He has, common
with Caesar, the first and last Qualities; and they are not deceived, who find
a third resemblance in their style; Purity, Eloquence, and sweetness being
equally natural to them both. They have each an agreeable manner of expression,
without art, or affectation; though no art or affectation can come near it. The
Surname of Apes Attica, and Athenian Muse, with which all the Ancients have
dignified Xenophon, is not only a witness, Xenophon. it is sermo est quidem me^le
dulcior. Tullius lib. de Clar. oratoribus ad Brutum. Et eodem libro p^^lo
inferius scribit, Xenophontis vote musas quasi locutas fer^^t.
of the beauty of his language, and of that hony-like sweetness, which the
Graces seem to have poured on it, with their own hands, (to speak like
Quintilian) but it is a particular mark of his Attick Dialect, wherein he
excelled so much, that Diogenos Laertius, writing his life, gives no other
reason for the bad intelligence, that was between him, and Plato, than the
jealousy they conceived, one against the other, upon that account. Yet
Marcellinus, who attributes to Thucydides, in his Elogy, the height of
Eloquence, gives the lowest rank to Xenophon, placing Herodotus between both:
and Dionysius Halicarnasseus, when he observes that Xenophon has often imitated
Herodotus, adds, that the former was always much inferior to the latter.

But notwithstanding this, it is very considerable, that Xenophon was the first
Philosopher, who applied himself to the compiling of a History, which, in what
relates to the Grecian affairs, treats of the Transactions of eight and forty
years; and begins where Thucydides ended: showing Aleibiades his return to his
Country, whom Thucydides, in his last Book, left meditating upon that retreat.
Nor is it a small glory to Xenophon; but a proof of extraordinary Honesty, to
have freely exposed, to the public, the writings of Thucydides, which he might
have suppressed, or delivered as his own, if he would have been a Plagiary, and
have ascribed, to himself, the works of another, which many others have done,
and do daily practice. Besides the continuation of the History begun by
Thucydides, Xenophon has left us, that of the enterprise of young Cyrus,
against his brother Artaxerxes, and the memorable retreat, of ten thousand
Graecians, from the extremities of Persia, to their own Country; in which he
had almost the whole honor, as well for his council, and discipline, as the
excellency of his conduct.

What he writ, of the institution of the Elder Cyrus ille a Xenophonte, non ad
Historiae fidem scriptus est, sed ad effigiem^ Justi Imperii Tullius ad Quintum
Fratrem.
Cyrus, is not an historical Treatise, but purely Moral, where he drew the
figure of a great Prince, without confining himself to the truth, except of two
or three events ( viz.) the taking of Babylon; and the captivity of Craesus.
All the rest is feigned, and has nothing in it commendable, but the
agreeableness of the Fable: as Hermogenes has well observed, on the subject of
Panthea's death, who slew her self, with three Eunuchs, upon the body of her
Husband Abradatus, in the seventh Book of that institution.

These compositions of Xenophon, of which we have spoken, are such, that as
they may serve for a rule, to the first Ministers of State, in all the extent
of Politics (according to the excellent judgment, which Dion Chrysostomus
makes of them) so likewise they are capable, to form great Captains, and give
the world Generals; and we have two notable examples of this, among the Romans:
for they acknowledge, that their Scipio, Cicer. 2. Tusc. quae.
surnamed Africanus, had, almost always, Xenophons works, in his hands, and
that nothing* made Lucullus capable to oppose such a formidable enemy, as King
Mithridatos; but the reading the writings of Xenophon. Whereof Lueullus made so
good use by Sea, (he who before had a very small insight, into the affairs of
War) that he knew enough afterward, to gain those famous Victories, which few
of the learned are ignorant of, and whereby the most considerable Provinces of
Asia, became tributary to the Romans.

Xenophon has writ upon diverse Subjects; and it seems that, in many of them,
there has been Emulation, between him and Plato, for they both composed, a
defense of Socrates; and many other moral, and politic Treatises, according to
the observation of Diogenes, in Plato's life, without any mentioning, one
another, with reciprocal praise, whatsoever occasion presented it self, among
so many Dialogues by them exposed, in the name of Socrates with his Disciples.
Some will have it, that Xenophon represented, in very lively colors, the
defects of one Menon a Thessalian, in the end of the Second Book of Cyrus his
expedition; for no other reason, than that he was a friend to Plato. But as for
that other Book, de Libellus de Aequivocis Voss. de hist. graet. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Aequivocis, printed an Age ago, under the name of Xenophon, it is to be held,
one of the impostures of Annius Viterbius. In like manner, some would have a
certain suppositious History, of the Siege of Troy, to pass for current, under
the name of one Dictys Cretensis, a Companion of Idomeneus, and of one Dares a
Phrygian: and that it was translated, out of Greek, into Latin, by Cornelius
Nepos; when the Style bewraies, that he never thought upon the work; for it has
nothing of that inimitable purity, and eloquence, which appears, in his lives
of the Greek Captains, and in that of Atticus, writ by the same Author: such
impostures are offensive, and cannot be too much derested, by the Lovers of
truth. And yet some there are, so led away by their affection for Fables, that
they feed themselves with such trifles, and so build upon those idle
foundations; as thereby to encourage others, to impose the like chears upon
Mankind. We have lately seen, the Itinerary of Alexander Geraldin, Bishop of
St. Dominick, who pretends, to have found, over all Aethiopia, on this, and the
other side of the Line, Roman Inscriptions, and Antiquities of such value; that
all others, which the rest of the Earth affords, would be despicable, if the
worst of his were true: But it is observable, that none before, or after him,
ever saw them: nor is there any Scholar, so unexperienced in this sort of
reading, that cannot easily discover, the falsehood of his observations, so
unlikely they are. Is it not a great impertinence to raise pillars, to testify
the Conquest, and absolute dominion of the Romans, in places, where apparently,
none of them ever set foot: and in direct opposition, to all we have from their
own Histories? The same judgment is to be made, of those Hetruscian or Tuscan
Antiquities, which we have of a fresher date, from one Inghiramius; whose
impudence is unpardonable, for deceiving the world at such a rate. And perhaps
it were not unfit to have punishments established, to signalise the infamy, of
those that dare expose, to the public, spiritual Aliments, so corrupted and
Mortal as those are; for no poison operates with more violence, and bad effects
upon the body, then errors and impostures, upon our minds, Speron. Speroni
dial. di Xenoph.
when we are infected with them.

An Author, of the last Age, accuses Xenophon, of having loved Agesilaus, so
passionately, Unus Xenophontis libellus, in eo rege laudando, facile omneis
imagines omnium, flatuasque superavit. Tullii Epistol. lib. 5. ad Q. filium.
that not only, in his Book which he writ of his praise, but likewise, in his
History, he makes rash judgments in his favor, and extols his Victories, much
more than the Laws of History will permit. But this Capricio of an Italian,
will be approved of by very few, because it arraigns the judgment of all
Antiquity, which never spoke so much to the disadvantage of Xenophon. And
Tully, who mentions his praise of that Prince, does not accuse him of any
indecency in it.

As for his Style, one may see, what Hermogenes writes of it, who commends it,
especially for its sweetness, and simplicity, which he makes, one of the
principal Ornaments of Language; and in this respect; he, by much, prefers
Xenophon, to Plato.

He was, by Birth, an Athenian, and the Son, of one Grillus, and lived, about
four hundred years, before the Nativity of Christ.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF POLYBIUS.
AS Xenophon was the first Philosopher, that applied himself to write
Histories, so Polybius has the advantage to have given us the most considerable
one extant: and made it appear, more clearly, than any other Historiographer,
that History is, as it were, the Metropolitan of Philosophy; Diod. Sic. initio
lib. 1.
to use the terms of the Historian, of whom we shall write, in the Chapter
following. But what is said of Polybius, might be more reasonably admitted, if
the whole body of his works, were now extant, of which only the least part
remains; since of forty Books, which he composed, there are, but the five
first, entire; with the Epitomy of the following twelve, which is continued, to
the beginning of the Eighteenth. Many are of opinion, that this Epitomy was
writ, by the great assertour of Roman Liberty, Marcus Brutus, because it is
known, that he delighted, in nothing, so much as in reading History, being a
man, so difficult to please, that Cicero's works did not affect him, and
therefore he employed his leisure, in Epitomising the History of Polybius,
finding therein, besides that instruction wherewith it abounded, the
consolation, he needed, in the last, and most unfortunate days of his life.
The Subject of this History, were all the most considerable actions in the
world, from the beginning of the second Punick War, to the end of that, which
terminated the differences, of the Romans, with the Macedonian Kings, by the
utter ruin of their Monarchy. This includes the space of Three and Fifty
years, the events of which, Polybius showed, in the last Eight and Thirty
Books: for the Two first, are not so much of the body of his History, as they
serve for a preparative, in a summary narration, of the taking of Rome, by the
Gauls, under the conduct of Brannus, and of that which followed, until the
first year, of the second War, against the Carthaginians. But though the
affairs, of the Roman Empire, were much more exactly described by him; than the
rest of those, that writ of that Subject; because his chief aim was to omit
nothing, that might give a perfect information of them: yet he neglected not
also to represent the concerns, of all the other powers of the Universe,
unsolding the interests, of the Kings of Syria, Egypt, Macedon, Pontus,
Cappadocia, and Persia, with those of all the different Dynasties, which were
then in Greece. And therefore he gave, the name of Catholic or Universal, to
his History, as informing us of the destinies of all the Nations of the Earth:
there being scarce any at that time which had not some difference with, or
dependence on the Romans. He received, at his Birth, great gifts from Nature,
which favored his enterprise: and that chance of fortune, which made him come
to Rome, was no small advantage to him; since he is indebted to it, not only
for the best part of his learning, but the important friendship, he contracted
with Scipio, and Lelius, which contributed much to the celebration of his
History, to posterity. But the pains, he took in the acquisition of all, that
could put him in a capacity of writing it well, and laboring for eternity,
seems worthy to be considered. He thought it was required of a good
Historiographer, to have seen the best part of those things he related, A.
Gellius Noct.
according to the Erymologie of the name, given by the Grecians, to that
profession. He knew the errors, At. l. 5. c. 18.
which the ignorance of places, made Timeas commit: for he reproached him, in
his Twelfth Book, that having trusted, to the reports of others, and not
traveled himself, he might be proved guilty of many errors. And possibly
having learned the Latin Tongue, with great care, he remembered the expressions,
which Plautus (who lived an Age before him) makes Messenio say to Menechmus,
that unless they had a design to write a history, he thought, they had seen
enough of the World.

-- Quin nos hinc domum
Redimus, nisi si Historiam scripturi sumus.
So much they, at that time, thought travel necessary to an Historiographer,
who could make no exact description, nor be confident of the authority of his
memorials, from whatsoever place he should have them, if he had not rectified
them, by his own sight, viewing himself the Countries, he intended to treat of.
Polybius resolved therefore, to know exactly many places, as well of Europe, as
Asia, and Africa; whether he went purposely, to be assured of what he might
write of them. And he used Scipio's Authority, to procure Vessels, fit to Sail
on the Atlantic Ocean, judging that, what he should there observe might prove
useful to his intentions. It is certain, that he passed the Alps, and one part
of the Gauls, to represent truly Hannibals passage into Italy, and fearing to
omit the least circumstance, of the same Scipio's actions, he traveled all
over Spain, and stopped particularly at new Carthage, that he might carefully
study the situation of it. But now we are mentioning, the famous Subverter of
Carthage, Scipio Aemilianus Grand Son, by adoption, of Scipio Africanus (who
vanquished Hannibal, after he had compelled him to leave Italy) it may not be
improper to insert, what Polybius himself left in writing, concerning the
strict friendship, which was between them two* shall borrow the discourse of
it, from a fragment of his one and thirtieth Book, taken from the Collections,
of Constantinus Porphyrogennetus, under the Title, of Vice, and Virtue; he
tells in that place, that this reciprocal affection had its rise, from the
pleasure they took together, to talk of books, and communicate them one to
another. This was the reason why Scipio employed all his own, and his Brother
Fabius his credit, to obtain leave for Polybius, to live at Rome, when the
other Grecians (which were sent for, as well as he, to remain as Hostages) were
distributed through all the rest of the Cities in Italy. One day, when they had
Dined all. Three together, Scipio, being alone with Polybius, after dinner
(blushing a little) complained to him, that he always addressed his speech at
Table to his Brother. Perhaps, said he, you do it, because you see me less
active than he; and that I am careless to seek fame by public pleading, A
custom in use amongst the greatest of the Roman Nobility.
in which the Youth of this City employ their time, and by this measure, you,
and many others of my friends, may conceive amiss of me, which will be no small
trouble to me. Polybius soon perceived the commendable jealousy of Scipio, who
was not full Eighteen years old, and assuring him, of the esteem he had of his
person, as one most worthy to bear the many illustrious names, which his
Predecessors had left him, he excused himself, in respect of Fabius, to whom,
he said, being the eldest, civility often required him to direct his discourse,
which he prayed him not to apprehend amiss in him: and after this little
expostulation, which was followed by a mutual protestation of good will, Scipio
never received any one, into sucst a strict of Cordial familiarity, Lelius
excepted, as he did Polybius.

I thought the circumstances of this conference, between Two such great men, so
much the more considerable, besides that thereby we make some discovery of
their Genius, which always appears, more in a private discourse, than in any
the most serious actions, that I may, by this instance, refute the impertinence
of a modern Writer, who had the impudence, to make many injurious reflections
on Polybius. It is one Sebastian Maccius, that treating of History, and
declaming against digressions, took occasion, to condemn those of Salust and
Polybius, indecently calling them, base conditioned Fellows, and men, sprung
out of the dregs of the People. And the more to defame the latter, he
particularly adds, that he was a mere pedant, given to Scipio, to serve him, in
the Quality of a Preceptor. But this is too malicious, to pass without an
answer, on Polybius his account, deferring, what may be said in behalf of
Salust, till we treat of the Latin Historians. None that converse with Books
can be ignorant, that Polybius was of Megalopolis, a City in Arcadia: and that
he was Son, of Lycortas, General of the Achaians, which was the most puissant
Republic then in Greece. That great State sent them, both Father and Son, in
Quality of Ambassadors, to King Ptolomaeus surnamed Epiphanes; and the Son had
afterward the same Honor, when he was deputed, to go to the Roman Consul,
which made War upon King Perseus in Thessaly. His Birth then was very
illustrious, contrary to what was said, by Maccius, and it is not probable,
that a person, so exercised in the affairs of State, and accustomed to great
emploiments, as Polybius was, should be known to Scipio, for no other purpose,
than to instruct him in the Rudiments of Grammar. Nor has any, but this
detractor, had so lewd an imagination of him. All the Ancients, who writ of
Polybius, have done it, with great commendations, and many of them esteemed
Scipio, for nothing more, than his choice of so faithful a Counselor, and his
carrying him with him, in all his military expeditions. Cicer. l. 1.
Cato reproached a Roman Consul, Tusc. quae.
for having had a Poet, amongst those of his train, when he went to visit a
Province, out of Italy. I will not say, he showed in that too much of the
Philosophical severity, of which he made profession; though it is said, that he
would himself, sometimes, quit that humor, when he feasted with his friends:
but it is certain, that no man ever found fault, with the choice, Scipio made,
of the person of Polybius, to accompany him, for he was neither considered as a
Poet: nor mere Grammarian, if to be such may be accounted faults, the fragment
we quoted is express enough, to assure us of the contrary, in pursuance indeed
of the discourse he used, to please Scipio, he added, that neither his Brother
Fabius; nor he, should ever want instructors, in what related to letters, which
he might decently enough say, considering the great number of learned men,
which came daily to Rome, from all parts of Greece: and in further compliance
with him, that no man should be more zealous, or industrious, than he, to
improve his thoughts to things worthy of his Birth, and what might be expected
from a successor of the Scipio's and Aemylii. Constantinus Porphyrogennetus ut
supra.
After this conference, says my Author, Polybius was hardly ever out of
Scipio's company, who communicated to him his most important affairs, and made
use of his Counsel, in all the occurrences of the great emploiments he had. But
who can be safe from the insolence of detractors, when there will be found,
some that vilify this great Historian, though he was honored, in Inscriptions,
and Statues, by his Countrymen, who best knew his Quality (as may be seen in
Pausanias) to acknowledge thereby, In Arcad.
the esteem they had of his benefits and rare merit.

There might perhaps be more reason, to lay to his charge, as some have done,
his not having been religious enough, in his devotion to the Deity; for though
he speaks, in many places, very advantagiously of the worship of the Gods; as
when he attributes all the glory of Arcadia his Country, to the great care they
had, to serve the Altars: and else here professes, that he abhors the
outragiousness of War, that causes the destruction of Temples, which he makes
to be a most capital crime. Yet he declares so formally, in another place,
against the Divinity, and all those, which in his time, held the opinion, of
the pains of Hell, that it appears evidently, he believed nothing thereof. And
about the end of his Sixth Book, he observes, that superstition, which was
accounted a vice by all other Nations, past for a Virtue, among the Romans. If
one could, says he, compose a Republic, only of wise and virtuous men; all
those fabulous opinions, of Gods, and Hell, would be altogether superfluous:
But since there is no State, where the people are not (as we see them) subject,
to all sorts of irregularities, and evil actions, one must, to bridle them,
make use of those imaginary fears, that our Religion imprints, and the panick
terrors of the other world, which the Ancients have so prudently introduced to
this end that they cannot be contradicted now by any but rash persons, or those
who are not well in their Wits. Let them who defend Polybius in every thing (as
Casaubon has done) say what they please, on his behalf, they can never make him
pass (after so formal a Declaration) for a man, very zealous in the Religion of
his time. They would, perhaps, do him better service, to speak of him, as of a
Soul, illuminated by Heaven, in the darkness of Paganism: and who believing,
but in one Principle, or only Deity, laughed at all those, which the Idolatry
then reigning, made to be adored, as well as at the Elysian Fields, Gerberus,
and Rhadamantus, which were represented to those Proselites. Thus, in my
opinion, he may be best acquitted (if it be possible) of the crime of impiety,
putting him, in the rank of Heraclitus, and Socrates, whom, St. Justin more
charitably, than perhaps truly, maintains to be Christians, long before
Christianity.

Besides the Forty Books of his Universal History, Lib. 5. Ep.
it is credible, by one of the Letters, which Cicero writ to Lucceius, that he
made a particular Treatise of the War of Numantia. In Macr.
His great Age furnished him with the convenience to write much, since we
understand, from Lucian, that he passed the great Climacterical year, and died
not, till he was Eighty two years old, about Two Hundred and Thirty years,
before Christ. He confesses himself, that the advice of Lelius, which he often
required in their ordinary conferences, and the memorials, which that great
person furnished him withal; were very advantageous to him. But, as to his
manner of writing, the Ancients agree not, that he ought to be accounted,
eloquent. Dionysius Halicarnasseus, the most strict and austere critic among
them, names him impolite, and reproaches him with negligence, both in the
choice of words, and structure or composition of his periods. His excellency is
nevertheless such, in all other things, that one ought to think, that he
neglected words, as of little importance, to tie himself entirely, to things
more serious. Titus Livius is not thought very ingenious, Vossius de hist.
graetis c. 19.
to give him only the commendation, of a Writer not to be despised, since whole
books of his, are seen transcribed, word for word, in his Decades. It is sure,
we have no Historian, of whom one may learn more, in matter of government, and
civil prudence, than of Polybius. He does not think a simple narration
sufficient, but moves pathetically; and instructs no less like a Philosopher,
than an Historian. Patritius is mistaken, to reprehend him for that method of
writing, without considering the affinity, which has always been, between
History, and Philosophy, which is such, that the former, has been often defined
to be, a Philosophy filled with examples. Perhaps, a mere Commentator is
condemnable, when he acts the Philosopher too much, and stretches so far that
way; which cannot be said of one, that undertakes to write a just History. We
learn from Suidas, that one Scylax (whom he confounds, with a certain
Mathematician of that name) made an invective against Polybius, which was not,
possibly, more reasonable, than the censure of the forementioned Patritius. I
cannot also be reconciled to those, who are scandalized, that he called, one of
the Capes or Promontories of Sicily, Pelorus, long before that name was imposed
on it. For, treating of the first Punick War, he calls the place, Pelorus,
where that innocent Pilot was interred, whom Hannibal slew, long after, so
unjustly, and which gave, it is name of Pelorus, to the Promontory now called
Capo di Faro (if this Etymology, which is combated by the learned Cluverius,
may be received.) However it is a way of speaking, which the Compilers of the
holy Scriptures practiced when it was necessary to make a thing better
understood. He is, it may be, not excusable, for having, contrary to the truth
of History, flattered his Scipio, to that degree, as to make him exercise a
memorable example of continency, toward the fair Spanish Captive, with whom
nevertheless he was so taken, that he could never resolve to restore her.
Valerius Antias is he, who charges him with this crime, L. 6. Noct.
in Aulus Gellius; which seems to me so much the more strange; Act. c. 8.
because Polybius compared History (which has not truth for a Guide) to an
Animal, Lib. 1. hist.
whose Eyes are put out, and he pretended, after Timaeus, to render truth, Tr.
of Hist. upon Sand.
as essential to an History, as rectitude to a Rule; in which resemblance, he
may be reasonably contradicted, as I remember, I have done in another work. The
great affection, he had for Scipio, puts me in mind of the excellent counsel he
gave him, that whenever he went abroad, he should never return to his House,
till he had first endeavored, to gain the friendship of some particular
person, by obliging him all the ways, that lay in his power. And although this
was a very useful advice, to him that received it, I mention it, in this place,
to show the great humanity, which appeared, in him that gave it. We are
indebted, to Pope Nicolus the Fifth, that great friend of the Muses, and
restorer of letters, for the first publication of the Works of Polybius, at
that time, when the Turks invaded Constantinople, though they are much
augmented since in the latter Editions.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF DIODORUS SICULUS.
CLUVERIUS, one of the most exact of our modern Geographers, teaches us that
Agyrium (of which Diodorus Siculus speaks, as of the place of his birth) is now
called San Filippo d' Agyrone. It is a great honor to this little place, to
have given to its Isle such a person, without whom no body would know its
Antiquity; nor many things which render it very considerable. He says in the
beginning of his History (which stands instead of a preface to it) that he was
no less than Thirty years in writing it, Rome.
in the Capital City of the World, where he gathered Notions, which he could
not have elsewhere; confessing that the vastness of the Roman Empire had
extremely favored his design. But nevertheless he did not omit to go himself,
through the greatest part, of the Provinces of Europe, and Asia: where he was
in many dangers, and endured extreme labor, that he might not commit the
faults, which he had remarked (as he says) in those, who had meddled to speak
of places, where they had never been. It does not appear in that place, that he
saw Afric, and yet we read in the second Section of his first Book, that he
traveled to Egypt, in the reign of that Ptolomy, who is distinguished from
the rest, by the Surname of new Bacchus, or Dionysius, and who was the first
Husband of his Sister Cleopatra: whereby one may note, that the best part of
Egypt was formerly, of Asia, when the Geographers divided it, from Africa,
rather by the Nile, than the Red Sea.

It is not without reason, that Diodorus gave his work, the name of an
Historical Library, since, when it was entire, it had united in one, according
to the order of times, all that which other Historians have writ separately:
for he had comprised in Forty Books, whereof we have but Fifteen remaining, the
most remarkable passages in the World, during the space of Eleven Hundred and
Eight and Thirty years, without reckoning, what was comprehended, in his six
first books of the more fabulous times, that is to say, of all which had
preceded the War of Troy. His History is then truly, Ecumenical or Universal,
and we ought, so much the more, to bewail what is wanting, since, after the
loss of Berosus, Theopompus, Ephorus, Philistius, Callisthenes, Timaeus, and
such other great Authors, the reading of Diodorus alone, repaired in some
manner our damage, having compiled, and digested all their works, in his
Library. Of the Six first Books before mentioned, the last is no where to be
found, although Raphael Volaterranus, and some others, quote it sometimes, as
if we had it yet. But if one observes exactly, it will be found, that they
misreckon in their account; and that what they report to be in the Sixth, is in
the precedent Book, which Diodorus names, the Insular, and which is only the
Fifth. The error proceeds from the first impression, which was all Latin, and
wherein Poggius Florentinus, Author of the translation, which Pope Nicolaus
Quintus desired of him, made Two Books of the first, because Diodorus divided
it into Two different Sections: By this means the second became the Third; and
consequently that which was but the fifth, was taken for the sixth, as if we
had lost no more, of the fabulous Antiquities of Greece, The Greeks called all
Nations, but themselves, by that name.
contained in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth book, than of those of the
Barbarians, which we have entire, in the first, second, and third.

The remainder of Diodorus his Library consists in Two parts; which are squared
by Two Epochies of note. The first reaches from the destruction of Troy, to the
death of Alexander the Great: for the understanding whereof, and all which
happend in the world during that time, he employed Eleven whole Books, which
are from the Sixth to the beginning of the Eighteenth; of this number the four
first are lost, but we have the other Seven remaining. The Second Epoche
stretches from the time in which the first ended, to that of the Conquests of
Julius Caesar in Gallia; when he made England, and the British Ocean, the
limits of the Roman Empire, on the North side. The mavelous successes of all
this interval, were described in Three and Twenty Books; but there remains no
more, than the Eighteenth, the Nineteenth, and the Twentieth, to our time: the
others unto the Fortieth being all lost, except some small fragments, taken
from Eusebius, Photius, and some others, who used Diodorus his Text, in their
works. Henricus Stephanus affirms, out of a Letter communicated to him by Mr
Lazaro Baif, that all the works of Diodorus are found entire, in some corner of
Sicily. I confess I would willingly go, almost to the end of the World, if I
thought to find there so great a Treasure. And I shall envy those, that will
come after us, this important discovery, if it shall be made, when we shall be
no more, and that instead of Fifteen Books only, which we now enjoy, they shall
possess the whole Forty.

Since Diodorus speaks of Julius Caesar, which he does in more than one place,
and always with an attribute of some Divinity, as it is the custom of the
Pagans, he cannot be more Ancient than he; which is about Forty Eight years,
before the Nativity of Christ. But when Eusebius writes in his Chronicles, that
Diodorus Sieulus lived under this Emperor, it seems that he limits the life of
the former, with the reign of the latter. Yet Suidas prolongs his days even to
Augustus. And Scaliger very well observes, in his animadversions upon Eusebius,
that Diodorus must needs have lived to a very great Age, and that he was alive
at least half the Reign of Augustus, since he mentions, on the subject of the
Olympiads, Ad annum Number. 1567.
the Romans Bissextil year, which name was not used, before the Fasts, and
Calendar were corrected, which was done by Octavius Augustus, to ma^ke the work
of his Predecessor more perfect. We have at this time, in the last impression
of Diodorus, a Fragment of his Seven and Thirtieth Book, which would remove all
this difficulty, if it were true: for in it is seen the death of Caesar,
revenged by the Triumvirat, on Brutus, and Cassius, with the fall of Anthony,
and the establishing of Augustus in the Empire, for all his life. This would
infer that Diodorus lived longer, than Augustus. But that collection, which is
somewhat larger in Photius, shows by those whom he calls Illustrious, by a
Title unknown in the Age of Diodorus, that another was the Author of it, or
that his Text has received additions from some one, who lived long after his
time, whence consequently we cannot make any certain conclusion.

The time of these Two Emperors Caesar and Augustus, is indeed the Age of the
best Latin, as all, who understand it, agree: but not so of Greek; because,
even in their time, the Athenian Eloquence was already transferred to Rome, and
that faculty, which delights in command, had quitted the vanquished, to follow
the fortune of the victorious, taking their habit, and Language. It is no
wonder then, that Diodorus is not equal, in this respect, to Herodotus,
Thucydides, or Xenophon, bing a Sicilian only, and having, added to that, the
disadvantage to write in such a season. Photins nevertheless does not forbear
to praise his Style, as being very clear, unaffected, and very proper for his
Subject, which is History. It is (says he) neither too Attick, nor too full of
Ancient words. His manner of writing has a just mediocrity, between the most
high Style, and the other, which the School calls humble and creeping, for its
lowness, which is always avoided by Diodorus. There is certainly more reason
to credit, Photius Meth. hist. c. 5.
that learned Patriarch of Constantinople, who was a most exact critic in his
Tongue, than John Bodin, who though he understood Greek much less, ventures to
give a quite contrary judgment, and reprehend the words, as well as the Style
of Diodorus; as if a stranger, at this day, could say any thing worthy
consideration, in that matter, after what has been said by the Ancients, and
contrary to the opinion of those, to whom Greek was a maternal language.

Nor is there more heed to be taken, 5. disc. de trad.
to the invective of Lodovicus Vives, the Spaniard, against Diodorus, than to
that of Bodin, the French man. The last blames even the expressions, and words:
the first arraigns the body of his History, and the things whereof his
narration is composed. If we believe Vives, there is nothing more vain, than
the Historical Library, of our Sicilian; and Pliny was much to blame, in his
opinion, to say in his Preface, that Diodorus, was the first of the Greeks, who
spoke seriously, and abstained from writing trifles, I know, the Authority of
this accuser, is not small, he being very learned, in respect of his Age, and
one of the ornaments of his Country: neither am I ignorant that others besides
him, as Pighius, and Sigonius, complained of the faults, which Diodorus
committed in Chronology, for having followed bad computations. And I consider
that Vives, having commented, on the Books of St Augustine, Lib. 18.
de Civitate Dei, remarked in them, Cap. 40.
how that great Doctor of the Church, laughed at the Egyptians, who said, that
they had Records, in their Books, a hundred thousand years old, to which
Diodorus his Text is not repugnant: nay he goes farther than this, when he
makes mention, Lib. 2.
of the great knowledge of Heavenly things, which the Chaldeans had acquired,
who bragged that they had made observations upon them, for the space of four
hundred seventy and two thousand years, before the conquests, of Alexander the
Great in Asia. He had already said, Lib. 1.
that the Egyptians reckoned, some Ten, and others of them, Three and twenty
thousand years, from Isis, and Osiris, to the same Alexander: and that their
first Kings, who were Gods, did each of them Reign, no less than Twelve Hundred
years. This is doubtless that account, which Vives could not suffer, and which
provoked him, to declare so highly, against Diodorus, who will not allow him,
to have been praised by Pliny, for any other thing, than the Title of his
History, which is indeed, neither improper, nor ridiculous, as many of those
were, which the other Grecians ordinarily gave to their Books.

But if that may be said to be the only occasion, which moved Pliny, to
pronounce this fair Elogy, of our Historian (viz.) Primus apud Graecos desciit
nugari Diodorus, yet it was always favorably interpreted, to extend to his
whole composition, and it is a kind of injustice to affirm, as Vives did, that
there is nothing more vain, not less solid, than his History. As for the
Egyptian Ephemerides, and the Astronomical calculations, of the Chaldeans, they
are inferted, only to show what was the common belief of those people, not
arguing, that he gave any credit to them. He is so far from it, that he says
expressly, in his Second Book, that he cannot possibly acquiese, to what the
College of Chaldeans had determined, of the long space of time, which preceded
the Victories of Alexander. I am so far from condemning the Fables, and
excellent Mythology, in the Five first Books of Diodorus, that in my opinion,
we have nothing more precious, in all that remains of Antiquity: for besides
that Fables may be told seriously, and that Plato's Timaeus, with several other
works of very great consideration, should be rejected, if they were absolutely
unnecessary, it is to be said of these, that they teach us, the whole Theology
of the Idolaters. And if it were lawful, to give a Holy name, to a profane
thing, I might call the Five forementioned Books, the Bible of Paganism, since
they teach us at the first sight, what the Gentiles believed of Eternity, and
the Creation of the World: and the birth of the first men, is therein
afterward described, according to the pure Light of Nature; So that they
represent to us so well, all the Theogony of the Egyptians, whence that of the
Greeks drew its Original, that without Diodorus, we should be ignorant, of what
is most curious, in that sort of knowledge. Nevertheless he is not the first
Infidel, that began his History, with the Original of all things, as well as
Moses, with the Creation of the World. The name, or inscription of his History.
For he himself teaches us, in the fifth Book, of his Bibliotheca, that,
Anaximenes of Lampsacum, had not writ the first of any (as some have ill
translated it) but the first History of Greece; because he took it from the
birth of the Gods, and the infamy of Mankind (to speak like him) continuing it
to the famous battle of Mantinea, and the glorious death of Epaminondas:
however since our evil destiny would not permit the others labors to come to
us; I believe we cannot, at this day, have too great an esteem for those of
Diodorus, which it has not envied us, nor too much retort the injurious
censure of Vives, and such like.

But in this we do no more, than follow, the opinion of most men of letters,
not only Ethnicks, Paraen. ad Gr.
but even Christians also. Jnstin Martyr calls Diodorus, in several places, the
most renowned, and esteemed, of all the Greek Historians: and proves by his
writings, the excellence and Antiqnity, of the Great Law giver of the Hebrews,
and when he would insinuate, that Homer had learned, in Egypt, the most refined
things, he put into his Poesy, he uses for it the Authority of Diodorus, whom
he does not name without praise. And Eusebius goes beyond Justin Martyr, both
in Titles of Honor, and in citations of passages, drawn from our Historian,
with which he fills, all the books of his Evangelical preparation. And when he
treats, of the beginning of the world, and of what the Ancients believed, of
the Sun, and Moon, and of the custom, which the Carthaginians had, to
Sacrifice men, and of infinite other Subjects, which fall into his principal
design, he always alleges Diodorus, but he does it chiefly, when he examins
the Theology of the Egyptians, in his Second Book, where he very much extols
the fame of him: he calls him a most illustrious Writer, most exact in his
Narrations, and one esteemed by all learned men for his profound doctrine, and
he adds, that there is no Grecian, who is not desirous to read him, by a common
approbation, and preference to the rest of their Authors. But when he insists
in his Tenth Book of the same work, that Greece had received, from the hands of
those it esteemed barbarous, and particularly from the Jews, all the Sciences
and learning, for which it had so great a value; it is in that he attributes
the greatest Honor to him. For after having used the Testimonies of St
Clement, Porphyrius, Plato, Democritus, Heraclitus, Josephus, and such like
Authors, of the first Class, he finishes his proof with a Quotation, out of
the first Book of that incomparable History: to the end (says he) that the
Authority of Diodorus, may be as a Seal, to all my demonstration. To say the
truth, he has a mavelous advantage given him by Eusebius, to be cited, and
put expressly after the rest, to show how much he is esteemed by him: in the
same manner, as Archirects place that Stone last, which is called the Key of
the Arch, and which conduces no less to the solidity, than the ornament of the
whole Edifice.

This is that, which I purposed to add to the suffrages of Pliny, and Photius,
in favor of our Historian, for fear that the ill terms, which Bodin, and
Vives, used against him, should be prejudicial to his fame. If I had reason to
blame him, it should be much rather, for the great superstition, in which he
abounds, in all his writings, as well as Titus Livius, amongst the Latins, than
for his bad Greek, or for having handled his subject ill, whereof those
indecent Critics accuse him, there being no reason to diminish his reputation,
in that regard.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF DIONYSIUS HALICARNASSEUS.
IF Dionysius Halicarnasseus had not said himself, in the beginning of his
History, that he lived in the Emperor Augustus his time (in whose Regin our
Savior was born) Strabo would teach it us, in the Fourteenth Book of his
Georgraphy, where speaking of the City of Halicarnassus, he observes that it
bestowed on the world, Two great persons, Herodotus, and in our time (says he)
Dionysius the Historiographer. So that since Strabo witnesses, in that same
work, that he had it in hand, under Augustus, and Tiberius, we are certain,
that Dionysius Halicarnasseus was also of the same Age, which is, as all know,
one of those, which most favored learning, and learned men.

Suidas names among many Writers, who bore the name of Dionysius, another
besides him, we speak of, who was of Halicarnassus also, and of his Posterity;
and appeared, under the Emperor Adrian, with the Surname of Musicus, because
though he was an Orator, his principal Talent lay in Music, of which he
composed many Books; and among others, one wherein he interpreted all the
places, of Plato's Republic, which could not be well understood, without a
particular understanding of that Art. That which makes me say, that this other
Dionysius was descended from the first, is, that the same Suidas says, that
from Dionysius, the Historian, came one Dionysius (whom he calls) Atticista,
who lived under Adrian, and had writ a Lexicon of the Attick words, as may be
seen in the Hundred and Two and Fiftieth Section of Photius. For my part, I am
easily persuaded, that this Atticist, and Musician, are but one, since they are
both mentioned to be under one Emperor. As for our Historian, he came to Rome,
a little after Augustus had happily finished the Civil Wars, and sojourned
there Two and Twenty whole years, learning the Latin Tongue, and making his
provision of necessaries to the design, he had of writing his History.

He read to this end all Books, which are called Commentaries and Annals, made
by those Romans, who had writ with some reputation, about the concerns of their
State, as old Cato, Pabius Maximus, Valerius Antias, Licinius Macer, and some
others. But acknowledges, that the conversation he had with the worthy men, of
that Capital City of the world, and his conferences with an infinite number of
learned men there, were not less servicable to him, than all the other
diligence he could use. His History was of the Roman Antiquities, which he
comprised in Twenty Books, whereof there remains no more, than the first
Eleven, to this Age, which conclude with the time, when the Consuls resumed the
chief Authority in the Republic, after the government of the Decemviri, which
happened, Three Hundred and Twelve years after the foundation of Rome. The
whole work comprehended much more; for it passed from the taking of Troy, over
the fabulous, and Historical time, to the beginning of the first Punick War;
ending where Polybius beings his History, near Two Hundred years later, than
what we even now mentioned.

Whereupon, it behooves us to observe the error of Sigismond Gelenius, who
imagined that Dionysius Halicarnasseus, whom he has translated very well, never
ended his work, and that death hindered him from composing above Eleven Books,
of the Twenty, he promised to give to the Public. When Stephanus, a Greek
Author, who writ of Cities, quotes the Sixteenth and Twentieth Book, of the
Roman Antiquities, of our Dionysius: and Photius says, in his Bibliotheca,
that he read all the Twenty Books, giving the last the same ending, which we
assigned unto it.

This learned Patriarch assures us also, Photius.
that he saw the compendium, or synopsis, which Dionysius made of his own
History, which he reduced into Five Books, with much Eloquence, but it was not
agreeable to a Reader, because of the strict Retrenchment of all he thought not
absolutely necessary. The loss of that Epitomy would be less sensible, if we
had the first composition entire; which has received so much approbation,
especially in respect of the calculation of times, and what relates to
Chronology, that all Critics prefer, in this point, Dionysius Halicarnasseus,
before Titus Livius. And Scaliger confesses, in his Animadversions upon
Eusebius, that we have no Author remaining, who has so well kept the order of
years.

As for his Style, Photius considers it, as extraordinary and new, but
accompanied with a simplicity, which renders it delightful: and he adds, that
the Elegancy of his discourse or phrase corrects and softens all the roughness
which is sometimes found in his speech. He commends him also very much, for
having understood how to use many digressions, which retain, and recreate the
mind of the Reader, when the evenness of an Historical narration, begins to be
redious and wearisom to him.

And certainly it is not to be imagined, that a man of that reputation, which
Dionysius Halicarnasseus had acquired in learning, could produce any thing,
which was not very polite, and worthy of his name. We have his compositions of
Rhetoric; and the most subtle Critics place him, in the first rank of those
who delighted in that sort of study: and though there were no more to be said
of him, than the request that was made him, by Pompey the Great, to give him
his judgment, on the first Greek Historians, and especially on Herodotus, and
Xenophon; it shows sufficiently the esteem, wherein he lived in his time, and
of what Authority he was in Rome, among the learned; when Pompey chose him, out
of so many others, to inform him therein.

If there be any thing which may be found fault with, either in that letter,
which he addresses to Ammaea, and Tubero, or in others upon the same matter, it
is that he was too exact, and rigorous therein, giving Laws to Eloqueuce, so
full of severity, that they take from it, one of the best parts, which is the
generous liberty, whereof it has always made profession. In effect he often
straightens that noble Art so much, that he deprives it, almost of all its
reality, and reduces it to a simple Idea, without hopes that it can be
practiced by any one, for the future: so that one may say, according to the
strictness of his Maxims, there was never any perfect Historian, nor true
Orator. If one studies his precepts of Rhetoric, upon all the sorts of
Oration, his characters of the Ancients, wherein he shows what one ought to
imitate in them, and what to avoid; with his other Treatise, made to instruct
us how to examine their Writings; the truth of what I have said will appear, and
the Spleen of this Critic will be discovered, who found fault with the Style
of Plato. This was one of the occasions of a letter, which Pompey taking
Plato's parr, writ to him. And we see by Dionysius his answer, that although to
content Pompey, he professes himself, an admirer of Plato, he forbears not to
prefer Demosthenes to him, protesting, that it was only to give the whole
advantage to the latter, that he exercised his censure, against the former.
Nevertheless it appears, that at another season he spared his Demosthenes, no
more than the rest, so prone was his inclination to carping: because after he
had conceived things in the highest perfection, he pretended to find nothing,
which was not far beneath them, and which did not consequently displease him.

But since it is not our intention to consider him here, so much an Orator, as
an Historian, Let us be content to make some observations, on his Roman
Antiquities, to be acquainted with his judgment, concerning the principal
matters of History.

We have already seen, that he was no Enemy to digressions, when we said, that
Photius drew one of the greatest causes to praise him, from his making such
good use of them. And that which he makes, in his Seventh Book, to describe the
whole course of the Tyranny; of Aristodemus, surnamed Mollis, shows that he
thought them, one of the Ornaments of History. The long Orations of Tullus
Hostilius, and Metius Suffetius in the Third Book, with others of Servius
Tullius which are in the Fourth, make it also appear sufficiently, that he did
not condemn, as some have done, all sort of direct Orations; though he has
elsewhere blamed the bad ones. He is not content, in his Fifth Book, to praise
P. Valerius Publicola, but takes occasion thereupon, to prescribe it to
Historians, not to represent, the brave and glorious actions of illustrious
men, in their Histories, without making their particular and Domestic virtues
appear, accompanied with their merited praises: which is directly contrary to
the opinion of those, who would have them refrain, from all things that may
excite the passions, least they thereby invade the Province of an Orator. In
the same Book, on the Subject, of the Conspiracy of the Tarquins, detected, and
severely punished, by the Consul Sulpitius, he delivers another important
precept, to those who write History, not to set down barely, in their
narratives, the issue of things, but to represent them always, jointly with
their causes, and the means which were used to make them succeed, not
forgetting the least circumstances; nay to penetrate, if it be possible, into
the Counsels of the first Authors, and those who had the greatest share in the
execution. But though Dionysius Halicarnasseus reproved Theopompus, for having
employed some comparisons to no purpose, he does not judge them to be all
faulty, for he makes use of them sometimes, and of those Parallels, or
affinities of actions, which many cannot endure. Thus, on the Subject of
Tarquin, who to answer the Servant of his Son, Lib. 4.
beat down in his presence, the heads of those Poppies, which were higher than
the rest: he remarks, that Thrasybulus had practiced the same thing, toward
Periander, pulling up, before his Messenger, those Ears of Corn, which
over^opped the rest. Lib. 5.
And treating of the creation, and absolute power of the Roman Dictators, he
observes, that this Magistracy was probably instituted, in imitation of the
Greeks: because the Inhabitants of Mitylene, Urbs maxima Lesbi, juxta Methymnum.
now called Metelin, had formerly raised P^ttacus, one of the Seven Sages, to a
like dignity (which they limited to a certain time only) in an expedition,
against some persons, banished from their State, who were companions to the
Poet Alcaeus.

As these opinions, which we have examined elsewhere, more amply than here,
seem to me very receivable; so we must, on the contrary, take heed of many
improbable Tales, which he relates sometimes with too much assurance. He makes
a Rasor cut a Wherstone in two of them, Lib. 3^
by the command of the Augur, Navius Actius, and represents Castor, and Pollux,
fighting for the Romans, Lib. 6.
against the Latins; and the Rivers, Vulturnus, Lib. 7.
and Glanis, to remount to their Source, in favor of the Inhabitants of C^m^.
Lib. 8.
And relates, that a Statue, of the Goddess Fortune, pronounces twice these
words, rite me Matronae dedicastis, according to the words of the Annals, which
he thought himself obliged to rehearse: and he would have had reason for it,
Lib. 5.
if he had left us some hint, not to believe it; as he might have done perhaps,
if it would have been permitted. But there is not a worse Relation, in the
Roman History, than the action of Cloelia, as he represents it. He reports,
that this Roman Virgin, who was given in hostage, with many others, to Porsen^,
King of the Hetruscians, returned with all her companions, from the Tuscan
Camp, into the City of Rome, swimming over the River Tiber, wherein they had
asked leave to bath themselves; as if it were possible, that fearful Women, and
who had not learned to Swim, durst but look upon such a River, with design to
pass it, and cast themselves desperately into it, without any necessity, the
peace being almost then concluded. For though Plutarch describes the place, in
the life of Publicola, so very agreeable, and convenient to bath in, yet he
acknowledges, that the River was very Rapid, and deep. I confess Livy writes
with no more likelihood, Dec. 1. l. 2.
when he tells the same story; and that Plutarch does no more than doubt, of
that of Cloelia, who, as many reported, passed the Tiber, by her self, on
Horseback, thereby encouraging the rest of her Companions, to Swim over it.
Nevertheless I dare say, that the report of Valerius Maximus, has much more
appearance of truth in it, than what the others related, though he was less
obliged than they, to follow it strictly, since he was not an Historian, and
his Subject engaged him only, to enrich (and if we may say so) to illustrate,
with fine colors, such memorable actions. He writes that Cloelia, under the
favor of a dark Night, escaped from the Enemies Camp, mounted on a Horse,
which bare her, to the other side of the Tiber, amongst her friends: and the
Statue Equestris which was raised to her, and which they all mention, would
even force them to be of this opinion, if they had not rather chose to follow
the most popular rumor, and that which rendered their narration more
agreeable, because it seemed extraordinary, and mavelous; wherein, it is
almost incredible, how much the greater part of Historians transgress.

I will not forget, for a Corollary, to what is above expressed, that by the
consent of all learned men, Dionysius Halicarnesseus unfolds the Roman
Antiquities, not only in respect of time, as before mentioned, but also in
what relates to matter, much better, than any of the Latin Historians have
done. For his being a stranger, was so far from being prejudicial to him, that
upon that account, he made it his business, to observe an infinite number, of
the most curious particulars, of the Roman State, that are found in his Books,
and which we do not learn, in their own Authors; either because they neglected
to write, that which was familiar to them, which they thought, all the World
knew; as well as themselves; or because this Grecian was more careful, and
diligent, than they, to seek after that, which might best conduce, to make all
the circumstances of their affairs, known to Posterity. And it is a great glory
to him, to have surpassed them all in things, wherein they ought to have had
such great advantage over him.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF JOSEPHUS.
A Certain Roman Consul was derided heretofore, Aulus Albinus.
for writing a History in Greek; who, to excuse the impurity of his language,
alleged in his Preface, that he was born in Italy, where nothing but Latin was
spoken. Which Cato reading, scoffingly said, That Author was very ridiculous,
Maluisti culpam deprecari, quam culpa vacare. A. Gell. l. 11. c. 8. in Ca^.
who chose rather to ask pardon for a fault, than to avoid it, when nothing
obliged him to do it; and the offense was not committed when he asked
forgiveness. Plutarch relates this after another manner, and will have Cato
pronounce, the Consul most worthy of excuse; if he could make it appear, that
he was forced to write in Greek, by a Decree of the Amphictyones. This
ingenious reflection which imports, that an excuse is always unreasonable,
when it is not necessary, cannot be applied to Josephus: because, though as a
Jew, he was as great a stranger to the Greek Tongue, as the person before
mentioned, he was compelled to make use of it, or the Latin, to be understood
by the Grecians and Romans, for whom principally, in his Prologue to the
Judaick War, he declares that he set Pen to Paper. Few are ignorant, that those
Nations had no esteem, for the Hebrew Language, and it is evident, that when
the Great Captain Hannibal, Aemil. Prob. in. Hann.
to recreate himself, had a mind to set down in writing, the actions of Cn.
Manlius Volso, in Asia, he did it not, in the Punick or Carthaginian Tongue,
which was a Dialect of the Hebrew, but in Greek (that he had learned of the
Historian, Sofilius of Lacedaemon, his Master) that his work might be
understood in the world. Josephus, who had the same design, found himself
obliged to write in Greek, which was familiar enough to him, because he had
been conversant in the greatest part of Syria. Moreover, had he been equally
skilled in these Two Tongues, he ought to have preferred, as he did, the Greek,
which was then Mistress of all Science, and so much valued at Rome, for that
reason, that some Roman Citizens chose rather in their writings, Urbs Latii,
una exceleberri^is, in Finibus Aequo^um.
to express themselves in Greek, than Latin. Such a one was Aelianus, who soon
after Josephus, under the Emperors* Nerva, Trajanus, and Adrianus, writ de
Animalibus, de varia Historia, de Re Militari and some other Treatises. He was
born in Praeneste, and therefore reputed a Roman, having composed his works in
Greek, in such rare expressions, that Philostratus affirmed (after he had
placed him among his Sophisters) that his Phrase was no less Attick, than that
which was spoken, by the most Mediterranean, in the Attick Territory (to use
his own terms.) As for Josophus, his Style is very clear, if we may believe
Photius; and with a great purity he joins, to the weight of his reasons, the
force and elegancy of Expression: so that he is, as this Father relates, very
dexrerous, as well in moving passions, as in allaying them, when he judges it
requisite. Nor is it a small honor to him, to be so succesful in a foreign
Tongue, as to have purchased such high praise, as is attributed by the learned
to him. But we must not forget that besides his merit this way, Hist. Eccles.
lib. 3. cap. 9.
Eusebius reports, that he exposed his Books of the Jewish Wars, and
Antiquities, in Hebrew, as well as in Greek, that they might be useful to more
People.

His Extraction was very illustrious, as well on his Fathers side, who came
from the High Priests of Jerusalem, as on his Mothers, who was of the Royal
Blood, of the Asamoneans or Machabees. He came into the World, in the time of
Caligula, about the Thirty Ninth year, of the Incarnation of Christ; and was in
it, under Domitian, so that he lived, during the Reign of Nine Emperors at
least. When he was Six and Twenty years old, he made a voyage into Italy, in
favor of some Ecclesiastics of his Nation, whom Felix, Nomine Aliturus.
Vossius de Histor. Graecis l. ^. c. 8.
Governor of Judaea, had sent Prisoners to Rome. A Jewish Comedian, beloved by
Nero, supported him at Court, and brought him acquainted likewise, with the
Empress Poppaea Augusta, from whom he received some benefit: so that having
brought his business to a happy issue, he returned with content, into
Palaestine. The Factions, which were then in the Holy Land, made him be chosen
Captain of the Galileans, a charge which he executed most worthily, until
Jotapata was taken, where he was reduced to cast himself into a Well, which had
already served for a retreat, to Forty of his Soldiers, wherein he suffered
mavelous extremities, but at last he became Prisoner to the Romans. In that
time of his Captivity, he foretold to Vespasian, his exaltation to the Empire,
and that he would soon deliver him from his bonds, as Suetonius reports, in the
life of this Emperor, Cap. 5.
and as Josephus writes himself, in the Third Book, and Fourteenth Chapter, of
the Jewish War. He shows also his deliverance, in the Fifth Book, and Twelfth
Chapter, after that Vespasian had found the truth of his Predictions. Lib. 5.
hist. I* Vesp. c. 4.
What the profane Historians, such as Tacitus, and Suetonius, relate
conformable to this, deserves our observation for they affirm, that all the
Provinces of the East, were then firmly possessed with a belief, that they, to
whom the Destinies, and Sacred Writs had promised the Empire of the World,
should at that time come from Judaea. The Jews, and Josephus amongst the rest,
interpreted what regarded the true Messiah, of Vespasian and his Son Titus,
because of the victories they had newly gained over them, and the unmeasurable
extent, of the Roman Empire. And it happened that after his deliverance from
his imprisonment, he was Spectator of the taking of Jerusalem, by the same
Titus, and composed since as an Eiewitness, the Seven Books, of the Judaick War
of which he made to him, and Vespasian who was then living, such an agreeable
present, that Titus caused them to be put into the Public Library, Ah ^o
acceperit Epistolas septuaginta^duas etc. Vos. loco citato.
subscribed and approved of, by his own hand. Josephus adds in his own Life,
which he himself has given us in writing, that King Agrippa had testified unto
him by many latters, that he held him for the truest Author; of all those who
enterprised to treat of the affairs of their country. He was an Egyptian born
in Oasis a City of Egypt, and Alexandrinus vocari gaudebat, Vossius de script
graecis l. 2. c. 7.
Being returned to Rome with Vespasian, he lived there under his protection and
that of his Two Sons, gratified with their Pensions, and with the condition of
a free Citizen of Rome, and many other benefits, which gave him means to finish
peaceably under D^mitian his Twenty Books of the Jewish Antiquities, from the
Creation of the World, to the Twelfth year of the Empire of Nero.

His Two Books against Apion Plistonices are made in favor of the Jews, whom
this same Apion Surnamed also Grammaticus, had defamed as much as he could, in
a work he published, being sent Deputy to Rome, to the disadvantage of Philo
and his Countrymen. But the discourse of the Empire of Reason, or the Martydom
of the Machabees, is the most eloquent of all the pieces writ by Josephus. As
for the Treatise of his life, he composed it in imitation of many great Men,
who had done the like thing before him, and have been imitated by many others.
For passing by Moses, who alone, filled with the Spirit of God, writ not only
his Life, but Death; it is known, that a little before Josephus, the Emperors
Augustus, Tiberius, and Claudius, were pleased to leave the platform of their
lives to Posterity, traced with their own Pens: Agrippina Mother of Nero, did
no less, as Tacitus reports. And private persons such as Sylla, Varro, Rutilius
Rufus, Aemilius Scaurus, and Nicolaus Damascenus, had already practiced that
sort of writing. If we must mention others who exercised themselves therein,
since Josephus, we shall name in the first place the Emperors Adriaanus, Marcus
Antoninus, and Severus; secondly, to draw nearer to these Times, Aegyptii op.
inter Pelusium and Memphin.
James King of Arragon, Maximilian the first, the Abbot Trithemius, Cardanus,
and Augustus de Thou, who have all written Books of their own Lives.

But there is no small difference at this day, between learned Men, touching
the credit Josephus his History ought to have amongst us. For if we refer our
selves to Maldonat, Melchior Canus, Pererius, Salmeron, Baronius, Salian and
some others, we should have no value for all his labor, which they defame as
full of Anachronisms in the Calculation of times, and Fables in the Narration
of things. Baronius amongst the rest, rebukes him very severely in his Preface
which he calls Apparatus, Ad. Ann. Chr. 58. Cap. 158.
etc. and in many other places of his Annals, nay he proceeds so far as to
impute to him that he knew not justly his own Age, and that he was mistaken in
it by six whole years. But if on the other side we yield to the judgment of his
Partisans, such as Scaliger and Calvisius, of whose Party are Justin Martyr,
Eusebius, St. Hierome, Suidas, and several other Ancients, we shall be obliged
to place him in the rank of the best Historians which remain. And truly when I
consider with what recommendation Justin spoke of him, I am not easily induced
to condemn him so absolutely as many do. He styles him many times an exceeding
wise Historiographer, and joining him with Philo, he says they are Two Persons
worthy of great respect. Lib. 3. cap. ^9.
As for Eusebius, he remarks in his Ecclesiastical History, that Josephus was
honored with a Statue at Rome, which we have already observed, giving him the
Title of a most true Author, and one that deserves that credit should be given
to what he written. The Books Styled an Evangelical preparation of Eusebius, are
full of passages of Josephus; and in the Third of his Evangelical
Demonstration, he rehearses that place of the Jewish Antiquities, which makes
such express mention of Jesus Christ. As for St Hierome, after he had placed
Jesophus amongst the Ecclesiastical Writers, he confirms the favors he
received from Vespasian and Titus, and the honor that was done him by putring
his Books into the Public Library, and raising a Statue to him in Rome. He
quotes also his forementioned Testimony of Jesus Christ. And in one of his
Epistles, he did not forbear to name him the Grecian Livy, which shows the
great value he had for his History. Suidas recites almost all the same things
which he could see in Justin, Eusebius, and St Hierome, and he gives him
particularly the Quality of a Lover of truth, which is much to be considered in
his case. I wonder not therefore after these Testimonies, if many will take
Josephus his part, against those who endeavored utterly to discredit him.
Nevertheless Scaliger was a little too forward, when he named him in a Preface
to a Book entitled the correction of Times, in one place the most diligent,
and greatest friend to truth of all Writers, Diligentissimum, (...) omnium
Scriptorum, out-doing in this manner Suidas by a Superlative Encomium, and in
another place the most true and religious of all Authors, Omnium Scriptorum
veracissimum and religiosissimum. He adds further that the integrity and
learning of Josephus showing it self in every thing, he shall not be backward
to assert boldly, that not only in what relates to the Jewish affairs, but in
all others also, it is more fit and sure for one to refer himself unto this
Hebrew, than to all the rest of the Greek and Latin Authors. I would not
proceed to so determinate a judgment; yet I think one may safely say that
abating what may be contrary to the Sacred Texts of the Old and New Testament,
Josephus is for the rest, an Historian of great Authority, and one that merits
a great deference, especially in the things of his own time; whereof he writes
as an Eie-witness: for we ought I think in charity to make that interpretation,
of what so many Christians have often uttered in his Commendation.

Although that passage of Josephus concerning Jesus Christ, and the primitive
times of Christianity was quoted, as we have already shown, in Eusebius his
time, and since by Great men, it is suspected by many others, who think it
foisted or thrust into the Text of Josephus, by one of those pious frauds,
which they pretend to have been sometimes used in favor of Religion. Ad (...).
34. C. 2^6.
Baronius who is not of their mind, says, that place was found struck out in
an Hebrew Manuscript of the Jews in Rome, which he delivers not for the proper
language of Josephus, (as it might have been according to Eusebius) but only
for a translation from Greek into Hebrew. This justifies the Antiquity of the
passage, and the animosity of the Jews against our belief, rather than it fully
decides the Question, And though the same Cardinal endeavors to show in
another place, Ad ann. 96. cap. ^
that which could humanly induce Josephus to give such a glorious Testimony of
our Savior, without a Divine impulsion, which possibly might force him to it:
nevertheless he allows this passage as we have it now, to be incorrect, and
that other to be more like truth as it was received in St Hieromes time, where
Josephus does not affirm that Jesus was the expected Christ, Christus hic erat,
but only that he was believed to be so, and credebatur esse Christus. There is
cause to wonder how it happened, Sect. 47. 76. et 238.
that Photius never remembered so notable a passage in Three different Sections
wherein he examins this Author. The chief thing is, that those Ages are past,
in which the Authority of Josephus was so important to the establishment of the
Church: yet they that will make use of it in this, either against the Jews, or
otherwise, may well do it after so many Fathers, whose opinions it is always
allowed to follow.

But we ought to take heed of the omissions of Josephus, which tend to the
suppression of many Evangelical truths. For though he made no mention of the
coming of the Wise men into Judaea, no more than the Massacre of the young
Innocents, spoke of by St Matthew, Cap. 2.
it does not follow that we should doubt ever so little of that which we read
of it in the History of the Gospel. Truly it is very strange that Josephus,
Lib. 1. de bello Jud. cap. 21.
who pardoned Herod nothing, who remembered well how that Tyrant had burned or
cut the Throats of a great number of young men, with their teachers, for having
beat down the Roman Eagle from the Gate of the Temple of Jerusalem, and who
has so expressly shown us all the other crimes of the same man, Ib. lib. 2.
cap. 4.
namely in that Oration of the Jews, spoke at Rome, against his memory in the
presence of the Emperor; that this Josephus, I say, should not have said the
least word of so cruel an action, so odious, and so noised abroad, as the
murder of so many poor Infants, put to death by the command of Herod, must
needs have been. But his forgetfulness, or Jewish malice, if he concealed it
wittingly, cannot prejudice truth, nor be alleged against the Authority of our
Sacred Texts, and that, of a Pagan also such as Maerobius, which is express for
that, in the Second Book of his Saturnals, where he rehearses Augustus his
words, to this effect; That it was better to be one of Herod's Swine than his
Child. Josephus moreover has writ many things in his Antiquities quite contrary
to what Moses has done, in which he cannot be followed without impiety. As for
the rest, it cannot be denied that he taught as many fine curiosities of the
History of his Country, which we should be ignorant of without him, who has
delivered them very well to us, though it has been observed that he did not
always agree with his Countryman Philo in his relations.

That which ought to recommend his History very much unto us, is, that besides
the advantage he had by his extraction, since knowledge and the Priesthood were
in a strict union amongst the Jews, he was so well instructed in learning from
his most tender years, that at the Age of Fourteen, as he writes, the chief
Prelates and Principal men of Jerusalem, asked his Counsel in the greatest
difficulties of the Law. At Sixteen years old he applied himself to the study
of what was particular to each of the Three Sects, which were current in his
Country, the Pharisean, the Saducean, and the other which was called the
Essenian; whose professors were very Austere and solitary in their way of life.
One of them called Banus, lived in the Desert; as the strictest Hermits of this
time, his food was of Fruit and Herbs, covering himself with nothing but
leaves, or barks of Trees, and washing his Body Night and Day in cold Water
against the temptation of the flesh. Josephus passed Three years with this
Anchorite, which ended, he betook himself again to a civil life, and made
public profession of following the Pharisean Sect, which he maintains to be
very like unto the Stoic, that has been so much valued by the Greeks and
Latins. It is certain that none but the Pharisees, made public profession of
Politics, and partaked in the government of the State; so that if a Saducee
was compelled to be a Magistrate, which he always undertook very unwillingly,
the People obliged him to yield to the opinion of the Pharisees, Lib. 18. Antiq.
and to be guided by their Maxims, as may be seen in Josephus, where he treats
of these Three forementioned Sects, Jud. c. 2.
and of a Fourth which was a refinement of the Pharisean. Thus according to the
Principals of his Sect, he accepted the chief emploiments amongst the Jews
either in Peace or War, which gives a mavelous Authority to his History; as
being ordinarily composed of things which he saw himself, and actions wherein
he had often the greatest share.

We must take heed of confounding as Munster has done the false Josephus,
commonly called Josippus Gorionides (who also made, or rather falsified, a
History of the Jewish War) with our Historian. When this Pseudo-Josephus, in
his Third Book placed Goths in Spain, and in his Fifth made Gallia to be
possessed by the French; he sufficiently declared his impertinence, to have
aspired thereby to pass for the true Josephus, in whose time there were neither
Goths in Spain, nor French in Gallia. It is filled throughout with the like
repugnancies, which are so plain that nothing but the credulity of the Jews of
these last Ages can endure it, whose ingenuity alone consists in cheating
themselves. Scaliger takes this man for a Circumcised French man, who is not a
very ancient Author, or at least has writ since the Sixth Age of our Salvation.
But the Invective, which I have already used in the Chapter of Xenophon,
against such Impostours, deters me from declaming any more against them.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF ARRIAN.
IN the time of Adrian the Emperor, and his two successors, Antoninus Pius, and
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Arrian the Macedonian, began to write his History:
he lived in the Hundred and Thirtieth year of Christ: he was a Disciple of
Epictetus. It is not easy to know, whether his History was writ, before his
Enchiridion, and those other discourses of his Master, which Simplicius, in his
Commentaries, assures us to be composed by him, for though it might not be
thought, according to the ordinary, and natural course of men's dispositions, he
should apply himself to Philosophical contemplations, in the Youthful part of
his life, yet it appears, in the Preface of those discourses, that he writ
them, as they were spoken by Epictetus, collected from his mouth, whilst he was
yet the Scholar, of that great Philosopher, and he complains, that they were
published without his privitie, which is a certain evidence, of their being
writ in his younger Age. Photius says, they were formerly in Twelve Books,
besides certain Philosophical dissertations, by him mentioned, which are lost
to this Age.

As for his Historical Compositions, though we have not them all entire; by
what remains of them, we may discern enough, to oblige us to value his merit.
And his Seven Books, of the Conquest of Alexander the Great, and Eight, which
treat particularly of India, may suffice to give him a Rank, amongst the
chiefest Historians.

I shall not insist on the description, which he has made of the Euxin Sea,
and the Countries which border on it, nor on that of the Erythrean Sea, which
comprehends part of the Indian Coasts, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea,
because they are rather pieces, of Geography, than History. Rhamusius observes,
that many would distinguish this Arrian, who, in his Eighth Book, describes the
Voyage of Nearchus, Admiral to Alexander, from the River Indus, to the Persian
Gulf; from him, who is the Author, of Periplus, or the description of the
Erythrean Ocean. The difference of Style (whereon, those that deba^e this
matter, establish their opinion) is but a slender foundation, for all agree (if
it must be) that there were Two Arrians, that they both lived, in the time of
the Antonines, and that Prince of Geographers, Claudins Ptolemaeus
Alexandrinus. But that, which the same Rhamusius notes on this occasion, is
very considerable. That though Arrian has often followed, the opinion of
Marinus Tyrius, whom Ptolemy does always reject, yet it appears, that his is a
better, and more just situation, of many parts of the East Indies, than that,
which Ptolemy has left us; as is manifest by many Modern Relations, exhibited
thereof, by the Portuguese. It is certain, that Arrian's merit recommended him
so much, to the Emperors of his time, that they advanced him, to the Consular
dignity.

He was a Native of Nicomedia, a City of Bithynia, where he made his Studies,
and became a Priest, of Ceres, and Proserpine, as he himself reports, in those
Eight Books, of his Bithynicks, mentioned by Photius, which began the History
of his Country, at the fabulous times, and continued it, to the death of the
last Monarch of Nicomedia, who left the Romans, to be the Heirs of his Crown.
He pretends to have writ this History of Alexander the Great, by Divine
inspiration; and that he did it, under the Title of (...); and with the like
number of Seven Books, as Xenophon chose, to describe the Conquests of Cyrus:
and some observe, that he so affected to follow that Author, that he has
perfectly imitated him in his Style, and many other respects, and is therefore
called, the Young, or the Second Xenophon. He declares in his Preface, that his
Relations are by him delivered, on the faith of Aristobulus, the Son of
Aristobulus, and Ptolemaeus Lagus, who accompanied Alexander in all his
Enterprises, which were the more credible for that, besides the Royal Quality
of the latter, they did neither of them publish their writings, till after the
death of Alexander, without any other obligation, than a real desire of
discovering the truth of his Actions. And yet our Author professes, in his
description of the death of Callisthenes the Philosopher, that it was diversely
reported by them, though they were both near the person of Alexander, when the
process was made against that unfortunate person. Aristobulus says, he was led
in Chains after the Army, till he died of a Sickness, and the other affirms,
that, after having been exposed to Torture, he was Stangled, for having been
unhappily involved in the conspiracy of Hermolaus; so difficult it is, to know
the truth of actions performed: and there is nothing more certain, than that
one and the same action is many times variously related by those that saw it,
because of the diverse respects, and interests, wherewith most men are
preoccupied. But notwithstanding these particular defects, which Arrian could
not redress; his History is the more esteemable, because those of Aristobulus,
and Ptolomy, are not to be found, moreover there are many places, in the
History of Quintus Curtius, which have need to be reformed, by the Text of
Arrian; for when he writes, in his Sixth Book, that Alexander parted from the
Batavians, Bataues in the French Original. Chief City in Media now called
Yerack. Moreri dictionar.
doubtless it ought to be, from the City of Ecbatana, as it is expressed in
Arrian. And the voiages to the East Indies, made these last Hundred and Fifty
years, show, that he has better represented, the Houses or Cabbins, of certain
Ichthyophages, built of the bones of Whales, and other Fishes, than Quintus
Curtius, who says, they are made of Shells, and the excrements of the Sea,
conchas, and purgamenta Maris. But there are some places also in Arrians
History, which the other does very well explain, and I shall not determine,
which of them has been most lucky, in expressing the name of Alexanders
Physician, whom Arrian calls, Critodemus: and Quintus Curtius, Critobulus (for
Plutarch makes no mention of either) and Pliny, when he commends the excellency
of that Physician, who drew the Arrow out of Alexanders Fathers eye, without
disfiguring his Face, nameing him Critobulus, makes it to be reasonably
supposed, that his Son made use of the same Physician, and consequently that
Curtius did not mistake in the name.

Photius commends Arrian, as equal to the best Historians, his narration is
always agreeable, because it is both short, and intelligible: and he never
discomposes his Readers, with tedious digressions, and such Parentheses, as may
obscure the sense of his sentences. And one cannot easily find, in all his
History, any one such Miraculous event, as might render it suspected, if you
will except some predictions of Aristander, and the story of Two new Springs,
which appeared near the River of Oxus, as soon as Alexander was there Encamped.

The pattern, which Arrian proposed to imimitate, permits him not to elevate
his Style, to a Sublime degree of Oratory; because the Eloquence of Xenophon is
not of that order, but his Phrase is mingled with such excellent figures, that
by retaining all the clearness, of him that he imitates, his Style has nothing
in it, either too flatly low, or too highly Towering. He occasionally uses,
someties oblique Orations, and sometimes direct ones. And all along, in his
Second Book, he Artificially couches the imperious letter of Alexander to
Darius. The Oration of Callisthenes, against Anaxarchus, who would have
Alexander to be adored, is one of the most considerable, of those that are
direct. And there are Two others, not inferior to it, of the same Prince to
his Soldiers, which began to mutiny, once in the Indies, and the other time on
the Banks of the River Tygris. Those which were made, before the Battle, given
at the Streights of Amanus, and at the Plain of Arbela, or Gaugamela, are
oblique, and much more concise, than the occasion required. Photius makes a
very favorable judgment of the History of Arrian (viz.) that whosoever shall
compare it, with the most Ancient of those, which are so much esteemed, it will
be found, that there are many things in them, which in no wise approach the
value of the other.

But yet there is one passage, in the middle of his first Book, wherein there
is Vanity enough, to stain the whole body of his History, if decency did not
oblige us, to consider it with that indulgence, which the best of us may
sometimes need, in respect to our own productions; the place I mean, is, where
he declares, that the greatness, and number, of the famous Achievements of
Alexander, made him enterprise the writing of his History, by the assurance he
had, of being able to acquit himself well therein: and that without putting his
name to it, or mentioning his extraction, or Quality, he would have the world
to know, he might value himself in all those respects: and that having loved
letters from his Infancy, as Alexander has merited the chiefest Rank, amongst
the Leaders of Armies; so the greatest, amongst those that have enterprised the
writing of History, cannot without injustice he denied to him. This impudence
of Arrian puts me in mind, of the impertinence of another Grecian, Sect. 131.
that was contemporary with him, of whom Photius writes, that he dedicated his
composition, to the Emperor, Marcus Antoninus, to get thereby the more credit
to it, and that it might obtain a more favorable reception: and at his first
entrance, preparatory to the matter, he pretended, that his Style should be as
Sublime, as the actions of Alexander, which was the subject of his Book, when,
alas! Nothing was ever lower, and more barren, than his Narrations, nor more
weak and faint, than the expressions wherein he exposed them. It may be
reasonably believed, that the Ambition of this pretender equalled in the
beginning the vanity of Arrian; but his weak performances made all his promises
ridiculous in the end, whereas the other has given, to Posterity, one of the
best Histories that Antiquity has left us; yet he ought not to pass without a
censure, for the fault he committed, there being scarce any thing in the world
more insupportable than self praise; which, instead of the esteem and
reputation that our merit might justly challenge for any worthy enterprise,
draws on us nothing but contempt, and hatred.

Besides the Seven Books, before mentioned, of the expeditions of Alexander the
Great, and the Eighth, of so much of the East Indies, as was known in his time:
He writ, in Ten Books, the History of those actions, which happened amongst
Alexanders Captains, after his death, for they could not agree about the
dividing their Conquests; but of those there remains nothing at this day, but
an abridgment of them, which Photius gives us, in his Bibliotheca, and we have
also lost his Bithynicks; and Two other Treatises, One, of the most
considerable actions, performed by Timoleon of Corinth, in Sicily, and the
Other, of the means used by Dion of Syracuse, to free the City so called, and
all the circumjacent Country, from the Tyranny and oppression of Dionysius, the
Second Tyrant of that name: nor has the misfortune of the Age been less, by the
loss of another work of his, composed in Seventeen Books, which Stephanus, in
his Cities, mentions more than once, whose Subject is, of the Parthians, and
their descent from the Scythians, and their Wars with the Romans, in the time
of the Emperor Trajan.

Photius informs us, that he writ another Treatise, called the Alanick History:
so that many believe, that which Dion Cassius reports, of one Arrian Governor
of Cappadocia, under the Emperor Adrian, who reduced the Alanians, and
Massagets, to the obedience of the Empire, was meant of our Historian: it is he
also, to whom Plinius Novocomensis addresses Seven of his Epistles, Vossius de
hist. graecis, c. 11.
betwixt whom there was a friendship contracted, whilst the same Pliny was
Proconsul of Pontus, and Bithynia, which our Arrian acknowledges to be the
place of his Nativity. Lib. 43. dig. tit. 3. leg. 1. par. 4. et Lib. 44.
digest. tit. 7. leg. 47. in Pseud.
And if we may ascribe to him, those Decisions of Law, which Vlpian, and Paulus
determine by his Authority: the knowledge of that learned Science may be added,
to his excellency in Geography, History and Philosophy.

But one of the greatest Encomiums that can be given to any, is that which
Lucian applies to him, when he excuses himself for writing the life, of his
false Prophet Alexander: Let no man, says he, blame me, for employing my time,
on so inconsiderable a Subject, since Arrian, that worthy Disciple of
Epictetus, one of the greatest among the Romans, who has exercised himself
among the Muses, condescended to write the life of the Villain Tiliborus.

It is not to be doubted but there are many Arrians, I^ Gordian.
besides this person of whom we now write, for Julius Capitolinus, quotes one
Arrian, a Greek Historian, to prove that there were three of the narne of
Gordianus, against the opinion of those, who pretend there were but Two; and
this cannot be meant of our Arrian, who lived an Age, before the time of any of
those Emperors; and Su^tonius mentions a Poet of that name, more Ancient than
any of the others, because Tiberius is said to have imitated him, in his Greek
Poesy. And perhaps, this may be the same Arrian, cited by Suidas, to be the
Author of an Heroic Poem, divided into Four and Twenty Books, called
Alexandriades, written to celebrate the Honor of Alexander the Great.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF APPIAN.
APPIAN is so much the more considerable, amongst all those that have labored
in the Roman History, in that, besides the commendation which Photius gives
him, to have, as truly as possible, delivered his matter: He alone has
particularly described their actions, according to the Provinces, and different
Regions, wherein they were transacted: Not that he has, in this method,
excelled all other Historiographers, for the most Ancient of them have always
followed the order of time, and related things annually done, in Countries very
distant, one from the other.

But though Appian seems, in some things, to have affected an order, even
contrary to Nature, not observed by any of the Ancients, yet it must be
acknowledged, that his Method, in general, is very useful, to express the
things performed distinctly, and separately from each other, to represent, as
to our view, all that passed in each Country, so that no way of writing is more
instructive, and apter, in that respect, to conten^ the mind of the Readers. We
learn from Suidas, that his History, by an excellency of Title, was sometimes
termed Basilick, or Royal. And his Roman History (which he writ in Twenty Four
Books, Vossias de Historicis graecit. l. 2. c. 13.
from Aeneas, and the Taking of Troy, to the Foundation of Rome) contains, in
the first thereof the Government of its Seven Kings, as may be conjectured by
the Text of Photius. Florus his Epitome is indeed composed of Wars, and actions
separated one from the other; but Appian has represented them more entirely,
how long soever any of them endured; whereas the Other confounds his relations,
in the mixtures of them: as in the First, Second, and Third Punick Wars, he
shuffles together all the affairs of the Romans with the Gauls, Ligurians,
Macedonians; and many other People, with whom they had contest, in the interval
of those Two cessations of Arms, which happened betwixt the Carthaginians and
them.

But this favorable judgment of Photius, in Appians behalf, Meth. hist. cap. 4.
does not restrain Bodin, from accusing both his memory, and judgment in the
matter of his History: for this bold Censurer asserts, that the Romans did
never lend their Wives one to the other, according to the custom of the
Parthians, and Lacedaemonians; and imputes therein too much credulity to Appian:
Though Plutarch has written the same thing, affirming that Cato freely sent
his Wife, to Hortensius the Orator, In vita Cat. V.
to raise of her an issue to him: nor is the Law of Romulus, or that against
Adulterers, mentioned by Aulus Gellius, repugnant to this practice (as Bodin
unadvisedly imagins.) He taxes him likewise, to have made Caesar say, in his
Second Book of the Civil Wars of Rome, certain expressions, which were not
uttered by him, but Pompey, in a threatening speech, which he used to the
Senate, when he put his hand on his Sword, and told them, if they would not
grant him the things he desired, that Sword should purchase them: but this may
be ascribed to a failure of memory, to which all mankind is subject: as also
another error, which he notes of him, in mistaking Calphurnia, for Pompeia,
that Wife of Caesar, which was vitiated in the Temple, called by the Romans,
the Temple of the good Goddess. But Sigonius is more indecent, who arraigns him
of levity, and many omissions, without alleging any proof or instance thereof.
And Scaliger is not less bold in the censure that he makes of him, in his
Animadversions on the History of Eusebins, where he says, he would appear to
be a Child in the business of History, were it not that an infinity of matters
are added to his Treatise of the Wars of Syria. Yet though I approve not of
these reflections; I presume, one may truly impure it to him as a fault in all
his works, that he too much flatters the Romans, always making the right, as
well as the advantage, to be on their side, to the prejudice of all other
Nations in the world, with whom they were concerned, as well as of his own
Native Country. And we may add to this, that he often attributes to himself the
labors of others, transcribing many Paragraphs, and entire Sentences of
Polybius, Plutarch, and other Authors more Ancient, and inserting them in his
Book, without citing their Texts, to render them that acknowledgment, which is
due to their merit, on such occasions. And some affirm that he in like manner
transcribed, the greatest part of the Commentaries of Augustus; which contained
(as Suetonins relates) the principal actions of his life. This is indeed a sort
of theft not to be allowed; Deprehendi in furto malle, quam mutuum reddere. As
Pliny says to Vespatian, on the same subject, and Scaliger, on this occasion,
calls him, alienorum laborum fucum, in resemblance to a certain sort of Flies,
which nourish themselves with the honey of others.

I have read in some Author, that the Rhodians, when they had a purpose to
honor the memory of any well deserving person, by having his Statue erected in
some public place, were used only to take the head from some of the old
Statues in their City, and put a new one in the place of it, of the Figure of
him they designed to represent. Those that steal from the writings of others,
do the same thing as those Rhodians did, but in a more ridiculous fashion, for
by putting their names to other men's Works, hoping thereby to acquire honor to
themselves, they ordinarily, instead thereof, reap only shame and contempt, for
so sordid a practice. This matter calls to my remembrance an abuse, which was
put upon Diomedes, by his friend Alcibiades, to whom he committed the charge,
of conveying his Horses to the Olympic games; for by changing the inscription
which belonged to them, and making them to run in the name of Alcibiades, he
took to himself the honor of the victory they acquired, which was not of small
consequence at that time, and to complaet his deceit, was so unjust to retain
them to himself, without ever making restitution to Diomedes, who trusted him
therewith. What greater treachery can there be in respect to letters, than to
ascribe to our selves, the productions of others, when instead of yiedling the
glory to those, by whose thoughts we have profited, we would have those very
conceptions pass, for the pure inventions of our own wit. Crimen Plagium a
Plagis (1) a dolor quo is afficitur qui surreptus est. Cat.
The figurative expression of Plagiary, which the Latins give to those, that
are guilty of a Crime so abject, and odious, sufficiently denotes the
Abomination they had for it; as if, by the word Plagium, it were to be
understood, that such offenses could not be expiated, but by a Whip. Vitruvius,
in the Preface to his Seventh Book of Architecture, after having asserted, that
such of whom we now treat, are to be punished, as impious, and infamous, he
informs us, with what severity, and Ignominy, Ptolomy punished some Poets, that
had been so impudent to recite, in a public Assembly in Alexandria, certain
Verses stolen by them, out of different Authors, and to expose them as their
own; whereby they had carried the prize, (which the King proposed to be given
them that best performed, by the suffrage of Six of the Judges, and all the
People) if the Seventh, who was called Aristophanes, that had been more
conversant in Books, than the other, had not discovered the abuse; preferring a
Poet, before them, that was the least applauded of all the rest, but one that
had pronounced nothing, in the Assembly, that was not of his own composition.
Theocritus boasted, in one of his Epigrams, with a kind of assurance, that he
never was of the number of those, that ascribed to themselves the Verses of
other men, Lib. 5. et ^ Strom. Lib. 9. Cap. 2. and 3.
but I am not ignorant of the excuses, that many are forced to make in his
behalf, for that very assertion. They tell us, that Clemens Alexandrinus, and
Eusebius in his Evangelical preparation, report, that the Greeks did not only
take from the Hebrews, that which is best in their Writings, but instanced in
many examples, how they frequently borrowed from one another also.

Strabo writes of Eudorus, and Ariston, Two Peripatetick Philosophers, Geogr.
Lib. 17.
which had writ some Commentaries of Niliss, so like in Phrase, and matter,
that the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon only could discover, which of them was the
true Author, upon their mutual accusations of one another, of the theft
committed.

Marcianus Heracleota affirms, that Eratosthenes transcribed a Treatise, writ
by one Timosthenes, of an Epitome of the Isles, from one end to the other, and
published it as his own. Athenaeus defames Plato, about the end of the Eleventh
Book of his Deipnosophists, to have taken the greatest part of his Dialogues,
from Byrson, Aristippus, and Antisthenes. And though it be known, that Apuleius
his Golden Ass, is not of his own Fabric, it is not yet discovered, whether he
took it from Lucian, or Lucius Patrensis, for both these have writ of the same
Subject, and each of their pieces pass as Originals. But all these examples,
and many more that might be instanced, cannot produce the effect, which those
that make them, promise to themselves; nor is it enough to excuse a fault, by
saying many others are guilty of the like, for if that were sufficient, there
is scarce any that would not be easily pardonable.

Appian lived in the time of Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus Successive Emperors
of Rome, and about the 140th year, of our Saviors Incarnation. In the Preface
of his History, he declares his Extraction, to be from one of the best Families
of Alexandria, from whence being come to Rome, he rendered himself, in a short
while, so considerable in the employment of Advocate, that he was elected, and
enrolled in the number of those, that were the Proctors of the Emperor,
Procuratores Caesaris, an Office which resembles the charge of Attorney General
in England.
and to have (as Photius relates) the Administration of a Province. Sigonius,
and some others call him, Sophista Alexandrinus, and make him an Egyptian.

His History was divided into Three Volumes (which as the same Photius
mentions) contained Four and Twenty Books, or Twenty Two, as ^arolus Stephanus
Volaterranus, and the before named Sigonius inform. O^sus ab Aenea, et Ilio
capto, percurrit illa tempara, usque ad Romulum. Inde accu^atius persequitur
omnia usque ad Augustum. Quaedam etiam carptim atque obiter addit, usque ad
Trajanum. Vossius loco citato.
It began at the burning or taking Troy, and the fortune of Aeneas, and
extended beyond the Reign of Augustus, making sometimes excursions even to the
time of Trajan. As to his Style, the same Photius observes, that as his manner
of writing was plain and easy, so he had nothing in it, that was soaring high,
or superfluous, and he gives to him the prerogative, of being not only very
faithful (as we hinted in the beginning) but one of those, that has given the
greatest Testimony, of his knowledge in the art of War, and all kind of military
Discipline. To read the description of his battles would make one fancy himself
in the middle of them. And he is so happy in his Orations, that he manages, and
moves the affections, which way he pleases: whether it be to revive the courage
of the drooping Soldiers, or express the extravagant transports of those that
are too violent. But of the many works which he composed, there remains to this
time but the least part which describe the Punick, Syrian, and Parthian Wars,
Those against Mithridates, against the Spaniards, against Hannibal: and Five
Books of the civil Wars of Rome, and those of Illyria: As for that of the
Celtick War, or the War of the Gauls, there is only a fragment or compendium
of it extant, rather to make us regret what we want, than satisfy our minds
with that which remains.

Thus far we have confined our self, in this Chapter of Appian, to Monsieu^ de
la Mothe le Vayer, our Author, who in many things seems to me, not so exact in
his judgment of this Historiographer, as his merit requires, and too severe in
his reflection, whilst he makes so long a defamatory digression, against those
that incorporate the writings of others in their works, on occasion of the
mention of his borrowing something, in his History, from Polybius and Plutarch,
which he makes to be the more unpardonable, because he cites not, in his Books,
the Texts of those Authors, to render them (as he Phrases it) the
acknowledgment due to their merit. And yet he himself, even in this Chapter,
borrows some part of his matter from Vossius, without quoting him. But may it
not be doubted, whither this Gentleman ever saw the Original Manuscript of
Appian, where perhaps those Quotations were, to know thereby, whether he or
those that transcribed it, are to be blamed for this omission, or indeed
whether, in those Ancient times, such citations were practiced: for though the
borrowing of writings from others, may be sometimes in some circumstances a
great offense; it is not always to be so accounted, since there is not any
thing written, that is not taken from the conceptions of them that went before:
and when we take from others to improve their reason, that it may be derived to
us in a more familiar, refined and exquisite sense, it is rather commendable
than faulty; as may be said of that which Virgil takes from Homer, or to speak
of our time, of what our Ben Johnson extracts from Catullus, Juvenal, Horace,
Plautus, and other Poets, and from Tully also, who so much improves their
thoughts, that they themselves, if they were alive, would not think themselves
dishonored, by the use he makes of them.

What our Author mentions of Scaliger, which is also hinted by Vossius, of
Appians being a Child in History, is rather to be imputed to his passion, than
right judgment, whose censures are not always to be allowed, especially when
they contradict the more general consent of the learned in all Ages. What he
says also, in the beginning of this Chapter in one place, that Appian seems to
have affected an order of writing, even contrary to Nature, is an opinion,
wherein he is very singular, for Caelius Secundus Curio (who had, it may be,
more curiously studied Appian than he) in his Epistle Dedicatory, before the
Latin Impression at Basil 1554, writes thus of him.

It is certain (says he) that Appian proposed to himself, Caellus Secundus
Curio, in Epistola Dedicatoria, ad Bonifacium Amberbachium, versus finem.
the method, and contexture of Thucydides, and Salust, and endeavo^red to
imitate them both, in their veracity of expression, and quickness of
transition, for he did not weave together a perpetual series of History, as
Livy and others, but from the whole matter (that is to say) from the greatest,
most, and immortal actions of the Romans, he separated the Wars they made, upon
any Nation or People; and made so many bodies of History, as they undertook and
waged Wars, which Reason and image of writing Caesar pursued, in his so much
celebrated Commentaries, wherein nothing is found, empty, fabulous, or
prodigious. No superfluous, or feigned speeches, or Orations for ostentation;
but all pure, true, religious, and necessary; in which he did not imitate the
Vanity of the Greeks, which to do, is not indeed to write a History, but
deceive the World with Fables.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF DIO OR DION CASSIUS.
DIO Cassius, who is besides known by the Surnames of Cocceius and Cocceianus,
was born at Nicea, a City of Bithynia, whether he retired, in his latter years,
to pass in quiet the remaining part of his life, after the example of those
Animals, who always return, as they say, to die in their Mansions. The
infirmity of his legs called him to this retirement, and he writes, that his
Genius had foretold it him long before by a Verse of Homers Iliads, recited by
Photius. As Socrates was said to have had a Familiar Spirit or Demon, who was
as a Director of his life, Dio alleges that he was warned by his, to avoid by
a retirement, the Ambushes which the ^retorian Militia prepared for him: and
the same Spirit, or Goddess (to use his own terms in his Threescore and Twelfth
Book) made him write his History, who before exercised himself only in
Philosophical learning, as that of the Divine Dreams, and their Interpretation,
of which he had composed a Book. Homo Consularis.
His Father Apronianus a Consular man (according to the Phrase of that Age) was
Governor of Dalmatia, and sometime after Proconsul of Cilicia: He himself had
the same Consular dignity bestowed on him twice, which he exercised jointly
with the Emperor Alexander, Son of Mammea; after he had passed through diverse
Employments under the precedent Emperors: for Macrinus had established him
Lieutenant or Governor of Pergamus, and Smyrna, and he sometime commanded in
Afric; and had afterward the Administration of Austria and Hungary, then
called Pannonia, committed to him. These things are convenient to be known,
before we speak of his Writings, because they recommend, and give the greater
Authority to them. His History comprised all the time from the building of
Rome, to the Reign of Alexander Severus, which he writ in Eighty Books, divided
into Eight Decades, whereof few are saved from that unhappy loss, which, as we
have elsewhere shown, has been fatal to many admirable Works of this nature,
whereof the ignorant and barbarous Ages have deprived us. At present the Five
and Thirtieth Book is the first of those that remain entire (for we have but
some Eclogues or Fragments of the Four and Thirtieth preceding. His progress to
the Sixtieth is entire enough. But instead of the last Twenty, we must be
content with what Xiphilinus, a Constantinopolitan Monk, has given us in an
Epitome or Compendium of them; for the Text of those pieces of Dion is not to
be found whole, by a misfortune always incident to Books, that are
abbreviated. Photius observes, that he writ his Roman History, as some others
had likewise done, not from the Foundation of Rome only, but even from Aeneas
his Descent into Italy, which he continued to the Tyranny of Heliogabalus, and
some part of the Reign of Alexander Severus, his successor. That which we have
of it now in our possession, comprehending the events of Three Hundred years at
least, Lucullus lived about 71 years, before Christ, and about 23, before
Julius Caesar assumed the government of the Roman Empire.
begins but at the time, when Lucullus had his great commands, and finishes
with the death of Claudius the Emperor, the rest is the Epitome of Xiphilinus,
before mentioned.

Though all that has been lost of this excellent Author, is much to be
regretted, I think nothing is so deplorable, as the loss of the Forty last
years, of which he writ as an Eie-witness, and one that had a part in the
government of the State. For he could not express, what was before the Empire
of Commodus, but from the relation of strangers, and as others had done it
before him. But after that Emperor, until the other, with whom he had the
honor, to be Colleague in the Consulship, he built no more upon the faith of
other men; but what he relates, that descends to us, by his Organ Xiphilinus,
is no other than what he saw himself, and wherein he was a principal Actour. It
is a clear proof of Dion's prudent conduct, that he could pass over such bad
times, as those of the Tyrannical Dominion of Commodus, Caracalla, Macrinus,
and Heliogabalus, without loss of life, goods, or reputation, which are often
in danger under such Princes, without a wonderful dexterity of Wit. His was so
commendable, that after having overcome those Stormy and Tempestuous seasons,
wherein the quality of a stranger and his riches exposed him to much envy, he
arrived happily at a safe Port, to wit the Reign of Alexander Severus an
exceeding Lover of justice, and a most powerful Protector of virtuous men.

Under him he published the Roman History, to which as he was led by his Genius,
as we before hinted, so he was commanded by Septimius Severus. He confesses
himself, that he employed Ten years, in providing the necessary materials for
this great building, and twelve more in raising it, and adding that Majesty
unto it, which makes us, even at this day, admire its dismembered Fragments and
Ruins. A man of his Quality, who had passed all his life in the management of
affairs, and had read men as well as Books, and of such an experimented
conduct, must needs have been a very considerable Historiographer. Nor have any
of them revealed so much unto us as he, of those state secrets, which Tacitus
Styles Arcana Imperii, and whereof he makes so high a Mystery. He is so exact
in describing the order of the Comitia, the establishing of Magistrates, and
the use of the public Rights of the Romans, that those things are no where
else learned more distinctly. And in what relates to the Consecration of
Emperors, their Apotheosis, or inrolling amongst the number of the Gods; We may
say, that he is the only Writer, who has shown us a good form, except Herodian
who coveted afterward to imitate him in the same Subject. But particularly, in
the Fifty Sixth Book, he is very curious, where he represents the Pomp of
Augustus his Funerals, his Bed of State, his ^ssigies in Wax, and the Funeral
Oration, which Tiberius read before the People, he exposes after that the
manner of the burning his body, how Livia gathered, and laid up his Bones,
finally with what dexterity they made an Eagle part from the Funeral Pile,
whence that Bird of Jupiter seemed to bear the Soul of the Emperor to Heaven.

The Funeral Oration before mentioned obliges me to remark, that Dion freely
used, not only the Oblique, but the Direct way of Oration also in the body of
his History. Those of Pompey to the Romans, and of Gabinius afterward, in his
Thirty Sixth Book, are of the last frame. The Philosophical discourse of
Philiscus to Cicero, which is seen in the Eight and Thirtieth, to persuade him
to bear his Exile into Macedonia constantly, is also in the form of a
Prosopopaea, after a very considerable Dialogue between them Two. The Orations
of Agrippa, and Mecaenas, the first of which exhorted Augustus to quit the
Empire, the Second on the contrary to retain it, are of the same sort, and
contain the whole Fifty Second Book. And Xiphilinus was not contented, in his
Abbreviation of the Sixty Second, to make Paulinus, Governor of great Britain,
speak a direct Oration to his Troops, ready to Engage with the British Forces,
after he had divided them into Three different Bodies, but makes him speak
Three separate ones, on the same Subject, to persuade them to fight
courageously, and thereby to obtain the Victory. By this it appears, that they
who believe that all sorts of Orations are indecent in History, will not be
satisfied with Dio's method of writing, for he abstains not from those, which
are most to be avoided, namely the direct, and has made use of Dialogues also.
which is contrary to the rules of the Critics in History; but if we must take
notice of his faults, there are others, which deserve sooner to be complained
of, than what we mentioned. He is accused of having taken Caesar's part too
much, against Pompey, to accomodate himself to the course of Fortune. Nor seems
he more equitable in respect of Antonius his Faction, which he always favors
to the prejudice of that of Cicero. And whoever reads in the Forty Sixth Book,
the invective of Q. Fusius Calenus, against this incomparable Orator, Cicero.
will be hardly able to endure all the injuries, with which it seems Dio would
have Sullied his reputation. Not content to make him be reproached, that he was
the Son of a Fuller or Dyer, very often reduced to dress Vines, or cultivate
Olive Trees; he assaults his person, and touches his honor in all the most
sensible parts: he renders him ridiculous for his fearfulness: and to blast him
the more, affirms, that of all the Orations which were seen of his, he
delivered not one of them, after the manner in which they were writ, and
therefore his want of memory is imputed as a crime to him. But he makes Calenus
much more severe, He would have him contented, not to wear the long Robe, if he
had not wanted it to hide his ill-shapt Legs and Feet. And arraigns his
Conjugal Bed, to expose the vice of his Wives, defaming him to have prostituted
the honor of one of them: and in the mention of his Children, he accuses him
of Incest with his Daughter; and represents his Son, as an infamous Libertin,
Drunk Night and Day. Certainly, to treat one of the greatest persons of the
Roman Republic thus, is rather like a Satyrist than an Historian. But Dion
does so pursue his disparagement, that in the following Book, he takes a new
occasion to make Fulvia, the Wife of Antonius, vomit out abundance of
reproaches against his memory, who pierces his Tongue through and through with
her Needle.

He has not been much more respectful to Seneca, if the conjectures of some men
are not true, who think that Xiphilinus, in that part, maliciously delivered
the thoughts of Suillius, or some other as bad, for those of Dio. Yet we read
in what Constantinus collected out of him, besides what is related in the
Epitomy of Xiphilinus, that Seneca led a life quite contrary to his Writings,
and the Philosophical profession, to which he pretended. Lib. 60.
He is accused of Adultery, with Julia and Agrippina, and of the death of the
last. He is taxed with reading Lectures of Pederasty, to Nero, and charged with
as-ending the Theater with him, to make Orations in his applause. In fine his
Luxury and Avarice are aggravated to that pitch, that the cause of the
Rebellion of Great Britain, is imputed to him, where the People could no more
endure his extortion, than Nero could suffer his Conspiracies, from which he
had no means to deliver himself, than by putting so bad a Master to death. But
what we before hinted, that the invectives against Seneca, are rather the words
of Tigellinus the abbreviator, than our Author, seems to be very manifest,
because Dion, in his Fifty Ninth Book, speaks very honorably of Seneca.

We might perhaps accuse him of Superstition and Credulity, and thereby
something discredit his History; if something were not to be allowed to
Humanity, and if we did not know, that the best Authors in this kind, have
fallen into the same inconveniences. In his Forty Seventh Book he tells us, the
Sun appeared at Rome sometimes lesser, and sometimes greater than ordinary, to
foretell the bloody Battle, fought in the Fields of Philippi, which was also
signified by many other Prodigies. How he credited the report of the strange
quality of the These Psylli are mentioned, to have been employed by Augustus
Caesar, to cure Cleopatra of her poison, by sucking the venom out of her
wounds, that he might carry her in Triumph to Rome-Sueton. in Aug. c. 17. Lib.
66. Lib. 67. A City of Cappadocia.
Psylli, to expel poison, may be read in his One and Fiftieth Book, on the
Subject of the death of Cleopatra, whom these men (since there was no Female
amongst them, and they begot themselves) endeavored in vain, to bring to life
again. In his Fifty Eighth Book he reports, that a Phaenix was seen in Egypt,
in the Seven Hundred and Nineteenth year of the Foundation of Rome. In another
place he writes, that Vespasian cured a Blind Man, by spitting in his Eyes, and
worked a like Miracle, on a Lame man's Hand, which he cured and restored to its
vigor, by walking upon it, they being both forewarned in a Dream, that they
should receive this benefit from the Emperor. In another place he expresses,
that the famous Apollonius Tyanaeus saw, in the City of Ephesus, all that
passed at the death of Domitian in Rome, at the same instant that he received
it; so that he cried out, calling on the name of Stephanus, which was that of
his Murderer, bidding him strike boldly, and soon after that (says he) it was
done; as if Dion would have conformed himself to Philostratus, who writ at the
same time, the Imaginary life of this Philosopher; V. Lib. 8. de Vita Apol. c.
10.
and as if there were no difference to be put, betwixt true, and Fabulous
History.

Though some men, and Baronius amongst others, Ad Ann. Chr. 176.
find fault with Dio, because he was not favorable to Christianity, I think it
not worthy to be considered, since he is to be esteemed as a Pagan Author, who
was not like to uphold a Religion contrary to that which he professed. It is
true that speaking of the victories of Marcus Aurelius, he attributes to the
Magic Art, of one Arnuphis an Egyptian, rather than to the prayers of the
Christians, the miraculous Rain, which fell in favor of the Romans, and the
strange Tempests, which afflicted the Army of the Quadi, whom the learned
Cluverius takes, for the present Moravians. But is it a wonder, in things
subject to various interpretations, as are ordinarily such Prodigies, that Dio,
an Idolatrous Historian, should not give the same judgment, as a believer? And
that he spoke otherwise of them, than Tertullian, Eusebius, Paulus Diaconus,
and some others have done?

His Style is by Pho^ius, put into the rank of the most elevated, being
extraordinarly raised by the loftiness of his thoughts. His discourse, says
he, is full of Phrases, which resemble the Ancient construction or Syntaxis,
and his expression answers the greatness of the matter he treats of. His
periods are often interrupted with Parentheses, and he uses many Hyperbates, or
transitions, which are very troublesome when they are not used Artificially
after his manner. But one thing is very remarkable, that though his language is
very numerous, and adjusted according to Art, yet it appears to be so little
labored, that the Reader does in no wise perceive the care that has been taken
in it, because it is so clear and intelligible, that every one presupposes as
much facility in the composition, as there is in the reading. He seems to have
imitated Thucydides, whom he follows, especially in his Narratives, and
Orations: But he has the advantage over him, not to be reproached with
obscurity: In all else Thucydides is the pattern, by which he Copies with all
sort of Circumspection. This is the judgment Photius gives of him, who is much
more creditable in this point, than Sigonius, that to say something of his own,
long since thought on, accuses Dio of being too Asiatick, and so prolix in his
Orations, that he is troublesome to his Readers. The world must be left to
their liberty of thinking, according to the Law of the Romans, Populo libera
sunto suffragia. Yet I conceive, for what relates to language, the surest way
is to leave that to those to whom it is natural, and who have sucked it with
their milk, rather than to strangers, who are much more subject to be mistaken.

Besides Dio's History, and his little Treatises before mentioned, it seems
that Suidas ascribes to him, some other compositions, as the life of the
Philosopher Arrianus, the action of Trajan, and certain Itineraries. Raphael
Volaterranus makes him besides, Author of Three Books, entitled de Principe,
and some small Treatises of Morality.

We must also observe, that there have been many Dio's of great repute; and one
amongst the rest, who lived an Age before Dio Cassius, in the same Emperor
Trajans time. This is he, who for his Eloquence, had the Surname of
Chrysostomus, who was of Prussia, and by consequence of Bithynia, as well as
the other, and for whom Trajan had so particular a Love, that he often honored
him with a place by him in his Ch^riot. These Two Dions are distinguished, by
their professions, as well as their Surnames. The first, according to the times
they lived in, was an Orator, and Phisopher, the Second, an Historian, and
Statesman, such as we have represented him in this Section.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF HERODIAN.
THE History of Herodian (as most of those we have already mentioned) receives
its commendation, from the merit of its Author. He declares at the beginning of
his first Book, that he will only write of the affairs of his own time, which
he himself has seen, or understood from creditable persons; for which he was
very competent, because of the public employments that he exercised, for he
might justly boast, to have passed through the principal charges of the State.

About the end of his Second Book, he acquaints us) before he begins to write
of the life of Septimius Severus, which contains all the Third Book) that his
History in general shall comprehend the space of Seventy years, and treat of
the Government of all the Emperors, which succeeded one another, during that
time, that is, from the Reign of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Philosopher, to
that of the younger Gordianus Grandchild of the former, A Latin Historian.
which some, with Julius Capitolinus, reckon to be the Third of that name. His
Eighth Book, which is the last of his Work, Two Roman Emperors killed at Rome
A^. 237.
ends with the unworthy slaughter of the Two old men Balbinus, and Pupienus,
whom he calls Maximus, committed on them by the Praetorian Soldiers, to
advance the forementioned Gordianus Junior to the Throne.

Photius writes of his Style, that he has writ in an Air so much the more clear
and agreeable, in that he has not too much affected the Attick terms; but so
tempered his Phrase, that his discourse is heightened above the lower form of
Oration: and as there is nothing superfluous in his writings, so it cannot be
said, that he has omitted things necessary or useful to be known: and he adds
(to complete his Elogium of him) that considering all the virtues of an
Historian, there are few Authors to whom Herodian ought to subscribe.

We have observed in the preceding Sections, that he has, as well as Dion
Cassius, informed us of the Pagan Ceremonies, used at the Consecration of their
Emperors. It is in the beginning of his Fourth Book, where he so well
represents to us all the Funeral honors, rendered to the Ashes of Severus
(which his Children had transported from England, in an Alablaster Chest) that
it is hard to see any where, any thing more exact, and more instructive. He
tells us how they were put into an Urne, with the general adoration of the
Senate and the People, and carried by the Consuls to the Temple, where the
Sacred Monuments of their Emperors were preserved, and then proceeding to
describe the Funeral Pomp, he informs us, that his Effigies in Wax, all
clothed in Robes of Gold, was placed at the Gate of his Palace on an Iv^ry
Bed, elevated from the Ground, and magnificently adorned: Where Seven days
together the Senators clothed in black, and the Roman Ladies all in White
(without any other Ornaments) came to pay their respects, taking their places,
the Women on the right, and the men on the left side of the Bed, all appearing
with very mournful countenances. He observes also, that the Physicians came
duly to visit this representation of the Emperor, making formal approaches to
the Bed, as if he were alive, and declaring that his sickness grew daily worse
and worse; so true it is that this world is a continual Comedy. Universus
Mundus exercet Historiam, Sea.
After this time was passed over, the most considerable of the Youth, and the
Knights, carried the same Bed on their shoulders, first to the great Market
places, where the Magistrates of Rome used to Surrender their charges; and
there a Chorus of young men on one side, and Virgins on the other, Sung Hymns
to the praise of the dead Emperor: from thence they proceeded to the Campus
Martius, which was out of the Town, where the Bed, and Effigies, were placed in
a large square Tabernacle of Wood, resembling and elevated, Pharos vulgo dict.
to the height of one of those Towers, upon which Lights are placed on the Sea
Coasts, to direct Mariners to avoid the dangers of Rocky shores, whereof he
makes such exact descriptions, both as to the exterior and interior Ornament,
and the several stories of it, that any one may easily thereby comprehend the
manner of the structure. In the next place he writes that the Roman Knights
made their Horses run round about the Tabernacle in certain orderly motions,
which were at that time called Motus Pyrrhichii, and in orbicular revolutions.
And at the same time there were a certain number of Chariots, filled with
persons which represented the most qualified men of the Empire, which also went
in a kind of Procession, round the great Machine, till the next successor of
the Emperor, first took a Torch in his hand, and with it kindled some
combustible matter, made for that purpose at the bottom of it, and then in a
little time all that S^perbe Edifice was consumed in Flames, and at the same
time they let an Eagle fly, which the Pagan superstition of that Age believed,
was to carry away the Soul of the deceased.

Herodian used direct O^ations in all his History. As in the first Book we have
that of Marcus Antoninus to his friends, a little before his death: with
another which Commodus delivered to his soldiers (whilst he was yet very
young) to gain their affections to him. And his Eighth Book does as it were
conclude, with that speech which Maximus made in the middle of his Army, a
little before he marched with it to Rome: and all his other Books are filled
with the like discourses, which are leaning to the form of Declamation; and
which without any difficulty he continually used as occasion offered; as may be
seen by that letter which Macrinus writ from Antioch, to the Senate and Roman
People, in the beginning of his Fifth Book.

He did not moreover avoid Digressions in his Compositions. There is one in his
first Book, on the occasion of that Idol of the Mother of the Gods, which the
Romans caused to be brought from Phrygia; after having related that the Stone,
all ingraved as it was into the form of the Image, fell down from Heaven, in
the Field of Pesinunta, and made the Ship that carried it stop at the Mouth of
Tyber, till a Vestal in proof of her Virginity had drawn it out with her
cincture: and he gives no other reason for the Sacrifices, which the Eunuchs
celebrated to such a Divinity, and many other Fables which depended thereon (in
this whole diversion) than that, writing in Greek, he thought it might be
acceptable to his Countrymen, to be informed of the Theology of the Latins,
whereof few of them had any knowledge.

Julius Capitolinus mentions Herodian, He was an Historian that writ many
Books, whereof some are lost, by the injury of the times. He lived in the time
of Dioclesian the Emperor. Voss. de Hist. Latinis Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
in the Life of Clodius Albinus, as a good Historian, but accuses him
nevertheless, in his two Maximins, to have favored one, in hatred of Alexander
Severus, whose memory was displeasing to him. He did indeed commend the
clemency and mild disposition of that Prince, who reigned Fourteen years,
without any effusion of blood; and without taking away the life of any one,
otherwise than by the ordinary course of Justice, which he remarks as a virtue
very rare, and without example, since Antoninus Philosophus.

As to the Empress Mammea (who is proposed by some, as a Pattern to those to
whom the Education of such Princes, which they shall have brought into the
World, may appertain) he by no means approved of her Government; sometimes he
described her as an avaritious person, that invaded the possessions of many
persons, by evil and fraudulent means, and says, she was for that reason hated
by her Son. And then he represents her to be so proud, that she could not
endure her Daughter in Law Augusta, impatient to have the Title of Empress
given to any but her self, but banished her into Afric, after having caused
her Father to be put to death, against the consent of the Emperor; because he
made public complaints of the wrongs, he, and the young Empress Augusta his
Daughter had endured by the cruelty of the same Mammea: nor was she less
injurious to her Son, who, when he regretted the defeat of a Roman Army, which
was too far advanced in to the Country of the Parthians, could not but impute
the dishonor of it to her, who on pretext of her care, which persuaded him not
to hazard his person, was thereby the occasion of the loss of that Army, and
all the reproach and infamy that attended it. Not does Herodian assign any
other cause of the death of both the Mother, and the Son, who were assassinated
by the Soldiers, than the hatred they had conceived against Mammea, because of
her insatiable avarice and shameless parcimony, whereby Maximinus was advanced
to the Empire.

Lampridius also, after having called Mammea a pious Woman, does not refrain
from arraigning the impudence of her avarice, for amassing together all the
Gold and Silver she could gather. And when he relates the ass^ssinate of
Alexander Severus, he says, that Prince was grievously reproached by his
Murderers, with the covetousness of his Mother. And Sextus Aurelius Victor
declines not, to have it pronounced to that unfortunate Emperor, at the last
moment of his life; that the same person which gave it to him, was the cause of
his death. And he adds that Mammea had reduced her Son to that extremity, by
her frugal humor, that the meat which was untouched at the Table one day, was
saved to be served to it the day following, to content her, though at best it
was but meanly furnished.

But though Herodian justly blamed Mummea, for her ill conduct in the matter of
Government of the State, he very much commends her care for the instruction of
her Son, excluding from him all depraved persons, and especially those Pests of
Courts, which flatter the bad inclinations of Princes; and thereby pe^vert
their nature, and immediately vitia^e their understandings: she would let none
approach him, that were not virtuous in their lives, and of approved behavior:
and so discreetly regulated his time, that it was chiefly occupied, in
employments worthy of him, not permitting any leisure for indecent actions,
which are begotten and nourished by idleness, as their proper Aliment.
Certainly these wise precautions cannot be sufficiently prised, and do well
deserve those commendations which are ascribed to this unhappy Princess. Nor
was her vigilance, and the great pains she took, to preserve her Son from so
vile a Monster as Heli^gabalus (who tried always, to deprive him of his life)
less praise worthy, as our Historian observes. And Lampridius, who, as it was
before hinted, commended her piety of life; adds to it, that never any Prince
was better educated, than Alexander Severus, in all the exercises of peace and
War, by the excellent Masters she provided for him. And he finishes his
discourse of the life of that Emperor, in saying he was of a very good
disposition, being the Son of a most virtuous Mother. Zosimus relates that the
Animosity of the Soldiery, against Mammea and her Son, proceeded from her
favor to Vlpian the famed Lawyer, preferring him above the Captian of the
Emperors Guards, which is no small proof of the zeal she had, He was Secretary
of State, to Theodore King of Italy, An. Dom. 584. he writ many Books, and died
it a Monastery in Calabria, to which he retired: Legra^^ dictionaire de Morere.
to maintain the Laws. The Chronologer Cassiodorus reports, that the piety and
respect which Alexander had for his Mother Mammea, made him to be beloved by
all men. But Eusebius has surpassed all others in her commendation, extolling
her to be a Lady of virtue and piety, in a more religious sense than that of
Cassiodorus, and equal to, if not exceeding therein, all the Women of her time,
and he improves that his good opinion of her to us; because of her sending for
Origin from Antioch, to confer with him of the mysteries of Christianity.

What shall we then conclude of the bad reports which Herodian writes of her,
may we not believe, with Julius Capitolinus, that as he was displeased with the
Government of Alexander Severus, he for that reason arraigned the Qualities of
his Mother, or rather that in a mixture of virtues and vices wherewith Mammea
was taxed, he would suppress neither of them, to acquit himself the better of
the duty of an Historian; which last I take to be the most equitable opinion.

Though we consider Herodian in this place, but as an Historian, Suidas informs
us that he writ many other Books, which are not preserved to our time. He was
Originally a Grammarian of Alexandria, and lived in the Three Hundredth year of
Christ, the Son of one Apollonius, surnamed Difficilis of the same profession:
and perhaps it is for this reason that Ammianus Marcellinus calls him, Artium
minutissimum sciscitatorem. However, he passed the best part of his life at
Rome, in the Courts of the Emperors, where he had the means to inform himself
(with that curiosity which appears in his writings) of many excellent
particulars, which are no where else to be found.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF ZOSIMUS.
THEY who with Sigonius make no distinction, between the Historian Zosimus, and
Two or Three others of the same name, commit in my opinion an inexcusable
fault. For Suidas names Two; the First an Alexandrian, that had, amongst other
his Works, writ the life of Plato; and the Second, of Gaza, or Ascalon, who
commented upon the writings of Demosthenes, and Lysias, in the time of the
Emperor Anastasius. We ought not therefore to confound this last Zosimus, Lib.
3.
with the Historian, who (as Evagrius expressly affirms, in his invective
against him) lived under Theodosius the younger. Eccl. Hist. Cap. 41.
Neither do I know, why we should take the Alexandrian for the same Historian,
their writings being quite different, and the Quality of Count, and Advocate of
the Treasury wherewith the last was dignified, was not attributed to the other
by Suidas, who gives him only the Title of Philosopher. Balthazar Bonifacius
would have it, that the Historian Zosimus wrote a Chemical Book of the
Transmutation of Metals, L. de Romans hist. s^r.
which he heard was kept in that excellent Library Royal of Paris: But he is
mistaken in his conjecture, for the Manuscript he mentions, which I have
examined, is of one Zosimus, who styles himself Panopolitanus, and is indeed a
counterfeit name; a practice usual among Chemists, who delight so to deceive
one another, by writings, which they ascribe falsely, sometimes to Democritus,
sometimes to Zosimus, and sometimes to others, to give them the better
Authority. But the History of Zosimus has no resemblance to those compositions.
If we may believe Photius, it may have some affinity, with Eunapius his History
of the Caesar's, which Zosimus is said to have merely abridged, so great a
likeness there was between one and the other, except in those places where
Stilico was concerned, whose reputation Zosimus did not defame as Eunapius did;
whereof we might more particularly relate, if the Venetians had made public
the Manuscript, which we are assured they have of Eun^pius his History. Histor.
Eccles. l. 3.
Zosimus as Evagrius reports left in his History in six Books, Cap. 41.
whereof the first comprehends all the Caesar's from Augustus to Probus, and was
by the Author continued to Diocletian; but the matter is so contracted and
succinct that nothing thing can be more: the Five other Books are larger,
especially when he comes to the time of Theodosius the Great, and of his
Children Arcadius and Honorius, because he then writ of what he had seen. He
goes but a little beyond the Siege which Alaricus laid to Rome; and the
occasions of division which some Sowed between Honorius and him. And indeed we
have but the beginning of the Sixth Book, the end being lost. But I know not
upon what Authority Sigonius builds, to assert that there was a Seventh Book of
Zosimus his History, which was also lost, since Photius mentions but Six, and
no other person says any thing of a Seventh.

We hinted before, that there was an Invective of Evagrius against Zosimus,
which may be seen more at large in Nicephorus Callistus, Lib. 16. Eccl. Hist.
Photius says indeed that he barks like a Dog, at those of our Christian
belief. Cap. 41. and se^.
And few Christian Authors, till Leunclavius who translated his History into
Latin, made any Apology for him: To say the truth although this learned German
defends him very pertinently in many things, showing that they were to blame to
require of a Pagan Historian, as Zosimus was, other thoughts than those he
exposed; or that he should refrain from discovering the vices of the first
Christian Emperors, since he also had not concealed their virtues: Nevertheless
it may be said, that, in many places, he expressed more Animosity, in that
behalf, than the Laws of History do permit. Yet I think, he had reason to
reproach Constantin, of that imposition of Chrysargyr or glisteting Gold, which
Anastasius afterward removed, and that his duty obliged him to arraign his
luxury and prodigality: nor was it a fault to have accused him, of having made
his wife Fausta to be smothered in too hot a Stove, after he had commanded
through Jealousy his own Son Crispus to be put to death: Perhaps Eusebius
writing in this Constantine's time, or at the latest in that of his Son
Constantius, durst not publish such bold truths, as it happens to those who
expose any relations, wherein the Governing powers are interessed. Nor is it
unknown, that Constantine committed several other actions worthy of blame. He
repealed from Exile the Arch Haeretick Arrius, to gratify his Sister
Constantia; and banished St Athanasius to Tryers, to the great prejudice of
Christianity. But nevertheless Zosimus cannot be excused, who as much as in him
lay, made an ill interpretation of all the actions of this Prince: who made
himself a Christian, if you believe him, only because he was told, that
Paganism had no faculty to wash away so many crimes as he had committed; and
therefore he resolved by the advice of a certain Egyptian, to embrace the
Christian Religion, Lib. 2.
which promised an absolution of all sorts of offenses. But this assumption is
as if Zosimus had penetrated into the inward thoughts of Constantine, and all
those graces with which his Soul might be filled, by the liberality of Heaven.
Moreover, when he speaks of the differences he had with his Brother in Law
Licinius, he lays all the blame on him, as one that never kept his word. And
he is not content to say, that Constantin caused him to be strangled in
Thessalonica, violating thereby his faith given to the Wise of this unhappy
person; but it was his usual Style, to take hold of all occasions to blast his
reputation to the world.

And yet it is not on the Subject of Constantin alone, that his passion is seen
against Christianity. He attributes the fall of the Roman Empire, to the
contempt of the Ancient Pagan Religion, and principally to their neglecting in
Diocletian's time, the celebration of the secular Plays. And to the misfortunes
which happened to Gratian, Lib. 2.
he assigns no other cause, than his refu^^l as a Christian, to be the Pontifex
Maximus of the Gentiles, for which even Constantin, says he, had no aversion.
When Theodosius exhorted the Roman Senate, to quite the worship of Idols, Lib.
4.
declaring, that he would no more go to the charge of Sacrifices; he put this
answer into the mouths of all the Senators, that there was no reason to oblige
them to abandon a Religion, wherein they had prospered, during Twelve Hundred
years, to follow an unreasonable faith, to which it was intended they should be
compelled. The injurious description of the Monathal Order, Lib. 5.
which he said, did appropriate to its self all the wealth of the Nation, under
a pretext of making the poor partake of it, is no small proof of his Animosity.
He called that Olympius, an Hypocrite, and wicked man, who was the cause of the
ruin of Stilico, as well to make him always pass for innocent, as because the
other was a Christian of great esteem, as may be seen by Two Letters, which
Saint Augustine writ to him. In fine, no person, in my opinion, ought to believe
him; when he does not only represent St John Chrysostom, Ep. 124. and 129.
as a Seducer of the People; but affirms that Pope Innocent the First, whom he
names (...) ur^is Episcopum, permitted Pagan Sacrifices to be made, for the
safety of Rome, whilst Alaricus besieged it.

Zosimus his aversion to Christians will be less wondered at, when one
considers what deference he had, to all the Superstitions of Idolatry, which
made him tell many tales; that I should think unworthy of History, if I had not
already observed, that the like are found even in those, who have writ with the
greatest reputation. In the first Book, after the taking of Zenobia by
Aurelian, he re^ites the Oracles, and shows the Podigies, which did forerun the
ruin, of the Palm^renians her Subjects. And in a Famine toward the Rhine, he
makes corn enough to fall from Heaven to make bread, and by that means render
the legions of the Emperor Probus victorious. The Fable of that Vaelesius, who
was warned by a voice, to Sacrifice to Ceres, and Proserpina, is seen in his
Second Book: And in the Fourth he alleges, that the Sacrifices offered to
Achilles by one Nestorius, defended Athens, and all the Athenian Territory from
a great Earthquake, after the death of Valentinian. In the Fifth, he pretends
that the same City was again saved, by the Apparition of that Hero, and of
Minerva who pacified the mind of Alaricus, Ad. Ann. Chr. 395. art. 16.
which I leave to the learn^d Baronius to refute. He mentions Two Statues, one
of Jupiter, and the other of that Daughter of his, to be miraculously preserved
from a fire, happening in Arcadius his Reign, in Constantinople: and all the
misfortunes which overwhelmed the House of S^ilico, to proceed from the
imprecations of a Vestal, because his Wife Serena had the temerity to adorn her
self, with one of Rhea's attires for the head; and also because she took her
Collar, the impiety was punished with a Cord, wherewith Serena being strangled,
suffered Death in that part which seemed to be most culpable.

May it not then be reasonable to avouch, that infidelity has made Zosimus
write many things, either in favor of his Altars whose destruction he was
unwilling to see, or against ours which he could not endure, to the prejudice
of his History: and that we might be therefore induced to despise it, if it did
not contain some curious matters, which are not learned elsewhere. And it is
certain that laying aside the excess of sharpness and Animosity, which he
showed against the first Christian Emperors, it is injustice to take it ill,
that he noted their defects, when he omitted not, as has been said, to praise
their virtues, as may be seen, in what he expressed, both of Theodosius, and
Constantine. Was he not obliged in duty, to reproach the Children of the last,
with their strange cruelties, in spilling the blood of their nearest Relations?
And can we think it strange, that he should exhibit the successors of the
First in their lively colors? Arcadius, to make the same Allusion, which
Leunclavius used, was a true Animal of Arcadia. His brother Honorius was no
better: and both miserably possessed by Women, and Eunuchs, who abused their
Authority, and were the cause of so many disgraces in the Roman Empire, that
its ruin has not a more certain Epoche, th^^ the time of their dominion.
Zosimus had then been faulty, if he had not instructed us in all this, and they
are much to blame, who bear him an ill will for having done it.

His Style is recommendable, in the judgment of Photius, for its purity, and
that agreeable sweetness, which ordinarily accompanies that which is writ
intelligibly. His sentences are short, and his phrase concise, as they ought to
have been, since he brought into a narrower compass, what others had more
diffusedly exposed before him. It is also for this reason, that Photius
observes his language to have rarely had any figures, which are not proper to
the manner of writing that he used. He likewise refrained from Orations, and
all those Ornaments which only become high Eloquence: and we cannot but
acknowledge, that he is no way comparable to those first Historians which we
have already examined.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF PROCOPIUS.
PROCOPIUS was a person of great fame in the Reign of Justinian the Emperor, he
was Secretary of Belisarius, all the time when that renowned General was
employed in the Wars of Persia, Afric, and Italy; and described the actions
of many of them. He was both an Orator and a Rhetorician, and no mean
Historian. His History contains Eight Books, Two, of the Persian War,
epitomized by Photius in the Sixty Third Chapter of his Bibliotheca: Two, of
the Wars of the Vandals: and Four, of that of the Goths: Of all which there is
a kind of Compendium, in the Preface of Agathias, who began his History, where
Procopius left. But besides these Eight Books, Suidas mentions a Ninth, which
comprehends matters not before published, and he calls it his (...) or inedita,
which is an invective against Justinian and his Wife Theodora: and those
inedita were by Vossius thought to be lost; though there have been of late some
Editions of them, as will hereafter appear.

He is said, to have used in his History, both oblique and direct Orations, and
all such as he believed, might make him approach the method and manner of the
Ancients; yet he, as well as Zosimus, came far short of them. That which
induces me to put him in the Rank of the precedent, is, that I conceive, he may
pass, with Agathias who follows next, for the Two last Pagan Historians that
have writ in Greek, of whom in our time there remains any thing considerable. I
know that many take him for a Christian Author: and that in some passages of
his works, especially in the Treatise he made of the Edifices of Justinian, he
speaks like the Christians of his time. But there are other passages in his
writings, so contrary to that doctrine; and the opinion of those that believe
he is an Ethnic, is founded upon such strong considerations, that I cannot but
yield to it. For not insisting upon his seeming in many places, to esteem
Fortune a great Goddess: and not minding the strange Antimosity which he showed
against Justinian, grounded partly upon the interest of Religion: that place
alone in his First Book of the Wars of the Goths, where he speaks of the
Ambassadors which the Emperor sent to the Bishop of Rome, to reconcile the
different opinions of Christians, is sufficient to undeceive those who
considered him as a Christian Historian. (...).
I will not trouble my self, says he, to relate the Subject of such
controversies; (although it is not unknown to me) because I hold it a mere
folly to covet to comprehend the Divine Nature, and understand what God is.
Human wit knows not the things here below, how then can it be satisfied in the
search after Divinity? I led alone therefore such vain matter, and which the
credulity of man only causes to be respected; contenting my self with
acknowledging, that there is one God full of bounty, who governs us, and whose
power stretches over this whole Universe. Let every one therefore believe what
he thinks fit, whether he be a Priest and tied to Divine Worship, or a man of a
private and secular condition. How could he more plainly deride all our
Theology, and the zeal of the Fathers of the Church, who were then busied in
suppressing the Heresy of the Arrians, in what relates to the Second person of
the Trinity? His discourse expresses him to be a perfect Deist, who thought, as
many other Philosophers have done (and amongst the rest that Melissus in
Hesychius) that one could determine nothing of God but rashly, and that it was
impossible to have any knowledge of him. How can it be imagined, that such a man
was a Christian, who founded his whole belief of Heavenly matters upon such
erroneous maxims? If we add to this, the marks of Pagan Superstition which
appear in all his books, we shall be hardly able to distinguish him from the
most profane of the Gentiles. The Tale he tells in the first book of the Persian
War, of the Artifice used by some of the Magi, to make One Arsaces confess the
truth, is of this strain. They covered one half of a borded Floor with Persian
Earth, and the other with Armenian, and both of them conjured in such a sort,
that when Arsaces was upon the last half which was that covered with his
country Earth, he confessed all that he had denied upon the other. In the
following Book, he relates that some military Ensigns turned of themselves,
from the West to the East, presaging thereby the calamity wherein the
Inhabitants of Antioch fell. He makes King Genzerich, in the first Book of the
War of the Vandals, to understand by the flight of an Eagle upon the head of
Martianus, that he should be one day Emperor. And he reports, that Attila ready
to quit the Siege of Aquileia, stayed his enterprise upon seeing a Stork carry
its young ones out of the City. And in the same Book he relates one of his
dreams, which was the most vain that sleep could form; and yet to testify how
much he relied on it, he confesses that nothing but that made him resolve on
his Sea Voyage with Belisarius. Nor are his Writings concerning the War with
the Goths, Lib. 1.
less exempt from such like superstition; wherein he makes a Jew foretell, by
Thirty Hogs the ruin of the Goths in Italy: and Constantin bury in the chief
Marketplace of the City (which bears his name) that renowned Palladium of
Aeneas, purposely transported thither from Rome. Which wild relations have no
conformity with the purity of Christian Religion.

But since we have mentioned something of that ill will Procopius bore to
Justinian, which he made so visible in his Anecdota, I^edita.
it is expedient to examine that work a little; because it is the place from
whence, those who pretend to defame this Emperor, have always collected their
detractions. If we make it apparent that Procopius was much to blame, in
writing so defamatory a Satyr against his Sovereign, to gratify his passion; we
shall at the same time render those aspersions inconsiderable, which others
have cast upon his reputation. The word Anecdota imports that it was a secret
work, and that the Author thereof had no mind to be known. He is judged to have
composed it, in the Two and Thirtieth year of the Empire of Justinian, and left
it imperfect, as well because he repented that he was so far transported, as
for the satisfaction he received in his Stipend (which was then paid him) and
many other favors which he obtained. He had complained in several places
before that one, that the Salaries of such serviceable men as he were detained:
and it was an insupportable grief unto him, to see himself excluded from those
honorable places and employments above Thirty years, to which others were
admitted, whose desert he thought no way equal to his. Lastly having been
Belisarius his Secretary, during all the Wars of Persia, Afric, and Italy (as
it was before mentioned) he was received into the number of the Senators:
attained unto the Quality of Illustrious, which was given to few men: and to
complete his dignity the Emperor made him Prefect of new Rome, where all
offices were inferior to his. In the mean time his book of Anecdota remained;
Suidas makes mention of it, and they who for diverse considerations have been
animated aganst the memory of Justinian, made use of it and alleged the
matters in it to his prejudice: it was not long since printed with Expositions
and Comments (as bad as the Text they explain) others besides my self have
already endeavored to confute the absurdities of it; Thomas Rivius, and
Gabriel Trivorius.
but it shall suffice to sho^ summarily, that all which Procopius has writ of
History will prove ridiculous, if never so little credit be given to the
Calumnies of this piece.

He protests in the beginning of the First Book of the Persian War, that he
cannot be reasonably reproached of writing any thing for favor, or to oblige
the undeserving; nor of refraining to speak the truth to spare a friend: and
acknowledges in the same place, that as Eloquence is the object of Rhetoric,
and Fable that of Poetry; the knowledge of truth is the only end of History.
After this declaration what can be said in his excuse, for having represented
Justinian in his History, as a mighty and most virtuous Prince, and in this
Libel rendered him the most infamous and vicious of men? The fear of offending
the Sovereign Powers which is thereupon alleged, cannot qualify such a
shameful diversity, nor reconcile so manifest a contradiction. And Procopius is
at the same time convinced of having trespassed, against the two most important
Laws of History, whereof one forbids the writing of lies, and the other,
concealing of a truth which ought to be discovered. But for a better
understanding of this matter it may not be impertinent to proceed to some
particulars.

It is certain that Procopius ever made very honorable mention of Justinian,
She was a common Comedian before he married her.
and his Wife Theodora in his History, although he did it not so often as he
might. In the Second Book of the War against the Persians, he extols the
Emperor for providence joined with singular l^iety, on the Subject of that
great Pestilence which passed from Egypt to Constantinople, where he used all
possible means to allay it. And in his Six Narrations of the Edifices of the
same Justinian, he incessantly celebrates his greatness of Courage, his
devotion, liberality, clemency, and magnificence. That Monastery of Penitent
Women, whom the Empress Theodora withdrew from vice, gives him occasion to
commend her zeal and charity jointly with her Husbands, although he recounts
the action otherwise in his Anecdota. But he has remembered this Lady in many
places of his History with great titles of honor. Lib. 1. de Bello Pers.
When a council was held to resist the enterprises of Hipatius (who had caused
himself to be proclaimed Emperor in Constantinople) he makes her argue so
generously that, as he affirms, nothing infused so much courage into the whole
imperial council, as her Heroical resolution. And when he describes the ill
conditions of that Johannes of Cappadocia who was turned out of his office of
Prefect of the Praetorate, he says, he was so indiscreet and rash, as to
slander the Empress Theodora even in the presence of Justinian, whom he there
Styles a very discreet Lady. And though he did not praise her in other places
of his History, he never blamed her. In the end of the Second Book of the
Persian War, he mentions her death, but does not speak ill of her. And in the
Third treating of the War of the Goths, he again remembers her decease, which
happened at the same time that Belisaerius sent his Wife Antonina to Court, to
forward his affairs there by the favor of the Empress, which he relates
without using the least invective against her.

But let us now see the reverse of the Medal, and with how many different
colors he draws the Picture of Justinian and Theodora, in that extravagant
Satyr which we complain of.

To render this Prince the more odious, Page 37.
he will have him resemble Domitiaen in his outward form, whose memory was so
much abhorred, that by a Decree of the Senate of Rome, his Statues wear beat
down through the whole Empire, and his name razed out of the public
inscriptions. But though he is constrained in the comparison he makes of these
Two Monarchs, to confess that Justinian was not ill-favored, yet he likens him
in one place to an Ass, not only for his dullness and sottishness, but also in
respect of his wagging Ears, which made him be called in a full Theater (...)
that is to say Master Ass, Page 36.
by those of the Prasine Faction whereto he was an Enemy; according to the
observation of Nicalacis Alemannus, who lately caused these Anecdota to be
printed with Historical Notes of the same kind. Moreover he makes him a Prince,
that condemned upon the first, and very light information without hearing; and
would coldly and without any remorse, order the razing of places, the sacking
of Cities, and the desolation of Provinces. Page 39. and 59.
The love of Women, he says, transported him beyond all bounds; and he was an
irreconcilable Enemy. He also accuses him to make a show of being a Christian,
but that in his heart he esteemed the Heathen Duities. His prodigality (he
writes) especially in building, forced him to ase strange exactions, Page 91.
so that besides the extraordinary Tolls, he drew from the Prefect of his
Tribunal of Justice, a tribute, which he himself called in a scoffing manner an
Airy Lap, because it had no other foundation than his covetous and Tyrannical
humor. His light mind was susceptible of all impressions except humanity. He
never kept his word, but when it was to his advantage: Page 60.
and was so transported with flattery, that nothing made him affect Tribonianus
so much, as hearing of him once say, that he feared his extreme piety would
make Heaven steal him from the Earth on a sudden, and when it was least thought
of. Lastly, it seemed, if this Character of him was true, that Nature had took
pleasure to instill into the Soul of this Monarch, all the defects which are
capable to defame the rest of Mankind. And the more easily to betray those they
had a mind to ruin, his Empress and he laid this Snare, they feigned to be
always at discord, so that the one to compass their design, sided with those
of the blew Livery, the other openly favored the contrary party namely the
Green, which were the Two factions of that time. They were both of them so
impious says this Detractor, that many persons to insinuate themselves into
their esteem, seemed to be wicked and have all their inclinations bent to vice.
And amongst those who knew them so well as Procopius, Page 56.
they passed for no other than Devils Incarnate, and true Furies invested with
humanity, more conveniently to infest human kind, incense Nations one against
the other, and turn all the world upside down. It is certain, as he pretends,
that the Mother of Justinian often confessed, that he was not begotten by her
Husband Sabbatius, but an Incubus who lay with her. And as for Theodora, they
who loved her while she was a Comedian, Lib. 58.
reported that Demons or Nocturnal Spirits often forced them from her, to take
their places in her bed. That part of the book which for shame was cut off,
from the One and Fortieth, and Two and Fortieth Pages of the printed Anecdota,
was sent to me from Rome, wherein Procopius renders this Woman Author of
actions so strangely incontinent, that I think no body has reason to envy the
Vatican Library the Original entire, and that such abominations were never
heard off. But let this that has been writ, suffice for a brief description of
Justinian and Theodora, acco^^^ng to the lineaments wherein Procopius has
represented them, in that infamous work which discred is all the rest we have
of his. I shall not enlarge on what Nicephorus Bartholus, Johannes Faber,
Gennadius, and several others have written of Justinian, who report that he was
ranked amongst the Saints, assigning even the Calends of August for his holy
day. But though he and his Empress had been the most vicious persons in the
World, Procopius ought not to have been so unlike to himself, and so unfaithful
to truth, as to speak of them so as he did, overthrowing the Faith of his
History in his book of Antidota: and that of Anecdota, in his Treatise of the
Edifices of Justinian, which is the last of his works. But without undertaking
to refute so many calumnies, what appearance is there to accuse this Emperor of
cruelty, after he had given the world a proof of his clemency, by his gentle
usage not only of the Vandal Kings, but of Vi^ges, and Gilimer, those very
Subjects who had conspired against his person and Government. Johannes de
Cappadocia his prefect, and the valiant Captain Artaban^ convicted of
perfidiousness, escaped with imprisonment only, and the Last in a short time
was restored to his offices, and the favor of that Prince, from whom he would
have taken both life and Empire. I know that he is reproached for having been
too severe to Belisarius. Yet we read nothing of it in Procopius, who in all
likelihood would not have concealed it. Agathias writes plainly that those who
envied this great Captain, were the cause that his services were not worthily
rewarded, without speaking one word either of the condemnation, or confiscation
of his goods. Lib. 3. Hist. cap. 32.
Gregory of Tours alleges, that Justinian was necessitated to substitute in
his place the Eunuch Norses in Italy, because he was too often defeated there
by the French, adding that to humble him, the Emperor reduced him to his first
place of Consta le, which could not be so considerable at Constantinople, aa it
was not long since in France. Some, but petty writers of no Authority, affirm
that being reduced to extreme misery, he was forced to beg; but that must be
accounted as a Fable: and on the contrary we may observe in his person the
bounty of his Prince, who having heaped riches and Honors on him, never
treated him worse, although endeavors were thrice used to render him suspected
of designing to be master of the State. It is also strange that he upbraids
Justinian with his buildings, who writ a book purposely in their commendation,
and who describing the lofty structure of so many Churches, Hospitals, and
Monasteries, did no less admire the Piety, than the magnificence of their
Founder. Evagrius attributes unto him the reparation or re-establishment of a
Hundred and Fifty Cities; But I see no reason for this to be imputed to his
disadvantage. Nor has the love of Women, for which his reputation is blemished,
any better foundation. For though he may be blamed, for having engaged himself
so far in the affection of Theodora, as to extort from his Predecessor Justin,
new laws in favor of Actresses, that she might be qualified to marry him; we
cannot therefore accuse him, like Procopius, for having abandoned his thoughts
to Women, without specifying any particulars, when neither his own History, or
any other mentions those Ladies to whom he was so passionately addicted; and
who doubtless would have prevailed on his weakness, if he had been so fond on
that side, as the Anecdota would make it be believed. I could not forbear to
manifest in some sort, the absurdity of these Two or Three heads of accusation,
by which one may judge of the rest, though they were not confuted either by
themselves, or by what we had observed before we proposed them.

I must nevertheless, add this only word on the Subject of the Stupidity of
Justinian, that though he had wagging Ears as the Satyr applies to him, he was
never so blockish as he represents him.

The truth is, a fault which was committed a a Hundred and Fifty years ago, by
one Chalcondylius that then printed Suidas by a corrupt Copy, where the name of
Justinian passed for that of Justin, Anecd. Page 28.
with the Surname of (...) an illiterat man, which even Procopius attributes
only to the last, who could not so much as write his name; has made worthy men
mistake: amongst which Alciatus and Budaeus, when upon this false Authority,
which all the Vatican Manuscripts contradict, they ranked Justinian with the
most ignorant Princes that ever were. I was curious to see in the King of
France his Library, Three other Manuscripts of Snidas which are there, to
assure me of the mistake which happened in that impression: Two of the best
account were very correct, and ascribe this ignorance to Justin alone (who was
known to be a mean keeper of Oxen, before he bore Arms by which he attained to
the Empire) but the Third was false, and in that Justinian was called Justin,
which shows that the Impression before mentioned probably followed a Copy, as
erroneous as the printed Book. In the mean time it is notorious, that Justinian
had made a great progress in learning, under his Tutor the Abbot Theophilus.
Many Books are ascribed unto him by Isidorus and others. Cassiodorus his
letters style him most learned. And this observation has been also made, that
many crowned Heads at the same time made profession of Philosophy, Chosroes in
Persia, the unfortunate Theodahatus in Italy, and our Justinian at
Constantinople; which plainly discovers the injury that is done him, by those
terms of stupid and ignorant.

Though Procopius is to blame for having yielded so much, to his particular
resentments against Justinian, the reading of his History is of great moment,
because we can learn from no other, what he delivers as an Eyewitness, of the
Wars of this Emperor in Persia, of the Vandals in Afric, and of the Goths in
Italy. It was that which made Leonard Aretin commit the crime of a Plagiary
(for we have no other term to signify that sort of theft) when he had a mind
to publish their History in Latin. For being not able to learn almost any thing
of them elsewhere, he resolved to Translate the Three books of Procopius into
the Roman Language; dividing them into Four by making Two of the last, and
rescinding in some places, what he judged less important to his Country, and
adding something in others; as the burning of the Capitol by Totilas, by whom
as Procopius affirms, so much of Rome was not consumed by fire, as Aretin
reports. In the mean time he is contented to say in his Preface, that he used
some Foreign Commentaries, or Greek relations, not naming the person of whom
he is merely a bad translater, by an affected forgetfulness which cannot be too
much condemned. We have already in our foregoing Sections, exclaimed upon those
who counterfeit Authors, ascribing books to persons that never thought upon
making of them. And certainly it is a great point of infidelity thus to deceive
as much as one can even all mankind: But as this vice is very great, I find
that of a Plagiary which is the contrary, and takes away instead of giving, to
be much the more shameful: because there is nothing more vile or infamous than
to steal, and they who apply to themselves other men's labors, confess their
own inability to produce something of value. But to return to Procopius, he was
acquainted under Belisarius, with almost all the secrets of State of that Age,
which renders his History of great weight. But the excessive zeal which he has
for this General, makes Bodin amongst others, accuse him of too much partiality
toward him. Thus Eginard is reproved for having always flattered Charlemagne;
Eusebius, Constantine; Paulus Jovius, Cosmodi Medici; Sandoual Charles the
Fifth; and several others, the Princes whom they affected to oblige at the
expense of truth. It is certain that Procopius never speaks but to the
advantage of Belisarius; he illustrates all his actions, and rather chooses to
suppress a part of the successes which he recites, Page 58.
than to write any thing which might any ways blemish the reputation of his
Hero. I shall produce one single instance, and such a one that I think is not
to be marched in any other Historian, the place is in his Second Book of the
War of the Vandals, where, after the Oration of Belisarius to his Soldiers,
and Two others of his Adversary Stozas; Procopius writes that the Troops of the
former revolting, forced their Chiefs to retire into a Temple where they were
all killed. He was obliged in reason to signify thereupon what became of
Belisarius, who one would think was massacred with the rest. But because it was
an unhappy event, without telling how he came off; Procopius adds only, that
Justinian upon this ill news dispatched away his Nephew Germanus, who came and
took possession of the command of the Armies in Afric; and not saying the
least word of Belisarius, he makes his narration so lame that the Reader knows
not where he is. The Latin Text is a little deffective here, having not all
which is read in the Greek, yet this fault we speak of appears also in that
version.

This puts me in mind of another place, in the Second Book also of the War of
the Goths, where upon a mere Letter of Belisarius to Theodebert King of France,
he quits the pursuit of his victories in Italy, and returns hastily into his
Country. He acknowledged his fault, says he, and his temerity, as soon as he
had read the Letter of Belisarius, returning with all speed to France: as if
this powerful Monarch came thither like a raw Scholar, without having well
considered what he did; and the Rhetoric of Belisarius had obliged him and all
his Council, to absent themselves for want of a reply. Certainly there is a
great defect of judgment in this passage, and Aretin had reason to supply
something of his own in this place, saying that hunger and want of victuals
made the Victorious French return into their Countries. He might have added
sickness, according to the relation of Gregory of Tours who speaks of this
retreat. I find moreover, Lib. 3. Hist. cap. 32.
that our Historian makes Theodebert Author of an action, which does not agree
with what he had said a little before of him, namely that the French were the
men of the world, who violated their Faith the most; when the letter of
Belisarius, which upbraids that Prince with nothing else but not observing
Treaties, had nevertheless such power over him. An Author of more judgment
would not have said so, nor have rashly offended a whole Nation, with the like
Animosity wherewith the Romans declaim against the Greek and Punick Faith, at
the same time when they themselves were the most unfaithful, that ever had
been, to all Nations of the World. I must, before I leave that place where
Procopius spoke so ill of the French, do the Nation reason, by remarking with
how much malice and absurdity, he makes them in the same place, become Masters
of the Camp of the Goths, and of that of the Grecians Romanized, as it were by
a surprise, although they exceeded the number of a Hundred Thousand: as if
their Army descended from Heaven upon the heart of Italy, like Grasshoppers,
which a boisterous Tempest of wind transports sometimes, from one Region to
another. But since we reprove him of having been too partial, let us stop here
the course of the zeal, which we have for our Ancestors, Meaning the French.
that it may not be judged excessive.

To conclude, I think that Procopius deserves to be read attentively,
especially in consideration of the things which he alone treats of with an
exact knowledge. And that besides a great discretion is to be used in reading
of him, to discern the good things from the bad, and the defects, whereof we
have produced Examples, from what he has writ more judiciously. He was of
Caesarea in Palaestine, from whence he came to Constantinople, in the time of
the Emperor Anastasius, whose esteem he obtained, as well as that of Justin
the First, and Justinian. Suidas after he had given him the Surname of
Ilustrious, calls him Rhetorician and Sophister, as truly he seems to have been
to much for an Historian. He is diffused, but with a Copiousness more Asiatick
than Athenian, which has often in it more superfluity than true Ornament.
Photius only inserted in his Library, as was before mentioned, an abstract of
the Two Books of the War against the Persians, Cap. 160.
although he made some mention of the rest. He distinguishes him elsewhere,
from another Procopius Surnamed Gazeus, who lived in the same time of
Justinian, and who also was a Rhetorician by Profession. If I durst follow the
judgment of one of the men of this Age, M. Gueit.
who has the greatest insight into the Greek Tongue; I should willingly be of
his mind, that the Book of Anecdota is a supposed work, and falsely ascribed to
the Historian Procopius. For that which is really his, is writ in a Style much
different from that of this Satyr, and has much more of the Air of Ancient
Greece. But because even they who have writ against the Anecdota, seem to
agree, that they are his to whom they are imputed, I was obliged to make the
precedent Reflections, and to treat Procopius upon this Foundation, more to his
disadvantage than I had othewise done. It is true, that at the same time I end
this Section, an Epistle of Balthazar Boniface to the Clarissimo Molini, which
I read even now, hinders me from repenting of what I did. It is printed at the
end of his judgment upon those who wrote the Roman History. And because they did
not mention the Anecdota in the Chapter of Procopius, he takes occasion to
declare his opinion to that Noble Venetian in the said Letter. He appears to be
no less concerned than I, at such an insolent invective. And wonders, as I did,
that Rivius, and they who undertook to answer it, never thought of considering
it as a supposed piece, although he himself comes to no determination therein,
being only content to declare how much he suspects it.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF AGATHIAS.
I HAVE as much reason to doubt of the Religion of Agathias, as I had of that
of Procopius. For when he speaks, in the beginning of his History, of the
French of his time; he praises them amongst other things, for being all
Christians, and because they entertained (as he adds) very good thoughts of
God. But when he gives a reason in his Third Book, why the fortress of Onogoris
Situate in Colchis, was called in his time the Fort of St Stephen; he reports,
that this Protomartyr was stoned to death in that Place, using the term (...)
as they say, or as it is said; from whence many draw a strong proof of his
infidelity. The most common opinion also, founded as well on this passage, as
on some others, lists him in the number of the Gentiles; although he never
railed any more than Procopius, against Christianity; as most Pagan Historians
did in imitation of Zosimus. The time wherein these Two lived, not favoring
Paganism, is perhaps the only cause. He himself declares in his Preface, that
Murina a City of Asia, was the place of his Nativity; which he distinguishes
from another of Thrace, bearing the same name. His Father was called Memnonius;
and he professed the Law, pleading at the Judicatories of Smyrna in Quality of
an Advocate, as Suidas reports; whence he had the Surname of Scholasti^us:
because the places where the Roman Laws were taught, then went under the name
of Schools, as they are even at this time in some places called. He confesses
that Poetry was the Mistress of his first affections, which led him to write
many small Poems in Heroic Verse, that he published under the Title of
Daphnicks. And there are certain of his Epigrams collected by diverse hands,
whereof, I believe, many are seen in the Greek Anthology under his name. And
this renders his Style so agreeable and Florid, having undertook History, by
the advice of Eutychianus the First Secretary of State, as approaching in this
respect to, and bordering (as he terms it) upon Poetry. Sigonius and Verderius
were of another mind concerning his writing, and that very different from this
opinion, listing him amongst the lowest and impurest writers. But they were not
only mistaken in Agathias his Style; but have been accused for several other
rash judgments; so that I have been constrained many times hitherto, to follow
some more equitable censures than theirs. He began not to write till after the
death of Justinian, in the Reign of Justin the Second, as he himself declares
in his Preface, beginning his History where Procopius left. And I doubt not,
but that great Statesman Eutychianus, who put him upon so high an Enterprise,
and who was his intimate friend, furnished him with many rare pieces and
Memorials of consequence, to make him so successful as he has been. There are
Letters and Direct Orations in all his Books; as that of Narses in the Two
First; of Aetes in the Third; of the Deputies of Colchos in the Fourth; of
Belisarius in the Fifth. And not content to penetrate into the Councels, and to
discover the principal causes of events, he frequently gives his judgment
thereupon: and contrary to the custom of Xenophon and Caesar, who never declare
what they think of things, he delivers his opinion of matters; and therein
imitates some great Authors, who were not of the mind of these we mention.

Although Agathias highly commends Procopius; he does not refrain from
following opinions very contrary to his, and even reproves him sometimes, for
having given unreasonable conjectures: of which there are many examples; the
most considerable whereof, is that which he said to the advantage of the
French, in his First Book, against the infamous reproach which Procopius had
cast upon them, of being the most unfaithful of men. Agathias on the contrary,
after he had shown that they were very polite and civil, as they who already
made use of the Roman Laws almost in all things, adds, that they were to be
esteemed for nothing so much, as the exact justice they observed without
exception, their Kings themselves being not exempted from it; whereby they
lived in an admirable Union. Certainly, besides that justice is a transcendent
virtue, and which comprehending all others, cannot subsist without fidelity;
nothing is more contrary to it, than breach of word of Faith, and consequently
Agathias could not more reasonably contradict Procopius, nor make better amends
for the wrong he had done the French Nation.

It is observable, that notwithstanding these Two Historians had such opposite
thoughts in what concerned us, The French.
they agreed in what related to the greatness and independence of our Kings.
Procopius acknowledges, in the Third Book of the Gothish War, that They, and
the Roman Emperors, were the only Monarchs in the World, who had the privilege
to stamp their Images on golden Coin; so that even the King of Persia, who had
such glorious Titles, durst not attempt to do the like. Agathias also speaking
of King Theodebert, says, that he was so much offended to see, that the
Emperor Justinian assumed among other Titles, that of Francious; as if he had
conquered the French, and held some right of superiority over them; that for
this consideration alone he resolved to go and subdue Thrace, lay Siege to
Constantinople, and overthrow the Roman Empire, whereof that City was then the
Capital. I know that the same Agathias calls that design rash, presupposing
that Theodebert would have perished in so bold, or, to use his term, in so
furious an Enterprise. Nevertheless he confesses, that this King had brought it
to such a pass; that if he had not been killed, as he was hunting a wild Bull,
nothing had retarded him in it: and God knows, whither the event would have
answered the conjectures of Our Historian. But we may say that these are
unreproachable testimonies, of the absolute power of the French Monarchy, which
never acknowledged any Superior but God (and according to the words of a good
Gaul to Alexander) any thing but Heaven to be above it.

To return to the reflections of Agathias, very different from those of
Procopius, which seem to have the force of argument wholly on their side, we
will examine a very remarkable place of his Fourth Book. Where he cannot endure
that Procopius, not content to say that Arcadius left his Son Theodosius, and
Empire, to the protection of Isdigerdes King of Persia (which no Author worthy
of credit ever writ before him) should moreover praise the action, as if it
were full of prudence: and add, that although Arcadius was not very discreet in
other things, yet in this he showed wisdom, and demeaned himself very
prudently. This, says Agathias, is judging of things by their success, as the
vulgar always do; but weighing them with reason, it will be found, that a
Sovereign never did any thing more blameworthy, than this Declaration of
Arcadius: for he seemed in it to make a Wolf Guardian of a Sheep, trusting his
Son and State in the hands of their greatest Enemy; through a confidence which
though it is sometimes tolerable in private men, was not sufferable when the
safety of a young Monarch lay at stake, and the preservation of a Crown by so
much the more envied, as it pretended to give Laws to all others. Methinks,
every one ought to yield to this opinion of Agathias, and conclude with him,
that in the event of this Tuition, happy as it appeared, there is more reason
to admire the goodness and integrity of the King of Persia, than the wisdom of
the Emperor Arcadius.

Amongst many very remarkable things found in the Five Books of the History of
Agathias, particular notice is to be taken, not only of what he says of the
following Oriental Monarchies, toward the end of the Second; but chiefly of
what he adds in the Fourth, concerning the succession of the Kings of Persia,
since Artaxares who restored the Empire to them, from whose hands the Parthians
had taken it, and placed it in their own. For besides his care and industry to
handle this matter well, the authority of one Sergius an Interpreter is of
great weight, who had from the Annalists and Library-keepers of the Persian
Kings, all that this Historian delivers unto us. Wherefore doubtless, he had
reason to correct the writings of Procopius, by the Records wherewith this
Interpreter had furnished him, and to prefer them before all other relations;
because they that describe the History of their o^n Country, are rather to be
believed than strangers, especially if their discourse be grounded on such
Authentic Pieces, as were those of the Public Archives, Places where Ancient
Records were kept.
which were communicated unto Sergius. Thus we have finished all we purposed,
on the first part of our Enterprise; and shall procceed to the Second, which is
to consider the writings of the most considerable of the Latin Historians,
which remain of the Ancients.

THE SECOND PART* BEING REFLECTIONS upon the Writings OF THE LATIN HISTORIANS.
REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF CRISPUS SALUSTIUS.
THE same reason which induced me to give Herodotus, the first place amongst
the Greek Historians, obliges me to allow the same rank, amongst the Latin, to
Crispus Salustius, although there have been some much more Ancient than he. For
it is known that Ennius had writ Eighteen Annals in Heroic Verse long before
him: and that Nevius in the same Age described the first Punick War, in another
sort of Verse called Saturnian. Fabius Pictor was the first of the Romans (as
Vossius observes) that compiled a History in Latin Prose. Posthumous Albinus,
Cassius Hemina, and C. Fannius, whom Salust celebrates for true Historians,
writ after him. And Cato with his Origines Historicae, Sempronius, Vaelerius
Antias, and Quadrigarius (so often quoted by Aulus Gellius) may be all said to
have preceded Salust in this sort of writing. But since there remains to us
nothing of their works, but the grief for the loss of them (the Histories of
Fabius, Cato, and Sempronius delivered unto us by Annius of Viterbum, being all
counterfeit, by an imposture which we have already complained of more than
once) is it not just to begin this our Second Enterprise with Salust, from whom
we have Entire pieces of History, and other Fragments which all learned men
respect? I know that Julius Caesar is as Ancient as he, and that some even
affirm, that Salust though Elder, died Seven years after the murder of this
Emperor. It cannot be a fault to give precedence in this place, now he is dead,
to One that he could never endure while he lived. The name of Commentaries
rather than History which his works bear, invites me to it: And the language of
Salust (that is raxed with the Air of Antiquity, and affectation of the old
words of Cato) may be another Motive, in which also the judgment of Martial
(which all the world alleges in his favor) very plainly concurs: Hic erit,
Mart. in Apop^.
ut perhibent doctorum corda virorum,
Crispus Romana primus in Historia.


Besides the reproach made him by Asinius Pollio, A. Gell. l. 1. c. 15.
for having too much affected that old way of writing, which Cato used in his
Origines, the quite contrary vice is imputed to him ( Viz.) of making too many
new words; Audacious Translations, as Suetonius calls them; and Phrases purely
Greek; L. 9. inst. cap. 3.
Whereof Quintilian gives this Example, Vulgus amat fieri. Moreover he is
accused of having been too concise in his expressions, thereby rendering his
Style obscure and difficult, as shortness ordinarily confines upon obscurity.
Wherefore the same Quintilian instructs young men to read Livy more than
Salust; L. 2. inst. c. 5. and l. 4. c. 2.
and charges them to avoid carefully, that broken and contracted way of
writing, of which Salust made a perfection; and which is truly very agreeable
in him: but we ought not to propose it to our selves for imitation, because it
may render us insensibly less intelligible, which is very contrary to true
Eloquence. We learn also from diverse passages of Aulus Gellius, L. 3. c. 1. l.
4. c. 15. ^^ l. 10. c. 20.
that many persons in his time, found fault with the Education of Salust;
though it appears sufficiently, that he himself was not displeased with it: for
he calls him in one place, Subtilissimum brevitatis Artificem, and in another,
Proprietatum in verbis retinentissimum, L. 11. ep. 1^4.
Seneca likewise, whose ^tile fitted to his Philosophical profession, is
wonderful short and interrupted, does not forbear to rail at the affectation of
one Aruntius, who in his History of the Punick Wars, took great pains to
express it in the very terms of Salust. He censures his too frequent repetition
of the word hyemare, and of Famas in the plural signifying Fame, and some other
expressions which were read in Aruntius. But nevertheless he writes, that in
the time of Salust, obscure brevity, and cut periods, which left men to guess
at the sense, passed for an Ornament of language; Salustio vigente, amputatae
sententiae, L 5. Satur. c. 1.
and verba ante expectatum cadentia, and obscura brevitas, fuere pro cultu. But
do we not see that Macrobius many Ages after, under the Authority of one of
Eusebius his Entertainments, makes Salust reign in the concise way of writing;
that is, he rendered himself so considerable in it, that no body thereupon
could dispute the first rank with him.

Because the word brevity is equivocal, and many persons speak of Tacitus, and
Salust, as of Authors equally brief; it may be convenient to declare, of what
great consequence it is, not to confound their Style as agreeing, when they are
very different. It cannot be denied that Tacitus followed Salust in a close way
of writing, which both used; wherein they may be said somewhat to resemble one
another. And in this all those agree that have considered the Style of the
Ancients; and even Tacitus himself acknowledges, how much he esteemed that of
Salust, L. g. hist.
when he called him Rerum Romanarum florentissimum Auctorem, which made him
imitate him. But it cannot be affirmed that this Laconick expression, which is
common to them both, makes them equal in the rest, and can make them pass for
as correct Historians one as the other: for to speak properly, a succinct way
of writing does not so much contribute to make an exact brief Historian; as
when the matter whereof he writes is such, that nothing can be taken from it,
without a prejudice to his Subject, and the spoiling of his work. Tacitus is
admitted to be an Author correct, and brief in his Phrase, by the impossibility
there is to cut of the least word of his composition, without necessarily
diminishing his thoughts, and doing a notable injury to his narration. But it
is not so with Salust, who though he straightens his Style, puts many things
into his History, which are not essential to it, and may be severed from it
without distracting his design, Lib. 4. de re Poet. Cap. 24.
or wronging the conduct of it, according to the observation of Julius Scaliger.

We have but parcels of the principal History of Salust, the beginning whereof
was at the foundation of Rome: but Two entire pieces of his remain, Catilines
conspiracy, and the War against Jugurtha; from whence may be drawn sufficient
proofs of what I have said of him. As for the first, though small, it has Two
Prefaces, whereof that which precedes, and is a most excellent Declamation
against idleness, may nevertheless be called a true Saddle for all Horses;
because, as Quintilian well observed, it has nothing which relates to his
History, nor any thing which renders it more proper for this than any other
composition. It is followed by a description of the good and bad conditions of
Cataline in Three or Four periods. And from thence he passes to the Second
Preface, finding himself obliged, as he says, by the immorality of Cataline,
to describe the virtues of the first Romans, and that which made them
degenerate in his time. To this end he begins no nearer, than at the foundation
of Rome by the Trojans, when the Fugitive Aeneas with the rest, came to
dispute, that part of Italy where it is founded, with the Aborigines. He
afterward shows how it was governed by Kings, who were deposed for their
pride, and how it became great in a short time, by the virtue of the
Inhabitants, He insists upon the Wars they waged with the Carthaginians, the
slackning of Discipline which happened since; and the civil Dissentions of
Marius and Sylla, which had like to have made the Republic desolate. All this
he relates to come at length to Catilines time, the most corrupted of all; and
which seemed to invite that bad Citizen to enterprise his conspiracy. Wherefore
methinks, it cannot be properly said, that he who takes occasion to write,
though very well, so many things, before he enters upon his chief purpose,
affects brevity. The Preface of the Jugurthine War is no nearer to its Subject.
It is an Invective against those, whom Vice and Riot divorted from embracing
those occupations of the mind, wherewith Nature had sufficiently endowed them.
He pretends not to be of that number; and therefore judging it in no wise
convenient, considering the corruption of the Age, to interess himself in the
Government of the State, he declares he will endeavor to be useful to it, by
the employment he undertakes of writing History; and will begin with that of
the Wars which the Romans had against Jugurtha. But we cannot better show, with
what liberty he inlarges upon all he thought, might render his work more
agreeable, than by the Digression of those Two Brothers named the Philani, who
died so gloriously, for the love of their Country: and that upon the pretext
alone of Two Deputies of the little City of Leptes, situate between the Two
Syrtes, who came to Metellus after the taking of Thala; where he takes occasion
to say, that he thinks fit to relate a Notable action, which happened in the
same Country, of Two Young Men of Carthage, who buried themselves alive to
increase the Territory of their Nation. And thereupon he makes a curious
description of the State differences, and Wars, which the Cyrenians heretofore
had with the Carthaginians concerning their limits, and how they agreed upon a
course, wherein the Two Philaeni, after an extreme diligence, were contented
for the good of their Country, to take so generous a resolution. It is certain
that the War of Jugurtha might have been described as well without this
Digression; and if Salust had affected to be concise in his History, he would
doubtless have forborne it. Which induces me to affirm, that though his
Expression or Phrase was very short, as was that of Tacitus, it does not
restrain him from being large like Livy, in the body of his History, who uses
not such confined expressions. And perhaps Servilius Nonianus had no other
meaning, when he spoke these words mentioned by Quintilian, Viz. that Salust
and Livy were rather equal than alike, Lib. 10. inst. c. 1.
pares eos magis esse quam similes, because both of them handled their Subjects
very diffusedly though in different manner.

I shall be very sorry if it be thought, that by marking this Digression of
Salust, I seek to condemn it. It seems to me very agreeable; and I am of the
opinion, that no sort of Episodes are to be blamed, unless when they are
unreasonably used: not would I be understood to arraign him for what I have
related concerning his Phrase and expression, either as too new, or too old,
desiring not to be of the number of those that censure a whole work, for a word
which displeases them. It is good to avoid as much as one can, that form of
speech which is out of use, or which is not enough used: and perhaps Salust in
the time he writ, was justly reproved upon that account, considering the
authority of his Accusers. But we ought not to be too scrupulous in that point,
and I desire those that are so nice, that they cannot suffer any thing in
language, that grates them never so little, to consider what Dion Chrysostomus,
one of the most celebrated Orators of Greece, Orat. 22.
observes, when he describes the incomparable Eloquence of Homer. He says that
he freely used all Dialects, and as a Painter mixes his Colors, he agreeably
mingled the Dorick, Attick, and Ionick Dialects, He made no difficulty to
employ a significant term, were it never so Ancient, and not commonly approved
of; and therefore Dion compares him to those who have found a Treasure, and
sell old pieces of Gold and Silver, whose worth is esteemed because of their
intrinsic value, though they are not current coin. And where he found energy
and grace, though in new and barbarous words, he composed them, says he,
freely in his verses; as often as there was occasion to express, the murmr of
running Waters, the noise of Winds, or some such resemblance. In the mean time
(adds this Great Orator) whatever liberty Homer took, he is acknowledged to be
the most eloquent of all Poets, and the Prince of those of his Profession. And
we ought to give the like judgment of the Eloquence of History or Oratory, as
Dion does of that of Homer; but because I have insisted upon it largely enough
in another Treatise, I shall say no more of it here.

To return to Salust, it is no wonder that he was discommended for his Style,
Vell. Patere. in voce Zenobius,
since Thucydides, whom he had proposed to himself for a Rule and Prototype,
was not free from censure. Yet this did not hinder Zenobius a Greek Sophister,
who lived in the time of Adrian the Emperor, from taking the pains to
translate the History of Salust into Greek, so great a reputation it had
amongst those of his Nation, as well as the Romans, as Suidas reports. L. 9.
cont. decl. 1.
But the judgment of Seneca in behalf of our Historian, is very considerable,
who writes in one of his Declamations, that Salust only equalled by Quintilian,
to Thucydides, surpassed him in his concise way of writing, and as he terms it,
conquered him even in his own fortification, in the place where he seemed to
have the greatest advantage, cum sit praecipua in Thucydide virtus brevitas,
hac eum Salustius vicit, and in suis eum castris caecidit. His reason is,
because one may take away something from a sentence of Thucydides, impairing a
little the Ornament of it, but not utterly spoiling it; whereas to do the like
to the expressions of Salust, they will be very perceptibly defaced. And Seneca
complains thereupon of the injustice of Livy who endeavored on the contrary to
advance Thucydides above Salust. It was not said he, for the great affection he
bore Thucydides that he prefers him, but because he is not jealous of him, and
therefore he does it to get more easily the applause from Salust, whom he had
ranked below the other.

The Emperor Adrian was of another fancy, when he preferred one Caecilius to
Salust, Cato to Cicero, In Hadr.
and Ennius to Virgil. But Spartianus, who took notice of the capricious
judgment of this Prince, shows us that of Another as advantageous to our
Historian, In Sev.
as this was prejudicial. He writes that Septimius Severus at the point of
death, feeling himself subdued by sickness, sent to his Eldest Son that Divine
Oration (so he terms it) which Salust makes Micipsa at his death speak to his
Children, to exhort them to concord: This Oration is in the beginning of the
Jugurthine War; and by the credit it received from that Emperor, it makes its
Author be valued above that contempt of him, which Adrian exposed, and none
ever imitated.

There is an Oration that Cicero ascribed to Salust, which is a counterfeit,
and ought not to be admitted as his, for it is not an Historical work; and all
the learned agree, that how Ancient soever it may be, and notwithstanding that
it is quoted by Quintilian, Lib. 4. inst. cap. 1.
yet Salust never was the true Author of it. But there is not a like consent
amongst the Critics, in what relates to the Two Orations, or rather Epistles
addressed to Caesar, probably about the time when he made War in Spain, and
which treat of the order that might be established in the Government of the
Republic. Lewis Carrion cannot be persuaded that they are of Salust,
especially considering that none of the Ancients, who often quoted passages of
his writings, ever recited any part of these Two Epistles. John Douza on the
contrary part affirms, that their Style, and the Faith of all Manuscripts ought
to oblige us, to hold they proceeded from Salust his own hand. It is true that
none can deny that they are very Ancient, and were writ in the time of the
purity of the Latin Language.

It is of much more importance to observe, that from Salust may be drawn a
certain Testimony, that all judgments of the manners of men by their writings,
are not receivable. No one ever spoke better sentences than he, in favor of
all sort of Virtues, and chiefly of Chastity; nor used more rigid invectives
against the excess and avarice of his time. But notwithstanding this, it is
recorded, that his immorality made him be expelled the Senate by the Censors:
and that being taken in Adultery with Fausta the Daughter of Lucius Scilla, by
Milo, he had been sentenced to be shamefully whipped, if he had not by money
commuted for the offense; Lib. 17. Noct. A^t. cap. 18.
which we learn from Aulus Gellius, under the Authority of Varro, Pedianus
Servius and others. He is moreover accused to be immoderate in his desire of
riches, joined with great profusion, which is not only objected to him by the
Satyr of Leneus an illustrious Grammarian, Suet. de Ill. Gram. cap. 15.
and Freeman of Pompey, but the Oration, which they make Cicero speak against
him, mentions that he had consumed his Patrimony, and even in his Fathers time,
their House was depressed because of his debts. It is true that Caesar restored
him to his dignity of Senator and procured him the Praetorship; Apud Dionem
lib. 42 and 43.
and having sent him into Numidia, furnished him with occasion to recover his
former State and Riches; which last he pursued with so much Tyranny, that
(though after he had ransacked the whole Province, and found a way to be
absolved by Caesar, he could not escape the infamy of his actions, which was so
much the greater in him, because it was considered how severely he had in his
History, exposed those who were much less guilty than he, and Metellus amongst
others, whose excess and expenses in Spain he very much arraigned) He returned
so rich from Africa, that he immediately purchased one of the noblest dwellings
in Rome, in the Mount Quirinal, with Spacious Gardens, which are at this day
called the Gardens of Salust; and besides this he had a Country house at
Tivoli, which Cicero tells him of in the same Oration. His life therefore was
very different from his writings; and his Example alone is sufficient to prove,
that as very good men may write very bad Books, so vicious men sometimes may
compose those that are good; it being not incongruous that an Author should at
the same time be an excellent Historian, and a wicked man.

Amongst the things observed in him, and which are most conducing to the
recommendation of his History, is his imbarking purposely to take a precise
view of the places in Africa, of which he intended to make a description;
because it was requisite so to do, for the better understanding of what he
writ. And this was the practice of the best Historians; and Messenio's words in
Plautus, show sufficiently, how important and necessary to an Historian, the
Romans thought Voyages, and the sight of places. That Servant says to one of
the Manechmi, Maenechmi a Comedy so called in Plautus because of Two of that
name so called in it.
that they had traveled over the world enough, and that it is time to return
home, unless they have a History to write.

-- Quin nos hinc domum,
Redimus, nisi si historians scripturi sumus.
So persuaded they were at Rome, where this was said, that to be a good
Historian, it was expedient to have traveled aforehand, which I think I have
already observed in the Section of Polybius. It is moreover affirmed, that
Salust made provision of many books writ in the Punick Tongue, which he caused
to be very carefully interpreted to him, to make use of them likewise in his
Historical Treatise. But though few are ignorant how much the Ancients esteemed
this Author, as it is before expressed, I shall nevertheless produce the
Authority of Lipsius, though a Modern Author, to join in his commendation, who
made no scruple to call him the Prince of Historians. Praef. in Tac. and not.
in l. 1. Pol.
He frankly prefers him to Caesar, Livy, and the rest of those he styles
minorum gentium historicos; and praises Cornelius Tacitus for nothing so much,
as having excellently imitated Salust. Turnebus also averred, that he found so
much Eloquence in his writings, L. 28. advers. c. 22. Justini^s l. 38.
that in his opinion he approached nearer to Demosthe^es than Cicero. I have
purposely passed in silence, what Trogus Pompeius objected against the Orations
of Livy and Tacitus, which he made Direct, instead of being Oblique; because
though he, and some others are of that opinion, yet it is subject to much
debate. Salust inserts Letters in his writings, without regarding whither that
of Lentulus to Cataline, or that other of Mithridates to Arsaces, does
interrupt the contexture of his Narrations. But though these are little things,
yet they deserve to be taken notice of in great Authors, for an example. If
Keckerman, and some modern Writers, had been touched with such a reasonable
consideration, they would not have condemned, as they did, all sort of blame or
praise given by an Historian. The reason they give for their opinion is weak,
saying that such things are more the business of an Orator; and according to
them, a naked Narration leads a Judicious Reader enough, to esteem or
disapprove the actions represented: for they observe not, that an Orator and
an Historian have many things in common, which makes Cicero say some where,
that History is the most important part of Oratory, Lib. 1. de l^g.
opus oratorium maxim. And on the other side the authority of Salust, joined
with that of Thucydides, Livy, Agathias, and several others (whose writings we
read with so much satisfaction, who were either contrary to the persons they
speak of, or to the things they report) ought to render them more reserved in
their censures.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF JULIUS CAESAR
THE name of Julius Caesar is so illustrious, that nothing can be added to the
commendation of his works, of what nature soever they are, after it is said
that he is the Author of them. So that he is not indebted to his military
actions alone, for the high reputation that follows him; since his learning has
contributed little less to it than his Arms; and he is not less glorious by the
Crown he received from the Muses upon their Parnassus, than his Triumphs by
Bellona's side in the Fields of Mars. Which made Quintilian say, that Caesar
spoke writ and fought by the same Spirit, and that the same happy Genius which
favored all his victories, L. 10. ins. c. 1. eodem animo dixisse quo bellavit.
animated even his Orations and writings. It is observable, that amongst the
praises which the Ancients gave to the Orators of that time; though they valued
much the sharpness of Sulpitius, the gravity of Brutus, the diligence of
Pollio, the judgment of Calvus, and the copiousness of Cicero, they admired
above all the vigor of Caesar's Style, vim, Caesaris: as if the same virtue by
which he executed so many military exploits, had inspired him with that Ardour
and vehemence, by which he was always so eminently distinguished from the rest
of that Age. But if it may be fit to enlarge on this subject, and draw new
parallels of the learning and valor of this incomparable Prince; it will not
be difficult to show, that Europe, Asia, and Africa, even all the parts of the
world then known, divided his Conquests: nor has he less penetrated into the
intellectual Globe, having hardly left any Science uncultivated, and not
improved to admiration. In his most tender age he composed the Praise of
Hercules, Ascon. Pedia.
and wrote the Tragedy of Oedipus, and some other Poems under the Title Julii,
which Augustus afterward did forbid to be published. We cannot affirm, what
the Poem called Iter was, which Suetonius mentions. But as for that Epigram
which some ascribe to him, In Caes. cap. 56.
and others to Germanicus, made upon the young Thracian which fell into the
River Hebrus, as he played upon the Ice; it is one of the most delicate pieces
of all Latin Poetry. Great was his fame in Oratory, as it is before expresed:
and his Orations for the Bithynians for the Law Plautia, for Decius a Samnite,
for Sextilius, and many others (which are now wanting) gave a certain Testimony
of his excellency therein. At the age of One and Twenty, he solemnly accused
Dolabella: and being no more then Quaestor he composed the funeral Orations of
his Aunt Julia, and his Wife Cornelia; and his two Anticatones showed what he
could do in Satyr; as his Two other books of Analogy gave him no small place
amongst the most esteemed Grammarians. He wrote some Treatises of presaging by
the flight of Birds; and others of Augury; and some of Apothegms or short and
witty sentences. But what he published of the motion of the Stars, which he had
learned in Egypt, deserves so much the more to be considered, because it
Prognosticated his own death on the Ides of March (if the Elder Pliny may be
credited) nor must we omit the mention of his reformation of the Calendar,
Macr. 1. Satur. cap. 14. (...) l. 11. Aea.
which succeeded that work. I pass over the Ephimerides or Journals mentioned
by Servius, which he left, to proceed to his Commentaries, which are his
Historical writings that we now propose to examine, and the only work remaining
of so many different pieces, whereof methinks a perfect Encyclopaedie might be
made.

The Title of these Commentaries alone makes it manifest, that Caesar had no
design to write a complete History. In Beuto.
They are so naked, says Cicero, and stripped of all those ornaments of Oration,
which he was very capable to give them; that though they are extremely
agreeable in the condition they are, they are to be taken for nothing else but
Notes prepared by him, for their use who would compile a History of his time.
And though materials so well provided might have excited some persons rash
enough to attempt any thing, to try their skill to refine and polish them: yet
all judicious men have abstained from doing it, and others that perhaps
endeavored in it, have found themselves altogether unable, and unlikely to
gain to themselves any Honor, by meddling with a design framed by so great an
Artificer. His pure and elegant Style is ordinarily compared to that of
Xenophon. And though he is brief, nothing that is obscure can be imputed to
him; for the places wherein he seems any thing difficult are without doubt
corrupted. Since we know that he was so far from falling into the vice of
obscurity, A Gell. l. 1. Noct. At. c. 10. and Macr. l. 1. Satur. c. 5.
that he himself gives it as an important precept, to avoid like a Bock all
expressions that are not frequently used, and thereby less proper to explain a
thing neatly and clearly. As for the matters whereof he treats in his
Commentaries, they are his own actions which he describes, and he recounts few
events that he has not seen. In Caesar. 56.
Nevertheless Suetonius makes Asinius Pollio accuse him of not having been
exact enough, and even to have swerved sometimes from truth, either through
credulity when he relied on false reports, or wittingly for defect of memory;
so that as the said Asinius conjectures, if he had lived, he would have
reviewed his Commentaries, and corrected them in several places. To say the
truth, his report is very different in many things that concern himself, from
what we read of him in other Authors, such as Dion, and Plutarch who have writ
on the same subject. An Example of this (to instance no more) may be observed,
in what he writes concerning that public Treasure, which was preserved from
the time that Rome was taken by the Gauls, not to be made use of but in some
extreme necessity. He pretends that Lentulus who had order to send it to
Pompey, abandoned it by his flight, upon the first Rumor that Caesar's Troops
began to be masters of Rome, though it was a false report. But that which is
received for a certain truth in this matter, is, that Metellus intending as
Tribune, to hinder Caesar from seizing on the Treasure, was forced to quit the
City, being terrified by the Menaces of Caesar, who made the Gates of the place
where that sinew of War and of the State was kept to be forced open, which
proved a wonderful advantage to his designs. This shows that it is oftentimes
no less difficult to an Historian, than any other writer, to resist the
temptations of humanity, and treat as indifferently of the things which concern
himself, as those wherein he is no way interessed. For my part I doubt not, but
Caesar said many things of the Ancient Gauls, which would be contradicted by
their Histories, if any of them had been preserved to our time.

Some Critics have maintained, Fr. Floridus Sabinus, et Lud. Carrio.
that neither the Three Books of the Civil War, nor the Seven of the War of the
Gauls, were writ by Caesar. but such an opinion is so groundless that it
merits not the least reflection. As for the Eighth book of the last mentioned
work, most agree that Hirtius was the Author of it, who writ also the
Commentaries of the Wars of Alexandria, Africa, and Spain. Though some ascribe
them to Oppius an intimate friend of Caesar's, who likewise wrote a Treatise, to
prove that the Son of Cleopatra, which she pretended to have had by the same
Caesar, was not of his begetting. Whosoever was the Author of the last book of
the War of the Gauls, appeared to have been much in the favor and confidence
of Caesar, for he says in one place, that though all that read the writings of
Caesar admire them as well as he, yet he had more reason to do it than others,
because they consider in them only the purity of Phrase, and excellency of
Style; but he who knew with what facility and expedition he used his Pen, had a
more particular subject of admiration. This passage calls to my memory the
noble Elogy which Pliny gave him ( viz.) to have surpassed in vigor of mind all
the rest of Mankind. L. 7. Not. hist. c. 25.
He writ that he has been seen at the same time to read, write, dictate, and
hear what was said to him; and adds that he made nothing at once to dictate to
Four Secretaries; and when he was not diverted by other affairs, he usually
employed Seven to write under him. This activity of thought is as if he ^ere
something more than human, and indeed the greatness of his genius would be
judged wholely incomparable, should we examine it exactly in the extent of all
his actions: but this being not the proper place for such an inquiry, we shall
confine our self to what particularly concerns his Commentaries.

They are destitute of many Rhetorical Ornaments, as we have already observed,
yet they contain both Oblique and Direct Orations: and they have been so valued
by all Nations, that they are translated into most languages. Selimus the Great
caused them to be turned into Arabic. And it is held that the reading of them,
which was no less agreeable than ordinary with him, contributed much to the
conquest of so many Provinces, wherewith he augmented his Empire. And Henry the
Fourth that famous Monarch of Franco, took the pains to translate into French
those that related to the War of the Gauls; which doubtless were no small
assistance to that Heroic Ardour, wherewith his whole life was animated. It
was under Florence Christian his Tutor, that he undertook that work so worthy
of himself. And Casaubon who affirms that he saw it writ by the Kings own hand,
adds, that he told him he was recollecting his matter, to write commentaries of
his own actions, which he would finish as soon as his leisure would permit. But
God was not pleased to allow him that leisure, and his hasty death, by a crime
more detestable than was that of the Murderers of Caesar, has deprived us of
those Second Commentaries, which might have made a greater resemblance between
these Two Princes, than there is; though the clemency, valor, diligence, and
several other virtues wherein they both excelled, rendered them very
conformable to each others, not to mention the resemblance of their ends.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF TITUS LIVIUS.
SOME persons have given the same Elogy to Livy, as Seneca the Rhetorician
ascribed to Cicero (viz.) to have had a wit answerable to the greatness of the
Roman Empire. And others have not been content to equal the eloquence of this
Historian to that of so great an Orator, but have proceeded so far, as to
suppose that if Cicero had attempted to write a History, he would have been
inferior to him in the performance of it. But without reflecting on either to
their disadvantage by such comparisons, we may say that they both excelled in
their way of study; and as never any one was heard with so much attention and
transport at Rome as Cicero, so we have no example of a reputation higher and
more glorious in respect of History than that of Livy. Pliny the Younger has
left us a memorable passage of his fame in one of his Epistles. Where he says
that his Predecessors saw a man come into Italy from the extremities of Spain
(which was then counted the remotest place of the Earth in the West) to have
the satisfaction to see Livy, and enjoy for some time his conversation, who
sought no other diversion than the discourse he had with so great a person; and
though the Capital City of the world where he found him had many rarities to
entertain his curiosity, nothing thereof could detain him, after he had
conversed some time with him for whose sake he undertook such a journey. But we
must observe that the credit Livy has amongst the learned, is not only for the
writing of this History, for he had writ certain Philosophical Dialogues before
he came to Rome, which he dedicated to Augustus Caesar. and which acquired him
the love and protection of that renowned Monarch, the most favorable to the
Muses that ever governed the Roman Empire. Ep. 101.
And besides these Dialogues which are mentioned by Seneca, we learn from
Quintilian, that in a Letter to his Son he delivered excellent Precepts of
Rhetoric, Lib. 10. inst. cap. 1.
wherein he especially commended to his reading the writings of Demosthenes,
and Cicero, bidding him neglect many other Authors, unless any were found
amongst them, to resemble those which he advised him to have always in his
view. In Claud. cap. 41.
And one may read in Suetonius, that Livy was chosen amongst the most learned
men of his Age, to take care of the instruction of Claudius who afterward was
Emperor; Suetonius in Claud. loco citato.
and in his younger years by the advice of this his Tutor, as Suetonius
reports, he undertook to write the Roman History, of which he gave many volumes
to the Public which are lost to us. As to the writings of Livy the last and
most considerable thereof, is the History which reached from the foundation of
Rome to the death of Drusus in Germany; Quint. l. 10. inst. c. 1.
the fine contexture whereof, the agreeable narrations, and the pleasing
easiness makes him to be compared to Herodotus, and placed in the first rank of
the Latin Historians. It was not at first divided by Decades, as we now see it.
That is a recent distribution or distinction, whereof no mention appears in
Florus his Abbreviator, nor in any of the Ancients; Ep. ad. Jo. Boc. l. 7. de
hon. disc. ^. 12.
and which Politian, Petrarch, with Petrus Crinitus have already disputed. Of
the Hundred and Forty, or Hundred and Two and Forty Books which it contained,
there remain not above Five and Thirty, nor are they all in an uninterrupted
continuation, for the whole Second Decade is wanting, and we have but the
First, the Third, and the Fourth, with half of the Fifth which was found at
Worms by one Simon Gryneus. The beginning of the Forty Third book has been
also lately recovered, by the means of a Manuscript in the Library of the
Chapter of Bamberg; but this fragment is a little contested. Francisous
Bartholinus that brought it from Germany into Italy, Antonius Quaerengus, and
Gaspar Lusignanus the Author of the first impression, judge it Authentic. L.
9. ^. 19. de hist. la^.
But Vossius and some others on the contrary, pretend that it is a counterfeit
piece, and can be only imposed on those who have ears like Midas. For the
remaining Fourteen Decades we must rest satisfied, with that Summary or Epitomy
which Florus compiled, if he was the Author of a work which many persons
condemn, believing him to have been the cause of the loss of Livys writings, a
loss that cannot be enough lamented. This is the opinion of Bodin who likewise
accuses Justin, In Meth. hist. c. 2.
for having done the same prejudice to Trogus Pompeius, Xiphilinus, and Dion,
in epitomizing them. Casaubon is also of this mind, who thinks that the brief
collection made by Constantine, of a body of History in Fifty Three parts,
occasioned the neglect of the Authors that composed it, which were afterward
lost. But if the Three Decades and a half which we have of Livy, make us
deplore the want of the rest, they are yet sufficient to represent him to our
esteem, most worthy of the Elogies which he received from the Ancients. Anna
1451.
The most celebrated whereof was that yielded to him, two hundred years ago by
Alphonso King of Arragon, when he sent his Ambassador to demand of the Citizens
of Padua, and obtained from them as a precious relic, the bone of that Arm
wherewith this their famous Countryman had writ his History, causing it to be
conveyed to Naples with all sorts of honor, as the most estimable present
could be made him. And it is said that he recovered his health from a
languishing indisposition, by the delight he had in reading the same History.

But it is strange to consider with how much passion others went about to
defame if they could, a person of such rare merit. In the Age wherein he lived
Asinius Pollio arraigned his Style, which he called Patavinity. Augustus taxed
him of having favored Pompey's party, but did not therefore diminish his good
will toward him. And Caligula a while after, accused him of negligence on the
one side, and too excessive redundancy of words on the other, taking away his
image and writings from all Libraries, where he knew they were curiously
preserved. But the capricious and Tyrannick humor of this Prince, was
exercised in the same manner toward the works and Statues of Virgil. Suet. in
Calig. cap. 34. et in Domit. c. 10.
And he would have suppressed the Verses of Homer, pretending that his power
ought to be no less than Plato's who had prohibited the reading them in his
Imaginary Republic. Moreover hating Seneca, and all men of eminent Virtue, it
came into his head to abolish the knowledge of Laws, with all those Lawyers
whose learned decisions were respected. But the humorous conceit of such a
Monster cannot prejudice Livy, nor those others we named, no more than that of
Domitian a second prodigy of Nature, who put to death, through a like
animosity, Metius Pomposianus, because amongst others he delighted to expose
some Orations of Kings and Generals, collected by him out of Livy's History.
The Testimony of Augustus is full of moderation, he declares that the same
History instead of flattering the victorious Party, could not condemn that of
the good and most honest men in the Commonwealth, who had all listed
themselves on Pompey's side, which rather tends to the commendation of Livy
than otherwise. But that which Pollio finds fault with in all his observations,
is a thing which deserves to be a little more reflected on.

The most common opinion is, that this Roman Lord accustomed to the delicacy of
the language spoke in the Court of Augustus, could not bear with certain
Provincial Idioms, which Livy as a Paduan used in diverse places of his history.
Pignorius is of another mind, and believes that this odious Patavinity had
respect only to the Orthography of certain words, wherein Livy used one letter
for another, according to the custom of his Country, writing sibe, and quase,
for sibi, and quasi; which he proves by diverse Ancient inscriptions. Some think
that it consisted merely in a repetition, or rather multiplicity of many
Synonymous words in one period, contrary to what was practiced at Rome, where
they did not affect such a redundancy which denoted a Forreigner. Others report
that the Paduans having always been of Pompey's Party, which was apparently
the justest as we have observed, Pollio that was a Caesarian, derided Livys
Patavinity, and accused him of having shown too great an inclination for the
unhappy faction of the vanquished; which seems so much the likelier, by the
conformity it has with that opinion of Augustus, which we already mentioned.
There are those who likewise affirm, that Livy's partiality for those of Padua,
appeared manifestly in those books which are lost, where he was led by his
Subject to an immoderate praise of his Countrymen. It is the same fault which
Polybius imputed to Philinus as a Carthaginian, and Fabius as a Roman. And many
modern Historians have been charged therewith, whereof Guicciardin was one, who
to oblige the Floreutines dwells so long upon the least concerns of their
State, and amplifies so much their smallest actions, that he often becomes
troublesome, and sometimes ridiculous in many men's judgment. The quaint Distich
of Actius Syncerus, against that of Poggius on the like occasion, renders it
altogether despicable, Dum patriam laudat, damnat dum Poggius hostem;
Nec malus est civis, nec bonus historicus.


They who rather imagine than prove a like passion in Livy, please themselves
with a belief, that this was that which Pollio found fault with in his History,
when he was offended that it had too much Patavinity. I rather build upon that
sense which Quintilian gives the word, Lib. 1. inst. cap. 5.
who in all probability knew in his time the true signification of it. He
quotes it in the Chapter of the virtues and vices of Oration, where he remarks,
that Vectius was reproached of having employed too many Sabine, Tuscan, and
Praenestine words in his writings; so that, says he, Lucilius thereupon
laughed at his language, as Pollio did at the Patavinity of Livy. Wherefore
after an interpretation so express, of such a considerable Author in this
respect as Quintilian, I should be loath to wrest the signification of that
word, which the Courtiers of Rome reproved in the History we speak of, to any
other sense than that of Style and Phrase.

Justin informs us, that Trogus Pompeius censured Livy's Orations for being
Direct, and too long; which many attribute to some jealousy, that might arise
between Two Authors of the same time and profession, Lib. 9. inst. cap. 4.
Quintilian observed that Livy begins his History with an Hexameter Verse: and
Mascardi in the Fifth Treatise of his Art of History, Cap. 6.
rehearses many others which he found there; but there is no prose where some
do not occur, if looked after with too much curiosity. Tr. 1. c. 4.
The same Mascardi taxes him in another place, of having been defective in many
important circumstances, L. 9. contr. decl. 1.
which we read in Appian, and which he ought not to have omitted. I have
already shown in a precedent Section, how Seneca the Rhetorician accuses Livy,
of having suffered himself to be swayed by envy, when he gave Thucydides the
preference to Salust. I here add in opposition to Vossius his opinion, that
although Seneca the Philosopher conferred the Title of most Eloquent upon Livy,
Lib. 1. de Ira. c^ult.
he does likewise reprove him in the same place, for having attributed to any
man greatness of wit without goodness, believing them to be inseparable
Qualities. And in another place on the subject of the Great Library of
Alexandria, Lib. de. tranq. c. 9.
he blames him for commeding the care of those Kings who founded it; and yet
pretending, that they did it rather in a vain ostentation of glory, than a true
affection for books. But such Stoical Austerities do not much wound the
reputation of an Historian, who speaks according to the common sense of things,
and is not obliged to follow all the opinions of Philosophers. But if Antoninus
his Itinerary, such as Annius of Viterbum exposed was true, Vide Vossium de
Hist. Lati. page 95. cap. 19.
it would be a hard matter to excuse Livy of a great fault which he accuses him
of, in speaking of Fanus Volturna, which was his suppressing of the most
gallant actions of the Tuscans, whereof he envyed them the glory. But it is of
importance to know, that the impudent supposition of Annius in this respect,
appears manifestly in the good editions of that Itinerary, which we have from
Simler, and Surita, wherein nothing like that is read, because it is a
slanderous addition of the Impostour, who soisted in this corrupt relation with
that Comment, whereof we have so often complained already. But I find it a
harder task to answer the zeal of Gregory the Great, who would not suffer
Livy's Works in any Christian Library, because of his Pagan Superstition; which
I remember I read in the Preface of Casaubon upon Polybius. And indeed it
cannot be denied that his History is filled with many Prodigies, which denote a
great adherence to Idolatry. Sometimes an Ox spoke; one while a Mule
ingendered; another time Men, Women, and Cocks, and Hens changed their Sex.
There are often showers of Flint-stones, Flesh, Chalk, Blood, and Milk. and the
Statues of the Gods be mentioned to speak, shed tears, and swet pure blood. How
many Ghosts are made to appear; Armies ready to engage in Heaven; with Lakes
and Rivers of Blood; and the like? So that no Historian ever reported so much
of the vulgar's vain belief of that time, as he. But we should condemn almost
all the books of the Gentiles, if our Religion received any prejudice from such
trifles. One might moreover represent to Pope Gregory, that Livy exposes all
those and some others of the same nature, no otherwise than as fond opinions of
the vulgar, Dec. 1. l. 5. et dec. 3. lib. 1. et 4.
and uncertain rumors which he derides; often protesting, that although he is
obliged to report them; because they made such an important impression upon the
minds of most men of that time, and had a mighty influence on the greatest
affairs, yet there was nothing therein but vanity and imposture.

Some modern Authors have been found, Lib. 2. de consec. hist. Jul. Scal. l. 1.
poet. c. 2.
such as Bodin, Benius, and others like them, who presumed to censure Livy's
Style for being too Poetical in some places, too prolix in others, and often
unlike it self. But these are rash judgments, and worthier of pity than
consideration, chiefly in respect to those that give them. Yet the like cannot
be said of Budaeus, and Henricus Glareanus, that accuse him of injustice to the
Gauls in all his narrations, where he treats of them and their Wars. I know
they who have endeavored to defend him from this imputation, reply in his
behalf, that if the powerful consideration of Augustus his Protector, could not
hinder him from speaking honorably, not only of Pompey, Lib 4. annal.
but even of Cassius, and Brutus, as Cremutius Cordus testifies in Tacitus, it
is improbable that he should refrain from saying the truth in what concerned
the Gauls, out of a particular Animosity, to render himself more acceptable to
the Romans. But it is certain, he was borne away herein with the common tide of
opinion, and that there was no Latin Historian of that time, who did not as
well as he use all Nations ill, to oblige the Italian, either through flattery
or ignorance, taking their relations from the reports of the victorious, who
suppressed all the memorials of others.

So general a fault nevertheless, ought not to hinder us from esteeming Livy in
particular, as one of the first men of his Country. He was of Priori nomine
Patavium appellata.
Padua, and not of Vicus ad Euganeos colles in Italia prope Patavium.
Aponus, as Sigonius imagined, because of a verse in Martial which puts one
place for another, by a figure ordinary enough to Poets. His residence at Rome,
and the favor of Augustus, afforded him the means to have all the instructions
necessary for the compiling of his History. He composed one part of it in that
Capital of the Empire, and the other at Naples whither he retired from time to
time to digest his matter with less disturbance. After that Emperors death he
returned to the place of his Birth, where he was received with unparalleled
honors, and applauses by the Paduans, and there he dyed in the Fourth year of
the Reign of Tiberius, and the very day of the Calends of January, which was
also Ovids last day, according to the observation of Eusebius in his
Chronicles. His life was lately delivered unto us by Jacobus Philippus
Thomasinus the Paduan Bishop, who omitted nothing that a Paduan could say, to
the advantage of One whom he considers as the glory of his Country. He mingled
in all places of his History Oblique and Direct Orations, wherein his Eloquence
principally appears. And he did not refrain from Digressions, though he excuses
himself for it, in the Ninth Book of his first Decade, on the Subject of
Alexander, whose renown, he says, obliged him to reflect upon the probable
success he might have had against the Romans, if he had attacked them. He makes
a question of equalling Ten or Twelve Roman Captains to that invincible
Monarch, but manages it with so much disadvantage on one side, and so much
flattery on the other, that it is the place in his whole History, which is the
least agreeable to a judicious Reader. Is it not ridiculous to say upon so
serious a Subject, that the Senate of Rome was composed of as many Kings, as
there were Senators? And ought he not to have considered, that Alexander led
Twenty Generals under his command, Ptolemaeus, Lysimachus, Cassander, Leonatus,
Philotas, Antigonus, Eumenes, Parmenio, Cleander, Polyperchon, Perdiccas,
Clitus, Ephestion, and others like them, more renowned and experienced in
military affairs, if we may judge by their actions, than all those Roman Chiefs
which he pretends to compare to him? To say the truth, that his Digression
examined in all its parts, is more worthy of a declamer, than of an Historian
of Livy's reputation.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF VELLEIUS PATERCULUS.
THOUGH Velleius Paterculus in the Two Books he composed, pretended only to
write an Epitomy of the Roman History, from the Foundation of Rome to the time
wherein he lived, which as he himself reports, was in the Reign of the Emperor
Tiberius. Yet he began his Treatise with things more Ancient, for though the
beginning of his first Book is lost, we nevertheless find, in the remains of
it, the Antiquities of many Cities more Ancient than Rome, the Originals
whereof he discovers, before he describes the Foundation of that great
Metropolis. He was of an illustrious extraction as appears by those of his
family, Vide Vossium de scriptoribus latinis. Lib. 2.
who had signalised themselves in the exercise of many of the greatest
employments of the Roman Empire. And he himself having gloriously succeeded in
the military profession, says that the remembrance of the countries he had
seen, during the time he commanded in the Armies, and in his voyages through
the Provinces of Thrace, Macedonia, Achaia, Asia the less, and other more
Easterly Regions, especially those upon both the shores of the Euxin Sea,
furnished his mind with most agreeable diversions. Whereby one may judge that
if he had writ this History as entire and large, as he sometimes promised, we
should have found many things very considerable in it, as reported by a man who
was so Eminent an Eyewitness, and had a share in the execution of the noblest
part of them. In that little which is left, wherein he represents all
compendiously, diverse particulars are related that are no where else to be
found; which happens either by the silence of other Historians in those
matters, or the ordinary loss of part of their labors.

The Style of Velleius Paterculus is very worthy of his Age, which was also the
time of pure language. His greatest excellence lies in discommending or
praising those he speaks of; which he does in the softest terms and most
delicate expressions, that are seen in any other Historian or Orator. But he
is blamed, and perhaps with reason, for flattering too much the Party and House
of Augustus, and making extravagant Elogies not only of Tiberius, but even of
his Favorite Sejanus, whose merit he celebrates as of one of the prime and
most virtuous persons, which the Roman Common wealth has produced. But the like
fault may be observed in many others that have writ the History of their own
times, with a design to publish it whilst they lived. However it was, Lipsius
imagined that those his excessive praises of Sejanus, were the cause of his
fall, and the ruin of the rest of that unhappy Favorites friends, who were
almost all put to death upon his account; but yet this opinion can pass for
nothing but a mere conjecture, since it is no here else to be seen. The nature
of his Epitomy did not (it seems) admit of Orations. Yet an Oblique one is seen
in his Second Book, which he introduces the Son of Tigranes to speak before
Pompey, to procure his favor. I find besides a very remarkable thing in his
Style, to wit, that amongst all the Figures of Oratory which he uses, he
imploies the Epiphonema so gracefully, that perhaps no One ever equalled him in
that respect. So that in all or most of the events which he mentions, there are
few that he does not conclude with one of these sententious reflections, which
Rhetoricians call by that name. And besides the beauty of that figure when it
is judiciously employed, as he knew how to do it, there is nothing instructs a
reader more usefully, than that sort of Corollary applied to the end of the
chief actions of every narration. He showed his great inclination to Eloquence,
in his invective against Mark Anthony, on the Subject of his proscription, and
the death of Cicero, whom none ever raised higher than he does in that place,
and in another of the same book, where he acknowledges that without such a
person, Greece though overcome in Arms, might have boasted to have been
victorious in wit. And this he did in pursuance of that zeal, which made him
declare in his first book, that excepting those whom this Orator saw, or by
whom he was seen and heard, there was none amongst the Romans who ought to be
admired for their Eloquence, which was a faculty as to the excelling part, as
it were enclosed only in the space of Cicero's life.

Besides the Two Books of the abridged History of Velleius Paterculus, a
Fragment has been seen which is ascribed to him, touching the defeat of some
Roman Legions in the Country of the Grisons. Civitatem non muro, sed vallo
fossaque etc. quam appellabant Cicera, e nomine deae Cisae, quam religiosissime
colebant. Wolfangus Lazius. Lib. 1. de frag. Velleii.
And of that part amongst others where this small writing place a City called
Cicera, it informs us, that of a Legion there engaged, Verres alone escaped,
whom the above mentioned Cicero caused afterward to be condemned with infamy,
for having during his Proconsulship in Sicily, used such extortions in so
important a Province, that they had like to have made it desolate. But most
learned men, and Velserus with Vossius amongst the rest, declaim against this
piece, which they affirm to be counterfeit as well by the Style, which seems of
an Age much inferior to that of Paterculus, as by the matter whereof it
treats, wherein they find great absurdities. But laying aside the doubtful
judgment of Critics, it is evident in respect of the true Phrase of this
Author, that excepting the faults which proceed rather from his transcribers
than himself, and the Copies than the Original, we have nothing more pure in
all the Latin Language than his Writings; nor more worthy of the times of
Augustus and Tiberius.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF QUINTUS CURTIUS RUFUS.
ALEXANDER has no reason to complain (as once he did) for not having like
Achilles, a Homer to celebrate his praises, seeing there was found amongst the
Latins, so eminent an Historian as Quintus Curtius to describe the actions of
his life. I take him to be one of the greatest Authors they had; and the
excellency of his Style would oblige me to think him more Ancient than Livy,
and Paterculus, Lib. 3. ad Q. fr. ep. ^.
and to make him pass for him of whom Cicero speaks in one of his Epistles, if
the more common opinion of those who have labored in the search of his Age,
did not yield him Vespasian's Contemporary; and some to have lived in the Reign
of Trajan. I will not insist upon the passages of his fourth book where he
speaks of Tire, nor on that of the Tenth where he makes a Digression upon the
felicity of his Age, because many are subject to wrest those expressions to
their own sense. But as he lived to a great Age, he may well be the same person
that Suetonius mentioned, as a great Rhetorician in the time of Tiberius; and
Tacitus as a Praetor and Proconsul of Africa under that Emperor, Lib. 11. Ann.
for there is not above Two and Thirty years from the last year of Tiberius to
the first of Vespasian. And what the Younger Pliny reports of a Phantasm which
appeared in Africa to one Curtius Rufus, Lib. 7. ep. 27. ad Suram.
can be understood of no other than him that was mentioned by Tacitus as
aforesaid.

But it is of little moment to my design, to reconcile the diversity of
opinions on this subject, which are collected together in Vossius, and Raderus
a Commentator of Quintus Curtius. He is perhaps a Son only of those whom Cicero
or Suetonius mentions, and may have nothing in common with any of the other
that we named, especially considering that neither Quintilian, nor any of the
Ancients, have said the least word of him or his History, which is very
strange: for how Quintilian, who omitted not to mention all the considerable
Historians then extant, in the Tenth Book of his Institutions, writ in
Domitians Reign, could forget him, is not to be answered, without presupposing
that the works of Quintus Curtius were not at that time published.

The ordinary impressions of this Author witness, that his Two First Books, and
the end of the Fifth are lost, as also the beginning of the Sixth, and in some
few places of the last which is the Tenth, there manifestly appears a defect.
It was not Quintianus Stoa, but Christopher Bruno that supplied the Two first
Books, which he did out of what Arrianus, Diodorus, Justin, and some others
left us in writing of the Archievements of Alexander the Great. Quintus Curtius
did well to abstain from the relations of the counterfeit Callisthenes (the
true one cited by Plutarch being not to be found) which make One Nectanebus a
Magician to be the Father of that Monarch, instead of Philip of Macedon, and
represent him rather as a Roland, or Amadis of Gaul than a true Conqueror.
Henry Glarean is not followed by any, in his distribution of Quintus Curtius
his History into Twelve Books, re-establishing the Two first, and dividing the
rest into Ten others, instead of the ordinary Eight. But in what manner soever
his History is disposed, it will be always found worthy of its Subject; and to
him alone can that Elogy be applied, which one Amyntianus insolently and
undeservedly arrogated to himself ( Viz.) that he had in some sort equalled by
his Style the noble actions of Alexander. Apud Photium sect. 131.
As Censurers are every where found, it is not to be supposed that Curtius will
escape them. The same Glarean whom I mentioned before, reproves him for having
like an ill Geographer, made the River Ganges proceed from the South; and
confounded Mount Taurus with Caucasus, and also mistook the Jaxartes of Pliny
for the River Tanais. But one may answer in his behalf that these errors (if
they are such) are not his, who as a Latin Author did no more than follow the
Grecian Relators, from whom he borrowed his History. Strabo observed in the
Fifteenth Book of his Geography, that the Macedonians called that, Caucasus,
which was but part of the Mount Taurus; because the former furnished them with
more fabulous matter than the latter, as that wherewith they delighted to
flatter the ambition of Alexander, and their own also. And as for the course of
the Ganges, although it is true that generally speaking it descends from the
North to the South, yet Strabo adds that it finds such opposition as obliges it
many times to hold different courses, and that at length it conveighs all its
waters to the East. Tr. 5. dell'. art hist. c. 2. ep. 3.
But Mascardi makes other objections, he thinks him excessive in the use of
Sentences; and though he cannot but confess that all his are very elegant and
ingenious, yet he accuses him for not having always employed them judiciously,
making some persons speak in a Phrase no way proportionable to their
conditions; and he instances in that Oration of the Scythians to Alexander in
the Seventh Book. I have read it over and over by reason of this imputation,
but with far different Eyes from those of Mascardi; and I can scarce believe
that it is a piece contrived by the Author, for I find all matter and Style, so
fitly suited to the persons of the Scythian Ambassadors that pronounced it,
both in respect of the Sentences, and all the rest of its parts, that it passes
in my judgment for a Copy taken from the true Original of Ptolemaeus,
Aristobulus, Callisthenes, Onesicritus, or some other of those present with
Alexander at the time it was spoke, who had the curiosity to insert it in the
History of that Monarch. I insist not on that part which is so well
accommodated to the present made by those Barbarians, of a pair of Oxen, a
Plough, a Cup, and an Arrow. The Greek Proverb of the solitary places of their
Country is admirably applied. And the Scythian description of Fortune without
feet, whose flight cannot be stopped, although you have hold of her hands,
seems unexpressibly graceful in their mouths. But though all these things do
suit wonderfully well with the persons that utter them, I find the greatest
harmony in the manner of employing those Sentences which Mascardi arraigns; and
if ever the Decorum of the Latins was considered, or those rules observed which
their Rhetoricians authorized, I think one may say that Quintus Curtius has on
this occasion most religiously kept them.

They who know with what liberty the Scythians and Tartarians use Fables in all
their discourses, and that they, like the rest of the Eastern People, scarce
say any thing without intermixing parables therewith, will admire the judgment
of Curtius in the most sententious part of that Oration, which his Censurer
found so much fault with. Are you ignorant (say those Ambassadors to Alexander)
that the tallest Trees which are so long growing, may be beat down and rooted
up in an instant? It is not the part of a wise man to mind only the fruit they
bear, and not to consider their height, and their danger of falling. Take heed
lest endeavoring to climb up to the top, their uttermost branches do not
break, and make you fall with them. The Lion be it never so great and fierce,
sometimes serves for nourishment to the least Birds; and Iron for all its
hardness is often consumed with rust. Nor is there any thing so solid or strong
in Nature, that may not be hurt by the weakest things, and which have in
appearance the least vigor. Certainly here are many Elegant expressions, which
instead of being condemned for unseemliness, as spoken by Scythians, Lib. 6.
and Lib. 10.
ought rather to be esteemed in a more than ordinary manner, for the Air they
have of their Country, and that unusual way of expression, which almost totally
differs from that of the Greeks or Latins. If I had a mind to censure this
History, as well as Others, I would not find fault with its Geography, or
Rhetoric; I should rather accuse Quintus Curtius for his Immorality, wherein
he can be no way justified. For after he had acknowledged in more than one
place, that Alexander made the same use of the Eunuch Bagoas, as Darius did,
which made him have so great a power over his affections (not to speak of
Ephestion, whose friendship he does not render so shameful or criminal as
others have done) he had the confidence afterward to affirm, that the
pleasures of Alexander were natural and lawful. The place I mean, is where he
first represents the death of that Prince, and then examins his virtues and
vices, using these very terms, veneris juxta natural desiderium usus, nec ulla
nisi ex permisso voluptas. How! this infamous passion he had for Bagoas was not
then esteemed against Nature? I know not, since long before, notwithstanding
the darkness of Paganism, Phocylides had observed in one of his verses, that
even Brutes naturally abhorred that sort of conjunction. And Plato how infamous
soever in that respect, acknowledged in the Eighth Book of his Laws, that even
before the time of Laius, that Example of Beasts, made masculine love be styled
a sin against nature. Certainly Quintus Curtius his fault herein cannot be
palliated, what license soever may be ascribed to the Gentiles, both Greeks and
Romans, on this Subject.

I will not repeat in this place what I said in the Section of Arrian, of some
small errors of Quintus Curtius, which are amended by the writings of the
former, or rather by the mutual assistance which these Two Authors give one to
the other to be rendered more intelligible. But I will observe, that
notwithstanding the praise we attributed to the Grecian, of having been one of
the most tender writers in matter of prodigies, he whom we now examine is much
more reserved therein than he, of which there needs no more proof, than what
they both writ of one or two extraordinary Springs, which newly sprung up from
the ground where Alexander had Encamped, near the River Oxus. Arrian says that
one of them was of Oil, and the other of clear Water, which he confidently
reports, as if he would impose a belief thereof on his Readers. Lib. 7.
Quintus Curtius on the other hand, says nothing of the Source of Oil, but
that in digging of Wells a Spring was found in the Kings Tent, of which as soon
as it was discovered, a rumor ran as if it had been miraculous; and Alexander
himself so far improved it, as to be pleased that it should be thought a grace
of Heaven, bestowed on him by the Gods. But to show clearly, with what
circumspection this Historian always handled things which admitted of doubt,
Lib. 9. But this fierceness so admired and doubted by Curtius, is not strange
to us, that see the like courage in our Mastifs on all occasions.
I will instance the terms wherewith he accompanies the narration he writes of
a Dog in the Kingdom of Sopita, that fastened on a Lion with so much courage,
that he suffered his members to be cut piecemeal, rather then lose the hold he
had taken. Equidem, says he, plura transcribo, quam credo. Nam nec affirmare
sustineo de quibus dubito, nec subducere quae accepi. And this moderation may
be applied to that place of the same book, where on the occasion of Ptolomy's
sickness, a Serpent showed to Alexander in his sleep, an Herb which would cure
him. Truly when an Author is so modest in his relation, that he appears not to
have any design to invade the credulity of his Readers, he may write what he
pleases, as we have already remonstrated in the Chapter of Livy.

Amongst all the Latin Historians there is none more generally approved than
Quintus Curtius. Some are for Livy's Style, others for that of Tacitus, but all
agree that Curtius has writ very agreeably, and well. Lipsius advises that no
book is more worthy the perusal of Princes, than this History which he commends
to their frequent inspection. Some there are of that dignity, who have not only
recreated their minds with this Book, but found other advantages by it. We have
already reported somewhat like this in what we writ of Livy; and I remember I
observed that one Laurentius di Medicis, who caused the History of the Emperors
to be read to him, was so affected with the recital of some notable Act of
Conrard the Third of that name, that he thought he owed his health to the
content he received from that relation. Lib. de reb. gest. Alph.
Antonius Panormitanus, and several others observe a memorable occurrence
concerning our Author, in reference to Alphonso that wise King of Arragon, who
finding himself oppressed with an indisposition, from which all the remedies of
his Physicians could not delive him, sought some diversion in the History of
Quintus Curtius; which was with so much satisfaction and good success, that he
became cured of his infirmity, and protested to all about him, that neither
Hippocrates, nor Avicenna, should ever be of equal consideration to him with
that Treatise. But to draw to a conclusion, I must admit that Curtius is
excellent in all his Orations, either Direct or Oblique. I have seen but one
Letter in all his works, which is the answer of Alexander to Darius. And I do
not remember that there is any other Digression, than that one of the Tenth
Book which I mentioned before, where, taking an occasion from the Divisions
amongst the Macedonians after the death of him that had made them Monarchs of
the world, he celebrates the felicity of the Roman People, reunited in the time
when he wrote, under a great and happy Emperor. Supposed to be Vespatian.
We must not take for a Digression, the Relation of the manner of living of the
Indians, and the Description of their Country, which is found in the Eighth
Book, because there is nothing therein, that is not essential to the Theme
which the Author proposed to himself; for being to write of the Exploits of
Alexander in that Country, it was requisite for him to give some summary
account of it.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF CORNELIUS TACITUS.
IN all the impressions of Cornelius Tacitus, his Annals are printed before his
History, which is understood to be because they have a farther beginning, I
suppose the Author is mistaken in this computation, for Vossisius speaks but of
two years.
treating of the last days of Augustus, and proceeding unto the end of Nero's
Reign, whose last Twelve years are nevertheless wanting; whereas the books of
his History seem to follow one another from the Epoche of the death of that
Tyrant, to the happy Government of Nerva and Trajan. And yet there is no doubt
but Tacitus first composed his History, as being nearer to his own time;
Extremum Neronis Biennium deest. de Hist. Latinis lib. 1. cap. 30.
for he quotes a place in the Eleventh of his Annals, to which he refers his
Reader, concerning what he had already writ of the actions of Domitian, which
were not by him mentioned any where, but in the Books of his History. Of this
History there remains to us but Five Books, and Lipsius guesses that there are
Ten lost. For if they reached from Galba, to Nerva, and Trajan, which includes
at least a space of Twenty one years, it is probable the greatest part of them
are wanting, seeing the Five we have comprehend little more than the
occurrences of one year.

Their Style is more large and florid than that of the Annals, which are
composed in a close contracted Phrase; but Tacitus his Eloquence appears every
where in his grave way of writing, Muret. or. de Tac.
which has something of that (...) or sublimity in it, from which the
Rhet^^icians have observed, that Demosthenes never straved. Amongst so many
Censurers, who find every one something thing to say against the works of this
Historian, none are more excusable than those who only complain of his
obscurity. For as he often leaves his Narrations imperfect, he is sometimes
found less intelligible. And the faults of the Copies, and depravation thereby
of his sense, in many places, contributes much to render his matter difficult
to be understood; but where the Paragraphs are entire and uncorrupted, his
meaning is easily discovered. Howsoever it be, it is no wonder if Tacitus
(having imitated Thucydides, and both followed Demosthenes) retained something
of that roughness and austerity, which is observed in the writings of those Two
Graecians; and which all the Ancients accounted as a virtue, so far is it from
deserving to be imputed as a fault, to him that should propose them to himself
for imitation. And as some Wines are recommended to our palates by a little
bitterness that is in them; and many persons find that a dusky and obscure
light in Churches in most suitable to their exercise of devotion: so others
conceive the obscurity of an Author, mixed with a little roughness of Style, is
rather to be esteemed than otherwise; because it disposes the mind to
attention, and elevates and transports it to notions, which it would not arrive
at in a more easy composition.

As for those who were so confident to pretend that Tacitus writ ill Latin, I
judge them more worthy of compassion for that extravagance, than any solid
answer. Yet Two great Civilians were of that opinion, Alciat, who maintained
that the Phrase of Paulus Jovius was preferable to that of this Ancient
Historian, which, he said, was full of Thorns; and Ferret, who condemned his
Style, as being in his judgment not Roman enough. If ever men were absurd in
censures, doubtless these were: and I do affirm against such unreasonable
opinions, that apparently Tacitus makes the least Groom or Cook, in
narratives, speak better Latin than either Ferret, or Alciat: they are indeed
learned in the Law, but very bad judges of the Roman Eloquence. For though
Tacitus has not writ like Caesar, or Cicero, that is no argument of his bad
performance. Eloquence is not uniform; there are diverse kinds of it: and it is
not unknown to the Learned, that Latin flourished in all of them differently
till the Reign of the Emperor Adrian, who was not so Ancient as Tacitus, to
whom the greatest Orators of his time Freely yielded the Palm of History. And
Pliny the younger who was one of the most considerable amongst them, declared
in many of his Epistles, that he esteemed Tacitus one of the most Eloquent of
his Age. In the Twentieth Epistle of the first Book, he makes him Judge of a
dispute he had, about the Eloquence to be used in pleading at the Bar, against
a learned man that maintained the most concise to be always the best. Epist.
1. l. 2.
And in another place he describes to one of his friends the Pomp of Virginius
Rufus his Funerals, observing his last and principal happiness to consist in
the praises of the Consul Cornelius Tacitus, who made his funeral Oration, and
who was the most eloquent of that time; laudatus est a Correlio Tacito. Nam hic
supremus felicitati ejus cumulus accessit laudator eloquentissimus. When he
imparts to another called Arrian, the success of a great cause against a
Proconsul of Africa, accused of robbing the public Treasury, he says, that
Cornelius Tacitus made a replication to the person that defended him, Ib. ep.
11.
wherein his Eloquence and gravity inseparable from his discourse were admired;
respondit Cornelius Tacitus eloquentissime; and quod eximium orationi ejus
inest, (...). And when the same Pliny designed to provide a public Preceptor
for the City of Coma in his Native Country, L. 4. ep. 13.
he entreated Tacitus, as one to whom all the great Wits of the Age applied
themselves, to recommend one to him to exercise that charge. I mention not the
descriptions he makes him, in two different Letters, of the death of the Elder
Pliny his Uncle, Lib. 6. ep. 16. et 20.
and of the burning of Vesuvins, which he was so desirous that the History of
Tacitus should describe, Lib. 7. ep. 33.
that he conjures him elsewhere not to forget his name in it, declaring his
passion for it in terms, which I think not unfit to rehearse in this place:
Auguror, nec me fallit augurium, Historias tuas immortales futuras, quo magis
illis, ingenue fatebor, inseri cupio. Nam si esse nobis curae solet, ut facies
nostra ab optimo quoque artifice exprimatur, nonne debemus optare, ut operibus
nostris similis tui scriptor praedicatorque contingat. But the place, wherein
Pliny shows most the esteem which he and all Italy had of Tacitus, Ib. ep. 20.
is that of another Letter, where he declares that from his youth upwards he
had chosen him for a pattern of Eloquence, from amongst the great number of
excellent Orators, which were then in Rome. And because we learn precisely from
that place the age of those two men, I will again very willingly insert it in
its native language: Equidem adolescentulus cum tu jam fama gloriaque floreres,
te sequi, tibi longo, sed proximus intervallo and essse and haberi
concupiscebam. Et erant multa clarissima ingenia, sed tu mihi (it a similitudo
naturae ferebat) maxim imitabilis, maxim imitandus videbaris. There is no
need to seek other proofs of Tacitus his reputation in his own time, which
produced so many excellent persons: and few are ignorant how all the following
ages have honored his endeavors, whereof we shall give some more Testimonies
before we finish this Section. But in the mean time is it not strange, that any
should be so barbarous as Alciat and Ferret, and contradictory to all the
Ancient Romans, to maintain that so considerable an Author could not so much as
speak his mother tongue? One must certainly have a brazen face, and a very
empty head to advance such propositions. For my part should I see a Thousand
things that displeased me, I should rather accuse my own weak understanding, or
the faults of the Copies, or some other defect (which ought not to be imputed
to him) than give the lie to all Antiquity, by falling into such an imaginary
imputation.

There is a third sort of Tacitus his accusers, who tax him of speaking
untruths; Vopiscus is of that number. In Aurel.
But because he only arraigns him to excuse himself in this general
proposition, that the best Historians of the world cannot avoid the mixture of
lies in their truest narrations. Tacitus his reputation seems not to be much
concerned therein. We have shown elsewhere that several persons took delight to
maintain this thesis. Orat. 11.
And I remember Dion Chrysostom endeavoring to prove in one of his Orations,
that one never knows the truth of things, is not content to say, that the
taking of Troy by the Graecians is a mere Fable; and that the Persians
delivered a very different account of the wars of Xerxes and Darius against
Greece, than the Graecians themselves; but he adds, as a note of the small
certainty there is in History, that amongst the most famous of the Greek
Historians, some held that the Naval victory of Salamin preceded that of
Plataea, and others asserted the contrary. It is sufficient then to answer,
that there are untruths which our humanity bears with, when they are related by
report, and without lying. But when Tertullian reproaches Tacitus with
imposture, and Budaeus calls him one of the most vile and impious Authors we
have, it is evident that they mean something more than that sort of misreport,
which ignorance may excuse; and which one may retort upon errors Authorized by
common belief. For they are offended at what he impiously spoke of Christians,
and in derision of our holy religion, whom he assaults even in the foundations
of the Old Testament, deriding the Miracles of Moses, and reproaching the Jews
with adoring the Effigies of a Wild Ass. I confess that one cannot too much
condemn what he writ on that subject, as he was a Pagan. But nevertheless we
must be forced to acknowledge, that if he must be totally renounced for what he
writ against the true God, and our Altars, we shall be obliged to burn with his
Books, almost all those of the Gentiles, very few of them having abstained from
the like calumnies. I say the same thing against the judgment which Casaubon in
his Preface, passed upon Polybius, where he pretends that Princes cannot read a
more dangerous book than Tacitus; because of the bad examples which are seen in
it. For it is an ill custom that Casaubon has followed, never to write upon an
Author without blaming all others, to give that the greater Authority; and we
know that he has praised Tacitus elsewhere as much as any one can do. It is
true his History has represented unto us, the actions of the most wicked
Princes that ever were; and that by misfortune those Books which contained the
best Emperors Raigns, as of Vespasian, Titus, Nerva, and Trajan, are lost. Yet
it is the way to censure all the Histories we have in the world, even without
excepting the Holy Writ, to make that of Tacitus responsible for the bad
examples it contains, there being none found that have not some very dangerous
in them, and where there is no need of distinguishing with judgment, the good
and the bad of every Narration. But perhaps heretofore, as even in Tertullians
time, the Pagans invectives against us might be apprehended, because the world
was not then purged of their errors, as it is at present by the Grace of God. I
cannot imagine that any person can be found at this day, that would let himself
be seduced by the Calumnies of the Ethnicks; or by all that the infidelity they
lived in, could make them write against our Evangelical truths.

The general esteem the works of Tacitus have gained, might suffice alone
against the Authorities we have examined, though we wanted reasons to refute
them. If it were needful to weaken them by other contrary authorities, I can
produce Two, besides the Universal consent of learned men, which are so weighty
that they will always turn the Scale on their side. The first is that of the
Emperor Tacitus, who though invested in the supreme dignity of the world, did
not forbear near two hundred years after the death of our Historian, to glory
in that name common to them, esteeming it as an honor to have had such an
Ancestour, and to be acknowledged one of his Posterity. He caused his Statue to
be placed in all Libraries, and all his books to be writ over Ten times every
year, that they might pass from hand to hand, and from Age to age, as they have
done unto ours. The Second Authority shall be that of the Great Duke Cosmo di
Medicis, whose memory will never want veneration, as long as the Science of
Polity or good government (as his Countrymen term it) shall be cultivated. That
Prince chose Tacitus amongst all the Historians, as one from whom his mind
could receive the most instruction and solid satisfaction. Add to the Testimony
of Princes and Emperors, that the translation of this Author into all Tongues,
gives a certain proof of the value of him in all Nations. Besides his
Commentaries and History, he wrote a Treatise of diverse people who inhabited
Germany in his time, and of their different manners; with another Book of the
Life of his Father in Law Agricola. Some moreover ascribe to him, the book
Entitled the causes of the corruption of Latin Eloquence, which others
attribute to Quintilian, and which possibly belongs to neither of them,
according to the probable conjecture of Lipsius. As for the collection of the
book of the pleasant sayings of Tacitus, Taciti facetiae.
which Fulgentius Planciades mentions, it is a mere counterfeit, which never
deceived any one but that Grammarian. The true compositions of Tacitus are
discernable enough, Lib. 2. de re poet. c. 1. et l. 3. c. 1.
either by their form, or matter, taking, as Scaliger does, the words of the
History for the matter, and the things it unfolds for the form. He scatters
here and there throughout the whole, Oblique and Direct Orations, as the
condition of time, place, and persons require. But as concise as he is in his
Style, he flies out into Digressions in many places, witness that of the God
Sarapis amongst the rest, in the Fourth Book of his History; and that other
wonderful one in the Fifth, which we have already in some sort reflected on,
relating to the Religion of the Jews, and that of Moses their Lawgiver. He was
of the opinion, that, as there is no Traveller who may not go out of his way
sometimes, to see a memorable place, or some singular thing of the Countries he
passes through; so the Laws of History do no more forbid a Writer to make some
small excursions, which please and refresh the mind more than they diver it,
when they are used only in apt season. He is no less sententious than
Thucydides or Salust, but with such artifice, that all the maxims he lays
down, issue from the nature of the subjects he treats of, in the same manner as
Stars are made of the proper substance of the Heavens. There is nothing of
Foreign, affected, too far fetched, or superfluous in what he writes; each
thought holds a place which becomes it so well, that it cannot be disputed.
Moreover you do not only learn from him the events of things past; He seldom
fails to discover their causes, and the foregoing councels. One may say the
same thing of History, as the Poet said of Husbandry.

Faelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Virg. 2. Georg.
And if what many people aver, be true, to wit, that the water is sweeter in
the bottom of the Sea, than in the Superficies; it is more certain that an
Historical relation, which only gives an insight into affairs, and the
pursuance of events, leaving the Antecedent causes and advices unpenetrated,
cannot be so useful or pleasant, as that which reveals all the mysteries
thereof, and does not hide the greatest secrets contained in those affairs,
which relish according to the comprehension we have of them. But that which
neightens the merit of Tacitus his works, is the observation which others have
made before me, that one often learns no less from what he left unsaid, L. 1.
Hist.
than what he expressed, his silence being as instructive as his language, and
his ciphers (to speak in the terms of numbers) as considerable as his most
important figures, because all therein described is full of consideration,
proportion, and judgment. Thus as the Ancients report, the Painter Timanthes
left more in his Pictures to be imagined, than he exposed to the view of
Spectators. And it is known that Tacitus did not set himself to write, before
he was very old, after Nerva's Reign, and under that of Trajan, as he himself
declares.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF LUCIUS ANNAEUS. FLORUS.
THEY who make Lucius Florus to live under Trajan, are obliged to correct that
place of his Preface, where he says there was little less than two hundred
years, from Augustus his time to his. The most probable opinion is that he was
of a little later time. And it is believed that the Poet Florus, whose verses
Spartianus quotes in the Life of the Emperor Adrian, is the same of whom we now
write, the Author of the Epitomy of the Roman History in four books. The verses
are in a very familiar Style; Ego nolo Caesar esse,
Ambulare per Britannos,
Scythicas pati pruinas.


The Emperor Adrian was addicted to Poetry, as may be seen by the pleasant
answer which he returned.

Ego nolo Florus esse,
Ambulare per Tabernas,
Latitare per popinas,
Calices pati rotundos.
And one may see that the Phrase of his History is wholly Poetical, and that
the love of Parnassus caused him sometimes, like Virgil, to employ Hemistichs
in his Periods, But though he seems very licentious in it, and his speech and
expressions often favor more of a Declamer, than an Historian, yet we must
affirm Sigonius to be very unjust, when he styles him an impertinent Writer.
The manner in which Florus treats of every War apart, did not deserve so severe
a censure. And it is apparent, that he was ever acknowledged to be a very
fluent Author, full of Eloquence, and very agreeable flowers of Oratory. He is
moreover replenished with very ingenious sentences, thoughts expressed with
force and vehemence. And laying aside some little places, which may be thought
cold, in comparison of others, many refined precepts are contained in what he
writes, which could not be expressed in better terms.

Some doubt whither Florus that made the four books above mentioned, was the
same that composed Arguments to the books of Livy's history. Nevertheless it is
a great mistake, to believe that he intended to Epitomize the whole History of
Livy, in his four books, for he does not follow it in diverse places, but rather
pursues his particular fancy. Which is so extravagant in reference to
Chronology, or the account of time, that it is not safe for any that will be
truly informed, to take him him for a guide in that matter, because of the many
faults he has committed therein, through negligence, or otherwise. He is
accused also of contriving the loss of Livy's works, to value his own
collections; but I judge those that are of that opinion, to be in an error,
such a sort of summary Narration being not sufficient so to satisfy the mind,
as to make it reject a work, whereof that Compendium gives but a very
superficial account.

Moreover some make Seneca to be the Author of the Compendious History of
Florus, because Lactantius lays down, in the fifteenth Chapter of the Seventh
book of his Divine Institutions, a Division of the Roman Empire into four
different seasons, ascribing Metaphorically to it, Infancy, Youth, Virility,
and Old Age, which he attributes to Seneca's invention. And because the like
division is seen, in the Preface of Florus his books, they conclude that Seneca
is the Author of them; and that the name of Florus is to be no otherwise
considered, than as a counterfeit. But he that shall well observe the writings
of these two Authors, will easily discern great differences in them. Seneca
makes the Youth or Adolescency of Rome, as he terms it, reach to the end of the
last Punick War, whilst Florus makes it continue but to the first. And Seneca
begins its Old Age, when the Civil Wars arose between Julius Caesar, and
Pompey; whereas Florus accounts it from Augustus his establishment in the
absolute power of the Empire. Is it not therefore more probable that Florus
made use of Seneca's thought, varying it, and rendering it in a manner his own,
by the alteration he made therein? I am apter to believe, that Lactantius was
mistaken, than to imagine that all the Manuscripts should err, which have put
L. Annaeus Florus in the Title of the Books we now mention. But perhaps Florus
and Seneca, being both of the same family* Viz. that of the Annaei, their names
may have been confounded by adoption, or otherwise; and that Florus was
therefore sometimes called Seneca, as one cannot deny that he is in some old
Copies; and some have given him also the Surname of Julius. Whereupon we must
observe that the House of the Heraclidae, is not more honored in the valor of
the many gallant men it has bestowed on the world, than that of the Annaei in
the number of the excellent persons it has produced in all sorts of learning.
Seneca the Philosopher, the Tragedian, and the Rhetorician, (if they are three)
prove it sufficiently, as well as the Poet Lucan, and our Historiographer,
whose Style retains something of the Genius of that last Family, born all to be
Masters of Eloquence, and Poetry. It will not be amiss to observe, that the
praises which Florus gave in many places to Spain, are reproached to him by
those who think, that the love of his country induced him to exceed a little,
in the sixth, seventeenth, and eighteenth Chapters of the second book, besides
what he adds in the third, Cap. 22.
treating of the Warlike exploits of Sertorius in that Country.

There was another Julius Florus, more Ancient than the Historiographer, who
lived in Tiberius his Reign. Seneca, in his Controversies, says that he was
instructed in the art of speaking well, by the Orator Portius Latro. Lib. 1.
instit. c. 3.
And Quintilian, speaking of that Florus, says he was the Prince of Eloquence,
and was a public Professor of it in Gallia. They who build upon the Surname of
Julius (which some Manuscripts attribute, as we have already said, to him whose
History we examine) imagine he may be descended from that other Florus, whereof
Seneca and Quintilian have made such honorable mention. But it is a mere
conjecture, and so light, that it deserves not to be further reflected on.

I will only add, that amongst the Licenses Florus has assumed, as we have
already observed, there is one so Poetical, and strangely Hyperbolical, that
Scaliger with reason blames him, in his Commentaries upon Eusebius, Page 134.
for having in a mistaken zeal, suffered himself to be led away, by a mean and
childish appetite of relating wonderful things to the prejudice of truth. Lib.
2.
It is where he relates the expedition of Decimus Brutus, Cap. 17.
along the Celtique, Galician, and Portuguese Coasts. Where he alleges that
Brutus never stopped his victorious course, till he beheld the Sun fall into
the Ocean, and heard with horror its fire extinguish in the waters; which gave
him a certain apprehension of being Sacrilegious, and to have done more than
his religion permitted. Putida (...) sunt haec, says Scaliger, after he had
used these terms, Florus (...) Poetica drama amplificat. The same desire of
writing some strange thing ought to be censured in him, where he speaks of the
defeat of the Cimbri by Marius. He pretends that two Young Men were seen in
Rome near the Temple of Castor and Pollux, presenting to the Praetor Letters
accompanied with Laurel, to witness a victory obtained. But I shall on this
occasion repeat a Maxim, which I have elsewhere established, viz. that if an
Historian sometimes inserts any thing in his Narration, of so extraordinary a
nature, he ought at the same time to signify the small faith he has therein,
and protest that he merely reports it as a popular rumor.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF SUETONIUS.
I Have hinted in the Preface of this Book, that I would not have ranked
Suetonius with the other Historians, if what he writ of the twelve first
Caesar's, had not contained as well as their Lives, an Historical series of what
happened, during so considerable a time as an Age and more. Moreover I observe
that no body mentions the Roman History, without speaking very advantagiously
of Suetonius; and Lodovicus Vives has not stuck to prefer him for diligence,
and fidelity, to all the Greek and Latin Writers extant. Lib. 5. de trad. disc.
Bodin likewise affirms, that none of them has composed any thing exacter, or
better accomplished, than what we have of this Historian. But though he is very
deserving, I should be loath to ascribe so much to him, as to celebrate his
praise to the prejudice of those whom we have hitherto treated of. I allow him
to be one of the Principal of the Latin Writers. He was Secretary of State to
the Emperor Adrian, which is an evidence that he possessed, besides the
knowledge of Great Affairs, a competent capacity to deliver them in proper and
apt expressions. It is said, his employment was taken from him, because of some
private familiarity he had with the Empress Sabina, which was disliked, as if
the respect and reverence due to her supreme dignity, had been thereby
violated. But it happens sometimes that particular disgraces are useful to the
public, as was evidenced in his person, for his fall, and the leisure he had
by it, reduced him to a studious contemplation, which has procured us amongst
other works, that which gives him a place amongst the best Historians.

Besides his Historical Labor, we have part of his Treatise of the Illustrious
Crammaninus, and that of the Rhetoricians, and some remains of another which
contained the Lives of the Poets. For that of Terence is almost all of
Suetonius his writing, as Donatus himself confesses, who adds something to it.
And the Lives of Horace, Juvenal, Lucan, and Perseus, are probably of the same
composition. However it be, some write that St Hierome took him for his
Pattern, when he made his Catalogus of the Ecclesiastical Writers. But we ought
not to believe, that which is extant of the Elder Pliny's Life, under the name
of Suetonius, to be of his writing; and if the Style were not an obstacle, the
Phrase is enough to discover it to be of a more modern contexture. Suctonius
was too much a friend to the Younger Pliny, (as it is apparent in his Epistles)
to speak so coldly, and say so little of his Uncle, that was a most worthy
person. There are many of the Epistles of the Nephew addressed to Suetonius, in
one whereof Pliny takes notice, that he desired him to defer for some days,
Lib. 1. ep. 18.
the pleading of his cause, on the occasion of an ominous dream, which made him
apprehend at that time, the event of his business. This shows on the one side
that Suetonius was superstitious; and the answer Pliny makes him, importing
that dreams are often to be taken in the contrary sense, witnesses that he
yielded no less than his friend, to that sort of vanity. And in another Epistle
Pliny merrily menaces Suetonius, that if he delayed to publish his writings, he
would change the Hendeoasyllables, which he had made in their praise, Lib. 5.
ep. 11.
into Scazons of defamation, adding withal, to encourage their publication,
that his work was arrived to such a state of perfection, that the file instead
of making it brighter, did now diminish its value, and weaken it. Perfectum
opus absolutumque est, nec jam splendescit lima, sed atteritur.

One may read in Aulus Gellius, Servius, Tzetzez, and in Suidas, the Titles of
several Compositions of Suetonius, which we have lost; As that of the Games and
Spectacles or Shows represented by the Romans; The Republic of Cicero; An
Account of the Illustrious Families of Rome; and many others. Suidas gives him
barely the character of Roman Grammarian, a Quality much more considered in
that time, than it has been since. Ausonius mentions a Treatise of Kings, Ep.
19.
writ by Suetonius in three books, whereof Pontius Paulinus contracting them
made a Poem. Moreover the Surname of Tranquillus, which is given to Suetonius,
is in effect the same in signification, as that of his Father, whom he himself
calls, Cap. 10.
in the Life of Otho, Suetonium Lenem, reporting that his charge of Tribune of
the thirteenth Legion, obliged him to be present, when that Emperors Troops
engaged against those of Vitellius. They therefore were deceived who believed,
In vita Suet. var. lect. l. 5. c. 11.
that this Suetonius of whom we write, was Son of that Suetonius Paulinus,
whereof Tacitus, Pliny, and Dion make mention. Sicco Polentonus, and Muret
committed this error, which Lipsius, and Some Others judiciously repair, there
being no reason in what they affirm, to confound a Military Tribune with a
Consul. Gerardus Vossius shows also the mistake of those who read, in the tenth
Chapter of the first book of the Divine Institutions of Lactantius,
Tranquillus, instead of Tarquitius, who was another Author very learned in the
Pagan Religion, and whom probably in that respect, Lactantius speaking of
Aesculapius, rather intends than our Suetonius.

But to return to his particular History of the Twelve first Emperors, There
are some Critics which affirm, that the beginning of the first book is
wanting; and the ground of their opinion is founded on the improbability, that
Suetonius should have writ nothing of the birth and first years of Julius
Caesar, when he took the pains to search into the Original, and Education, of
eleven other Emperors that succeeded, whose lives he has described. He labored
in it, according to the judgment of St Hierome, (with the same liberty as
Sovereigns so absolute assumed) in a condition exempt from all sort of fear.
Eadem liberate scrip^lt, qua ips^ vixerunt.
Muret indeed, in his Oration upon Tacitus, converts this to his disadvantage,
and maintains that St Hierome rather blamed, than praised him in that saying.
For, says Muret, it were to be wished, that we had not learned so many Riots,
and shameful Vices, as he declares to have been practiced by the Tiberii,
Nerones, and Caligulae. They are, says he, so filthy, that they almost make
the Paper blush, upon which they are represented. And if what one of the
Ancients says, be true, namely that there is but little difference, Parum
abest a docente qui talia narrat.
between him who describes such infamy with care, and he who teaches it; we
shall have much ado to excuse Suetonius, for having acted such a part as he
did. And to augment his charge, he is accused of having used the Christians
ill, In Ner. cap. 16.
calling them a sort of men, who embraced a new, and mischievous superstition,
which made them be persecuted in Nero's time. But, as we have already answered
to the like objections in other Sections, is there any of all the Historians of
repute, who is not guilty, if it be a crime in him, to have represented the
wicked actions of those they write of, which makes the greatest, and often the
most considerable part of the narration? Does not the Sacred History it self,
show us Parricides, Incests, Idolatry, and many other Profanations, amongst the
best examples, and holiest instructions? And ought we not to cast into the fire
all the books of those Pagans, who have writ since the beginning of
Christianity, if what they exposed against our Religion, should make us
absolutely condemn it.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF JUSTIN.
SOME think they are to blame that complain of Abreviators, because without
contributing to the loss of the writings they epitomized, they have not left us
destitute of the most remarkable memorials of many Authors, of whose works
nothing now remains. But those which are of this opinion, ought to confess
themselves obliged to Justin, by whose Industry, the Great Labor of Trogus
Pompeius is so happily reduced into little, that we have few Latin compositions
more considerable than his Epitome, either for the Style, or matter thereof.
Yet methinks, these sort of writers are not sufficiently discharged, in
asserting that they have left behind them valuable works, unless it be made to
appear, that they have not been accessory to the loss of the Originals, which
is the crime imputed to them by many Learned Men, as we have already observed
in the Chapters of Herodotus, Dion Cassius, and Livy. The Extracts or
Collections of that Understanding Emperor Porphyrogenetus are instanced on this
occasion. And Tribonianius meets with the like entertainment, for having made a
defective compilation, in his Pandects, of the Texts, or rather Oracles, of all
those Ancient Lawyers, whose excellent reasonings, and elegant expressions,
ought to have been preserved from so bold an attempt. A very speculative modern
Author speaking of Epitomys, Verulam de aug. Scient. l. 2. c. 6.
does not stick to call them Moths and Worms that gnaw History, which have made
such a spoil therein, that there often remain but miserable shreads of the
first contexture. And indeed there ought to be more than a bare negation, to
refute so probable an opinion; though it may be alleged that the works of most
Abreviators, and those of Justin amongst the rest, ought to be now very
acceptable to us, because we can have recourse to no other relations of the
matter they deliver.

It is easy to make a near guess at the time when Trogus Pompeius lived, by
what he said in his forty third book, of his Parents that came from Gallia
Narbonensis, where he declares his Grandfather to be made a Citizen of Rome, by
the favor of Pompey the Great (whose Surname probably he took) during the Wars
of Sertorius; and that his Father, after he had borne Arms under Caius Caesar
(who is here taken for the first Emperor who bore that name, rather than for
Caligula) had the honor to be his Secretary, and jointly to keep his Seal. It
is therefore thought, that Trogus Pompeius wrote his History under Augustus and
Tiberius, having spoken of the former at the end of the whole work. It was
divided into forty four books, whose number Justin has not changed, no more
than their Title, which was the Philippick History, because (as it appears from
the seventh unto the one and fortieth book,) it was a continued narration of
the Macedonian Empire, which owed its rise to Philip Father of Alexander the
Great. Theopompus had written before, fifty eight books called Philippicks,
which are quoted by Athenaeus and Diodorus, and by Some held to be the Model
which Trogus Pompeius followed; as Cicero, imitating Demosthenes, named his
Orations Philippicks, with much less reason. The seven first books of that
History, in pursuance of the Title we mention, comprised the first beginnings
of the world, or of the Inhabitants thereof, together with descriptions of
Places and Countries, which Justin has apparently cut of, as it may be
collected from the Ancient Preambles before each book of Trogus Pompeius,
published by Bongars. But we had been more fully satisfied herein, if that
Friend of Aldus, who bragged he had in his hands all the works of that
Historian, and would even in a short time show them the light, had said a truth.

As to what relates particularly to Justin, he made his Epitome, according to
the most common opinion, under Antoninus surnamed Pius, to whom it is thought
he dedicated it in his Preface. I know, the passage wherein that Emperor is
mentioned, is diversely interpreted; and some have been persuaded, that he wrote
after the Establishment of the Roman Empire in Constantinople, because of a
place in the eighth book, where he speaks of the Sovereign power of Greece. But
that may admit other interpretations, without a necessity of making him live
two hundred years later than he did, and in an Age which produced nothing so
polite or elegant, as all we have of this Author is. Yet it is a greater error
to confound him with Justin the Martyr, as one Martin' a Polander did in his
Chronicle. For though these Two Justins were Contemporary, the manner how the
Historian treats the Israelites in his six and thirtieth book, where he will
have Moses to be the Son of Joseph, and the Latter a very Great Magician, shows
that he was of the Pagan belief. And Justin the Martyr never wrote but in
Greek, nor did Eusebius, St Hierome, or Photius rank the Epitomy of Trogus
Pompeius, amongst his Works. Though St Hierome indeed quotes something of it in
his Preamble upon Daniel; And no Author more Ancient than that Father of the
Church, spoke of Justin the Historian.

He was not like to use Direct Orations, when he whom he epitomized, had
condemned them in Salust and Livy, as we have already elsewhere mentioned.
Which appears in the eight and thirtieth book, where he rehearses in an Oblique
form, that long Oration of Mithridates to his Soldiers, to animate them
against the Romans. And that of Agathocles in the twenty second book,
pronounced as soon as he arrived at Africa, to encourage his Troops then
terrified by the obscurity of an Eclipse of the Sun, is no less considerable
than that of Mithridates, though it be shorter. But he is censured by Some, for
introducing a few Digressions in a work so close and short, as the History he
writes. The first is found in the beginning of his second book, where the
Scythians and the Egyptians have a debate on the point of honor, in what
relates to their Antiquity, both of them pretending to have sufficient reasons
to call themselves, the most Ancient People of the Earth. The second is in the
twentieth book, on the subject of Pythagoras, whose birth, voyages, learning,
virtues, and death, he describes, without forgetting the misfortune which
happened to his Disciples, whereof threescore were burnt in Croton, and the
rest exiled. Whence one may conclude, that all sort of Digressions are not to
be condemned; when so eminent an Author as Justin, who contracted into so
little a space, the History of the Transactions of two thousand years (which
are reckoned from Ninus the Founder of the Assyrian Monarchy, to the Emperor
Augustus) made no difficulty sometimes to divert himself this way upon an
agreeable subject.

But though Justin's manner of writing is so excellent, that it was thought
worthy of Augustus his Age, rather than of that of the Antonines; his elegancy
of Style cannot atone for his mistakes in relation. Cap. 40.
Pererius has convinced him of many errors in reference to the Jews, In Aurelio.
in his Commentaries upon Daniel. And Vopiscus places him in the rank of
Historians who could not avoid lying: but one may say, that his associating him
with Livy, Salust, and Tacitus, renders that accusation very light. That which
he cannot be excused in, is Chronology, where he was so much mistaken, that one
ought not to follow him always. And that which makes his fault the greater, is
that the reputation of Trogus Pompeius, and the esteem which all the Ancients
had for him, obliges men to think, that those misreckonings in the sequel of
times, are rather of the Copy, than the Original, or of the Abreviator, rather
than the Primitive Author. Which is the ordinary judgment of those who have
labored most in the best Editions of Justin.

I Should have ended here, according to my first intention, not finding after
Justin and the time of the Antonines, any Latin Historian amongst the Ancients,
whence one might draw any profitable instruction to compose a History, or whose
works might merit a serious reflection, unless it should be absolutely to
condemn the exposition, and ill conduct of them. They who are usually called
the Writers of the August History, Spartianus, Wlcatius Gallicanus, Trebellius
Pollio, Julius Capitolinus, Lampridius, and Vopiscus, have nothing in them
contrary to this proposition, or otherwise considerable, except it be that they
teach us things of many Emperors, whereof we hardly learn any thing elsewhere,
though indeed Vopiscus is the least faulty of them. Trebellius Pollio may be
put in the second order. Spartianus, Lampridius, and Wlcatius are incomparably
more faulty and more negligent than the others; and Julius Capitolinus is the
worst of all, by the advice of those who have taken the pains to examine them.
But it is very strange that a whole Age and more should pass away, from that of
the Antonines to Diocletian (under whom all those before mentioned did write)
without the appearance of one good Historian in the Roman Empire, who might
deserve to have his works descend to us. Neither will Sextus Aurelius Victor
(who came a little after) merit a better esteem, whose abridged History
contains but a word of each Emperor's Life, from Augustus to Julian; nor would
it be any advantage to him if we should confound in one, the three who bore the
same name of Sextus Victor, to Theodosius the Great. And as for Eutropius, who
dedicates almost at the same time, his Historical Breviary, to the Emperor
Valens, and whom Suidas calls an Italian Sophister, I shall say little of him,
as having nothing comparable in his writings, to those of the celebrated
Authors, whose works we have examined. There remains only Ammianus Marcellinus,
whom I cannot with a good conscience decline, he having compiled a just body of
History, and by whom I will finish this Treatise: for we cannot extend it to
the Age of Justinian, as we have done that of the Greek Historians; unless we
should introduce Jornandes, and Cassiodorus, indiscreetly mingling the
barbarity of the Goths, with the purity and adress of the best Authors of the
Latin Language.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE HISTORY OF AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS.
IT must be confessed, that Ammianus Marcellinus is not considerable in respect
of the beauty of his language. For he was a Greek by Nation, as he himself
declares at the end of his last book. And from an Epistle of Libanius to him,
it is inferred, that he was a Citizen of Antioch; he speaks of him with
Elogies, as often as occasion does occur, excusing him in his two and twentieth
Book, on the subject of the Invectives of the Misopogon of Julian, which he
affirms to have been excessive, and contrary to what might be justified with
truth. After the death of the Emperor Valens, he retired to Rome, where it is
believed by very probable conjectures, that he complied his History after he
had passed through the most honorable Offices of the Militia, which he
exercised under diverse Emperors, having been in his youth, of the number of
those who were then named Protectores Domestici; which was a Quality that
resembles that of the Gardes du Corpse in France, Guards of the King of France
his body.
an ordinary step to the highest Employments of the State. He flourished under
the Emperors Gratianus and Valentinian, and wrote his History in one and thirty
books, which he began at the end of Domitians Reign, or the beginning of Nerva,
and continued to the death of Valens; the first thirteen of them are lost, and
the eighteen that remain, are full of imperfections, which the injury of time,
and the insolent temerity of Critics have introduced in them, Henr. Valesius.
as the learned Author of the last Edition of that work, has very prudently
observed.

It is easy to judge that the books of Ammianus his History, which are wanting,
were writ much more compendiously, than those we have; for he comprised in the
thirteen first, the Reigns of as many Caesar's, as were between Nerva and
Constantius, who makes the beginning of the fourteenth; all the rest which
followed being employed to describe, what past from that last Emperor's, to
Gratian's time, under seven Reigns only. We have spoken in the Section of
Josephus, of those who undertook to write in Foreign Tongues. I will not repeat
any thing here that I there mentioned; but only add, that if the History of
Ammianus Marcellinus receives some prejudice from his defects in the Latin
Elocution, in which a Grecian, and a Soldier by profession as he was, could
not very much excel, it is so well recompensed by the merit of the thoughts,
and all the rest of his work, that an advantageous place, amongst the Prime and
Principal Historians, cannot be refused him, He is of the number of those who
writ the things they saw, in which they often had a great part; wherefore he
has something common with Caesar and Xenophon. Nevertheless I do not think (as
others have done) that he is that Free Prince of Dalmatia and Illyria, of whom
Suidas speaks, though he bore the same name, and was a great friend of
Salustius the Philosopher, who ought not to be confounded with another of that
name, a Principal commander of the Praetorian Militia, under Valentinian. But
Ammianus Marcellinus is very much to be valued; because, though he was a Pagan,
he had the discretion to publish nothing directly contrary to Christianity; and
abstained from many Invectives, which his equals often in that time used
against our Religion. He gives indeed excessive praises to Julian; Lib. de
virtute Paganorum.
and though that Apostate cannot be too much detested, for his infidelity and
revolt, yet it cannot be denied but he was endued, according to the ordinary
definitions of the Schools, with the Moral and intellectual virtues of
Chastity, Magnanimity, Learning, and Temperance, unless the faith of all
Histories that have writ of him be disputed; which is needless in the Age in
which we live, wherein the grace of God has left us nothing more to fear from
the Idolatry of the Ancients. If the opinion of Gesner may be allowed, who
maintains that Marcellinus the Historian is the same that writ the Life of
Thueydides, it may be wondered that he treated Christianity with so much
moderation. The Author of the Life commends Thucydides for nothing so much, as
that he had the power over himself, to forbear writing with Animosity, against
Cleon, or Brasidas (who had caused him to be banished) never showing any where
his resentment of so great an injury; though, to speak the truth, he did not
wholly refrain from representing the bad conditions of Cleon. It is no marvel
then, that Marcellinus practiced himself what he esteemed so much in others, or
that he made use of that virtue in his discourses, which he commended in those
of Thucydides.

One of the considerations which ought to oblige us to a greater esteem of the
History of Ammianus, Meaning the French.
is, that we have none like that, which gives us the knowledge of many
Antiquities of the Gauls, or so well explains the Originals of the first
French, Germans, and Burgundians, of whom it makes frequent mention. Morover it
contains many things besides, which are found no where else, and has had the
approbation of all Ages since it was writ, because of the sincerity and
veracity of the Author. And for his reputation, we may add to what has been
already said of him, and his Employments, that he passed his last years with
great reputation, under the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius the
Great.

But all these Encomiums do not protect him, from being accused of having too
often acted the part of a Philosopher in his writings, affecting to appear
learned, beyond what the Laws of History permit, which do not admit of
Entertainments of so great ostentation, as many of those he relates.

It is the ordinary fault of those that are distinguished by their profession,
from men of letters, and has great resemblance to that vice, which the Greeks
named (...), which signifies a learning in old age; because they which study
when they are advanced in age, and against the Rules of the usual course of
study, are much more subject to it than others. And indeed, Ammianus
Marcellinus cannot be justified in many places of his History, where he
indecently quits the prosecution of his narration, to enter upon discourses of
Philosophy, and other Sciences, which have hardly any relation to the matters
whereof he treats. But to make the thing clearer, and consequently more
instructive, I will produce two or three examples of his practice herein.

In the seventeenth book, speaking of terrible Earthquakes, which happened
under the Reign of Constantius in Macedonia, in the Province which at that time
bore the name of Pontus, and in many parts of Asia Minor, he makes an excellent
description, and not improperly, of the strange Ruins which Nicomedia the
Capital City of Bithynia suffered by this accident. And if he had stopped
there, he had done enough, but he takes occasion on that subject, to seek for
the Physical causes of such shakings in the lowest part of the Universe. And
considers first what the Priests of his Religion said of it. Thence, examining
the reasons of Aristotle, Anaxagoras, and Anaximander, strenghtned by the
Testimony of the Poets, and Theologians, he shows that there are four sorts of
Earthquakes. And after a long enumeration of the new Isles, which appeared in
diverse places after such shocks, he names those that were swallowed up by a
quite contrary violence, and one amongst the rest, which was of a greater
extent than all Europe, and was swallowed by the Atlantic Sea; which doubtless
he took from Plato's Timaeus though he does not name him. At last having a long
time Philosophically expatiated himself, he begins his narration again with
Julian's residence at Paris, being then only a designed Caesar or Emperor.

In the beginning of the twentieth book, he takes notice of a great Eclipse of
the Sun, in the year when the Scotch, and the Picts wasted England, which was
that of the tenth Consulat of Constantius, and the third of Julian. As this was
a good observation to be made, and very worthy of his History, so there is no
reason on that circumstance, to fall upon the most secret mysteries of
Astronomy, not only in what concerns those Periodical defects of the light of
the Sun, but also in what touches the travels of the Moon* as the Poets say,
when the Earth darkens it with its shadow. He exposes on that subject the
opinion of Ptolemaeus, in the same words he used; and not content to treat of
Eclipses, he inquires into the cause of the Parelia, when we think we see more
than one Sun in the Heavens; so that one would think in this place, he quite
abandons the prosecution of his History, to deliver to his readers, a Lecture
of Astronomy. Nevertheless at last he resumes his discourse, recounting the
preparations of Constantius against the Persians, and his jealousy of the brave
actions of Julian, after a tiresome and intolerable excursion.

The third and last example of the vicious digressions of Ammianus, is in his
thirtieth Book, where he observes with curiosity and profit, how the Emperor
Valens was diverted by his Courtiers from hearing causes pleaded, and assisting
at judgments, that they might thereby pursue their unjust Monapolies; and
because they feared, considering his rigid and severe nature, he would cause
justice to be exercised as legally and justly, as it was a little before, under
the government of Julian. Thence he takes occasion to inveigh against the
profession of Advocates, which he says, Epicurus named the Art of Knavery
(...). And the better to represent the infamous proceedings of those of his
time, he exaggerates the merit of one Demosthenes, that made all Greece come to
Athens, when he was to speak in public; and of one Callistratus, who made even
Demosthenes leave Plato in his Academy to go and hear him; And then he mentions
Hyperides, Aeschines, Androcides, Dinarchus, and one Antiphon, who was the
first of all Antiquity that was recompensed for pleading in a weighty cause.
From the Greeks he passses to the Romans, and naming those great Orators
Rutilius, Galba, Scaurus, Crassus, Antonius, Philippus, and Scaevola, he
descends to Cicero, to prove that formerly, they that had exercised the chief
employments of State; after having been Censors, Consuls, Generals, and had
Triumphed, did not disdain to take a place at the Bar; and add to the glory of
their precedent actions, as a Corollary, that of having had the applause of a
whole Audience in pleading. And after having shown so fine a Scene, he draws
the Curtain, to expose to all eyes the shameful and criminal prostitution of
the Advocates of his Age, dividing them into four sorts, whose impostures,
impertinencies, and perplexing tricks he does so particularly display, that one
has much ado to get out of the Laborinth, to recover the narration, and return
to Valentinian in Tryers, where he had left him. Though his Declamation is very
moral and elegant being separately considered, it must needs be troublesome,
and tedious as he introduces it, because it too visibly interrupts the course
of the History. And those that would be instructed in Physics, Astronomy, or
Moral Philosophy, do not seek such lessons in an Historian, and to those that
design to be informed in History, nothing can be more uneasy, than to find in
the midst of a relation foreign discourses, which divide or mislead the mind,
and do but show his learning that exposes them.

Besides this vicious ostentation, which one may easily perceive in those three
passages I instanced, Ammianus Marcellinus is blamed for having made certain
descriptions so Poetical, that they are hardly sufferable. And though, as we
have elsewhere observed, In the Section of Agathias. Lib. 2. cap. 8.
History and Poetry are good friends enough, and agree in many things;
Caussinus the Jesuit, in his Treatise of Eloquence, gives diverse examples of
this defect, which appear so frequently in the writings of Ammianus, that it is
hard not to find some in every opening of the book. But all these censures
cannot deprive him of the praises we have given him. There are generally
speaking, certain things in books that are displeasing, which nevertheless are
not to be rejected, because they serve for a Basis to others which are better,
and are like the Lees, which preserve the Wine, in its spirits.

But after all that has been said, the imperfections of this Historian seem to
me so much the less considerable, as the virtues of his Age were rare. And it
is that which induces me to put an end here to my labor, hardly finding after
him, any thing but gross errors, in the writings of those Authors of the next
succeeding age, which busied themselves in writing Latin History. To write of
the Modern Historians is not my design, and the Interval of time which divides
them from the first of that order, is a just occasion for me to make a stop
here.

FINIS.

