THE HISTORIAN UNMASKED: OR, SOME REFLECTIONS On the Late HISTORY OF
Passive-Obedience:

THE HISTORIAN UNMASKED: OR, SOME REFLECTIONS On the late HISTORY OF
Passive-Obedience.

WHEREIN The DOCTRINE of Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance Is truly Stated
and Asserted.

By one of those DIVINES, whom the Historian has Reflected upon in that Book.

And late Author of the Resolution of several Queries, concerning Submission to
the present Government. As also of an Answer to all the Popular Objections,
against the taking the Oath of Allegiance to their present Majesty's.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, in the Old-Bailey.
1689.

SOME REFLECTIONS On the late HISTORY OF Passive-Obedience.
TWO great Advantages the Established Church of England has gained by those
severe Trials, which in the late King's Reign it was severely exercised with.
The first is, that she has delivered her self from the Imputation and
Jealousy of being too much affected to Popery, of which she manifested so
great an Abhorrence, even when Popery was in its Ascendant, and made too near
an approach to the Throne. And the Controversy was managed with so much
Learning and Success, that she has acquired deservedly the Title of, More than
Conqueror. The next is, the Calumny of her being of a Persecuting Spirit;
which, not only her readiness and bounty for the Relief of such Protestants as
were under Persecution (though in many things they differed from her
persuasions) but her exposing her self to suffer for the Protestant Religion,
all those Afflictions, which were actually executed on some, and intended
against all the Members of that Church, has well-nigh silenced. And lest she
should fall under that Woe which our Savior has denounced against those of
whom all Men shall speak well, Luke 6.26. A late Historian has represented the
greatest part of that Church, as a Generation of Men, that have renounced their
first Principles of Loyalty, and acted contrary to their Solemn Oaths and
Declarations. Whether the Author be a Papist, or some such Journyman of theirs,
I shall not enquire; but that he has done a very acceptable work to them, is
very manifest; for if all those Persons which he names, and consequently all
others that have taken the Oath of Allegiance to our present Sovereigns, be
Apostates from their Loyal Principles and Public Declarations, and Oaths, we
can never upbraid the Papists with their Equivocations, Dispensations of Oaths,
and Plots and Conspiracies against our Princes. Now, though I doubt not among
so many learned Men (of more Abilities and Advantages than my self) who are
concerned in these Reflections of the Historian, will vindicate themselves and
their Brethren, yet I think my self particularly obliged, having already
asserted that to be our Duty, which he imputes as our Crime, to wipe off that
filth, which he has endeavored to fasten on us.

It was an excellent Defense which the Noble Earl of Ossory made in the House
of Lords for his Renowned Father, the Duke of Ormond, against the unworthy
Reflections of the E. of S. First (says that Noble Earl) I will tell you what
my Father has done: He has faithfully served the Crownwith his Life and
Fortunes in all Conditions, as well Adverse as Prosperous; He acted for him at
home, and suffered with him abroad; he endured the loss and sequestration of
his Estate for many years, without any reparation by beneficial Offices. And
now I will tell what my Father has not done: My Father did not advise the
shutting up of the Exchequer, he did not contrive the breaking of the Triple
League, nor did my Father encourage the seizing of the Smirna Flee^; he never
h^^e Arms against his Sovereign, or was found in any Plot or Conspiracy against
the Crown.

The like Defense I shall make against the virulent Accusations of the
Historian, and shall first instance in what they have done: They have Preached
up Loyalty on all occasions, against the Principles and Practices of Papists
and Fanatics; they have suffered Sequestrations and Imprisonment for their
Loyalty in the days of Charles the First; they have defeated the Plots and
Attempts of all disaffected Persons in the Reigns of Charles and James the
Second. They have stoutly withstood the united strength of Papists and
Sectaries, which conspired their Ruin: They suffered under the late King, for
refusing to Obey him in things unlawful, and never failed to Obey him according
to the Laws; they prayed for him, and in humble manner Petitioned him, and gave
him such wholesome Counsel, as might make him Happy both here and hereafter.

And now let me tell you what they have not done: They have not Preached up an
Arbitrary and Absolute Power in their Prince, to dispense with the Laws
established; They have not encouraged a standing Army, nor Addressed their
Thanks for a Toleration and Indulgence of Papists and Sectaries. They have not
promised Obedience without a Reserve, they have not taken Arms under him, to
fight for Popery and Slavery, nor yet to resist him, or expose him to his
Enemies.

Yet these are the things which the Historian expects we should have done, and
submitted our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, yea, our very Lives to those who
were prepared to devour them all: All this the Historian expected as the
necessary Consequences of our Doctrine of Non-Resistance, and Passive
Obedience; (though neither Parker nor Cartwright would ever have inferred such
a conclusion from those premises) nor were ever intended by those Doctrines; as
by the mature determinations of some of those Reverend Divines which he has
quoted, will hereafter appear. If therefore our not doing those things
abovementioned, be the Crimes which are laid to our charge, we shall plead
Guilty, and use the like Defense for our selves, as St. Paul did, Act. 23.6.
when he was smitten contrary to Law: Men and brethren, concerning the
resurrection of the dead are we called in question. For our Deliverance from so
great a Death as was prepared for us, was a Miracle next to the Resurrection of
the Dead, and was not done but by God's own power. And the wonderful Providence
of God in contriving our Deliverance, so as at the same time to fall into no
sin, and to be delivered from all danger, Is the Lord's doing, and mavelous
in our eyes.

It was a great straight that David was in, when being persecuted by Saul, he
fled to Achish, and being kindly entertained by him, and made Captain of his
Guards, he offered to fight for him against Saul; whereby he was engaged either
to fight against Saul, or to betray Achish his Benefactor: But by the
Providence of God, the Lords of the Philistines having conceived a jealousy
that David would betray them, prevailed with Achish to dismiss him: and so he
retired to his own City Ziglag (...) and secured it against his Enemies.

Much like this was the Case to which the Clergy of England were reduced: They
were terrified and oppressed by their Prince; the present King undertakes their
Protection and Deliverance; they being no Men at Arms, were not obliged to
fight for the one, or against the other; in this Juncture their Duty was to
stand still, and wait for the salvation of God; which they did, and God wrought
Deliverance for them, as he did for David, and they sat down peaceably every
Man under his own Vine, as free from sin, as from danger. Rumpatur quisquis
rumpitur Invidia.

Now to remove the Prejudices which the Historian has insinuated into the
minds of some, to make them of his own Opinion, that such of our Clergy as have
taken the late Oath, are as wicked as he represents them: And to state the
present Case aright, I shall premise these things to consideration.

There are Two Extreme Opinions which some Men have espoused concerning
Monarchy: The First Sort hold: I. That Monarchy is Jure Divino; which would
infer, that all other Species of Government are unlawful. II. That the Monarch
has such an indelible Character of Majesty and Sovereignty inherent in his
Person, as cannot be erazed or dissolved but by his Death. III. That every
Supreme Monarch has an Absolute and Arbitrary Power over his Subjects,
independent on the People, and paramount to all Laws, which he has Power to
dispense with, as he shall think fit; and that the Laws are only Acts of Grace,
and Condescentions granted by the King. And consequently, IV. That though at
his Coronation he have Sworn to maintain such Laws, yet he is not obliged by
his Oath, when he shall see cause to do otherwise.


The Second Sort would depress the Majesty of Kings too low. And they hold:

I. That the Original of all Power is from the People, and that they may resume
it on Maladministration.

The Papists hold, That there is such a Power in the Pope, who in Case of
Heresy, may depose one Prince and set up another, in Ordine ad Spiritualia.
And some of the Presbyterial Persuasion, affirm the same Power to be in their
Synods.

That Democracy, or the Government of the People by a Commonwealth, is more
eligible than that of Monarchy.

The Church of England walks in a middle way between these; and holds, That
though the King be not strictly Jure Divina, (i e.) so as to make other Species
of Government unlawful; yet is he the Minister of God, and not of the People,
though the Power be conveyed, Medias Populo.

That he is in all Causes and over all Persons, both Ecclesiastical and Civil,
Supreme Governor.

That though he be Supreme, yet he is not Absolute to do whatever he shall
please.

That Kings are generally limited, either by certain Laws and Agreements with
their People, or those Ends for which Government was appointed by God.

That the Parliament of England have part of the Legislative Power, without
whose concurrence, no Acts of the King do bind the Subject.

That Kings are bound by those Oaths, which they have taken at their
Coronation, to defend the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the People. And that
our Laws and Oaths are the Measures, as well of Government to the King, as of
Obedience to the People.

That though the King may dispense with a particular Law, pro hic and nunc, for
the Public welfare, (wherein Salus populi Supreme Le^^) yet he cannot
ordinarily dispense with Fundamental Laws, to alter Religion, and the Species
of Government, and destroy the Liberties and Privileges of the People;
particularly when by Law it is agreed, how the Members of Parliament, and
Officers Militery and Civil, ought to be qualified; it is not in the Power of
the King to dispense with unqualified Members and Officers.

That although no Degrees of Subjects have Power to co-erce, resist, or depose
the King for Maladministration, yet Cases may happen whereby he may exuere
personam Regis, cease to be King, and the Obligation of his Subjects be made
void.

As first, in Case of Conquest in a just War, when the Conqueror protects the
People in their Laws and Liberties, and is in a plenary possession; especially
if the conquered King flies to a professed Enemy of the Nation, and seeks to
subject or enslave his People to such a Foreign Power.

2. In Case of Lunacy and a settled Distraction of Madness, which makes him
utterly unfit to Govern himself, he has only nomen fine Re, no Power of
Administration.

3. In Case a King obstinately persists to Subvert the Species of Government,
to alter the Religion, to subject his Dominions to the Pope, or French King,
and for want of Power to effect it, wholly deserts the Government, and not only
leaves his People in a state of Anarchy and confusion; but he himself enters
into a state of War, and procures the assistance of Foreign Princes to spoil
and destroy the People.

That no Precept of the Gospel, nor any Law of God does interfere with, or
annul the Constitutions of a Nation, or the general Ends of Government, (viz.)
the welfare of the Community; for as King James said, The King is for the
Commonwealth, and not the Commonwealth for the King: And the End is more Noble
and Valuable than the Means.

That if any Laws be made on an emergent occasion, which may prove destructive
to the Fundamental Laws, and the Public Welfare, such Laws are not obligatory,
by reason of a previous obligation, for the preservation of our selves, and of
the Community.

These are the leading Rules which we of the Church of England have followed,
and which we hope, will in the judgment of all sober Men, excuse us from those
black Characters of Time-Servers, Apostates, etc. which the Historian would
brand us with, only for transferring our Allegiance from the late King (upon
whom the Jesuits had practiced their Power of Transubstantiating, and made him
of a King to be No-King) to the present King and Queen; wherein only, for ought
I yet see, the Historian differs from us; for as to the Authorities and Reasons
by him alleged, we are very near of the same mind: And because he says in the
conclusion of his Preface, That he should be sorry that he has lost his
Labor: (viz) If we be not persuaded to deny and withdraw our Allegiance from
King William and Queen Mary. I do assure him, I am as sorry that his Labor
should be lost, as he himself can be, and to think with how much greater sorrow
he may be overwhelmed, if his Labor be not lost; For what can follow if his
Design should take the desired effect? (i. e.) If the late King should return
with full Power to execute his whole pleasure in such an arbitrary manner as he
began, but the total Destruction of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; in which
Case, if the Historian be yet a Protestant, he must turn Apostate, and declare
for an arbitrary independent Power in the late King, or prepare himself to
suffer whatever that King and his Instruments shall think fit to inflict on
him; which will be no cause of Joy to him, though his Labor be very
successful. Wherefore I desire him to consider, whether seeing we do still
agree in those Doctrines of Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience rightly
stated and understood, it were not more advisable for him to submit his Opinion
to the Judgment of those Divines, upon their more mature and particular
consideration of the Obligation of those Doctrines, in such a Case as has now
happened; or at least to the Determination and Establishment by Public Consent,
now happily settled, and by all Christian Princes approved of, the French only
excepted, than so resolutely to persist in his Opinion, to scandalize such as
have taken the Oaths, and to affright others from doing the same; and like
Jeroboam, to make Israel to sin.

To put a stop to this Gangreen, my next endeavor shall be to find the Nature
of Non-Resistance and Passive-Obedience: In order whereunto, I shall enquire
first the Sense of the Scripture; and secondly the Sense of our Laws. As to the
Scripture we find it in a Prohibition of our Savior, Matthew. 5.39. (...), (i.
e.) Not to resist an injurious person, (viz.) So as to return the like Injury
on him, recompensing evil for evil, it being unlawful for a private person to
avenge himself, and take an Eye for an Eye; and this Precept obliges only in
lesser Injuries, which are tolerable and supportable without any great damage
to our Bodies or Estates, such as a blow on the Cheek, taking away a Coat, and
compelling a person to go with him a Mile, which is but a small restraint of
his liberty: So Dr. Hammond in his practical Catechism, expounding the Precept,
restrains it to matters of a light nature, and to a light contumely; and again,
such slight Injuries, in which cases notwithstanding, for prevention of greater
Evils, which we have just cause to fear, it is permitted to seek such
reparation as the Laws under which we live do allow. But in cases of greater
Injuries, as in Exodus 22.2. when a Thief is found breaking up, and be smitten
that he die, there shall be no Blood shed for him; in such a Case the Law of
Nature allows, Moderamen inculpatae Tutelae: And if I have assurance that a
malicious person comes to take away my life, I may kill, rather than be killed.
So Dr. Hammond, who proposing the Question, What is the general nature of the
Precept? answers, That the Injuries be tolerable and supportable, in respect of
what is already done, and what may be consequent on our bearing them; this
concerns private persons: As to our not resisting our Governors, he that
resists them is condemned by the Apostle; and the word is by Hesychius
paralleled with (...), raising War against him, where according to the former
Exposition, if the Injury done by a Prince be tolerable, and supportable,
without destroying the Ends of Government, and the Common Welfare, they may not
resist, but in such desperate Cases they are bound by a Superior Law, Salus
Populi: which being the End of Government, is to be preferred before the Means,
it is lawful to defend themselves. To this purpose, Bishop Sanderson, p. 216.
De Consc. A Subject is not ordinarily bound to obey a Law that is very
grievous, to the certain Ruin of himself and Family, unless some great
necessity, or Public danger do appear: And if we are not bound to such Laws,
much less to such Governors as are highly injurious to their Subjects against
Law. And thus in case of a lesser abridgment of the Subject's Liberty, while it
is tolerable, and tends not to his utter Ruin, the Subject must be passive, but
when the loss of their Liberty tends to the loss of their Lives, and Estates,
and so the common Ruin of the present Subjects, and their Posterity, Quin and
resisti potest non dubito, says Grotius: In such case Resistance may be made;
and yet we did not resist, but only withold our assistance, and only did not
do what in truth was not in our power to do, to which no Laws nor Oaths could
oblige us to defend the late King in all his Extravagancies. But because the
Precepts of the Gospel do not interfere with the Civil Constitutions of a
Nation, let us consider how far the Laws of our Land do forbid Resistance.

There are two Laws made in the Reign of Charles the Second upon special
occasions, which forbid resistance by any persons, on any pretense whatsoever;
the first is the Stat 13 Chapter 2. when the Parliament having fresh in their minds
the War against Charles the First, wherein many Members of both Houses, as well
as the Royal Family, had been great Sufferers, they made it unlawful for both
Houses of Parliament, to raise War Offensive or Defensive, etc. The second is
the Corporation Act, which says, It is not Lawful on any Pretense whatsoever to
raise War, etc. But both these Laws must be understood in a sense consistent
with the Fundamental Constitutions for the Public welfare, and according to
the intention of the Legislators, which was to prevent the like Mischiefs, as
had happened in the long Civil War between the King and Parliament, and which
were then fresh in memory, and which some Malcontents were endeavoring to
renew; and not to establish an Arbitrary Power in the King, that by a standing
Army he might exact all his Pleasure from the People, destroy their Religions,
Laws, and Liberties; and if his Disposition lead him to it, with a handful of
Cutthroats, might enter into the two Houses of Parliament, and destroy them by
their own Law; and so to go through the Nation, and murder as many as they
please; which is the killing letter of the Law, and of those Doctrines too
taken in a strict sense, in which they are contrary to all Laws, Divine and
Moral, and therefore though delivered in general terms, Aequitatem admittunt
interpretem.

3dly, It is a needful Observation, that de odiosis and raro contingentibus Lex
non decernit, the Law makes no provision for such odious things, as are not fit
to be mentioned, and rarely come to pass; yet when at any time such cases do
happen (as under the late King they did) we find our Legislators very
Industrious and unanimous for the suppressing of them. And when the Queen of
Scots brought French Forces into Scotland to withstand the Reformation, that
Parliament and Convocation, than which the Historian neither has nor can
mention a more August Assembly of the States, agreed to give a Subsidy of six
Shillings in the Pound, to defray the Charge of that War, and call the Design,
the Queen's using all Prudent and Godly means, 5 Eliz c. 24. and 27. And the
Temporalty call it, The Princely and upright preservation of the Liberty of the
Realm and Nation of Scotland from iminent Captivity and Desolation. And in 35
Eliz. c. 12. another Subsidy was granted by the Clergy, for the Queen's Charges
in the needful and prudent prevention of such Attempts as tended to the
extirpation of the sincere Profession of the Gospel, both here and elsewhere.
And Chapter 13. the Temporalty give this Reason for their Subsidy, Besides the
great and perpetual Honor which it has pleased God to give Your Majesty
abroad, in making You the principal Support of all Just and Religious Causes
against Usurpers, besides the great Succors in France and Flanders, which we
conceive to be most Honorable, in regard of the Ancient League, the Justice
and Equity of the Causes, etc. And in the 39. Eliz. c. 27. They say, This Land
is become since Your Majesty's days both a Port and Haven of Refuge for
distressed States and Kingdoms, and a Rock and Bulwark of Opposition against
the Tyranny and Ambitious Attempts of Mighty Usurping Potentates. And 43 Eliz.
c. 17. The Clergy say, Who has or should have a livelier sense, or better
remembrance of Your Majesty's Princely Courage and Constancy in advancing and
protecting the free Profession of the Gospel, within and without Your Majesty's
Dominions, than Your Clergy? Now who can doubt, but they would have acted the
same things for their own Preservation, which they did in the behalf o^ others,
and to which they encouraged others against their oppressing Princes? And it is
observed, that the Assistance of the Hollanders cost this Nation 15000 l. per
Annum; and the encouraging of a Rebellion in others, is as much as if we were
engaged in it our selves; and then the Nation that assisted Queen Elizabeth in
promoting the Wars in Scotland and Holland, and King Charles the First in the
Wars against the French King, in behalf of the Rochellers, were guilty, which
is Durus Sermo, because, as Grotius says, l. 2. c. 25. n. 4. He that does not
repel an Injury from his Confederates if he can, is as much in fault as he that
does the Injury. And he commends Constantine for making War on Maxentius and
Licinius, who persecuted such of their own Subjects as were Christians only for
their Religion; of whose Opinion in this case, I have mentioned more from his
l. 2. c. 25. n. 8. which shows, notwithstanding what our Historian says to
the contrary, that in the Judgment of our Nation, as well Clergy as Laity,
there may be a Restraint laid on such Princes as would destroy the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of a People: And notwithstanding the former Declarations of
the University of Oxford, when an alteration of our Government was designed,
and vigorously carried on, condemning many Heterodox Opinions; yet upon mature
Consideration of the Revolutions that have lately happened, they have since
taken up new Measures, with almost a general consent, upon that alteration of
Affairs, which they could not foresee, and therefore not determine of. But I
shall not presume to plead their Cause, they are of sufficient Age and
Abilities to answer for themselves. In the mean time I see no cause, why the
Historian should so signalize himself, for his great Loyalty above others,
when, as David pronounced of Abner, 1 Samuel 26.16. That he was worthy to dye,
because he had not kept his Master more carefully, but slept when his Spear and
his Cruse was taken from him; so might the late King, if ever he should return,
charge him with a Male defensus, for not discovering the Traitorous Conspiracy
against him, and to his power assisting his Person, according to his Oath; for
I suppose, his Sword would not discern whether he were a Guelfe or a Gibelline,
or take any notice of his Loyal History, which was so unseasonably published.

4thly, There are only these two things remaining, at which such as refuse the
present Oath of Allegiance do stumble. The first is, the Example of the
Primitive Christians; The second is, their former Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance.

As to the first, the Primitive Christians lived under such Heathen Emperors,
as has had an Absolute and Arbitrary Power, whose Edicts had the force of Laws,
and so they differed from us, who have our Religion established by Law: Now
their Religion being contrary to those Edicts for worshipping other Gods, did
expose them by their very Profession to Persecution: It does not appear, that
they were under any Oaths to their Heathen Persecutors, but they were under the
Precepts of the Gospel, not to resist them, and they chose to dye, rather than
to resist; but then it may be observed, that though they fought for their
Emperors, against other Pagan Princes, they refused to fight for them against
their Christian Brethren, as Grotius, l. 1. c. 1.. 9. quoteth St. Ambrose, who
says, That the Apostate Julian had many Christian Soldiers under him, who,
when he commanded them to fight against the Common Enemies of their Country,
they obeyed him, but when to fight against Christians, then they acknowledged
none but the Emperor of Heaven. And in Tertullian's time, they thought it
unlawful to list themselves after Baptism, under Pagan Princes; and one
Maximilian, an African, suffered Martyrdom for refusing to fight under the
Emperor, ob spretam Militiam De Corona, c. 11. They prayed for and obeyed their
present Emperors, but were not curious to enquire after their Titles, though
some came to the Empire by Murder of their Predecessors, and usurping on such
as had better Titles; and when any of those Emperors were deposed, or taken
Prisoners, they were not sollicitous to endeavor their Restoration; as when
Valerian was taken by the Persians, and cruelly handled, yet Non omnino
repetitus est, agreeable to that Sentence of Nicetas, Choniates nec Imperatorem
qui absit quaerendum nec qui adsit pellendum esse; and it is observed, that of
Thirty Emperors in those Primitive times, at least Twenty of them were Usurped
upon, Deposed, Captivated, or Slain with the Sword, without any reluctance or
great concern of the Christians, who thought of no farther Obligation, than to
the Emperors in being, according to that of our Savior, to render to the
Caesar that was in being, though a Persecutor and Usurper, the things that were
Caesar's, which is the sense that Grotius gives on that place, De Jure belli,
c. 4.. 20. In re controversa judicium sibi privatus sumere non debet sed
possessionem sequi sic tributum solvi Caesari Christus jubet, Matthew. 22.20.
quia in possessione erat Imperii and nummus ejus imaginem habuit; and so the
Primitive Christians understood that of the Apostle, Romans 13. The powers that
be (viz.) in possession, are ordained of God, and their practice was
accordingly, as has been shown. And from these practices of the Primitive
Christians, the Historian cannot find any number of the Clergy of the Church of
England to have deviated.

As to the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which is the second Objection
against the present Clergy, the Obligation by them has sufficiently been
declared void by the late King himself, but much more satisfactorily by others,
that have written on that Subject: Those Oaths were very seasonable and sacred,
but each of them bound us only to our power, not to what is impossible for us
to do, (viz.) to fight to bring back James the Second, which is by the Law of
the Land made Treason against the present King and Queen; and if the Historian
think himself so bound, I suppose he is as faulty in not endeavoring the
Restoration of the one, as he has been too Industrious to exclude the other;
besides, those Oaths bound us not only to the defense of the King (as if the
Government were excluded) but expressly to withstand all such as should offer
any violence to any of His Majesty's Subjects, much more to the whole frame of
our Government, which too many, without any Lawful Commission, did with great
violence and injustice; and we were sworn to defend, to our power, all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc. granted or belonging to the King's Highness,
not such as were neither granted or belonging, as the Claim and Exercise of an
Arbitrary Power, and dispensing with Fundamental Laws, and altering the
established Religion, as many other actions of the late King were; and lastly,
I suppose, that by the plain letter of the Oath of Allegiance, which says, That
neither the Pope of himself, nor by any other means with any other, has power
to annoy the King's Countries, License any to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or
offer any violence or hurt to His Majesty's State or Government, or any of his
Subjects: All which things, the Pope by any means, or in conjunction with any
other (the King himself not being excepted) has no power to do by this Oath,
but having so done, the Oath binds the Subjects rather to resist than to
assist, and does certainly permit the Subjects, if not oblige them to defend
themselves against all Opposers.

In a promissory Oath, the matter whereof does respect things future, that
matter is subject to change and uncertainty, and so is the Obligation also,
which cease with the matter; for then it may not be in the power of the
person to perform what he swore to, and really intended, rebus sic stantibus;
and no Man is bound to do an impossible thing, nor is any Oath so absolute when
it is made, that it may not admit of some tacit Conditions. So Bishop
Sanderson, in his Praelect. 7.. 7. There is Solutio vinculi per cessationem
materiae aut mutationem aliquam notabilem factam circa causam Juramenti
principalem: When the state of things is so changed from the time of swearing,
to that of fulfilling, that if at the time of taking the Oath, that change
which afterward followed, had been foreseen, the person would not have taken
such an Oath. Thus when Solomon promised Bathsheba to grant her Request, and
she desired that Adonijah might Marry Abishag, one of King David's Concubines,
which was a kind of Treason for any one to attempt, except the Successor,
Solomon, notwithstanding his Solemn Promise, instead of performing it, swore
that Adonijah should dye; yet Solomon brake not his Promise, because there was
a tacit Condition, that Adonijah should ask nothing that was unlawful.

Thus in the Oaths above mentioned, we swore to defend the King's Person, and
the Privilidges and Prerogatives granted, and belonging to the Crown; this
tacit Exception is plainly to be understood, that if the King should attempt
to subject his Kingdom to a Foreign Power, and leaving us in Confusion, should
put himself under the Power of the French King, which is diminutio Capitis, a
kind of Civil Death, and by his Arms seek to destroy the Community and
Government, which by those very Oaths we were bound to defend, the Obligation
of those Oaths does cease, upon his attempting such things, which if they had
been foreseen, and expressed in those Oaths, the Subjects would never have
taken them.

Now, although some Divines in their occasional Discourses of Government,
particularly of this of England, seem to make it Absolute, and indefesable, and
inseparable from the person of the Prince; yet when they come to consider
particular cases, which they could not foresee, or for the odiousness of them,
and the almost impossibility of happening they omitted; the same Divines do
agree to the Heads abovementioned, and make Exceptions to their own General
Rules, as will appear in what follows hereafter. In the mean time, I doubt
not but the Reader has observed, that as well Divines, when they Treat of
Law-matters, and Moot-cases, as Lawyers, when they handle Points and
Controversies in Divinity, are guilty of many Blunders; as particularly the
Authors of the Erudition, who affirm, that the Proclamations of the King are as
binding as a Law and Bishop Bancroft, who told King James in the presence of
Cook, and other Lawyers, That the King might call and Judge any Cause
personally in his Chamber. But of this we need no other instance than the
present Historian, who after so great a Deliverance, as he must confess the
Nation has had, and of which such ungrateful Murmurers as the Historian are
unworthy to partake; After that the Great Assembly of the Nation have declared
their Judgments by their Oaths, and many thousands of the Clergy joined with
them, presumes after an Histrionical manner, to bring them on the Stage, and
represent them as Rebels, Traitors, and perjured Persons, not without
Reflections on their present Majesty's, as Usurpers, to say no worse, is a most
uncharitable, if not an unrighteous deed, seeing he stands in a manner, Solus
contra omnes. Had he differed through a doubting Conscience, he should have by
the Apostle's Rule, Romans 14.22. kept his persuasion to himself, and with all
Humility and Modesty sought satisfaction, and not have published his Opinion
against the more mature Judgment, not only of our own Nation, but of all
Christian Princes, who do approve of our present Settlement. And if my Account
fail me not, there is not one of an hundred that consent with him; and before
the Six Months be expired, there may not be more then one of that hundred that
will stand off, and then our Historian may stand alone as Tom of Ten Thousands.

The PREFACE Considered.
THE first Paragraph of the Epistle, which shows that the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance and Passive-Obedience are founded in Scripture, etc. is admitted
as Orthodox, and the Doctrine of the Church of England; but being delivered in
general Rules, they admit of some Exceptions, and carry with them certain
tacit Conditions, and Qualifications, which in case of great alterations,
would appear to be necessary and justifiable: And I suppose, that if such a
case as ours now is, had been thought of or proposed, that Declaration, viz.
That it is not lawful on any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms, etc. would
certainly be excepted or provided against; as in the Case of Edward the Fifth,
when Richard Duke of Gloucester seized on his Person, raised War, and granting
Commissions in the King's Name, it might have been lawful for the then Queen
Elizabeth, having the Broad Seal brought to her by the Archbishop of York, to
raise an Army to rescue the King from the Usurper's Power, notwithstanding he
had raised an Army, and granted Commissions in the King's Name. And the Case of
the present Irish comes home to the point, who being invaded by the French,
pretending Commissions from the late King James, who now acts under them may
undoubtedly defend themselves by Arms. Mr. Faulkner pleaded the Case of
Non-Resistance as far as any, yet p. 542. he considers this Case: If the
Supreme Governor should according to his own Pleasure, and contrary to the
Established Laws, and his Subjects Property, actually engage upon the
destroying and ruining a considerable part of his People, whether they might
defend themselves by taking Arms: And he instanceth in the Parisian Massacree,
where about 100000 were slain in cold Blood, most of which were innocent
persons, never accused or tried by Law; which he says is such a Cruelty, as can
hardly be paralleled under Mahometism. And he grants, if ever such a Case
should happen, it would have great difficulties: Grotius (says he) thinks, That
in this utmost extremity, the use of such Defense, U^timo necessitatis
praesidio, is not to be condemned; provided the Common Safety be preserved:
Which may be true, (says he) because such Attempts of ruining, do ipso facto,
disclaim the Governing those Persons as Subjects, (i. e.) according to Law; and
consequently of being their Prince or King. And so the Expressions in the
Declaration, That it is not lawful on any Pretense whatsoever, etc. would be
secured. And p. 529. he quotes Barclay, l. 3. c. 16 Se omni principatu and
dominatu exuit atque ipso jure sine ipso facto Rex esse desiit, l. 6. c. 23.
With whom he joins Grotius, l. 1. c. 4. n. 11. Si Rex vere Hostili animo
exitium totus populi feratur: To resist such a one is not to resist the King,
but him who cease to be such; and his Reason is, Consistere simul non possunt
voluntas imperandi and voluntas perdendi quare qui se hostem totius populi
profitetur to ipso abdicat regnum. And p. 531. Mr. Faulkner says, That on
yielding such Suppositions to be true, I shall grant the Answer to be true.

The Historian is much troubled how to evade the Judgment of Bishop Bilson,
which he delivers in these two passages among other: The first is in p. 520. If
a Prince submit his Kingdom to a Forreiguer, or change the Form of the
Commonwealth, or neglecting the Laws Established by common consent, or execute
his own pleasure, the Lords and Commons may join to defend the Laws
Established, The other is, where he speaks of the Roman Cruelties, Which are
such, says he, as are able to set good Men at their Wits end, and make them
justly doubt, since you refuse all good Laws, Divine and Humane, whether by the
Law of Nature they may not defend themselves against such barbarous
Blood-suckers. To these passages the Historian (acting the part of a Disputant)
replies, That this is but one Doctors Opinion, contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church: Which is apparently false; for both the Parliament and Convocation,
gave ready and liberal Contributions to assist the Queen in the Wars of
Holland, against the Spaniards, at that time, of which I have spoken already.

2. He says, Bilson was not infallible, for he was deceived in other things.
Answ. And most probably he was so, when he wrote contrary to those passages,
which were approved by all Protestants abroad, as well as by our own Nation.

3. He would invalidate the Judgment of Bilson, by the Censure of Charles the
First, in these words: I remember well what Opinion my Father ( King James) had
of him for these Opinions; and how he showed him some Favor, in hope of a
Recantation; but whether he did or not, I cannot say.

Answ. King James was of the same Opinion, as to the Wars against the
Spaniards; and so was King Charles in the Case mentioned by our Historian, viz.
His assisting the Protestants of Rochel, under the Oppressions of Lewis the
Thirteenth: And it is improbable that he would ever Recant that Opinion,
wherein the whole Nation, and the two succeeding King's did agree.

For the Historian says: 4ly, That Bilson's Book was written when the Queen was
assisting the Dutch, against her and their Common Enemy.

Answ. The War then was undoubtedly lawful, and the Bishop's Determination
seemed sound as to that War; but the Historian may see that he applies his
Opinion to the English Government, when in the Cases mentioned by him, (viz.)
If a Prince submit his Kingdom to a Forreigner, or change the Form of the
Commonwealth, or neglect the Laws, and execute his own Pleasure, the Lords and
Commons may in such Cases defend the Laws Established; and therefore it is very
unlikely that he was hired to write only in justification of the Wars of
Holland. And if our Constitution be founded on a Compact, there is no
difference.

But 5ly, he says, If the Bishops Opinion be contrary to that of Christ and his
Apostles, we ought to renounce it. As if the Bishop had not considered, that
the Gospel does no where abridge the Civil Constitutions of particular
Governments, and that it requires subjection to the powers that are in being.
But he objects again, That the Presbyterian made very dangerous use of that
Book against King Charles the First.

Answ. They were therein inexcusable, by seeking to justify a Rebellion
against so good a Prince, by what was chiefly intended against the Spanish
Usurpations and Cruelties, who invaded all their Privileges Sacred and Civil,
contrary to Agreement, introduced the Inquisition, slighted all Petitions, and
barbarously Murdered some Hundreds of Thousands, which much altered the Case
against so pious and merciful a Prince.

And lastly, That which that Bishop says, does not concern the Clergy of
England, who always did, and are still resolved to maintain and practice the
Doctrine of Non-Resistance, for to that the Bishop applys his Discourse, in
which the Divines whom the Historian accuses, have not transgressed. But to go
on with the Historians Preface, some affirm, (says he) That the Tenet was no
older than Archbishop Laud, and was introduced by a few Court Bishops, for the
attainment and establishing of their own grandeur. To which I answer,

It must be acknowledged, that in Bishop Lauds time, this Doctrine was scrued
up to the highest, and frequently urged, and with great reason, the people
being prepared for a Rebellion against the best of Kings; and had the Doctrine
of Non-Resistance been so well practiced, as it was pressed, the effusion of that
Deluge of Blood might have been stopped; but even then, there was an (...), and
more than what was due was demanded, that the people might not yield less,
which that ancient Rule, Iniquum petas ut aequum feras, might justify. Yet the
Doctrine of Sibthorp and Manwaring, who would have raised the Prerogative to an
Absolute Power, as Cartwright and Parker of later days did also attempt, has
been generally exploded by all sober Divines, and Statesmen; and yet the design
of this Author, is far more exorbitant, who would have the whole Nation submit
to the Arbitrary Power of King James, to alter our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, and to kill, ravish, and ruin the whole Community, and submit all
to the Pope, or French King; which things the Nation in darkest times of Popery
have resisted, even to Blood: And this, without ridiculing, is the Doctrine of
the Bow-string, which the Author would introduce into this Nation.

It is therefore just and necessary, that such General Rules and Maxims,
whether Divine or Political, should be received with some restrictions; else,
as Dr. Barrow says, They would clash with Reason and Experience: And therefore
many formal Prohibitions are to be received only as sober Cautions; and so are
general Oaths and Laws made on emergent occasions, in dangerous times, which at
other times may themselves prove dangerous and destructive: As appears in that
Exception of the Jews, to the General Rule concerning the Sabbath, Periculum
vitae tollit Sabbatum, and both in Law and Equity; Omnia dicta quantumvis
universalia equitatem admittunt interpretem. And it is not so much the letter
of the Law, as the intention of the Lawgiver, which makes the Law: Ratio legis
and intentio Legislatoris Dominatur verbis tanquam anima corpori: And, Verba
inserviunt intentioni tanquam fini.

Now it could never be the intention of God in the Scripture, to set up such an
Order of Governors, and invest them with such an uncontrollable Power, as to
subver the Ends of Government, or of the Legislators in our Nation, to make any
one such Law, as should destroy all those other Fundamental Laws, which with
mature deliberation had been anciently Established for their preservation; for
both in Civil and Canon Law, this is a sure Rule: Ex verbis quantumvis
generalibus nemo praesumitur velle sibi magnum praejudicium. Such as that Law
which declares, It is not lawful on any Pretense whatsoever, etc. by which the
late King might have sent a number of Irish or French Papists into Both Houses,
and have cut the Throats of the Legislators. The Casuists therefore give many
Exceptions to such General Rules, Ex impossibili, inhumana dura, etc. And
Baldus says, Clausula de plenitudine potestatis semper intelligenda est de
potestate bona and laudabili. So that the Calumny of Changlings, and
Weather-Glasses, imputed to such as have written for Non-Resistance, is
malicious; the change is not in their Doctrine, which they did (and resolve
still to) adhere to, as long as the King kept his station, and they were in a
capacity to observe it; and that of Seneca is a sufficient Apology for them, l.
2. c. 16. n. 27. Eadem mihi Praesta and idem sum. If the late King had
continued in the same Condition as he was, we should have yielded him the same
submission as we did, though many were cruelly dealt with; that is, we should
have prayed for him as our King, we should have petitioned him, and (as some of
our Bishops did) have given him good Advice, to prevent the ruining of himself,
and that he would have called a Free Parliament; which, doubtless, would have
provided much better for him, than he has done for himself, by those
destructive Counsels which he chose to follow; but we would not have lifted up
a hand against him, nor abridged him of any of those Rights, Privileges, and
Preheminences, which by Law belonged to his Crown and Dignity.

Nor can the Author that upbraids the Clergy for their Doctrine, instance in
any one of those Writers, who did transgress that Doctrine, by resisting the
King, while he continued in his Kingdom. And as Seneca says, A wise Man cannot
be said to change his Resolution, when things are changed from what they were
at the time when he resolved: Tum fidem fallam si omnia eadem sint me
permittente, si mutentur fidem meam liberat. And those other limitations given
by Bishop Sanderson, are applicable to this Case: Si Deus promiserit quoad
licet Rebus sic stantibus, salva potestatis Superioris, and p. 216. de Consc. A
Subject is not bound ordinarily to obey a Law that is very grievous to the
destruction of himself and Family. And p. 202. when the subject matter of an
Oath cease, the Obligation also cease. Cessante causa cessat Lex, says
Grotius.

This may suffice to show, that such as the Author has branded so maliciously,
as if whatever they said or did, was to gratify their ambitious or covetous
Appetites; as if their Honesty, like Quicksilver in a Weather-Glass, rose
higher or sunk lower, as the Day proved clear or cloudy, as the greatest
Hypocrites, and Time-Servers in the World; who sacrificed their Consciences to
their Desires of growing Rich and Powerful; while had the Times been contrary
to them, they would have owned other principles; and that all their former
Declarations have been only pretense and juggle, and that they have been Loyal
no longer than they could get by it. Hoc Ithacus vellet and magno mercantur
Atridae.

His next Paragraph says, The Doctrine (of Non-Resistance) cannot be
unseasonable, since no Government can be safe without it; Men's Passions
inclining them to think well of themselves, and to make Complaints of hard
usage, even when they are most gently treated: And it were well for the Author,
if he be not found to be one of that sort of Complainers: As for those whom he
has so causlesly defamed, they still resolve to retain their first Principles
of Non-Resistance to the present Governors; because, as he says, No Government
can be safe without it: We therefore leave him in the Company of Parsons and
his Party, railing at the most gentle and admirable Government, now Established
under King William and Queen Mary, to whom all that have taken the Oath of
Allegiance, are branded as Rebels, and perjured Persons; which in effect is to
say, that there is no Allegiance due to them. But if the Author were indeed a
Protestant, of the Established Church, or had any regard to the condition of
other Protestant Churches abroad, he would see a necessity of transferring his
Allegiance from him, that would wholly extirpate those Churches, to one, who by
God's Blessing, is likely to preserve and establish them; for the lawfulness
whereof, I refer him to a Treatise concerning those Oaths, written, as it is
reported, by Dr. Whitby.

As to his upbraiding us with the Writings of Preston, Widdrington, and others
in England, and Ireland, and Barclay in Scotland, some of them lived to act
contrary to what they wrote; and it is the manner of those Men, to cloak their
wicked Designs by contrary pretenses, to render their Adversaries secure, while
they carry on their Designs with the least suspicion, as Watson did, who was
after all his quodlibets, executed for Treason. And Barclay clearly expresses
himself, That a Prince, seeking the ruin of his People, is no longer King, l.
3. c. 16. p. 212. Se omni principatu exuit atque ipso jure sive ipso facto Rex
esse desiit, l. 6. c. 23.

In the next Paragraph he tells us, Of studying the Laws of Providence, and of
considering the indispensible Obligations of taking up the Cross; but when
Providence has in a signal manner, without any unlawful Acts of our own,
delivered us from the Cross, a little study will inform us, that we ought not
to draw it down on our backs again, and to murmur against our Deliverers, as
the Israelites did against Moses and Aaron, who brought them out of the House
of Bondage, and their cruel Oppressors.

As for the Opinions of the Gnostics, and Machiavel, I suppose that learned
Person whom the Author names, has sufficiently condemned them; and so do all
those Reverend Persons whom this Author has accused, explode the wild Opinions
of Hobs, Milton, and Cressey, and have acted in a direct Opposition to them.
And therefore he hopes in vain, That no Man can imagine he intends any
disturbance by his Writing; for what could be intend by charging such a number
of the Church of England as Apostates from their own Principles, and guilty of
Perjury, only for taking the Oath of Allegiance to the present King and Queen?
There needs a better Apology than he has yet made for himself, to clear him
from that Crime, whereof his Conscience does accuse him, viz. that devilish
Office of Accusing his Brethren; for what though he truly relate the Opinions of
those great Men, his mis-applying of them, and calling them to a Recantation,
and intimating, that they are the greatest Incendiaries, from whom we may
justly fear greater Judgments, is as great a Reproach as the most malicious
Jesuit could cast on them; for though the Preaching up the necessity of
Suffering, and the unlawfulness of Resisting, be not a Doctrine likely to
disturb the present Government, yet when that Doctrine is applied to the Person
of King James, and because we did not for his sake, that would have destroyed
us, resist him that came to save us; and as the Jews did, Crucify our Savior,
to make way for those Romanists that will destroy us and our Nation; This is
the sole ground of all his Clamor against us; but we are not such Children as
to be affrighted by such Clamours, we keep steady to our Principles, and
yielded both Active and Passive Obedience to the late King, until he made it
morally impossible for us to Obey him any longer; and now that God has set
over us more gentle Governors, by the same Methods that from the beginning he
did set Rulers over all other Nations; that is, Mediante Populo, which I could
never yet see disproved, we think our selves still bound to yield them that
Obedience, without which, our Author says, no Government can subsist. If we
compare what this Author designs by his Collections, with that which the
Jesuits and other Papists have written, it will evidently appear, that he
intends to make the late King as Absolute in all Causes, and over all Persons,
in his Dominions, as ever they intended the Pope should be, (i. e.) to be
Infallible; to be the Supreme Judge of all Controversies, to declare what is
Good, and what is Evil; what is Virtue, and what is Vice. And as has been
observed of Finch, he attributes all the Divine Perfections to the King, (viz.)
Sovereignty, Omnipotence, Omniscience, Majesty, Infinity, Vbiquity, Perpetuity,
Justice, Truth, and Clemency, and all these to be inseparable from his Person.

So that he is the very Hobbs of this Age, whose Principles he would have all
Men to espouse, as himself has done; who in his Book de Cive, c. 12.. 1, 2.
says, That the Rules of good and evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest,
are the Civil Laws, and therefore whatever the Law Commands, is to be accounted
good and valid; and that it is a wicked speech, that Kings are not to be
obeyed, unless they Command Just things. That before Empires were established,
there was nothing just or unjust, which are Relatives to a Command, that
Emperors make things just, which they command to be done, and unjust what they
forbid; that private Men, who assume the cognizance of good and evil, do aspire
to be like Kings, which cannot consist with the safety of Government.

These seem to be the Articles of our Author's, as well as of Hobbs his Creed:
Now let the Author review all the Writings of those learned Men, whom he has
defamed, and see whether he can Collect any such Problems out of them; whether
they ever declared, that the King of England has as Extensive and Absolute
Power, as either the Turk or the Pope; or that the Person of the Prince had
such an indelible Character of Majesty on him, as could by no means be erazed.
Have any of them said, that he could not be conquered in a just War, or that on
such a Conquest, we were bound to pay him our Allegiance still, and by no means
transfer it to any other? Have they said, that the King might submit his
Dominions to the Pope, or the French King, or that in so doing, his Subjects
were bound to assist him, even to the utter destruction of the established
Religion, and the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Nation? That it was in
the King's Power to alter the Succession, and set up a Suppositious Child, to
the Exclusion of his own Children, and Lawful Successors.

King James never declared, that he would assume to himself such an excess of
Power, though he declared, that he was an Absolute Prince, and would be obeyed
without a Reserve, as this Author has for him, who has exceeded in this his
Design, all those flattering and fulsome Addresses, which any the most
infatuated Fanatics presented to him. But to go on, did any of the Church of
England say, that it was not in the Power of the King exuere Regis personam, to
cease to be a King, and either for his Religion, or some other cause, betake
himself to a Cloister, and live as a Recluse, leaving the Administration of the
Government to a Successor? Or if he were a Madman, and bent on the Ruin of
his People, that no Restraint ought to be laid on him? In such cases you might
have required a Recantation of their Errors; but when they never acknowledged
more Power or Authority to be his due, than what the Laws gave him; when they
never withdrew their Obedience, Active or Passive, until they were left in a
state of Nature and Confusion, and could never expect that he would return to
them again, or not without a Foreign Power, that would make them and their
successive Generations, as unhappy, in respect of things Spiritual and Eternal,
as in things Temporal; what have they done to deserve those black Characters,
which the Author stigmatizeth them with? which they do better deserve, who
would give the Powers of the World a kind of Omnipotence, to do all that they
will, and to exceed the Devil himself, who has his Bonds and Chains, beyond
which he cannot go; and even tempt Men to be of the Opinion of the Gnostics,
That all the Governments of the World are a contrivance of some evil Spirits to
destroy the lives of Men, and to abridge them of their Liberties, which God and
Nature have given them.

And with what Countenance can this Author aver, that he does only the Office
of an Historian, when the whole Design is a Satyr, and an Indictment of Treason
and Perjury against all those Divines that he quoteth, who have since their
Writings, submitted to the present Government, and sworn Allegiance to King
William and Queen Mary, and seems willing that King James should return with
his French and Irish, to be their Executioners.

It is not material to enquire, whether he has misquoted any passages, but it
is plain, he has mis-applyed them, and stretched them beyond the meaning of
their Authors; for which I Appeal to the Author himself, and shall only demand
of him, whether he himself does, or any of those whom he quotes, ever did
declare their Approbation of those Tenets of Sibthorp and Manwaring, in the
days of Charles the First, or of the Bishops of Chester and Oxon, in the Reign
of James the Second, whose Authorities in their own times were, as he
confesses, excepted against, as of Men that did not write soberly on the
Subject, as our Author acknowledges.

And yet his whole Design is to show, that the King has a plenitude of Power,
paramount to all that either of those four have mentioned, over all the Laws of
the Land, over the established Religion, and the Lives, Liberties, and Estates
of all the Subjects, with a quicquid libet licet. This is not barely to plead
for an inconsiderable rate of Ship Money, for granting Tolerations and
Indulgences, for a Power of Dispensing with some Laws, but for the Legality of
any Impositions, even to the seizing our Freeholds, of abrogating and making
void all the Old Laws, and giving the Prince's Will and Personal Commands, the
force of New and contrary Laws, without any muttering, or complaint of
Grievances.

And if this Author have any spark of Ingenuity in him, he must with shame
acknowledge, how Partial he has been, in relating the Opinions of many, the
most eminent of those Divines, whom he has quoted, and leaving out the
Opinions and Arguments of others, whom though obvious to every ordinary Eye, he
has wholly omitted. I have already instanced in the decision of the present
Case made by Mr. Faulkner, and Barclay, and Bilson; and it were easy to fill a
Volume, far greater than I intend, to show only the Judgment of some of those
Authors by him quoted, when they considered what might be Lawfully done in some
Cases, against which being so odious and so rarely incident, that the Laws have
taken no notice of them, or made any provision against them.

I shall give but two Instances more to this purpose; The first is, that of
Grotius, of whom, p. 128. he says, Whatever the learned Grotius says in his
Books de Jure belli, in his later works, wherein he may be presumed to speak
his truest sense, he asserts this Doctrine on Mat. 26.52. If it be once
admitted, that private Men, when injured by the Magistrate, may forcibly resist
him, all places would be full of Tumult, and no Laws or Judicatories would have
any Authority, since there is no Man who is not inclined to think well of
himself. This Comment is alleged, with a Non obstante to whatsoever he had
written in his Book de Jure belli, because this was the latter Work; whereas it
is well known, that his Book de Jure belli was not only written when he was in
his full Maturity, and acted in his proper Sphere as a Statesman, and often
reviewed it, even after his Comment on the Gospels, and was the Text on which
almost all Civilians and Politicians did Comment, as Authentic, and for which
we have his irrefragable Reasons, as well as his Authority, and in which he
does not deliver his Opinion in general, but condescends to the consideration
of particular Cases and Accidents; whereas in that Comment, he only delivers
his Opinion as to the general, and that not without restriction, of the
Resistance of private Men, that were inclined to think well of themselves;
whereas, when he considered the Constitution of particular Monarchies and
Governments, where the Legislative Power is not solely in a single Person (as
he knew it was not in England) he has otherwise determined; for thus in that
Famous Book, p. 21. wherein having urged all the Arguments for Non-resistance
he could think of, he admonishes his Reader of something else.

As first, That such Persons as are under Compact with their People, if they
offend against the Laws, may be restrained by force.

And secondly, If a King abjure his Kingdom, and desert it, all things are
Lawful against him as against a private Person; for which he quotes Barclay:
That if a King alienate his Kingdom, or subjects it to another, he loses it;
and then adds of his own, Si Rex reipsa tradere regnum aut subjicere moliatur
quin ei resisti in hoc possit non dubito nam aliud est imperium aliud habendi
modus qui ne mutetur obstare potest populus id enim sub imperio non est.

Again, he says, If a King have one part of the Empire, and the People another,
the King attempting to destroy the Peoples Right, a just Force may be opposed;
and this I think to have place, though it be said, That the Power of War (or
Militia) is in the King, for that is to be understood, of Foreign War; for he
that has Right, has Power to defend that Right; and he quotes Barclay, That a
Kingdom may be lost if a King be carried on to the destruction of his People;
Consistere enim non potest voluntas imperandi and voluntas perdendi, that if a
King be intent on the destruction of his People, to resist such a one, is not
to resist a Sovereign King, but one who cease to be such. Qui se hostem
totius populi profitetur eo ipsa abdicat regnum, on which place Grotius his
Annotator mentions a Note of Jo. Major in 4 Sentent. Non posse populum a se
abdicare potestatem destituendi principis si in destructionem vergeret; and
Grotius himself thinks, that the Law of Nature allows it, in his Notes on
Esther 8.11. speaking of the Edict obtained by Mordecai for the Jews to defend
themselves, he says, Jus naturae munit autoritate regia. Much more might be
added from Grotius to our purpose, but he is so commonly quoted, that I
forbear, and leave the Reader to judge, how well the Author has performed the
Office of an Historian, who picks and chooses out of an obscure place, and a
(...) what may make for his own Opinion, omitting those plain, obvious, and
elaborate Discourses of the same Author, which would confute it; as the
Observation of Grotius on Mat. 22.20. mentioned in his Book de Jure belli, p.
93. c. 4.. 20. which is more adapted to the present Case. In re controversa
(viz.) of a Title to the Right of Government, Judicium sibi privatus sumere non
debet sed possessionem sequi sic tributum solvi Caesari Christos jubet quia in
possessione erat and nummus, ejus habuit imaginem. And l. 2. c. 9.. 8, 9. de
Jure belli, If a King dye without Issue, (and it is the same if he be dead in a
Civil sense, by Conquest, by Resignation, or wholly deserting his People,
without making any Provision for their Government) the Empire remains in the
Body of the People, who may create another, and limit him, the People being sui
Juris. And as these Arguments of Grotius, which our Author omits, would have
solved the Phenomena in the present Case, so will also the Resolution of Bishop
Sanderson, in the Case of the Engagement, and in diverse other parts of his
Treatises, of the Obligation of Conscience, and of Oaths. In the Case of the
Engagement, p. 90. he says, That Allegiance is such a Duty, as every Subject,
under what form of Government soever, by the Law of Nature owes to his Country
(primarily) and consequently to the Sovereign Power, by which that
Commonwealth is governed, as is necessary for the preservation of the whole
Body. -- And that if the intention of the Lawgiver should be understood
precisely of that particular actual and immediate intention of the Law Giver,
in making a particular, it will not hold true in all Cases; but there is to be
understood in the Lawgiver, a more general, habituate, and ultimate intention,
of a more excellent and transcendent nature than the former, which is to have
an influence into, and an overruling Power over all Laws, (viz.) An intention
by the Laws to procure and promote the Public Good.

The former intention binds, where it is subservient to the latter, or
consistent with it, and consequently binds in ordinary cases, and in orderly
times; but when the Obligation of the Law, by reason of the Conjuncture of
Circumstances, or the Iniquity of Times, (Contingencies which no Lawgiver
could either certainly foresee, or if foreseen, could not sufficiently
provide against) would rather be prejudicial than advantageous to the Public,
or is manifestly attended with more Inconveniences, and sad Consequents to the
Observers, than all the imaginable Good that can redound to the Public
thereby, can in any reasonable measure countervail; in such case the Law
obliges not, but according to the latter and more general intention only; even
as in the Operations of Nature, particular Agents do move ordinarily according
to the proper and particular inclinations; yet upon some occasions, and to
serve the ends and intentions of Universal Nature (for the avoiding of
something which Nature abhors) they are sometimes carried with Motions quite
contrary to their particular natures, as the Air do descend, and the Water to
ascend, for the avoiding of vacuity. And p. 216. De Consc. A Subject is not
ordinarily bound to a Law that is very grievous, to the certain ruin and
destruction of himself and Family, unless some great necessity or public
danger do appear: And which comes home to the matter of the present Oath, he
says, That when the Imposer chooses Words capable of a double sense, it is
neither necessary nor expedient that the Promiser do doubt which sense the
Imposer does mean, but may in prudence, and without Violation to his
Conscience, make his advantage of the ambiguity, and take it in the laxer
sense. And we may be resolved in our present case, as he declares in that of
the engagement, p. 106. There wants not greater probabilities of Reason, to
induce us to believe that the laxer sense is to be accounted the immediate and
declared sense of the Imposers; who though they might have a more secret reserved
and ultimate intent, the Ingager is not concerned in it, the equivocation, if
any, lies on the Imposers score, not on the Subscribers, for which he gives
many reasons, and the limitation which he gives to an Oath (among many others)
does deserve a remark, (viz.) Rebus sic stantibus, if things continue in the
same state wherein they were; for when a Man swears to return a Sword that he
borrowed, and he of whom it was borrowed grows furiously mad, he is not bound
to restore it: I shall mention but one passage more out of his Praelect. 5. p.
176. where he puts the question, When any one takes the Government on him,
having by Force driven out the lawful Prince, or so straightened him that he
cannot pursue his Right, which is invaded not on a doubtful Right, but by
manifest wrong; what shall a good Subject that has Sworn Allegiance to the
oppressed Prince do in this case? Answ. It seems to me, that it is not only
lawful for a good Subject to obey the Laws of the Prince in being, but to do
what he is commanded, Medo non sit turpe factu aut injustam: But also if the
condition of Humane Affairs require it, there may be a necessity of Obeying, or
he may be judged to fail of his Duty. And whereas he had said, that Laws made
by him, that wanted lawful Power, do not bind the Conscience, he answers, That
these things are not repugnant; because, though the Subject be bound to do what
the Law requires; yet he is not bound to that Law, but to himself and his
Country. The Obligation is annexed to the Law that concerns himself, and is
truly a Law which he thus explains: Seeing it is the Duty of a pious and
prudent Man to consider, not only what is lawful, but what becomes him, and is
expedient to others, a good Subject may be bound to do that for the welfare of
himself and Fellow Subjects, to which by Law he is not bound; which Obligation
arises from the Duty he owes to himself, and to his Country, that Wars, and
Rapines may be prevented, and he may live peaceably under them, without
violating the Faith we owe to the ^ightful Heir. I shall mention many others,
whose Judgment in particular Cases agrees with what has been lately practiced.

Bishop Hall, Decad. 2. says, If a Thief rob me of my Treasure, and flies, my
Conscience would not strike me, if I pursue him, and so strike him that he
dies. The same holds good, in resisting such as want a lawful Commission, and
due Qualifications, which are but as Thieves and Robbers, and for want of legal
Qualifications may be dealt with as such.

Bishop Tailor in his Second Volume, p. 137. resolves, That where the Right of
Succession is in a Family by Law, or Time immemorial, no Prince can prejudice
his Heir, or the People committed to him, for it cannot without consent be
alienated, because Persons cannot be disposed of as Slaves, or Beasts. So that
in this (and some other Cases) the King loses his Authority, and then the
force of his Authority cease also: And as to the Law of Nature (for
Self-preservation) cannot be dispensed with, says that Bishop, by any Humane
Power: 1. Because God is the Author of it. 2. Because this Law for the
preservation of the Common Welfare, is as necessary to the support of
Societies, as Nourishment is for support of their Bodies. 3. Because Natural
Laws are the Dictates of Natural Reason; and no Man has power to alter Reason,
which is an Image of the Divine Wisdom, and therefore unalterable. And
concerning the Obligation of the King's Oath, this learned Bishop gives his
Opinion, quite contrary to what our Historian contends for, l. 3. p. 144. of
his Cases, he says, Kings are bound by Natural Justice and Equity, without
Oaths, to do what they swear, for they are not Kings unless they Govern, and
they cannot expect Obedience unless they tell the Measures by which they will
be obeyed, which are the Laws, and these are the Will of the Prince; If Kings
are not bound to Govern the People by Laws, why are they made? By what else can
they be Governed, by the Will of the Prince, the Laws are so which are
Published, that wise Men may walk by them; and that the Prince may not Govern
as Fools and Lions, by Chance or Violence, and unreasonable Passions, Ea quae
placuerunt servanda, says the Law, De Pactis. And p. 143. Whatsoever the
Prince has Sworn to, to all that he is obliged, not only as a single Person,
but as a King; for though he be above the Laws, yet he is not above himself,
nor above his Oath, because he is under God, and cannot dispense with his Oath
and Promises in those Cases wherein he is bound. Although the King be above the
Laws, that is, in Cases extraordinary, and Matters of Penalty; yet is he so
under all the Laws of the Kingdom, to which he has Sworn, that although he
cannot be punished by them, yet he sins if he break them. And p. 149. he says,
The Prerogative of Kings is by Law, and Kings are so far above the Laws, as the
Laws themselves have given them leave. And p. 143. The great Laws of the
Kingdom do oblige all Princes, though they be Supreme. The Laws of the Medes and
Persians were above their Princes, as appears in Daniel. And such are the
Golden Bull of the Empire; the Saler, and Pragmatical Sanctions in France; the
Magna Charta, and Petition of Right in England, etc.

And whereas the Historian does urge at large, the Doctrine of our Church, in
the Articles, Homilies, Liturgy, and Canons, etc. it may be observed, that
there is no distinction in any of those, of a King de Jure, and de Facto; but
as by that Law of 11 Henry 7. did require Allegiance to the King de Facto, so
did the Subjects under Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth pay their Obedience to
both successively, although one of those Queens was not Legitimate; and if we
pay our Allegiance to our present Sovereigns, we do not transgress either her
Doctrine or Practice; unless it could be proved, that we had resisted the late
King: And therefore our Historian reflects too severely on Dr. W --, who said,
That Passive Obedience, in the narrow sense we take it in, was not so much as
thought on, when these Homilies were Published; those Homilies being aimed
against the Usurpations of the Church of Rome, to which they never intended
Obedience. And when, as our Historian observes, That as well evil as good Kings
do Reign by God's Ordinance, and that it is a perilous thing, to permit
Subjects to judge which Prince is wise and godly, and his Government good, and
which otherwise, it may be supposed, they intended our Obedience should be
paid to the present King.

But because the Laws are the Measures as well of the Princes Power, as the
Subjects Obedience, I shall therefore act the part of an Historian so far, as
to give you an account of our Laws in both these Cases: And I shall begin it
with our Magna Charta, which has been confirmed by Parliaments in every Age,
since it was first made; wherein the King grants, That neither He, nor his
Heirs shall procure, or do any thing, whereby the Liberties therein granted
shall be infringed; and if any such thing be procured, it shall be of no force:
And in the Original Grant, yet preserved, and in the hands of the Bishop of
Salisbury, it is provided, That in case the King should violate any part of the
Charter, and refuse to rectify what was done amiss, it should be lawful for
the Barons, and People of England to distress him by all the ways they could
think on; such as the seizing his Castles, Lands, and Possessions, etc. Bracton
has been often quoted, who says, l. 1. c. 17. The King has for his Superiors,
God, and the Law, by which he is made King, as also his Court the Earls, and
Barons, who when they see him exorbitant may restrain him: And l. 1. c. 2. The
Laws of England being approved and confirmed by the King's Oath, cannot be
altered: And c. 17. Let Kings therefore temper their Power by the Law, which is
the Bridle of Power: And c. 8. The King in receiving Judgment, may be equalled
with the meanest Subject. L. 2. c. 24. The Crown of the King is to do Justice
and Judgment, and to preserve Peace, without which he cannot subsist: (i. e.)
As in the Laws of King Edward, c. 17. The King is constituted for the Liberty
of the People; which if he do not, Nee nomen Regis in eo constabit: And that by
the word (Heir) all Successors are meant, though not expressed in words.

Fortescue, fol. 27. says, From that Power which flows from the People, it is
not lawful for him to Lord it over them by any other Power; that is, a
Political not a Regal Power. And fol. 32. The King is set up for the Safeguard
of the Laws of his People. The Sword called Curtein was given to the Counts
Palatine of Chester to this end: Vt Regem si aberret habeat potestatem
coercendi, says Matthew. Paris, p. 563.

The Parliament in Richard the Second's Case, did refer to an Ancient Statute,
whereby it was provided, That if the King through a foolish obstinacy and
contempt of his People, or any other irregular way, should alienate himself
from his People, and would not Govern by the Laws of his Kingdom, made by the
Lords of his Kingdom, but should exercise his own Will, from thenceforth it was
lawful for them, with the consent of the People, to depose him from the Crown:
This Law it seems was embezelled by that King, for in the Twenty Fourth Article
against him, it was alleged, That he had caused the Records and Rolls
concerning the State of the Government to be crazed and imbezelled, to the
great detriment of the People. The Author of the Mirror says, p. 8. (speaking
of the Rise of the English Monarchy) That when Forty Princes chose One King to
Reign over them, to Govern the People of God, and to maintain the Christian
Faith, and defend their Goods and Persons in quiet, by the Rules of Right, and
to be obedient to the Rules of Right; if he did not so, he should lose the Name
of a King.

Old Fleta speaking of the King's Oath, says, The King by Virtue of his Oath is
especially obliged to the preservation of the Laws, and he is therefore
Crowned, that he may Rule the People committed to him, per Judicia, by the
Laws. 15 Edw. 3. Stat. 1. We considering how by the Bond of our Oath, we are
bound to the observance and defense of the Laws and Customs of the Realm, etc.
And 20 Edw. 3. Mo^e at large the King declares: We perceiving that the Law of
the Land, which we by our Oath are bound to maintain, is less well kept, and
the execution of the same disturbed, we greatly moved in Conscience in this
matter, desiring as much for the pleasure of God, and ease of our Subjects, as
to save our Conscience, and to keep our said Oath, etc. The like is in the
Statute of Provisors. King James told his Parliament the same, March 21. 1609.
That the King is bound by a double Oath to preserve the Laws tacitly, as being
King, and so bound to protect his People and the Laws, and expressly by his
Coronation Oath: So as every just King is bound to observe that Paction made
with his People by his Laws, framing the Government thereunto: And a King
leaves to be a King. and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to
Govern by Law; in which case the King's Conscience may speak to him, as the
poor Woman to Philip of Macedon, Either Govern according to Law, or cease to be
King. And elsewhere, he says, If he should not keep the Laws to which he was
Sworn, he should be perjured. But I proceed to the Statute of 11 H. 7. That
from thence-forth, no Person attending on the King for the time being, and
doing him true and faithful Service of Allegiance in his Wars, should in
any-wise be Convict or Attaint of High Treason, nor of other Offense for that
cause, but to be for that Service utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble,
or loss. The Lord Bacon, p. 144. Hist. of Hen. 7. gives a Reason of this Law,
as agreeable with Reason of State, that the Subject should not enquire of the
justness of the King's Title or Quarrel; And it was agreeable to good
Conscience, that whatever the Fortune of the King were, the Subject should not
suffer for his Obedience. The Spirit of this Law, says he, was wonderful Pious
and Noble, being like in matter of War to the Spirit of David, in matter of the
Plague, who said, If I have finned, strike me, but what have these Sheep done?
Neither wanted this Law parts of Prudence and deep foresight, for it did the
better take away from the People occasion to busy themselves, to pry into the
King's Title, for that however it fell out, their Safety was provided for;
besides, it could not but greatly draw to him the love and hearts of the
People, because he seemed more careful for them, than for himself.

To this purpose the Lord Cook, p. 7. of his third Book of Institutes, speaking
of Treason, says, That the Act for Treason is to be understood of a King in
Possession of the Crown and Kingdom; for if there be a King Regnant in
Possession, although he be de Facto only, and not de Jure, yet is he within the
purview of this Statute, and the other, which has Right, and is out of
Possession, is not within this Statute. And if Treason be committed against a
King de Facto, and not de Jure, and afterward the King de Jure comes to the
Crown, he shall punish the Treason against the King de Facto; and a Pardon
granted by the King de Jure, that is not also King de Facto, is void. It is the
Opinion of Lawyers, That Melior est conditio possidentis: And Judge Hales gives
the same sense of that Statute, in his Remarks on the Pleas of the Crown, Chap.
of Treason. The Lord Cook says, It Is against all Reason that the King's
Politic Capacity may not be separated from his Personal, seeing his private
Will is distinct from his public Will, expressed in the Law.

Littleton, in his Tenures, Title of Homage, Sect. 85. says, Allegiance is due
to every one (in Possession) that becomes King, and to no other. And Judge
Popham, in his Reports, fol. 16, 17. mentions a Case to our purpose; Richard
the Third granted certain Privileges to the City of Gloucester, with a Salvo
to him and his Heirs. And in Queen Elizabeth's days, it was questioned, whether
the Salvo did pass to her, she not being Heir to King Richard, and all the
Judges did Resolve, that the Salvo did pass to her.

Sir Edward Cook, in his Institutes on Magna Charta, allows, That the King
has no Power over the Militia to Muster his Subjects, but only in such cases
and manner as the Parliament by special Acts has prescribed. And p. 147. That
the Right of Electing Sheriffs was anciently in the People, as in London, York,
Bristol, etc. So the Heretochs, or Lord-Lieutenants, in every County, were
chosen by a Folkmote in their Counties, Lambard. Arch. p. 135.

And Spelman, on the word Legiantia, says, it is Archius vinculum inter
principem and subdites.

It would be tedious to relate all that Grotius has said, though very
pertinently, and rationally. I shall name a few of such Observations as come
home to our Case; l. 1. c. 4.. 7. n. 3. It is to be observed, that Men did not
at first unite in Civil Communities by any Command from God, but voluntarily,
and from the experience they had that private Families were unable to resist
Foreign Force; from hence grew Civil Power, which St. Peter calls, a Humane
Ordinance, though elsewhere it be called a Divine, because God approved it, as
convenient for the good of Mankind; but when God approves of a Humane Law, he
must be supposed to do it after a Humane manner.

L. 2. c. 14.. 4. That Promises fully made and accepted, do naturally transfer
a Right, and this holds as well in Kings as in private Persons. L. 2. c. 13. n.
16. If a Promise, confirmed by Oath, be grounded on a Condition, whereto it
related, that Condition not being performed, makes the Promise void; or if the
Quality of the Person cease, the Oath sworn to that Person, in relation to his
Quality, does cease also. L. 2. c. 13. n. 18. Every Contract, though sworn, is
to be understood with this reserved Condition, That matters continue in the
same state. A wise Man, says Seneca, changes not his Resolution, all things
continuing as they were when he made it; nor can he be said to repent, because
at that time no better Counsel could be followed than that he resolved on, l.
2. c. 16. n. 27. cadem mihi omnia praesta and idem sum.

Such Persons as are under Compact with the People, if they offend against the
Laws, may be restrained by Force: And if a King desert and abjure his Kingdom,
all things are Lawful against him, as against a private Person; and he quotes
Barclay, That if a King alienates his Kingdom, or subjects it to another, he
loses it; and I doubt not but in such a case he may be resisted. The Empire is
one thing, and the manner of administering it is another thing; which the People
may hinder from being changed, for that is not in the Empire; and from Sen. l.
3. contr. Although I must Obey my Father in all things, yet not in that wherein
he cease to be a Father; Consistere enim non potest voluntas imperandi and
perdendi. And if a King have one part of the Empire, and the People another,
the King attempting to destroy the Peoples Right, a just Force may be opposed.
L. 2. c. 7. n. 27. in a Question concerning the Right of Succession, it is not
amiss to take the Advice of the People, as Camden says of England, Anno 1571.

Grotius de Jure belli, p. 93. c. 4.. 20. In a Controversy (concerning the
Title to a Kingdom) a private Man must not undertake to become a Judge, but
follow the Possession; for thus Christ commanded Tribute to be paid to Caesar,
Matthew. 22.20. because he was in Possession, and the Money bare his Image.

L. 2. c. 25. n. 4. He approves of a War on behalf of Confederates, because he
that does not repel an Injury from his Confederates, if he can, is as much in
fault as he that does the Injury; and he commends Constantine for making War on
Maxentius and Licinius, who persecuted such of their own Subjects as were
Christians, only for their Religion; and l. 2. c. 20. n. 39. Injuries begun
only, are not to be vindicated by Arms, unless the matter be both very weighty,
and proceeded so far, that from what is already done, either a certain
Mischief, though not yet what was intended, has already befallen, or some
extraordinary danger do threaten thereby; if an Enemy has once assaulted me,
and comes armed with a resolution to kill me, I am not bound to tarry till he
comes within reach of me, but seasonably to prevent him: And l. 2. c. 25. n. 8.
Those Princes who are free, may make War for themselves or others; and though
we should grant that Subjects may not take Arms for their own Defense against
their Prince (which yet is doubted even by those whose purpose it was to defend
Regal Power) yet it follows not that Princes may not take Arms in their
Defense; that which is unlawful for one to do, by reason of a personal
Impediment, may be lawful for another to do for him. As in Affairs of the
Church, Bishops are said to take on them the Care of the Universal Church; so
besides the care of their particular Dominions, Kings assume the gegeral Care
of Humane Societies. So Seneca, Bello a me peti potest qui a mea gente
sepositas suam exagitat. This which I have named from this Renowned Casuist may
suffice to silence all the Objections of such as are of the Historians
persuasion, and to quiet the Consciences of such as have taken the late Oath to
the present King and Queen.

I proceed now to our late Lawyers and Casuists, and Seldom deserves the first
place, who, de Jure Not. l. 1. c. 8. p. 106. says, That by permission of Nature
it has been granted, that whatsoever has been by Men joined in Society,
limited; forbidden, or constituted, that they are bound to keep, who have so
consented according to the Conditions and Qualifications wherewith it is
prescribed, even as in any as have, and as they have given their consent; but
whence is it they are so bound? From the Authority of a Deity (i. e.) of Man's
Superior, even from those things the rise of the Authority is derived, and
therefore from some Heads of the Law of Nature. Lod. Vives, on St. Augustine,
de Civ. Dei, l. 4. c. 5, 6. takes Notice of the first words of Justine (viz.)
That in the Beginning the Rule of Nations was in the hands of Kings, whom not
Popular Ambition, but their Moderate Carriage, approved by the good, advanced
to that height of Honor. -- That the People elected such Kings to be their
Guides, and Overseers of Public Interest, and that they were not compelled to
take such a one to them as happened any way; neither did Nobility, or the
seeking of a Party carry it, but every Man's own private good, with the good of
the Public, was so near to him, that it made him to make choice of none but
the best. And Juvenal observes, Satyr 10. That it was the People, Qui dabat
olim, Imperium faces legiones Omnia.

I shall crave Pardon, if I here insert a little of what our Judicious Hooker
has said in our Case, to countervail what the Historian has quoted, as his
Judgment. Now thus says he, l. 1. c. 10. Though wise and good Men are fit to
make Laws, yet Laws take not their constraining Power from those that make
them, but from the Power which gives them the strength of Laws. And by Natural
Law the Lawful Power of making Laws, whereunto all Societies are subject,
belongs so properly to those entire Societies, that for any Prince or Potentate
whatsoever to exercise the same of himself, and not either by express
Commission from God, or Authority derived from their consent upon whose Persons
they impose Laws, is no better than Tyranny. Laws they are not, which Public
Approbation has not made: What is the Chaff to the Wheat? That Quotation from
an imperfect, broken, exploded Fragment, to this substantial Argument?

I shall not swell this Tract by those Excellent Discourses of Puffendorff,
translated by the Author of the Answer to Popular Objections. I shall mention
but two Sentences of his; first, from his Tract de Interregno, p. 272. If a
King abdicates the Peace of his Kingdom, and be of an Hostile mind, or departs
from the Rules of Government, the ground of the Subjects Obedience is made
void. As in the Digests, l. 49. Tit. 15. Qui fugit ad eos cum quibus nulla est
amintia a fide suscepta transfugit. The second is, de Jure Naturae, p. 1008.
Such as desert the Government, or abdicate the Kingdom, against them is Lawful
whatever is Lawful against a private person. Also if a King that is constituted
by his People, would alienate his Kingdom, or alter the form of Government, if
he continue to effect it by force, the people may resist him by force.

Carpzorius, an approved Author, De Capit. Caes. c. 1. p. 15. says, There is no
King in the Christian World, whose Power some Compact made with the several
Orders of the People, may not restrain and limit, and which are not bound by
the Capitulation. Reinbech says the same of the Empire, That Caesar is bound by
the Laws. And Bodine, concerning France, Principem contra leges nihil posse and
rescriptis ejus nullam rationem haberi debere nisi aequitate perinde ac
veritati consentanum sint.

The Historian may be satisfied from these Men, that much more than has been
practiced by our Nation, has its Approbation in such a Case as we were reduced
to.

But to return home, that saying of King James is very memorable, That the King
is for the Commonwealth, and not the Common wealth for the King.

Albericus Gentilis, Professor of Civil Law, says, That he that would keep
himself out of danger, must meet and prevent it; which is a point of greater
Wisdom and Courage, than to expect it, and revenge it. -- If our Adversary have
declared his Will, and is preparing a Power to hurt us, we may not tarry to
receive the first blow, but anticipate the Evil as Gladiators do. Yea, it has
been always the Practice to put a stop to the Ambition of great Monarchs, who
have unjustly invaded one Man's Dominions, lest he should attempt others; hence
the Princes of Christendom have been careful to preserve an equal Pallance
between growing Empires. Thus Baldus says, It is a fault to omit the defense of
another, but of our selves a treachery. And Siracide, Eccles. 4. Free him to
whom Injury is done, out of the hand of the injurious. And Constantine says, We
ought to account of the Injuries done to others, as our own. Thus Justine
answered the Persians, That he ought to defend the Christians, whom they would
compel to forsake their Religion. And Queen Elizabeth defended the Hollanders
against the Spaniards, who if they had broken down that Pale of Religion (as
Lipsius calls it) would have extended their Tyranny farther.

King Charles the First, in answer to the Nineteen Propositions says, The Lords
being trusted with Judicatory Power, are an excellent skreen between the Prince
and the People, by just Judgment to preserve the Law: Therefore the Power
legally placed in Both Houses, is more than sufficient, to prevent and restrain
the power of Tyranny. Dr. Fern pleading his Cause, grants, That personal
Defense, against the sudden Assaults of the King's Messengers, if illegal, though
the King be present, is lawful, even to warding off the King's blows, and to
restrain him, and to preserve the innocent.

Peter Martyr on Romans 13. We may not anxiously dispute by what Right or Wrong
Princes have obtained their Power, but rather make it our business to obey the
present Magistrates.

Judge Vaughan: In Cases that depend on Fundamental Principles, Millions of
Presidents to the contrary are to no purpose.

Judge Jenkins says, We hold only what the Law holds, the King's Prerogative,
and the Peoples Liberties are both determined by Law. And so King Charles the
First's Declaration at York says, That his Prerogatives are built on the Laws
of the Land: And when the Parliament would have him grant an extraordinary
Power to some Lords-Lieutenants, he tells them, If they would have him grant
more Power than by the Law of the Land was in him, it was fit that the same
should by some Law be first vested in him, with full Power to transfer the
same. The same Judge Jenkins speaking of the Oath of Supremacy, says, We do not
swear that the King is above all Laws, nor above the safety of the People, but
his Majesty, and we will swear to the contrary. The Law and the Safety of the
People, are the King's Honor and Safety, and Strength: And when Hobbs extended
the Power of the Prince above the Law; the Earl of Clarendon answers, That in
dangerous Circumstances Men are not to resort so much to the Words of
Submission, as to the Intention of the Law Givers, which could not be that the
Prince should have Power to take away the Lives of his innocent Subjects; nor
could such a Submission be ever supposed to be the mind of the Contractors.
This may serve in answer to the Declaration, That it is not lawful on any
pretense whatsoever, etc. which was past the House, not without great
opposition, by a mercinary Party of Pensioners, and was destructive of many
ancient Laws, and an alteration of the Government; making it absolute, and in
itself null: For as Sherringham, who learnedly defended Charles the First,
says, Those Laws which are made for the benefit of the Prince and People, are
Fundamental, and Foundations cannot be altered, without the Ruin of the whole
Building. If therefore that Declaration, or any other Act is contrary to the
Fundamental Laws, it is invalid.

And now we come to that Declaration of the Lords and Commons, who as it became
the Masters of the Assembly, have fixed our Government, as a Nail in a sure
place: They found us as Sheep without a Shepherd, and in the midst of many
grievous Wolves, ready to devour both them and us; they considered that the
late King had exercised a Power of suspending Laws; committed the Bishops for
Petitioning to be excused from concurring to that Power; That he erected a
Court for Ecclesiastical Causes, by Commissioners; Levied Money without Consent
of Parliament; kept up a Standing Army; disarmed Protestants, and armed
Papists, and Quartered them contrary to Law; violated the Elections of
Parliament; broke the Seal, or cast it away, and deserted the Government and
Kingdom; and did thereupon declare, that he had abdicated the Kingdom, and left
the Throne vacant; they being assembled in Parliamentary manner, did for the
Redress of those Grievances (other means being denied them) as their Ancestors
had done in like Cases) declare the Prince and Princes of Orange, to be King
and Queen of England, etc. And appointed the present Oath to be taken, instead
of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; which Methods have been taken in the
like Cases by all Nations, as well as our own.

And I know not what Authority or Reason should determine our Judgments, if
these cannot; for let us suppose, that the late King at his departure
(whetherit were forced or voluntary) had left behind him in Writing, under his
own hand, a Declaration to the following effect, which consisting of undeniable
Matter of Fact, is no less Authentic:

-- We do declare to all the World, That the the Church of England as by Law
Established, has on all occasions signally manifested all due Loyalty to Our
Royal Father, and Brother, as well as to Our self, particularly in opposing the
Bill for Excluding Us from the Throne, and assisting Us in suppressing the
Rebellion of Monmouth, for which Reasons we thought fit and just at Our coming
to the Crown, solemnly to declare Our Royal Intention to support and defend it
in all its Rights, and confirmed our Declaration by our Coronation Oath; but
having wholly devoted Our Self to the Romish Religion, and Papal Authority, We
were absolutely resigned to the Conduct of such, as by that Authority were
appointed to Counsel and Direct Us, who having convinced Us of a Power to
Absolve Us from Our Oaths, and that no Faith is to be kept with Heretics; and
also how Meritorious a Work it would be to root that Pestilential Schism and
Heresy, whereof the English Church was the chief Bulwark, by which We should
merit a better Crown; and that it would be to Our Damnation, to keep Our said
Oath; We thought Our Self Obliged in Conscience, industriously to attempt the
Destruction of that Church, and the introducing of Popery into Our Kingdoms: In
order whereunto We having entered into a League with Our Brother of France, have
pursued those well-known Methods. We have discarded all such Officers Military
and Civil, as would not comply with Our Royal Intentions; and having
Established a Standing Army, We committed their Conduct to such Papists, and
other Sectaries in Our Kingdoms of England and Ireland, as would serve Our
Designs; and for their Security, We suspended and dispensed such Laws as
incapacitated them for such Offices; and caused the Bishops and Clergy, who by
their Petition and Refusal to Read Our Declaration to that purpose, to be
Imprisoned; and by Our Commission for Ecclesiastical Affairs, We suspended the
Bishop of London, and turned out the whole Society of Magdalen College, to
plant Men of our own Persuasion in their place; as also We founded diverse
Schools, Seminaries, and Colleges, for several Orders of the Romish
Persuasion: and as a farther check to that Church, We gave such a Toleration to
the Sectaries, who were professed Enemies to that Church, as we promised to
make unalterable. To which end it was advised, to impose a Suppositious Heir on
Our Kingdoms, that they might not fear an alteration from our Lawful
Successors. Which Proceedings the Prince of Orange conceived to be a Just Cause
of War, as well for the Vindication of his Princess, her Right to the
Succession, as for Redressing the Grievances (as they were called) of Our
discontented Subjects; who thereupon Invaded Our Kingdom by a Foreign Army,
and by the Revolt of Our Army from Us to him, reduced Us to a necessity of
submitting Our Self to his Power, and to come under a Guard of his Soldiers
for the Security of Our Person. During these Distractions, We were advised by
Our Bishops, and other Subjects, to admit of a Treaty, and to Summon a Free
Parliament, which for Our present Security We seemed willing to do: But
well-knowing those great and necessary Ends by Us designed, would be by such
means made void, We caused those Writs that were made ready for the Summoning
of our Parliament, to be destroyed; We cast away our Broad Seal, disbanded Our
Army, and left Our Kingdoms in Confusion; and committed Our Royal Person to Our
Brother of France, hoping that by his Assistance, and by the Divisions which We
should foment among Our Subjects, fully to accomplish in a short time Our
Religious Intentions, to the rooting out of all that should oppose Our Royal
Pleasure, after the admired Example of Our Brother of France.

Now this being the lively Pourtraicture of the late King, and the Truth of the
Case between Him and the Kingdom, what could the Nation do less, than to
provide themselves of another Governor? And who more fit, than those who by
Common Consent, as well as by Right of Succession are now set over us? To whom
Our Allegiance on these Accounts is as due, as if the late King were actually
dead: And when all the Princes of Christendom (except only France, who aspires
to a Universal Monarchy) have owned our King and Queen as rightful Sovereigns,
it is an unexcusable singularity and obstinacy, for a few private Persons to
stand off.

It must be acknowledged that some Divines acting beyond their Sphere, have
rested in general Notions concerning Government, as Men in the Clouds; and
others have made such Conclusions as the Premises would not bear, and this has
been the (...), the Foundation and Cause of many Errors; for if from General
Propositions or Rhetorical Expressions, or from Arguments urged in the heat of
Disputations, as also from Laws made on emergent and present Occasions, we
should frame Rules for our Faith or Obedience, we should incur many great
Errors as well in Polity, as in Morality and Divinity; for from such beginnings
grew up the Doctrines of Praying to Saints, and to the Virgin Mary; of
Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead; Indulgences, and Pardon of Sins past,
present, and to come; Worshipping of Images; Transubstantiation; the Supremacy,
and Infallibility of the Pope; and from the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, etc.
rigidly understood, Princes, who are generally Men of Great Passions, would be
under almost irresistible Temptations of fulfilling all their Lusts: And the
Subjects in that Case be of all Creatures the most miserable.

Whatever therefore the Authors of such a Law might have in Speculation, I am
confident they never intended to suffer it to be put in Practice on themselves.
And such a Government would be worse than Anarchy, and a State of Nature, which
allows, Vim vi repellere, to defend themselves against violent Aggressors. The
People could not be more miserable when there was no King in Israel, than when
they had a Rehoboam, to chastise them with Scorpions, as his young rash
Counselors would have advised him to have done.

We may say of some Laws, as of some Truths, if we follow them too close at the
Heels, they may dash out our Teeth.

And sometimes there are such Legislators, as like the Pharisees, bind heavy
Burdens, and lay them on others, which they will not touch with one of their
Fingers. And I think without breach of the Rule of good Manners, I might desire
those who made those Laws, against offensive or defensive Arms in any Case, and
those that adhere so precisely to the Doctrines of Non-Resistance and Passive
Obedience, whether if the late King should return with French Dragoons, or
Irish Cutthroats, they would cast themselves at their Feet, and offer their
Throats to their Swords, as a willing Sacrifice to their own Laws, and Examples
to their own Doctrine.

When the Scripture Commands Wives to obey their Husbands in all things, no
good Wife will think her self bound to Obey her Husband, if he should Command
her to Steal, Murder, and prostitute or kill her self. Such things which
Nature abhors, need not be excepted out of general Precepts. And what an
insolent and odious Reflection would it be upon a King, if when his Parliament
presented him with such a General Law for his consent, they should tell him,
Sir, we have framed such a Law for Your Majesty's Safety, That it shall be
Treason for any to take Arms, Offensive or Defensive, on any pretense
whatsoever, unless contrary to all Laws of God and Men, Your Majesty shall turn
a Turk, or an Idolater, and force your Subjects to become such; or shall
against Law, dispossess us of our Free-holds, Ravish our Wives, destroy our
Religion and Laws, to which you have sworn; yet though such things be not in
express words excepted, there is no doubt but it was the intention of the
Legislators to exclude them out of those Laws, which were made with respect to
a more particular occasion, as the (...) face to those Laws plainly shows.

It is notoriously known, how hardly the Church was beset by two busy and
powerful Factions when those Laws were enacted, who, though they agree in
Principles tending to Rebellion; yet, that they might undermine the Church,
they found Patrons, and an Interest in Court and Council, in the Reign of
Charles and James the Second; and how opposite soever the Factions were to each
other, they were still ready to unite against the Church, as their Common
Enemy; in which case it was requisite, that the Members of the Church should
use all honest means to retain their Superiors in a good Opinion of their
undoubted Principles of Loyalty, and to press the same Duty on such as were
suspected to be of a contrary Mind; against whom the Parliament especially
intended those Tests and Declarations; for who can suppose them such Madmen, as
to make a Law upon a particular emergent Occasion, as should cassate and
destroy all other Laws for the preservation of their Religion, Lives, and
Liberties, and to establish Tyranny, Popery, and Idolatry, by Law, if the King
will have it so; for which end he may by the killing letter of that Law, when
ever he pleases, bring in what Foreign Forces he pleases to eat us up, and no
Resistance must be made; if this Law be strictly understood, without any
Reserve, or Consideration of the Occasion of making the Law, and the intention
of the Lawgivers, which undoubtedly was their own and the preservation of the
Nation.

And wise Men think, that if there should be such a pack of Lawmakers, as to
serve a turn of their own, should have no regard to the over-turning and
perverting, as well of the Duties we owe to God, our Neighbors, and our
selves, as the Ancient Fundamental Laws of the Land, that they are utterly
void, and we should sin more in swearing to keep such Laws, than in not
observing them.

The Historian reflects so severely on some Divines, as if he came with a
Commission from James the Second, to execute on them the consequences of the
Doctrines of Non-Resistance and Passive-Obedience; they are Arraigned and
Condemned as Apostates, Traitors, and perjured Persons; and when time serves,
they shall not want an Executioner. In the mean time, he directs a fatal blow
at one single and obscure Person, but through him wounds all the rest, who,
though they be many Heads, yet all standing on the same Neck, and our Historian
thinks he has got the Advantage which Nero wished for; however, he thinks he
deals friendly with him, if, as Butchers are wont to use their Swine, who
scrape them a little before they cut their Throats. Mr. Long (says he) is so
well known for his Zeal in this good Cause (viz. of Non-Resistance, and
Passive-Obedience) to all that have seen his Answer to Mr. Johnson and Hunt,
His no Protestant but Dissenters Plot, and other such Treatises, that it is
wondered that of late he should own himself the Author of the Solution of the
Popular Objections, etc.

Answ. They who have known Mr. Long ever since the War began against Charles
the First, know that he has inviolably practiced those Doctrines himself, to
which in those Writings he persuaded others, and shrunk not from them after the
Prince of Orange came to Exeter, as the present Bishop of Salisbury, and
several Members of the Church of Exon can attest; and continued to Pray for the
late King, until he received Order for the contrary, though he were publicly
disturbed for so doing; but when he considered that the late King had deserted
the Government, and left us in Confusion, that the States of the Kingdom had
admitted their present Majesty's to the Throne, even then, though our
Governors were changed, he changed not his Opinion of the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, and Passive-Obedience, but thought that it ought to be
transferred from the Person of the late King, to the present King and Queen; so
that it is no wonder that he owns himself the Author of the Solution of Popular
Objections, wherein if any thing be urged by him that seems to comply with the
Opinion of Mr. Johnson, etc. it was an Argument ad hominem, and in such a case
as happened after Mr. Johnson had written, and was scarce thought possible to
happen, and we hope never will more.

And though he needed not that Apology of St. Austine's making retractations,
and to confess, Errare possum Hereticus esse nolo, yet he thinks it much better
to do so, than with Bellarmine, to make such Recognitions, as should declare
his Obstinacy in a dangerous Error, as the Historian does.

And as to the particular Quotations from a Sermon of that Authors, the Reader
may observe, that they were aimed at the Popish and Fanatical Doctrines of
Resisting and Deposing Lawful Princes, for the good of the Kirk, and
Mother Church, and do not touch a hair of them that did neither Resist nor
Depose, nor are any way guilty, unless their not sighting with Popish and Irish
unqualified Miscreants for the utter Destruction of our Church and Religion,
and the establishing of Popery and Slavery, be a Crime of that Magnitude, as to
be accounted Perjury and Treason, which seeing the late King's Soldiers very
honorably and worthily refused, it could not be expected from those who were
to sight under another Banner.

What remains then, but that we study to be quiet, and to do our own business,
not provoking, not envying, or slandring one another, but leaving the
Government of the Nation to God and our Superiors, make it our business to
govern our selves according to the Laws of God and the Land, and to follow the
things that make for Peace, and whereby we may edisie one another; and not
publish Histories, with a design to foment Divisions, to alienate the
Affections of the People from their present Governors, and to run us again
into Confusion.

And although the Author of the History do conceive that either we have been
too sinful, in not assisting the late King (though it were out of our Power) or
not Passive enough in our Obedience to him, yet I shall still think it my Duty
to Pray, that neither he nor we may sin in resisting Lawful Authority, nor
suffer under an Unlawful and Arbitrary Power, Lead us not into temptation.

And I hope that all good Protestants will join with me, not only in this
Prayer, but in that Thanksgiving of the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 66.8, 9, etc. O
bless our God, ye People, and make the voice of his praise to be heard, which
holds our Soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved, for thou, O
God have proved us, thou have tried us as Silver is tried. Thou broughtest us
into the Net, thou layedst Affliction on our Loins, thou causedst Men to ride
over our heads, we went through fire and water, and thou broughtest us out into
a wealthy place. I will go into thy House with burnt-offerings, I will pay thee
my Vows.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
A Resolution of Certain Queries, concerning Submission to the Present
Government.

The QUERIES.
I. Concerning the Original of Government. II. What is the Constitution of the
Government of England? III. What Obligation lies on the King by the
Coronation Oath? IV. What Obligation lies on the Subject by the Oaths of
Supremacy, etc. V. Whether if the King Violate his Oath, and actually Destroys
the Ends of it, the Subjects are freed from their Obligation to him? VI.
Whether the King has Renounced or Deserted the Government? VII. Whether on
such Desertion, the People, to preserve themselves from Confusion, may admit
another, and what Method is to be used in such Admission? VIII. Whether the
Settlement now made, is a Lawful Establishment, and such as with a good
Conscience may be Submitted to?
By a Divine of the Church of England, as by Law Established.

