THE Non-Conformists PLEA FOR PEACE IMPLEADED: In Answer to several late
Writings of Mr. BAXTER and others, pretending to show Reasons for the
sinfulness of Conformity.

It is the Nature of Sin, especially Pride, to be unreasonable, unpeaceable,
and a troubler of the Soul, the Church, and the World. Mr. Baxters only Way of
Concord, p. 152.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

THE INTRODUCTION.
I Shall not be so troublesome to my Reader, as to lead him through all that
dark and dirty Labyrinth, wherein Mr. Baxter has lost himself; but pass
directly to that part of his Late Writings, wherein he pretends (to do what he
had long threatened) to give Reasons for the sinfulness of Conformity. In the
Epistle to the Plea, he says, many Impositions were laid on them which they
durst not do, because they fear God, and that nothing less than Sin should
hinder their Conformity: and p. 135. That they gave in Eight particulars to the
Commissioners at the Savoy, which they took to be flat Sins, but had not time
fully to discourse one of them, by which I guess, that kneeling at the
Sacrament (for that was then discoursed of) was one and the chief of those many
heinous Sins in Conformity; what the other Seven were, I cannot find; but I
believe he has mentioned them in this Plea, though he be ashamed to call them
Reasons, and says, he will not urge the case, but barely mention matters of
Fact, and tell us what it is they dare not do. And if we be so hardy as to bear
this, we may (when he can get leave) have more, P. 119. of the Plea; we do not
here tell men, unless by the by, in stating some few questions, what it is that
we account Good or Evil, much less do we here give the Reasons of our Cause; he
dares not be so bold yet as to venture by it to displease us. But this
Hypocrisy is so thin that the weakest Eye may look through it; for, whereas
the Right Reverend and Learned Bishop of Ely, had told Mr. Baxter (as he
confesses in his Preface to the Late Book of Concord) that he would petition
Authority that they (the Non-Conformists) might be compelled to give their
Reasons; He there says, To answer the earnest demand of our Reasons, by you the
Lord Bishop of Ely, I have published an Historical Narrative of our Case and
Judgment in a Book called the Non-Conformists Plea for Peace. And if he may be
believed, they are not only Mr. Baxters Reasons, but of many others; for p. 3.
it is said, We that publish this here, give an account of our own Judgment, and
those that we are best acquainted with; how far we hold it lawful or unlawful,
to gather or to separate from Churches, or to differ from what is established
by Authority. So that plainly that Book was published to answer the Bishop of
Ely's demand of their Reasons for the Sinfulness of Conformity: But where is
that allowance from Authority which he pretends to have so long waited for, and
begged on his Knees? And where is that care not to displease, or provoke the
Conformists by showing the many heinous Sins in their Conformity, when without
leave of God or Man, he not only endeavors to displease, but to ruin us? If
any thing may be, this is worse than his Hypocrisy; it is mere distraction and
rage, when our common adversaries the Papists are undermining our Foundations,
and there wants but a blow to throw down the whose Fabric of the best of
Protestant Churches, for any one that bears the name of Protestant, thus to
help on their Design, and justify it too; by declaring many heinous Sins in the
Constitution of it, and to cry, down with it, down with it, even to the ground.
But (God be thanked) his Malice is as Impotent as his Words; for after Eighteen
years swelling and laboring, parturiunt montes, and there appears not so much
as a Mouse to affright us: all vanishes like the noise of Armies under ground,
wherewith his Predecessors amused the Nation; their long confinement has made
them so weak, or rather their weakness has caused their so long confinement,
that Mr. Baxter dares not call them Reasons, and I hope the Nation are
sufficiently instructed how unreasonable it is to be affrighted, and run into
confusion upon such empty noises as these. I have here considered only the
Arguments which concern Ministerial Conformity, that of Lay-persons being
consequent to it. And when the most Learned Nonconforming Ministers, have in
former and latter times yielded Conformity to our public Ordinances
themselves, and by Example and Arguments too (for Mr. Baxter says, they wrote
more against Separation than the Conformists themselves) wherein Mr. Baxter
also has done his part. And when I have reason to think the greatest part of
the Nonconforming Clergy are of the same mind; because I know how great an
influence they have on the Consciences of their people, with whom they
familiarly converse, and who especially advise them in what concerns their
common Cause; yet no person of any Note that I have heard of in all that party,
who were in places of Trust, and public Employment, did on the late Test
refuse to Communicate with the Church of England. And lastly, when all our
United strength is too little to withstand the attempts of our common
Adversaries: It is a wonder to me, with what Confidence, and with what Design
(these circumstances considered) he should not only Proclaim Conformity on the
Ministers part to be impossible; but endeavor also with all his might, to
withdraw the Laity from our Communion, unless it be to expose us all to
Confusion again. But I hope the Nation have been sufficiently taught by
experience, not to entrust the Conduct of their precious Souls, as well as the
Safety of their Lives and Estates to such Giddy and Unstable Men. Especially
when they shall consider on what frivolous pretenses they still seek to
perpetuate the distractions of Church and State, and now when we are in
greatest danger, exert their utmost Art and Strength to divide and destroy us.
-- Pudet haec opprobria vobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
The Controversy concerning the sinfulness of Conformity will be reduced to a
narrow compass, if there be an agreement in these particulars. First, what are
the parts of the Book of Common Prayer, to which we are to declare our Assent
and Consent. Mr. Baxter contends that all things named as the Contents of the
Book, are parts of that Book, to the use whereof we declare our Assent, etc. p.
159. of the Plea. There is not a word in the Book that was not intended for
some use; the Preface, the Calender, and Rubric have their uses: And p. 203.
we have reason to doubt whether the Act for Conformity it self, be not a part
of the Book which we must Subscribe, Assent and Consent to; because this Act is
named among the Contents of the Book. Either (says he) it is a part of the
Contents or not. If not, we must not consent to that falsehood that it is. If it
is, O far be it from us that believe a God, a Judgment, a Life to come, and the
sacred Scriptures, to Assent and Consent to that Act with all its penalties,
silencing and ruining such as Conform not. Answ. The Act for Uniformity, naming
the Book of Common Prayer, always names that Book as distinct from it self, and
as a thing annexed to it; and if the Parliament had enjoined the Use of some
New Translation of the Bible, and prefixed their Act to that Translation, and
required our Use of the same under penalties, our Assent to such an Act could
not suppose the Act it self to be a part of the Canonical Books.

Secondly, The design of the Act, in these words, To the intent that every
person may certainly know the Rule to which he is to Conform in Public
Worship, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of England, etc. be it Enacted, etc. Plainly shows what are the
parts to the use of which we are to declare our Assent, which particulars are
Enumerated more than once; but not a word of the Act for Uniformity, or the Act
1. Eliz. which in the Contents is mentioned with it, whereof Mr. Baxter ought
to be minded; for under the Contents of the Book, the First thing mentioned is,
The Acts (in the Plural) for Uniformity of Common Prayer; whence I argue: If
the Parliament intended that this last Act should be taken as a part of the
Common Prayer Book, because it is in the Contents; for the same Reason it may
be thought they intended that other Act 1. Eliz. to be a part also, which were
very unreasonable. For then we must subscribe our Assent to the use of Two
Common Prayer Books, viz the Old and the New. 3. That Act of Queen Elizabeth
explains what is meant by Open (or Common) Prayer. By Open Prayer, in and
throughout this Act is meant that Prayer, which, is for others to come unto, or
hear, either in common Churches or Chapels, or Oratories, commonly called the
Service of the Church; and the intent of that Act was, that no Minister should
refuse to Use the said Common Prayers, and Administer the Sacraments in such
Order and Form as they are mentioned in the said Book; or wilfully or
obstinately standing in the same, Use any other Rite, Ceremony, Order, Form, or
manner of Celebrating the Lords Supper, etc. than is mentioned in the said
Book. This Act was Printed probably to give Light to the other, and to show
that the same thing was formerly required of Ministers. And if the Conformists
heretofore did not take that Act to be part of the Common Prayer Book, then
there is no reason why they should take the New Act to be a part of the New
Book. 4. The Book of Common Prayer was complete before the Act was made; it was
first presented to the King, who approving it offered it to the Parliament, who
approved of it, and afterward made their Act for Uniformity in the Use
thereof. And whoever gathered the Contents of the Book, did no more intend to
have all things named therein to be parts of the Book, than they that set forth
the Bible with Contents to the Chapters and Psalms, intended that we should
take those Contents for Canonical Scripture. The Contents of Ps. 149. says, the
Prophet exhorts to praise God for that Power which he has given to the
Church over the Consciences of Men. But that is no part of the Text, neither
the Acts, Prefaces, Rubricks, etc. which come not into Use in the
Administration of Prayer, Sacraments, etc. any part of that Book to the Use
whereof we give our Assent and Consent. This Act does exclude the Use of any
other Forms (when it injoyns those prescribed in the Book for public Worship)
but it does not include those previous Acts, Prefaces and Instructions, which
only tend to justify and enforce the Use of the Common Prayer. But Mr. Baxters
Dilemma, may be answered to the advantage of Conformity, thus; Either the Acts
for Uniformity, and the Prefaces, are parts of the Book, to which our Assent is
required, or not: if not, then our Assent to them is not required; if they be,
then our Assent will be more facile upon this account. First, because in that
Preface concerning the Service of the Church, it is thus said; for as much as
nothing can be so plainly set forth, but doubts may arise in the Use and
Practice of the same, to appease all such diversity (if any arise) and for the
resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to understand, do, and
execute the things contained in this Book, the Parties that so doubt or
diversely take any thing, shall always resort to the Bishop of the Diocese; who
by his discretion shall take order for the quieting and appeasing of the same,
so that the same order be not contrary to any thing contained in this Book. And
if the Bishop of the Diocese be in doubt, then he may send for Resolution
thereof to the Archbishop. Here is a way opened to such as think that the
Acts, and Prefaces are to be Assented to, to clear their doubts to their
satisfaction; the several Bishops within their Diocese have a Power by Law, to
explain any doubts that may arise concerning the Use and Practice of
Uniformity, and their determinations are declared to be as Valid as the Law it
self: Now doubtless if sober Dissenters did consult their Diocesans, in such
Cases as concern their Practice in the public Worship, they might easily
obtain satisfaction. Again, it is said in the Preface before the Liturgy; We
are fully persuaded in our Judgments, and we here profess it to the World, that
the Book as it stood before established by Law, does not contain in it any
thing contrary to the Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or which a Godly Man
may not with a good Conscience use and submit unto, or which is not fairly
defensible against any that shall oppose the same; if it be allowed such just
and favorable Construction as in common equity ought to be allowed to all
humane Writings, especially such as are set forth by authority, and even to the
best Translations of the Holy Scripture it self. If these Mitigations be
admitted, a great many of the Objections made by Mr. Baxter and others would
vanish. And if they be not admitted, Mr. Baxter himself will grant that they
cannot safely subscribe this Assent, and Consent to all things contained in the
Bible according to any Translation. But (says he) if they might but say, we
Assent to all things contained, that are not by humane frailty mistaken, they
would soon conform herein. See the Plea, p. 166. Now the Church of England
declares here, and in the Preface to the Articles, 1564. that they prescribe
not these Rules as Laws equivalent with the Word of God, and as of necessity to
bind the Consciences of the Subjects in the Nature of them considered in
themselves, but as Temporal Orders merely Ecclesiastical, without any vain
Superstition, and as Rules in some part of Discipline concerning Decency,
Distinction and Order for the time. So that the Law leaving it to the Bishops
to remove doubts, and explain difficulties; and the Preface desiring that
things may be heartily and favorably interpreted; they are greatly to be
blamed, who will take that with the Left which their Superiors offer with the
Right Hand, and seek how to make that a Snare and a Net to entangle and ruin
themselves, which was intended only as a means to keep the Unity of the Spirit,
in the Bond of Peace.

Secondly, It is granted by the Non-Conformists, That the Common Prayer Book as
it is now amended, and abstracted from the Declarations and Subscriptions
required by the Act for Uniformity, is better to be Assented to, than as it
stood formerly. Yet evident it is that in the days of Edward the 6. when it was
much more liable to exceptions, there being in it Prayer for the dead, Chrysme
in Baptism, extreme Unction etc. (which it is supposed Mr. Calvin called
tolerabiles ineptias) many Learned Men and Godly Martyrs did readily Conform to
it: And in the days of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, the Body
of the Clergy (as Learned and Pious as any in the World) to which the few
Non-Conformists in each Age were no way comparable for Parts, Piety or Number,
and at the beginning of the Wars, there were not in the Assembly, as Mr. Baxter
observes, above Five or Six Non-Conformists. Now ever since the Confirmation of
the Canons by King James, the 36 Canon enjoined Subscription to the 39
Articles, and the Book of Common Prayer; as containing nothing contrary to the
Word of God, (which is one of the greatest Objections now) and this the
Subscriber was to do, lubens and ex animo, which in English may be rendered
with unfeigned Assent and Consent, and that he would use the same and no other.
Who can think but that Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Davenant, Jewel, Whitgift, the
two Abbots, Usher, Hall, Prideaux, Brownrigg, Doctor Jo. Reynolds, Preston,
Moreton, Sibs, Fenner, Whately, and many more named by Mr. Baxter himself, were
both Pious and Learned Men, and subscribed according to judgment and
Conscience. And if the Liturgy had not been accompanied by the Acts for
Subscriptions, etc. it is Mr. Baxters opinion, that multitudes would have
Conformed to it (though it were an ill sign of the readiness of those Men to
Conform to the whole, who when they were as Probationers on their good
Behavior, did not at His Majesty's desire in his Declaration yield to the use
of any part of it) so that it seems there is no such sinfulness in the Use of
the Forms, etc. prescribed; the great quarrel is against the Parliament, for
requiring such Subscriptions as they cannot consent to, because they fear God,
p. 191. of the Plea. It is not the sense of the Liturgy, but of a Statute of
Parliament which we doubt of, says Mr. Baxter.

3. Non-Conformists grant, that it is better to submit to the practice of a
doubtful small evil, than to forbear a necessary and great duty: especially
when greater good than evil may be procured to our selves and others by such
submission; there is no command against the Cross, Kneeling, Surplice, etc. nor
is there any intrinsecal Turpitude in them, and therefore the practice of them
may be submitted to, rather than to break the known Commandments of God for
Obedience, Peace and Charity, and to suffer Deprivation when they conceive
there is so great necessity, and there may be so much benefit to the Souls of
the people, as well as to the peace of the Nation, by the exercise of their
Ministry.

Thirdly, let that Rule be observed which Mr. Baxter quoteth from Bishop
Sanderson, p. 329. of the Plea: We must take heed that the strict
Interpretation (of words or things) turn not into a rigid one. Many Men by
mistake and wresting of other Men's words, do draw Blood from that which would
have naturally yielded Milk or Food; we owe Candor to all Men's Writings,
especially to those which are set forth by Authority, and most of all to
public Laws. In that particular of Promissory Oaths, these exceptions and
conditions are ever of common right to be understood. 1. If God Permit. 2.
Saving the right of others, and as far as is Lawful. 3. Things standing as they
do, or in the same state. 4. As far as I am able, etc. See the Plea, p. 329.

It is excellently said by Bishop Sanderson, that if our Lawful Superiors
command us any thing whereof we have just cause to doubt, we may and ought to
enquire into the Lawfulness thereof; yet not with such anxious curiosity, as if
we desired a Loop-hole whereby to evade; but with such modest Ingenuity as may
witness to God and the World; the unfeigned sincerity of our desires, both to
fear God, and to honor them that are set over us. And if having used ordinary
Moral diligence, bona fide, to inform our selves there appear nothing unlawful
in it; We are then to submit and obey without more ado, Bishop Sandersons
judgment in one view, p. 145. But evident it is that the Non-Conformists, who
strain at every Gnat which they fancy to be in the commands of their Lawful
Superiors, did glibly swallow down Camels in the impositions of Usurpers; the
Covenant, the Negative Oath, the Engagement, and many other unlawful
Impositions were generally taken without any Scruple.

A Fourth thing to be premised is, That Practice is the best Expositour of the
Law: many Laws are worded so strictly, and enjoined under such rigorous
penalties, as may serve for greater terror to evil minded Men; they do (iniquum
petere ut quod aequum est ferant) command and threaten what is very severe,
that they may obtain what is just and equal. And the practice of our Superiors
in the case of Conformity shows; that they intended the weightier matters of
the Law, Obedience, Uniformity and Decency in the public Worship. If there be
no contempt of Authority, no neglect of the established Liturgy, by bringing in
other Prayers in the room of those that are prescribed, Lex non curat minima,
neither the Law of God or Man is sollicitous about circumstances and the lesser
punctilioes. There are in most Laws, some doubtful words and expressions which
the practice of Law, and the Judges do interpret; some Casus omissi, which the
practice does admit, as in the present Law: it admits the Forms of Prayer and
Praise on extraordinary occasions for Fasting and Thanksgiving. It admits of
Singing the Psalms, as translated in Meter, and of other Forms of Prayers
before and after Sermons. If the Law should be strictly executed according to
the rigor of it, there are but few Men would go unpunished; God himself does
dispense with many things expressly enjoined for the performance of some more
necessary duties: I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice; and St. Paul did
Circumcise Timothy to avoid greater inconveniences, when doubtless he had
rather not have done it. And as we may do some things, so we may omit some
other which are enjoined by Law, according to the exigency of circumstances; so
it be done without bewraying contempt of Authority, or giving just occasion of
scandal to others, Bishop Sanderson p. 19. of Submission to Superiors.

The last thing that I shall premise is, that the Non-Conformists are not yet
agreed, what that is in our Conformity which they think to be sinful: For what
some think unlawful, others condemn only as inconvenient. One sticks at the
Sign of the Cross, another at Kneeling at the Sacrament, a third at the
Surplice, a fourth can submit to all these, but sticks at Re^ordination, which
different judgment of dissenters gives just cause to believe that there is no
real sinfulness in either; because what some think to be sinful, others grant
to be lawful: These things being premised, I come to the business of
Ministerial Conformity.

Mr. Baxter tells us,. 7. that the root of the difference is this. That the
Non-Conformists thought that they should stick to the mere Scripture rules and
simplicity, and go far from all additions which were found invented or abused
by the Papists, in Doctrine, Worship and Government, (against which Opinion Mr.
Baxter disputes part. 3. chapter 2. of his Directory.) And the Conformists thought
that they should show more reverence to the Customs of the Ancient Church, and
retain that which was not forbidden in Scripture, which was introduced before
the ripeness of the Papacy, or before the year 660. and common to them with the
Greek; which doubtless was the sounder Opinion. So that the Foundation of
Nonconformity was laid on a false principle; and they that built thereon,
frequently raised Sedition, and would have as certainly destroyed the Nation as
they did one another, had they not been prevented. For Mr. Baxter observes,
that some of them were so hot at home, that they were put to death (not for
their Nonconformity, but for Murder, Treason or Blasphemy, as the Histories of
those times show) Others as Ainsworth, Robinson, Johnson, etc. fled beyond Sea,
and there gathered Churches, and broke by Division among themselves. And
whereas Mr. Baxter says, that the difference among the Exiles at Frankford,
was, that Dr. Cox, and Mr. Horn, and their party strove for the English
Liturgy, and the other party for the freer way of praying from the present
sense and habit of the speaker: It will appear to him that reads the Troubles
of Frankford, that the Question was not between the English Liturgy, and such
free Prayers which were not then publicly used: For Calvin himself used a
Liturgy at Geneva, and a short Form before his Sermons, and sometimes that
which we call Bidding of Prayers, as may be seen after his Sermons on Job,
Printed in English. And Mr. Calvin thus relates the matter, p. 33. of his
Opuscula. When the Exiles could not agree about the English Liturgy, they did
by my Advice and Approbation, draw up another, Printed in the English Tongue
1556. wherein was a Confession taken out of Daniel the 9th. a Prayer for the
whole Church, the Lords Prayer, the Creed, etc. the rest of this Section
carries its Confutation with it. The 8.. concerns the conformity of Laymen,
which falls under that of Ministerial Conformity,. 9.

Where first of Assent, Consent and Subscription, nothing is contrary to Gods
word, etc. This as Mr. Baxter observes is required by the 36. Canon, not by the
Act or the Book it self. Now if we consider by what Men this has been
subscribed to ever since those Canons were Confirmed, and what Latitude the
Church seems to allow us in making this Subscription, viz. If we shall allow it
such just and favorable construction as in common equity ought to be allowed
to all humane Writings; especially such as are set forth by authority, and even
to the best Translation of the Holy Scripture it self (which as you have seen
Mr. Baxter himself does grant) they that Scruple at this, may also refuse to
subscribe any Articles, Confession of Faith, yea even the Apostles Creed. This
therefore is already answered; and so is the next Objection, that the
Subscriber will use that Form in public Prayer, etc. and none other: For other
occasional Forms for Prayer and Thanksgiving commended to us by authority, may
be used without violating this Subscription, it being Casus omissus, the
constant practice of the Church showing that this exception was intended though
not expressed, and that conceived Prayers before Sermons are not hereby
forbidden, the general practice does evince.

All Lawgivers do leave to the Judges and Magistrates, a Power to interpret
the doubtful Letter of the Law, and to mitigate the rigor of its Execution, in
order to the public good, and dispenses with the Subjects (so be it they
observe the chief end of the Law) in the omission of some circumstances on
reasonable occasions, and unavoidable accidents, without which Justice would be
turned into Wormwood. He therefore that presumes of the Magistrates consent to
dispense with the Observation of the lesser parts of the Law, on just
occasions, and in needful cases, presumes no more than he has reason to do:
And this Bishop Sanderson groundeth on that Maxim, Salus Populi Suprema Lex:
All that is required by the Act, is unfeignedly to Assent and Consent, that
there is such a measure of Truth and Goodness in the Book of Common Prayer, as
qualifies it for the public Worship of God; which even they that pretend
disorders and defects in it may do, in Obedience to Authority for the sake of
Peace, Order and Charity, as well as for the continuing of themselves in the
Ministry. And doubtless they may approve of the present Liturgy with all its
defects, (which was compiled by the Holy and Learned Martyrs, and has been
reviewed and approved by many stout Confessors, as well as of their (so he
calls his new Liturgy) more correct Nepenthes, which being done in haste, has
many Imperfections, or the Directory that had, nor Creed, nor Decalogue (both
which leave Men to their own extemporary Conceptions:) And in a short time
justled out the Lords Prayer too.

The title of the Act, which is the Key that opens the sense and intention of
the Lawgivers, is an Act for Uniformity of public Prayers, and Administration
of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies; so that if Uniformity be
unfeignedly observed, the Act is satisfied, though the Conformist may wish that
some things in the said Book had been amended. But some Men are so unhappy as
to contrive Nets and Snares to involve themselves and others, and raise nice
distinctions where the Law distinguishes not. As do they, who say Assent
implies the Truth, and Consent the goodness of the things; 2. And whereas the
Act says to all things, they say it means all words and expressions. 3. Whereas
it says to the Use of all things, they pretend it to be meant of those things
that come not into Use; and 4. whereas it says, in sensu composito, all things
contained and prescribed in, and by the Book, etc. they say it is extended to
all things that are contained, as well as prescribed. Now to the First, the
Phrase of Assent and Consent, being used by our Legislators, we must satisfy
our selves of the meaning of it, in the use of our Laws, where it signifies no
more than an agreement between parties in grants and contracts, and is used
where the parties agreeing, in some cases might wish that it had been
otherwise; yet upon considerations may unfeignedly Assent and Consent to them,
as is showed at large by Mr. Faukner, p. 91. etc. 2ly. Whereas they extend it
to every Phrase and Expression; the Act mentions only the things which it
particularly enumerates, viz. all the Prayers, Rites, Ceremonies, Forms and
Orders.

3. Whereas it says, to the Use of all things, they pretend it requires our
Assent and Consent to such things as come not into Use, but are only
occasionally mentioned; as when it is said in the Preface, That this Book as it
stood before established by Law, did not contain in it any thing which a godly
man may not with a good Conscience use and submit to; which clause cannot be
included in the Declaration, for then the things which were thought fit to be
altered, must be still in some sort Assented to.

4. The Act mentions the things, to the Use whereof we are to Assent and
Consent (viz.) the things contained and prescribed, in and by the Book, etc. It
is not said contained in, or prescribed by; but three several times it is
carefully expressed, as well before and after, as in the Declaration; so that
it seems to require no more than is expressed in the second Declaration; I will
conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by Law
established. Nor can it be reasonably thought, that our Lawmakers require more
in our Conformity to the present Liturgy, than they themselves declared
concerning the Old; in these words, We are persuaded in our judgments, and we
profess it to the World, that the Book as it stood before established by Law,
does not contain in it any thing contrary to the Word of God, or to sound
Doctrine, or which a godly man may not with a good Conscience use and submit
unto, or which is not fairly defensible against any that shall oppose the same,
if it shall be allowed such just and favorable Construction, as in common
equity ought to be allowed to all humane Writings; especially such as are set
forth by authority, and even to the very best Translations of the Holy
Scripture it self. Now if Dissenters would use this Candor, in judging of those
things prescribed to be used for Uniformity sake, they might no doubt declare
their unfeigned Assent and Consent unto them. But Mr. Baxter puts all out of
doubt, that the Act requires more than a bare Assent to the Use of the
Common Prayers, etc. Because the House of Lords added to another Bill, which
was brought into their House, a Proviso, that the Declaration should be
understood but as obliging men to the use of it; and the House of Commons
refusing at a conference about it, they gave in such reasons against that Sense
and Proviso to the Lords, upon which they did acquiesce and cast it out. If so,
the Bishops in the House of Lords were more your friends than the Commons. 2.
It is fit we should unfeignedly approve of those Services which we offer to
Almighty God, and not barely submit to them as to burdens. 3. Much less, if our
judgments tell us they are sinful; or, 4. To use them as the Pharisees did their
Prayers for mischievous designs. 5. The Papists are not the only men that have
their Emissaries, who serve themselves into such Assemblies as they approve not
of; that they may have better opportunities to prepare the Minds of men for,
and to serve the occasions of doing mischief.

These, and some other such might be the weighty Considerations which Mr.
Calamy said, Apol. against Burton.
prevailed with him and many of his Brethren, for their so late laying down the
Common Prayer; and for these reasons, many would still yield a feigned and
partial submission to the use of some parts of it, that they might have
advantages to destroy the whole: And certain it is, that such Conformists draw
more prejudices on the Church, than the Non-Conformists can do. There was
therefore great reason for all this Caution, that men might not mock God, nor
delude their Superiors in things that concerned his public Worship, and his
Churches peace. And I fear that they who cannot serve God unfeignedly in the
Communion of our Church, will do it but hypocritically any where else.

And lastly, I have heard concerning the pretended Proviso that the Commons
answered, that they had expressed the Obligation, to be only to the use of
things prescribed so plainly, that it needed no further explanation, with which
the Lords were satisfied.

I conclude this with a Direction of Mr. Baxter,. 27. of his Directory. If any
impose an ambiguous Oath, and refuse to explain it, and require you only to
take it in those words, and leave you to your own sense. If a lawful Magistrate
command it, or the interest of the Church or State require it; I see not but he
may take it on Condition, that in the plain and proper sense of the words, the
Oath be lawful, and that he openly profess to take it in that sense. And Q.
152. he determines, that it is lawful to profess or subscribe our Assent and
Consent to humane Writings, which we judge to be true and good, according to
its measure of Truth and Goodness; as if Church-confessions that are sound, be
offered for our consent; we may say or subscribe, I hold all the Doctrine in
this Book to be true and good. And this he cannot deny of the things prescribed
to be used by the Liturgy. And if as Mr. Baxter says, the presence of
Godfathers, who hear the Charge concerning the Education of Children, implies
their consent: So does the presence of such as come to our Congregations to
Worship God according to the Liturgy, imply their Assent and Consent to the
same. This is a real, and that which is required, is but a verbal Declaration
of our Assent; So much of Assent, etc. in general.

P. 160. Mr. Baxter insists upon some particulars, unto which the
Non-Conformists cannot give their Assent: The first is, the Rules given (in the
Rubric) to know when the moveable Feasts, and Holy Days begin. Where it is
said, that Easterday on which the rest depend, is always the first Sunday after
the first Full Moon, which happens next after the 21. of March. To which I
answer, that this being a general Rule, it may be allowed to have some
exception. 2. The Rubric does not say, a Rule, but Rules, in the Plural. Now,
though this Rule be defective, yet Mr. Baxter grants there is another
subjoyned, which is more perfect, and the practice of the Church guides us in
following that Rule which is perfect. So that where the first Rule fails, the
defect is to be supplied by the second: And then the defect never coming into
practice, our Assent to it is not required, being limited to the Use of things
only. And Mr. Baxter might have as well objected against the Almanac, which
says, February has 28. days, when as it is afterward intimated, it has
sometimes 29. days. So that this Objection is frivolous, and serves only to
show that the Non-Conformists find great want of more substantial reasons
against Conformity, while they catch at such Shadows as this.

P. 162. We Assent to approve of, and Consent to these words in the Preface; We
are fully persuaded in our Judgments, and we here profess it to the World, that
the Book as it stood before established by Law, does not contain in it any
thing contrary to the Word of God, etc. Where Mr Baxter omits those Proviso's,
which in his own Judgment (as has been showed) would make such a Profession
lawful, viz. If it be allowed such just and favorable Construction, as in
common equity ought to be allowed to all humane Writings; especially such as
are set forth by authority, and even to the very best Translation of the Holy
Scripture it self. This is not heartily done.

But Mr. Baxter is guilty of another wilful mistake in this particular, greater
than the former, when he says, we Assent and Consent, and approve of these
words in the Preface; whereas he well knows our Assent to the words there
mentioned is not required nor could be intended; for it is only a profession of
our Superiors that were then in Being, what their Judgment and Belief was
concerning the Old Common Prayer Book, and if we think charitably of them as we
ought to do, (that they meant as they spoke) this is all that is required of
the Subscribers to Assent unto, if the Preface come under the Act for
Conformity. And therefore to say no worse, Mr. Baxter very inconsiderately
says, p. 164. These things we must approve in the foresaid approbation of all
things in the Old Common Prayer Book.

3. Mr. Baxter does very ill to recount those mistranslations in the Old Book,
which are amended in the New Book of Common Prayer, whereby our Assent to it is
much more facile, though (under the Proviso's before mentioned) as our
Superiors thought them defensible. So many pious men (in the account of all
the Non-Conformists) did subscribe unto the Old Book, as containing nothing
contrary to the word of God. And when our Assent, etc. is required only to the
New Book; as it stands amended, there is no fear of our being required to
Assent to the Old Book and its Imperfections; which yet Mr. Baxter insinuates
as if it were included under this Declaration in the Preface, and did concern
the present Conformists, which Mr. Baxter knows to be false, and contrary to
the end of such alterations, as well as to the meaning of that profession in
the Preface. As to that Translation of Ps. 105.28. which in our present Liturgy
is, They were not obedient to his Word; and in the New Translation, They
rebelled not against his Word; which Mr. Baxter says are clear contrary: It
will not appear to be so, if it be considered that in the Translation used in
the Liturgy, which is according to the Septuagint, the Arabic, Syriack,
Ethiopick, and many Latin Copies; the Psalmist is understood to speak of the
Egyptians, who, notwithstanding the wonders done upon them, were not obedient
to the Word of God, whereas others understanding the Verb to refer to Moses and
Aaron, or as Junius and Tremelius understand it, to the Signs and Wonders which
God commanded against the Egyptians, Translate it, they rebelled not against
his Word; both which Interpretations are true and agreeable to the History, and
therefore (if Mr. Baxter could have given them a favorable construction, as
was desired by his Superiors) he would not have said they were clearly
contrary. The same answers may serve to the exception against the Collects of
the Old Book, which for several days together used the words this day, which is
now altered in the New Book into this time, which is the same with day in a
large sense. But little reason have they to object against any Words or Phrases
used in our Liturgy; who are still fond of Singing Psalms according to the
Translation of Sternhold and Hopkins, far more defective than any in the
Liturgy.

The next Objection is concerning the reading of some part of the Apocrypha,
concerning which, I answer in general; that the Church has sufficiently
distinguished in her Articles and Homilies, as well as in the Liturgy it self,
between the Canonical and Apocryphal Books. 2. The times when the Apocrypha
Lessons are to be read, are known by the Calender to be between Sept. 28. to
November. 24.3. This is to be read only on the Week days, not on Sundays. 4. It
is granted by Mr. Baxter that the sounder Books may be read. 5. The 5 Chap. of
Tobit, and that part of the 46 Chap. of Eccles. which speaks of Samuels
Prophesying after his death are omitted. 6. The Non-Conformists think there is
Liberty granted in the Preface, to the Second Book of Homilies to change some
Lessons. But it is still Objected, that by reading of these, the Scripture is
for that time excluded. Answ. This is ill urged by those Non-Conformists, who
for many years together, omitted the Reading either of Psalms or other
Scriptures in their public, as well as private meetings, contenting themselves
with a Singing Psalm, and an Harangue of Extemporary Prayer and Preaching. 2.
Many ancient Fathers have taken pains to Translate and Expound them, and
commend them as containing many useful Moral Instructions. Ireneus, Tertullian
and others cite Bell and the Dragon as an Example for Martyrdom. Origin defended
the History of Susanna. So did St. Herom, who also propounded the History of
Judith, as an instance of Love and Courage on behalf of our Country, which may
serve as an Answer to that other Objection, that many of our Divines account
them fabulous, and to contain many untruths. And so we say still, if we take in
all the Apocrypha Writings, but deny it of those that are retained by our
Church; against which Mr. Baxter excepts. 1. That the intrails of a Fish are
said to drive away Devils, and keep them from returning, whereas Christ says,
this kind goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer. Answ. This saying of our
Savior concerning one kind, does not exclude the use of other means joined
with Prayer and Fasting, as for ought we know was here done; for the ejecting
of such evil Spirits, as affected the parties possessed with Bodily Diseases
and Infirmities, of which many instances may be given.

And why should we so limit the goodness and Power of God, as to think that if
he sent an Holy Angel for the Preservation of a good Man, (which he often did
before the coming of Christ) he could not bless any means for the effecting of
a good end. The next passage excepted against by Mr. Baxter, is that, where the
Angel says, that he was the Son of Ananias of the Tribe of Nephthali: Whereas
the Scripture frequently calls Angels by the name of such Men as they
represent, Genesis 19.12. The Angels sent down to Sodom are called Men; the Angels
that appeared at the Ascension are called Men in white Apparel; besides, these
names were assumed as significative of the end wherefore the Angel was sent:
Azarias signifying the help of God, and Ananias the Grace and Favor of God.
But it is farther Objected, that it is not appointed that the Priest shall tell
the People that those Lessons are Apocryphal, or what that word signifies.
Answ. Neither is it denied them to inform the People, as often as such Lessons
are to be read. And lastly, Mr. Baxter thinks that the chief doubt is, whether
the Calender appointing those Lessons may be consented to; which upon
supposition that those Lessons contain nothing contrary to Gods Word or sound
Doctrine, may undoubtedly be done, especially in case of Deprivation. Mr.
Baxter resolves the case thus: p. 191. That the Apocrypha is no part of the
Book to which we must Profess, Assent, Approbation and Consent, nor to which by
the Canon we must, ex animo subscribe, that there is nothing in it contrary to
the Word of God.

P. 167. Mr. Baxter resumes the business of Godfathers against which he
multiplyeth words rather than objections; as 1. That no Parent is permitted to
be Godfather to his own Child, or to speak at his Baptism, or Dedicate him, or
promise in his name, or to undertake any part of his Education. All which is
frivolous, for the Godfathers are to be Sureties, for the credibility of the
Parent as well as for the Child, and so the word Surety implies that the Parent
is the principal; and who ever thought the Church intended to exclude the
Parents Duty, to which the Law of God and Nature bind him, and from which
nothing but death can excuse him? Nor did ever any good Man think that his
procuring of Godfathers, did supersede his duty toward his Child, but that it
was his duty more especially to do what they promised in behalf of the Parents.
And though it be not expressed, that the Godfather is the Parents
Representative; yet the contrary is not employed, as Mr. Baxter says, because
(as he there says) the Parents are to procure the Godfathers, and how can Mr.
Baxter tell whether he bespeaks him to be his Representative or not? Calvin
advised the Parent to bring his Sureties with him, Epist. 302. And that they
should answer to the Interrogatories which was the practice at Geneva, and by
Beza approved in the Church of England, Quis damnare ausit? Epist. the 8. to
Grindal.

As to his demand, whether it be not enough that the Baptized Infant be the
Child of a Believing Parent? I answer, the Church thinks it sufficient in the
case of private Baptism, where no more is required; yet the Church may require
witnesses, that the Parent is such a one, under which notion they do represent
him; and for the better Assurance, the Church requires that the Godfathers
themselves be such as have received the Holy Communion, i. e. in the Language
of the Primitive Church, that they be fideles.

But he makes another Query, whether the Godfathers Act be truly the Child's in
Gods account? Answ. That Infants may be engaged in a Covenant with God, cannot
be denied. They were entered into a Covenant by Circumcision, under the Law,
Deuteronomy. 29.11.12. And for this reason, our Children may be called Holy, as entered
to a Covenant with God, and receiving the Privileges of Baptism, and fit it is
they should be early obliged to the Duties of the Covenant. And being not
capable to do this of themselves, it is requisite that some others should do it
on their behalf, with that solemnity which becomes so great an Ordinance,
Buxtorf. mentions a Susceptor at the Circumcision of Infants under the Law. And
many Divines think that Custom was practiced from, Isa. 8.2.3. of which see the
Notes of Junius and Tremelius, in Locum.

Mr. Calvin to Knox, Epist. 285. I confess that Stipulation is necessary, for
nothing is more preposterous than that those should be ingrafted into Christ's
Body, whom we may not hope to be his Disciples; wherefore if none of the
Kindred appear, that may give his Faith to the Church, and take charge of
Teaching the Child; it is but a Lusorious Action, and the Baptism is defiled.

Tertullian among the Ancients, speaks of Sureties for Children at Baptism, and
of the Three Interrogatories concerning their Belief of the Creed, Renouncing
the Devil, and the Christian-Warfare, and some think there is an Intimation of
the same, in the 1 Pet. 3.21. St. Cyprian, St. August. and many others mention
the same. The Reformed Churches have owned this Practice: The Bohemian, Geneva,
Dutch, French, and many able Divines have defended it. And it is resolved by
them that the words, I Believe, I Reneounce, etc. being a Form of words to
express the contract, do oblige the Infant, which was anciently done, alio
protestante, and therefore the question being asked of the Godfather in the
Child's behalf; do thou Believe and Renounce, and will thou be Baptized? It is
plain that the answer also is in the Child's name, and the Catechism says,
Infants are Baptized, because they Promise Faith and Repentance by their
Sureties. Now if Children may be engaged, and there be no way of doing it, but
by some others on their behalf, seeing this way of Godfathers has been used by
the Churches of God; who can doubt but that their Act may truly be accepted of
God as the Act of the Child? and when we grant that the Parent joins in the
same Act with the Godfathers, whom he procures, and may bring with him and
signify his Consent, and receive the Charge, which though it bind the
Godfathers to do their honest endeavor, yet it is more especially incumbent on
the Parent; I see no reason but we may Assent to this.

And thus, the 9. Object. that Ministers must Assent to all this Exclusion of
the Parents, and Presentation, Profession, Promise, and undertaking of the
Godfathers is answered. All this Exclusion is none at all, the Liturgy says
nothing of it; the Canon says only he shall not be urged to be present, and the
Reason is supposed; because in time the ancient Use of Godfathers would be laid
aside, which all Protestant Churches have carefully continued.

P. 169. Mr. Baxter excepts against the Rubric which says, It is certain by
Gods Word, that Children which are Baptized, dying before they commit actual
sin, are undoubtedly saved. Answ. 1. This being a Rubric, and never coming to
Use in the public Worship; it cannot reasonably be thought to be imposed as an
Article of Faith on others; but only as the Judgment of our Superiors, with
whom, for ought I perceive, Mr. Baxter is more offended than with that
Doctrine: For p. 172. N. 12. When young unstudied Men (as he calls those of the
Convocation, who declare this Opinion, p. 172. N. 12.) have in this point
attained to an undoubted certainty, which their wiser Seniors cannot attain, it
behooves them to convince us of the Truth of their Inspiration or special
Indowments, either by a proportionable excellency above us in other things; or
by some Miracles or Testimonies from Heaven. Thus did such wiser Seniors in our
Saviors time require a Sign from Heaven, for Confirmation of his Doctrine,
though he taught nothing but what was Consonant to the Law and the Prophets. He
is angry with them for not Citing one word of God in the Rubric to show this
certainty: Whereas had Mr. Baxter been employed in such a work, he could have
quoted an Hundred at least, viz. all those places which speak of Baptism for
remission of Sins, of Ingrafting and Burying with Christ, of being Baptized
into one Body, by one Spirit and the like, Acts 2.37. Acts 22.16. Romans 4.11. 1
Cor. 1.15. 1 Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.27. Ephesians. 5.26. Col. 2.12. Titus 3.5. Romans 6.3.
1 Pet. 3.21. All and each of which are as plain Scripture-Proofs of the
Salvation of Baptized Infants, as any that he produces for their Baptism; yet
he calls it clear Scripture Proof.

Mr. Baxter is the first that has accused the Church of England of Instituting
a second Covenant of Grace. But, how impertinently, will appear from the
distinction (which he mentions) of a Sacrament out of the Church Catechism,
viz. An outward and visible Sign, of an inward and Spiritual Grace, given to
us, Ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof. But First, here is no intimation of any inward or
Spiritual Grace, given to us by this outward Sign. Nor Secondly, is it
pretended that the Cross is Ordained by Christ himself; much less that it is a
means whereby we receive that Grace. Or, 4. A Pledge to Assure us thereof. And
therefore Mr. Baxter does not well to question, whether the Cross be not made a
Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace, or so very near it as to have the greatest
part of that Sacramental Nature, when no one part of the definition agrees
with it. And it is confessed by Mr. Baxter, that the Liturgy uses not the
Cross as a part of Baptism, but as a thing added after it; and therefore not
as Mr. Baxter says, even in our Covenanting with God; for that Stipulation on
the Child's part is past before: All that is mentioned in the Office of Baptism
is, that the Child is Signed with the Sign of the Cross, in token that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed, etc. So that it puts such as have been
formerly Baptized, in mind of that Duty which is incumbent on them, and to be a
witness to every one of the Engagements that lay on him. And that the Cross may
be thus used, will follow from Mr. Baxters Concession, in the Third part of his
Christian Directory. Q. 113. Where he allows of the Use of the Cross before
Heathen, as a signification that we are not ashamed of a Crucified Savior:
Now, if this Use of the Cross be forbidden by the second Commandment as a
Transient Image; or if it be a Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace, it is so
when used at other times as well as after the Sacrament of Baptism. The time or
the place wherein it is used does not alter the nature of the thing. If
therefore he grants such a Use of the Cross, as St. August. de Civitate Dei,
and other Ancients mention, as in open Indication to Heathens, that we are not
ashamed of a Crucified Christ; and in civil Uses also, it may be as innocently
used after Baptism, to the same end. And it may be observed, that in
Administering the Sacrament of Baptism, it is said by the Priest, I Baptize
thee, etc. where he acts as Gods Minister, but in the Admission of the Child,
as a Member of the Congregation it is said, We receive this Child, which cannot
be thought any part of that Sacrament. But let us hear how Mr. Baxter resolves
the Question, 49. p. 123. of Direct. May one Offer his Child to be Baptized
with the Sign of the Cross, or the Use of Chrysme, the white Garment, Milk and
Honey, or Exorcisme (as among the Lutherans) who takes these to be unlawful
things? Answ. When he cannot lawfully have better, he may and must Offer his
Child to them that will so Baptize him, rather than to worse, or not at all;
because Baptism is Gods Ordinance, and the Child's privilege, and the Sin is
the Ministers and not his. Another Man's sinful Mode, will not justify the
neglect of our Duty; else we might not join in Prayer or Sacraments, in which
the Minister modally singneth, that is with none. -- The Parent may make known
in such Cases, that it is Baptism he desires, and that he disalloweth the
manner, which he accounts sinful, and then he is no consenter to it. But
where the Law, or Scandal, or greater Inconveniences forbid him, he is not to
make his Profession openly in the Congregation; but in that prudent manner
which beseems a sober peaceable Person, whether the Minister in private, or
to his neighbors in Converse. Now when Mr. Baxter grants a Man may thus Offer
his Child to Baptism, where he supposes many unlawful things are Administered;
he does very ill to amuse the Laity with the bare Sign of the Cross.

Yet I think if we take in the Doctrine and Practice of the Church, I may
declare that it is certain by Gods Word, that Children ought to be Baptized:
And it is observable that the Salvation of Baptized Infants dying, etc. was as
generally Believed, as their right to Baptism. The Council of Milevis, which
was Confirmed by the Sixth general Council, delivers this not only as their own
Opinion, but as a Rule of the Catholic Church, C. 2. And St. August. De
Peccat. and Mer. l. 3. c. 5. says, That of Old, the whole Church did firmly
hold that Children do obtain Remission of Original Sin by the Baptism of
Christ; it would be tedious to quote the authority of the Fathers, who
generally hold that the guilt contracted by the First Adam, is done away in
Baptism, which Ingrafts us into the Second Adam. This was the Doctrine of our
Church ever since the Reformation, agreeing with the Augustan, Saxon,
Helvetick, Palatine, French and Scottish Confessions. So that generally all
that Assent to the Protestant Doctrine, do Assent to the Truth of this Rubric,
and seeing it is certain by the Word of God, that Baptism was Instituted for
the Remission of Sins, and to be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace; seeing it is
certain by the Word of God, as Mr. Baxter Asserts, that Infants have a right to
Baptism; I see no cause why Mr. Baxter may not Assent to this Rubric.

Our Wiser Seniors ought to deal so heartily with young and unstudied Divines,
as to Interpret a Rubric occasionally delivered by them agreeably greeably to
those other places, wherein this Doctrine of the Church to which they had
formerly subscribed, is purposely handled and explained; now, Article 25.
concerning the Sacraments, the Church holds, That in such only as worthily
receive the same, they have a wholesome Effect and Operation. And Article 27.
Those who receive Baptism rightly, are thereby, as by an Instrument, Grafted
into the Church, and obtain Remission of Sins. Now as this may probably be the
meaning of the Rubric; so it is the sense of all sober Protestants, that all
such Infants as are duly Baptized, are admitted into the Covenant of Grace, and
are in a State of Salvation. And this the Church of God has always taught, that
none shall perish for the Imputation of the Sin of the First Adam, that are
Baptized into the second Adam; and unless Infants that dye shortly after their
Baptism have this benefit by it, we may turn Anabaptists, and deny it to them
without any Injury.

But it is objected that neither Rubric, nor Canon, except from Baptism and
certainty of Salvation, any Children of Turks, Infidels, etc. Answ. Mr. Baxter
grants that as under the Old Testament, Abraham might cause the Children born
in his House, or bought with his Money to be Circumcised; so Christian
Proprietors may by themselves, or other Godfathers, Offer such Children to
Baptism, and the benefits thereof. And Fulgentius de Vera praed. l. 1. c. 12.
says, that if such Infants die soon after Baptism, they are heirs of God, and
Coheirs with Christ. Favores sunt ampliandi.

P. 174. It is Objected, that the Ministers subscribing to use no other Form in
the Administration of the Sacraments, than what is enjoined by the Book of
Common Prayer, the Non-Conformists cannot Assent to it, lest they should refuse
from Baptism the Children of true Christians, who will not procure Godfathers,
nor submit to the Sign of the Cross; for the Priest consents, says Mr.
Baxter, p. 177. Not to Baptize them, who dare not receive it with the Use of
the Cross and Godfathers. Answ. That as the Practice of our Church in one case
of necessity, when Children are like to dye, shows that they approve of
Baptism, without either Godfathers or the Sign of the Cross; so it argues that
they do approve of it in other cases, where no contempt or scandal does appear,
(as where Godfathers may not be had, and it may be dangerous to use the Cross
as in the late times of confusion) and those persons have a very low esteem of
the necessity and benefit of the Sacraments, as do withdraw themselves and
their Children from them, merely on a Ceremony used in the Administration.

But the great fear of the Non-Conformists is, lest this Use of the Cross be a
second Sacrament of the Covenant of Grace made by Man, added to Baptism, -- and
the rather because it is the Use of an Image, though transient in Gods Worship,
and to such high ends, p. 180. n. 5. and the question here, is whether the
Cross be not here made (not only a Sacrament in a larger Sense, as Ordination
and Matrimony may be called Sacraments, but even) a Sacrament of the Covenant
of Grace. Answ. I perceive Mr. Baxter is none of the young unstudied Divines in
raising Scruples and Controversy, which he has as well multiplied in number,
as aggravated in the nature of them.

It is yet a vainer Cavil which Mr. Baxter has against those Words in the
Exhortation before the Communion; That no Man should come to the Holy Communion
without a full Trust in Gods Mercy, and with a quiet Conscience: Any Man that
shall read the whole Period, will find this to be the sense of it; that because
it is the duty of every one to come to that Holy Sacrament with a full Trust in
Gods Mercy, and a quiet Conscience; Therefore such whose fears are great, and
their Faith but weak, whereby they might be hindered from not Communicating at
all, or not with comfort; should consult their own, or some other able Pastor
for satisfying their doubts, removing their fears, and strengthening their Faith
in such a measure, as that they may receive it for the better, and not for the
worse. If a serious Christian should complain to Mr. Baxter of the weakness of
his Faith, and some troubles of Mind, I doubt not but that after Ghostly
Counsel and Instruction, he would advise the same method, viz. to frequent the
Holy Communion for the increase of his comfort, and strengthening of his Faith.
Suppose the case stood thus, That one who is afraid of Communicating with such
as he thinks to be wicked Persons, or to receive the Sacrament kneeling, should
consult with Mr. Baxter, whether he may Communicate according to the Order
prescribed in the Liturgy: I am much deceived if Mr. Baxter could not give him
sufficient reason to lay aside those doubts, and rather than to neglect that
Ordinance, to submit to the Orders of the Church, and receive that Sacrament
kneeling, and if it be no Sin to receive it, it is none to give it to one that
kneels; nor is it any way inconvenient for scrupulous persons to seek
Resolution and Consolation from some able Minister of the Church.

P. 184. N. 15. Mr. Baxter observes, that by the Liturgy every Parishioner is
to Communicate twice a year; the Rubric says three times in the year, whereof
Easter is to be one. As for the compelling Men so to do, that is, as he
observes, by Statute, and therefore it concerns not the Conforming Ministers;
so that this will not amount to what Mr. Baxter reports, as if it were the
Voice of the Minister. -- Receive the Sacrament, or lie in Goal. But Mr. Baxter
ought to have understood this Rubric, cum grano Salis, if he had so much left;
for it could not be strictly understood of every Parishioner, but only of such
as should be judged fit and duly qualifyed; not to every Child, or ignorant
Person, seeing it directs that such as are admitted to that Sacrament, should
be able to give an account of the Catechism, and be actually Confirmed, or
desirous of Confirmation.

And the Curate is to have notice at least the day before who intend to
Communicate, and if any of them be a notorious evil-liver, or have done any
wrong to his Neighbor by Word or Deed, whereby the Congregation is offended,
or if the Curate perceive any to live in malice and hatred, he may not only
admonish them to forbear the Lords Table, but not suffer them to be partakers
thereof, till he know them to be reconciled.

But into what deplorable times are we fallen, that our highest Privilege
should be accounted a great Grievance, and when all things are prepared and we
are Invited in the Name of Christ to come to his Supper, we do rather choose
Imprisonment and Goals, rather than the Table of the Lord? The First Christians
made this Sacrament their Daily-Bread, which Devout Practice was continued for
many years, till as Devotion waxed colder, they Communicated only once a Week,
or on Sundays and Holydays at most; at last they came to once a Year, until it
was Decreed by some Councils, that they should receive at least three times. By
the Liturgy of Edward the VI. the Clergy in Collegiate Churches and Cathedrals
were to receive Daily; and by the present Liturgy every Sunday. But that
Heavenly Ordinance, which the Primitive Christians begged on their Knees, and
which is a most excellent means to Unite us to Christ, and to one another, is
despised and made a ground of Strife and Division. And when, notwithstanding
the pious Provision made by the Church to qualify its Members for a due and
frequent Participation of that Blessing; and the Penalties provided by Law for
such as neglect this duty, there is so miserable a neglect of it; we may justly
fear, that if these methods be disused, we shall return to the practice of the
late times of Reformation, where that Sacred Ordinance was in very many
Parishes wholly neglected for some years together.

P. 187. Mr. Baxter excepts against those words in the Office for Burial.
Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God, to take to himself the Soul of our
Dear Brother here departed. Which he takes in a strict sense, as implying the
Salvation of the Deceased, when it may be understood only in a larger sense;
that as the Body returns to the Earth, so does the Soul return to God that gave
it to be by him disposed of. And therefore the Church says only of the Soul,
that it is here departed, that is, gone from the Body unto God the Judge of all
Men; and when at the Interring of the Body, it is said, In hope of the
Resurrection to Eternal Life, it is not said particularly of his Resurrection,
but more generally that there shall be a Resurrection of our Bodies to Eternal
Life in the sense as it is taken by Expositors of the Creed, that there shall
be a Resurrection of our Bodies to Eternal Life; when they that have done well
come forth to the Resurrection of the Just, and they that have done evil to
Condemnation.

Of this as we express a sure and certain hope for our selves, and all that do
depart in the true Faith; so, when we apply it particularly to the party
Deceased, we say only our hope is that he rests in Christ. And Christian
Charity teaches us to hope the best of all that dye in the Communion of the
Church. For as those that dye Excommunicate, the Office of Burial is denied to
them; And seeing Mr. Baxter pleads, that some upright Christians in Phrensies,
Melancholies and Distractions make away themselves, of whom he would have us to
entertain this hope: It would puzle a more charitable Man than he, to resolve
of any particular Man that dies in the Communion of the Church, that there is
no hope of his Salvation; and it is better to err on the right hand in Judging
Charitably, than through Pride or Malice to condemn a Brother; our Savior
forbidding us to Judge that we be not Judged.

His next Exception is against these Words, We give thee hearty thanks for that
it has pleased thee to deliver this our Brother, out of the miseries of this
sinful World. Now it being certain to us, that Death does put an end to a State
of Sin and Misery, to which all are subject in this Life; we ought doubtless to
give God thanks for that which we know to be a Mercy, and to leave the Final
Determination of his Soul, (which is a secret unto us) to God. There was no Sin
in Jobs blessing the Name of the Lord; when by a severe Providence he took away
his Children amidst their Mirth, not in another passage which is used also in
this Office, and spoken by the Apostle concerning the Corinthians: Thanks be to
God who has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ; and when we
see our Friends and Relations peaceably departed; we may bless God for his
Mercy, in delivering them from the evils which they suffered, and hope that he
has given them rest in Christ; and we do but our duty to God, and show our
Charity to our Brother in so doing.

P. 190. The Surplice is accounted by some Non-Conformists to be unlawful, and
therefore they cannot Assent to the Use of it: For which no reason is given,
only Mr. Baxter says, If a Man mistakingly should take the Use of the Surplice
to be sinful, he should not therefore be silenced. Answ. If he do mistake, he
ought to do it modestly, suspecting his own Judgment which he will find to be
contrary to that liberty which Christ has purchased for us, that to the pure
all things are pure, and contrary to the Practice of Primitive times, wherein
the White Garment was in Use, by the Testimonies of St. Hierom, Chrysostom and
Augustine, contrary to the Judgment of the most Learned Protestants, and of Mr.
Baxter himself. In his Five Disputations, p. 409. Some decent habit is
necessary, the Magistrate, Ministers, or Associated Pastors, must determine
what -- if they tie all to one Habit (and suppose it were an indecent habit)
yet this is but an imprudent Use of Power, it is a thing within the Magistrates
reach, he does not an Aliene Work, but his own Work amiss. And therefore the
thing in it self being lawful, I would Obey him, and use that Garment if I
could not be dispensed with. Yea, though secundarily the whiteness be to
signify purity, and so it be made a Teaching Sign, yet would I obey. Now if any
Man against all this Authority and Arguments of Mr. Baxter and others, should
still think the Surplice unlawful, it is better that he should be silenced,
than the Churches Peace and Order be disturbed, or Ancient Laws abrogated, as
often as some (mistaking) think them unlawful; it is disobedience which the
Church does censure, and the Law punish. The Surplice is but a Ceremony, which
ought not to weigh down the Duty of Obedience.

P. 191. Mr. Baxter grants, that if the Athanasian Creed be referred to the
Doctrine of the Trinity, it would not be excepted against. For he takes it to
be the best Explication of the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity, which in so short
a Sum is extant in the Church: So that by requiring Assent and Consent
thereunto, the Church of England has secured her self against any suspicion of
Socinian or Anti-Trinitarian Doctrine, whereof Mr. Baxter and others frequently
and falsely accuse the Conformists. That which cannot be Assented to, is the
Damnatory Sentences in that Creed; as,

First, Where it is said in the beginning, Whosoever will be saved, before all
things it is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith. -- And the Catholic
Faith is this, etc. And in the end, This is the Catholic Faith, which except a
Man believe faithfully he cannot be saved. Answer, if our Assent be required
only to the Use of this Creed, and not to a belief of the Truth of every part
of it, the controversy will be at an end.

Secondly, The Belief of things as necessary to Salvation, is granted by
Non-conformists to be not an Assent to the several Phrases and obscure Words;
but to the general sense contained in them. Now the sense of our Church in
proposing this Creed, may be judged by the Use which she makes of the Apostles
Creed, not only in the daily Profession of it, but in the Office of Baptism, as
containing all the necessary points of Faith, into which we are Baptized: And
in the Catechism as containing all the Articles of the Christian Faith, which
does show that no more is required as necessary to Salvation, than what is
contained in the Apostles Creed.

Thirdly, In this Creed some things are propounded as necessary points of
Faith, which Men of weak judgments may apprehend, as that we Worship one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity. Other things are for a clearer explication of
that Doctrine, and vindication of it from the errors that were then risen in the
Church, as the Arrians and Nestorians who erred concerning the Divinity of
Christ and his two Natures; which begin thus: For there is one Person of the
Father, etc. After which follows the necessary Doctrine again: So that in all
things, as is aforesaid, the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is to be
Worshipped. He therefore that will be saved must thus think of the Trinity. So
that the Doctrine of the Trinity is that Faith which is proposed as necessary
to Salvation. I know the exception of many against this Creed is in relation to
the Heathen, who seem by it to be excluded from Salvation. In which respect, I
suppose it is that Mr. Baxter says, p. 191. That some R. Reverend Conformists
do profess that those Sentences are untrue, and not to be approved; and he
instanceth somewhere in Mr. Chillingworths refusal to subscribe it. But if this
be the ground of the Exception, I conceive that the generality of the
Non-conformists who maintain the same Opinion, which is consonant to the
Scriptures, and to the Assemblies Confession of Faith; to which Mr. Baxter also
has declared his Assent in this particular, will not oppose. For in the
Assemblies Confession, C. 10. Article 4. concerning effectual calling, they
say, That Men not professing the Christian Religion, cannot be saved in any way
whatsoever, be they never so diligent to frame their Lives according to the
Light of Nature, and the Law of that Religion they do profess, and to assert
and maintain that they may, is very pernicious, and to be detested. And I know
some Non-conformists have lately blamed some Conformists for seeming to incline
to the contrary Opinion. Which, if this be sense of the Creed our Church does
explode; yet some Non-conformists think that by holding the Doctrine of the
Athanasian Creed, they do not judge the Heathen World, and that they dobut not,
but in every nation he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted
of him; so that this obloquie is silenced. But it is most probable, that
Athanasius intended the Explanatory part of the Creed against the Arrians and
other Heretics in the Church, who if they denied the Divinity of Christ, and
dyed in that error; who can think they can be saved? seeing they make Christ a
mere Creature, and overthrow the Doctrine of our Redemption by him: But that he
should condemn all that have a true, though but a weak Faith in the Holy
Trinity, and cannot comprehend the manner of the Eternal Generation of the Son,
the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and the Co-equality of the Trinity, cannot be
thought to have been the Mind of Athanasius.

P. 192. N. 20. The Liturgy says, All Priests and Deacons are to say daily the
Morning and Evening Prayer privately or openly, not being let by sickness or
some other urgent cause etc. Answ. That the Primitive Christians did meet
daily, not only for public Prayers, but to receive the Sacrament is believed;
and that it is our duty to Pray Morning and Evening cannot be denied, and what
should hinder, but that such as are specially devoted to the Service of God,
should Pray openly with the people, if not reasonably hindered, or at least pray
privately for them? there are many that do their duty herein, and if all did,
it would be better with us; because all Men do not perform their Baptismal
Vows, is it fit that none such should be made? we see this duty is performed in
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and in many other places, where there is a
liberal maintenance provided for the Priests and Deacons, where though one only
do Officiate, yet all those that are present may say the daily Prayers as the
Liturgy requires, which is another frivolous Objection of Mr. Baxters, p. 192.
n. 3.

The next is a Calumny against the whole Liturgy, viz. that the Prayers are
disorderly and defective, not Formed according to the Order of Matter, nor of
the Lords Prayer; but like an immethodical Sermon which is unsuitable to the
High Subjects, and Honorable Work of Holy Worship, and that the Non-conformists
have Offered (when it shall be well accepted) to give in a Catalogue of the
disorders and defects of the Liturgy. But all this notwithstanding, they think
it lawful to Use the Liturgy in Obedience or for Unity, or when no better may
be Used: It is something to go thus far, but if they would impartially consider
the defects and confusions which were in the Directory, as it has been
considered by Doctor Hammond, or in Mr. Baxters Eight days exploit for a more
correct Nepenthes, and shall on the other side read that account which Mr.
Comber, and others have given of the Methodical order and dependence of the
several Prayers and Offices, the Grave and Scriptural Phrases and Expressions
in the Liturgy; he may perceive that this is fitter to guide the Devotion of
the Universal Church, than those other are for Country Conventicles.

P. 194. He excepts against the Preface to the Book of Ordination, where it is
said, that -- It is evident to all Men diligently reading Holy Scripture, and
ancient Authors, that from the Apostles time there have been these Orders in
Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as several Offices. Answ. I shall
not trouble my Readers with the Arguments of Learned Men, for the Order of
Bishops in the Church ever since the Apostles days as distinct from Presbyters;
much less shall I repeat those uncomely Reflections, which Mr. Baxter has made
on Diocesan Bishops in both his late Books. It may suffice in Answer to this
Objection, that Mr. Baxter has been formerly of a contrary persuasion, I do
not mean only when he was Ordained by a Bishop, and did, or ought to swear
Canonical Obedience to him, as his Lawful Governor; but in his more mature and
serious Age, when he had studied the controversy; I mean in his Christian
Directory, p. 127. part 7. Where having proved the particular Orders of
Presbyters, and Deacons: He gives his reasons for a larger Episcopacy, as the
Margin tells you. And N. 4. Thus he says, -- Besides this, in the Apostles
days, there were under Christ in the Universal Church, many general Officers
that had the care of Governing, and Overseeing Churches up and down, and were
fixed by stated relation unto none. Such were the Apostles, Evangelists, and
many of their helpers in their days. And most Christian Churches think that
though the Apostolical, extraordinary Gifts, Privileges and Offices cease, yet
Government being an ordinary part of their work, the same Forms of Government,
which Christ and the Holy Ghost did settle in the first Age, were settled for
all following Ages, though not with the same extraordinary gifts and adjuncts:
Because, 1. We read of the settling of that Form, viz. General Officers as well
as Particular, but we never read of any Abolition, Discharge, or Cessation of
the Institution. 2. Because if we affirm a Cessation without proof, we seem to
accuse God of Mutability, as settling one Form of Government for one Age only,
and no longer. 3. And we leave room for audacious Wits accordingly to question
other Gospel-Institutions, as Pastors, Sacraments, etc. and to say that they
were but for an Age. 4. It was General Officers that Christ promised to be with
to the end of the World. Matthew. 28.20. Now this will hold true or not (says Mr.
Baxter) If not, then this general Ministry is to be numbered with humane
Additions to be next treated of. If it do, then there is another part of the
Form of Government proved to be of Divine Institution: I say not another
Church, but another part of the Government of both Churches, Universal and
Particular; because such General Officers are so in the Universal, as to have a
general Oversight of the particular: As an Army is Headed only by the General
himself, and a Regiment by the Colonel, and a Troop by the Captain, but the
General Officers of the Army, as the Lieutenants General, the Majors General,
etc. are under the Lord General, in and over the Army, and have a general
oversight of the particular Bodies, (Regiments and Troops) Now if this be the
Instituted Form of Christ's Church Government, that he himself rule absolutely
as General, and that he have some General Officers under him, (not any one
having the charge of the whole, but in the whole unfixedly, or as they
voluntarily part their Provinces) and that each particular Church have their
own proper Pastor, one or more; then who can say, that no Form of Church
Government is of Divine appointment or command? So far Mr. Baxter, with whom I
find other Non-conformists to agree in the Notion of Diocesan Bishops; which is
enough not only to confute this Objection against the Order of Bishops, but all
that Mr. Baxter has said in his late Writing, against the Constitution of
National Churches, and the Government of Diocesans, with so much partiality and
passion. And though Mr. Baxter deny it here, that having diligently read the
Holy Scriptures, and Ancient Authors, yet Three Orders and Offices are not
evident to him; yet it is evident, he has proved it solidly enough, even from
the Scripture alone, to which whoever shall join the Practice and Testimony of
the Primitive Church, as a help to explain the sense of the Scripture, must
needs be persuaded of the Truth of these Three Orders in the Church of Christ;
and therefore this Objection, from the Preface to the Book of Ordination, is of
no weight.

In all the fardle of Mr. Baxters impertinencies, there is not a more trifling
Objection than that which follows against the Bishops inviting the people in
the Name of God to come forth, and show what Crime or Impediment they know in
the Persons to be Ordained, p. 196. For seeing no Person is to be Ordained
without a Title to some Cure; seeing there are solemn days set apart for
Ordination, and Prayers ordered to be Used the preceding Weekdays, for Gods
Blessing on that Ordinance; seeing every Person is to produce Testimonials
under the hands of Three Persons, to whom he is known, of his Life and
Conversation; seeing any person may, if he please, be present at the
Ordination, and the Bishop may personally enquire into his Ministerial
abilities: I know not what further caution is necessary than to pronounce a
Liberty to the people, who generally meet on that occasion in the greatest
Congregations, and in public Places, to come forth and show if they know any
impediment in the Person to be Ordained; upon which, I my self have known
several Persons to be repulsed in the Face of the Congregation; and when the
Ordained Person is to continue a Deacon, for a year before he is admitted a
Presbyter, the people have a competent time to inform the Bishop of any Crime
that they know by him, which may render him an unfit Person, without such a
call from the Bishop; which is but Abundans Cautela.

P. 197. He objects against these words, in the Form of Consecration. Receive
the Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Priest, etc. The doubt is, says
Mr. Baxter, whether this be not an abuse of the words which Christ himself, or
his Apostles used, and so not to be Assented to. Now Mr. Baxter grants that
Christ or his Apostles used these words; that our Savior used them, and when
is very observable. It was after his Resurrection, and before his Ascension,
that our Savior endowed his Apostles with this Ministerial Power, saying unto
them, Receive the Holy Ghost, which could not be meant of any extraordinary
Power of Tongues and Miracles, which were not given till Christ was first
glorified, when the Day of Pentecost was fully come. The Power therefore
conveyed by these words, was an Authorizing of them to the ordinary work of the
Ministry, as the following words do enforce; whose Sins ye remit, they are
remitted; and this Power Mr. Baxter grants to belong to every Minister: That
the Apostles of our Lord did use the same words, is probable from that
expression of St. Paul, Acts, 20.28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the
Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you over seers. And Mr. Baxter
complains, that too little notice is taken of the Holy Ghosts setting Pastors
over the Flocks, which the Scripture mentions, p. 310. Which is a conveying
of that Authority, which Christ at his Ascension left to his Church; he gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, etc. for the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
v. 13. Till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, etc.

P. 198. He excepts against the Oath of the Bishops to their Metropolitan, and
p. 199. the Oath of the Priests and Deacons for Canonical Obedience to their
Diocesan; against which he gives no reason, but argues negatively, that it was
not Instituted by Christ or his Apostles. But Mr. Baxter having granted a like
Sub-ordination of Offices in the Church, as in an Army; I see no Reason, but
that when authority injoyns it: as a Captain may swear Obedience to his
Colonel, and he to his Lieutenant General, or Major Generals; so may the
Presbiter to his Diocesan, and the Diocesan to his Metropolitan. But Mr. Baxter
has more plainly resolved this doubt, in answer to Q. 152. in his Directory,
part the 3d. p. 181. the Question is, -- May we lawfully swear Obedience in all
lawful things to Usurpers, or to our lawful Pastors? To which under N. 3. he
thus answers, The old Non-conformists, who thought the English Prelacy an
unlawful Office; yet maintained that it is lawful to take the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, because they thought it was imposed by the King and Laws; and that
we swore to them not as Officers, claiming a Divine Right in the Spiritual
Government, but as Ordinaries or Officers made by the King, N. B. to exercise
so much of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under him as he can delegate. -- And if
Prelacy were proved never so unlawful, no doubt but by the Kings command we may
swear, or perform formal Obedience to a Prelate, as he is the Kings Officer. Of
the Non-conformists Judgment in this, read Bradshaw against Can. This
concession of Mr. Baxter will overthrow that, wherein he places the force of
the Objection, viz. That the Ordinary is not only the Bishop, but also the
Chancellor, Officials, etc. because they are the Kings Officers. And, if the
Chancellor do invade the Office of the Ministry in Excommunications and
Absolutions; Mr. Baxter well observes, p. 202. It is not justified by the
Bishops themselves. I wonder how any right Presbyterian can except against one
Lay-Chancellour in a Diocese, who would set up one or more Un-ordained Ruling
Elders in every Parish; and though Mr. Baxter be not through Paced in this
point, yet in his Tract of Ordination, he would have the Magistrate to
authorize a Lay-Officer, well like to our Chancellours, p. 299. He directs the
Magistrate to appoint an able Godly moderate Minister in each County, or half,
or quarter, to see the Pastors do their duty, not having Episcopal Power to
suspend or excommunicate them; but let every Visitor have an Agent of the
Magistrates joined with him, Armed with Authority to convent the Ministers, and
examine Witnesses, and to do what more the Chief Magistrate shall see meet, so
that still these two Visitors go together, and let the Civil Visitor have all
the Coercive Power. This comes home to our Lay-Chancellours, who being the
Kings Officer, we may by Mr. Baxters permission swear Obedience to him. And
other Non-Conformists (as wise as Mr. Baxter) think that the Apostles Wise Man
spoken of in 1 Cor. 6. to be a President for our Chancellours. And it is
strange that they who would set two Lay-Ruling Elders in every Parish, should
not admit one in a Diocese.

Mr. Baxters last quarrel against the Rubric is, that it obliges the
Minister, who repelleth any from the Sacrament to give an account of the same,
to the Ordinary within fourteen days after. Answ. He that has no notorious
scandalous persons in his Parish, is free from this trouble; and so is he that
has such, if they do not press themselves on that Holy Communion. If any such
do, the Minister having timely notice of his intention, as is required, may
send for him, and privately admonish him, that the Congregation are much
offended by his disorderly Conversation; especially by such or such a Crime,
whereof by common Fame he is reported guilty, and therefore desire him to
forbear that Sacrament, till such time as he have given Testimony of his
Repentance and Reformation, to the satisfaction of the Congregation. In this
case the party forbearing on a private Admonition, there is no need of
informing the Ordinary. But if such a person still press on, the Minister ought
to refuse him, and it will much abate his trouble, and the Odium which
otherwise might lie on him, to refer the Case to the Ordinary to be determined
by him.

These are the great number of Sins, hindering Conformity, so heinous as that
Mr. Baxter was afraid to name them, lest he should displease and provoke the
Conformists; which even in the judgment of Mr. Baxter himself, and other
serious Non-conformists, will scarce amount to an appearance of evil. As for
the Objections against the Declarations, and Oaths required by Act of
Parliament; seeing he acknowledges that it is not the sense of the Liturgy,
but of a Statute of Parliament which the Non-conformists doubt of, and that it
would be impertinent for us to tell them what is the sense of the Church; the
doubt being, what is the sense of the Parliament, p. 191. I shall not add much
more to what I have spoken on those Subjects, but refer them to those, to whom
the Execution of those Laws are committed for their better Instruction. And I
shall only observe, that the complaint against the Lawgivers, p. 204. n. 3. is,
that they will not otherwise expound their own words, after seventeen years
waiting for it under compulsive executions. By (otherwise) he means against the
sense of the plain words, as appears, n. 2. in which the Non-conformists there
profess to understand them, but cannot Assent to them, and therefore they think
they may be excused, if by mistake they think some of those passages to be
unlawful, that are not, or to have a worse sense than indeed they have. This
mistake will appear to the Judicious Reader to be wilful, and an Act of pure
malice and revenge. For the plain English of it is this, That because the
Parliament will not, in favor to the Non-conformists, alter their Laws, and
dispense with the Oaths of Obedience, and renouncing of the Covenant, and
reforming every thing in the Liturgy which they have fancied to be sinful, and
thereby justify the Non-conformists, and confess themselves to be the cause of
our present Divisions: They are still resolved to pronounce the Liturgy to be
sinful, the Laws Tyrannical, and such as would force them to perjury. And
though they want power for the present to help themselves, yet if you will not
hear, those will, whom God will use to the healing of his Churches (as he says
in his Preface) the meaning whereof is too plain: By this time the Reader may
discern how vainglorious his boast is, that he has shown us a righter way of
Concord, more Divine, Sure, Harmless, Comprehensive, fitted by Christ himself,
to the interest of all good Men; yea, of the Church, and all the World. Would
you know, what that grand discovery is he tells you, p. 36. of his Plea, which
is the Sum of his five first Sections; and this is the result of all. If every
Pastor might be a Bishop in his Parish, Independent and free from any Superior
to control him; if he may have an arbitrary power, if they may be arbitrary in
exercise of the power of the Keys without appeal, such as he says, p. 265. the
Jews had, where there was a Village of Ten Persons, there was a Presbyter that
had power of Judging Offenders: Then we should be so far (says he) from using
the controversy about the Divine Right of Episcopacy, as a distinct Order from
Presbyters, to any Schism or injury to the Church, (as hitherto they have
done) that we should thankfully contribute our best endeavors to the Concord,
Peace, Safety, and Prosperity thereof (i. e.) they would give the Bishops leave
to exercise their Authority in Vtopia, having provided that they shall have
nothing to do in England: But the Magistrates must yield to them also. -- Might
we be freed from Swearing, Subscribing, Declaring and Covenanting unnecessary
things, which we take not to be true, and from some few unnecessary practices
which we cannot justify: And if they might have power of Ordaining such as they
please, and of Confirming the Adult not according to the Order of the Church of
England (for that comes too near to Popery;) but according to Mr. Baxters, or
Mr. Hanmers Model, that is, May the power of altering the Laws in Church and
State, then, (and not till then, when these necessary terms are granted) they
will serve the Church (so modelled) in poverty and rags. But of so great a
mercy (says he) experience has made our hopes from Men to be very small; and
the Reason of the thing makes our hopes as small, of the happiness of the
Church of England, till God Unite us on these necessary terms. To what great
streights do some Men reduce themselves, that they cannot live unless they Rob
and ruin their neighbors, subvert whole Churches, and Kingdoms, and grasp all
Power and Authority, over the Bodies and Consciences of their Brethren into
their own hands?

Did ever any Bishop aspire to such Tyranny as this? (the Pope only excepted)
is not the King and whole Nation greatly Culpable, not to trust themselves with
the Ingenuity of this people, of whose Loyalty and Charity they have had such
experience? and is it not pity that they should be constrained to attempt
these things against Law, when they so humbly desire to have them established
by Law? and when the reason of the thing, (i. e.) their resolution to have it
so, (it being their great concern as he calls it) makes the hopes of the
happiness of the Church of England to be very small, which Men so resolved as
they are may foretell, as Mr. Baxter does without a Spirit of Prophecy.

Sect. 2. p. 207. Mr. Baxter proceeds to the second part of Conformity, which
he calls Reordination, and says, it was either intended as a second
Ordination, or not; If yea, it is a thing condemned by the ancient Churches, by
the Canons called the Apostles, etc. If not, then they take such Men's former
Ordination to be Null, and consequently all such Churches to be no Churches,
their Baptizings and Consecration of the Lords Supper, etc. to be Null. Answ.
Although the Ordination by Presbyters alone, especially when it has been done
in opposition to, P. 237. of the five Disputations. We Ordain not present, but
Spreto Episcopo.
and Contempt of Bishops, has been ever condemned in the Church, and the
validity thereof is still questioned; yet granting it to be valid, a Submission
to Episcopal Ordination, is no renouncing of that which was performed by
Presbyters, no more than the submission of the Disciples of John, who had been
Baptized by him with the Baptism of Repentance, to the Baptism of Christ. Nor
does the Law any where require them to declare that their former Ordination was
Null; because then it would have pronounced their Baptizings, and other
Ministerial Offices to be Null; if therefore we did juge as charitably of our
Legislators as we ought, and Interpret the Laws by the practice, we cannot find
any such thing as Reordination intended. For first, the word is no where
mentioned, but the Ordination required is to qualify them for the exercise of
their Ministry in the Church of England, and to capacitate them for it. Thus in
the Preface to the Book of Ordination, it is said, None shall be taken as
Ministers of the Church of England, but who are so Ordained.

It denies not, but they may be Ministers elsewhere, and the Act for
Uniformity renders them incapable of any Parsonage, Vicaridge, etc. in the
Church of England. But the same Act allows of the Ministers Presbyterially
Ordained in other Reformed Churches, to exercise their Ministry here by His
Majesty's Authority. Yea, the same Parliament permits them to meet, and
exercise many Ministerial duties; so that the number above that of their own
Families do not exceed Five, and Mr. Baxter knows, that the most eminent
Divines of our Church, ever held the Ordination by Presbyters in foreign
Churches to be lawful.

2. It is Mr. Baxters Opinion, that the outward part of Ordination may be
repeated. Directory l. 3. Q. 21.

And that the Ordainer does but Ministerially invest the person with Power,
whom the Spirit of God has qualified for it by the Inward Call; now the Inward
Call being the Essential part (as he accounts) and the Ministerial Investiture
of the person with power, being the outward part. P. 311. of the Plea; I see no
reason why one Ordained by Presbyters, may not submit to Episcopal Ordination
by his own Argument. Yea, Mr. Baxter there affirms, That the mutual consent of
the people, and themselves may suffice to the orderly admittance into the
Office; especially if the Magistrate consent, and the Ordainers should refuse:
For which see more in his Dispute of Ordination, from whence I propose this
case; suppose a person fitly qualified for Parts and Piety, Chosen and Ordained
a Minister by an Independent, or Anabaptistical people, should afterward submit
himself to Presbyterial Ordination: I doubt not but the Presbyters would think
it lawful to Ordain him, and I believe they would not admit him into their
Churches without such Ordination, which may justify our Superiors in
requiring that they who will be admitted Ministers of the Church of England,
should be Episcopally Ordained. For here is nothing repeated but the outward
part, or Ceremony of Investiture, which by Mr. Baxters Confession may be
repeated, and is no more than the Marriage of such by a Minister, who had been
Married before by a Justice of Peace: Or as he makes another Comparison, it is
no more than if a person very expert in Physic, should practice without a
License. Upon which he tells you a story of his great success in Physic, which
he practiced many years gratis, and saved the Lives of multitudes, p. 78. of
the Third part of the way of Concord; and yet he there grants, that it is meet
for the safety of Men's Health, that none practice Physic, but a Licensed
Physician. And until there be a greater want of Divines or Physicians than now
there is, it is pity that such as are not Licensed should be permitted.

The Third part of Conformity begins p. 208. concerning the Renunciation of the
Covenant, whereof he treats,. 11. and 12. Ministers (says he) must only
subscribe, that there is no Obligation on me, or any other person from the
Oath, etc. to endeavor any change or alteration of Government in the Church,
to which he adds the Oxford Oath, That we will never endeavor any alteration.
And the Articles for Prelacy, the Ordination promise, and Oath of Canonical
Obedience. Against all which he Objects, that even those Non-conformists that
are for the lawfulness; yea, the need and desireableness of Bishops and
Archbishops are unsatisfied in these things: That some Hundred of Parishes are
without any particular appropriate Bishops, and consequently are without the
Discipline of such Bishops, and so are no Churches but only parts of a Diocesan
Church, that the Bishops have more work than they can do, and the Keys are to
be exercised by Laymen. Answ. I have already showed Mr. Baxters judgment of
Bishops and Lay-Chancellours, and shall only add, that the Laws which Empower
the Ministry with the Exercise of Discipline are so full, and exact, that if
each Minister did faithfully perform his duty, there would be no need to
complain for want of work, or of authority to do it effectually. Every Minister
is to admonish his Parishioners not to delay the Baptism of their Children,
whereby they are entered into a Covenant with God, and by their Sureties engaged
to Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience; as soon as they come to years of
Discretion, they are to be instructed out of the Church Catechism every Sunday,
which Catechism Mr. Baxter himself commends to be better for its Method than
most others: Then upon their knowledge of the Principles of Religion, and owning
their Baptismal Vows, whereof the Minister is to take cognizance, and certify
to the Bishop they are to be Confirmed; and none but such are to be admitted
Communicants, and none but Communicants to be admitted as Godfathers, etc. The
Minister ought both publicly and privately to admonish such as are scandalous,
and to deny them the Communion, until they manifest their Repentance, which is
a kind of Excommunication. He is constantly to Celebrate public Worship, to
Preach the Word of God, and Administer the Holy Sacraments frequently; to visit
his Parishioners, that he may know the State of his Flock, to instruct the
Ignorant, rebuke the Wicked, encourage the Good, to visit the Sick, absolve the
Penitent, and to strengthen them by the Word of God, and the Comforts of the
Holy Sacrament against the fear of death. If these things were duly done as
they might and ought to be; there would be no cause to complain, either that
the Bishop has too much, or the Pastor too little work, the fault is not in
the Laws or Constitution of Government, but in the want of due Execution.

To omit the many impertinencies in the 12.. there are Three things only, on
which he grounds his Plea for the Covenant: The First is, p. 214. Whether when
Charles the II. had (though injuriously) been drawn to take the Covenant, it
does not oblige those that took it afterward, and whether the King having taken
it, no one person be bound by it? p. 143. Answ. Mr. Baxter leads me by this
Question to consider, how His Majesty was dealt with by the Scots in this
matter; how they tortured him with various temptations of hopes and fears, and
so affronted him with many horrible Reproaches of his own Sins, as well as of
the Sins of His Father and Grandfather, that he often attempted to leave them;
what Provocations he met with in private, may be guessed at by their public
Actions. The Thursday before the Coronation was set apart as a Solemn day of
Humiliation throughout the Land, for the Sins of the Royal Family. Robert
Douglas in the Coronation Sermon, told the King, That His Grandfather King
James remembered not the kindness of them, who had held the Crown upon his Head;
yea, he persecuted faithful Ministers; he never rested till he had undone
Presbyterial Government, and Kirk Assemblies, setting up Bishops, and bringing
in Ceremonies. In a word, he laid the foundation whereupon his Son, our late
King did build much mischief in Religion all the days of his Life. 73.

P. 52. He tells the King to his Face, That a King abusing his Power, to the
overthrow of Religion, Laws, and Liberties (which are the fundamentals of that
Covenant) may be controlled and opposed. And if he set himself to overthrow all
these by Arms, they who have power, as the Estates of the Land, may and ought
(I suppose by obligation of the Covenant) to resist by Arms; because he does by
that opposition break the very Bonds, and overthrow the Essentials of this
Contract and Covenant. This may serve (says he) to justify the proceedings of
this Kingdom, against the late King, who in a Hostile way set himself to
overthrow Religion, Parliaments, Laws and Liberties. Thus was the Kings Crown
lined with Thorns, and he had Gall and Vinegar given him to drink, instead of
the Royal Unction which that profane Scot thus derides; p. 34. The Bishops
behoved to perform this Rite, and the King behoved to be Sworn to them. But
now, by the Blessing of God, Popery and Prelacy are removed, let the anointing
of Kings with Oil, go to the door with them, and let them never come in again.
If the King ought by the Laws of the Kingdom to have been Sworn to the Bishops,
this may make void the Obligation of the Covenant; for the Coronation Oath is a
right of the Subject, and concerns their interest and security, and the King as
Heir to the Crown is obliged to that Oath, and if any subsequent Oath may
violate that in one particular, it may also in others, and then farewell to
Magna Charta, the privileges of Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject. See
more in the Review of the grand Case, p. 139. 140. P. 92. He tells the King,
That God in his Righteous judgments, suffers Subjects to conspire and rebel
against their Princes, because they rebel against the Covenant made with God,
(and adds) I may say freely, that a chief cause of the Judgment upon the Kings
House, has been the Grandfathers breach of Covenant with God, and the Fathers
following steps in opposing the work of God and his Kirk within these Kingdoms;
and probably too many do still think they may rebel again in Defense of the
Covenant.

But I argue from the manner of the Kings taking the Covenant, (as it is
related p. 75. etc.) that the King is not obliged by it to make any alteration
in the Government of our Church, for thus it is related: That the National
Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant being read, the King Swore, that
for himself and successors, he should consent and agree to all Acts of
Parliament, injoyning the National Covenant, and the Solemn League and
Covenant, etc. in the Kingdom of Scotland, as they are approved by the general
Assembly of that Kirk, and Parliament of that Kingdom. And that he should give
his Royal Assent to Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, passed or to be passed,
injoyning the same in his other Dominions. And in the Declaration set forth at
Edinborough in His Majesty's name, 1650. (But penned as it seems by the
Covenanters,) He declares, That if the Houses of Parliament of England, sitting
in freedom, shall think fit to present unto him the propositions of peace
agreed upon by both Kingdoms, he will not only accord to them, and such
Alterations there anent as the Houses of Parliament, in regard of the
Constitution of Affairs. and the good of his Majesty, and his Kingdoms shall
judge necessary; but do what is further necessary for the Prosecuting the ends
of the Solemn League and Covenant. Especially in those things which concern the
Reformation of the Church of England in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government. And p. 107. He does also declare his firm resolution to manage the
Government of the Kingdom of England, by the Advice of his Parliament,
consisting of an House of Lords, and an House of Commons there. All which His
Majesty has punctually performed, and the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, having
rescinded the Covenant, and condemned it as an unlawful Oath, and settled the
ancient Government of the Catholic Church: I speak with all humble submission;
His Majesty is not at all obliged by that Covenant thus taken, much less to
make any alteration in the Government of the Church of England; unless he would
act not only contrary to the established Laws, but contrary to that very Oath
and Declaration by which the Non-conformists suppose him to be obliged; which
oblige him to agree to such alterations, as the Houses of Parliament, in regard
to the Constitution of Affairs, and the good of His Majesty and his Kingdoms
should judge necessary, and to manage the Government of the Kingdom of England,
by advice of his Two Houses of Parliament. And this will answer the first
Question in the Negative, that neither the King (who was injuriously and
unlawfully, as is acknowledged) drawn to declare for it, and consequently no
other person that took it afterward, are bound by it to make any alteration,
etc. If any alteration be found necessary, there are lawful means to be used
for that end. But there is no obligation from this Covenant, being so repealed
to use even lawful means, much less such unlawful ones as the Covenant implies,
(i. e.) for Subjects to reform without, and against the Magistrate and his
Laws. By this also a second question is resolved, p. 215. which Mr. Baxter
calls the main question: Whether every Minister must or may become the Judge of
all other Men's Consciences and Oligations in three Kingdoms? For let it be
remembered that the case is only, whether they are obliged by the Covenant to
endeavor any alteration, etc. Any lawful endeavors are not denied, but the
Covenant being Condemned as an unlawful thing, cannot lay an obligation on any
to act against the Laws, whereby the Church Government is established.

Against this, a third question is urged, whether this League and Covenant were
a Vow to God, and not only a League and Covenant with Men, which cessante
occasion, and by consent of Parliaments does cease. Mr. Baxter affirms, that
it was a Vow to God, and a League and Covenant of Men with one another that
they will perform it; and instead of Proof he says it is notorious to any Man
that reads it with common understanding.

Answ. 1. The Title of it is a Solemn League and Covenant; there is no mention
of a Vow to God: And in the Preface, a mutual League and Covenant.

2. And in the Renunciation, it is to be declared, that there lies no
Obligation from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant. If
any part of it be a Vow to God, that is not mentioned to be disclaimed; for,

3. The particular Case wherein its Obligation is to be disclaimed, is to
endeavor any alteration, etc. Now, how can it consist with the nature of a Vow
to God, to make unnecessary alterations against the Laws of the Land? Would not
this cause the Christian Religion in a short time to be exploded out of all
Kingdoms?

4. It is notoriously known, that the few things that make the Contract, (as
Mr. Douglas calls it) or Covenant between the Rebel Scots and English, to seem
as a Vow to God, were used only as a pretense to draw on that part of the
Covenant which is acknowledged to be unlawful, and which is the greatest part
of the Covenant, the intent whereof was to strengthen the Rebellion against the
King, as (by the negative Oath and the general actings of both Nations which
followed) does evidently appear: And what Rebellion or Heresy may not be
Covenanted for, under pretense of such Vows? If therefore there had been any
thing of a Vow to God in the Covenant, it was a horrid Profanation of Gods
name, to make it subservient to such unlawful ends. And it is rightly observed,
that it binds to the Extirpation of Bishops, out of other Churches, as well as
out of ours alone.

5. The most part of those who took the Covenant when it was first imposed, had
declared their approbation of the established Government, and sworn Obedience
to the Bishops; so had generally all the Assembly, and fixed Ministers, and as
I presume Mr. Baxter himself; and whatever contrary Oaths they took afterward,
are rightly esteemed to be as Null, the pretense of a Vow notwithstanding.

6. It is inconsistent with the nature of a Vow to be forced, as the Covenant
generally was, as has been observed from Mr. Baxter, That the Scots taking
advantage of the straits to which the King had reduced the English Parliament,
brought in the Covenant as the condition of their help; and that the House of
Lords complained of the Parliament (as Mr. Baxter calls the House of Commons)
which tied them to meddle with nothing, but what they offered to them. And
though the Covenanters pretended for this Vow the Example of Gods people in
other Nations, and the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times,
yet there never was the like Oath for matter and manner, taken by any people,
fearing God in any Age of the World.

I conclude with a Concession of Mr. Baxters, p. 213. of the Plea: It is not in
the Subjects power by Vows to withdraw themselves from Obedience to Authority;
which is proved from Numb. 30. And the Reason of it is, because Obligatio prior
praejudicat posteriori, God has first enjoined Obedience to our Superiors.
They therefore lawfully requiring our submission to the established Government,
there can lie no obligation on me, or any other person to endeavor alteration
of the Government. If any fault be found in subordinate Governors, we may in
our places and callings endeavor a Reformation of them, but the Government is
a noli me tangere, we may not undermine foundations. But Mr. Baxter proposes
another question; whether the Covenant as a Vow to God bind to things
necessary? Answ. To all necessary things we are pre-ingaged by the Command of
God, and extraordinary means must not be used when ordinary may serve. Mr.
Baxter. 43. of his Directory, says, A Vow is as Null when the matter is morally
or civilly out of our power, as if a Child or Servant Vow a thing which he
cannot do lawfully without the consent of his Parent or Master, though the
thing in it self be lawful; for God having bound me to obey my Superiors in
all lawful things, I cannot oblige my self by my own Vows.. 79. of his
Directory. Make not a Law and Religion to your selves, which God never made by
his Authority, nor bind your selves for futurity to all that is a duty at
present, where it is possible the changes of things may change your duty. And.
3. p. 19. The true nature and use of Vows, is but for a more certain and
effectual performance of our duties, not to make new Laws and Religions to our
selves. From which concessions it will follow, that the power of Reforming,
etc. being in the King, the Vow was Null: And it is morally impossible for them
to do that in their places and callings, which they cannot do without Invading
the Place and Office of their Superiors. And therefore notwithstanding the
pretense of a Vow; yea though it were for things lawful (which the alteration
of the established Government is not) we may declare that there lies no
Obligation, etc.

P. 216.. 13. Mr. Baxter insists on the Declaration, concerning taking Arms
against the King, etc. Where he says, the question is not of the first clause,
of taking Arms, etc. For he grants that a Popish King is to be obeyed in lawful
things, p. 77. but of the 2 d. viz. I abhor that Traitorous position of taking
Arms by his Authority against his person, or against those that are
commissioned by him. This as the Law of the Land has declared to be
Traitorous, so has the Law of God. 2 Pet. 2.13. requiring submission to the
King, as Supreme, and unto Governors sent (or Commissioned) by him. The ground
of this Declaration, was for the security of the Kings Person, against such as
distinguishing between his public and private capacity, under pretense of his
Authority detained his Towns, and fought those Armies where the King was in
person; but when they had Conquered him, they declared the Supreme Authority to
be in themselves. But Mr. Baxter pleads, that Ministers are mostly ignorant of
the Law, not knowing what is called a Commission, and what Seal makes it such,
and they dare not think that a Lord Chancellor or Keeper, has Power at his
pleasure to depose the King by Sealing Commissions to any to seize on his
Forts, and c. Nor yet to destroy the Kingdoms, Cities, Laws and Judgments, and
seize at pleasure on all Men's Estates or Lives. This had been good Doctrine if
Mr. Baxter had taught it when the Kings broad Seal was broken, and by Virtue of
a counterfeit one, the Lives and Estates of the best Subjects were destroyed,
the Act of Parliament has declared the Supreme Authority to be inseparable in
the Kings Person, so that we cannot doubt of the Legality of Commissions
granted by him, and his pretended ignorance against the known Laws, being that
Block on which the best of Kings fell; I hope no good Englishman will stumble
at it again. But Mr. Baxter complains that these words [against those that are
Commissioned by him] are unexpounded, and have no limitations or exceptions. It
is not fit for private men to distinguish where the Law does not, or that an
Usurper, or Protector pretending Reformation and Liberty, and that abused Maxim
of Salus populi Suprema Lex, should rather be obeyed than such as Act regularly
by the Kings Commission, and according to the known Laws. Wherefore to seek
evasions, and to suppose extraordinary Cases, that may never happen against
plain and necessary duties, ought not to be a Bar against this Declaration.
That which follows. 14. Of deserting their Flocks, and keeping Conventicles;
and. 15. of not residing within Five Miles of Cities and Corporations, are not
conditions of Conformity, but consequences of their Nonconformity. And I leave
-- them to be read and considered by others, who will perceive how well Mr.
Baxter deserves the Character which the Reverend Bishop Sanderson gave of him:
That he never knew a Man of more pertinacious confidence, and less abilities in
all his Conversation; A double minded Man is unstable in all his Ways.

An Answer to some passages in the Second Part of the Non-conformists Plea for
Peace.
HAving reflected on as much of the First Part of the Non-conformists Plea, as
concerned the Ministerial Conformity; I thought it not material to answer the
many Impertinencies Printed in that Book: But finding a Second Part extant
published as (the Authors say) to save their Lives, and the Kingdoms Peace,
from the false and Bloody Plotters; who would first persuade the King and
People that the Protestants, and particularly the Non-conformists are
Presbyterians and Fanatics; And next, that it was such Presbyterians that
killed his Father; and next, that our Principles are Rebellious; and next, that
we are Plotting Rebellion and his Death, etc. On which particulars he enlarges
in the Preface, where I find him thus to justify his party. I desire those that
seek our Blood and Ruin by the false accusation of Rebellious Principles, to
tell me if they can, what Body or Party of Men on Earth, have more sound and
Loyal Principles of Government and Obedience: and p. 109. of that Book, We are
far from designing any abasement of the Clergy, nor do we deny or draw others
to deny any due reverence or obedience to them.

I considered that very many of Mr. Baxters Readers, are apt to believe him,
and therefore must needs be greatly incensed against those whom he accuses to
be the Persecutors of such a pious and peaceable party, viz. the Bishops, whom
he calls Thorns and Thistles, and the Military Instruments of the Devil, p.
122. of the Book of Concord, and p. 247. of the first part of the Plea, and
complains, Popish Clergymen.
(as if he were in Egyptian Bondage, or the Popish Inquisition) of tearing
Engines, Goals, Starving, and Bloody Persecution, Ruin and Death. Every good
Man is sensible what Indignation, such Cruelties practiced upon innocent
persons, may raise in the hearts of our English Nation; who are noted for their
compassion to their Brethren, in misery against the Authors of it; and I
suspect these suggestions are published to inrage them, against their present
Governors in Church and State, to prevent the mischievous consequences,
whereof I have made the ensuing inquiries.

And First, their respect to the Conforming Clergy, will appear in the Epistle,
before the first part of the Plea inscribed to the Conforming Clergy, where he
thus reproacheth them to their Faces. It is now seventeen years since near 2000
Ministers of Christ, were by Law forbidden the exercise of their Office, unless
they did Conform to Subscriptions, Covenants, Declarations and Practices which
we durst not do; because we feared God. -- The reason of which Impositions, it
is God and not we must have an account of, from the Convocation, etc. (by
which, etc.) I suppose he means the Parliament that made those Laws. He tells
them of rendering odious them whom they never heard; and urging Rulers to
execute the Laws against them. (i. e.) to Excommunicate silence, confine,
imprison, and undo them. He says, he is not so uncharitable, as to impute all
their false reports to Malignity and Diabolism, but that it was strangeness, (
i. e. ignorance of) their case, which wrath and cross interest kept them from
hearing: He says he had read the Books of Bishop Morley, Mr. Stileman, Mr.
Faukner, Mr. Fulwood, Mr. Durel, Mr. Fowlis, Mr. Nanfen, Dr. Boreman, Parker,
Tomkins, the Friendly Debate, Dr. Ashton, Mr. Hollingworth, Dr. Good, Mr.
Hinckly, the Countermine, Mr. Lestrange, Mr. Long, etc. And I think (says he)
Mr. Tombs has said more like truth for Anabaptistry, the late Hungarian for
Polygamy; Many for drunkeness, stealing and lying in cases of necessity, than
ever he yet read for the lawfulness of all that is there described, ( viz. the
terms of conformity.) He tells them if they will not hear, those will whom God
will use to the healing of his Churches. He means such Reformers as were in 42.
and 43. to whom this Patriarch gives the Blessing of Peacemakers, and says,
they shall be called the Children of God, as sure as the Incendiaries in the
late War, viz. Brook, Pym, etc. are by him called glorious Saints in Heaven, p.
83. of his Saints rest. And thus reminding them of his pastoral Admonition; if
any of you be an hinderer or slanderer of Gods word, etc. he has sufficiently
evidenced what reverence he has for the Conforming Clergy.

But how he has discharged that which he professes to be his duty, p. 246. of
his Plea, part. 1. Most of our acquaintance take it for their duty to do their
best to keep up the Reputation of the public conformable Ministry: Let the
Reader judge by bis deeds, rather than his words, seeing he continues
Conventicles himself, and defends others in the same Practice. And for his
Admonition to us, By their fruits ye shall know them.
I shall commend to him one Lesson from our Catechism; to keep his Tongue from
evil speaking, lying and slandering.

The Second thing I observe in his Plea for the innocence of his party, is,
That no Men on Earth have more sound and Loyal Principles of Government and
Obedience. Answ. While they were Governors none exacted Obedience more
severely, or Ruled more imperiously; but take them in the capacity of Subjects,
and their practices show what their principles are. But let us hear his Plea to
the Accusations: The first is, that they are Presbyterians and Fanatics. 2.
That they began the War in 42. and 43. 3. That they destroyed the King. 4. That
their principles are disloyal. 5. That they are Plotting a Rebellion. To the
first, he tells us what a Presbyterian is, viz. such as hold Church Government,
not only without Bishops, but also by Presbyteries, consisting of two sorts of
Elders, Preaching and Ruling, and over these Classes, and over these a National
Assembly, consisting of the same two sorts. That such a Government was intended
by the Long Parliament, appears by their Ordinances, Anno 1643. for imposing
the Covenant, rooting out Episcopacy, bringing all to an Uniformity (with the
Church of Scotland) and January 44. For taking away the Book of Common Prayer,
and establishing the Directory. And June 5. 46. for settling without farther
delay of Presbyterial Government in the Church of England. And August 28. for
Ordination of Ministers by Classical Presbyteries, within their respective
bounds; which Form of Government to be used in the Church of England and
Ireland, was agreed by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, after advice had
with the Assembly of Divines: The Assembly drew up an Exhortation for the
taking of the Covenant; where they declare that the Government by Bishops is
evil, justly offensive and burdensome to the Kingdom.
This Assembly was called by the Parliament, 12 June 43. consisting of Lords,
Knights, Esquires, and some Divines, who assented to the Ordinances above
mentioned, and therefore it will be very hard for Mr. Baxter to persuade us
that they were Conformists (of which more hereafter) I shall account them
Presbyterians. And if ever a Child was like his Father, our present
Nonconformist is like the Presbyterian in 43. Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic
ora gerebat. And what if as Mr. Baxter says, they do not now exercise their
beloved Discipline; are those Lions no Lions which the King keeps within the
Tower? Have they not the same appetite to the Church and Crown Lands, the same
antipathy to Prelacy, the same zeal for the Covenant and Directory? Were they
not generally Ordained by these Presbyterians, non tantum absente sed spreto
Episcopo, as Mr. Baxter says? these then I conclude to be Presbyterians, and if
Mr. Baxter will add the term Fanatics, I cannot help it; they who plead
aliquid (...), some impulses on their spirits, moving them from ingulphing with
this generation, by reason whereof they cannot go back from that more
spiritual, plain and simple zealous Service of Almighty God, in the way they
are in, and reformation they seek, against the (established) Worship and
Discipline. (See p. 9. of the Answer to Doctor Stilling fleets Sermon) I say
they, who for want of reasons to defend their cause, do plead impressions on
their spirits, do prove themselves to be Fanatic, and I have proved them to be
Presbyterians.

The Second Accusation is, that we began the War in 41. and 42. To this he
pleads. 1. The King has said so much for the Act of Oblivion, that it is no
sign of Loyalty and Peace to violate it. Answ. An Act of Pardon implies guilt,
though it exempt from punishment. And Secondly, God himself will pardon none
but the penitent, whatever the King may do. 2. You plead that false reporters
say, that the Papists were the Kings party, and the Presbyterians the
Parliaments, in the beginning of the English War. Answ. They are false
reporters indeed, that say the Papists were the Kings Party, which were not an
hundred part of his party; and I wonder not that Mr. Baxter calls it a false
report, because it shows the Papists to have been more Loyal Subjects than the
Presbyterians. Yet wanted not a number of Papists, some openly, and others
under hoods, to Act for the Parliament, and they wanted not invitation and
temptations to have been all of that side, as the Royal Martyr declared.

2. Mr. Baxter says, the contrary is so well known to Men yet living, that the
reporters can hope to seduce none but young men and strangers. Does Mr. Baxter
mean by the contrary, That the Papists were not the Kings party, and the
Presbyterians were not the Parliaments party, or that the Papists were the
Parliaments party, and the Presbyterians were the Kings party at the beginning
of our War; this I take to be contrary, and I think no Man living can affirm
it. But he tells us that the controversy was begun between Archbishop Abbot,
and his adherents, and Bishop Laud, and those that adhered to him. Answ. There
was no War begun in Archbishop Abbots time, nor long after; but the
controversy which made way for the War was of another kind, and a more ancient
date, as Mr. Baxter relates it,. 7. of his Plea, part 1. To which I suppose he
refers the Reader; and there he says, the root of the difference between the
old Non-conformists and the Conformists was this, That one sort thought they
should stick to the mere Scripture rule and simplicity, and go far from all
Additions which were found invented or abused by Papists. The other side
thought they should show more reverence to the Customs of the Ancient Church,
and retain that which was not forbidden in Scripture, which was introduced
before the ripeness of Popery, or before the year 600. at least, and which was
found lawful in the Roman Church, and common to them with the Greek. And herein
I have reason to believe Mr. Baxter was of the same mind with the Conformists
against the Non-conformists. See Directory, part 3. chapter 2. This difference was
begun among the Exiles at Franckfort (says Mr. Baxter,) some striving for the
English Liturgy, and others for a freer way of praying, (i. e.) from the
present sense and habit of the Speaker, (which by Mr. Baxters favor was not
any where publicly practiced at that time, no not by Calvin himself at
Geneva.) But farther, Queen Elizabeth, and King James (says Mr. Baxter,)
discountenancing and suppressing Non-conformists. They attempted in
Northamptonshire and Warwickshire, to set and keep up private Churches, and
governed them in a Presbyterian way, but the attempt was broken by the industry
of Archbishop Whitgift and Bancroft: Some Conformed, and some were Connived
at, which kept them from gathering secret Churches; yet some Preached secretly
in Houses, and some publicly for a day and away; some were further Alienated
from the English Prelacy, and separated from their Churches, and some of them
called Brownists were so hot at home, that they were put to death. Mr.
Ainsworth, Johnson, Robinson, and others fled beyond Sea, and there gathered
Churches, and broke by divisions among themselves, as their Successors did in
our memory. It will not be impertinent to show from Mr. Cambden, how
troublesome this sort of Men were under Queen Elizabeth, p. 420. of the English
Translation of Cambden, They chose that season when the Spaniards amused the
whole Nation from abroad, by their Invincible Armado, as they called it to
disturb her at home. And never did contumacious impudency against
Ecclesiastical Magistrates, show it self more bold and insolent; for when the
Queen would not give Ear to Innovators in Religion, who designed to cut in
sunder the very sinews of Ecclesiastical Government, and her Royal Prerogative
at once; some of those Men who were great admirers of the Discipline of Geneva,
thought there was no better way to be taken for establishing it in England,
than by inveighing and railing against the English Hierarchy, and stirring up
the people to a dislike of Bishops. They therefore set forth scandalous Books
against the Government of the Church and Prelates, as Martin Mar Prelate,
Minerals, Diotrephes, A Demonstration of Discipline, etc. in which Libels they
belched forth most virulent Calumnies, and opprobrious taunts and reproaches,
in such a manner that the Authors seemed rather scullions out of the Kitchen,
than pious and godly Men; yet the Authors were Penry and Vdal, Ministers of the
word, and George Throckmorton a Learned Man: their favorers were Richard
Knightly and Wigston Knights. Others exercised their Discipline in corners in
despite of Authority, and the Laws, holding Classes in several places, and
forming Presbyteries; for which Thomas Cartwright, Edmund Snape, Andrew King,
Proudlow, Pain, and other Ministers were called in question, whom some of the
zealots conspired to deliver out of the Magistrates hands, p. 451. He tells us
how one Hacket insinuated himself into certain Divines, which with a burning
zeal labored to bring the Presbyterial Discipline of Geneva into England;
among whom was one Wiggington a silly Brainsick Minister, a despiser and enemy
of the Magistrates; by Wiggintons means, he was acquainted with Coppinger a
Gentleman, who persuaded Arthington an admirer of that Discipline: First that
himself, and then that Arthington was extraordinarily called of God for the
good of the Church, and that way was revealed from Heaven to draw the Queen and
Council to a better mind, meaning to admit of the Discipline of Geneva;
Coppinger imparted this to Hacket, who by his counterfeit holiness, and fervent
praying ex tempore, his fasting on the Lords days, and boasting that he had
been buffeted by Satan, and had Revelations from God. -- He Prophesied that
there should be no more Popes, and that England should be lamentably afflicted
that year, with Pestilence and Famine, except the Discipline of the Lord, and
Reformation were admitted in the Realm. They conspired as was proved by their
Letters to accuse the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Chancellor of
Treason, (and one of the party stabbed one Hawkins, a famous Sea-Captain,
supposing him to be the Lord Chancellor) Hacket had such an implacable malice
to the Queen, that he said often she had forfeited her right to the Crown; he
defaced her Arms and Picture, striking his Dagger through the Breast of it (to
omit many things) Hacket being Indicted for Treason Confessed it, and was
Executed; dying, he lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and grinning said, Do thou
thus repay me? instead of a Kingdom, I come to revenge it Coppinger shortly
after starved himself in Prison, Arthington repented seriously, and set forth a
Book of it. Yet many others opposed the Discipline of the Church, reproaching
the Prelates, and drawing some common Lawyers to their party, but the Queen
knowing that her authority was struck at through the Bishops sides, broke the
force of the adversaries without noise, and maintained the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, inviolate against all Opposers, (Presbyterians and Fanatics.)
Nor were these Men less troublesome under King James, having conceived great
hopes from his Education in Scotland, but he knew them so well, that he never
showed them any favor: In his first year they frame a Petition in the names of
a Thousand Ministers for Reformation, which I find answered by the University
of Oxford, and seconded by the University of Cambridge.

The King told his Parliament, March 19. 1603. The third which I call a Sect
rather than Religion, is the Puritan and Novelist, who do not differ so far
from us in points of Religion, as in their confused forms of Polity and Parity,
being ever discontented with the present Government, and impatient to suffer
any superiority, which makes their Sect unable to be suffered in any well
governed Commonwealth. And it is one reason why Grotius was so condemned for a
Papist among this people; because in his Book de Anti-Christo, he has left
this Character of them, Circumferamus oculos per omnem historiam, quod unquam
seculum vidit tot subditorum in principes bella sub religionis titulo? and
horum concitatores ubique reperiuntur Ministri Evangelici (ut quidam se vocant)
quod genus hominum in quae pericula etiam nunc opti mos Civitatis
Amstelodamensis magistratus conjicerit? videat si cui libet de Presbyterorum in
Reges audacia librum Jacobi Britanniarum Regis, cui nomen Donum Regium videbit
eum, ut erat magni judicii ea praedixisse, quae nunc cum dolor and horrore
conspicimus. I will give it you presently in that Kings English.

But the King giving them a fair hearing in the conference at Hampton Court,
partly by his Arguments, and partly by his Authority suppressed them for that
time: Yet this restless people, so incensed him by their murmurings and
reproaches, that he frequently in his Writings and Speeches in Parliament,
professed both his jealousy of them, and caution against them in his Preface
to the (...). These rash heady Preachers, says he, think it their honor to
contend with Kings, and perturb whole Kingdoms; and p. 41. 42. Take heed my Son
to such Puritans, very Pests in the Church and Commonweal, whom no Desert can
oblige, neither Oaths nor Promises bind, breathing nothing but Sedition and
Calumnies, aspiring without measure, railing without reason, and making their
own Imaginations without any warrant of the word, the square of their
Consciences. I protest before the great God, and since I am here as upon my
Testament, it is no place for me to lie in; that ye shall never find with any
Highland or border Thieves greater ingratitude and more lies, and vile
perjuries than with these Fanatick-spirits; and suffer not the principles of
them to brook your Land, if ye like to sit at rest, except ye would keep them
for trying your patience, as Socrates did an evil Wife. The good King Charles
found this Prophecy to be true; for notwithstanding all the care that himself,
and Archbishop Laud (who apprehended the approaching danger) to suppress them,
in so much as that Mr. Baxter says, in that 7.. That the old Non-conformists
being most dead, and the latter gone most to America; we cannot learn that in
1640. there were many more Nonconformists Ministers in England than there be
Counties, if so many; the Wolves be like had got on the Sheeps Clothing, and
not being able to ruin the Church by open force, seek to undermine it by
secret Arts, being got within the Pale. In 37. says Mr. Baxter, Archbishop
Laud using more severity than formerly, and the Visitations inquiring more
after private Fasts and Meetings, and going out of their Parishes to hear. --
And in many Places Lectures, and Afternoon Sermons being put down (which was
done only where Faction and Sedition were Sown, and there Catechizing a much
more useful exercise, was enjoined in its room) by these things (and some other
which he there mentions) the minds of Men were made more jealous than before,
(and fears and jealousies were made the grounds of the War, the King and
Archbishop being reported to be Popishly affected, though they both, as well
in their Life time, as at their Deaths, gave irrefragable Arguments for the
contrary, sealing the truth of their Professions with their Blood.) And after
the Imprisonment of some, the stigmatizing of others, and the removal of many
beyond the Seas, all which, both many, and some, amounted not to above Three or
Four; whom though the Parliament received in Triumph, and plentifully rewarded,
yet they found them to be turbulent Persons, viz. Prin, Burton and Bastwick,
for I hear not of any removed beyond the Seas by authority) these were the
causes of Alienating the peoples Minds from the Bishops, and made them afraid
of Popery more than before, (and so it is still, any restraint from Faction is
Condemned for Popery) Mr. Baxter tells us there of another Intregue; Then was
the New Liturgy imposed on the Scots, with other changes there attempted (which
were the resuming of some Lands belonging to the Church and Crown, which had
been Sacrilegiously withheld, during a great part of King James and King
Charles's Reign; with the fear of losing the Tithes that some great Men there
detained from the Clergy) whereupon the Scots Armed and Invaded England, and
some English Lords (says Mr. Baxter) took advantage to prevail with the King
to call a Parliament once again. And here doubtless was the beginning of the
War, the Scots and such English as were in confederacy, and had agreed upon a
Covenant for Reformation, being the first Aggressors. But let Mr. Baxter
proceed -- The Irish (observing it is like how the Scots thrived in their
Rebellion) on Oct. 23. 1641. rose and murdered 200000. Persons, and (Mr. Baxter
is not ashamed to say) the News was here reported, that they said they had the
Kings Commission (just as much as the Parliament had to fight by his Authority
against his Person,) whereupon the Parliaments Declarations, raised in
multitudes of the people, a fear that they had partakers in England, and when
they had done their work there they would come hither. And (mark the
consequence) there was no way of safety, but to adhere to the Parliament for
their own defense, ( i. e. to strengthen the War against the King.) And in 42.
says he the lamentable Civil War broke out; but between whom? did the Bishops
fight against the King? or against one another? or against the Parliament? no
such matter. How began the War then? Mr. Baxter says, the Houses of Lords and
Commons consisted of such as had been Conformists, except an inconsiderable
number. Some number then were apparently Non-conformists, and it seems they had
infected many others; for Mr. Baxter says, they were such as had been
Conformists; they were not so when the War began: and (N.B.) their fear of
being over-powr'd by the Loyal party, of whom they thought themselves in sudden
danger, caused them to countenance such Petitionings and Clamours of the
Londoners Apprentices, and others, as we think, disorders and Provocations of
the King. This doubtless was a beginning of the War; of which, see the Kings
complaint in his Chapter of Tumults: Mr. Baxter says farther, the first open
beginning was about the Militia, which by an Act of Parliament is thus
determined: That the sole Command and disposition thereof is, and by the Laws
of England, ever was the undoubted right of His Majesty, and that both, or
either of the Houses of Parliament cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same,
etc. How then did the controversy between the Bishops and Conformists begin
the War, when the dispute of the Militia did it. In truth there were (as Wilson
in his History of King James confesses) Regians and Republicans, and the
dispute in several Parliaments was between the Prerogative and Privileges, and
as Mr. Baxter says, where other Parliaments ended, that of 40. began. And is it
not strange, that there should be so few Non-conformists in 41. and 42. and yet
in 43. when the Covenant was brought in, all the Parliament and Assembly, and
Officers in any Court, in the Army, and in the Navy, should generally take the
Covenant? for that was made the Test of all such as should be entrusted: and we
hear of very few that refused, and I think there is no great difference between
a Covenanter and a Presbyterian, who still cry up the Scottish Discipline, as
the very Scepter and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, to which all Kings and Scepters
must bow or break.

The Third Accusation is, the death of the King, of which Mr. Baxter says, that
he proved in times of Usurpation, that the Presbyterians detested it, and that
it was done by a Proud Conquering Army. Answ. Who rose that Army, and carried
on that War wherein the King perished? it was not the last stroke given by the
Independents, that felled that Royal Oak; there were many repeated blows at the
very Root of Majesty given by others, which cut all the Ligaments of his Power
and Authority in sunder, chopped off all the Branches, his two great Ministers
(as Mr. Baxter calls them) the whole Order of Bishops, His power of the
Militia, Forts, Garrisons and Navy, and exposed the declining trunk to the fury
of a Rascal party, whom themselves had Armed to the Kings ruin. I shall freely
give you my thoughts of it, in an answer to another writing of Mr. Baxters,
where he seeks more at large to excuse the Presbyterians from this horrid
Crime. Mr. Baxter says, were it not for entering upon an unpleasing and
unprofitable task: I would ask you, who that Juncto of Presbyterians was that
dethroned the King. Answ. The question I confess is very unpleasing; for,
Infandum renovare jubes Baxtere dolorem. Yet because it may be profitable to
know the truth; I say, that the dethroning so good a King, was a fact of an
unparalled nature, to which the Sins of the whole Nation contributed, as well
as yours and mine, and whereof we ought still to repent and beg pardon
notwithstanding the Act of Oblivion. Yet there was a Select Juncto, that had a
more immediate influence into it, and you ask me who they were; though I
believe you know them better than my self, I will tell you my thoughts freely.

First, they were the Men whom Mr. Baxter Canonizeth for Saints, in his
Everlasting Rest, p. 83. in my Edition, viz. Brook, and Prin, and Hambden, and
White, etc. For I suppose you could have named many more of your own Coat, as
precious Saints as they, of whom you say with an Asseveration, Surely they are
now Members of a more knowing, unerring, well-ordered, right-aiming,
self-denying, unanimous, honorable, Triumphant Senate than this from whence
they were taken, or ever Parliament will be: But what if they are gone to
another place, than what your Everlasting Rest intended? have you not made a
scurvy Reflection on your long beloved Parliament, and some Men do fear they
were never admitted into Gods everlasting rest; because you that fancied them
there, were ashamed to continue them in yours, being left out in your latter
Editions.

Secondly, I say it was that Juncto, who procured great numbers of factious and
tumultuous people, in a rude and illegal way to affright the Loyal and most
considerable part of the Parliament from their duties, and trust reposed in
them by God and Man; such were the Kings Majesty, and the Prince, the Loyal
Nobles, the Bishops and chosen Gentry, posting them up as Malignants, and
exposing them to the fury of the Rabble; of which tumults one of your Saints,
Mr. Pym by name, said God forbid, that the House of Commons should dishearten
their people, to obtain their just desires in such a way: Exact. Collect. p.
531. Mr. Baxter p. 474. of the Holy Commonwealth makes this Objection, The
tumults at Westminster drove him away; to which he answers: Only by
displeasing him, not by indangering or meddling with him; and another eminent
Man of Mr. Baxters acquaintance in his Jehovah Jireth, p. 65. says, the
Apprentices and Porters were stimulated and stirred up by Gods Providence
Thousands of them to Petition the Parliament for speedy redress. Whereas the
Five Members and their favorers had enraged the multitude not so much to
Petition the Parliament, as to affront the King.

Thirdly, It was that Juncto, who against His Majesty's Crown and Dignity,
against the known Laws, and his express Proclamation to the contrary, did
contrive and impose, under heavy penalties the Solemn League and Covenant upon
the Nation, whereby they did justify the Rebellion, and avow the maintenance of
it, against the King and his Forces. And having first vowed with their Lives
and Estates, to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliament; they add --
and to preserve the Kings Majesty's Person, and Authority, in the preservation
and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom; Which
experience shows, they no more intended, though it be here put in, as it was
in Essex's Commission, than it was in Fairfax's, where (as I am informed) they
left it out, and if they meant as they speak, they had no great care of his
person, having actually deprived him of his Authority. And besides that
limitation, they preserve the Kings Person in defense of the true Religion,
Covenanted to introduce another Religion in Doctrine and Worship, in opposition
to that which was established by Law, and resolutely defended by his Majesty,
and to root out Episcopacy, which as he had sworn to support, so had it been a
great prop to the Throne; and therefore his Majesty declared concerning the 19.
Propositions, that he could not consent unto them without violating his
Conscience, and a total extirpation of that Government, whose Rights they had a
mind to invade, and which was necessary to the well being of His Majesty, as by
many Arguments in the Chapter concerning Church Government it appears. This
certainly was one of the keenest Instruments that hewed down the Throne. For
the Speech without Doors (defending Mr. Challoners Speech within Doors) tells
the Parliament, that they are bound by their Covenant (for bringing evil
Instruments to Condign Punishment) to destroy the King and his Posterity, and
that they cannot justify the taking away of Strafford's and Canterbury's Lives
for Delinquency, while they suffered the chief Delinquent to go unpunished,
Oxford Reasons, p. 22. And the Speeches within Doors spoke no less, for Sir H.
Martyn told them, the Kings Office was forfeitable, and that the happiness of
the Kingdom depended not on him, or any of the Royal Branches of that Stock,
Exact. Collect. p. 552. and Sir H. Ludlow, that he was not worthy to be King of
England. That this was the sense which their own Creatures had of the Covenant,
appears by the Answer of the Army to the Scots Declaration 1648. Who pleading
that they had Covenanted for preservation of the King, reply in a Paper Printed
for Robert White before the Kings death; That it was conceived, to be absurd
and hypocritical, to swear the Preservation of the Kings Person as a Man, and
at the same time to be engaged in a War against him, and he in the Field. And
Mr. Marshal had said long before, That if the King had been so slain, it had
been none of the Parliaments fault; for he might have kept himself farther off
if he pleased, p. 19. of his Letter. The same Man said in his Sermon, Jan. 8.
1647. The question is now, whether Christ or Antichrist shall be King. And in
a Sermon to the Mayor and Aldermen 1644. These are miserable and accursed men,
Factors for Hell, Satan's Boutefeus, and as true zealots are set on fire from
Heaven; so these Men's Fire is kindled from Hell, whither also it carries them.
Mr. Arrowsmith in a Sermon 1643. It is not a Kingdom divided against it self,
but one Kingdom against another; the Kingdom of Christ against Antichrist: So
my Countryman John Bond told them they fought against Babylon, Dagon and
Antichrist, and exhorted them to pull it down; though like Samson they dyed
with it. In a Sermon 1644. Joseph Boden said, they were fighting for the Lamb
against the Beast, Anno 1644. And Mr. Marshal in his (Meroz) I pray look on me
as one that comes to beat a Drum in your Ears, to see who will come out to
follow the Lamb. This use the Covenanters made of that limitation, defending
the Kings Person in the preservation of Religion; and you know who says, p.
423. of the Holy Commonwealth, We are to believe that Men would kill them,
whom they fight against. And doubtless if His Majesty had perished in the War,
the guilt had lain not only on the Soldiers, but chiefly on those that gave
them their Commission; The Author of Bounds and Bonds spoke home at that time,
If by the Covenant you thought your selves indispensably bound to preserve the
Royal Person, how comes it to pass, that you thought your selves obliged by the
same Covenant, to wage War against him.

I have heard of a distinction (says he) between his Power and his Person, but
never between his Person and himself. And if the Covenant would have dispensed
with any Soldier of England or Scotland, to kill his Person by accident of
War, (as his Life was often in danger before he came to the Scaffold) his death
had been violent, and the Obligation to preserve him had ended; and yet
according to this argument, the Covenant had not been broken; why then should
those Men think the World so dull, as not to understand plainly enough, that
the Covenant provided for his death more ways than one.

4. They that permitted such Pamphlets to be published without control, as
declared the King to be a Tyrant, Oxford Reasons, p. 21. That judged his
Actions to be illegal, and his Declarations false and scandalous, and his
suggestions as false as the Father of lies could invent, Exact Collect. p. 494.
That banished the Queen as a Traitor, Imprisoned the Bishops in the Tower; That
held him to such unreasonable Articles and Propositions, at Newcastle, and
Carisbrook, as His Majesty declared he could not consent unto, without
devesting him of his Authority; That rejected all his offers for peace; And in
January 17. 1647. Voted no more Addresses, and that they could repose no more
trust and confidence in him (which was a year before they were secluded the
House) which by the Army was understood of their intention to proceed in
Justice against him. They who deprived him of all the Comforts of his Life, his
Wife and Children, his Counselors and Chaplains, as if with an Italian hatred
they would have destroyed his Soul as well as his Body. These were they, that
did diminuere Caput Regis, as the Civil Law speaks, and they who afterward,
finding him thus bound and fettered, defamed and condemned, did obtruncare
Caput Regis, were but the others Executioners. What action was more barbarous
than that of the Scots, selling their Native Prince, that cast himself upon
them, to his declared and avowed Enemies? after which he was hurried up and
down, from one Prison to another, and inhumanly treated, till he was forcibly
taken from them. Whoever shall compare the Declaration of the Scots, when they
Invaded England, upon their Covenant, with the actings of the High Court of
Justice against His Majesty, may see, what Copy they wrote after, and whose
Journy-men they were, in bringing him to the Block, whom they had pulled out of
the Throne.

They were Roman Soldiers that actually Crucified our Savior; but we know who
Sold him, and how long the Chief Priests and Elders took Counsel against him,
Matthew. 27.2. And St. Peter tells the Men of Israel, Acts 2.23. Him have ye
taken, and with wicked hands Crucified, though the Roman Soldiers did it.
There is this only difference between the Graves and the Prisons of Kings, that
in the Prisons they dye daily, or are buried alive, in the Grave they are at
rest from all their fears and sorrows.

But to this it may be replied, that these were not Presbyters, properly so
called, though they were a Juncto of Presbyterians: I would therefore have it
considered, whose Scholars these were, who taught and animated them to these
practices, and upon whose principles they acted; I could set down such maxims
of the Consistorian Brethren, as the Jesuits would blush to own; but I shall
forbear to foul my Paper with such Collections, as I have among my Adversaria:
The Reader may satisfy himself, usque ad nauseam, if he observe what is
Authentickly mentioned in His Majesty's large Declaration, in Bishop Bancrofts
dangerous positions, in Bishop Spotswood, and the Writings of the several
Presbyteries of Scotland, in the result of false Principles, the Calvinists
Cabinet, and which is, instar omnium, the Holy Commonwealth. What fruit could
such bitter Roots produce, but Wormwood and Hemlock, as indeed they did in
every Furrow of our Fields? It was said of Cato, that he did good, not that he
might appear to be good, but because he could not do otherwise; and some Men do
espouse such principles, that if they Act according to them, they cannot do any
thing but what is notoriously evil. What shall we say of Mr. Andrew Ramsey,
that Preached, That it was Gods will that the Primitive Christians should
confirm the Truth by suffering; but now the Truth being established, it is his
will the Truth should be defended by Action in resisting Tyrants? and John
Goodwin said as bad of the Doctrine of resistance: Mr. Robert Blaire told his
Auditors. -- Beloved, the Lord has forsaken our King, and given him over to be
led by the Bishops, the blind brood of Antichrist, who are hot Beagles hunting
for the Blood of the Saints: Nor can I forget Mr. Douglas's Sermon at the
Coronation, who turned the Pulpit into a Scaffold, and Acted the Martyrdom of
the Father in the sight of the Son. After these Scottish Pipes did too many
English Presbyters dance; whose Sermons were Satyrs, and invectives against the
best of Kings, and his most Loyal Subjects. Take the active Covenanters from
the greatest to the least; and as they thought it their duty, so they made it
their business to do more than dethrone the King. I have said enough of Mr.
Marshal already, let him that would know more read his Sermon on Curse ye
Meroz, and not his only, but the most of those Sermons Preached to the
Parliament, especially on their Solemn days of Thanksgiving. Mr. Case in a
Sermon to the Court-Marshal, 1644. says, God would have no Mercy shown, where
the quarrel is against Religion, and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, p. 16. These
Men that would bring in Idolatry and false Worship to depose Christ from his
Throne, and set up Antichrist in his place; such a generation Christ has
doomed to destruction, Luke 19.27. As for these mine enemies, bring them forth
and slay them before me; and p. 18. What severity will God expect from you, who
are called to judge for God, between the Sons of Belial, bloody Rebels, and an
whole Christian Church and State, now resisting unto blood for Reformation? Let
me say to you, as God said to Moses concerning the Midianites, vex those
Midianites and smite them, for they vex you with their Wiles, Numb. 25.17, 18.
Mr. Th. Palmer said, that God saw it good to bring Christ into his Kingdom by a
Bloody way, p. 13. Dr. Downing of Hackney, in a Sermon to the Artillery-men; It
is lawful for defense of Religion and Reformation of the Church, to take up
Arms against the King: And Mr. Calamy seconds him, it is commendable to fight
for Peace, and Reformation against the Kings command.

Mr. Love, who was chosen as the fittest person to assist at the Treaty at
Vxbridge, does no doubt speak the Sense of the Juncto; he calls Episcopacy, and
Liturgy, two Plague Soars, and tells the Commissioners, that while their
enemies are going on in wicked practices, and they keep their principles; they
may as soon make Fire and Water to agree, yea I had almost said (quoth he)
Heaven and Hell: And again it is the Sword, not disputes that must end this
controversy. Wherefore turn your Plowshares into Swords, and your
Pruning Hooks into Spears, to fight the Lords Battles, to avenge the Blood of
the Saints which has been spilt, it must be avenged by us, or upon us: See p.
7. and 26. of Englands distemper. I have sometime feared, always prayed that
too much pity and mercy in our State Physicians, may not retard the healing of
the Land, p. 32. There are many malignant humors to be purged out of many of
the Nobles, and Gentry in this Kingdom, before we can be healed. -- It was the
Lord that troubled Achan, and cut him off; because he troubled Israel. O that
in this, our State Physicians would resemble God to cut off those from the
Land, who have distempered it, (would you know whom he means, he speaks
plainly) melius pereat unus quam unitas, Men that lie under the guilty of much
innocent Blood, are not fit persons to be at peace with, till all the guilt of
Blood be expiated, and avenged either by the Sword of the Law, or by the Law of
the Sword; else the peace can never be safe or just.

Are these the principles of Love? or can they consist with holiness? it will
amaze any Christian to consider, that though the hand of God might mind him of
his sin by the nature of his punishment: yet instead of declaring his
Repentance a little before his death, he professed his hatred to Malignants,
his opposing the Tyranny of a King, saying, I did, it is true, in my place and
calling oppose the forces of the late King, and were he alive again, and should
I live longer, (the cause being as then it was) I should oppose him longer: In
his Speech Sect. 14. Yet how horrid soever this final impenitence appears to
be, too many that should know, and do better things, have little sense of it.
And it is very remarkable, that Prideaux the Attorney General repeated most of
these passages against Mr. Love at his Trial, as Arguments that he ought not to
have any mercy showed him. See the Printed Trial. What a sad thing is it (says
Mr. Case) to see our King in the head of an Army of Babylonians, refusing as it
were to be called the King of England, Scotland and Ireland, and choosing
rather to be called the King of Babylon, on Isa. 43.4. p. 18.

Those that made their peace with the King at Oxford, were the Judas 's of
England, and it were just with God to give them their portion with Judas, says
Mr. Calamy in a Sermon Preached December. 25. 1644. p. 18.

Mr. Herle in a Sermon to the Commons, November. 5.44. Do Justice to the
greatest, Saul's Sons are not spared; no, nor may Agag or Benhadad, though
themselves Kings. Zimri and Cosbi, the Princes of the people must be pursued
into their Tents; This is the way to Consecrate your selves to God. Strickland
at the same time to the same tune; You know the Story of Gods message to Ahab,
for letting Benhadad go upon Composition. Brooks to the Commons, December. 26.
1648. Set some of those grand Malefactors a mourning (that have caused the
Kingdom to mourn so many years in Garments Rolled in Blood) by the Execution of
Justice. But though many of those Sons of Thunder had done wickedly, there is
one exceeds them all, as you may read partly in a submissive Petition of Mr.
Jenkins, and in a Sermon Preached Sept. 24. 1656. Who thus discovers his inward
parts to be very wickedness. Before the present Parliament; Worthy Patriots,
you that are our Rulers in Parliament, it is often said, we live in times
wherein we may be as good (he might more truly have said as bad) as we please,
wherein we enjoy purity, and plenty, praised for this be that God, who has
delivered us from the impositions of Prelatical Innovations,
Altar-genuflections, and cringes with Crosses, and all that Popish Trash and
Trumpery; and truly I speak no more than what I have often thought, and said,
the removal of these insupportable burdens, contravailes for the Blood, and
treasure shed, and spent in these late distractions; nor did I as yet ever hear
of any godly man that desired (were it possible) to purchase their friends or
money again at so dear a rate, as is the return of these, to have the
Soul-burd'ning Antichristian Yoaks reimposed on us. And if any such there be,
I am sure their desire is no part of their godliness. From this Man's principles
one has observed, That whoever are of this persuasion, do wish this King on
the Scaffold too, provided that would free them from our Episcopacy, and think
it lawful to Rebel again, and destroy as many Families more, to shake off that
Yoke. Again Mr. Jenkins in his Conscientious questions concerning submission to
the then present power, 1651. Asks whether the stupendous Providence of God,
manifested in the destruction of the late King, and his adherents in so many
pitched Battles, and in the Nations Universal forsaking of Charles Stuart, God
has not as plainly removed the Government from Charles Stuart, and bestowed it
on others, as ever he removed and bestowed any Government by any Providence in
any age? And whether a refusal to yield obedience and Subjection to this
present Government, be not a refusal to acquiesce in the wise and righteous
providence of God, and a flat breach of the Fifth Commandment? (See his
Petition.) And now I cannot but wonder why Mr. Baxter should move this
question, who that Juncto of Presbyters was, etc. Unless he took as much
pleasure and glory, as others do shame and sorrow in the repetition. It is a
sad Observation which some have made, That not one of the Regicides manifested
his Repentance for that impious Act, for which they were Executed: The Lord
give all guilty persons more Grace.

Mr. Bagshaw says, that Mr. Baxter was guilty of stirring up and fomenting the
War, as any one whatsoever, p. 1. And my Lord of Worcester says, that he had
done what he could to make this King odious to his people, p. 2. Of his Answer,
and that he Sowed the Seeds of Schism and Sedition, and blew the Trumpet of
Rebellion among them at Kidderminster, p. 4. And adds, I my self have heard him
at a conference in the Savoy, maintaining such a position, as was destructive
to the Legislative power, both in God and Man, and produced the Assertion under
his hand; and when Mr. Baxter reported that the Bishop had defamed him; to
prevent that report, the Bishop collected some of his Political Theses or
Maxims of Government, the repetition of a few whereof will be too many. He
tells us the War was begun in their streets, before the King and Parliament had
any Armies, p. 457. of H. Commonwealth. He confesses that he was one that
blew the Coals of our unhappy Divisions; and that if he had been for the King,
he had incurred the danger of condemnation. H. Commonwealth, p. 485. And
should I do otherwise, I should be guilty of Treason, or disloyalty against the
Sovereign Power of the Land. He holds that the Sovereignty is divided between
King and Parliament, and that the King invading the other part, they may
lawfully defend their own by War, and the Subject lawfully assist them; yea
though the Power of the Militia be expressly given to the King; The Law
supposing that the Militia is given the King against enemies, not against the
Commonwealth: These. 358. he says (its true) that now that the Parliament has
declared, where the Sovereign Power is, he should acknowledge it, and submit to
it, where he supposes that the King owes his Sovereignty to the Parliament;
and if they should again challenge it to themselves, he would rather obey them
than the King; Bishop of Worcesters Letter, p. 8. 9. And this appears clearly
by what follows, p. 486. That having often searched into his heart, whether
he did lawfully engage in the War or not, and lawfully encourage so many
Thousands to it (the Issue was) he could not see that he was mistaken in the
main cause, nor dares he repent of it, nor forbear doing the same if it were to
do again in the same state of things, (though the Power of the Militia be given
to the King.) He tells us indeed (says the Bishop) that if he could be
convinced that he had sinned in this matter, that he would as gladly make a
public Recantation, as he would eat or drink; which seeing he has not yet
done, it is evident he is still of the same mind, and consequently would upon
the same occasion do the same things, viz. fight and encourage as many
Thousands as he could to fight against the King, for any thing that calls it
self, or which he is pleased to call a full and free Parliament: As likewise
that he would own and submit to any Usurper of the Sovereignty, as set up by
God, although he came to it by the Murder of his Master, and by trampling upon
the Parliament. Lastly, that he would hinder as much as possibly he could the
restoring of the rightful Heir to the Crown: And now whether a Man of this
Judgment, and of these affections, ought to be permitted to Preach or no; let
any Man but himself Judge. And may we not reasonably think, that those Men did
approve of that Hellish Fact, who did post factum, tell the World of his
Tyranny, and Maladministration of Government, and inclination to Popery: And
applauded the grand Regicide, as one that did piously, prudently, and
faithfully to his immortal honor exercise the Government.

I conclude this with the words of a worthy Person, who Printed a view of the
Life and Reign of King Charles the First, even when the Faction was in Power,
p. 94. The Presbyterians carried on the Tragedy from the beginning to the end;
from the bringing in the Scots, to the beginning of the War; from thence till
they brought him Prisoner to Holmby House, and then quarrelled with the
Independents for taking the work out of their hands, and Robbing them of the
long expected fruit of their Plots and Practices. -- The Independents confessed
they had put Charles Stuart to death, but that the King had been murdered long
before by the Presbyterians, who had deprived him of his Crown, Sword, and
Scepter; of his Sword by wresting from him the Militia; of his Scepter,
divesting him of his power of calling Parliaments; they deprived him of his
natural Liberty, as a Man of the Society of his Wife and Children, and
attendance of Servants, and of all those comforts which might make his Life
valuable; so that there was nothing left for the Independents to do, but to put
an end to those Calamities, into which this miserable Man had been so
accursedly plunged by the Presbyterians. And so much for the Juncto of
Presbyters, that dethroned the King.

The main Battalia being thus discomfited, the little reserves will be more
easily defeated.

Mr. Baxt. Was it they that Petitioned and protested against it?

Answ. Who ever Petitioned or protested against the proceedings against the
King, until the Army took him out of the Parliaments power? and was he not
dethroned before that time? afterward perhaps some of them did as the Hiena,
that has destroyed a Man and gorged himself, weep and howl over the Carcass,
because he could not devour him wholly.

Mr. Baxt. Whether it was not an Episcopal Parliament (forty to one, if not an
hundred) that began the War against the King?

Answ. With what face can one that pretends to Truth say this? when it is so
notoriously known, that till by a prevailing Faction in that Parliament, the
Bishops, and the Loyal and Episcopal party were forced away, nothing could be
done against the King.

Mr. Baxt. Whether the General and Commanders of the Army, Twenty to one, were
not Conformists?

Answ. They had been such indeed, but, when they began the War, they neither
feared God, nor honored the King, but made the Reformation of Religion, the
pretense of the War; which as the Covenant shows, was the abollishing of
Bishops, Liturgy, etc.

Mr. Baxt. Whether the Major Generals in the Countries were not almost all
Episcopal Conformists? The Earl of Stamford was over your Country.


Answ. Stamford I knew, and one Baxter his Engineer; but that he was either a
Major General, or a Conformist I never heard. The first Major General that I
knew in these parts was Desborough, after that the Kingdom was Cantonized; and
I believe the Turkish Bashaws, were as much Conformists as any of them.

Mr. Baxt. Whether the Admiral and Sea-Captains were not almost all Episcopal
Conformists (as Heylen distinguishes them of Archbishop Abbots mind,
disliking Arminianisme, Monoplys, etc.

Answ. I suppose the Admiral and his Officers had well studied the points of
Arminianisme; when, as Mr. Baxter that fought against them, wrote for them in
the judgment of his Brethren, and as I have heard that Dr. Hammond said of him,
he was an Arminian too, though he did not know it.

Mr. Baxt. Whether the Episcopal Gentry did not more of them take the
Engagement (and many Episcopal Ministers) more than the Presbyterians?

Answ. The King was dethroned before the engagement was imposed, and if you
drove any of the Episcopal party into that Snare; I hope that as Peter for
denying his Master, they have repented of it, and so are pardoned, I wish I
could say so much of the Covenanters.

Mr. Baxt. Whether the Archbishop of York, were not the Parliaments
Major General?

Answ. That he was a Traitor if he took any such Commission is no doubt, and
when among the Twelve, there was one that sold his Master, it is not strange, if
there were one of Twenty four Bishops that betrayed his Liege Prince; it was
pity that any Apostate Clergyman should have an higer Office in that Army
than Mr. Baxter, but I think you did them more service, as an Adjutant General,
than he as a Major General.

Mr. Baxt. Whether if this Parliament, which made the Act for Uniformity and
Conventicles, should quarrel with the King, it would prove them to be
Presbyterians and Non-conformists?

Answ. This is that which I know too many did expect, and I hope they will
never live to see it; but if it should have happened, I would say, they had as
much contradicted their principles, and falsified their engagements, as Mr.
Baxter had done, almost.

Mr. Baxt. Whether the Presbyterian Ministers of London, and Lancashire, did
not write more against the Regicides and Usurpers, and declare against them,
than all the Conformists? or as much?

Answ. What they did against the Regicides, was long after the King was
dethroned, and so is not pertinent to the question; yet I have somewhere read,
that the London Ministers, about 59. in number, as I remember, in an endeavor
to vindicate themselves from the Blood of the Royal Martyr, Printed 1678. did
say thus; The woeful miscarriages of the King himself, which we cannot but
acknowledge to be very many, and great in his Government; have cost the Three
Kingdoms so dear, and cast him down from his excellency, into a horrid pit of
misery beyond example. This was a Repentance somewhat like that of Judas, when
he had irrecoverably ruined his Lord and Master, but he could not wash his
hands from that innocent Blood.

Mr. Baxt. And the Long Parliament was forced and most of them cast out before
the King could be destroyed.

Answ. But not before the King was Actually dethroned, and it was about Twelve
Months before they were forced off by the Army, that they Voted their
Non-addresses.

Mr. Baxt. And when they were restored, it made way for his Restoration.

Answ. Surely they could not do it on your principles, which assert that the
King may be deposed; nor are the Subjects afterward to trouble themselves for
his Restoration; nor is the injured Prince himself to seek his resettlement, if
the Commonwealth may prosper without him, and so he is obliged to resign his
Government; and thus the people being free from any Obedience to him, may chose
another King, or if not, a Commonwealth may be pitched on. And had it been left
to the Presbyterians to bring in the King on their Articles, he had not been
admitted to this day.

Mr. Baxt. And Sir Thomas Allen Lord Mayor, and the City of London inviting
General Monck from the Rump into the City, and joining with him, was the very
day that turned the Scales for the King. Not forgetting that Mr. Baxter
Preached to the Parliament, as he often tells us the day before the King was
Voted home.

Answ. Sir Thomas Allen, and the City did their duty Nobly and Worthily; but
what turned the Scales against the Rump, that you reflect so upon, that Rump
which while it had a better name, and a little more power, though then its
nakedness appeared sufficiently, you prayed for it in these words, May the
Parliament be holy, and this ascertained from Generation to Generation, by such
a necessary regulation of Elections, as I have hereafter described, and that
all those that by wickedness have forfeited their Liberties, may neither choose
nor be chosen, p. 14. 15. And again, That they were sworn, and sworn, and sworn
again to be faithful to, and to defend them; and that they were the best
Governors in all the World, and such as it is forbidden Subjects to oppose upon
pain of Damnation. So that I conclude, whoever restored this King (for which
let God have all the praise) I still affirm, it was a Juncto of Presbyters that
dethroned his Royal Father.

This may suffice concerning the third and fourth part of the Accusation of
destroying the King and disloyal principles.

The Fifth, That they are plotting a Rebellion, to which Mr. Baxter forgot to
make any defense. Only he thought it his duty to give this account of their
principles, as far as they are known to him. Where First, he seems rather to
defend than disclaim his Political Aphorisms, though he desires the Book may be
taken as Non scriptus: This will not satisfy; If he be of another Judgment
now, he ought to have undeceived his party by confuting those dangerous
principles, whereas he rather continues to practice them still. But what I
Judge undeniable, says Mr. Baxter, I here declare. Now let the Reader go on
from these words, until he come to the period, where he says, As I have here
described the Judgment of such Non-conformists as I have Conversed with, I do
desire those that seek our blood and ruin by the false accusation of
Rebellious principles to tell me if they can; what body or party of Men on
Earth, have more sound and Loyal principles of Government and Obedience? And if
any person can extract any such principles within all that period, I will say,
he has turned Mr. Baxter's Whetstone into the Philosophers Stone. He says,
indeed we are all bound, if it be possible, and as much as in us lies to live
peaceably, and follow peace with all men. But how have they followed this
principle? We have, he says, many years begged for peace of those that should
have been the Preachers, and wifest promoters of peace, and cannot yet obtain
it, nor quiet them, that call for fire and sword, not knowing what spirit they
are of. This is the Presbyterian way of Petitioning for Peace, to rail against
their Superiors, charging them with persecution, fire and sword; and asserting
that there can be no peace, until the Laws for Conformity be all reversed, the
Bishops Authority and the Kings too, in Ecclesiastical affairs taken away, the
Liturgy exchanged for Mr. Baxters new Directory, as he has at large declared
in the first part; and such a desolation as this they call peace, solitudinem
volunt and pacem vocant. He says, the Declaration about Ecclesiastical affairs
tells us, that the King would have given the people peace. Answ. And there
were a sort of men, whom the King for peace sake, desired to read only so much
of the Liturgy as was beyond exception, and they would not; did not these tell
the World they would have no peace but victory? So true it is as Mr. Baxter
says, with unpeaceble Clergymen, no Plea, no Petition (no not of the King
himself) could prevail, but the things that have been are, and the Confusions
of our age come from the same causes and sorts of men, as the Confusions in
former ages did; for which we need not go to Mr. Baxters Church History, the
Men and methods of 41. and 42. are well nigh revived. They told His Majesty in
their second Paper for Peace, That if he would grant their desires, it would
revive their Hearts to daily and earnest Prayers for his Prosperity. But what
if he deny them? Then p. 12. it astonisheth us to foresee what doleful effects
our Divisions would produce, which we will not so much as mention in
particular, lest our words should be misunderstood. And it is obvious enough to
whom they would apply that passage, p. 117. of their reply to the Exceptions:
As Basil said to Valens the Emperor, that would have him pray for the Life of
his Son: If thou will receive the true Faith, thy Son shall live; which when
the Emperor refused, he said, the Will of the Lord be done: So we say to you,
if you will put on Charity, and promote peace, God will honor you; but if you
will do contrary, the Will of the Lord be done with your honors. Amen say I:
Let them fall into the hands of God, who is still exceeding gracious to them,
and not into the hands of such cruel men, who have War in their Hearts while
they Petition for Peace. And will Mr. Baxter still demand what party of Men on
Earth have more Loyal Principles. Our English Papists, who as Mr. Baxter grants
adhered to the King, would be offended if I should say, they that fought
against the King, were more Loyal than they, who with Lives and Fortunes fought
for him; dares he compare with the Church of England, who lived and died, and
rose again with their King, to the great regret and envy of those Men? I will
not say only that the Primitive Christians, but even the Old Greeks and Romans
had better Principles than any you practice by, and will rise up in Judgment
against such a Generation. How vainly do you inquire what Hottoman or Bodin
have written? Consider the Precepts of our great Lord, and the Practice of the
Primitive Christians for the first 600. years, and how night the true Members
of the Church of England followed those Principles and Examples for Twenty
years together, and how far the Presbyterians Acted contrary to them, and then
convince the World whether the party you Boast of, or these were most Loyal.
But Mr. Baxter demands; Must this Age answer for their Fathers deeds; what is
all this to the present Non-conformists? Answ. If they follow the deeds of
their Fathers, we cannot deny them the reputation of being their Children, who
(without controversy) begat and Nurtured them.

And though I have not the opportunity to ask those Noble Lords and Gentlemen,
whom Mr. Baxter names concerning the Conformity of their Fathers; yet I can
give you their Sense, and the Opinion of the whole Nation, concerning the
behavior of their Children; who have as great a mind to begin a second War.
And take it in the best English Dialect, (i. e.) in the Acts of Parliament; And
first in the Act against Conventicles, 16. Car. 2di N. 2. For providing of
further and more speedy remedies against the growing and dangerous practice of
Seditious Sectaries, and other disloyal persons; who under pretense of tender
Consciences, do at their meetings contrive insurrections, as late experience
has shown, etc. And in the Oxford Act, they say of those that Preach in
unlawful Assemblies, Conventicles or Meetings, under color or pretense of the
Exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, have
settled themselves in diverse Corporations of this Kingdom, three or more in a
place, thereby taking opportunity to distill the poisonous principles of
Schisms and Rebellion into the hearts of His Majesty's Subjects, to the great
danger of the Church and Kingdom, etc. Now how little difference there is
between such Seditious tumults and meetings, the late Rebellion in Scotland
does demonstrate, where the chief Masters of those Assemblies Preached an
Evangelium Armatum, and having in cold Blood barbarously murdered the most
Reverend Archbishop, drew many Thousands into the Field, and would have done
the like by the King himself, had he been in their power, as by their
Declarations we may guess. I do not accuse their Brethren of England of
Rebellion; the Parliament says, their actions tend to it, and that is,
Tantamount to a Plot. Sedition and tumults, open and professed disobedience to
the Laws, adhering to a Rebellious Covenant, refusing the Tests of Obedience,
which require only the disclaiming of Rebellious Principles and Practices,
Preaching and Printing what is actually Seditious, and tends directly to
Rebellion; and all this when our Parliament has declared that there is an
horrid Plot on foot, for the destroying of the King and established Religion;
to the latter whereof you are avowed Enemies: this may draw at least a
suspicion on you, that you are in the Plot, whether you know it or no; for as I
suppose, in the beginning of the First War, very few of them that were engaged,
intended a Plot against the King and the Church, yet were acted to the ruin of
them both. So now a great many that call themselves Protestants, may be
over-acted by the Papists; who if they can once destroy the Church of England,
by means of our divisions, which is the most likely means, may cry Victoria,
and boast that we have destroyed our selves. And then you may say truly, p.
123. of the second part of your Plea, The blood will be on you, and your
Children.

Mr. Baxter professes in his Preface, a detestation of the lying Malignity,
and bloody Cruelty of the Papists, but p. 235. of his first part, he concludes
it to be but reasonable, if on such necessity, ( i. e. the penalties for
Nonconformity) they should accept of favor from any Papists that would save
them. And that if one party, ( viz. the authority of the Nation) would bring
them to such a pass, that they must be hanged, imprisoned, ruined or worse,
unless the favor of the Papists deliver them; And the other party, viz. the
Non-conformists had rather be saved by the Papists, than be hanged or ruined by
Protestants, they ought not to be suspected of Popery; this shows that he has
a better Opinion of the Papists than of the Conformists. Some blush not, says
Mr. Baxter, to accuse the Non-conformists, as the bringers in of Popery by
desiring Liberty, p. 245. that is, that there is a door opened to them by our
Divisions. Answ. None has more reason to blush at this than Mr. Baxter; for in
his defense of the principles of Love, As to Popery (says he) the interest of
the Protestant Religion must be much kept up, by means of the Parish Ministers,
and by the Doctrine and Worship there performed (not by Conventicles then) for
they that think and endeavor contrary to this, of which side soever, shall
have the hearty thanks and concurrence of the Papists (who then are in the
Plot.) Nor am I causelessly afraid, says Mr. Baxter, that if we suffer the
Principles and practices which I write against, ( i. e. the dividers and
destroyers of peace and love) to proceed without our contradiction, Popery will
get by it so great advantage, as may hazard us all, and we may lose that which
the several parties do contend about.

Three ways, especially Popery will grow out of our divisions.

1. By the Odium and scorn of our divisions, inconsistency and multiplied
Sects. -- Thousands have been drawn into Popery, or Confirmed in it already,
and I am persuaded, says he, that all the Arguments in Bellarmine, and all
other Books that ever were written, have not done so much to make Papists in
England, as the multitude of Sects among our selves.

2. Who knows not how fair a game the Papists have to play by our Divisions?
methinks I hear them hissing on both parties, saying to one side, lay more upon
them, and abate them nothing; And to the other stand it out and yield to
nothing, hoping that our divisions will carry us to such practices, as will
make us accounted Seditious, Rebellious and dangerous to public peace, and so
they may pass for better Subjects than we, or else they may get a Toleration
with us. And shall they use our hands to do their work? we have already served
them unspeakably, both in this, and in abating the Odium of the Gunpowder Plot,
and other Treasons.

3. It is not the least of our dangers, lest by our follies, extremities and
rigours we so exasperate the Common People, as to make them readier to join
with the Papists than with us, in case of Competitions, Invasions or
Insurrections against the King and Kingdoms peace. And in the Key for
Catholics, The Papists (says he) account that if the Puritans get the Day,
they shall make great advantage of it; for they will be unsettled, and all in
pieces; factions and distractions, (say they) give us footing for continual
attempts; to make all sure we will have our party secretly among Puritans also,
that we may be sure to maintain our interest. And in his Holy Commonwealth,
Let the Magistrate cherish the Disputations of the Teachers, and let him
procure them often to debate together, and reprove one another, for so when all
Men see that there is nothing certain among them, they will easily yield says
Contzen the Jesuit.

Pudet haec opprobria, etc. -- You conclude your second part of the Plea, with
some Petitions out of the Liturgy, which I have reason to think you do with an
ill design; praying, that he, whose Service is perfect freedom, would defend
you his Humbled Servants (non satis humiliati quia nondum humiles,) in all
assaults of your Enemies, etc. Whom you mean by your Enemies all parties will
guess. But I shall commend to you the same advice which Bishop Prideaux gave
the Assembly, when they consulted him what they should do; his direction was,
that they would consider their ways, and return to their Obedience, and say, in
the Confession of the Church. -- Almighty and most Merciful Father, we have
erred and strayed from thy ways like lost Sheep, We have followed too much the
devices and desires of our own hearts, we have offended against thy Holy Laws,
we have left undone those things which we ought to have done, and we have done
those things which we ought not to have done, and there is no health in us,
etc. And the God of Heaven give us all Grace, so to confess and forsake our
Sins, that we may find Mercy.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce my dispatch of the former Papers, I met with a Prognostication written
by Richard Baxter, which though it were Calculated chiefly for England; yet it
presumes, First to foretell, what shall befall the Churches on Earth, until their
Concord; and Secondly, what from thence to the end. But the first part (though
it be a Contradiction in terms) may be called more agreeably to the matter, A
Prognostication of what is past; for it has been twice Acted over in this
Nation. And the Second part is a Prognostication of what never shall be. For by
Mr. Baxters method, it is impossible we should ever see such a Golden Age of
Love. There are but two things worthy of the Readers notice; The First is, the
time when it was written, viz. When by the Kings Commission we (in vain)
treated for Concord, 1661. This circumstance he does with so much concern and
diligence labor to convince the Reader of, that (as if his Reputation of being
a Prophet depended on it) he tells you again in the first words of the Epistle;
It is many years since this Prognostication was written, 1661. Except the
sixteen last Lines; and in the end of the Epistle, he cautioneth the Reader,
not to mistake it for Historical Narratives. And again at the end of the Book,
he tells us of several Books of his, viz. The true and only Terms of Concord,
Catholic Theology, and The Cure of Church Divisions, which were all written
long since the Prognostication. This extraordinary diligence about so
inconsiderable a Circumstance, made me suspect that it was a Soar place upon
which he rubbed so frequently, and that it was an itch of vain glory that
occasioned it. And I believe, when I have imparted my second thoughts to the
Reader, he will be much of the same mind with me.

For, First, I considered that there needed no spirit of Prophecy, to foretell
what effects Nonconformity had produced many years before 1661. when he
pretends this Prognostication was written; nor yet to foretell what the
Non-conformists were resolved (as much as in them lay) to attempt with all
their might. Wherewith I find they were not afraid to threaten the King, and
the Bishops, as I have elsewhere observed.

But secondly, He tells us, P. 28. N. 105. That where Papists or Heretics are
shut out by Laws, they will secretly contribute the utmost of their endeavors
to make the sufferings of Dissenting Protestants as grievous as possibly they
can; that in despite of them, their own necessities may compel them to cry out
for liberty: Till they procured a common Toleration for all, and opened the
Door for Papists and Heretics, as well as for themselves. Where (N. B.) Mr.
Baxter speaks of a Toleration, which had been procured, and a Door opened for
Papists and Heretics, which must needs look back to the time past; and in all
probability he intended that indulgence, which upon the Non-conformists Cries
for liberty, was granted by His Majesty about Seven years since; and if so,
then this Prognostication was written some time after that common Toleration,
which was of a much later date than 1661. And so, some Words and Phrases seem
to be, as new Impositions, Subscriptions and Oaths, and serving the Bishops in
Jayles; but I lay no stress on these.

3. Mr. Baxter tells the Reader, the Prognostication was written 1661. Except
the Sixteen last Lines, which Lines P. 66. begin thus. I say all this is, etc.
Now it is obvious to every Reader, that there is a necessary connection and
dependence between these Sixteen Lines, and that which precedes; for in the
preceding Paragraph which he calls a Consectary, you have these Nominative
Cases, which have no Verb to answer them, until you take in part of these
Sixteen Lines, viz. All the Romish Dreams, and all the Plots, etc. I say all
this is; whereby it appeared to me that the Sixteen last Lines were of the same
contexture, and written at the same time, as the rest was, which could not be
in 1661. For those Three Books of his, mentioned in the Sixteen Lines, were not
then extant. So that I doubt not, but he that Reads the whole Consectary, will
be of my mind, that it was written at the same time, as the last Sixteen Lines
were. And if so, the Prognostication was written since the Book called the True
and only Terms of Concord, Printed 1689. I perceive by Mr. Baxters Contextures,
that he has not well learnt the Art of Weaving Spiritualized.

4. I suspected also the Reason which Mr. Baxter gives why though it were
written in 1661. yet it was cast by, viz. Lest it should offend the guilty. Now
it is notorious, whom Mr. Baxter condemns as guilty, throughout the whole
Prognostication; namely the Bishops, whom he accounts Enemies to the
Non-conformists. And it is as notorious, what little care he had of not
offending them, which I have observed from the Petition for Peace, the Reply to
the Bishops exceptions, and other Printed Papers, wherein Mr. Baxter had a
chief hand. Besides in 1661. Mr. Baxter was on more equal terms with the
Bishops, with whom he was joined in Commission by the King, and the Bishops
were not warm in their Chairs, nor did the Act for Uniformity take effect,
until Bartholomew day 1662. And the Sectarian Spirit (which then prevailed
among the people, was as Mr. Baxter observes, p. 40. of his Prognostication)
like Gunpowder, Errat. p. 32. it should be n. 120.
ready to take fire upon such injuries, as he there mentions. So that
certainly that was a fitter season for the publishing of this Prognostication,
had it been then Penned, than this present juncture of Affairs in 1680. when
the Bishops and Conformity are enjoined and Confirmed by Law; and so the
offense is much greater, and less like to have its desired success. But if all
these Conjectures should be groundless; yet the very publishing of a
Prognostication of things to come, after they are come to pass, carries with
it the Suspicion of a Cheat, the pretense that it was written long before
notwithstanding. But (whether it were written in 1661. or which I rather think
in 1680.) the second thing which the Reader may observe is, that Mr. Baxter by
publishing this Prognostication, has rendered himself obnoxious to those Laws,
which are still in force against the spreaders of false News, under which the
Authors of pretended Prophesies are included. And it will be hard to find any
Pamphlet that offends more against those Laws, being directly intended to
infuse into, and encourage in His Majesty's Subjects a Seditious, Factious and
Implacable Spirit, as well against the known Laws of the Land, as against the
established Constitutions of the Church, by suggesting groundless fears, and
jealousies of things that are not, and false and slanderous representation of
things that are, as in P. 32. He intimates the Clergy to be Worldly, Vbi suprd
N. 120.
Proud, Covetous, Domineering, Malignant and Lazy; The Plague of the World, the
Troublers of Princes, and Dividers of the Churches. And P. 9. That they will
please the great Men of the World, for Lordships, Wealth and Honor, to be
Rulers of their Brethren, and to have their Wills. And P. 12. Being Hypocrites
as to Christianity and Godliness ( like Judas that loved the Bag better than
Christ) they will make themselves a Religion consisting of the mere Corpse and
dead Image of true Religion. And P. 13. The powerful Worldly Clergy, will think
it their interest to devise some new Impositions, which they know the other
cannot yield to, to work them out. Whether they be Oaths, Subscriptions, Words
or Actions, which they believe to be against Gods Word. (Here I suspect that
Mr. Baxter had respect to the Oaths, and Subscriptions required by the Act of
Conformity, and by Words, those of Assent and Consent, which were not enjoined
until 1662. and therefore probably, this Prognostication was written
afterward.) And P. 14. Their Sufferings will make many otherwise sober
Ministers too impatient, and to give their Tongues leave to take down the
Honor of the Clergy. And this will stir up in the people an inordinate,
unwarrantable, passionate zeal, which will corrupt their Prayers, and make them
speak unseemly things, and pray for the downfall of that Clergy, which they take
to be the Enemies of God and godliness and that, to speak easily or charitably
of such Men, is but to be lukewarm, and indifferent between God and the Devil.
P. 20. Some (of the Nonconforming Ministers) will think these passions of the
people needful to check the fierceness of the Afflicters (though it do but
exasperate,) and therefore will let them alone. Some of the Younger or more
injudicious hot-brained sort (of the Nonconforming Ministers) will put them
on, and make them believe that all Communion with any Conforming Ministers, or
their Parish Churches is unlawful, and their Forms of Worship, are sinful and
Antichristian, and that they are all temporizers, and betrayers of truth and
purity, that Communicate or Assemble with them And P. 22, 23. They will carry
about among themselves, viz. (the Heretical patty) false reports and slanders,
-- partly, because they think that humane converse binds them to believe the
reports which those that are accounted good Men utter. And partly because that
they will think that the upholding of their cause, which they think is Gods,
does need the suppression of these Men's Credits and Reputation that are against
it. P. 25, 26. The Godly and Peaceable Conformists, will get the Love of the
Sober by their Holy Doctrine and Lives; but will be despised by the Sectaries,
because they Conform: And will be suspected by the Proud and persecuting
Clergy, as leaning to the dissenters, and thereupon will be under continual
jealousies and rebukes. And perhaps new points of Conformity shall be devised
to be imposed on them, which it is known their consciences are against, that so
they also may be forced to be Non-conformists, because secret Enemies are more
dangerous than open Foes; And so part of them will turn downright
Non-conformists, and the other part will live in displeasure, till they see an
opportunity to show it. And these are the likeliest to cross and weaken the
Worldly persecuting Clergy of any Men. Certainly this was no Prognostication in
1661. but an History of what was done betwixt that and 1680.

Concerning Princes, he says, he will give no other Prognostics but Christ's,
(which yet Christ never applied to Princes.) That it will be as hard for a rich
Man ( i. e. for a Prince in his sense) to enter into Heaven, as for a Camel to
go through a Needles Eye. P. 34. The Magistrates may guess by this, what
Charity Mr. Baxter has for them.

That this was no Prognostication, but a Plot of Mr. Baxters to imbroil the
Nation, may farther appear by what he writes, P. 122, 123. Of his Way of
Concord, where he thus carries on the design; He supposes a Decree that none
shall Preach the Gospel, but those that subscribe, swear, promise or profess,
or do somewhat accounted sinful; that strict Laws are made to punish such as
disobey, lest their Commands be contemned; then that the Preachers will be cast
out and silenced; yet they still believe, that God Commands what Man forbids,
and that it is a damnable Sin, no less than Sacrilege and Cruelty to Souls to
forsake their calling and duty: The Preachers then must be fined, imprisoned or
banished for Preaching, and the people for public Worshipping; but when fined,
they will go on still; nothing can remedy it, but either perpetual
Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death. When this is done, more will arise of the
same mind, and continue the work: And the Prelates that cause this, will be
taken by the suffering people for Thorns and Thistles, and grievous Wolves, and
the Military Ministers of the Devil. The indifferent common people will look on
the persecutors, as the Enemies of good Men, and of public peace, that do all
this by Pride and Domination. The ungodly rabble of Drunkards, Swearers,
Adulterers, and such like hating godliness and strict living, will cry up the
Prelates, and Triumph over the sufferers. Thus the Land will be divided, the
Prelates and other Persecutors with the dirty malignant rabble of the
licentious will make one party, these will call themselves the Orthodox, and
the Church the sufferers, and those that pity them will be the other. The
conjunction of the debauched and malignant rabble with the Prelates will
increase sober Men's disaffection to them, and make Men take them for Patrons of
impiety; and how sad a Condition must such Churches be in? This Prophecy is
the same for substance, and I cannot think it much different in the
circumstance of time; the design of this is the same, which in the Title Page
of his Prognostic, he says, is to instruct the Sons of Love and Peace in their
duties. But how ill does such Railery become a dying Man, or a mortified
Christian? to defame the present Governors, and teach others to do the same.
If St. James speaks truth, This Man's Religion is vain, Chapter 1.26. And under this
Artifice of pretended Prophesies, Mr. Baxter strikes at the Root of all
Authority. For if Men may be excused from Obeying the Laws by pretending
something sinful in them (which yet they know not) when they know certainly
that disobedience is a sin: Then on the same grounds that the Presbyterians
disobey their Rulers, the Independents may disobey them, and the Anabaptists
both, and Children and Servants their Parents and Masters. And then any Man as
well as Mr. Baxter might Prognosticate that there can be no peace where such
Principles and Practices are encouraged.

And now I appeal to the Christian Reader, whether these suggestions were fit
Legacies for a dying Man to bequeath to a divided and dying people, of which he
tells the Reader, he was taking his farewell in 1661. but lived to publish them
in 1680. that is near Twenty years after, when the age was almost ruined by the
practice of such unchristian intimations; and both sides were preparing for the
increase of their fury and extremities, and at last for Repentance or ruinous
Calamity, if they do (says Mr. Baxter, p. 31.) as I have described. And he
could not but think, that with a great many his Descriptions would go for
Prescriptions, and be as a Rule and Law for too many to walk by. For in the
Title Page, he says, it was published to instruct the Sons of Love and Peace in
their duties and expectations. These things considered, I can have no better
esteem of Mr. Baxter's than I had of Lillies Prognostications, which were
designs to revive and support The good old Cause. Having considered the first
part of the Prognostication, which concerns things that are past, there need no
reflections on the second part, because it concerns things that never shall be.
I only observe that the evils which he speaks of are generally effected, but
the good things are Calculated for the golden Age of Love; and when that
revolution will be, if ever it be, his Prophetic Spirit cannot discern. If
ever it be, it will be when all Men are of one mind, that is, of Mr. Baxters
mind, who is seldom of the same mind with himself, and so it is like never to
be. And therefore I advise the Printer, though not for his own profit, yet for
Mr. Baxters Credit, and the public Welfare, to lay up this Prognostication,
and some other of Mr. Baxters Books among the Almanacks, for 1661.

In perpetuam Rei oblivionem.

A FAREWELL TO Mr. Baxter.
IN the Preface to your late Book of Concord, you desire, That if you err,
they (to whom you write) would faithfully detect your error, that you may
repent before you die, and may leave behind you a Recantation of all your
mistakes and miscarriages, as you say you intend to do, upon Conviction. You
confess that by our differences, Satan has got great advantage in England
against that Christian Love, which is the Life and Character of Christ's
Disciples, and to cause Wrath, Envy, Hatred and Strife, that the honor and
success of the Ministry is thereby hindered; The Wicked and Infidels are
hardened, the weak scandalized, the Papists encouraged to despise us all; and
many turn to them scandalized by our discord: Sects are advantaged, the Church
and Kingdom by Division weakened, and the King denied the comfort which he might
have in a loving, united, and Concordant people. Now I beseech you lay your
hand upon your heart, and consider whether your actions and writings have not
notoriously contributed to these mischiefs. You confess that you were one that
blew up the Coals of our unhappy Divisions; and that if you had been for the
King, you had incurred the danger of Condemnation; you gave several intimations
that the King was Popishly affected, (as Bishop Bramhal affirms,) you
encouraged great numbers to that War, many of which perished in it: You
applauded the grand Regicide, as one that prudently, piously and faithfully to
his immortal honor did exercise the Government, you have since the
establishment encouraged and defended separation (notwithstanding you did
sometime seem to oppose it.) And now at last you proclaim the terms of our
Communion, to be such as have increased an impossibility of Conforming. And why
may I not now expostulate with you, as you do with those whom you thought
guilty of the like evil, p. 14. of your answer to Bagshaw. Is it possible for
any sober Christian in the World to take them to be blameless, or those to be
little sins? what? both the violating the person, and the Life of (so good) a
King? and the change of the fundamental Government or Constitution, and the
Armies force upon the Parliament, which they promised Obedience to, -- the
making their General, Protector; The making an instrument of Government
themselves without the people; The setting up their second Protector, -- The
setting up the remnant of the Commons again, the pulling them presently down
again, (of whom he said) that they had sworn, and sworn, and sworn again to be
faithful to, and to defend them, and that they were the best Governors in all
the World; and such as it is forbidden Subjects to oppose upon pain of
damnation; Was all this lawful? and to do all this with dreadful appeals to
God, and as for God? If all this was not Rebellion, or Treason, or Murder; is
there any such crime (think you) possible to be committed? are Papists
insulting over us in our shame? are thousands hardened by these and such like
dealings into a scorn of Religion? are our Rulers exasperated by all this into
the severities which we feel? are Ministers silenced by the occasion of it? are
we made by it the byword and hissing of the Nations, and the shame and pity
of all our friends? and yet is all this to be justified or silenced, and none
of it at all to be openly repented of? I openly profess to you, that till this
be done, we are never like to be healed, and restored, and that it is heinous,
gross impenitence, that keeps Ministers and people under their distress. And
I take it for the sad Prognostic of our future Woe, and at best our lengthned
affliction to read such writings against Repentance, and to hear so little open
profession of Repentance, even for unquestionable heinous crimes, for the
saving of those that are undone by these scandals, and for the Reparation of
the honor of Religion which is most notoriously injured, to see Men still
think that their Repentance is the dishonor of their party, and cause, whose
honor can no other way be repaired, to see Men so blind as to think that the
silencing of these things will hide them, as if they were not known to the
world; That man or party that will justify all those heinous crimes, and still
plead Conscience or Religion for them, does grievous injury to Conscience and
Religion. I have told you truly that Gods way of vindicating the honor of
Religion, is for us by open free Confession, to take all the shame to our
selves, that it be not injuriously cast upon Religion; And the Devils way of
preserving the honor of the godly, is by justifying their Sins, and pleading
Religion for them, that so religiousness it self may be taken for Hypocrisy
and wickedness, as maintaining and befriending wickedness. -- And p. 12. Is
Repentance an unbecoming thing? I hope the Act of Oblivion was not made to
frustrate Gods Act of Oblivion? which gives pardon to the penitent, does it
forbid us to repent of sin, or to persuade our Brethren to repent? where sin is
hated, Repentance will not be hated, and if sin were as bitter as it must be,
Repentance would not be bitter; if I was guilty of such sins as you affirm, I
do openly confess, that if I lay in Sackcloth and in Tears, and did lament my
sins before the world, and beg pardon both of God and Man, and entreat all Men
not to impute it to Religion but to me, and to take warning by my fall, which
had done such unspeakable wrong both to Christ and Men, I should do no more
than the plain light of nature assures me, to be my great and needful duty, p.
17. Now all that Bagshaw accused Mr. Baxter of, was p. 1. That he was as guilty
of stirring up and fomenting that War, as any one whatever, concerning which if
we take his own Confession, and consider his circumstances being an Episcopal
Ordained Minister, whose Office was to Preach Obedience and Peace, his
applauding the first Boutefeus, as glorious Saints in Heaven, his vindicating
the Authority and War of the Parliament against the King, his pertinacious
adhering to the Covenant, crying down the Royal Martyr as a Papist, after he
had sealed the sincerity of his heart to the Reformed Religion by his blood,
and the crying up of his Murderer for a prudent, pious and faithful Governor;
His principles in his Holy Commonwealth, and his present practices in
defending Schism, and so sowing Sedition, and reproaching the established Laws
and Government, in Church and State; if these do not prove him guilty of what
Mr. Bagshaw accused him, yet I am sure they cry aloud for his Repentance, and
Retractations which he once promised the world ( p. 26, 27. of his Defense of
the Principles of Love) but never (that I hear of) has been so ingenious to
perform as he ought. It is an ill diversion for such a person to banish the
thoughts of repenting for his own sins, by inquiring into the heinous
sinfulness of Conformists. I wish heartily he could prove his innocence in the
one, as easily as they can in the other; and if he cannot clear his innocence,
that he would manifest his penitence, then would I as readily give him the
right hand of fellowship, as he now denies it to others, and he might be as
great an instrument of peace on earth among the Saints, as of joy in Heaven
among the Angels of God. I shall only beseech Mr. Baxter to say that Prayer
heartily, which he has penned in the 251, and 252. pages of his Cure of
Divisions, and then let him reply as he thinks fit.

Lord hide not my own miscarriages from my sight, and suffer me not to take any
sin that I have committed, to have been my innocence, or duty, lest I should
dare to Father sin on God, and lest I should live and dye without repentance,
and lest I should be one, that continues judgments and danger to the Land;
stir up some faithful friend to tell me with convincing evidence, where it is
that I have miscarried, that contrition may prepare me for the peace of
remission. O save me from the plague of an impenitent heart that cannot endure
to be told of sin, and from that ungodly folly, which takes the shame which
Repentance casts upon sin, to be cast upon God and Religion, which bind us to
Repentance and Confession. Amen.

Now when you have humbly and sincerely renewed this Prayer to Almighty God, I
beseech you to consider seriously with your self, that it may be God has in
answer to your prayers, raised up so vile an instrument as I am to be your
Monitor, that what you thought your duty is your sin, and that you are one that
still continues judgments and danger to the Land. For first, you seemed
doubtful of it, when you prayed against it. 2. When after long and mature
deliberation, you entered into Communion with our Church in all its Ordinances
that concern Lay-Communion, and resolved together with other of your Brethren
to continue in it, and by that practice of yours, as well as your Arguments,
did influence many others to a like pious and peaceable behavior; how can it
be less than a sin against God, and a grieving and gravelling the Consciences
of such well-disposed Christians, not only to withdraw your avowed Communion,
but to practice that which directly tends to Division and Confusion? 3. That in
the judgment of such as were very pious and learned men (in your own Opinion)
that practice of yours, which continues and encourages separation from our
Communion, is sinful; such were Cranmer, Ridly, Peter Martyr, and others that
compiled the Liturgy in King Edward the VI. days, and Parker, Grindal, Horn,
Jewel, who reviewed and recommended it in Queen Elizabeth's days. Such were
Usher, Davenant, Potter, Hall, Carleton, and others in the days of King James
and King Charles of Blessed Memory. What think you of all these sober and
moderate Conformists, such as Bolton, Whately, Fenner, Dent, Crook, Dike,
Stock, Smith, Preston, Sibbs, Stoughton, Tailor, etc. These you confess were no
ignorant nor temporizing persons. What think you of Jacob and Johnson, who were
Independents, yet wrote against separation? And what think you of the most
learned and pious of the Non-conformists, such as Cartwright, Egerton,
Hildersham, Dod, Ames, Parker, Baines, Brightman, Ball, Bradshaw, Paget,
Langly, Nichols, Hering who wrote more against separation than any of the
Conformists themselves? Principles of Love, p. 57.
(as you affirm.) What think you of the Assembly of Divines, Twiss, Gataker,
etc. Among whom you say you never heard but of Five Non-conformists? what think
you of such as have Conformed since 1660. such as Reynolds, Conant, Wallis? and
lastly what think you of the Father of all the Non-conformists Mr. T.
Cartwright, who after he had written as much as he could against Conformity,
saw so much of the weakness of his arguments, as that he repented and Conformed
at last? If all these have judged a bare withdrawing of the people from our
Communion to be unlawful, and against their duty; I wonder how you can still
think your more positive opposing and hindering of it to be your duty. I
considered again, that to live in the contempt of the Laws and lawful Authority
both of Church and State, in a well established Kingdom, is a sin of no mean
nature in it self, and by its effects may prove exceeding sinful; for Schism
and Division, Spiritual Pride and Censoriousness, are as certainly sins, and
perhaps greater than Whoredom and Drunkenness; and Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft. I considered also that you have had long experience of the evil of
Schism, how great a matter a little fire kindles, and did meditate and foretell
(with what design I know not) in the second paper to the King, p. 12. That if
you should lose the opportunity of your desired Reconciliation, i. e. if you
could not obtain what you would, it astonished you to foresee what doleful
effects your divisions would produce; These and such other motives prevailed
with me to become your Monitor, that what you now take to be your duty is your
sin, and that your present practice tends to the continuing of judgments and
danger to the Land; and if my charitable admonition to you, and peaceable
endeavors for unity and establishment in the Church and State be still
despised; I can only continue my prayer to God, as well for my self as you in
the Petitions above mentioned: Lord, hide not our own miscarriages from our
sight, etc.

Cujus Aures clausae sunt ut ab Amico verum audire nequeat, hujus salus
desperanda est. Cicero de Amicitia.
FINIS.

