AN EDICT OF THE French King, Prohibiting all Public Exercise of the Pretended
Reformed Religion in his Kingdom. Wherein he Recalls, and totally Annuls the
perpetual and irrevocable Edict of King Henry the IV. his Grandfather, given at
Nantes, full of most gracious concessions to Protestants. Together with a brief
and true Account of the Persecution carried on against those of the foresaid
Religion, for to make them Abjure and Apostatize. To which is added, The Form
of Abjuration the Revolting Protestants are to Subscribe and Swear to. With a
Declaration of his Electoral Highness of Brandenburg, in favor of those of the
Reformed Religion, who shall think fit to settle themselves in any of his
Dominions.

Translated out of French.

Printed by G. M. Anno Dom. 1686.

An Edict of the King, Prohibiting all Public Exercise of the Pretended
Reformed Religion in His Kingdom.
JEWS, by the Grace of God, King of France and of Navarre, to all Present and
to come, Greeting. King Henry the Great, Our Grandfather of Glorious Memory,
desiring to prevent, that the Peace which he had procured for his Subjects,
after the great Losses they had sustained, by the long continuance of Civil and
Foreign Wars, might not be disturbed by occasion of the pretended Reformed
Religion, as it had been during the Reign of the Kings his Predecessors, had by
his Edict given at Nantes, in the Month of April, 1598. Regulated the Conduct
which was to be observed with Respect to those of the said Religion, the places
where they might publicly exercise the same, appointed extraordinary Judges,
to administer Justice to them; and lastly, also by several distinct Articles
provided for every thing, which he judged needful for the maintenance of Peace
and Tranquillity in his Kingdom, and to diminish the Aversion which was between
those of the one and other Religion; and this, to the end that he might be in a
better condition for the taking some effectual course (which he was resolved to
do) to reunite those again to the Church, who upon so slight occasions had
withdrawn themselves from it. And forasmuch as this Intention of the King, our
said Grandfather, could not be effected, by reason of his sudden and
precipitated Death; and that the Execution of the foresaid Edict was
Interrupted during the Minority of the late King, Our most Honored Lord and
Father, of Glorious Memory, by reason of some new Enterprises of those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, whereby they gave occasion for their being
deprived of several advantages which had been granted to them, by the foresaid
Edict: Notwithstanding, the King, Our said late Lord and Father, according to
his wonted Clemency, granted them another Edict at Nismes, in the Month of July
1629, by means of which the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom being now again
re-established, the said late King, being animated with the same Spirit and
Zeal for Religion, as the King Our said Grandfather was, resolved to make good
use of this Tranquillity, by endeavoring to put this pious design in Execution,
but Wars abroad, coming on a few years after, so that from the Year 1635, to
the Truce which was concluded with the Princes of Europe, in 1684. The Kingdom
having been only for some short Intervals altogether free from troubles, it was
not possible to do any other thing for the advantage of Religion, save only to
diminish the number of places permitted for the Exercise of the pretended
Reformed Religion, as well by the Interdiction of those which were found
erected, in prejudice to the disposal made in the said Edict, as by suppressing
the mixed Chambers of Judicature, whichwer composed of an equal number of
Papists and Protestants, the erecting of which was only done by Provision, and
to serve the present Exigency.

Whereas therefore at length it has pleased God to grant, that Our Subjects
enjoying a perfect Peace, and We Our selves being no longer taken up with the
cares of protecting them against our Enemies, are now in a condition to make
good use of the said Truce, which we have on purpose facilitated, in order to
the applying our selves entirely in the searching out of means, which might
successfully effect and accomplish the design of the Kings, our said
Grandfather and Father, and which also has been our Intention ever since we
came to the Crown; we see at present (not without a just acknowledgment of what
we owe to God on that account) that our endeavors have attained the end we
proposed to Our selves, forasmuch as the greater and better part of Our
Subjects of the said Pretended Reformed Religion have already embraced the
Catholic, and since by means thereof, the Execution of the Edict of Nantes,
and of all other Ordinances in favor of the said Pretended Reformed Religion,
is made useless, we judge that we can do nothing better toward the entire
effacing of the memory of those Troubles, Confusion and Mischief, which the
Progress of that false Religion, has been the cause of in Our Kingdom, and
which have given occasion to the said Edict, and to so many other Edicts and
Declarations which went before it, or were made since with reference thereto,
than by a Total Revocation of the said Edict of Nantes, and the particular
Articles and Concessions granted therein, and whatsoever else has been Enacted
since in favor of the said Religion.

I.
We make known, that We, for these and other Reasons us thereto moving, and of
Our certain Knowledge, full Power and Royal Authority, have by the present
Perpetual and Irrevocable Edict, Suppressed and Annulled, do suppress and
Annull the Edict of the King, our said Grandfather, given at Nantes in April
1598. in its whole extent, together with the particular Articles ratified the
Second of May, next following, and Letters Pattent granted thereupon; as
likewise the Edict given at Nismes, in July 1629. declaring them null and void,
as if they had never been Enacted, together with all the Concessions granted in
them, as well as other Declarations, Edicts and Arrests, to those of the
Pretended Reformed Religion, of what Nature soever they may be, which shall all
continue as if they never had been. And in pursuance hereof, we Will, and it is
our Pleasure, that all the Churches of those of the Pretended Reformed
Religion, situate in our Kingdom, Countries, Lands, and Dominions belonging to
us, be forthwith demolished.

II.
We forbid our Subjects of the Pretended Reformed Religion to Assemble
themselves, for time to come, in order to the Exercise of their Religion, in
any Place or House under what pretext soever, whether the said places have been
granted by the Crown, or permitted by the Judges of particular places; any
Arrests of our Council, for Authorizing and Establishing of the said places for
Exercise, notwithstanding.

III.
We likewise Prohibit all Lords, of what condition soever they may be, to have
any Public Exercise in their Houses and Fiefs, of what quality soever the said
Fiefs may be, upon Penalty to all our said Subjects, who shall have the said
Exercises performed in their Houses or otherwise, of Confiscation of Body and
Goods.

IV.
We do strictly Charge and Command all Ministers of the said Pretended Reformed
Religion, who are not willing to be Converted, and to embrace the Catholic
Apostolic and Roman Religion, to depart out of our Kingdom and Countries under
our Obedience, 15 days after the Publication hereof, so as not to continue
there beyond the said term, or within the same, to Preach, Exhort, or perform
any other Ministerial Function, upon pain of being sent to the Galleys.

V.
Our Will and Pleasure is, that those Ministers who shall be Converted, do
continue to enjoy during their Lives, and their Widows after their Decease, so
long as the continue so, the same Exemptions from Payments and Quartering of
Soldiers, which they did enjoy during the time of their Exercise of the
Ministerial Function. Moreover we will cause to be paid to the said Ministers,
during their Lives a Pension, which by a third part shall exceed the appointed
Allowance to them as Ministers; the half of which Pension shall be continued to
their Wives, after their Decease, as long as they shall continue in the state
of Widdow-hood.

VI.
And in case any of the said Ministers shall be willing to become Advocates, or
to take the Degree of Doctors in Law, we Will and Understand that they be
dispensed with, as to the three Years of Study, which are prescribed by our
Declarations, as requisite, in order to the taking of the said Degree, and that
after they have passed the ordinary Examinations, they be forthwith received as
Doctors, paying only the Moiety of those dues which are usually paid upon that
account in every University.

VII.
We Prohibit any particular Schools for Instructing the Children of those of
the Pretended Reformed Religion, and in general all other things whatsoever,
which may Import a Concession of what kind soever, in favor of the said
Religion.

VIII.
And as to the Children which shall for the future be Born of those of the said
Pretended Reformed Religion, our Will and Pleasure is, that henceforward they
be Baptized by the Curates of our Parishes; strictly charging their respective
Fathers and Mothers to take care they be sent to Church in order thereto, upon
Forfeiture of 500 Livres or more, as it shall happen. Furthermore, Our Will is,
that the said Children be afterward Educated and brought up in the Catholic
Apostolic and Roman Religion, and give an express Charge to all Our Justices,
to take care the same be performed accordingly.

IX.
And for a Mark of our Clemency toward those of our Subjects of the said
Pretended Reformed Religion, who have retired themselves out of our Kingdom,
Countries, and Territories, before the Publication of this our present Edict,
our will and meaning is, that in case they return thither again, within the
time of four Months, from the time of the Publication hereof they may, and it
shall be lawful for them, to Re-enter upon the Possession of their Goods and
Estates, and enjoy the same in like manner, as they might have done in case
they had always contiued upon the place. And on the contrary, that the Goods of
all those, who within the said time of four Months, shall not return into our
Kingdom, Countries, or Territories, under our Obedience, which they have
forsaken, remain and be Confiscated in pursuance of our Declaration of the 20th
of August last.

X.
We most expressly and strictly forbid all our Subjects of the said Pretended
Reformed Religion, them, their Wives or Children, to depart out of our said
Kingdom, Countries, or Territories under our Obedience, or to Transport thence
their Goods or Effects, upon Penalty of the Gally, for Men, and of Confiscation
of Body and Goods for Women.

XI.
Our Will and Meaning is, that the Declarations made against those who shall
relapse, be Executed upon them according to their Form and Tenor.

Moreover, those of the said Pretended Reformed Religion, in the mean time,
till it shall please God to enlighten them as well as others, may abide in the
several respective Cities and Places of our Kingdoms, Countries, and
Territories under our Obedience, and there continue their Commerce, and enjoy
their Goods and Estates, without being any way molested upon account of the
said Pretended Reformed Religion, upon condition nevertheless, as
forementioned, that they do not use any public Religious Exercise, nor
assemble themselves upon the account of Prayer or Worship of the said Religion,
of what kind soever the same may be, upon forfeiture above specified of Body
and Goods.

Accordingly We Will and Command our Trusty and Beloved Counselors, the people
holding our Courts of Aids at Paris, Bailiffs, Chief Justices, Provosts, and
other our Justices and Officers to whom it appertains, and to their
Lieutenants, that they cause to be Read, Published, and Registered, this Our
present Edict in their Courts and Jurisdictions, even in Vacation time, and the
same keep punctually, without contrevening or suffering the same to be
contrevened; for such is Our Will and Pleasure. And to the end to make it a
thing firm and stable, we have caused our Seal to be put to the same. Given at
Fountainbleau in the Month of October, in the Year of Grace 1685, and of Our
Reign the 43.

Signed JEWS.
This signifies the Lord Chancellors perusal. VISA. Le Tellier.

Sealed with the Great Seal of Green-Wax, upon a Red and Green string of Silk.

Registered and Published, the Kings Procurator or Attorney General, requiring
it, in order to their being Executed according to Form and Tenor, and the
Copies being Examined and Compared, sent to the several Courts of Justice,
Bailywicks, and Sheriffs Courts of each Destrict, to be there Entered and
Registered in like manner, and charge given to the Deputies of the said Attorney
General, to take care to see the same Executed and put in Force, and to
certify the Court thereof. At Paris in the Court of Vacations the 22th of
October 1685.

Signed De la Baune.

A short Account of the Violent Proceedings, and unheard of Cruelties, which
have been Exercised upon those of Montauban, and which continue to be put in
Practice in other places against those of the Reformed Religion in France, for
to make them Renounce their Religion.
ON Saturday the 8/18 of August 1685. the Intendant of the Upper Guienne, who
Resides at Montauban, having Summoned the Principal Protestants of the said
City to come before him, representing unto them, that they could not be
Ignorant that the absolute Will and Pleasure of the King was, to Tolerate but
one Religion in his Kingdom, viz. the Roman Catholic Religion, and therefore
wished them readily to comply with the same, and in order thereto, advised them
to Assemble themselves and consider what Resolution they would take. To this
Proposal some answered, That there was no need of their Assembling themselves
upon that Account, forasmuch as every one of them in particular, were to Try
and Examine themselves, and be always in a readiness to give a reason of the
Faith which was in them.

The next day the Intendant again Commanded them to meet together in the
Townhouse, which should be left free for them from Noon till Six of the Clock
in the Evening, where Meeting accordingly, they Unanimously resolved, as they
had Lived, so to persist till Death in their Religion; which Resolution of
theirs, there were some Deputed by them to declare to the Intendant; who
presenting themselves before him, he who was appointed Spokesman, began to
Address himself to the Intendant in these Words: My Lord, We are not
unacquainted how we are menaced with the greatest Violence. Hold there, said
the Intendant (interrupting him) No Violence. After this the Protestant
continued; But whatever Force or Violence may be put upon us -- Here the
Intendant interrupting him again, said, I forbid you to use any such Words:
Upon which second Interruption, he contented himself to assure him in few
words, That they were all Resolved to Live and Dye in their Religion.

The day after the Battallion of La Fere consisting of 16 Companies, entered the
City, and were followed by many more. The Protestants all this while Dreaming
of no other Design they had against them, but that of Ruining their Estates and
Impoverishing them, had already taken some Measures how to bear the said Trial;
they had made a Common Purse for the Relief of such who should be most
Burdened with Quartering, and were come to a Resolution to possess what they
had in common: But alas, how far these poor Souls were mistaken in their
Accounts, and how different the Treatment they received from the Dragoons was,
from what they had expected, I shall now Relate to you.

First therefore, in order to their Executing the Design and Project they had
formed against them, they made the Soldiers take up their Quarters in one
certain place of the City, but withal appointed several Corp de Gards to cut
off the Communication which one part of the City might have with the other, and
possessed themselves of the Gates, that none might make their Escape. Things
being thus ordered, the Troopers, Soldiers and Dragoons began to Practice all
manner of Hostilities and Cruelties wherewith the Devil can Inspire the most
Inhumane and Reprobate Minds: They marred and defaced their Housholdstuff,
broke their Looking-Glasses, and other like Utensils and Ornaments, they let
the Wine run about their Cellars, cast abroad and spoiled their Corn, and other
Alimentary Provisions: and as for those things which they could not break and
dash to pieces, as the Furniture of Beds, Hangings, Tapistry, Linen, Wearing
Apparel, Plate, and things of the like Nature, these they carried to the
Market place, where the Jesuits bought them of the Soldiers, and encouraged
the Roman Catholics to do the like. They did not stick to Sell the very Houses
of such who were most Resolute and Constant in their Profession It is supposed
according to a Moderate Calculation, that in the time of four or five days, the
Protestants of that City were the Poorer by a Million of Money, than they were
before the entering of these Missionaries. There were Soldiers who demanded 400
Crowns a piece of their Hosts for spending Money, and many Protestants were
forced to pay down Ten Pistols to each Soldier upon the same account.

In the mean time the outrages they committed upon their Persons were most
detestable and Barbarous, I shall only here set down some few of which I have
been particularly Informed. A certain Tailor called Bearnois was bound and
dragged by the Soldiers to the Corp de Guard, where they Boxed and Buffetted him
all Night, all which blows and Indignities he suffered with the greatest
constancy Imaginable. The Troopers who Quartered with Mounsieur Solignac made
his Dining Room a Stable for their Horses, tho the Furniture of it was Valued
at 10000 Livers, and forced him to turn the Broach till his Arm was near Burnt,
by their continual casting of Wood upon the Fire. A Passenger as he went
through the said City saw some Soldiers beating a Poor Man even to Death, for
to force him to go to Mass, whilst the constant Martyr to his last Breath,
cried, He would never do it, and only requested they would Dispatch and make an
end of him. The Barons of Caussade and De la Motte, whose Constancy and Piety
might have Inspired Courage and Resolution to the rest of the Citizens, were
sent away to Cahors. Mounsieur D' Alliez one of the prime Gentlemen of
Montauban, being a Venerable Old Man, found so ill Treatment at their hands, as
its thought he will scarcely escape with Life. Mounsieur De Garrison who was
one of the most considerable Men of that City, and an intimate Friend of the
Intendant, went and cast himself at his Feet, imploring his Protection, and
conjuring him to rid him of the Soldiers, that he might have no force put upon
his Conscience, adding, that in Recompense of this Favor, he begged of him, He
would willingly give him all he had, which was to the Value of about a Million
of Livers; but by all his Entreaties and Proffers he could not in the least
prevail with the Intendant, who gave order, that for a Terror to the meaner
sort, he should be worse used than the rest, by dragging him along the Streets.

The Method they most commonly made use of, for to make them abjure their
Religion, and which could not be the Product of any thing but Hell, was this;
Some of the most strong and vigorous Soldiers, took their Hosts or other
Persons of the House, and walked them up and down in some Chamber, continually
tickling them and tossing them like a Ball from one to another, without giving
them the least Intermission, and keeping them in this condition for three days
and nights together, without Meat, Drink or Sleep; when they were so wearied
and fainting, that they could no longer stand upon their Legs, they laid them
on a Bed, continuing as before to Tickle and Torment them; after some time when
they thought them somewhat recovered, they made them rise, and walked them up
and down as before, sometimes tickling, and other times Lashing them with Rods,
to keep them from Sleeping. As soon as one Party of these Barbarous Tormenters
were Tired and wearied out, they were Relieved by others of their Companions,
who coming fresh to the Work, with greater Vig^^ and Violence reiterated the
same Course. By this Infernal Invention (which they had formerly made use of
with success, in Bearn and other places) many went Distracted, and others
became Mopish and Stupid, and remain so.

Those who made their Escape were fain to abandon their Estates, yea, their
Wives, Children, and Aged Relations to the Mercy of these Barbarous and more
then Savage Troops. The same Cruelties were Acted at Negreplisse, a City near
to Montauban, where these Bloody Emissaries committed unparalled Outrages.
Isaac Favin, a Citizen of that place was hung up by his Armpits, and Tormented
a whole Night by Pinching and Tearing of his Flesh with Pincers, tho by all
this they were not able to shake his Constancy in the least. The Wife of one
Roussion a Joyner, being violently dragged by the Soldiers along the Streets,
for to force her to hear Mass, Dyed of this Cruel and Inhumane Treatment, as
soon as she reached the Church Porch.

Amongst other their Devilish Inventions this was one, they made a great Fire
round about a Boy of about Ten Years of Age, who continually with Hands and
Eyes lifted to Heaven, cried, My God help me, and when they saw the Lad
resolved to Dye so, rather than Renounce his Religion, they snatched him from
the Fire, when he was at the very point of being Burnt. The Cities of Caussade,
Realville, St. Anthonin, and other Towns and places in the Upper Guienne, met
with the same Entertainment, as well as Bergerac, and many other places of
Perigord, and of the Lower Guienne, which had a like share of these Cruel and
Inhumane Usages.

The forementioned Troops marched at last to Castres, to commit the same
Insolences and Barbarities there also; and it is not to be doubted, but that
they will continue and carry on the same course of Cruelties, where ever they
go, if God in Pity and Compassion to his People do not restrain them.

It is to be seared (for it seems but too probable) that this dreadful
Persecution in conjunction with those Artifices the Papists make use of to
Disguise their Religion, and to, persuade Protestants that they shall be
suffered to Worship God as formerly, will make many to comply with them, or at
least make their Mouths give their Hearts the Lie, in hopes of being by this
means put into a condition to make their escapes, and returning to that
Profession, which their weakness has made them deny.

But alas! this is not all, for those poor Wretches, whom by these Devilish
ways of theirs, they have made to Blaspheme and Abjure their Religion, as if
this were not enough, must now become the Persecutors and Tormentors of their
own Wives and Children, for to oblige and force them to Renounce also, for they
are threatened, that if within three days time they do not make their whole
Family Recant in like manner, those rough Apostles (the Dragoons) shall be fain
to take further pains with them in order to perfect their Conversion. And who
after all this can have the least doubt but that these unhappy Dragoons are the
very Emissaries of Hell, whose very last Essorts and Death-struglings these
seem to be?

This Relation has given a short view of some of those Sufferings, the
Reformed have undergone, but not of all: It is certain that in diverse places
they have tried to wear out their Patience, and overcome their Constancy by
applying Red-hot Irons to the Hands and Feet of Men, and to the Paps of Women.
At Nantes they hung up several Women and Maids by their Feet, and others by
their Armpits, and that Stark-Naked, thus exposing them to Public View, which
assuredly is the most cruel and exquisite Suffering can befall that Sex,
because in this case their Shamefacedness and Modesty is most sensibly touched,
which is the most tender part of their Soul. They have bound Mothers that gave
Suck unto Posts, and let their little Infants lie Languishing in their sight
without being suffered to Suckle them for several days, and all this while left
them crying, moaning, and gasping for Life, and even Dying for Hunger and
Thirst, that by this means they might Vanquish the Constancy of their Tender
hearted Mothers, Swearing to them they would never permit they should give them
Suck till they promised to Renounce their Profession of the Gospel. They have
taken Children of Four or Five Years of Age, and kept them from Meat and Drink
for some time, and when they have been ready to faint away and give the Ghost,
they have brought them before their Parents, and horribly asseverated, that
except they would turn, they must prepare themselves to see their Children
Languish and Dye in their presence. Some they have bound before a great Fire,
and being half Roasted, have after let them go; they beat Men and Women
outragiously, they drag them along the Streets, and Torment them day and Night.
The ordinary way they took was to give them no rest, for the Soldiers do
continually Relieve one another for to Drag, Beat, Torment and Toss up and down
these Miserable Wretches without Intermission. If it happen that any by their
Patience and Constancy do stand it out, and Triumph over all the Rage and Fury
of those Dragoons, they go to their Commander and acquaint him they have done
all they could, but yet without the desired success, who in a Barbarous and
Surly Tone, answers them; You must return upon them, and do worse than you have
done, the King Commands it; either they must Turn, or I must Burst and Perish
in the Attempt. These are the Pleasant Flowery Paths by which the Papists
allure Protestants to return to the Bosom of their Church.

But some it may be will object, you make a great noise about a small matter,
all Protestants have not been exposed to these Cruelties but only some few
obstinate Persons: Well, I will suppose so, but yet the Horor of those Torments
Inflicted on some, has so filled the Imagination of these Miserable Wretches,
that the very thoughts of them has made them comply; it is indeed a Weakness
of which we are ashamed for their sakes, and from whence we hope God will raise
them again, in his due time; yet thus much we may allege for their excuse,
that never was any Persecution upon pretense of Religion carried on to that
pitch, and with that Politic Malice and Cruelty that this has been, and
therefore of all those which ever the Church of Christ groaned under, none can
be compared with it. True indeed it is that in former Ages it has been common
to Burn the Faithful under the Name of Heretics, but how few were there
exposed to that cruel kind of Death, in comparison of those who escaped the
Executioners hands? but behold here a great People at once oppressed,
destroyed, and ruined by a vast Army of Prodigious Butchers, and few or none
escaping. Former, yea late times have given us some Instances of Massacres, but
these were only violent Tempests, and sudden Hurricanes, which lasted but a
Night, or at the most a few days, and they who suffered in them were soon out
of their pains, and the far greater number escaped the dint of them: but how
much more dreadful is the present condition of the Protestants in France? And
to the end we may take a true view and right measures of it, let us consider,
that nothing can be conceived more terrible than a state of War, but what War
to be compared with this? They see a whole Army of Butcherly Canibals entering
their Houses, Battering, Breaking, Burning and Destroying whatever comes to
hand, Swearing, Cursing, and Blaspheming like Devils, beating to excess,
offering all manner of Indignities and Violence, diverting themselves, and
striving to outvie each other in Inventing New Methods of Pain and Torment, not
to be appeased with Money or good cheer, Foaming and Roaring like Ravenous
Raging Lions, and presenting Death, at every Moment, and that which is worse
than all this, driving People to Distraction, and set seless Stupidity by those
Devilish Inventions, we have given you an Instance of in the Relation of
Montauban.

Moreover, this Persecution has one Characteristical note more, which, without
any Exaggeration, will give it the Precedence in History for Cruelty, above all
those which the Church of God ever suffered under Nero, Maximinus, or
Dioclesian, which is the severe Prohibition of departing the Kingdom upon pain
of Confiscation of Goods, of the Gally, of the Lash, and perpetual
Imprisonment. All the Sea Ports are kept with that exactness, as if it were to
hinder the escape of Traitors and common Enemies; All the Prisons of Sea Port
Towns are crammed with these miserable Fugitives, Men, Women, Boys and Girls,
who there are Condemned to the worst of Punishments, for having had a desire to
save themselves, from this dreadful Persecution and deluging Calamity; this is
the thing which is unparalled, and of which we find no Instance. This is that
Superlative excess of Cruelty, which we shall not find in the List of all the
violent and Bloody Proceedings of the Duke of Alva, he Massacred, he Beheaded,
he Butchered, but at least he did not Prohibit those that could, to make their
Escape. In the last Hungarian Persecution, nothing was required of the
Protestants, but only that their Ministers should Banish themselves, and
Abandon and Renounce the conduct of their Flocks; and because they were
unwilling to obey these orders, therefore it is they have groaned under so
long, and so terrible a Persecution, as they have done; But this Hungarian
Persecution is not to be compared with that we are Speaking of, for the Fury of
that Tempest discharged it self upon the Ministers only, no Armies were
Employed to force the People to change their Religion, by a thousand several
ways of Torment, much less did it ever enter the thoughts of the Emperors
Council, to shut up all the Protestants in Hungary, in order to the destroying
of all those who would not abjure their Religion, which yet is the very
condition of so many wretched Persons in France, who beg it as the highest
favor at the hands of their merciless Enemies, to have leave to go and beg
their Bread in a Foreign Country, being willing to leave their Goods, and all
other outward conveniences behind them, for to lead a poor Miserable,
Languishing Life in any place, where only they may be suffered to Dye in their
Religion. And is it not from all this most apparent, that those Monsters who
have Inspired the King with these designs, have resin'd the Mystery of
Persecuting to the utmost, and advanced it to its highest pitch of perfection?

O Great God! who from thy Heavenly Throne do behold all the outrages done to
thy People, have thee to help us! Great God, whose compassions are Infinite,
suffer thy self to be touched with our extreme desolution! If Men be Insensible
of the calamities we suffer, if they be deaf to our cries, not regarding our
Groans and Supplications, yet let thy Bowels, O Lord, be moved, and affect thee
in our behalf. Glorious God, for whose Names sake we suffer all these things,
who know our Innocence and Weakness as well as the Fury and Rage of our
Adversaries, the small support and help we find in the World; behold we Perish
if thy pity does not rouse thee up for our Relief. It is thou art our Rock, our
God, our Father, our Deliverer, we do not place our confidence in any but thee
alone; let us not be confounded, because we put our Trust in thee. Have thee to
our help, make no long tarrying, O Lord, our God and our Redeemer.

A Letter sent from Bordeaux giving an Account of the Persecution of those of
the Protestant Religion in France.
SIR,
WHatsoever you have heard concerning the Persecution of those that are of our
Religion in the Land of Bearn, Guienne, and Perigort, is but too true, and I
can assure you, that they who have given you that account, have been so far
fromamplifying the matter, that they have only acquainted you with some few
particulars; yet am I not much surprised at the difficulty you find to persuade
your self that the things of which your Friends Inform you are true; in cases
of this Nature, so amazingly unexpected, we are apt often to distrust our own
Eyes; and I profess to you, that though all places round about us Echo the
Report of our Ruin and Destruction, yet I can scarcely persuade my self it is
so indeed, because I cannot comprehend it. It is no matter of surprise or
amazement to see the Church of Christ afflicted upon Earth, forasmuch as she is
a stranger here, as well as her Captain, Lord and Husband, the Holy and
Ever-blessed Jesus was, and must like him, by the same way of Cross and
Suffering, return to her own Country, which is above. It is no matter of
Astonishment to find her from time to time suffering the worst of usage, and
most cruel Persecutions; all Ages have seen her exposed to such Trials as
these, which are so necessary for the Testing of her Faith, and so fit a matter
of her Future Glory. Neither is it any great wonder, if, amidst these sore
Trials, vast numbers of those who made Profession of the Gospel, do now
renounce and forsake it: We know that all have not Faith, and it is more than
probable that they who do not follow Christ, but because they Thrive by it, and
for the Loaves will cease to be of his Retinue, when he is about to oblige them
to bear his Cross, and deny themselves. But that which seems Inconceivable to
me, is, that our Enemies should pitch upon such strange ways and methods to
destroy us, as they have done, and that in so doing, they should meet with a
success so Prodigious and doleful. I shall as briefly as I can endeavor to
give you an account of so much as I have understood of it.

All those thundering Declarations, and destructive Arrests, which continually
were Sued for, and obtained against us, and which were Executed with the
extremity of Rigor, were scarce able to move any one of us. The forbidding of
our Public Exercises, the demolishing of our Churches, and the severe
Injunction that not so much as two or three of us should dare to Assemble in
order to any thing of Divine Worship, had no other effect upon the far greater
part of us, than to Inflame our Zeal, instead of abating it, obliging us to
Pray to God with greater fervor and Devotion in our Closets, and to Meditate of
his Word with greater Application and Attention. And neither the great wants,
to which we were reduced by being deprived of our Offices and Imploys, and all
other means of Living, and by those insupportable charges with which they
strove to over-whelm us, as well by Taxes, as the Quartering of Soldiers (both
which were as heavy as could be laid upon us) nor the continual trouble we were
put to by Criminal or other matters of Law, which at the Suit of one or other
were still laid to our charge, tho upon the most frivolous and unjust pretenses
imaginable; I say all these were not able to wear out our Patience, which was
hardened against all Calamities; insomuch as the design of forcing us to abandon
the Truth of the Gospel, would Infallibly have been Ship-wrack'd, if no other
means had been taken in hand for this purpose. But alas! our Enemies were too
Ingenious to be bauk'd so, and had taken our Ruin too, much to Heart, not to
Study for means effectual and proper to bring about their desires; They called
to mind what Prodigious success, a new kind of Persecution had had of late
Years in Poictou, Aunix, and Xaintonge, which the Intendants of those places
had bethought themselves of, and they made no difficulty to have Recourse to
the same, as to a means Infallible, and not to be doubted of.

I must tell you, Sir, That we had not the least thought that ever such violent
Methods as these would have been pitched upon, as the means of our Conversion:
We were always of Opinion, that none but Dennuieux's and Marillacs could be fit
Instruments for such like Enterprises; neither could we ever have Imagined that
Generals of Armies, who account it a Shame and Reproach to Attack and take some
paultry Town or Village, should ever debase themselves to Besiege Old Men,
Women, and Children in their own Houses; or that ever Soldiers, who think
themselves ennobled by their Swords, should degrade themselves so far to take
up the Trade of Butchers and Hangmen, by Tormenting poor Innocents, and
Inflicting all sorts of Punishments upon them.

Moreover, we were the less in expectation of any such thing, because at the
self same time they Treated us in this manner, they would needs persuade us,
That the Kings Council had disapproved the Design: And indeed it seemed very
probable to us, that all Reasons, whether taken from Humanity, Piety, or
Interest, would have made them Disavow and Condemn a Project so Inhumane and
Barbarous: Yet now by experience we find it but too true, that our Enemies are
so far from rejecting the said Design, that they carry it on with an
unparalled Zeal and Application, without giving themselves any further
trouble to effectuate their desires, than that of doing these two things.

The first of which was to Lull us asleep, and to take away from us all matter
of Suspicion of the mischief they were hatching against us; which they did by
permiting some of our Public Exercises of Religion, by giving way to our
Building of some Churches, by settling Ministers in diverse places to Baptize our
Children, and by publishing several Arrests and Declarations, which did
intimate to us, that we had reason to hope we should yet Subsist for some
Years: Such was that Declaration, by which all Ministers were ordered to change
their Churches every three years.

The other was to secure all the Seaports of the Kingdom, so as none might
make their escape, which was done by renewing the Ancient Prohibitions of
departing the Kingdom without leave, but with the addition of far more severe
Penalties.

After these precautions thus taken, they thought themselves no longer obliged
to keep any measures, but immediately lift up the hand, to give the last blow
for our Ruin. The Intendants had order to represent to us, That the King was
resolved to suffer no other Religion in his Kingdom besides his own, and to
Command us all in his Name, readily to Embrace the same, without allowing us
any longer respite to consider what we had to do, than a few days, nay hours;
threatening us, That if we continued obstinate, they would force us to it by the
extremity of Rigor, and presently Executing these their Menaces, by filling
our Houses with Soldiers, to whom we were to be left for a Prey, and who not
content with entirely Ruining of us, should besides exercise upon our Persons
all the Violence and Cruelty they could possibly devise: And all this to
overcome our Constancy and Perseverance.

Four Months are now past and gone, since that began to make use of this
strange and horrible way of Converting People, worthy of, and well becoming its
Inventors. The Country of Bearn was first set upon, as being one of the most
considerable Out-parts of the Kingdom, to the end that this mischievous
enterprise gaining strength in its passage, might soon after over-whelm, and as
it were deluge all the other Provinces in the same Sea of the uttermost
calamity. Monsieur Foucaut the Intendant, went himself in Person to all the
places where we were in any numbers, and commanded all the Inhabitants that
were of the Protestant Religion, under the Penalty of great amercements, to
Assemble themselves in those places he appointed to them; where being
accordingly met together, he charged them in the Kings Name to change their
Religion, allowing them only a day or two to dispose themselves for it; he told
them, That great numbers of Soldiers were at hand to compel those that should
refuse to yield a ready Obedience; and this threatening of his being immediately
followed by the Effect, as the Lightning is by Thunder, he filled the Houses of
all those who abode constant in their resolution to Live and Dye Faithful to
their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, with Soldiers, and Commands those Insolent
Troops (fleshed with Blood and Slaughter) to give them the worst Treatment they
could possibly devise.

I shall not undertake, Sir, to give you a particular account of those Excesses
and Outrages these enraged Brutals committed in Executing the Orders they were
charged with; The Relation would prove too tedious and doleful, it shall
suffice me to tell you, that they did not forget any thing that was Inhumane,
Barbarous, or Cruel, without having regard to any Condition, Sex or Age, they
pulled down and demolished their Houses, they spoiled, dashed to pieces, and
burnt their best Movables and Household Stuff, they bruised and beat to Death
Venerable Old Men, they dragged Honorable Matrons to Mass, without the least
pity or respect, they bound and Fettered Innocent Persons, as if they had been
the most Infamous and Profligate Villains, they hung them up by their Feet,
till they saw them ready to give up the Ghost, they took Red-hot Fire-shovels
and held them close to their bare Heads, and actually applied them to other
parts of their Bodies, they Immured them within four Walls, where they let them
Perish for Hunger and Thirst; and the constancy wherewith they suffered all
these Torments, having had no other effect, but that of augmenting the Rage of
these Furies, they never ceased Inventing new ways of pain and Torture, till
their Inhumanity at length had got the Victory, and Triumphed over the Patience
and Faith of these miserable Wretches. Insomuch that of all those many numerous
Assemblies we had in that Province, as that of Pau, d' Arthes, de Novarre, etc.
there are scarcely left a small number who either continue constant in despite
of all these Cruelties, or else have made their escape into Spain, Holland,
England, or elsewhere, leaving their Goods and Families for a Prey to these
Merciless and Cruel Men.

Success having thus far answered their expectation, they resolved to loose no
time, but vigorously Prosecuting their work, they immediately turned their
Thoughts and Arms toward Montauban; where the Intendant having Summoned the
Citizens to appear before him, bespeaks them much in the same Language, as was
used to those of Bearne, whereunto they having returned about the same Answer,
he orders 4000 Men to enter the City, and makes them take up their Quarters, as
at Bearne, only in the Houses of Protestants, with express Command to Treat
them in like manner, as they had done those of Bearne: and these Inhumane
Wretches were so diligent and active in Executing these pittiless Orders, that
of 12 or 15000 Souls of which that Church did consist, not above 20 or 30
Families are escaped, who in a doleful and forlorn condition wander up and down
the Woods, and hide themselves in Thickets. The Ruin of this Important place
drew after it the desolation of all the Churches about it, which were all
Enveloped in the same common Calamity, as those of Realmont, Bourniquel,
Negreplisse, etc.

Yet was not the condition of the Churches in the Upper Guienne more Sad and
Calamitous, than that of those of the Lower Guienne, and of Perigort, which
this horrible deluge has likewise overwhelmed. Mounsieur Bousters and the
Intendant having shared the Country between them, Mounsieur de Bousters taking
for his part Agenois, Tonnein, Clerac, with the adjoining places; and the
Intendant having taken upon him to reduce Fleis, Monravel, Genssac, Cartillon,
Coutras, Libourne, etc. The Troops which they Commanded, in the mean time
carrying Desolation to all the places they passed through, filling them with
Mourning and Despair, and scattering Terror and Amazement amongst all those to
whom they approached.

There were at the same time 17 Companies at Saint Foy, 15 at Nerac, and as
many in proportion in all other parts; So that all places being filled with
these Troops, accustomed to Licentiousness and Pillage, there is not any one of
the said Places, where they have not left most dreadful marks of their Rage and
Cruelty, having at last, by means of their Exquisite Tortures, made all those
of our Religion submit themselves to the Communion of Rome.

But forasmuch as Bergerac was most signally Famous for the long Trials it had
most Gloriously endured, and that our Enemies were very sensible of what
advantage it would be to the carrying on of their Design, to make themselves
Masters there also, at any price whatsoever, they accordingly failed not to
attempt the same with more Resolution and Obstinacy than any of the
forementioned places.

This little Town had already for three Years together, with admirable Patience
and Constancy, endured a Thousand ill Treatments and Exactions from Soldiers,
who had picked them to the very Bones: for besides that, it was almost a
continual passage for Soldiers; there were no less than 18 Troops of Horse had
their Winter Quarters there, who yet in all that time had only gained Three
Converts, and they such too as were maintained by the Alms of the Church.

But to return, The design being formed to reduce this City, two Troops of
Horse are immediately ordered thither to observe the Inhabitants, and soon
after 32 Companies of Foot enter the Town, Monsieur Bousters and the Intendant
of the Province, with the Bishops of Again and Perigueux, and same other Persons
of Quality, render themselves there at the same time, and send for 200 of the
chiefest Citizens to appear before them, telling them, That the Kings Express
Will and Pleasure was, they should all go to Mass, and that in case of
Disobedience, they had order to compel them to it: To which the Citizens
Unanimously answered, That their Estates were at the dispose of his Majesty,
but that God alone was Lord of their Consciences, and that they were resolved
to suffer to the utmost, rather than do any thing contrary to the motions of
it. Whereupon they were told, That if they were so resolved, they had naught
else to do but to prepare themselves to receive the Punishment their Obstinacy
and Disobedience did deserve; and immediately 32 Companies more of Infantry and
Cavalry enter the City (which, together with the 34 Companies beforementioned,
were all Quartered with Protestants) with Express Command not to spare any
thing they had, and to exercise all manner of Violence upon the Persons of
those that entertained them, until they should have extorted a Promise from
them, to do whatsoever was Commanded them.

These Orders then being thus Executed, according to the desires of those who
had given them, and these miserable Victims of a Barbarous Military Fury, being
reduced to the most deplorable and desolate condition; they are again sent for
to the Townhouse, and once more pressed to change their Religion, and they
answering with Tears in their Eyes, and with all the Respect, Humility, and
Submission imaginable, That the matter required of them, was the only thing
they could not do, the extremest Rigor and Severity is denounced against
them; and they presently made good their Words, by sending 34 more Companies
into the City, which made up the full number of a hundred, who encouraging
themselves from their numbers, and flying like enraged Wolves upon these
Innocent Sheep, did rend and worry them in such a manner, as the sole Relation
cannot but strike with Horror and Amazement. Whole Companies were ordered to
Quarter with one Citizen, and Persons whose whole Estate did not amount to
10000 Livres, were taxed at the rate of 150 Livres a day: when their Money is
gone, they Sell their Household Stuff, and sell that for two pence, which has
cost 60 Livres, they bind and fetter Father, Mother, Wife and Children: Four
Soldiers continually stand at the door to hinder any from coming in to succor
or comfort them: they keep them in this condition, two, three, four, five, and
six days, without either Meat, Drink, or Sleep; on one hand the Child cries
with the Languishing accent of one ready to Dye, Ah my Father! Ah my Mother!
What shall I do? I must Dye, I can endure no longer: The Wife on the other hand
cries; Alas! my Heart fails me, I Faint, I Dye; Whilst their cruel Tormentors
are so far from being touched with Compassion, that from thence they take
occasion to press them afresh, and to renew their Torments, frighting them with
their Hellish Menaces, accompanied with most execrable Oaths and Curses;
crying, Dog, Bougre, What, wilt not thou be Converted? Wilt not thou be
Obedient? Dog, Bougre, Thou must be Converted, we are sent on purpose to
Convert thee: and the Clergy who are witnesses of all these Cruelties, (with
which they feast their Eyes) and of all their Infamous and abominable words,
(which ought to cover them with Horror and Confusion) make only a matter of
Sport and Laughter of it.

Thus these miserable Wretches, being neither suffered to Live nor to Dye, (for
when they see them sainting away, they force them to take so much as to keep
Body and Soul together) and seeing no other way for them to be delivered out of
this Hell, in which they are continually Tormented, are fain at last to stoop
under the unsupportable Burden of these extremities: So that excepting only a
few who saved themselves by a timely Flight, preferring their Religion before
all Temporal Possessions, all the rest have been constrained to go to Mass.

Neither is the Country any more exempt from these Calamities, than Towns and
Cities, nor those of the Nobility and Gentry, than Citizens. They send whole
Companies of Soldiers into Gentlemen's Houses, who Treat them in the most
outrageous and violent manner conceivable, insomuch that not a Soul can hope to
escape, except it may be some few, who like the Believers of old, wander in
Deserts, and lodge in Dens and Caves of the Earth.

Furthermore I can assure you, that never was any greater consternation, than
that which we are in here at present, the Army, we hear, is come very near us,
and the Intendant is just now Arrived in this City; the greater part of the
most considerable Merchants are either already gone, or casting about how best
to make their escape, abandoning their Houses and Estates to their Enemies; and
there are not wanting some Cowardly Spirits, who, to avoid the mischief they
are preparing for us, have already promised to do whatsoever is required of
them. In a word, nothing is seen or heard in these parts but Consternation,
Weeping and Lamentation, there being searce a Person of our Religion, who has
not his Heart pierced with the bitterest Sorrows, and whose Countenance has
not the Lively Picture of Death Imprinted on it: and surely, if our Enemies
Triumph in all this, their Triumph cannot likely be of any long continuance.

I confess I cannot persuade my self to entertain so good an opinion of them,
as to think that ever they will be ashamed of these their doings, so
Diametrically opposite to the Spirit of the Gospel, for I know the Gospel in
their accounts passes for a Fable: but this I dare averr, that this Method of
theirs will infallibly lay waste the Kingdom, which, according to all
appearance, is never like to recover of it, and so in time, they themselves
will be made as sensible of these miseries, as others now are. Commerce is
already in a manner wholly extinct, and there will need little less than a
Miracle to recover it to its former State. What Protestant Merchants will
henceforward be willing to engage themselves in Trade, either with persons
without Faith, and who have so cowardly behaved their Religion and Conscience,
or with the Outrageous and Barbarous Persecuters of the Religion which they
profess* and who by these courses declare openly and frankly, that it is their
Principle, not to think themselves obliged to keep their word with Heretics?
And who are those, of what Religion soever, that will Negotiate with a State
exhausted by Taxes and Subsidies, by Persecutions, by Barrenness and Dearth of
several years continuance; full of a despairing people, and which infallibly
will ere long be full of those that are proscribed, and be bathing in its own
Blood.

And these miserable Wretches who have been deceived, by those who have told
them, that it would never be imposed upon them to abjure their Religion, and
who are stupefied by the extremity of their Sufferings, and the terror of their
bloody and cruel Enemies, are wrapped up in so deep an astonishment, as does not
permit them to be fully sensible of their Fall: but as soon as they shall
recover themselves, and remember that they could not embrace the Communion of
Rome, without absolutely renouncing the holy Religion they professed, and when
they shall make a full reflection upon the unhappy change they have been forced
to make, then their Consciences being awakened, and continually reproaching
their faint-heartedness, will rend them with sorrow and remorse, and inflict
torments upon them, equal to those the Damned endure in Hell, and will make
them endeavor to be delivered from this Anguish, and to find rest in the
constant profession of that Truth, which they have so unhappily betrayed.

And on the other side, their Enemies will be loath to take the Lie at this
time of day, and therefore will endeavor through fear of Punishments, to
oblige them to stay in that Abyss of horror, into which they have precipitated
them: but because all the Sufferings they can possibly threaten them with, will
be no ways considerable when compared with those Tortures their Consciences
have already Inflicted upon them, and wherewith they threaten them in case of a
Relapse, they will be constrained to drag them to the place of Execution, or
else seek to rid themselves of them all at once by a general Massacre, which
many good Souls have so long desired.

I hope, Sir, You will not be wanting in your most Earnest Prayers to beg of
God that he would be pleased to take pity of these miserable Wretches, and make
the Heart of our Sovereign to Relent toward us; that he would Convert those
who in their Blindness think they do him Service by putting us to Death, that
he would cause his Voice to be heard by them from Heaven, as to St. Paul; Saul,
Saul, Why Persecutest thou me? and make the rest the Examples of his Exemplary
Justice; finally, that he would grant, that all those who have denied him,
being touched with a true Repentance, may with St. Peter Go out, and Weep
Bitterly. I am,

SIR, Yours,

An Extract of a Letter, containing some more Instances of the Cruel and
Barbarous usage of the Protestants in France.
BUt this, Sir, is not the thing which troubles me most at this time, there is
another cause of my Grief, which is but too just, and even pierces my Heart
with Sorrow, and that is, the Cruel Persecution which the Poor Protestants of
France do suffer, amongst whom I have so many near and dear Relations: the
Torments they are put to, are almost Incredible, and the Heavenly Courage
wherewith some of them are strengthened by their great Captain and Leader to
undergo them, is no less amazing and wonderful; I shall give for Instance one
or two of these Champions, that by them you may judge of the rest.

A Young Woman was brought before the Council in order to oblige her to abjure
the Truth of the Gospel, which she boldly and man fully refusing, was commanded
back again to Prison, where they shaved her Head, and singed off the Hair of
her Privities, and having stripped her Stark-Naked, in this manner led her
throngh the Streets of the City, where many a blow was given her, and Stones
flung at her. After this, they set her up to the Neck in a Tub full of Water,
where after she had been for a while, they took her out, and put upon her a
shift dipped in Wine, which as it dried, and stuck to her Sore and Bruised Body,
they snatched off again, and then had another ready, dipped in Wine, to clap upon
her, this they repeated six several times; and when by this Inhumane usage her
Body was become very Raw and Tender, they demanded of her, Whether she did not
now find her self disposed to Embrace the Catholic Faith? for so they are
pleased to term their Religion: but she being strengthened by the Spirit and
Love of him, for whose Names sake she suffered all these Extremities,
undauntedly answered, That she had before declared her Resolution to them,
which she would never alter; and that though they had her Body in their Power,
she was resolved not to yield her Soul to them, but keep it pure and undefiled
for her Heavenly Lover, as knowing that a little while would put an end to all
her Sufferings, and give a beginning to her Enjoyment of Everlasting Bliss:
Which words of hers, adding Fuel to their Rage, who now despaired of making her
a Convert, they took and fastened her by her Feet, to something that served the
turn of a Gibbet, and there let her Hang in that Ignominious posture with her
Head downwards, till she expired.

The other Person I would Instance in, and whom I pity the more, because (for
ought I know) he may yet Survive, and still continue under the Tormentors hands,
in an Old Man, who having for a great while been kept close Prisoner (upon the
same account as the former) in a deep Dungeon, where his Companions were
Darkness and Horror, and filthy creeping things, was brought before his Judges
with Vermin and Snails crewling upon his Mouldred Garment, who seeing him in
that Loathsome condition, said to him, How now Old Man, does not your Heart
begin to Relent? and are not you willing to Abjure your Haeresie? To which he
answered; As for Haeresie, I profess none; but if by that Word you mean my
Religion, you may assure your selves, that as I have thus long Lived, so I
hope, and am resolved by the Grace of God to Dye in it: With which answer they
being little pleased, but furiously Incensed, bespoke him in a rougher Tone:
Do thou not see that the Worms are about to Devour thee? Well, since thou art
so resolved, we will send thee back again, to the Loathsome place from whence
thou came, that they may make an end of thee, and consume thy Obdurate Heart;
to which he replied, with the words of the Holy Patient Job; Novi post quam
vermes confoderint (Corpus) istud, in carne me a me visurum esse Deum. I know
that after Worms have Eaten this Body, that in my Flesh I shall see God; and
having so said, he was sent back to his Loathsome dark abode, where if he be
still, I pray God to give him Patience and strength to hold out to the end,
that so he may obtain the Crown of Life.

I should be too tedious in giving you all the particulars of their Cruelty,
and of the Sufferings of the Protestants, yet I cannot well forbear acquainting
you with what lately I am most credibly Informed off, which take as follows;
Some Dragoons who were Quartered with a Person, whom they could by no means
oblige to Renounce his Religion, upon a time when they had well filled
themselves with Wine, and broke their Glasses at every Health they drank, and
so filled the Floor where they were with the Fragments, and by often walking
over, and treading upon them, reduced them to lesser picees and Fractions, and
being now in a Merry humor, they must needs go to Dance, and told their Host
that he must be one of the Company, but withal, that he must first pull off his
Stockings and Shoes, that he might moove the more nimbly; in a word, they
forced him to Dance with them barefooted upon the sharp points of Glass, which
when they had continued so long as they were able to keep him on his Legs, they
laid him down on a Bed, and a while after stripped him Stark-Naked, and roled his
Body from one end of the Room to the other upon the sharp Glass, as
beforementioned, which having done, till his Skin was stuck full of the said
little Fragments, they returned him again to his Bed, and sent for a
Surgeon, to take out all the said pieces of Glass out of his Body, which you
may easily conceive could not be done without frequent Incisions, and horrible
and most extreme pain. Another Person being likewise troubled with the
unwelcome Company of these Dragoons, and having suffered extremely at their
hands, without the expected success of his Conversion, one of them on a time
looking earnestly upon him, told him, That he disfigured himself with letting
his Beard grow so long; but he answering, That they were the cause of it, who
would not let him stir out of door, for to go to the Barber; the Dragoon
replied, I can do that for you as well as the Barber, and with that told him,
he must needs try his Skill upon him, and so fell to work, but instead of
shaving him, flayed all the Skin off his Face: one of his Companions coming in
at the cry of this poor Sufferer, and seeing what he had done, seemingly blamed
him for it, and said, He was a Bunglar, and then to his Host, Come your Hair
wants Cutting too, and you shall see I will do it much better than he has
shaved you: and thereupon begins in a most Cruel manner, to pluck the Hair,
Skin and all, off his Head, and flayed that as the other had done his Chin.
Thus making a Sport and Merriment of the extreme Suffering of these miserable
Wretches.

By these Inhumane, and more than Barbarous means, it is that they endeavor to
overcome the most resolved Patience, and to drive People to despair and
Faint-heartedness, by their more then Devilish Inventions. They refuse to give
them Death, which they desire, and only keep them alive to Torment them, so
long till they have Vanquished their Perseverance, for the Names of Martyrs and
Rebels are equally odious to their Enemies, who tell them, That the King will
have Obedient Subjects, but neither Martyrs nor Rebels, and that they have
received Orders to Convert them, but not to Kill them.

Sir, I beg your Pardon for having so long Entertained you with these more then
Tragical Passages, and that you would not be wanting to recommend the condition
of these Poor, Destitute, Afflicted, and Tortured Persons, to the Bowels of
Compassion of our Heavenly Father, that he would be pleased not to suffer them
to be Tempted above what he shall give them Grace to bear; which is,

The Hearty Prayer of, Your Faithful Friend, T. G.

The Profession of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Faith, which the
Revolting Protestants in France are to Subscribe and Swear to.
IN the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen. I Believe and Confess
with a firm Faith, all and every thing and things contained in the Creed which
is used by the Holy Church of Rome, viz. I receive and embrace most sincerely
the Apostolic and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and other observances of the said
Church. In like manner I receive the Scriptures, but in the same sense as the
said Mother Church has, and does now understand and Expound the same, for whom
and to whom it only does belong to judge of the Interpretation of the Sacred
Scriptures; and I will never take them, nor understand them otherwise than
according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

I profess that there be truly and properly seven Sacraments of the New Law,
instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary for the Salvation of
Mankind, although not equally needful for every one, viz. Baptism, Confirmation,
the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders and Marriage; and that they do
confer Grace; and that Baptism and Orders may not be reiterated without
Sacrilege: I receive and admit also the Ceremonies received and approved by
the Catholic Church in the solemn administration of the forementioned
Sacraments.

I receive and embrace all and every thing and things which have been
determined concerning Original Sin and Justification by the holy Council of
Trent.

I likewise profess, that in the Mass there is offered up to God, a true,
proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and Dead; and that in the
holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is truly, really, and substantially, the
Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ;
and that in it there is made a change of the whole substance of the Bread into
his Body, and of the whole substance of the Wine into his Blood, which change
the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation. I confess also, that under one
only of these two Elements, whole Christ and the true Sacrament is received.

I constantly believe and affirm, that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls
there detained, are relieved by the Suffrages of the Faithful.

In like manner, I believe that the Saints reigning in Glory with Jesus Christ,
are to be Worshipped and Invocated by us, and that they offer up Prayers to God
for us, and that their Relics ought to be honored.

Moreover, I do most steadfastly avow, that the Images of Jesus Christ, of the
Blessed Virgin, the Mother of God, and of other Saints, ought to be kept and
retained, and that due Honor and Veneration must be yielded unto them.

Also I do affirm, that the power of Indulgence was left to the Church by
Christ Jesus, and that the use thereof is very beneficial to Christians.

I do acknowledge the holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, to be the
Mother and Mistress of all other Churches; and I profess and swear true
obedience to the Pope of Rome, Successor of the Blessed St. Peter, Prince of
the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

In like manner Iown and profess, without doubting, all other things left
defined and declared by the holy Canons and General Councils, especially by the
most holy Council of Trent; and withal, I do condemn, reject, and hold for
accursed, all things that are contrary thereto; and all those Heresies which
have been condemned, rejected, and accursed by the Church.

And then swearing upon the Book of the Gospel, the party recanting must say: I
Promise, Vow, and Swear, and most constantly Profess, by Gods assistance, to
keep entirely and inviolably, unto Death, this self same Catholic and
Apostolic Faith, out of which no person can be Saved; and this I do most truly
and willingly profess, and that I will to the utmost of my Power, endeavor
that it may be maintained and upheld as far as any ways belong to my charge; so
help me God and the holy Virgin.

The Certificate which the party Recanting is to leave with the Priest, before
whom he makes his Abjuration.
I N. N. of the Parish of N. do Certify all whom it way Concern, That having
acknowledged the Falsness of the pretended Reformed, and the Truth of the
Catholic Religion, of my own Free Will, without any Compulsion, I have
accordingly made Profession of the said Catholic and Roman Religion in the
Church of N. in the hands of N. N. In testimony of the Truth whereof, I have
Signed this Act in the presence of the Witnesses whose Names are under Written,
this -- day of the Month of the -- year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the
King, and of our Redemption --.

A Declaration of the Elector of Brandenburg, in Favor of the French
Protestants who shall settle themselves in any of His Dominions.
We Frederick William by the Grace of God Marquess of Brandenburg,
Arch-Chamberlain, and Prince Elector of the Holy Empire; Duke of Prussia,
Magdeburg, Juilliers, Cleves, Bergen, Stettin, Pomerania, of the Cassubes,
Vandals, and Silesia, of Crosne and Jagerndorff, Burg-grave, of Noremberg;
Prince of Halberstads, Mind and Camin; Earl of Hohenzollern, of the Mark and
Ravensberg; Lord of Ravenstein, Lawneburg, and Butow, do declare and make known
to all to whom these Presents shall come.
THat whereas the Persecutions and Rigorous proceedings which have been carried
on for some time in France, against those of the Reformed Religion, have forced
many Families to leave that Kingdom, and to seek for a Settlement elsewhere, in
strange and Foreign Countries; We have been willing, being touched with that
just Compassion, we are bound to have for those who suffer for the Gospel, and
the Purity of that Faith, We profess, together with them, by this present
Declaration, Signed with our own hand, to offer to the said Protestants a sure
and free Retreat in all the Countries and Provinces under Our Dominion, and
withal to declare the several Rights, Immunities, and Privileges, which we are
willing they shall enjoy there, in order to the Relieving and easing them in
some measure of the burden of those Calamities, wherewith it has pleased the
Divine Providence to afflict so considerable a part of his Church.

I.
To the end that all those who shall resolve to settle themselves in any of our
Dominions, may with the more ease and convenience Transport themselves thither,
we have given Order to our Envoy extradinary with the States General of the
United Provinces, Sieur Die, and to our Commissary in the City of Amsterdam,
Sieur Romswinkel, at our charge, to furnish all those of the said Religion (who
shall address themselves unto them) with what Vessels and Provisions they shall
stand in need of, for the Transportation of themselves, their Goods and
Families from Holland to the City of Hamburg; where then our Counselor and
Resident for the Circle of the Lower Saxony, Sieur Guerick, shall furnish them
with all conveniences they may stand in need of, to convey them further, to
whatsoever City or Province they shall think fit to pitch upon for the place of
their Abode.

II.
Those who shall come from the parts of France about Sedan, as from Champagne,
Lorain, Burgundy, or from any of the Southern Provinces of that Kingdom, and
who think it not convenient to pass through Holland, may betake themselves to
the City Frankfort upon Maine, and there address themselves to Sieur Merain,
our Counselor and Agent in the said City, or in the City of Cologne to Sieur
Lely our Agent, to whom we have also given Command to furnish them with Money,
Pasports, and Boats, in order to the carrying them down the River Rhine, to our
Duchy of Cleves and Mark; or in case they shall desire to go further up in our
Dominions, our said Ministers and Officers shall furnish them with Address and
conveniences for to Arrive at those several respective places.

III.
And forasmuch as the said our Provinces are stored with all sorts of
conveniences and commodities, not only for the necessity of Living, but also
for Manufactures, Commerce and Trade by Sea and by Land, those who are willing
to settle themselves in any of our said Provinces, may choose such place, as
they please in the Country of Cleve, Mark, Ravensberg and Mind, or in those of
Magdeburg, Halberstadt, Brandenburg, Pomerania, and Prussia. And forasmuch as
we conceive that in our Electoral Marquisate, the Cities Stendel, Werbe,
Rathenow, Brandenburg and Frankfort; and in the Country of Magdeburg, the
Cities of Magdenburg, Halle, and Calbe; and in Prussia, the City of Konigsberg
will be most commodious, as well for the great abundance of all necessaries of
Life, which may be had there at cheap Rates; as for the convenience of Trade
and Traffic, we have given charge that as soon as any of the said French
Protestants shall arrive in any of the said Cities, they shall be kindly
received, and agreed with about all those things which shall be thought needful
for their Settlement. And for the rest, leaving them at their full Liberty to
dispose of themselves in whatsoever City or Province they shall judge most
commodious and best suiting with their occasions.

IV.
All the Goods, Household Stuff, Merchandise and Commodities which they shall
bring along with them, shall not be liable to any Custom or Impost, but shall
be wholly exempt from all Charges and Impositions of what Name or Nature soever
they may be.

V.
And in case that in any of the Cities, Towns, or Villages where the said
Persons of the Reformed Religion do intend to settle themselves, there be found
any Ruinous and decayed Houses, or such as stand empty, and which the
Proprietors are not in a condition to Repair, we will cause the same to be
Assigned to them, the said French Protestants, as their Propriety, and to their
Heirs for ever; and shall content the present Proprietors according to the
Value of the said Houses, and shall wholly free the same from all Charges, to
which the same might stand engaged, whether by Mortgage, Debts, or any other
way whatsoever. Furthermore, our will is, that they be furnished with Timber,
Quicklime, Stones, Bricks, and other materials, they may stand in need of for
the Repairing of whatsoever is decayed or Ruinous in any of the said Houses,
which shall for six years be exempt from all sorts of Impositions,
Free Quarter, and all other charges whatsoever, neither shall the said French,
during the said time of six years, be liable to any payments whatsoever, but
what are chargeable upon things of daily consumption.

VI.
In Cities or elsewhere, where convenient places shall be found, for to build
Houses, those of the Reformed Religion, who shall make their Retreat into our
Dominions, shall be fully Authorized and Empowered to take Possession of the
same, for themselves and their Heirs after them, together with all the Gardens,
Fields, and Pasture Grounds belonging to the same, without being obliged to pay
any of the dues and charges with which the said places or their dependances may
be Encumbered. Moreover, for the facilitating their Building in any of the said
place, we will cause them to be furnished with all the materials they shall
stand in need of; and will over and above allow them Ten Years of Exemption,
during which they shall not be liable to any other charges or payments, besides
the dues charged upon things of daily spending. And furthermore, forasmuch as
our intent is, to make their Settlement in our Dominions the most easy and
commodious for them that may be; we have given Command to our Magistrates and
other Officers in the said Provinces, to make enquiry in every City for Houses
that are to be Let, into which it shall be free for the said French to enter,
and take up their Lodging as soon as they shall Arrive; and do promise to pay
for them and their Families for four Years, the Rent of the said Houses,
provided that they engage themselves, within the said term, to build in such
places as shall be assigned to them, in manner, and upon condition as aforesaid.

VII.
As soon as they shall have taken up their Habitation in any City or Town of
our Dominions, they shall immediately be made Free of the place, as also of
that particular Corporation, which by their Trade or Profession they belong to,
and shall enjoy the self same Rights and Privileges, which the Citizens,
Burgesses, and Freemen of the said places or Corporations do enjoy, and that
without being obliged to pay any thing for the said Freedom, and without being
liable to the Law of Escheatage, or any other of what Nature soever they may
be, which in other Countries are in force against Strangers; but shall be
looked upon, and Treated upon all accounts, in the same manner, as our own
Natural Subjects.

VIII.
All those who are willing to undertake and Establish any Manufactures, whether
of Cloth, Stuffs, Hats, or any other whatsoever, shall not only be furnished
with all the Privileges; Pattents, and Franchises, which they can wish for, or
desire; but moreover we will take care that they be assisted with Moneys, and
such other Provisions and Necessaries as shall be thought fit to promote and
make their undertaking successful.

IX.
To Countrymen and others who are willing to settle themselves in the
Country, we will cause a certain extent of Ground to be allotted for them to
Till and cultivate, and give Orders for their being assisted and furnished with
all things necessary for their Subsistence, at the beginning of their
settlement, in like manner as we have done to a considerable number of
Swiss-Families, who are come to dwell in our Dominions.

X.
And as for any business of Law, or matter of difference which may arise
amongst those of the Reformed Religion, we do grant and allow that in those
Cities where any considerable number of French Families shall be settled, they
be authorized to choose on from amongst themselves, who shall have full power
to decide the said differences in a friendly way, without any formality of Law
whatsoever: and in case any differences shall arise between the Germans and the
said French, that then the said differences shall be decided jointly by the
Magistrate of the Place, and by the Person whom the French shall have Chosen
for that purpose from amongst themselves. And the same shall be done when the
differences of Frenchmen, amongst themselves, cannot be accomodated in the
forementioned friendly way, by the Person thereto by them Elected.

XI.
In any City where any numbers of French shall settle themselves, we will
maintain a Minister, and appoint a convenient place for the Public Exercise of
Religion in the French Tongue, according to the Custom, and with the same
Ceremonies which are in use amongst the Reformed in France.

XII.
And forasmuch as such of the Nobility of France who heretofore have put
themselves under our Protection, and entered into our Service, do actually
enjoy the same Honors, Dignities, and Immunities with those of the Country;
and that there are many sound amongst them, who have been raised to the chief
Places and Charges of Our Court, and Command over our Forces, we are ready and
willing to continue the same Favor to those of the said Nobility, who for time
to come shall settle themselves in our Dominions, by bestowing upon them the
several Charges, Honors and Dignities they shall be found fitted for. And in
case they shall purchase any Manors or Lordships, they shall possess them with
all the Rights, Prerogatives, and Immunities, which the Nobility of our own
Dominions do of Right enjoy.

XIII.
All these Privileges and Advantages forementioned, shall not only be extended
to those French of the Reformed Religion who shall Arrive in our Dominions (in
order to their Settling there) after the Date of this Declaration, but also to
those, who before the date hereof, have settled themselves in our Countries,
provided they have been forced to leave France upon account of their Religion;
they of the Romish Profession being wholly excluded from any part or share
therein.

XIV.
In every one of Our Provinces, Dutchies, and Principalities, We shall appoint
and Establish certain Commissioners, to whom the French of the Reformed
Religion, may have Recourse and Address themselves upon all occasions of need,
and this not only at the beginning of their Settlement, but also afterward.
And all Governors and Magistrates of our Provinces and Territories, shall have
order by Virtue of these Presents, as well as by other particular Commands, we
shall issue forth, to take the said Persons of the Reformed Religion into their
Protection, and to maintain them in all the Privileges here beforementioned,
and not suffer the least hurt or injury to be done unto them, but rather all
manner of Favor, Aid and Assistance.

Given at Postdam, October. 26. 1685. Signed. Frederick William.

Kind Reader,
BEcause in the Edict of the French King, the perpetual and irrevocable Edict
of Nantes is recalled and abolished, I thought fit (because the whole Edict
would be too long to be inserted here) to give you some passages of the
Prefatory part of it, whereby it may appear what stress was laid on it by Henry
the IV. (called the Great) Grandfather to the present French King, and how much
he judged the exact maintaining of it would conduce to the Settlement, Peace,
and Prosperity of his Kingdom.

-- Now it has pleased God to give us a beginning of enjoying some Rest, we
think we cannot employ our selves better, than to apply to that which may tend
to the Service and Glory of his holy Name, and to provide that he may be Adored
and Prayed to by all our Subjects; and if it has not yet pleased him to permit
it to be in one and the same Form of Religion, that it may at the least be with
one and the same Intention, and with such Rules, that may prevent amongst them
all Troubles and Tumults; and that we and this Kingdom may always conserve the
glorious Title of Most Christian, and by the same means take away the Cause of
Mischief and Trouble, which may happen from the actions of Religion, which of
all others are most prevalent and penetrating. For this cause, acknowledging
this affair to be of the greatest Importance, and worthy of the best
consideration, after having considered the Papers of Complaints of our
Catholic Subjects, and having also permitted to our Subjects of the Reformed
Religion, to assemble themselves by Deputies for framing their Complaints, and
making a Collection of all their Remonstrances, and having thereupon conferred
diverse times with them, we have upon the whole judged it necessary, to give to
all our said Subjects one General Law, clear, plain, and absolute, by which
they shall be regulated in all differences, which have heretofore risen among
them, on which may rise hereafter, wherewith the one and the other may be
contented, having had no other regard in this deliberation, than solely the
Zeal we have to the Service of God, praying that he would henceforward grant to
all our Subjects a Durable and Established Peace: And we implore and expect
from his Divine Bounty the same Protection and Favor he has always bestowed
upon this Kingdom from our Birth, and that he would give our said Subjects the
Grace to understand, that in observation of this our Ordinance, consists
(next to their Duty toward God and us) the principal Foundation of their
Union, Concord, Tranquillity, Rest, and the Re-establishment of this Estate in
its first Splendour, Opulency and Strength, as on our part we promise all to be
exactly observed, without suffering any contravention. And for these causes,
having with the advice of the Princes of our Blood, other Princes and Officers
of our Crown, and other great and eminent Persons of our Council of State, well
and diligently weighed and considered all this Affair; We have by this Edict or
Statute, perpetual and irrevocable Said, Declared, and Ordained, etc. --

FINIS.

