A TREATISE OF EFFECTUAL CALLING AND ELECTION.

In XVI. SERMONS, On 2 Peter 1.10.

WHEREIN A Christian may discern, whether yet he be effectually Called and
Elected.

And what course he ought to take that he may attain the Assurance thereof.

Preached by that faithful Servant of CHRIST, Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, late
MINISTER of Laurence Jury, London.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell at the Fountain and Bear in Goldsmiths Row
in Cheapside. 1655.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
ITs a true saying, that the assurance of an eternal life, is the life of this
temporal life. The Apostle tells us, that if in this life only we had hope in
Christ, we were of all men most miserable. None being exposed to so many
troubles and tribulations in this life as the best Christian; And what could
sustain and bear us up under them all, but the certain hope and expectation of
a better Resurrection? This makes Christians glory in tribulation, despise all
the glory of the world, run as swiftly in ways of duty, as the chariots of
Aminadab; in a word, to enjoy a Heaven upon earth. They therefore are the
greatest enemies of a Christians comfort, that teach a doctrine of doubting;
that a Christian must always hang in suspense about his eternal state; and can
never arrive to any certainty, whether he shall be saved or no.

But as this assurance is excellent, so it is hard to come by; Difficilia quae
pulchar. It Is not to be obtained without a great deal of labor and diligence.
It Is usually the fruit of much prayer, and care, and humiliation, and
long-waiting; those that come by it so easily, and get it so soon, have great
cause to suspect that their assurance is not of the right kind; Carnal
security and presumption is e^sily attained, but Christian assurance not
without great difficulty.

It Is therefore much to be lamented, that there is so litt^e diligence used,
for obtaining the assurance of our effectual Calling and eternal Election,
which i^ of such great concernment to every Christian. What care do men take,
and what diligence do they give to make sure their lands, and goods, and
worldly estates? They cannot be at rest till they have secured these. But upon
what uncertainties do they venture the salvation of their precious and immortal
souls? They run the most desperate hazard of their eternal salvation; never
consider whether they are in the way to heaven or hell, until they drop
irrecoverably into the bottomless pit. Oh what a strange madness possesses
the minds of men, that they should look no more to their own safety; that they
think it wisdom to secure every thing except their own souls. What evil have
they deserved of you, that you should neglect them so much?

The design of this Treatise is to awaken men from their security, and to
stir them up to give all diligence to make their Calling and Election sure.
It was handled by the Author as a just Consectary from the doctrine of the
Glory of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell, (which Treatise is already
published) as appears in the Introduction to this discourse; That seeing there
is such glory prepared for the Elect, and such torments for the reprobate: it
concerns every Christian to give all diligence to make sure to himself, that he
shall attain the one, and escape the other; So that these three Treatises have
dependence upon each other, and together make up one complete Systeme. In this
last thou shall find many practical cases handled, of great soul-concernment,
both for the comfort of such as are sincere, and the discovery of those that
are unsound. If thou will reap any profit by the perusal hereof, let God have
the praise, and let them have thy prayers, who are Ready to spend and be spent
for the good of thy soul.

Edmund Calamy. Jeremiah Whitaker. Simon Ash. William Tailor. Allen Geere.


OF THE ASSURANCE OF OUR Vocation and Election.
SERMON I.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


TO give you an account why I pitched upon these words, it is briefly thus:
Having spent seventeen Sermons in treating of the glory of Heaven for the
Elect, and of the torments of Hell for the Reprobate; I deemed it most meet to
shut up those two Doctrines in the prosecution of this Subject, of the
Assurance of our Election and Vocation, that so if this Doctrine be well
improved, you may have establishment in your own hearts, that you are freed
from the torments of the damned, and may be confident you shall be stated into
the Glory of Heaven, which God has provided for all his Saints. And to the end
you might have assurance, that you shall be freed from the one, and shall enjoy
the other; you must make it your work according to the words of my Text, to
make your calling and election sure: Make but that sure, and you are sure of
heaven. This is the reason why I pitched upon this subject: And it is my care
in preaching the Word, not to choose those Texts that are most for my ease in
study, but for your profit in hearing; that so one Subject might back another,
and one Subject might strengthen another, and being put together, might more
serve for your edification and knowledge.

I shall not stand long in Prefacing: All that I have to do in the managing of
those words, are these three things.

1. To show you the scope and dependence of the words.

2. The sense and meaning.

3. To draw out those practical observations which naturally flow from them:
and then apply the observations deduced.

For the scope and dependence of these words; you may discern it lies thus:
Peter who is called an Apostle of the Circumcision, that is, an Apostle whose
work and office it was to Preach to the circumcised Jews (as it was Paul's
office to Preach to the uncircumcised Gentiles) he writ his Epistle to the
dispersed Jews that were scattered throughout the world, through Pontus, Asia,
Cappadocia, Galacia, and Bythinia: whence observe, Gods people are a scattered
people. And to them he writes that though they were persons living in different
places, yet they had the same faith: Simon Peter a servant and an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith. So that you see
the spirit of God, where it works in men, though they live in different places,
yet they shall all believe the same Truth, and all receive the same Faith:
Though different in language, yet but one God, and one Faith. The spirit of God
wrought the same Faith among those scattered Christians; and the Apostle
writing to these Jews, he begins his Epistle 1. By way of salutation. ver. 2.
Grace and peace be multiplied to you. 2. He writes by way of consolation, ver.
4. telling them that they are Partakers of the Divine Nature, that they are
called to Glory, and shall enjoy all the promises of the Gospel: These are the
great props with which he bears up their hearts and comforts them by. Then 3.
He proceeds by way of exhortation and direction, ver. 5. and that is, that they
should give diligence to add grace to grace, that they should make it their
(...), or their main business for which they are sent into the world, not only
to get grace, but to thrive in grace; and begins with Faith, because this is
the foundation or mothergrace: and this he presses by a double Argument.
First, considering the benefit shall redound to them, in case they perform this
duty to labor to thrive in grace, ver. 8. If these things be in you and
abound, they shall make you that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of the Lord Jesus. If you make it your work to grow in grace, you
shall never be a barren or unfruitful people; but you shall be growing in
grace, and thriving in God still. 2. From the inconvenience that would accrue,
in case they should neglect this work, ver. 9. He that lacks these things, is
blind and cannot see afar off; that is, he that lacks these graces, if you do
not grow in grace, you will be so dim sighted, you will so deaden your comfo^ts,
and darken your evidences, that you can have no assurance you shall be saved.
And then he comes in with a general exhortation backing all this, that seeing
there is this good comes by adding grace to grace, and seeing there will be this
evil if you do it not; he brings all home by a practical inference, in the
words of my Text, Wherefore Brethren, give all diligence to make your Calling
and Election sure.

The words are not difficult, though indeed they are mangled by the Papists,
who bring this Text to Martyrdom by their corrupt glosses. I shall only give
you a brief Paraphrastical Explication, and so come to the Observations.

Wherefore] That you may see the force of the connection, it is as much as if
the Apostle should say thus: Seeing there comes so great good by growing in
grace, and seeing the neglect of it does so much hurt; not only to deaden your
hearts, but darken your comforts, that you can have no clear and comfortable
evidence for heaven; Therefore give diligence to make your Calling and Election
sure.

Wherefore the rather brethren:] that is, Brethren, not in the flesh, but in
the faith of Christ, embracing the same faith, keeping to the same head; them
the Apostle calls brethren.

Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence:] The word in the Greek is more
emphatical, (...).
and signifies to do a thing enough, not agere, but sat agere, not in an overly
and careless way, but to do a thing with industry, vigilance, and
unweariednesse of spirit: it should not be matter of constraint, but free and
voluntary: Give diligence. And the diligence you should use is in matters of
the soul. Give diligence: In what? To make your Calling and Election sure.
First, I must show you what is meant by Calling; then by Election: and then
show you why Calling is set before Election, when in order of time Election is
before Calling.

1. What is meant by Calling; which, that you may understand; you must know
there is a twofold Calling: an external, and an internal Calling.

The external Calling is that general invitation, which by the Preaching of the
Gospel is made unto men, to invite them to come in to Jesus Christ: and most in
the world are called by this call, both good and bad.

2. The internal Calling, when the spirit of God accompanies the outward
administration of the word, to call a man from ignorance to knowledge, and from
a state of nature to a state of grace; and of this Calling my Text means. Make
your Calling sure; that is, you that live under the Preaching of the Gospel, be
sure you be called thereby.

Your Calling and Election:] Election is an act of God, whereby from all
eternity he does purpose within himself, of his own pleasure and will, to bring
a certain number of men unto salvation by Jesus Christ.

But now, how can it be said, We must make our calling and election sure? Does
not the Foundation of God stand sure as the Apostle says? And are not the
gifts and calling of God without repentance? How then must we make our Election
sure, when all the Decrees of God stand sure?

Answ.
Beloved, when it is said you must make these sure, you must take it in this
sense; not to make them sure on Gods part, for it cannot be made more sure then
it is already; whom he has elected, shall be glorified: But make it sure on
your parts; that is, Labor to have a real, bottomed, and grounded assurance
that you are effectually called, that you are elected by God in his eternal
Decree, to obtain life and glory by Jesus Christ.

Certitudo Objecti, and certitudo Subjecti.
Divines therefore give this distinction; That there is an assurance of the
Object, and that is sure enough; for if God has decreed you to glory, that will
hold sure for ever. But then, there is a certitude of the Subject, an assurance
to the person that is elected; and that is, when by a reflex act of faith you
have a grounded persuasion in your own breasts, that you are effectually called,
and eternally elected: An assurance in your own apprehension and knowledge.

Lastly, Why is Calling here set before Election, when in order of time
Election is before Calling? You are called in time by the Preaching of the
Gospel, you are elected before all time, before the world: Before the
foundation of the world was laid he has elected us in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. And if
so, what is the reason that Calling in my Text is put before Election?

To this I answer, Answ.
Calling in order of words is placed before Election, not as if it were in time
before it; but to show that we can never be sure of our Election til God has
effectually called us by the Preaching of the Gospel: and therefore Calling is
set before Election.

Thus I have opened the things most material, giving you the sense of the
words. The whole Verse is made up of two parts.

First, Here is a main duty enjoined in these words, Give diligence to make
your calling and election sure.

Secondly, Here is a strong inducement to enforce you to this duty; and that in
the last words, If you do these things you shall never fall.

In the duty enjoined there are several things observable: 1. The matter of the
duty: To make sure your election and calling. 2. The manner how you must set
about this duty; and that is with diligence: Give diligence. 3. The motive to
draw you to it, in the word Wherefore. 4. Here is the comparison between this
duty and all other duties; Wherefore the rather: do this rather then all other
things in the world. And


Lastly, Here is that loving compellation whereby Peter would gain them to set
upon the ready practice of this duty, in that word, Brethren, Wherefore
Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure.

From these five Parts there are five points observable.

As 1. From the matter of the duty, Make sure your election and vocation. Hence
note.

1. That it is the main and chief duty of a Christian in this life, Doct. 1.
to make this sure to his soul, that he is effectually called and eternally
elected.

2. From the Manner how you must do this duty; willingly, or diligently. Note
hence,

Doct. 2.
2. That Christians ought to set about this duty, of making sure their ^ffectual
calling and eternal election, with a great deal of dilegence.

3. From the motive to this duty; Wherefore Brethren. Wherefore? why,
considering the evil that comes by slothfulness, and by neglect of improving
grace, therefore give diligence. The observation hence is,

Doct. 3.
3. That seeing much hurt comes by slothfulness in not improving grace, this
should strongly oblige Christians to be the more dilig^nt in all matters of
Religion.

4. From the comparison of this duty with others: Wherefore the rather,
Brethren; i.e. rather then do any thing do this, to make your calling and
election sure: Hence Note;

Doct. 4.
4. That of all employments in the world, you should rather employ your selves
with diligence in making sure of heaven: To make sure that you are effectually
called, and eternally elected.

Lastly, From the Compellation of Peter; Wherefore, Brethren. Note,

Doct. 5.
5. That when we would fasten exhortation upon others to duty, we should labor
to express to them abundance of affection. Here Peter when he would urge the
Jews to a duty, insinuates into them by a loving expression, calling them
Brethren; Wherefore Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election
sure.

But I should both confound your memory, and cross my usual Method, should I
speak of these five Doctrines thus drawn forth; I had rather then thus mangle
the Text, give you the scope and substance thereof in fewer Doctrines. You may
be pleased therefore in dividing the words, to draw them into two parts.

1. A duty generally pressed, and that in these words, Give diligence.

2. The particulars wherein our diligence must be conversant, expressed; And
that in two things. First, In making your calling sure. Secondly, In making
your election sure.

From the words thus divided, will arise two Points of Doctrine.

First, From the duty pressed, Give diligence, Note,

I. That in all matters of soul concernment, Doct. 1.
Christians ought to put forth a great deal of diligence.

Secondly, From the particulars wherein this duty of Diligence is to be
conversant; that is, in making your Calling and Election sure. Hence observe,

II. Doct. 2.
That the great diligence of a Christian ought chiefly to be employed about
this, to make sure to his soul, that he is effectually called, and eternal^y
elected. These are the two points I shall draw from these words.

I begin with the first, That in all matters of soul concernment, Christians
ought to put forth a great deal of diligence. In the fifth verse it is said
likewise, Give all diligence: as if all your chief endeavors should be about
the concernments of your soul.

In the managing of this point, I shall lay down the demonstrations of it; then
the reasons; then apply it.

First, For the demonstration of it: It appears that in all soul concernments
you should put forth a great deal of diligence, by those resemblances that the
work belonging to the salvation of the soul is compared to in Scripture. As

1. Sometimes the work of Christianity in saving the soul is compared to a
race, Heb. 12.2. Let us lay aside every weight, and run with patience the race
that is set before us. So 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. When you walk in your Gardens or
Galleries, you take no pains; but when you run a race, you labor and strive
hard, and put forth all your strength to attain the en^. Why (Beloved) matters
about the soul, they are compared to the running of a race; to show, what
labors and endeavors you must put forth in all employments of the soul.

2. It is compared to wrestling, Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not against flesh and
blood, but against Principalities and Powers. And so 2 Timothy 2.5. An allusion to
the Olympic games, and public pastimes, when men wrestled before the common
multitude, wherein they put forth all their strength and skill to throw each
other down; To note, that Christianity is no slight work, but a wr^stling work,
wherein a great deal of diligence and labor is to be put forth.

3. It is expressed in Scripture by fighting a Battle; 2 Timothy 4.7. We have
f^ught a good fight. And, As good Soldiers you have endured hardness, 2 Timothy
2.3. Now when men are fighting for their lives, what care, and what labor, and
what diligence do they put forth to save themselves? And the work of
Christianity in the concernments of the soul is set forth by this resemblance.

4. It is compared to one being in an Agony; Luke 13 24. Strive to enter in at
the strait gate; The word in the Greek is (...), Strive, till you are in an
Agony, as Christ was: Christ was in an agony in the Garden, when he sweat drops
of blood; so says Lu^e, Strive, and strive til you are in an agony, that you
sweat blood again in the work of your souls. Now put these together, that the
work of Christianity is resembled to a Race, to a Fight, to be in an Agony, to
Wrestling, wherein men put forth the utmost of their strength; the resemblance
will hold forth this, That you must put forth a great deal of diligence in all
matters of soul-concernment.

Now for the Reasons why you must be thus diligent in the matters of
Christianity. I shall lay down ten.

Reas. 1.
1. Because diligence is required in all matters concerning the body, therefore
much more should you put forth diligence in all matters concerning the soul.
Diligence is required in all matters concerning the body, Eccles. 9.10.
Whatever thou put thy hand unto, do it with all thy might. And we read (
Psalm. 127.) of men that rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread
of ca^efulness, and all for the body, to sustain that. Now if you must put
forth so much diligence, and use so much care to thrive in the Body, then much
more for the soul: The soul is a more noble piece then the body; and if you
must work in your calling, you must much more work out your salvation: If you
must labor for earth, you must much more labor for heaven: if you labor to
lay up treasure here, you should much more labor to lay up treasure for
hereafter. If you work, and toil, and all to find subsistence for a mortal and
vile body, you should much more use diligence and take pains for a glorious
immortal soul.

Reas. 2
Because many have miscarried to all eternity, for the want of putting forth
diligence in the matters of salvation, Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently, least
any fall from the grace of God: many men did fail of Gods grace, because they
did not look after grace diligently: Why alas, Beloved, how many lose grace,
and lose Christ for want of diligence? the five foolish Virgins lost Christ for
want of diligence, Mar. 25. Luke 13.24. Many have lost heaven by using slight
endeavors after heaven; Strive (says Christ) to enter in at the strait gate,
for many shall seek to enter in and shall not be able: Their want of diligence,
because they only sought, and did not strive in the ways of heaven, therefore
they fell short and missed it.

3. Because all you can do for your souls is little enough for to save them. I
may make use of that expression, 2 Pet. 4. Reas. 3.
17. The righteous shall scarcely be saved: (though I know it may have reference
in some sense to outward salvation only) yet I may make use of it to this
purpose, that if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and
sinner appear? all the diligence and endeavors you can put forth is little
enough, and too too little to save your souls: Ephesians. 6.13. Put on the whole
Armor of God, that you may be able to stand in the evil day, and when you have
done all, stand. A strange expression! as much as if the Apostle should say,
All you can do is little enough to stand: When you have done all to stand, you
can hardly stand, and when you have done all to get grace, you can hardly get
grace. And therefore when all the diligence you can put forth in the ways of
God, is little enough to save the soul; and all little enough to keep on a good
profession in the ways of grace; when you have done all you can, stand: Prove.
4.24 Keep thy heart with all diligence, etc. Rule 4.


4. You should put forth diligence in all matters of soul concernment, because
there is a great deal of labor and diligence used against your souls, and
against your salvation; As first, by the Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8. He goes about like
a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: And Job 1. when God asked the
Devil, Whence he came, he tells him, I come from compassing the earth to and
fro. The Devil is still industrious and indefatigable to damn souls; he went
compassing the earth to damn souls. Why (O Beloved) shall the Devil use
diligence to damn thy soul, and will thou use none to save it? Shall he go
about compassing the earth to damn thee, and wilt not thou stir one foot in
Ordinances and Duties, and all to save that poor soul of thine? Again, as the
Devil, so wicked men, they use diligence against the soul also: Matthew. 23.15.
It is said of the Pharisees, They would compass sea and land to make one
Proselyte, and when they had made him, they made him twofold more a child of
hell then before. Mark how indefatigable they would be; they would take so
great a journey to damn a poor soul? thus are wicked men. Ephesians. 4.14. It is
said of false Teachers, They lie in wait to deceive; they will be so
industrious, they will lie and watch opportunities. Beloved, look over the
world, how industrious will your companions be to draw you to sin, to draw you
to the Alehouse, to draw you to profaneness? And therefore seeing wicked men
use diligence to damn your souls, have not you reason in all matters of soul
concernment to put forth a great deal of deligence?

Reas. 5.
5. Because wicked men put forth a great deal of di^igence to damn their own
souls, and you your selves have done so in the days of your unregeneracy. What
pains will a Drunkard take to sit all day and all night at his pots? What pains
will a Robber take to endure the darkness of the night, the coldness of
weather, the danger of being taken, and all to break open a house to get a
little gain? What diligence will an Adulterer use to watch for a Harlot in the
twilight, in the evening tide? Why? Shall-wicked men (in the phrase of
Habakkuk) weary themselves in vanities, tire out themselves to damn their own
souls; and will thou do nothing to save thy soul? It Is said of wicked men,
Micah 7.3. They do evil with both hands greedily: A man may sin with one hand
enough to damn him; yet they were so eager they would sin with both. Shall
wicked men put forth both hands to sin, and wilt not thou put a finger to
holiness, put a hand to the ways of God? you have a phrase, Jer. 23.10. Their
whole course is evil, and therefore it is not right: A strange expression! God
does there complain of men, that they were not only wicked, but they were
forcibly evil; they were strong in their wickedness, and laborious in their
profaneness: And shall wicked men force God to damn them, as it were; shall
wicked men be violent in a way of sin, and wilt not thou with one hand, labor
to save thy soul? An old Father seeing a Gentlewoman spend three hours in
beholding her face in a Glass, to trim her self, when she came down he fell a
weeping; being asked why he wept? answered, because this woman has spent more
hours in a morning to damn her self, then ever I spent in Religious duties to
save my soul. Alas! many men are more diligent to damn themselves, then many of
us are to save our souls; which should strongly engage you to put forth
diligence in all matters of soul concernment.

6. Because the more diligent thou art, Reas. 6.
the less busy and operative will the motions of sin and suggestions of Satan
be in thy Spirit. It is the speech of Bernard, Vt jugulent homines, surgunt de
nocte latoones.
By how much the more (says he) the Devil finds a man well employed, by
so much the less will he be able to fasten a temptation upon him. The more
diligent the more industrious you are in heavens way, the less force will the
temptation of the Devil have upon you. I remember it was the speech of Mr.
Greenham, That when the Devil tempted a poor soul, she came to him for advice
to resist the temptation, and he gave her this Answer: Never be idle, but be
always well employed; for in my own experience I found this, When the Devil
came to tempt me, I would tell the Devil, I am not at leisure to harken to thy
temptations: and by this means I did resist his assaults. Beloved, tell the
Devil when he tempts you, you are not at leisure to lend an ear to his
temtations, and then he will never fasten upon you. The Devil never gets
advantage of us, but either when we are out of Gods way, or idle, or have our
hands in some sinful inployment; and then the Devil gets power over us. If once
you slack in diligence, in this spiritual industry, you do even tempt the Devil
to tempt you: you lay your selves open to a world of sin, and a world of
snares. As you know it is with water, whilst the stream keeps running, it
keeps clear; but let it stand still, it breeds frogs and toads, and all manner
of filth. So while you keep going, you keep clear; but do but once flag in
your diligence, and stand still, and O what a puddle of filth and sin will thy
heart be! The Keys that you keep in your pocket, and use every day, are bright;
but keys seldom used, the very rust eats them out. So it is with your graces;
not used with diligence, they will soon grow rustie, and decay; the less
diligent you are, the more will sin and Satan fasten upon you. Heb. 6.12. We
desire you, says the Apostle, every one of you to show the same diligence: to
what? that you be not slothful. As if he should say, if once you slack in
diligence, the sin of slothfulness will soon grow upon you. Whereas now, the
more deligent you are, the less busy and operative will the suggestions of
Satan, and the operations of sin be in thy soul. While men sleep, the enemy
came and sowed tears, Matthew. 13.25. As you know it is with the body, A man that
is given to live a Sedentarie life, a life of sitting, those bodies are more
exposed to ill humors, (And therefore the life of Scholars is a life exposed
most to diseases,) but those whose livelihoods are in handycraft trades,
always in motion, and stirring; the motion expels the ill humors, that they
cannot seize upon the body. It is so in the soul, the less you Act in matters
of soul concernment, the more spiritual diseases and spiritual infirmities will
grow upon you. Whereas the more active and industrious you are, the less power
will ill distempers and humors have to seize upon the soul.

Reas. 7.
7. Because the more diligent you are in matters pertaining to the soul, the
nearer resemblance and conformity you carry to Jesus Christ: you read of
Christ, that he went about always doing good: And when his father and mother
mist him, and went three days sorrowing to seek him, and having found him,
asked him, where have thou been? Wot ye not^, says Christ, I was about my
fathers business? As if he should say; I wa^ not about any evil work, but to
glorify my God, and promote the honor of my father: this was my work. And
elsewhere he tells us, it was his meat and drink to do the will of his father:
Here was a diligent person indeed. Why the more industrious you are, and the
more diligent you are in matters of the soul, the more like you are to Jesus
Christ. And where can there be a better pattern for you to resemble, or a
better Copy for you to write by?

8. Because the more diligent you are in this employment, Reas. 8.
the more peace, and the more profit will accrue to your own souls. The more
peace will accrue, the more industrious you are, 2 Pet. 3.14. Be you diligent
(says the Apostle) for what? that y^u may be found of Christ in peace without
spot, and blameless. So Isa. 32.17. The work of righteousness is peace, and
the effect thereof quietness for ever. It is not the bare habit, or having of
grace, that is peace; but it is the working of it, and being industrious in it,
and the acting of it in your lives that brings peace to your souls. And then it
will not only bring peace, but it brings profit also. I may say as Solomon
says, Prove. 10.4. The hand of the diligent makes rich. I am sure the hand of
a diligent Christian, that is industrious in Gods ways, will make him rich in
grace; when those who are spiritual sluggards, will come to spiritual poverty.
So 1 Cor. 15. last; Be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, for as much as you know your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. If then you are industrious in the work of grace, it shall not be in vain,
but you shall get by all that you do in the Lord.

9. Reas. 9.
Because you have lost more grace in a little time then you can ever regain by
all the diligence you can put forth should you live never so long. You had all
graces once in Adam, but Adam by one morsel of forbidden fruit lost all that
grace, which you cannot now regain by never so much diligence. Should you pray
til you can speak no more; and should you sigh to the breaking of your loins;
should every word be a sigh, and every sigh a tear, and every tear a drop of
blood, you would never be able to recover that grace which you lost in Adam;
You obliterated the beautiful image of God; You lost that knowledge by the
commission of one sin, which you cannot regain by ten thousand Sermons, or
doing ten thousand Duties. Have not you therefore need of diligence, seeing you
have lost so much in so little time, which by all your diligence you will never
fully recover?

10. Reas. 10.
Because the best of you have lived a long time either using diligence to damn
your selves, or else taking no care to save your selves, one or both; therefore
you had need now to set about the work. Magna pars vita nihil agendo, maxima
male, ^o^a aliad agendo elabitu^. S^nec.
Beloved, I may say Seneca did of the heathen, That a great part of man's life
does pass away in doing evil, the greatest part in doing nothing, the whole of
a man's life in doing other things then he should do. And truly so I may say to
you, a great of your lives has past in sinning away your salvation, in taking
pains to damn your own souls; and if not so gross, I believe a great part has
past away in doing nothing for your s^lvation, in not praying for salvation, in
not hearing for salvation, in not reading for salvation, in not mourning for
salvation, in doing nothing for heaven: and if it be so, that you have thus
spent your time, you have great cause now to put your hand to the work, and to
use all diligence in matters pertaining to your salvation. A man going a
journey, that has gone the greatest part of his time out of his way, he had
need mend his pace when he comes into the right way again: so if we have spent
the most part of our time in vain, we had need give the more diligence for the
^ime to come.

SERMON. II.
1 Pet. 2.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


HAving in the morning finished the doctrinal part of this general point, I
shall now only make a short Use, and then pass to the particulars wherein you
should be diligent.

Use 1.
1. Now is it true, that in all matters of soul Concernment, you must put forth
a great deal of diligence? Then first in applying this Doctrine, I must proceed
by way of Caution, and I shall lay down four Cautions, that you may not run into
any mistakes about this point.

First, That though God calls for a great deal of diligence at your hands in
the matters of your souls, Caut. 2.
yet this does no way presuppose, as if you could draw out, or put forth this
dilig^nce by your own native power; but that God that commands your strength,
that God must give you strength to do what he commands. Psalm. 68.28. Thy God
has commanded thy strength: What then? can a man therefore put forth his own
strength? No, but the prayer follows; Strengthen O God, that which thou
command us. Implying, that though God did command their strength, they could
not put it out by their own power: but they would make a prayer to back the
command, Lord thou command us to be strong, Lord, strengthen that which thou
command. So that though God call for your diligence, and call for your
strength; yet cannot you put forth any strength by your own power. Austine upon
this consideration has this passage; when I have a will, says he, to do good,
I have not a power; and when I have power, I have not a will; and herein I see
my own weakness, and that I must be beholding to Christ for strength. You can
as well carry on the work of Creation, as the work of Conversion by your own
strength. You can as well conquer a world of armed men alone, as conquer one
Suggestion of the Devil by your own power. Though God does call for your
obedience, and to put forth your diligence, yet this supposes not, as if you
could do this by your own strength; but that God that Commands you diligence,
that God must stir it up in you.

2. When God calls for your diligence in matters of soul-concernment take this
Caution; that you do not discharge your duty in expressing a great deal of zeal
and diligence in matters of your soul, unless you do it in a right manner, and
to a right end. People think, if they can be diligent in hearing, and diligent
in reading, and diligent in praying, and in receiving Sacraments; that then
they discharge their duty, and answer the command of my Text, to be diligent.
No Beloved, you do not answer your duty to God in expressing diligence in that
which is materially good, unless you do it in a right manner, and to a right
end: You have an instance in Jehu: 2 Kings 10. He was a mavelous industrious
man in many good matters concerning the worship of God; at one time he killed
the worshippers of Baal, at another time he pulled down the houses where they
worshipped, and broke the graven Images in pieces* At another time he calls out
to Jehonadab, to see his zeal for the Lord of Hosts. Wonderful diligent! and
yet all this was not done in a good manner, nor to a right end. Not in a good
manner because it was done by halfes, not thoroughly; for though he d^stroyed
the Images of Baal, yet he worshipped the Idols at Bethel. And then not to a
right end, because he did not show his zeal and industry out of any supreme
reference to Gods glory, but only out of a politic end; to establish himself
in his Kingdom, 2 King^ 10.31. So that you may put forth such diligence in
reading, and hearing, and in receiving, and the like; and yet, if not done in a
right manner, and to a right end, you do not perform the duty of my Text. For
take this as a rule in Divinity, that when God commands a duty, all the
circumstances included in ^he duty must be observed or else that duty is not
done aright. As when you pray, you must not leave out one circumstance or
quality required in a prayer; if so, God will not accept your prayer. So here,
God commands your diligence, if you are not diligent in a right manner, and to
a right end, your diligence is not right.

Caut. 3.
3. Though you put forth never so much diligence in the ma^ters of your soul,
all those acts you do, are none of them me^i^orious: Causae sine^ qui^us non.
you do not get heaven for praying, nor get heav^n for reading, nor get heaven
for hearing, though happily you get not heaven without it. Good works, they may
be causes of salvation in this sense, causes without which you cannot be saved;
but all your obedience, and all your diligence are no causes for which you are
saved, or which may any way move God to save you. So that though you are never
so diligent, this diligence is not meritorious at all: Why? Because to make it
meritorious, say Divines, three things must concur; First, The thing must be
done freely not as a debt. Secondly, it must be done with a man's own native and
proper strength, and not a borrowed power. Thirdly, It must be done perfectly:
and therefore Divines say, (and that upon good reason too) That all our
obedience, and all our actings in the ways of grace cannot be meritorious: Why?

Because (First) We do them not as a free gift, but as a due debt: we owe God
this diligence, and owe him this duty; and therefore cannot merit, because we
only pay God his due. If you lend a man money, will you thank and reward him to
pay you your own? No: it is your due, he ought to repay you. All duties in
matters of the soul are Gods due, of right belonging to him, and therefore
cannot be meritorious.

Secondly, This diligence, could you put it forth by your own strength, you had
somewhat wherein to boast; but all your diligence is put forth by a borrowed
strength, by a strength derived from Jesus Christ, by a strength from the
Covenant of grace; it is thence you fetch power to perform all acts of
obedience and spiritual diligence.

Thirdly, It cannot merit, because it is not perfect* nay, you are so far from
meriting by your obedience, that you merit nothing but hell for the defects in
your obedience, and the imperfections that are remaining in your best services.

4. Take this Caution, Caut. 4.
That though all the diligence you can put forth cannot be meritorious for God
to save you; yet take this for truth, that the more you abound in spiritual
industry in the matters of the Soul, the more likely you are to receive fuller
incoms of joy, and fuller increase of grace in your souls: To him that has
shall be given, and it shall be given him much more abundantly: That is, to him
that has improved his graces, and used them well, they shall be given more
abundantly: Thou have been faithful in a little, thou shall be ruler over much.
The more you act, and the more diligent you are in the matters of your soul,
the more likely you are to be eminent and increasing in grace above others. It
is a note that an Au^hor has upon the Apostle Paul. Paul was the most eminent
of all the Apostles; no Apostle like Paul, none outstript him. Now Divines ask
the reason, why Paul should be more eminent then the rest of the Apostles, who
saw Christ in the flesh; whereas Paul saw him only in a vision, and no where
else; yet Paul was more eminent then any other Apostle? and they give this
reason: Paul was in labors more abundant; Paul was more industrious, putting
out his gifts and graces, and God did bless that industry with a fuller
increase of the graces of Gods spirit then others had: So that, though God
gives us not heaven for our growth in grace; yet ordinarily God intails a
greater measure and increase of gifts upon the well using of them while we are
in this world: Open your mouths wide, and God will fill them. The more wide we
are in our desires and expectations, the more we shall be filled.

Use 2.
2. For Reprehension. Is it so, that in all matters of soul concernment we
should put forth a great deal of diligence? then this should be a great scourge
to that sluggishnesse of spirit that most men in the world are guilty of. What
benummednesse, and what sluggishnesse of spirit do most men lie under? Many men
are as David was, 1 King. 1.1. who when he grew old, he was so cold, no clothes
could warm him. There are many men, that happily have been hot and zealous in
profession; yet in process of time they grow so cold, that all Ordinances
cannot warm them. And though ordinarily, the words of the wise (says Solomon)
are as nails and goads; they are as nails to fasten us in a course of
profession, they are as goads to put us on; every Ordinance is as a goad in our
side, still putting us on in a course of holiness: yet O that sluggishnesse,
and O that deadness of spirit that lies upon men's hearts, they go but a snails
pace in the way to heaven; whereas they can run as fast as a Dromedarie in the
ways of sin.

It is the Observation of a Rabbi, That the Snail above all other creatures,
was by God pronounced unclean, because of its slow and easy pace: God looks
upon thee as an unclean man, and an unclean woman, that have a sluggish and a
slow spirit in matters of Christianity. There are many men that like no life
like an idle life; they are never weary so much, as they are weary of doing
good, and weary of duties; an hour at a Sermon, a day at a Fast, a little time
at a prayer quite tires them; whereas ways of vanity, and ways of pleasure,
they are never weary of. It was the speech of that Epicure Marcus Lepidus,
Outinam hoc esset laborare.
who lying under a shady tree upon a Sunshine day, stretching himself, cries
out, O would to God this were to take pains to live at ease. There are many men
as sottish as he: they could wish, I would to God to sit in a Tavern were the
way to go to heaven; I would to God to walk in the fields, to sit at the door
on the Sabbath day, that this were the way to heaven; many men would be saved
more easily! Why, how should this condemn that great sluggishnesse and
idleness of men's spirits, that they do so little in the matters of soul
concernments?

Beloved, you have cause to labor, because you find many that have taken
pains for heaven, that never came to heaven. Many shall strive to enter, but
shall not be able, Luke 13 Had not you therefore need to take heed? Nay,
Beloved, suppose (it is a supposition Aegydius has, though not true, Si u^u^
tantum homo damnandus esset caeterique omnes salvandi; Ego totis viribus
anniterer ne essem ille solus.

Talis dili gentia ^espicit tantam rem, tanta res requirit talem diligentiam.


yet I say suppose it) that all the world should be saved, but one man, yet,
says he, you have cause to take pains to be happy, lest you should be that one
man should perish. If all the world should be saved but one man only; if one
man should be damned, I have cause to labor with all my might, that I be not
that one man. Here then, great cause you have not to lie under sluggishnesse,
in all matters pertaining to the soul. You have a great deal of do, and happily
but a little time; if you knew the greatness of your work and s^ortnesse of
your time, happily you would now set about the business of your salvation. It
was the speech of young King Charles of Sicily lying upon his death bed: I have
scarce yet begun to live, and now, woe is me, I am compelled to dye. Beloved,
Many of you may have cause to say thus, you have scarce yet done one good
action that may give you any evidence to be happy with Christ another day:
Happily you have not yet begun to be Christians, and you may be soon called to
dye: and what an affliction would this be to you, that you have hardly begun to
live a life of grace, and yet you must dye the life of nature. This Diligence
is conversant about many things: 1. In getting grace. Here you have a great
work to do, to get grace, Above all gettings get understanding: And the
difficulty of getting grace, does show the goodness of grace. As we say in
nature, the most vile things are most obvious to the eye, and most common to be
found; you have stones and dirt every where, but things of a more excellent
nature are more hard to come by; if you would have Gold, you must dig into the
earth; if you would have Pearl, you must dive into the ^ea: things that are
excellent, nature has made them hard to come by. This shows the goodness of
those matters which concern the soul, that they are very hard to be got. Prove.
2.2, 4. N^n mimor est virtus quam quae rer^ ^atra tueri.
Seek f^r wisdom as for silver, and dig for it as for hidden Treasure. And
then, 2. Diligence is required not only to get grace, but to keep it; and it
is no less skill to keep grace, then to get it, there are so many temptations
lie in your way. And then, 3. To watch the heart, that does conspire against
your grace, and against your soul: Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all
diligence, for out of it are the issues of life. 4. In examining the heart:
Psalm 64.6. The heart is deep; and Psalm. 77.6. All these considered, you have
cause to take pains in all the matters of the soul.

Thus having finished this Doctrine; I now pass to the Particulars, to which
this diligence is applied. Give diligence: to what? Why, To make your Calling
and Election sure. From whence, the second Observation I shall draw, is this:

Doct. 2.
That Christians that profess the Gospel, ought to put forth a great deal of
industry and diligence to make this sure to their souls, that they are
effectually called, and eternally elected. Give diligence to make your Calling
and Election sure.

Now I cannot handle this Doctrine in the bulk of it, but must of necessity
take it into parts, and handle it piece by piece, that so I may give you the
strength of the whole Observation in the Application of it. And seeing Calling
lies in the front, I shall in a few Sermons treat of that. And the Point from
thence, will be this: That,

Doctr 3.
That Christians ought to put forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure
to their souls, that they are effectually Called.

Beloved, This is a very material Point I am now upon, especially in this
deceitful age, wherein men plunge themselves into a gulf of presumption,
wherein many times men take faith upon trust, and Christ upon trust. It is meet
that you that live under the Gospel, should try your Calling by the Gospel,
whether it be true or no; there may be an external Call, when there is no
inward calling by the operation of the Spirit upon your hearts.

In the managing of this Point, I shall show you these three things.

First, What effectual Calling is.

Secondly, Why you are required to put forth a great deal of diligence to make
your Calling sure to your souls.

Thirdly, By what Characters or Discoveries you ^ay be assured in your own
hearts that you are effectually call^^.

First, What Effectual Calling is. You say we must make it sure, therefore what
is the nature of it? For answer, you may take this description of it.

Effectual Calling is the fruit of Gods Election, whereby God of his free grace
works a wonderful change in the heart of an Elect person, by the inward
operation of the Spirit accompanying the outward Ministry of the word; by
virtue of which, the soul is brought from under the dominion of sin and Satan
into a state of grace, and so made meet for the enjoyment of God in glory. Now
I shall not take this apart, but commit it to your memory and judgment to
apprehend: Only in this description there are laid down four differences to
distinguish effectual Calling from that ordinary or outward Calling that wicked
men have by the Ministry of the word. As

1. Effectual Calling in the description, is said to be a fruit of Gods
Election; but outward or general Calling is a fruit only of common providence.
God by an overruling providence sends the Gospel among a people, and thereby
calls them to an outward compliance and conformity; but effectual Calling is a
fruit of Gods Election.

2. It is said in the description, that Effectual Calling, it changes the
heart, whereby God works a wonderful change in the heart: but an external
Calling no way reaches the heart, only works some kind of civil or common
alteration in the life.

3. It Is said, Eff^ctual Calling is wrought by the inward operation of the
Spirit accompanying the outward Ministry of the word; whereas an External Call
is only by the word, but no inward saving work of the Spirit at all.

4. It Is said of Eff^ctual Calling, that it is from the Dominion of sin; but
External Calling is only from the external acts of sin. Indeed by an external
calling the word may have that power over a man, as to restrain and keep in the
vis^ble and external actings of sin, but it no way works upon the inclination
to take off the affection from sin: whereas the effectual Calling works upon
the heart, and works to the subduing and destroying of the power of sin, as
well as the actings of it.

Secondly, Why does God require, that we should put forth such great diligence
in making sure that we are effectually called, by the Spirit of Jesus Christ in
the Gospel? There are three Reasons why this should be?

Reas. 1.
First, Because there are many professing the Gospel, that do harbor ungrounded
persuasions that they are effectually called, when they are not* Now if any men
be deceived, why may not you? And if any are apt to be deceived about this
matter, have not you great cause to be diligent, lest you are deceived also?
The Jews of old, they boasted of their Calling; and said, We have Abraham to
our father: but Christ confuts that; If you were Abraham's children (says he)
you would do the works of Abraham: but you seek to kill me, which Abraham did
not. But then they go higher, John 8.46. they were effectually called, For God
is our Father: No, says Christ, You are of your father the Devil. Thus many
men run into these gross mistakes, to believe they are effectually called,
when they are not. Many are called outwardly that are not called effectually,
Matthew. 22.14. And therefore it concerns you, not to be deceived in this great
business.

Reas. 2.
Secondly, Because there is this natural aptness in all of us, in things that
are of any value concerning the body; you will be sure to make sure of them. It
may be, if you have Brass and Pewter, or baser Metals, your Kitchen shall
serve for that; but things of greater value, as Pearls and Diamonds, they must
be in the Closet, and in a Cabinet in that Closet, you will be sure to ensure
them. Why how much more should you ensure this great and precious Jewel of
Effectual Calling, that so much concerns your immortal souls? When you buy
Land, you will be sure your Title is good; to draw up your evidences, so as to
be firm in Law. You know Merchants, if they venture a great or most part of
their estate at sea, where happily there may be hazard in the Voyage, they will
run speedily to ensure a great part of their Commodities. Beloved, this should
you do; this body of yours is the Ship, and the Merchandise and Freight in this
Ship is your souls; and this Ship is going a great Voyage to Glory, Glory is
the Port whither this Ship is to come, you shall meet with many dangers in your
way, happily with storms and tempests of temptation; yea, happily you may run upon
the rocks of presumption, or quicksands of despair. O now, run to the ensuring
Office: what is that? why, run to seek the Testimony of Christ's Spirit in your
own spirit, by the word, to evidence unto you upon good ground, that the Ship
shall be safe, and the Commodities brought secure to the Haven; that Ship,
Body, Soul and all shall come safe to Heaven. Beloved, if men will thus ensure
their Estates, you have much more reason to ensure your souls. For believe it,
if you make not sure your souls, if you suffer shipwreck, ye are ^urned
Bankrupts presently; Bankrupt to God, you lose him for ever. It is said of an
old Usurer, That when any man came to borrow money of him, he would hardly
trust one in twenty; and being asked the reason, Why he would do so? O (says
he) it is good to be sure. Why (Beloved) shall a Usurer in all his ways be so
secure, and so heedful in all his disbursments, that he could say, It is good
to be sure? and may not I much more say to you, It is good to be sure of
Heaven? it is good to be sure you are effectually called by Jesus Christ; it is
good to be sure that you are Christians in truth, not in name only; that you
are Christians in Deed, not in Profession only. O it is good to make your
Calling and Election sure.

Thirdly, Christians should labor to assure this, Reas. 3.
because the more assured you are of your Effectual Calling, the more it will
heighten and increase your inward peace and Comfort, 1 Pet. 1.8. In whom
believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. It is very
observable, that in all the Epistles of the new Testament, where the Apostle
speaks of their effectual calling to be Saints, in the very next verse he
salutes them with these words, Grace and Peace be toward you, 1 Cor. 1.2. You
are called to be Saints; Grace and Peace be toward you. Romans 1.6, 7. Called to
be Sa^^t^, Grace and Peace be multiplied toward you: and so in every Epistle
besides; to note that when a man is eff^ctually called, the more assurance he
has of his calling, the more peace he has in his own conscience. It will
greaten your peac^, and greaten your inward comforts; therefore you should
labor after this ass^rance of your effectual calling.

And thus having shown you what effectual calling is, and why you ^ust give
diligence to make this sure. I now pass to a third Q^erie.

What are the Characters or discoveries, whereby my soul may be assured that I
a^ eff^ctually called by Jesus Christ? And in the dispatch of this, I shall
resolve it only by these two general heads.

First, You may be assured of your effectual calling, if God has taken that
method with your souls, which he does ordinarily take with those whom he does
effectually call.

Secondly, If the Lord has wrought in you those saving effects or
concomitants, which do ordinarily accompany those that are thus effectually
called: if these two things be done, you may have a seal and assurance in your
own hearts that you also are effectually called. Beloved, it is not for
Ministers to flatter you: there are among many in the world but few that are
called; among many that are called but few that are elected; and therefore do
not flatter your selves. If upon trial you find you are not in the number of
Gods called ones, go home and bewail your unregenerate and unconverted estate.
But before I can speak of this method, I must first lay down some mistakes
that are held by erroneous minds about the method God takes in calling a
sinner home to himself.

A first mistake is of the Pelagians, who hold this, that a man is able to call
and convert himself. Now this opinion does quite exclude and justle out God
from having any hand therein: they say a Christian is able to call and convert
himself, having only a general concurrence and assistance from God.

2. Of the Arminians, and they hold this* That effectual calling consists only
in moral persuasions, and may be resisted by the person that is thus called;
and that a man being called into a state of grace, may fall from his calling
and fall from his grace, and so have no profit by his calling at all; which is
a most uncomfortable opinion: and surely God would never take this method in
calling of his people.

3. That of the Papists; and they say that God calls and ordains a sinner to
glory, but it is upon the foresight of his good works. God foresaw how good and
holy the man would be, and therefore God would choose and call him to glory: But
this has no ground from Scripture neither.

4. That of the Familists; and they hold this, That Gods method in calling a
sinner is not by the outward Ministry of the Word, but it is by Raptures and
Revelations, and by divine inspirations, and extraordinary ways of working:
but this is not Gods usual method, though God sometimes takes this way, as he
did by Paul, who was called this way after an extraordinary manner: Yet this is
not Gods ordinary rule.

5. There is another mistake, and that is of those who press a necessity of
such measures of legal horror and terror upon the consciences of men, else
they can never be saved. Sometimes Ministers have been so harsh now and then,
(though indeed no such cause to blame them as is pretended) yet sometimes
lashes break out, that men must be so and so humbled, in such a measure, and so
long for duration. Now this is not Gods method to press for measure, but a
great mistake about Gods manner of calling a sinner; though I must confess,
this is the nearest of all the five, to that rule God takes in calling a sinner
to glory. Having thus laid down the mistakes, it is the easier now to find out
the truth. I come now to speak of that method God takes in calling a sinner.
And here I shall lay down a sixfold method, in which God proceeds with those
whom he does effectually call, which if he does so with you, you may go home
with a seal upon your hearts, that you are effectually called to grace, and you
shall one day come to glory.

First, When God goes about effectually to call a poor sinner into a state of
grace, he puts a clear light into his soul, whereby he may see the heinous and
aggravated nature of all his sins, more then ever he did before. Romans 7.8, 9,
13. Paul tells you, Before the commandment came, he was alive, and sin was
dead; that is, before the power of the word came upon his conscience to convert
him, he was alive; i.e. he thought he was a good man, and a just man, and he
thought sin was dead, sin was destroyed; he never knew sin so sinful: but when
the commandment came, sin revived, and I died: but when the word of God came
with power upon my conscience, and light upon my judgment, then I saw I was a
dead man, sin had killed me, and I saw sin was reigning, and sin was raging in
me: and what then? ver. 13. I saw sin exceeding sinful: he never saw sin so
before conversion, before his Call, when he was a Pharisee; but when the word
of God came with power upon his conscience to call him, then says he, I saw
sin to be exceeding sinful. Now (O Beloved) has ever God done thus with your
souls? may be you look upon sin with a transient and general view but do you
look upon sin so as to see more evil in sin then ever you saw before? This is
the course God usually takes. Me thinks God deals with a converted sinner, as
it is spoken in Job 33.27, 28. He looks upon men, and if any say, I have
sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it does not profit me, he will
deliver his soul from going down into the pit, and his life shall see the
light: that is, God looks upon the mass of mankind in the world, and says, if
any man say he has sinned, and it did not profit him, that is, if he look upon
sin as an evil, and that he never did get good by it: then says God, I will
deliver his soul from hell, and bring him to heaven.

Object.
Yea, but you will say, May be sometimes God may do thus to affright men, and
trouble men in mind, make them see their sins: but is this Gods usual work?

Ans.
Yes, it is, ver. 29. Lo, these things works God oftentimes with men. Mark, it
is not a seldom work, but it is Gods work often, he will make you see your
sins, see them to be fruitless, and see them to be unprofitable; Lo, these
things God works oftentimes with men. Hence you read, John 16.8. When the
Spirit shall come (mark his Office) he shall convince the world of sin: The
first act of the Spirit in converting a soul, and calling him, is to convince
him of sin. And I Remember Piscator thinks this accomplished in Acts 2.37. When
they saw their sin in crucifying of Jesus Christ; this is the first work of the
Spirit of God, in you Calling; he will convince you of sin. Now, O Beloved, to
how many do I speak this day, with whom God has never taken this Method, since
they were born into the world? How many are there that have been told of their
drunkenness, and told of their lusts, and of their deceits, and of their
licencious living from day to day; and yet to this day they never saw sin to be
exceeding sinful; they never were convinced of sin to purpose? If they did
indeed see their sin, 1. it was but a transient sight, soon come and soon gone;
or else 2. it was but a general sight, ^o say we are all sinners: or 3. If they
did see their sin, it was but a confused sight; no way distinct: or 4. If they
did see sin, it was an unhumbling sight; the sight of sin did never humble them
in Gods sight. I entreat you, Beloved, do not lay hold or have hopes of being
effectually called, if God has not shown you the heinous and aggravated nature
of your sins. There is a speech, Job. 36.9, 10. He first shows to men their
works, and their transgressions, that they have exceeded; and then he opens
their ears to discipline, and commands them to return from evil. Mark, then the
Lord does it, when he makes them see their transgressions, that they have
exceeded; Now, have you seen that you have exceeded in your Passions, and in
your Pride? have you seen sin to be exceeding sinful? this is Gods first work;
and happy are you that are brought into Christ's School, that Christ does take
this Method withal.

2. After God has put a light into the soul, to make you see the sinfulness
of sin; then 2. God fastens these thoughts on the soul, to make you sensible of
the great misery that your sins have brought you into; to cry out with Paul,
Romans 7.24. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? There Paul cries out of his wretchedness and misery, by reason of that
body of death, the sinfulness of his nature, which he confesses did as much
trouble him as if a dead body should be tied to his living body; alluding to
the custom of the Romans, in punishing notorious Malefactors, which he takes
to be a most grievous punishment. Why Beloved, have you ever seen this? did you
ever see that misery that sin brought upon you? that sin did divest you of
righteousness, did rob you of your God, banish you from his presence, entitle
you to hell, and make you objects of his wrath? Now were you sensible of this
misery? this is Gods method, to make you see your misery by reason of sin.

3. God puts the soul into a kind of spiritual astonishment, that the poor
sinner does not know where to go, what course to take, which way to turn, how
he may get pardon for his sin, and recovery from his misery. This you find
mentioned as Gods method, Acts 2.37. upon 3000 at once, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? They were even in amaze, the word wrought upon them,
and they saw Jesus Christ crucified to be their sin; and now they cry out in
great astonishment, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? When God
effectually calls a man, he will leave him a little to himself, that he knows
not which way in the world to turn him. Now when I speak of spiritual
Astonishment, mistake me not; for first, I press not such a measure of
Humiliation, nor such a measure of trouble of mind, how great it must be; Nor
Secondly do I press the duration of it, how long it must be; that you must be
so long and so long. Nor Thirdly, do I press an absolute necessity of this,
as if a man could not be called without it. Indeed we read of Lydia, that her
heart was opened, and she never troubled nor astonished; and God sometimes works
thus in an extraordinary way: but I press this, that ordinarily, its Gods
Method in some measure or other, at some time or other, to put his People in
such a plunge, that they shall not know which way in the world to turn
themselves. And so were those 3000 Acts 2. They could not tell what they should
do to be saved.

And here further, if you ask me, With whom does God most of all take this
course, to put them into such spiritual amazement; to put them into horror and
terror about their everlasting estate? I Answer, first, Those that have lived
in a course of profaneness before Conversion; let them look to it: if thou
have been a knottie and stout-hearted sinner against God, God must give thee
many a blow before he can hammer thee to his own will. You that have been
guilty of Drunkenness, and guilty of Adultery, or guilty of
Sabbath-breaking in a gross and licencious way, that have made this world a
stage to act wickedness upon, look to it; boast not of your Calling: if God
has not brought you in this way, you have ground to suspect you are not yet
called. They that before Conversion were loose in their lives, if they find
not this spiritual amazement, it is not likely they are called. And therefore I
verily suspect your Call, that can jump out of a course of Profaneness, into a
course of Profession; that can jump from a course of Malignitie to delight to
hear Sermons, and love Ministers. You that have been opposers of godliness, if
you do not show an eminent work in your Conversion, I greatly suspect, whether
you are converted or no: because it is Gods usual Method, if men have been men
of gross lives before calling, to bring them to great ashonishment when they
are called.

2. You that have often withstood, and still withstand Gods call; that Sermon
after Sermon, and invitation after invitation would not gain upon you; Do you
look about you: God will give you many a blow, God will send you many a sad
hour, before he brings you ^o your peace.

3. Those that have often sinned against Conscience, that do as it were lay
Conscience wast; that are prodigal of sinning, not caring for sinning against
never so much light, and never so much conviction. Beloved, you shall not have
so easy a coming to heaven: God will first lay many strokes upon you, and draw
heavy groans from you. David says, By reason of thy terrors I am afraid, and
my bones are dried up: You are subject to most horror and astonishment, that do
sin against Conscience. Again,

4. When God has done thus, made you see the aggravated nature of sin, shown
you your misery by reason of sin, and brought you into such a condition that
you cannot tell how to be saved; then 4. this is Gods Method, to take you off
from your own bottom, beat you off from resting on duties, and beat you off
from dependence upon graces, and beat you off from every thing in your selves.
This was Gods work in Paul, Phil. 3.9, 10. I was, says Paul, Circumcised the
eigth day, of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamen, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews; that is, my father and mother were Hebrews: what then? and I was,
touching the Law, blameless, Mark, he was so standing upon his own legs, upon
his own bottom; that he thought himself a holy man, a man blameless touching
the Law. But now, says he, what things were gain to me, I count loss for
Christ; yea doubtless, I count all things lost, that I might be found in
Christ, not having mine own righteousness. Here Paul before Conversion
depended upon his holy living, and honest dealing; but now I am converted, and
see my folly; now I desire to be found in Christ, not having mine own
righteousness. See how God did unbottome Paul from any goodness in himself,
to make him rest upon Jesus Christ: and this is Gods work with thee; he will
unbottome thee from thy self, and make thee see thou can not be thine own
Savior.

5. After he has unbottom'd thee from thy self, he puts thee upon earnest
longings and looking after Jesus Christ. When the poor soul has ransacked
duties, and gone to this Minister, and the other Minister, to be satisfied; and
he sees duties cannot help him, and prayer will not help him; now he thinks, I
see none but Christ to lay my head upon: and I see none but a Christ I must
make recourse unto: And now he is so longing after Christ, that if all the
stones in the streets were gold, and all the building of his house were
diamond, and all his garments bespangled with pearl; none of these should
interrupt, or stay him from running after Jesus Christ; and this, as I may say,
is Gods second work: The three first may be in wicked men, they may see their
sin and misery thereby, and be in a maze not knowing which way to go: but
these two are a form beyond the wicked; they never unbottom themselves, nor
ever have any longings or breathings after Christ at all.

6. It is Gods method after all this, to make them find abundance of
contentment, and acquiescence in Jesus Christ; that they may have occasion to
say, I see I have laid my help upon one that is mighty; I see I have pitched
upon him that is both able and willing to do me good. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. Has given
us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace And now beloved, having
spoken of these things, how many in the Congregation have I left behind, that
happily the Lord has used none of these methods with their souls? O Lord, I am
not able to tell you your misery, but I entreat you take heed, and do not
nuzzle up your souls in Presumption and groundless persuasions; for believe
it, these are Gods ordinary methods he takes with most souls in bringing them
to Glory.

SERMON III.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


HAving finished the first part of the discovery, in relation to the method God
takes with those whom he does effectually call. I now proceed to the second way
of discovery, and that is, by those saving Concomitants, that do and will
accompany a soul that is effectually called: and these saving effects, I shall
reduce under eight heads.

First, A man effectually called by Christ, he does unfainedly love the word of
God, and the Minister that preached that word that God did use as an instrument
of his call. First, I say, he will love the word, John 8.47. He that is of God,
(that is, he that is called by God) hears Gods word, therefore you are not of
God, because you hear not his word. There the Scripture tells us, that they who
are of God, effectually called by him, they hear his word with abundance of
delight, and abundance of joy and love. So 1 John 4, 5, 6. He that is of God
hears us, he that is not of God hears not us. And therefore David, when he
would evidence a work of God upon his heart, Psalm. 119.14. Thy word, says he,
is as great riches to me. And as if he did not vulue riches comparable to the
word, verse. 72. I love thy word above thousands of gold and silver. Beloved, if
you are converted and called by Jesus Christ, you will love the Word of God,
that was an instrument of your Call. Wherefore all you that spurn against the
Gospel, that cannot endure to have the word come with power upon your
consciences; all you that are weary of Ordinances, and find no more savor in
an Ordinance of God, then (as Job says) there is taste in the white of an
egg; this is an argument you are not yet called. What Is the reason one man will
rise early, go far, take pains, and many times n^glect his own lawful affairs,
and all to enjoy the word: when another man will go by the Church-door, and
happily go to a Tavern, and will not go to hear the word at all? What Is the
reason? One is called by the word, and the other not: one is called by the
Word, and therefore loves it, another is not called, and that makes him neglect
it.

2. He does not only love the word, but the Minister that by preaching the word
was an instrument of his conversion. And therefore it is observable, which some
Divines note, That of all men that we read of in Scripture, there was no man
did love Paul so well as Timothy: For I have no man like minded, says Paul,
Phil. 2.22. No man that did so naturally care for him, and for the Church of
God, as he; For as a son with his father has he served me. And what is the
reason? Why, Paul was the instrument of Timothies conversion, and Timothy being
a Minister, and come to a great pitch in grace, he thought that of all
Arguments in the world, that should indear him to love Paul, because Paul was
the Minister that did convert him: therefore he calls him (1 Timothy 1.2.) Timothy
his beloved son in the Faith. And hence it is, that when the Apostle would draw
love from the Corinthians to himself, and the Ministers of Christ that were the
means of their calling, he urges it upon this ground, that they were the means
that did beget them to Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 4. ver. 1. compared with ver. 15,
16. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and as Stewards
of the myst^ries of God. Why should men so account of them? For (ver. 15.)
though you have ten thousand Instructers, yet have you not many Fathers; for in
Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Hereby he would draw out
their love to him, because he was the instrument that did first convert them.
Now then, put these two together: A man that is effectually called, he does
both love the Word of Christ, that was an instrument of his calling; and the
Minister that preached that word, which was the means by which he was called:
and try your selves by these. Many of you happily have some good wrought (as you
think) upon you, and some change in you; but truly let me tell you this, if you
are persons that are out of love with the word, if you are out of love with
those Ministers God made instrumental to convert you; you have just cause to
suspect your calling; for you see throughout the whole course of Scripture,
their hearts did cleave with love to them that called them: And therefore they
that can slight and contemn those Ministers by whose Ministry they were brought
home to Jesus Christ, they have just cause of jealousy to suspect their Call.
Again,

3. If God has effectually called you, he will by his Spirit bring you out of
a state of ignorance and darkness, and give you some measure of knowledge, to
be acquainted both with the mysteries of God and Christ, and the sinfulness of
your selves more then ever you were before. This the Apostle Peter intimates, 1
Pet. 2. ver. 9. You are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar
people, that you may show forth the praise of him, who has called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light: i.e. out of ignorance into a great measure
of knowledge. And it is called a mavelous light, 1. Because it is mavelous
if you compare that knowledge you shall have under the Gospel, with what men had
under the Law. 2. It is mavelous, because men are astonished, that they
should, after so long a night of ignorance, come to so great a measure of
knowledge. 3. It is called mavelous, because it is so contrary to that
condition they were formerly in: As if a man that has lain long in a dark
dungeon, should be suddenly called into a glorious Palace, the Palace would
seem more glorious, because it is so contrary to the dark Prison: So this work
of God when he calls you, it is mavelous light, because it is so contrary to
the condition you were in before your calling. Isa. 30.26. Acts 26.18. He has
sent his word to call you from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God. 4. It is a mavelous light, because such as none but the Mediator
could procure it, Isa. 42.6, 7. I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles.
5. It is a mavelous light, because a light that shines out of darkness, 2
Cor. 4.6. God that commanded the light to shine out of darkness. 6. It is a
mavelous light because it has more force then any other light: it is called
the light of life, John 8.12.

Now this call from darkness to light has two branches: 1. A man shall have
more Light, to have more acquaintance with, and more clearness in the mysteries
of Jesus Christ: And 2. more Light to know the sinfulness of himself.


First, He shall have more Light to know the mysteries of Jesus Christ: And
hence it is that Paul tells us, Gal. 1.16. It pleased God to call me by his
grace, and to reveal his Son in me; implying, that where God by his grace does
call a sinner, he does reveal his Son unto him. Wherefore, Beloved, if Jesus
Christ be not made known to your souls, if you have no competent measure of
the knowledge of Christ; you may be under this conviction, that you are not yet
called by Jesus Christ. Nay further, he does not only call you unto this Light,
to manifest Jesus Christ to you in some dim way; but you shall have a clear
light: 2 Cor. 4.6. For G^d who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts (not in a dim, but shining light) to give us the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: that is, you have
a clear light to know God in the face of Christ; you cannot know God in
himself, but in the person of Christ you shall have light to know him. This
therefore is the first Branch, That God will put a light into thy soul, whereby
thou shall have a clear knowledge of the things appertaining to Jesus Christ.

Again Secondly, This shall not only reveal Christ to thee; but this light shall
also reveal thy Self to thee, the sinfulness of thy self. It is observable of
Paul, that before his calling, he was after the law blameless; he thought
himself to be a faultless man; but when the word called him* then he cries out,
I see sin to be exceeding sinful: then he saw sin to be sin, and himself to
be a vile and wretched man. And therefore, Beloved, any of you that have not
this mavelous light in your souls, neither to know God, nor to know Jesus
Christ, nor the matters appertaining to him, nor to know the sinfulness of
your own hearts; take it from God, you are not effectually called: either these
passages in Scripture must be rased out, or else your call^ng must not be
sound; and therefore take heed: I would fain m^ke my Ministry searching, that
hypocrites may not lie lurking under it. You would be better Christians, if you
were better acquainted with all that unsoundness, and that wretchedness of
heart that is in you; and therefore (I entreat you) look about you: Though I
would have no godly man discouraged by this that is spoken; but that you that
are not yet called, might have your hearts a little staggered by what is and
will be said.

3. A man effectually called is cast out of himself, and cleaves to, and
closes with Jesus Christ, with more complacencie and contentment, then ever he
could do in all his life before. John 6.45. He that has heard and learned of
the father, shall come unto m^; he does not say, all they that hear of the
father: many men do hear the word, but never close in with Christ; but all
they that have heard, and by hearing have learnt, and are called, come unto me,
and close in with me, and cleave to me, and take content and delight in me.
Beloved, there are many that hear the word, yet never go out of themselves,
and never close in with Christ: yea but all they that hear and learn, that hear
and are called by hearing, they all come in to Jesus Christ. Wherefore all you,
that in hearing cannot find your hearts in love with Christ, cannot find your
hearts to close in with Christ, and believe in Christ; you have just cause to
suspect your call, that your calling is not effectual. 1 Cor. 1.24. The Apostle
tells you, there were other men counted Christ foolishness; but to you that are
called, Christ is the power and wisdom of God: that is, you do acknowl^dge,
and you do conceive of Jesus Christ, that he has as much power as God has in
him, and as much wisdom as God has in him; and you close in with Chrrst for
that end, when other men think Christ to be foolish, and Christ weak: men
uncalled, they have low thoughts of Christ: but to you that are called, Christ
is the power and wisdom of God: You will have high thoughts of Jesus Christ if
you are effectually called.

4. That man that is effectually called, he shall be enabled by the spirit of
Christ to call upon God, 1 Cor. 1.2. To all in Corinth called to be Saints,
with all that call upon the name of the Lord. There the Apostle joins called
to be Saints, with this phrase, to call upon God: to show, that whoever is
effectually called to be a Saint, that man shall be enabled by the Spirit of
Jesus, to call upon God. Psalm. 27.8. When thou saidest, Seek my face; my heart
said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek. Hence ye read, Acts 9.11. when
Ananias doubted whether Paul was truly called or no, and Jesus Christ would
convince Ananias that he was truly called: what means does he use? verse 11. do
not suspect him, but arise says Christ, and go to him into the street, called
straight, and inquire at the house of Judas for one Saul of Tarsus, for behold
he prays. If he were not called, he would never go to God in such a cordial
way, and humble his soul before God for his by past failings: and beg strength
for time to come, and labor to have his peace made with me. Go to him, for
behold he prays: and therefore all you that have not a spirit in any measure
to call upon God, and to pour forth your requests in a solemn prayer; you have
just cause of jealousy to suspect your Call.

5. If you are effectually called, God has wrought in your souls, an utter
detestation and loathing of all the evils that in the former part of your lives
before your calling you have committed and were guilty of. Hos. 14.8. Ephraim
shall say, what have I any more to do with Idols? The interogation imports a
vehement detestation of them, and indignation against them. 2 Cor. 7.11. the
Apostle speaks there of repentance, (the same with calling) when men come to
have the work of grace in their hearts: and this is a branch of it: that godly
sorrow causes care, and causes fear, and causes indignation: that is, if
any man be a repenting man, and a converted man: this conversion will cause
indignation; that is, he will be even mad with himself, and angry with
himself, that he should be so vile a wretch before conversion, as he has
been. Thus was Paul, he speaks with indignation against the sins he was guilty
of before his calling. I have been a persecutor, I have haled the Saints into
prison: Nay, says he, I was even mad against the Church. Beloved, you will
count your sins to be madness, and count them to be greatly aggravated, that
were committed before God called you. Anselm said to his body, I Will tame thee,
O unruly beas^, with fasting and pray^r. We read of one that bit off his tongue
in indignation, that therewith he had denied Jesus Christ. Another Martyr put
that hand first into the fire, with which he had subscribed a recantation:
saying, Burn thou, O hand, that did subscribe to that which might have made
me burn both body and soul in hell. And therefore you that have no loathing
thoughts against past deceit, and past drunkenness, and past swearing, and
past evils: suspect your calling: You that do not abhor the thoughts of your
forme^ evils, your wonted pride, and wonted covetousness: if you cannot look
with indignation against these, you have great cause to suspect your call: For
if God have called you, he will make you even angry with your selves, that ever
you have been so vile as you have been. Hence it is, when God speaks of Isreal's
conversion, Isa. 2.20. it is said, they shall cast away their Idols from them:
they shall cast away their sins as with indignation against themselves, because
they have sinned. And hence in the Prophecy of Ezekiel. 20.43. the Prophet tells
them, that for the evils they had done, they should loath themselves in their
own eyes: their indignation should be so great against themselves, that ever
they should be so vile against God before their call. So David with indignation
says, after he had recovered himself, and brought his heart into a repentant
frame, so foolish was I and Ignorant, Psalm. 73.22. Now Beloved, I would hear
appeal unto you, I will judge no man; let your own consciences pass sentence
upon you; But let me appeal to your selves: Have not many of you before these
times been opposers of Religion; men walking in ungodly, lewd, and profane
courses of living? happily now you are molded into a form of Profession; now you
hear the Word, speak well of Ministers; now you cry up Government, many your
plausible way^s and actions you can carry on; but what is in your hearts? Have
you indignation against your past persecution, and evils? If not, belie^e it,
though you go far, I fear you may com^ short of heaven: your calling is not
real, if you have not indignation ^n^ wrath against your former sins commit^ed.
And therefore, O what a sad word is this to all ^nsensible sinners! that are
men that never had their hearts touched with remorse for any evil: What a sad
word is this to you that have been drunk week a^^er week; and sworn day after
day; and d^c^ived hour after hour, and been unclean time after time: and yet
all these evils never touched the heart? Truly, you have great cause to fear,
that God has not yet ^ff^ctually called you by Jesus Christ.

6. The man that is eff^ctually called, his spirit is brought into an
obedi^ntial frame, to yield obedience to the commands of Jesus Christ: if God
call you by his Spirit, he will not leave you to the exorbitancies of your own
ways and will, but he will bring you to a yeeldingnesse of heart to all his
commands. Romans 15.6. We have received grace and Apostleship for obedience to
the faith among all Nations, among whom you are also the called of Jesus
Christ. The Apostle did not alone receive grace for obedience; but the same was
among them also: You receive grace for the obedience of faith. So that now, if
you are the called of Jesus Christ, the Lord has this work upon you, he does
bring you to the obedience of faith; that is, he does work in your souls a
yielding frame to obey all the commands of Jesus Christ: and therefore any of
you that stand out with stoutnesse of heart against Jesus Christ; let Christ
say what he will, you will do what you list; let him command what he will, you
will do what you please: you that stand out thus with gainsaying of spirit
against Jesus Christ, you have great cause to suspect your Call. Again,

7. A man effectually called by Jesus Christ, he will be mis-called and
reproached by the men of the world: John 15.19. If you were of the world, the
world would love his own; but because you are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Yet do not mistake
me; I do not say in this Concomitant, That every man that is reproached and
mis-called is a called man: but I say, A man that is truly called, will be
mis-called by wicked men. Now mis-calling, or the reproaches of wicked men, is
a pledge of you effectual calling, if you take in these qualifications: First,
if they mis-call you merely because you are godly, and hate you because of
your holiness, then it is an argument, as Jesus Christ said, Because I have
called you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Secondly, If they
mis-call you when you give no occasion of offense wherefore they may justly
mis-call you: If you can say with David, Psalm. 59. They mis-call me; but it is
neither for my wickedness, nor for my sins: if they mis-call you without any
ground, then it is a probable argument of your Effectual Calling.

8. A man effectually called, he makes it his endeavor to walk worthy of his
calling: 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14. So E^hes. 4.1. Walk worthy of the calling wherewith
you are called. And thus I have briefly gone over these Eight Particulars: I
entreat you, delude not your own hearts, but bring the Word and your hearts
together, and try by these Notes, whether you can evidence to your own souls,
That you are effectually called by Jesus Christ, or no.

Now is this true, That wi^h all those whom God has effectually called, he
does take those Methods before spoken of; and he does work these Concomitants
now named? Then 1. By way of Use, This should be astonishment to all those that
never had those Methods of God upon their souls; Use. 1.
that never had these effects within them to accompany their Call. O (Beloved)
I wish I could fasten the nail of Terror deep into their hearts, that never
had any of these wrought in their souls; that never loved the word, nor the
Ministers of it; that never were brought by God out of a state of ignorance
into a state of knowledge; that never did close in effectually with Jesus
Christ; that never had indignation against the evils they did before
Conversion; that never had their hearts brought into an obediential frame, to
take impression of any command that God should lay upon them; how sadly should
this Consideration lie upon your hearts?

2. Are you effectually called? Use. 2.
Labor to resemble him in your conversation that has called you. This Use the
Apostle makes of this Doctrine, 1. Pet. 1.15. As he that has called ^ou is
holy, s^ be you holy: Resemble him that has called you in holiness. An
excellent phrase you have, 1 Pet. 2.9. Show forth (says the Apostle) the
praises of him that has called you from darkness into his mavelous light.
(...), etc.
The word is more full in the Greek; Show forth, or manifest (not the praises,
as we read it, but) the virtues or the graces of him that has called you. If
God has called you, and Christ has called you, you should show forth Christ's
graces in your Conversation; that is, live as Christ lived, and walk as Christ
walked. If you say, you have fellowship with Christ, you ought also to walk as
he walked, 1 John 1.6.

Use 3.
3. Do nothing that may any way blemish this holy calling of yours; this the
Apostle presses, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. We pray always for you, that our God would
count you worthy of this calling. So Ephs. 4.1. I as a prisoner of the Lord
Jesus beseech you, that you walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith you are
called. Beloved, If you are called, take heed of any way blemishing your Call:
All the scandals and failings you commit, lays a spot upon that holy calling
of yours: though indeed their is no reason to blemish a man's Profession,
although some should err in their practice. The Apostle takes off this, Gal.
5.8. This persuasion, says Paul, comes not from him that has called you. As
if he should say; many men seeing the Galathians turn Apostates, they may blame
Religion, and blame God that called them; but says the Apostle, do not blame
them; for this persuasion of their failings, comes not from him that called
them: your calling is not in fault, but your corruptions are in fault.
Therefore it is an unjust accusation, because some men fail, to blame God, and
blame Profession, and Religion for it.

Use 4.
4. If God has effectually called you, and you can evince it to your own souls
upon the discovery before heard; my last Use is this, that you would live in
exalting and magnifying of the grace of God in your calling: 1 Timothy 1.9.
you are called, says the Apostle, according to the purpose of his grace; not
according to your own works. O live live in magnifying that grace that has
called you.

And here I might press upon you 7. or 8. Considerations, why you should live
in magnifying of grace. I shall name them first in general. This exhortation
should much sway with you, if you would consider these three things, 1. From
what you are called. 2. To what you are called; and 3. For what you are called.
I shall put the two first together.

1. The consideration of this, from what, and to what you are called, should
much heighten your magnifying of Gods grace: And here I shall name seven
particulars.

1. A man effectually called, he is called from ignorance to knowledge, 1 Pet.
2.9. You are called from darkness into mavelous light. Now should not this
make you magnify mercy, that you that lay in your sins uncalled, as in a
dungeon of darkness, now God should call you into a lightsome and pleasurable
palace? thy mind was a fair builded house without windows; or if any, but
wooden windows that would let in no light: now God has opened these shuts,
and let in the Sun of righteousness to shine upon thy soul; and brought thee
from this dungeon of darkness in thy soul, and given thee the light of his
knowledge.

2. You are called from a course of sin to a course of holiness: Before your
calling you were the Devils Drudges, and did his work at will; the Devil (in
Paul's language to Timothy) had you Captive at his pleasure; but when God calls
you, he takes you from under the dominion and reign of sin; and brings you into
a course of holiness, 1 These. 4.7. You are called, not unto uncleanness, but
unto holiness, 2 Pet. 1.3. He has called us to glory and virtue. Before
calling, thou were the receptacle or common shore of all filth and
uncleanness; when called, thou art swept with the besome of sanctification;
yea beautified and adorned as a pleasant palace for thy God to delight in. And
this should cause you much to magnify grace, that you are brought from being
the Devils drudges, to be Gods freemen; from being the Devils slaves, to be
Gods servants; from being the Devils taskeman, to pay thee thy wages in hell, to
be Gods workman, for which he will give thee thy reward in heaven.

3. God calls thee from bondage to liberty. In the time that thou art
uncalled, thou art in bondage; 2 Pet 2.19. they are the servants of Corruption,
etc. in bondage to thy lusts, and bondage to thy Passion, and a slave to the
world; thou art in bondage under the Law, under the curse and rigor, and
condemnation of it; but now Jesus Christ, if he have called thee, he has
called thee to liberty. Gal 5.13. You are called to liberty, only use not
liberty as a Cloak to wickedness. Before calling, 2 Timothy 2.25. you are in
Satan's snares; but after calling, you are set at liberty, you are freed from
the guilt, and freed from the bondage of your sin.

4. You are called from a condition of estrangednesse, into an intimate
familiarity and fellowship with Jesus Christ. Before calling, you are
Strangers from the life of grace, Ephesians. 4.18. You are without God in the
world, strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. But when God calls
you, he calls you from the condition of a stranger, and brings you into
friendship and fellowship with Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by
whom you are called into the fellowship of his Son: You who were without Christ
before calling, being called, you enjoy near familiarity with his Son.

5. You are called from Satan unto God. Acts 26.18. He has sent forth his
word among you, to bring you from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God. Satan who was thy lord, and was thy master, and ruler, thou art
now from under his clutches, and brought under the dominion and subjection of
thy Go^.

6. When God effectually calls thee, thou art brought from a state of enmity
against God, to a state of amity and reconciliation toward him, and Jesus
Christ, and all the things of God. Col. 3.15. Let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, for to this ye are called; and be ye thankful. God has called you to
peace, he has not called you to wrath. Before Calling, God and thy soul were
the most inveterate enemies in all the world: After Calling, God and thou are
of enemies become the greatest friends: You are called to peace, therefore be
thankful.

7. You are called from state of shame to a state of glory. Before you are
called, you are vile and shameful creatures in Gods sight; when Gone calls you,
he calls you into a condition of glory. 1 Pet. 5.10. Who has called us to his
eternal glory: and 1 These. 2.12. Since thou wast precacus in my sight, and I
have loved thee, thou becamest honou^able, Isa 43. 1 Pet. 2.6. To you that
believe, Christ is precious: or as it is in the Greek, he is an honor to you.
(...).
Jesus Christ, when once you are called to a believeing state, he is not only
precious to you, and priz^d of you, but he is an honor to you. This then you
are to consider, that unc^lled, you are in a shameful condition, ^o badg of
honor lies upon you; but when once you are called by Christ, he becomes an
honor to you.

8. And lastly, (which shall be accomplished in the end) you shall be called
from earth to heaven, and from the grave to glory; this shall be your call
after death. Now put all these Eight together: To be called from ignorance to
knowledge; from sin to grace; from bondage to liberty; from estrangement to
fellowship with Jesus Christ: from a state of enmity to a state of amity and
reconciliation with God and man; from shame to glory; and from earth to heaven:
and should not this mightily highten your joy, and greaten your praises in
magnifying the grace of God in your hearts?

Secondly, Again, The consideration of this, As, From what, and To what; so,
For what you are called, should greaten your praises. Now for what are you
called? You are called merely according to the purpose of his own grace;
neither foreseen works, nor good education, nor grace in you, none of all these
were motives in Gods breast to call you. And hence you may see it was nothing in
you, because there were many things in us might move God not to call us: We
have often withstood his call; we have often strangled the motions of his
Spirit in our hearts: we have often carried gainsaying hearts to the wooings
of the Ministers of Christ: So that it is nothing in us, but merely his own
grace that conquers our unholinesse, and conquers our unwillingnesse, and
overcomes that stoutnesse of that is in us; merely the grace and goodness of
Jesus Christ. Now sum up all these together, and revolve them in your hearts,
and you will see what great cause you have to live in magnifying of Jesus
Christ.

SERMON. IV.
2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


IN the prosecution of these words, the Doctrine I drew from the first
particular duty enjoined, was this;

That Christians ought to put forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure
to their souls, that they are effectually called by Jesus Christ.

In the handling of which, I have gone over several particulars: I now come to
lay down some Propositions or Conclusions about Effectual Calling, and I shall
name twenty in all.

First, Ten sad Conclusions to all those men who are not effectully called.

Secondly, Ten consolatory conclusions to all those men that are effectually
called by Jesus Christ; and mixing conclusions procuring terror to the wicked,
and such as procure comfort to the godly; one tempered with the other may be
good to both. I begin with the first.

1. The first sad Conclusion I shall lay down is this: That there are many men
in the world, that are called outwardly by the word unto a profession of
Christ, that are not called effectually by the spirit to a possession of
Christ. My meaning is this: There are many men have the word of God working
much upon them, to the changing of their lives, altering there course, and new
moulding of them into an external profession, that yet notwithstanding all this
never had saving grace wrought upon their hearts, which is effectual calling:
Many are called, but few are chosen, says Christ, Matthew. 20.16. And this is a
dreadful Conclusion to all you that are professors, that have not a saving work
upon your hearts: to you that flock unto the ministry of the word, yet are not
called thereby.

2. That they who are called outwardly by the preaching of the word to a
profession Christ, and yet not called inwardly by the spirit, they shall endure
greater damnation, and greater torments in hell, then those that never heard a
word of Jesus Christ. Matthew. 8.12. Many shall come says Christ, from the East
and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of Heaven: and what then? but the children of the Kingdom shall be
cast out into utter darkness, where shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing
of Teeth. Now, who are meant here by the children of the kingdom? not those
that have heaven prepared for them; but the professing Jews, who are called
the children of the kingdom, because they enjoyed a greater, and clearer, and
fuller measure of the things of God, which showed them the way to the kingdom
of heaven, then other men did. And when Christ calls them the children of the
kingdom, he calls the heathen the children of the world. Now, many of the
children of the kingdom shall be cast into utter darkness: If there be any
more dismal place then other, it shall be for the children of the kingdom;
those that have been as it were nursed up under Gods elbow by ordinances; the
children of the kingdom, they shall have a more dismal portion, and dismal
room in hell then other men shall have, that never enjoyed the ordinances of
Jesus Christ. And O what a sad word is this to you that live where ordinances
do most abound, that you may be called the children of the kingdom, and yet
you to be thrust into utter darkness!

3. That there are many men, who are only called outwardly into a bare
profession, that do harbor and nourish persuasions in their own hearts, that
they are eff^ctually called by Jesus Christ; when they never had any saving
work of grace upon their hearts. This I spoke of some weeks ago, from John,
8.41. The Jews had strong persuasions, they had Abraham for their father; and
when Christ beats them off from that, they went higher and said, we have God to
our father: and yet verse 44. Christ tells them, they were of their Father the
Div^l. And Beloved, you may also be deceived, in harboring strong p^rswasions
that you are called effectually, when you are o^^ly calle^ outwardly.

4. That they that are conceited the opinion of their own goodness, without
seeing their want and necessity of Jesus Christ, are of all sorts of people in
the world most unlikely to be effec^ually called by Jesus Christ. This I urge
from Matt. 9.13. I come not, s^ith Christ, to call the righteous, etc. Mark,
who are they? that is, Christ came not to call the Pharisees, who were
ri^hteous in their own eyes, and who had a self conceitedness^ that things
went w^ll with them; and saw no ne^d of a M^diator, and Intercessor, and
Redeemer; I came not to call the righteous: Jesus Christ exclude^ that sort of
men from being called by him: men that are sel^-opinionated, and have a conceit
of their own goodness, without any want of Jesus Christ. Wherefore all you
that ^^^k you have a strong faith toward God ever since you w^r^ born, that
think you live honestly among your neighbors, pay every man his due, and
therefore see no need of Christ all your days* the Lord show you mercy; you
are more unlikely to be called then any men in the world* Matthew. 21.31. There
is a parable of a man that had two sons, he bid both work in the vineyard; one
son said he would not work: he was obstinate: the other son said he would work,
but did not, and so was worse then his word. Now these two sons, they are the
emblem of two sorts of men within the pale of the Church; some are profane and
obstinate men, and they answer as the first son, and say, they will not work:
the second are professing men, men that make a good profess^on, but do not
answer their profession in their practice. Now mark; Whether of these twain
will the father accept? and they said un^o him, the first, the most obstinate;
that said, he would no^ go, but went. Verily, says Christ, so I say unto you,
Publicans and Harlots shall go into heaven before you. Mark, how Christ applies
the parable from their own mouths; you that are Pha^is^es, that are righteous
and honest in your own eyes, I will sooner call whores, and harlots, and the
worst of men, then I will call you. Publicans and Harlots; Publicans, they were
the worst sort of men that were, they were sitting at the receipt of custom,
their calling exposing them to a great deal of extortion and briberie: yet
these men should go to heaven before others that made a glorious profe^sion of
Jesus Christ. Again,

5. A fifth sad Conclusion, is this, That when others are effectually called
before your faces, and yet you remain uncalled, this should greatly aggravate
your sin and condemnation; when (I say) you shall see others that liv^ (happily)
in the same house with you, that hear in the same congregation, that sit in the
same seat with you; when you shall hear these effectually called, and you
remain uncalled; thi^ shall greatly increase your sin and damnation. Matt.
21.3^. John came to you in the way of righteousness, and y^^ believed him not;
(that is, they were not called by his Ministry) what then? but the Publicans
and Harlots believed: what then? and you, when you had seen it, repented not
afterward that you mi^ht believe: Mark how Christ argues; he urges that those
men that heard the same Sermons that the other men did hear, they were
converted; says he, you see whores and harlots converted, (alluding to Mary
Magdalen, and others) you see these, and yet you repent not, and yet you
believe not: now you see one, then another; and yet when you see this, you
repent not that you might believe. Beloved, This is a sad conclusion to you,
that shall see others converted, when you that happily lie in the same bed, sit
at the same board, and hear the same Sermons in the same Congregation; yet they
shall be converted and called, and you not: this will greatly increase your sin
and condemnation.

6. That whoever God intends effectually to call, it is Gods ordinary way to
call them by the Ministry of his word. 2 These. 2.13, 14. Its said there, that
they were called through the Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
truth, to obtain eternal glory by Jesus Christ: they were called by belief of
the truth, that is, by believing the word preached, and loving the word preached;
faith comes by hearing: faith is the first grace of a Christians Call, and that
comes by hearing. Romans 10.17. so Acts 26.17, 18. When Christ would call and
convert the Gentiles, he does it not immediately, but he uses the Ministry of
Paul: Go thou, teach the Gentiles, and bring them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unt^ God. God does it still by the preaching of his
word. Now this is a sad word to three sorts of men. First, its a sad word to
them that never sat under the powerful preaching of the word, they are out of
Gods ordinary way of being saved.

2. It is a sad word to those that may enjoy the word, and yet slight it; they
also are not likely to be called.

3 Its a sad word to those that leave the ordinary way of Gods calling by the
preaching of the word, and trust to raptures, revelations, inspirations, and
extraordniary means for God to call them by: alas, they also are out of Gods
ordinary way of calling; for God ordinarily takes this way to call a soul by
the preaching of his word. Luke 15.22. When the Prodigal was effectually called
home to his father, his father did not presently comfort him himself, but he
sends his servants, and said, Go, take the best robe, and put it upon my Son;
This son is a sinner, the father is God Almighty, the servants are the
ministers: now God does not his work by himself, but he leaves it to his
Ministers; and they shall put on the ring and the garment; they shall be the
instruments by the Ministry of the word to work grace in the heart. Hence it is
that 1 Cor. 1.12. some are blamed that should say, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo, and I of Christ; Why, are men blamed for saying they are for Christ? Is
that blameworthy, to cry up Christ? No: the fault is not simply in advancing
Christ, but the fault was this, so to cry up Christ, as to cry down duties, and
cry down the use of Ministers, and the use of Ordinances, and therein they were
too blame; because Christ would not immediately by revelations and raptures call
any, but leaves the conversion and call of a sinner, to the ordinary way of
preaching the word: and therefore a sad word it is to all out of Gods way of
calling, that either have not the word, or if they have it, never care to enjoy
it.

7. That if men continue long under the enjoyment of the word, and are not
effectually called by it, they are likely never to be called. I would commend
to you that place to prove this, in Luke 13.6, 7. where Christ tells you of a
fig tree, he s^ayed three years looking for fruit, and he found none; the
husbandman prayed to spare it one year longer, and if it did not bear fruit
then, he should cut it down, and cast it into the fire. Now, this Fig Tree were
the professing Jews, who lay some competent time under the Ministry of
Christ, and of his Apostles; and this Fig Tree, if it were spared but one year,
and brought not forth fruit, then it should be cut down: and Christ did so; it
seems he cursed it, and said, never fruit grow more upon this tree. Now, you
would ask what the meaning of all this is? Why, Beloved, a fig tree, if it
bears not fruit within four years after it is planted, it is likely never to
bring forth fruit: And here the Parable comes home thus far, that if after some
competencie of time, in which in all likelihood men may have some sparks
wrought in them by the ministry of the word; if after all this they are not
converted, the curse of the fig tree is like to fall upon that man's heart; never
let the word do that man good more, and never let grace grow in that man's
heart more; let never fruit grow more upon that tree: this the Parable holds
forth, that if you live under the enjoyment of the word long, and are not
converted, it is an argument you shall not be called. And this is a heartcutting
consideration to all ancient men, that have outlived many Ministers, and have
seen their Ministers laid in the grave; their Ministers have spent their
strength, and wasted their lungs in preaching to them, and yet they are as
profane as ever, and as loose as ever, and as regardless of God and grace as
ever; truly, you are in a very sad case if it be thus with you, you are likely
never to be called by Jesus Christ.

8. That God in the dispensations of his grace, does not ordinarily let
effectual calling run to the richer sort of men in the world; but rather to the
poorest sorts and ranks of men that are. Surgunt indocli and rapiunt coelum,
and nos cum doctrinis nostris detrudimur in Gehe^nam.
I remember that Austin in one of his books has this saying, Unlearned men
they snatch away heaven from us that are great Scholars: and truly, as it was
in his time, so it is now: Men that are great Scholars, that understand
Scripture, know Languages, they are turned into hell, when unlearned and poor
men, they get heaven. God has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in
faith. In all the dispensations of his grace (though he calls some rich men, it
is true, to carry on the work, and countenance his people; yet Gods effectual
calling does not so commonly come among rich men, as the poor of the world: the
poor, says Christ, receive the Gospel; the Learned Scribes, and Doctors among
the Jews, and the rich Pharisees, they did all spurn at Jesus Christ, when the
poor and ignorant people that knew not the Law, they followed him. 1 Cor. 1.26.
Not many wise, not many noble, not many mighty are called; but God has chosen
the poor things of this world, and things that are despised, yea and things
that are not, to bring to naught things that are. Here you see plainly this
conclusion proved, that Gods effectual calling does not ordinarily and
commonly run among the greater sort of men in the world, but it runs among the
poorer sort of men, they ordinarily give best entertainment to the Gospel. And
the reason of this is, 1. To magnify the riches of his grace: if Christ should
call rich men only and chiefly, many would think, it was only men's riches and
men's honor did move Christ to call them: Now, Christ to vindicate and magnify
his grace, he will call poor despicable wretches, that one would think there
should be nothing in the eye of reason or sense, why God should cast an eye of
favor upon them.

2. To magnify and manifest his power, that he will preserve a company of poor
contemptible people, among so many enemies, so potent, and so wealthy, that
they shall never be able to overthrow them.

3. Because rich men lie under more temptations against effectual calling, then
poor men do. Rich men think, should I be called to be a Professor, I may lose
my riches, endanger my estate, and eclipse my honor; and these are great
temptations to rich men to hinder their calling. Therefore you read Mark 10.22.
of the young man, that when Christ called him, it is said, he went away
sorrowful, for he had great possessions; and would not follow Christ, who had
not a house wherein to put his head. Many men for fear of losing their estates,
they lie under this sore temptation, to hinder them from being called: And then
also for their honor; men may think they shall eclipse their honor, should
they profess a course of Religion, Gal. 22. I preached publicly among the
ordinary sort, says Paul, but I preach privately to men of reputation, lest I
should run in vain. As much as if he should say, men of quality and of repute,
they would not own Christ publicly, they were afraid they should lose their
honor and credit; therefore Paul was enforced to indulge them so far, as to
preach privately to them: hence Nicodemus a great man came to Jesus by night.

9. If you are only externally called to a profession of Christ, and not
called internally to a possession of him, at one time or other before you die,
God will discover the hypocrisy of your hearts, and the unsoundness of your
call. There are many men who now are called; a man cannot discern whether they
be effectually called or no; but in likelihood before you die, you will discover
somewhat or other that may give just ground of suspicion you are not savingly
called, eiby falling into some error in judgment, or running nto some
scandalous sin, or the like.

Lastly, if God has not, or intends not effectually to call thee, thou may
take this for an undeniable truth, God neither intends to justify thee, nor to
save thee: Whom he calls, them be justifies, and none else; and whom he
justifies, them he glorifies, and none else: So that Justification and
Glorification depends upon calling, Romans 8.30. And thus I have done with these
ten sad conclusions.

I shall now change my discourse, and turn my speech to a second sort of men,
and to them I shall lay down ten consolatory conclusions, for the comfort of you
that are the called of Jesus Christ. And here, before I lay these down, I shall
first show you what need there is that Ministers should preach comfortably to
you that are effectually called. Because first, after you are called
effectually, you are more exposed to meet with persecutions from men. Secondly,
Temptations from the Devil. Thirdly, The stronger struglings of corruptions
from within, then ever you were before; therefore you had need of comfort.

1. I say, After calling you are more exposed to meet with persecutions from
men then ever you were before. Heb. 10.32 33. Call to remembrance the former
days, in which after you were illuminated, you endured a sore fight of
affliction, partly by being reproached, and made a gazing-stock, etc. They
endured nothing before, but after they were enlightened, they endured a great
fight of Affliction: had not you therefore need of comfort?

2. After calling, you are more exposed to temptations from the Devil, then
ever you were before. The Devil, when he finds all things at peace, he lets men
alone; but when he finds a man coming out of his clutches to be called, then
Satan* troubles and assaults him. 1 Pet. 5.8.10. Your Adversary the Devil goes
about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. These were they that
the God of grace has called to eternal glory. Yet these were they they that
the Devil rages so against. Had not you therefore need of comfort, because you
are exposed to more temptations from the Devil?

And 3ly. You are to meet with more strong and vigorous workings of inward
corruptions in your own hearts; as Paul, before his calling was not troubled
with his corruptions, sin never troubled him, the powerful and vigorous
workings of this lusts never wearied him; but when the command came, then sin
revived: When the power of the word came with Authority upon his conscience,
then he saw sin to revive and get strength upon him. Beloved, I would appeal to
any of you, whom God has called to grace and glory, whether before you were
called, you ever found sin so strong as after, and ever found the workings of
your inward corruptions so violent as after? and therefore upon these three
grounds, you have need that comfort should be preached unto you.

I now pass to the Conclusions, which I shall lay down for the comfort of all
them that are effectually called.

1. That Jesus Christ does effectually call a poor sinner, before that sinner
does look after Jesus Christ. Should God entail heaven upon this condition,
that you that had been first in the transgression, should be first in seeking
reconciliation, we should never have the difference ended betwixt God and us;
but behold, here is mercy, and here is a ground of comfort, that though we are
the first in the transgression, Christ is the first in suing out
Reconciliation: Jesus Christ does effectually call poor sinners, before they
either call or look after Jesus Christ at all. Isa. 65.1. I am sought of them
that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me not; I said, Behold
me, Behold me, to a Nation that was not called by my name. Here you see, Jesus
Christ goes out first to call thee, before thou go out to call him. And O
what c^mfort is this? Christ does not stay til thou look after a Christ, but
Christ casts an eye upon thee before thou look after him. We read of Matthew
the Pubcan, that while he was looking after his money at the receipt of custom,
at that time Jesus Christ was looking after his soul. We read of the Disciples
of Christ, whilst they were mending their ne^s, and looking after their fish,
Jesus Christ takes this occasion with the hook of the Gospel to catch them. We
read of Paul, that whilst he was breathing out persecution against the Church
of God, and raging with malice against the Saints of God, at that time he was
even called to be a Saint: So that this is very comfortable. God does first
look after a sinner in his effectual calling, before a sinner looks out after
Christ. God does first look after thee, enlightening thee by a Sermon, and
seizing upon thy conscience by a command, before thou look after him.

2. That Jesus Christ has effectually called thee, when he has left many
thousands in the world, of better parts, and better dispositions, more natural
good, and less evil in them then thou have in thy self; and yet he has
rejected them and called thee. Jesus Christ has many times rejected a patient
heathen, when he has called thee, who art of a rigid and passionate
disposition. Jesus Christ has left many a curious wit, and pregnant Scholar,
and many of singular parts, that had they grace to manage them, they might
bring God much glory; and it may be he has called thee, a poor ignorant
sottish creature. Jesus Christ (it may be) has rejected many that have had
less sin then thou have in thee. Jesus Christ did reject many an honest
heathen, when he would call Mary Magdalen, that had seven Devils in her: Christ
rejected Simon Magus, and rejected Agrippa, a half turned Christian, and
rejected Herod, who heard John Baptist gla^ly; and ^^ ^^ed Felix, that trembled
at a Sermon, and rejected Ab^^, that humbled his soul before God; when it may
be he has called thee, that never had such workings in thy heart as these
men had: And O what ground of comfort is here!

3. God in calling thy soul, and bringing thee into a state of grace, he does
it freely for his own names sake; when there was nothing in thee to move him to
call thee; when there was much in thee to provoke him never to call thee, yet his
own grace compelled him, and his own mercy engaged him to call thee. 1 Timothy
2.9. We are called according to the purpose of his own grace, not according to
our own works.

4. That they who are most sensible of their own vileness, and see the most
want and necessity of Jesus Christ, they of all people are most likely to be
called by him. When Christ rejects civil honest men, and self-conceited men,
and morally good men, and they are no way likely to be called; yet those men
that are sensible of their wickedness, and see their want of Jesus Christ, they
are of all Men most likely to be called. Matthew. 9.13. I came not to call the
righteous; but whom? but sinners to repentance. All men are sinners, but he
means such as see their sin, and see their need of Christ to pardon and subdue
sin in them, for so the words import: The whole need not a Physician, but they
that are sick: They that are sick of sin, and see their infirmities, they are
most likely to be called by Jesus Christ. And therefore this is most
comfortable to you, all you that are drooping Christians, that hang down your
heads under the sense of sin, that see sin to be exceeding sinful; this is the
end for which Christ came into the world, to call you to glory.

5. That a man may be elected by God from all eternity, and yet he may live a
long time in a course of sin, before he call him, and yet before he dies he shall
be called. John 10.16 I lay down my life for my sheep; and other sheep I have,
which are not of this fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice, and there shall be one fold under one shepherd, etc. The meaning is
this; Christ told them his converted ones were his sheep; and th^se are not
all, but I have others that are not converted? yet I will convert them, and
bring them to the same fold also. So that Christ has his sheep among them that
are not yet converted and called: and though many times you may go a long time
in a course of sin, yet before you die, you shall be effectually called, and
brought home to the sheepfold of Jesus Christ.

6. A man may be effectually called, when in his own apprehension he cannot
find any real and sound evidence of his vocation. This that phrase in Peter
imports, 2 Pet. 1.11. Whosoever does not these things, is blind and cannot see afar
off. It is spoken of a godly man, of a man that has his election sure, but
does not add grace to grace to make his calling sure, that man is purblind and
cannot see afar off; that is, cannot see as far as ^eaven, that his name is
written there; cannot have clear and strong comfort of his belonging to God.
Many a godly man may be effectually called, and yet that man a purblind man,
not able to behold as with open face the evidence of his effectual calling.

7. A man may have grounded assurance that he is effectually called, and yet
neither know the time when, nor the manner how, nor the instrument by whom he
was called. And this is a very comfortable conclusion. There are some that
presse-conversion so high, that if a man cannot tell the time when, or the
manner how, or the Sermon by which h^ was called, they say he is not yet
converted; this is too r^gid a Doctrine, and the Scripture makes more for the
confirmation of this, that a man may have a grounded assurance of his effectual
calling, when he neither knows the time, nor the manner, nor the instrum^nt by
which he was called. Mark. 4.27. And he said, so is the Kingdom of God, as if a
man should cast seed into the ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day,
and the seed should spring up and grow he knows not how. The seed here sown is
the work of grace, for so is the Kingdom of God, says Christ: and here this
seed springs up, the man cannot tell happily the day he sowed it, nor how he
scattered it, ye^ this seed springs up he knows not how* So a man may have the
seed of grace sown in his heart, which is effectual calling, and yet it grows
up he knows not how, nor when he^ was called. So John 9. (I only allude to i^)
19, 20. It is spoken there of the man that was healed by Jesus Christ; the
blind Son, that had his eyes opened by Jesus Christ: What say his Parents? We
know this is our son, and that he was born blind; but by what means he now
sees we know not, nor who opened his eyes. Beloved* So I may say of a poor
sinner; a poor sinner is like this blind son, we know we are born blind,
neither knowing God nor our selves. We know, if we are converted, we now see,
but how this was done, or by whom this was done, man cannot so ^x^ctly
determine.

But now, this Conclusion does not hold true in all causes; If a man have been
a profane liver; then it is impossible in an ordinary way, that that man should
be effectually called, but he must know the time when he is called: but for
others that from their childhood have been brought up in a godly family, and
from their childhood to their dying day, did never break out into any
scandalous sin, these men cannot give an account either when, or by whom they
were called, and yet their calling may be effectual: and therefore that is too
rigid a Doctrine, to press such high qualifications before conversion; for God
has different ways and degrees of working, though al are not obvious to our
eye.

8. That they who are called by Christ, they shall be kept by Christ, that they
do not fall from their Call, but be brought to the state of glory; and that is
another comfortable conclusion: you are not called by Christ, and so left to
your selves and the wide world, as Adam was. Adam was called by God to a state
of blessedness: but he was left to stand by his own strength, but you are not
so: You are not only called by Christ, but you are kept by Christ, that you
shall not fall from grace, being once called to it: Jude ver. 1. Jude the servant
of Christ, to them that are sanctified by God the Father, preserved in Christ
and called. Here then is your comfort, that you are not called by Christ, and
left to your selves: but you are preserved by Christ, and called and kept in a
state of grace, til you shall come to glory. So 1 These. 5.24. Faithful is he
that called you, who also will do it: that is, bring you to that glory which
you are called unto.

9. When Christ has an intent to call a poor sinner, neithe their Poverty, nor
their impiety shall hinder the call of Jesus Christ. Not your Poverty; God
has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of a
kingdom. Jam. 2. Not your impiety; poor Christians think, Oh, I am so vile,
and so sinful, and profane, that I fear Christ will not call me: Why, this shall
not hinder: Mary Magdalen a Harlot, possessed with seven Devils, yet called:
Manasseh a blood-sucker, that made the streets of Jerusalem run down with
blood, yet called: Paul a pesecutor, a blasphemer, a man mad with rage against
the Church of God, yet he obtained mercy: and why? that he might be an example
to them that after should be called. So that here is your comfort, when Jesus
Christ has an intent to call you, neither your Poverty, nor your Impiety shall
withstand his call, nor turn the thoughts of his mercy from you.

10. That though no man can pry into the Decrees of God about Election, and
Reprobation, yet if you can make good your Effectual Vocation, you may be sure
of your election and of your glorification. Though no man, I say, can enter
into the bosom of God to know his secret decrees, yet if you can find upon
good and Scripture grounds, that you are ^ff^ctually called, you may be sure
you are eternally elected, and shall hereafter live in glory. Romans 8.28. Whom he
predestinates, them he calls, whom he calls, them he justifies, and whom he
justifies, them he will glorify. And therefore comfort your hearts in these
consolatorie Conclusions about effectual calling.

SERMON V.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THe Doctrine I am yet upon in the prosecution of these words, is this, That
Christians should put forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure to
their souls, that they are effectually called by Jesus Christ. In the managing
of which, I laid down the last Lords day twenty Propositions; ten in relation
to wicked men not called, and ten Conclusions for the comfort of them that are
effectually called by Jesus Christ. I am now to proceed in the dispatch of six
cases of conscience, which I shall handle about effectual calling. Three of
which concern men not effectually called, and three touching Believers, who are
called by Christ to grace here, and to hopes of glory in the world to come.

The three first cases touching wicked men are these:

First, Whether a wicked man be able to resist his own call?

Secondly, What temptations does the Devil suggest, to keep a wicked man from
entertaining and embracing the call of Jesus Christ?

Thirdly, What delusions does the Devil use to deceive Hypocrites, to make them
presumptuously believe that they are effectually called, when they are not?

There are three cases more touching godly men: As

First, Whether may a man that is effectually called, be any way assured that
he is so?

Secondly, If a man may be assured, then what is the reason many a godly man is
not assured of his effectual calling?

And then Thirdly, How may he come to get the assurance of his effectual
calling? I begin with the first, about wicked men that are not called; and the
case is this.

First, Whether may a wicked man, a man as yet not called, be able to resist
and keep off his own call?

And that you may understand the answer hereto, I must lay down this
distinction; That there is a twofold callng of Christ:

A Significative calling, and an Operative calling.

First, a Significative calling, which is such a calling whereby Christ in the
Ministry of the word, signifies and declares what he would have men to do: Now
this kind of call, wicked men may resist; this call, I say, and this revealed
will of God, in declaring what grace he would have men act, and what sin he
would have men forbear: Therefore we read, Acts 7.5. You stiff-necked people,
and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you have always resisted the Holy Ghost;
meaning the Preaching of the word, by the Ministry of his Apostles. So Prove.
1.24. I have called, and ye have refused, etc.

But then secondly, There is an Operative calling, and that is such a call,
whereby God does not only signify to a man what he must do, but with the
signification of his will, gives a man a power to do what he calls him to do,
accompanying the word with his Spirit, making the heart stoop and yield to
Jesus Christ.

Now this call no man can resist; Grace is irresistible; and this effectual
calling by the operation of the Spirit, a man cannot resist. All the
gain-sayings of the heart, and all the stoutnesse of the will it must stoop, and
must be brought under subjection to Jesus Christ, John 6.37. All that the
Father has given me, says Christ, shall come unto me. They shall not be able
to withstand Jesus Christ, but they shall come in unto him. So Isa. 55.10. As
the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not thither again,
but waters the earth, to make it bring forth, so shall my word be that goes out
of my mouth, it shall not return in vain; but shall accomplish that which I
intended, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. As all the world
cannot hinder the rain from coming down on the earth, no more can any man in
the world, if God has an intent to convert and call him, hinder the benefit of
the word from redounding upon his soul.

Now the answering of this case thus briefly, will admit of a double Use.

First, an Use of Condemnation to wicked men, Use 1.
that have often resisted the signicative call of Jesus Christ. When Christ
has signified, this is my will, I would have you leave these courses, and I
would have you walk in these ways; Christ signifies his will in the Ministry
of the Gospel; yet let Christ signify what he will, you will do what you lift;
this is for thy great condemnation.

Secondly, The answering this Query, Use 2.
is for consolation to elect men, who are not yet converted. Do thou belong
to Gods Election? Why, before thou art converted, thou have a stubborn will,
thou have a gainsaying heart, thou have a stout spirit against God, thy heart
is as hard as an Adamant, as hard as the Rocks; yet here is thy comfort, all
the gain-sayings of thy spirit, and all the stubbornness of thy will, it shall
not be able to keep off converting mercy, and shall not be able to keep off
calling grace from thee: When God has an intent to call thee, he will come with
Power by his call, and make thee do what he commands thee, and make thee
embrace what he calls thee to. Did not Jesus Christ use an operative call, as
well as a significative call, no man in the world would ever be called. And this
is the reason, that in hearing the same Sermon, and following the same
Preacher, one man is converted, the other is not. The reason is this, The call
of the Ministry is only a significative call of a Reprobate; only signifying
what God would have him do: But there is no power conveyed with the invitation
to make the man able to do what Christ calls him to; and therefore one is
called, the other is not. Thus much in in Answer to the first case.

2 Case.
Secondly, What temptations does the Devil suggest to men, who are uncalled,
that they should not give entertainment to, or embrace the call of Jesus Christ
unto grace and glory? And in answer to this, I shall lay down only four
suggestions of the Devil, wherewith he entangles a man, that he should not
yield to the call of Jesus Christ. And as I lay them down, I shall labor to take
them a way. As

1. The first temptation the Devil will suggest, is to you that are young men;
and to you he will suggest, that you are yet too young to embrace the call of
Jesus Christ: 'twil be time enough hereafter, and you may do it soon enough
hereafter; you are two young now to be abridg'd of your pleasure, and to
mortify your lusts, and to betake your selves unto so serious a course as
Christ calls you to: and by this temptation, the Devil prevails with young men
more especially. And I remember Austine says, that this temptation of the
Devil made him keep off for seven years together, from embracing the call of
Jesus Christ; the Devil would still tell him in his heart, thou art too young to
leave thy Drunkenness, and too young to leave thy Harlots; til at last he
cried out, How long shall I say it is too soon? Why may I not repent to day?
This temptation I say, it has fastened upon many before you, that they were
too young to come in to Jesus Christ; and to this end, the Devil will suggest to
you that old and false Proverb, A young Saint, and an old Devil: Whereas
indeed, if you are young Devils, you will be old Beelzebubs. And therefore this
being a suggestion, prevailing wit^ many hearts, I shall lay down six
considerations, to take off this temptation, that it may not prevail with you.

First, If the Devil tempt you, that you are too young to hearken to Christ's
call, consider, That the Devil cannot give you a Lease of your lives; if the
Devil could give you a Lease of your lives, and tell you, you should live til
old age, you might then with more safety harken to his temptation; but your
lives are not at the Devils disposal: God is the Author of your life; the
issues of life, and death are in his hands; you may die in youth uncalled, you
may be damned, as well as dead. You may be as these men, Job. 36.14. that shall
die in their youth, and their lives shall be among the unclean. And therefore
though the Devil tempt you, that you are too young, seeing he cannon assure you
of your lives, you have no reason to hearken to his temptation.

Secondly, Suppose the Devil could assure you, you should live til old age; yet
take this consideration, that in putting off, your calling, and the work of
conversion from your youth, this may so provoke God, that he may harden your
hearts in your old days, that you shall have no heart to think of, and embrace
the call and invitation of Jesus Christ. Jer. 22.21. I spoke to thee in thy
prosperity, but thou would not hear, and this has been thy manner from thy
youth; Thou would not obey my voice. God spoke but they would not hear, and
it was from their youth that they did thus; therefore God would never speak
more: God hardened their hearts, that they should never receive or embrace the
call of Jesus Christ. So Isa. 6.9, 10. Seeing the Jews from their youth were
obstinate against the word of God, Go, (says God) make their ears heavy, and
their hearts fat, and their eyes blind, that they should not be called, and
converted, and I should save them. Let this therefore be a second
consideration, that the putting off your call til your old age, may so provoke
God, as never to give you hearts to embrace his call.

Thirdly, Suppose all this, that you could have a Lease of your lives, and you
could be assured, that when you come to old age, your hearts should not be
hardened; yet consider this, that the more sinful and evil the days of your
youth have been, the more disquietnesse of mind, and horror of conscience will
this breed in you when you are old, though you shall be called, and converted by
Jesus Christ. Job. 13.24.25, 26. Thou ^idest thy face, thou hold me as thy
Enemy. Thou do drive me as a leaf to and fro, and thou do pursue me like
dry stubb^e. Now why does Job complain thus? Mark the next words, For thou
writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities of
my youth. Job, when he was a young man, it seem^, he was a wicked man, and had
many sins in his youth, and this in his old age made him cry out, and say, that
God took him for his Enemy, and that God brake him like a leaf driven with the
wind. O beloved, the sins of your youth, though you should be Jobs, converted,
yet they will bring great disquietnesse, and great horro^, when you come to age;
the lusts of youth, and the vanities of youth, and the sensual pleasures of
your youthful days, they will lay a foundation of sorrow, when you come to gray
hairs, to be near your graves; so Job 20.11. And therefore, put the case you
should repent, and should be called when you are old, you have no cause to put
off the call of Jesus Christ, seeing sins of youth will fill you with horror and
disquietnesse of mind. Hence it is, that David, after he was called by the
power of the word, cries out, Psalm. 25. Lord, remember not the sins of my
youth; that gravelled and galled his conscience, Quae fue^^nt inania j^ventutis
^^udia, haec u^t acerba senect^^^s gravamina.
the sins of his youth before his call. It is the speech of an Author, that to
look on the pleasurable vanities and contents of youth, this will become an
heavy burden, and bitter vexation to old age. Beloved, the more evil you run
out into in your youthful days, the greater and deeper foundation of
disquietnesse and sorrow you lay in your souls in your latter days, though you
should be called by Jesus Christ.

4. If the Devil suggest, that you are too young to embrace the invitation of
Christ: consider, That Jesus Christ wll take it most kindly at your hands, if
while you are young you will give entertainment to his call, Jer. 2.2. I remember
thee, says the Lord, and the kindness of thy youth, that thou would follow
me in the Wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Mark how the Lord speaks,
and how kindly he takes it, that they would in their youth follow God; the Lord
will remember it, and take it acceptable from you, if while you are young, while
the Marrow is in your bones, and strength in your joints, you will embrace the
ways of Jesus Christ. It is an observation that some have, concerning the
Beloved Disciple John, John 20. He is called the Disciple whom Christ loved,
and that leaned upon his breast; of all the other eleven Disciples, Christ did
love John above the rest; and Divines give this reason of it, John was the
youngest of all the Disciples; he was converted and called by Christ, when he
was a young man; and Christ seeing a young man follow him, took this very
kindly at his hands, and calls him his beloved Disciple. As you that are
Parents, you let your little Children sit in your lap, when your great ones
shall not; so John, he being a young man, Christ would let him lean upon his
breast, and lie in his bosom, expressing his kindness to him.

Now, O how should this beat off this temptation that you are too young to
follow Christ, because Christ takes it so kindly at your hands, if you embrace
this call in time? nay, Christ does take it so kindly, that he does love bare
Morality and Civility in young men; and therefore it is said in Matthew, when
Christ saw the young man, and he told him, I have observed these things from my
youth, Christ looked upon him, and loved him: Christ showed a general love to
the young man, Matt. 19.20.
that was but a Moral man from his youth; and if Christ love Morality, he will
much more love Piety, and true Syncerity. It is observed of Timothy, that of
one particular man, Paul expressed more love to Timothy then to any other: Read
over all the book of God, you shall never find Paul express so much love to any
as to Timothy; he calls him Timothy my son, Timothy who serves me as a child,
and Timothy my dearly beloved; and why was all this? Why the reason is, because
Timothy from a child was converted, and knew the Scriptures, 2. Tim. 3.6. He
was from a child converted and called by the Ministry of the word in Paul^
m^uth, and ^his did indear the heart of Paul unto him. You read in the book of
L^viticus, that when God did require a Sacrifice, he would not have an old
Sheep, but a ^oung Lamb, a Lamb of a year old, and a Kid of the youngest of the
Flock: And it was significative in this, not only to show that Christ our
Sacrific^ should die and suffer for our sins (...) flower of his age, but also
to show that Jesus Christ loo^s upon that as an abominable Sacrifice, when you
will not be of his Fold while y^u are as young lamb^. O Beloved, Christ takes it
wonderful kindly, if in your youth you do embrace his call.

Fifthly, Yield not to the Devils temptation, considering this, that though you
should be converted in your old age, yet Christ cannot but take this very
unkindly at your hands, that you should put him off until your last end, that
you reserve (if any part, yet) the worst part for his service. You know when
Christ stood all the night for his Spouse, till his head was full of dew, and
his locks were wet with the drops of the night, he got him gone because she
came not, and would stay no longer. O how unkindly (think you) will Christ take
this, when he shall wait year after year, and yet you will not embrace his cal^!

It is said in Isaiah, All the day long have I stretched out my hand to a
rebellious people, yet they would not hear: and Mal. 1. Offer the lame and the
blind to the Governor, will he accept of it?

Christ must needs take this unkindly, that you should give the Devil the
flower of your age, and give to Christ but the decrepit and infirm parts of
your lives, that the Devil should suck out the Marrow of your youth, and only
give God the dry bones, a palsy head, a dim eye, a weak body, and so all your
services must needs be weak also: and think but how unkindly Christ will take
your services thus performed.

Sixthly, consider this, That from your Birthday, to your dying day, you have
time little enough to carry on the business of your salvation, should you live
never so long; and therefore you have no cause to put off the call of Jesus
Christ. And thus much be spoken by way of satisfaction, to take off the first
temptation, that you are too young to give entertainment to the call of Jesus
Christ: and this I do for the sake of young men, that they may take heed of
being ensnared by this d^lusion of the Devil.

2. Sug. 2. Here it may be, the Devil cannot ensnare you in this Gin: Old men
will say, this concerns not ^e, I am not taken with this temptation, therefore
now the Devil comes upon them with this suggestion: Says the Devil to them,
You cannot now give entertainment to the call of Jesus Christ, for you have
callings in the world to follow; you have a particular calling, and you must
provide for Wife, and Children, and Family, and lay up for future times,
against old age and sickness, and therefore you cannot be at leisure now to
give entertainment to the call of Jesus Christ; when I am more at leisure, I may
look after my effectual calling: And this also sticks very close to a great
many.

And to take off this suggestion of the Devil, I shall lay down six particulars
also, by way of Answer. As

First, God never intended that our outward calling should any way hinder us in
the work of our conversion. God never intended that our employments upon earth,
should justle out the necessary provision for heaven. But God has so given
out our callings here in the world, that he has made and ordained them to be
subordinate to our general and effectual calling, to the great business of Gods
glory and our own salvation.

It is said of Noah, that he walked with God, Genesis 6.14.
and was perfect in his generation. And yet Noah was employed by God for some
time, to wit for 120 years in a Handicraft-calling, to build an Hrk, to show
that God did never intend that Noah's making an Ark should any way hinder his
walking with God, or carrying on the work of his soul. Though you have callings
to follow, and families to provide for, yet God did never intend your outward
calling should justle out your inward and effectual calling.

Secondly, Consider you that make this plea, whether you do not imbezel away
much time from your outward calling, which you do not employ in the
concernments of your souls, but in the works of sin and Satan. There is many a
man that can plead he has no leisure to pray, nor no leisure to hear a Sermon,
he must follow his calling; yet this man can follow a Whore, and follow a
Tavern, and these men can spend a whole day upon recreation, and yet can spare
no time, find no leisure to hearken to Jesus Christ. This now should be a
great conviction to you that pretend you must follow your calling, that you can
neglect your calling, to follow your sensual and vain courses, and yet can
spare no time to make your souls happy.

Thirdly, You that plead your outward calling in the world, to be an excuse why
you cannot hearken to your effectual calling by Jesus Christ; consider this,
that this plea has damned many a soul before you, and will damn you also, if
you look not to it. This has been an ancient plea, Luke 14.18, 19, 20. When
Christ called a company of men there to come to him, what excuse have they?
Says one, I have bought a yoke of oxen, and I must prove them. I have bought a
Farm, says another, and I must manage that. I have marria wife, and therefore
cannot come, says a third. All these were lawful callings, and yet these
callings kept them from Heaven, and kept them from Jesus Christ. You read Acts
24.25. When Paul did startle Felix's conscience by a powerful Sermon of
judgment to come, Felix's heart trembled; but mark now, how did Felix put off
the power of the word? Why, Now, says he, I am not at leisure, but go thy
ways, and in convenient time I will send for thee to speak of this matter. As
if he should say, I am now to go about some other business, about the affairs
of my Kingdom, and cannot have leisure to hear thee now: and so by some
outward employment, he justled the power of the word from his heart, and had
not convenient time to embrace Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, Consider this, That this plea of yours (in making your callings an
excuse to neglect your effectual calling) it is the only way to provoke God to
curse and blast all your outward callings to you, and to engage him to curse
all you put your hands unto. Hagg. 1.6 9. Because they neglected Gods Worship,
and Gods Ordinances, Therefore, says God, you shall have much, but it shall
come to nothing; and what you get, you shall put into a bag with holes: You
shall lose all you get, and all you sow, and all you labor for, because you
would not look after Gods worship. So Micah 6.13, 14. I will make thee sick in
smiting thee, and desolate because of thy sins. Thou shall eat, and not be
satisfied: thou shall sow, and not reap: thou shall tread Olives, and not
anoint thy self with oil; and make sweet wine, but shall not drink it. For
the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the manners of the house of Ahab, and
you walk in their counsels. As much as if the Lord should say, You will not
hearken to my Statutes, and to my Counsels, but Omri's statutes, and Ahabs
counsel you will hearken to, Therefore now, you shall eat, and not be satisfied;
sow, and not reap: That is, God will curse what you have, and what you do,
because you will not hearken to Gods call and counsel. So Deuteronomy. 28.38. to 46.
Thou shall carry much seed into the field, and gather but little, the Locusts
shall consume it; there is one curse: And shall plant Vineyards, but shall not
drink the wine, nor gather the grapes, the worm shall eat them; another curse.
Thou shall have Olive Trees throughout all thy coasts, but shall not anoint thy
self with Oil, for thy Olives shall fall; there is a third curse. Thou shall
beget sons and daughters, but shall not enjoy them; all the trees and fruit of
the Land shall be consumed. Now what is the reason of all this, that God should
thus blast their callings and their comforts to them? Verse 45. Yea all these
curses shall come upon thee, and pursue thee, and overtake thee, because thou
hearknedst not to the voice of thy God, to keep his commandments, and his
statutes which he commanded thee. Here is the reason, they would not hearken to
God, nor obey God, and therefore God would blast their comforts to them. Now
then, Beloved, think of this, you that make your callings a plea why you cannot
hearken to the call of Christ; this plea is a great provocation to engage God
to blast, and to curse your very callings to you.

Fifthly, Take this consideration, that God will the more bless you in your
callings and prosper you in the work of your hands, the more conscientious you
are in harkening to the call and invitation of Jesus Christ. And the reason is,
because Godliness has not only a promise of the life to come, but of this
life also. 1. Tim. 4.8. And Mal. 3.10, 11, 12. Bring yea all the tithes into
the Storehouse, that there may be meat in my house; that is, says God, Use
all means, and take all care, that there may be meat in my house, that
Ordinances may be on foot, that my worship may be maintained; and what then?
And if you will take care of his Ordinances, God bids you prove him, and try
him, if he will not take care of you. ver. 11. M^rk the words, Let there be
meat in my house, and prove me now, says the Lord; if I will not open the
windows of heaven, and pour forth a blessing upon you, and there shall not be
room enough to receive it. A strange blessing: that if men will take care to
have meat in Gods house, and have a care of Gods ordinances, God would open the
very windows of heaven, and make the earth so fruitful, they should not have
room to receive Gods blessings. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes,
and all Nations shall call you blessed, and call you a delightsome land. Here
now you see if you will take care of Gods Ordinances, and embrace his call, God
will bless your outward calling the more; and give you in a more abundant
increase, if you embrace the call of Jesus Christ.

6. You that urge your outward callings as a reason why you cannot hearken to
the call of Christ: take this for answer, that if truth were known, it is not
the urgencie of your callings, but the obstinacy of your wills, and the
slugishnesse of your spirits is the cause, you do not give entertainment to the
call of Jesus Christ. If it were men's callings urged them, they would not take
pleasure in sin; therefore, it is not their callings, but the badnesse of their
hearts: they do not love Christ, and love his waie^, but think it too
industrious a work to labor for conversion; and therefore they make this plea.
John 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have life: When will is
wanting, says Doctor Preston, any vain excuse will be pretended. When will is
wanting to walk in the ways of God, any groundless pretense will be made to
excuse their negligence. And thus much to take off the second suggestion, that
men have callings to follow in the world, and therefore they have no leisure to
look after their effectual calling by Jesus Christ.

3. Sug. Thirdly, The Devil suggests, if you give entertainment to the call of
Jesus Christ, this will expose you to a great deal of poverty, and persecution
in this world; and therefore you must not hearken to his call: And he will urge
Scripture for this. First, for poverty, the Devil will urge Matthew. 8.19, 20.
Christ said, the Foxes have holes, the Birds of the air have nests; but the Son
of man has no where to lay his head: The Devil will urge this Scripture, and
tell you, you are exposed to poverty, want, and beggary, if you follow Christ.
And this we read in history likewise of Lucius, the first Christian King that
ever England had; (and indeed the first Christian King that ever any Nation
had, to the glory of England; so Gildas in his life tells us) And this King
though he was turned to Christianity; yet for many years he had this temptation
upon him, that the Christians were poorer then the Romans, that did not embrace
Jesus Christ; and this temptation he could hardly shake off: the Romans were
more wealthy, and the Romans were more warlick, and so had like to have been
overcome with this suggestion. Agolantus a heathen Prince, being taken prisoner
by the Emperor and being in his Court, he saw thirty or forty poor men in poor
clothes walking in the Palace; and demanding of the Emperor who those poor men
were, the Emperor told him they are the followers of Jesus Christ; are they so,
says he? If Christ keep his followers in such a low condition, I will never
follow Jesus Christ. The poorness of Christ's followers, made him stumble at
Christianity. There are many men, especially the gallants of the times, they
see a company of poor silly women come with a Bible under their arms; and they
embrace the faith, and they love it; and this is a mavelous great offense to
them, that they will not follow Jesus Christ, because of the poverty they are
exposed to in the ways of Jesus Christ: And then for persecution also, that
they are not only exposed to want, but to loss of liberty, and good name, and
life also; Matthew 10.38. You must take up the cross: these are tedious terms to
flesh and blood, and this does wonderfully gravel and keep back men from
entertaining of Christ. Now to take off this temptation of the Devil, that it
might not seize upon your hearts, I shall lay down six paticulars by way of
answer.

First, That the servants of God of old time, they had rather choose poverty and
persecution with the people of God, then to enjoy the vanities and profits of
this world with wicked men. And this was Moses's choice, Heb. 11.24 25. Moses
when he came to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs Daughter;
c^usi^g rather t^ suffer a^fliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ better then all
the riches of Egypt. Moses, when he came to years; it was no childish act, but
an act of deliberation; and it was no constrained act, but Moses choice rather,
it was an act of his own choice, rather to have affliction with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season. It was spoken of Mr.
Philpot his being in the Cole-house at Windsor, a dismal and dark place. Says
one, I had rather be with Philpot in the Cole-house, then be with Bonner in his
Palace. And being asked, why? the one being so dismal, the other so beautiful?
says he, the reason is, because Bonners conscience makes his Palace a
cole-house; but Philpots God, and Philpots Christ makes his cole-house a
Palace. And Beloved, this is a truth; though a man should be a beggar, if he be
rich in faith, he is the happiest man in the world. Though a man should beg his
bread from door to door, if he can beg Christ and have it, and beg grace and
have it; he is the richest man upon earth. This therefore is my first answer,
that the servants of God, had rather choose afflictions with the people of God,
then have pleasures with wicked men.

Secondly, Suppose you meet with poverty and persecution in following Christ,
yet consider, Jesus Christ does make you abundant recompense with that inward
peace, and inward joy he fills your hearts withal, for all the outward troubles
you meet with in the world. John 16.33. In the world you shall have
tribulation; but mark the Cordial, In me ye shall have peace, therefore be of
good cheer, I have overcome the world. Though you have troubles in the world,
yet you have joy in me, and peace in me; and therefore why should you be
offended?

3. Consider, Though you want many things in the world, yet you shall want
nothing that is good for you; Psalm. 84.11. He will give grace and glory, and no
good thing will he withold from them that live a godly life. If riches be
good for thee, thou shall not want it; if wealth be good for you, you shall not
want it; if estate be good for you, you shall not want that; for he will
withold nothing from them that live a godly life.

4. A gracious heart, if he has or can find that he has a real interest in
Christ, though he wants much in the world, he thinks he wants nothing: but he
has all things in having a Christ; nor will he complain of poverty, when
endowed with riches of heaven. Luke 22.25. And Christ said unto them, when I
sent you without purse, and without scripe, and shoes, lacked you any thing?
Mark the question. Now, if a carnal man had been to answer this, what would he
have said? What? send a man without a purse, then he wants money; send him
without a scrip, he wants meat; send him without shoes, a man is a poor man
indeed, that has no shoes to his feet; a carnal man would have said, Yes
Lord, we want money, and we want meat, and we want shoes; but ask the
Disciples, wanted you any thing? They said Nothing. And why was this? Because
the Disciples knew they had a grounded interest in Jesus Christ, and a right to
Jesus Christ, and though they wanted these poor outward comforts, they did not
want Christ's comfort, and Christ's graces; and therefore when they had neither
purse, scrip, nor shoes, they wanted nothing. Why, O Beloved, if you were of
the temper of these gracious Disciples, you would say so too; that if you can
find a grounded and real interest in Christ, though you want many of the
comforts of this world, you will say you want nothing. Wanted you any thing?
and they said Nothing.

5. You that make poverty and persecution a plea, Consider this, that the poor
are ordinarily the most people that Jesus Christ does call to embrace his
Gospel. The poor receive the Gospel, says Christ, and blessed are you that are
not offended at it; Not many wise, not many noble are called, but the poor
things of the world has God chosen. 1 Cor. 1.26. And in James, God has chose
the poor of this world to be rich in faith. Do not therefore Beloved make this
a plea to keep off from Christ, because ordinarily they are the people Christ
pitcheth most love upon, and does delight to make them rich in grace, who are
poor in goods.

6. Consider, That if upon this ground you refuse the call of Jesus Christ, you
are exposed to more poverty, and to worse p^rsecution then ever you could be
exposed to in the entertaining of Christ. In the following of Christ you are
only exposed to an outward poverty; but in neglecting the call of Christ, you
are exposed to be poor in faith, and to be such a beggar, as not to be endowed
with one dram of grace, and then you are beggars indeed. As we say, he is a
poor man that God hates: He that has not Christ, and has not the treasures
of heaven in him, he is exposed to worse poverty a thousand times then he can
be for embracing the call of Jesus Christ, Rev. 3.17. Yea, and he is exposed to
worse persecution also, that for fear of persecution neglects Jesus Christ.
Psalm. 83.5. The Lord will persecute them, says David, with fury and wrath,
speaking of wicked men. All persecution from man reaches but to the body, but
this from God reaches to the soul.

7. And then lastly, This should not hinder you from following Jesus Christ,
considering, that though you should be poor, and should be persecuted, yet
heaven will make you amends for all, Heb. 11.35. Heaven will make amends for
poverty, when you are endowed with all the riches of Christ, and Heaven will
make amends for persecution, when there the weary shall be at rest, and there
the troubled shall be at ease. And thus much be spoken of the third suggestion
of the Devil, that if you entertain the call of Jesus Christ, you shall be
exposed to much poverty, and persecution here in the world.

SERMON. VI.
2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE Doctrine I am yet upon is this.

That Christians ought to put forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure
to their souls, that they are effectually called by Jesus Christ. In the
prosecution of which, I have resolved one case of conscience, and am yet upon
the second case; namely, what suggestions the Devil does use to keep men off
from embracing the call of Jesus Christ: I have laid down and answered three
already.

4. Now there is one suggestion more. When the Devil sees either of these will
take place, then he comes in with a fourth, to dissuade men from embracing the
call of Christ, and that is this: Why, says the Devil, if you will entertain
the call of Christ, you will abridge your selves of all the joy and comfort of
your lives; you will never have merry days while you live upon earth: You see
men that pretend to be converted, and do hear Sermons, what lumpish and
melancholy men they are, not so jocund and jolly as others are, that walk not
so precisely; if you follow Christ, and his Gospel, this will casheer all your
merry days, and this will put you into a sad temper; all your jovial days are
gone. Therefore to take off this aspersion, that the ways of Christ are sad
and melancholy ways, which has been an aspersion that from age to age, and
generation to generation, has been as a Gin the Devil has used to keep men
from Christianity. And I remember it is one of the greatest Engines Antichrist
uses to support and uphold his Kingdom. The Papists, to deter men from
Christianity, and the Protestant Religion, they would hold their Disciples in
hand with this, that the spirit of a Calvinist is a sad and lumpish spirit, and
therefore they would dissuade all Nations from turning to their Religion; and
this the Priests were to tell in all the Churches of Rome, how sad and
melancholy they were that turned to the Calvinists religion; and this did
mightily stay the people from embracing the truth. And this aspe^sion has
passed from hand to hand, and is many times prevalent upon the spirits of men
that are of the true Religion, that they must not be too forward in the
practice of Religion, fearing lest this should work melancholy and sad thoughts
in them.

Now, to take off this, I shall only urge four or five heads briefly.

First, Whereas you say, they are melancholy and sad that are called by Christ
to a profession of his ways, I would answer thus, That they of all people in
the world have most cause of mirth and gladness, and they are the most truly
joyful people in the world. That they have most cause of rejoicing is apparent.
When the Disciples came triumphing that they could cast out Devils, heal the
diseased, and work Miracles: O but says Christ, Rejoice not in this, but
rejoice that your names are written in the book of life, Luke 10.20. As much as
if Christ should say, All the endowments and extraordinary gifts of the spirit,
they are no such grounds of joy, if you had them all; but here is your joy, and
cause of rejoicing, that your names are written in the book of Life; that you
are in Christ, and your souls shall be saved. And so Paul tells us, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say rejoice. The Apostle would not speak
it to them with a single command, but doubtless his expression, to show, that
they that are people that have their sins pardoned; that have their souls
reconciled; that have a title to glory, whose names are written in the book of
Life; these of all men in the world have most cause of joy and gladness. And
they have not only most cause, but they do most truly rejoice, and have more
real joy in their hearts in one day, then the wicked can have all their lives,
1 Pet. 1.8. They rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. What joy you
have in the world, the tongue is able to speak of it, but the tongue is not
able to speak of that inward joy that godly men have in their hearts, upon the
apprehension of the interest they have in Jesus Christ, Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance. And Thou shall put more gladness in mine
heart, etc. Prove. 14.13. A good conscience is a continual feast. Men are never
more merry, then when they are at a feast; godly men, they carry clear
consciences about them, and that makes them as joyous and pleasant, as if they
were always at a great and sumptuous feast. Indeed this is true, they do not
rejoice with such exorbitancies of joy as wicked men do. Wicked men rejoice in
sin, that they cannot do; wicked men rejoice in their lusts, in their
drunkenesse, and their adulteries, and ways of sin, that godly men dare not
do. Such a rejoicing as this, is the foundation of sorrow: This rejoicing (like
the Prodigal) in a riotous course of living, is the foundation of sorrow, and
will meet with you, when you are to die.

Secondly, Grant this should be true; yet consider, that this sorrow that godly
people have, it is such a sorrow, that they shall have no cause to repent
thereof, but it is a foundation of future joy to them, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. I
rejoice (says the Apostle) in that I have made you sorrowful. What, rejoice to
see them a sad people? Yes, for the sorrow I made you sorrowful with, was a
sorrow never to be repented of, you will never repent of that sorrow; and
therefore Paul would do it, because it was a sorrow, never to be sorrowed for;
nay, Psalm. 126.
it is not such a sorrow as is not to be repented of, but it is a sorrow that
lays a foundation to a great deal of future joy, They that sow in tears, shall
reap in joy. But now all the joy of wicked men, is a joy to be repented of. They
must repent of all their jovial bouts, and repent of all their merry pastimes,
this will be sadness to their remembrance; whereas the sorrow of the godly is
never to be sorrowed for.

Thirdly, It is true, it may be they are sorrowful, but they are sorrowful for
sin, which you have cause to be that are uncalled, as well as they, and more:
Now if a godly man be sorrowful for sin, this will never prejudice him. Indeed,
Worldly sorrow brings forth death, says the Apostle, but godly sorrow brings
forth salvation never to be repented of.

Fourthly, It may be they are sorrowful, but how is it? They are not sorrowful
because they are good, but they are sorrowful because they are so bad. It is
not profession makes them sorrowful, but it is because they can profess Christ
no better, and profess him no more zealously, this is their sorrow; and this
sorrow should be in all of us, that we can serve God no better, and bring God
no more Glory.

Fifthly, They are sorrowful, but it not for themselves, but for thee; they are
not sorry because they are good, but because thou art so bad; they are sorry
because of thy sins, because they see thee an uncalled man still, and they see
thee drunk, and see thee profane, and see thee dishonor God, and damn thy
soul; and this makes them more sad then they would be. Lot, his righteous soul
was vexed within him, for the wickedness of the Sodomites; 2 Pet. 2.8. And
Jeremiah, his eyes run down with tears, for the iniquity of the people he lived
amongst. And so Paul, I told you before, and now tell you weeping; there are
wicked livers among you, that walk not according to the truth, Phil. 3.17, 18.
Paul did not weep because he was miserable; but because he saw so many wicked,
and abominable in their lives. So David, Psalm. 119.136. Mine eyes run down with
water, because men keep not thy Law. Ezekiel. 9.4.

And lastly, Though you see some men sad and melancholy, yet think not ill of
the ways of God; because, this way of all other, does most invite to joy and
gladness in the Lord. Rejoice evermore, and again I say, rejoice, Phil. 4.4.
And John 16. These things I speak, says Christ, that your joy might be full.
In the profession and following of Christ, it is the intendment of Christ to
give you more joy, then ever you had before; there is no such cause therefore
to entertain a prejudice by the Devils temptation against the ways of Jesus
Christ, when he calls you to profess his Gospel. And thus much be spoken to the
second case of conscience in reference to wicked men.

There is a third case touching men uncalled, and that is, What delusions does
the Devil deceive hypocrites by, to make them nourish presumptuous persuasions
that they are effectually called when they are not? And I entreat you, give me
your attention a little in the dispatch of this material question. I shall only
lay down four Delusions, whereby the Devil deceives many.

1. The Devil may delude men by this, Delu. 1.
because they do delight to hear the word preached, therefore the Devil would
egg on this persuasion, surely your d^lighting to hear the word, and your
following of Sermons, this must needs be an evidence of your effectual calling.
And here the Devil would misapply Scripture, as John 8.47. He that hears not
my words, says Christ, is not of God; he that is of God, hears my words.
Now, here the Devil would misapply this Scripture, and tell you, you that hear
Gods word, and delight to hear Sermons, this can be no other then an infallible
evidence of your ^ffe^^ual calling.

Now, I beseech you to follow me in the taking off this delusion, and shewi^^
you wherein, and in what cases, this will prove but a broken re^d unto you. And
I shall show you that in five cases, hearing the word of God with d^light, is
no evidence of effectual calling, but may be a mere delusion of Satan. As

1. If your hearing the word, be but a bare hearing, and not a hearing with
practice; if you have not practice joined with what you hear; and know, your
thus hearing the word with delight, is no evidence of your effectual calling.
Ezekiel. 33.31. They come before thee as my people comes, thou art unto them as a
very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, as one that can play well
upon an instrument of music. Here the Lord sets forth with what delight they
heard Ezekiel preach; they heard him as a man that had a very lovely voice, and
they heard him as a man that played upon an Instrument of Music; much delight
they took in hearing. Yet, says God, they hear thy words, but do them not.
Beloved, though you take as much delight in hearing a Sermon, as to hear the
most melodious music a cunning hand can make; yet if you barely hear with
delight, not joining practice with your hearing; this is no evidence of
effectual calling. Hence it is James says, James 1.21. Be not hearers of the
word only, but doers also, lest you deceive your own souls. Implying, that you
will deceive your souls about eff^ctual calling, if you only hear, and do not
do. This was the fault of the stony ground, Matthew. 13.20.

2. If your hearing be a partial hearing: I mean thus; if you hear, and will
hear but part of the word, or leave but some part of your sins by hearing; will
pick and choose both whom you will hear, and what you will hear; in that case,
your hearing with delight can be no evidence of your effectual calling. If it
be a partial hearing, as first, that you will hear some part, and will not hear
other; to hear the promising part, and not the commanding part; to hear with
delight the commanding part, and not hear the threatening part of the word: in
this case, thus hearing will be no evidence of your call. Mark 6.20. Herod it
is said of him, he heard John Baptist gladly, and did many things: There was
his partial hearing: he heard him with joy in many things, but he would not do
all. Now, if you ask, wherein was Herod's failing? Herod heard the word with
gladness; yet this was no evidence of his effectual calling. Wherein did he
fail? Why mark, compare this Scripture with Luke 3.18, 19, 20. Herod, it is
true, he heard John Baptist gladly, while he preached of ordinary matter; but
when John came to reprove him of his sins, and told him he was an Adulterer,
then he could not endure to hear John preach, ver. 18. Many things in his
exhortation did John preach to the people, but Herod the Tetrarch being
reproved by John, for Herodias his brother Philips wife, and for all the evils
Herod had done, he added yet this above all, to shut up John in pris^n. He
would hear John no more then: Mark how the Scriptures points out a wicked man;
Herod heard John gladly, when he preached of comfortable and general matter;
but when John came to reproving matter, and convincing matter, then he would
hear him no more; but added this sin to the r^st, to shut up John in prison. So
that to be a partial hearer, gladly to hear some part of the word, but not all,
can be no evidence of effectual calling. So those in Isaiah discovered this
temper, Isa. 30.10* Prophecy to us smooth things, prophecy deceits. There
were many men could delight to hear smooth and comfortable preaching, but they
could not endure to hear a true denunciation of Gods judgments against them
for their sins. They love to hear some part of Gods will, not all; the promising
part, not the reproving part: this is no evidence of effectual calling. Ezekiel.
13.17, 18. There were some lying Prophetesses that did preach, but what did
they do? They sowed Pillows under men's elbows; and the Lord charges them for
it, that they did hunt after their souls. To preach smooth Doctrines, and
plausible comfortable Doctrines, is but to sow pillows, and hunt after men's
souls. Now, mamen love ^o be smoothed up, and flattered in their sins;
whereas to be a partial hearer* is no sign of your ^ffectual calling.

3. Hearing the word with delight, is no evidence of your effectual calling, in
case this be a fickle and unconstant hearing. To delight to hear the word,
because the word comes in request, because there is no danger in hearing; this
wicked men may delight to do, when yet if times of persecution should arise,
they would be fickle, and leave off their hearing. Matthew. 13.20, 21. It is said
of the stony ground, that the seed that fell among stones, are they that
receive the word with joy (there is their delight to hear) but not having deep
root, in times of persecution fell away. Here the Scripture Anatomizeth a man,
that he may hear the word with joy sometimes, when the current of the times run
for Religion, when the word comes in fashion among a people; but if persecution
should attend the word, and a prison attend hearing, you would then see how
flag their delights would be in hearing the word: and in this case you may
delight to hear the word, yet be no evidence of your effectual calling.

4. In case your hearing be a selfish hearing: As now, many men may hear the
word with delight: why? Because they may get profit by hearing, and praise and
vainglory by hearing the word, and this may make them wonderfully delight to
hear. Luke 12.1. There was an innumerable company went to hear Jesus Christ,
insomuch the crowd was so great, that one trod upon another to hear him: yet
Christ says of them, John 6.26. They come to hear me preach, but not for the
word I teach, or the miracles I do, but for the loaves they eat of. It was not
love to Christ's person, or his Ministry, but only beaause they saw Christ with
a few fishes to feed so many men, they seeing of this miracle, this made them
frequent the Ministry and word of Jesus Christ. Many men may hear the word,
when sel^ish advantage accompanies hearing, to get more trading, to be better
thought of among their neighbors; this is a selfish hearing, and in this case
you may hear, yet not be effectually called. There is a phrase in Hosea 7.14.
They c^ied unto me, and they howled upon their beds, and they assembled
themselves for corn and wine. Here was a people, that assen bl^d together at
the Ordinances of God; but what was their end? there was a dearth and famine
likely to come, and here they would use duties to be a means to prevent a
famine, and get corn and wine together. Here was a selfish end, and thus men
may hear, yet have no evidence of their effectual calling.

5. If your hearing be a divided hearing, and your delight a divided delight,
this can be no Argument of your call. As thus, A man may delight to hear, yet
if that man divide and share his delights, partly to sin, and partly to the
Word, this can be no evidence of his effectual calling. In the place before
quoted, Hos. 7. They assembled together, and howled upon their beds, yet they
s^n against me, says the Lord. There they divided their delight, they would
serve God in his worship, yet they would sin against him. So those Isa 58.3, 6,
7. They took delight in drawing near to God, yet in the day of their fast,
found pleasure in sin. Now, to have a divided love, to delight in sin, as well
as in Ordinances, this can be no Argument of effectual calling; and your
hearing the word in these five cases, is but a mere delusion. But on the
contrary, if your hearing be not a bare hearing, but with your delight in
hearing you join practice: If it be not a partial hearing, but the commanding
and reproving part as welcome as any other: If it be such a hearing as is not
selfish, such a hearing in which you aim more at Gods glory then your own
advantage: If these be the qualifications, then your delight in hearing the
Word is an evidence of your effectual calling.

Del^s. 2.
Yea, but you will urge further, Though this be not an Argument of our effectual
calling, yet we can go one step higher; We do not only delight to hear the
word, but we love the godly who are effectually called to grace and glory; and
if we love them, we hope it is argument that we also are called: and they urge
that Scripture for it, We know that we are translated from death to Life, if we
love the Brethren, 1 John 3.14.

Now, to speak to this: I answer, It is clear in Scripture, that every kind of
love to the people of God, is no Argument of effectual calling, but there may
be a feigned and a counterfeit love, as well as any other grace. Hence the
Apostle presses, Romans 12.9. Let your love be without dissimulation; importing,
that men may dissemble their love as well as any grace else. 1 John 3.18. Let us
not love in word and in tongue only, but in deed and in truth. So 1 Pet: 1.22:
Let there be unfeigned love to the Brethren: intimating that there may be a
feigned and false love. So that every kind of love is no evidence of effectual
calling. And this I shall make out by this demonstration; because there are
several acts or expressions of love, that men who are not effectually called,
may show to be godly men. Now if a man uncalled, may show many expressions and
acts of love to a man converted, then mere showing love to a godly man, is no
Argument of your effectual calling. I shall reduce what I have to say unto six
heads. As,

1. A man may be frequently in the company of godly men, yet not be effectually
called; and so Demas was a companion with Paul in the Gospel, yet he not
called, but embraced the world, and fell away.

2. They may speak well of the people of God. And this John tells us, 1 John
3.18. Let us not love in word, or in tongue. This loving in word and tongue,
was to speak well of a godly man; this a wicked man may do.

3. They may write Letters of commendation in the behalf of a godly man. And so
you read of Pilat's Wife, which the Scripture gives as no evidence of her
conversion, Mat. 27.19. She wrote a Letter to her Husband in the morning before
he was to arraign Christ, and told him, Have nothing to do with the blood of
this just man. Here you see she wrote in the behalf of a good man, of Jesus
Christ. And so we read of Claudius Lysias, that he wrote a Letter in the
behalf of Paul to Felix the Governor: Here were great acts of love, yet these
no evidence of their effectual calling. Nay,

4. They may think nothing too much to give to good men, yet not be called. And
so did the Galathians, whose calling Paul questions, Gal 4.15. They would pull
out their own eyes, and not think them too dear for Paul: Yet at length how
cold they did grow, and count Paul their enemy, for telling them the truth.

5. They may express such love, that in times of danger they may take care of
the safety of godly men. So Acts 23.27. Claudias L^sias, when he heard Paul was
in danger of his life, he came with an Army of men to rescue him, that they
should not take away his life from him; and yet Claudius Lysias lived and died
a Heathen, for ought the Scripture mentions.

Lastly, They may relieve the necessities of the godly, yet not be effectually
called. Now here are high expressions of love, yet it is evident, all these may
be, where calling is not.

But now its true, in some cases love to the people of God, may prove a good
evidence of ones effectual call; to wit, if it have these four qualifications.

1. If you love the people of God under this notion, because godly, it is an
evidence of your effectual call, because there is good in them, more then
because you receive good from them. Hence it is John tells us wicked men may
love a godly man, because they have good from him. 2 John 1. To the elect Lady,
whom I love in the truth, for the truths sake dwelling in her. John did not
love the Lady, because she was a Lady, or because she was a goodly woman, but
for the riuths sake that dwelt in her. Whereas wicked men they love a godly
man, but not as godly, under that notion. Therefore you shall see the difference
between John's love to a godly person, and Claudius Lysias a man unconverted.
Acts 23.27. Claudius Lysias tells you there, that Paul was in danger of his
life, and with an Army I rescued him. Now why was it he did so? did he love
Paul because a godly man? no, for mark the next words: With an Army I rescued
him, because it was told me he was a Roman. He loved Paul for his Nation, not
for his conversion: had he loved Paul as Paul, Paul as a Christian, this were
an Argument of grace; but to love Paul as a Roman, because of Country and
Nation sake, this was no evidence of his call. So Matthew. 5.46, 47. If ye love
them that love you, what reward have you? do not even the Publicans so; So
that you see a wide difference between the love of a godly man, and of a wicked
man.

2. To measure your love to them by their graces, that you love that man most
that has most grace, that is an Argument of effectual calling, because it is
grace in the man, and nothing else you love.

3. If your love be universal to all that are godly, of what sort or condition
soever they be, this is an evidence of your effectual calling; for then '^is
evident, that grace, as grace, is the object of your love.

Lastly, to love a man so, as to carry compassion in your breasts toward him,
to have a sympathizing heart with him in his sufferings, 1 Pet. 3.8. Suffer one
with another, love as Brethren. This shows your love to be true, when it has
pity and compassion to attend it.

I pass now to a third delusion, Delus. 3.
which indeed is a main delusion, and has deceived many, specially those that
profess the Gospel, to make them believe they are effectually called, when
they are not. And that is, because they discern a change in their conversation,
that they are not the same men they were in days past; and hereby the Devil
props up this persuasion, that surely they must needs be effectually called,
and he alleges Scripture for it, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Such were some of you,
but ye are washed, etc. Now this being so universal a delusion amongst most men
in the world, that if they have hopes of heaven, it is upon this ground, that
they are not the same now they were in times past. I shall therefore a little
enlarge my self in speaking of this particular, and shall lay down six or seven
particulars wherein I shall show, that this ground taken in general, is no
infallible evidence of a man's effectual calling.

First, Because there are many gradual changes, which do not come up, or amount
to a saving change or alteration of the heart of man. As there as a change from
a Pagan to a Christian, so was Julian changed, yet a man never called by Jesus
Christ. Th^n there is a change from a persecuter to be a countenancer of
Religion, so we read Valerius Maximinus was chang^d, who was the vil^st
persecuter of all men in his time, and the hand of God lying so sore upon him
for that sin, that his very bowels rotted within him, and the very worms crept
out of them, and in horror of conscience he cried out to his Nobles about him,
persuading them by his example, to take heed never to persecute the Christians
more. Now both these were great changes, and yet they are but gradual changes,
that leave men abundantly short of those saving changes that God works in them
that are effectually called. Thirdly, There is a change from profaneness to
profession, and yet this is a step below a saving change. Fourthly, there is a
step from profession into sincerity, into a real possession of Jesus Christ.
Now those three steps they fall short of a saving change, and therefore every
change of life does not not argue a man to be effectually called because there
are many gradual changes that do not amount to so high a pitch as this, to be
savingly changed.

Secondly, There may be a change in the life, when there is no change in the
nature, or in the heart, Matthew. 23. they may wash the outside of the cup, when
within it is full of pollution. The life may be changed, the external acts and
course may be changed, when the heart may not be changed, and the nature the
same still.

Thirdly, There may be a great change in a man's life, proceeding, not from a
change in their nature, but from the times wherein they live: the times are
changed, therefore they are changed; the times do not favor superstition,
therefore they will not show their superstitious hearts; the times countenance
not profaneness, therefore they will not be profane. Beloved, a change in a
man's life may flow many times from a change of the times wherein they live, and
yet this change no Argument of a heart change, or of effectual calling by Jesus
Christ.

Fourthly, A change in your life may proceed from a change in your sin, not
from a change in your heart: As thus. A man may be a Drunkard, may be an
Adultery, may be a profane liver in times past, and may change these sins for
other sins. He may change his Drunkenness into Covetousness, and be a
covetous Worldling. He may change his Adultery for Idolatry, and be a
superstitious m^n. He may change Profaneness into Hypocrisy, and be an
hypocritical man. He may change his loose practice into a loose judgment, and
be an erroneous man. Now this is no change of the heart, but only a change of
the sin; you have not the same sins you had, but you have other sins in place
of them; and men may thus have a change in their life, flowing from a change in
their sin, yet no Argument of effectual c^lling. Ier. 2.36. Why gaddest thou so
much to change thy way? The people of Israel they would be always changing,
now they would be for God, anon for Baal; now for Gods true worship, an on for
false worship; they would be ever changing their sin, but never leaving it,
only change their old sins for other sort of sins. And so there are many men
now adays changed, they are turned from Malignity, and are come to be
Professors; it may be they have not so gross sins now, as in times past; in
times past they would oppose Religion, and now they profess it; though they
have left their opposition, they have some sin more eminent then that. Many men
have been loose in practice, they have changed that to be loose in judgment;
this is no change of heart all this while: so that take this for a truth, there
may be a change in the life, when the heart remains unchanged still.

Fifthly, There may be a change in men's lives, arising from a change in the
occasions to sin, and not from a change in the heart: As now, A Lion that will
go ramping and roaring up and down, devouring his prey when he is at large, yet
put this Lion in a Den, there he is quiet, and will offer no hurt: now the Lion
is a Lion still, and has his ravenous disposition still, only he has not so
fair an occasion to show his rage. It is thus with men, many men want a^fions
and opportunities to show their wickedness, and the evil of their natures, and
therefore do not discover them: What Is the reason many a man was a drunkard
before, and is not so now? It may be drunkenness has brought beggary, and now
he has not money to sit upon an Ale-bench. What Is the reason a man was an
Adulterer before, and is not so n^w? It may be he has spent his stock, and
spent his strength upon Whores, and now he has neither strength nor purse to
follow after them. It is no thanks to you, if God take away your occasions of
sinning: men may be thus changed, yet have no change in the heart at all.

Sixthly, Many men may change their lives, because they come into better
company, happily their company is better then in times past, 2 Kin. 12.2
and this may work in them a change in their lives. As we read of Joash, all
the while he was in Jehojada's company, he was a well ordered man in his life;
but when he was dead, and he came to have wicked men about him, then he showed
the wickedness of his heart.

7. Lastly, Every change is not an evidence of effectual calling, because there
may be a change in the life, proceeding from a wrong principle, and tending to
a wrong end: As thus, a man may change his life from a wrong principle; what is
that? I will name two wrong principles of a change in unconverted men. As

First, Men may change their lives, because of some present outward affliction
that lies upon them in this life, their afflictions may enforce them to change
their ways, and not be so bad as in former days, Jonah 1.5. when they were in
a storm in the ship, every man went and prayed to his God. What a change was
here? yet the change was only because of the danger, they were in danger of
death, and therefore they grew religious: Every man when a danger and
affliction lies upon him, that will make him betake himself to God, and be a
better minded man. And so Pharaoh, when God sent ten sore plagues upon him, the
plagues did enforce Pharaoh to confess his sin, and beg of Moses to pray for
him; and yet this change in Pharaoh was only because of the present affliction
that lay upon him which wrought this change Ier. 22.23. Oh Inhabitants of
Lebanon, how gracious will thou be when thy pangs come upon thee? When pangs
and afflictions were upon them, then they would be a gracious people. There is
many a man will change his life, when God brings pangs, and death, and
sickness upon him; these are forced ways that God takes, to make a wicked and
stout-hearted wretch change his life, Isa. 16.12. Its said there, When Moab is
weary, Moab will come to my Eanctuary and pray. What a change was here in Moab?
Moab, an Idolatrous company, that hated Gods people, and were enemies to all
goodness; yet when they were weary, and Gods hand lay heavy upon them, then
they would pray, Ezekiel. 24.12, So that you see clearly, though men do change
their lives, yet if this change flow only from a present affliction they lie
under, that Gods hand upon them does even force them to change their course;
this is no Argument of a saving change, and so by consequence no evidence of
your effectual calling.

Secondly, Men may change their course from this Principle also, because of
that horror of conscience that seizes on them, in the apprehension of hell,
and the wrath of God; and from this principle a Heathen may change his course.
It is noted by one upon that place Peter, It happens unto them, as the Dog that
turns to his vomit, etc. Upon those words he has this note, That the Dog in
vomiting, carries resemblance to a wicked man leaving his sin. Now, says the
Author, the Dog when he vomits, it is by reason of some qualm and pang that is
in his stomach, and when he has that pang, he will disgorge himself, and ease
himself by vomit; not as if he loathed his meat, but if he could free himself
from those pangs, he would fain have the meat in his body to nourish him. Thus
a wicked man, he may disgorge and vomit up his sins, and leave his sins, but
why? it is not because he hates his sins, no, he would keep them as a sweet
morsel under his tongue; but it is because those sins cause horror and trouble
of conscience, he cannot deceive, nor he cannot follow his lusts, but
conscience will follow him. Now if thou change thy sin, only to stop
consciences mouth, and muzzle conscience, this is no Argument of effectual
calling.

Delus. 4.
Fourthly, Men are tempted by the Devil to nourish presumptuous persuasions,
that they are effectually called when they are not, because they are miscalled
and reproached by the men of this world. Now think they, I should never be
miscalled and reproached by wicked men, if I were not called by my God.

Now to take off this briefly, I answer: Every reproach from wicked men, can be
no argument of an effectual call from God, because men may be miscalled upon a
twofold ground: There are some men suffer as Christians, and some as
evildoers; we may suffer either for Christ's sake, or for our own sakes: The
distinction is laid down 1 Pet. 4.15, 16, 17. Let none of you suffer as a
murderer, as an evil doer, as a Thief, as a Busie-body in other men's matters;
but if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed. So that some men
may be punished for their own evils they have done, and so suffer no more then
they have deserved; but other men suffer for their profession, because they
profess Jesus Christ. Now to suffer because of your evil doings, this can be
no evidence; but to suffer for Christ, merely for professing his name, this is
an argument of effectual calling. Therefore Christ pronounces those blessed,
Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and speak evil of you
for my sake: This is an evidence of your effectual calling by Jesus Christ.

SERMON. VII.
2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE Doctrine I am yet upon, drawn from these words, is this, That Christians
should put forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure to their souls,
that they are effectually called by Jesus Christ. In the prosecution of which,
I have gone over many particulars, and resolved some cases of conscience in
reference to wicked men. I am now at this time to dispatch some cases of
conscience more, touching them that are effectually called by Jesus Christ: As

1. Whether men that are effectually called by Christ into a state of grace,
and hope of glory, may in this life attain to an infallible and firm assurance
of their own effectual calling?

2. If it be found that it is attainable in this life, then what is the reason
that many Christians who are effectually called, do so much suspect and doubt
their own calling; and walk so sadly for want of their assurance?

3. What must be done that so you may make it sure to your own souls, that you
are effectually called by Jesus Christ.

First, whether it be attainable in this life, that men who are effectually
called by Christ, may have a firm and infallible assurance of their own call?
And in resolution of this I shall briefly free it from two extremes, both of
which are untrue about this Query.

The first is that of the Papists, who utterly deny any such thing as assurance
about a man's Calling, Justification, or Election by God, and they hold all
their followers in suspense, affi^ming that the most a man can have is a
conjectural faith, an hope or conjecture that he shall be saved. And hence it
is, that in that Popish Council of Trent they made this Canon, that if any man
does say, Si quis dixerit hominem renatum teneri ex fide ad credendum se certo
esse ex numero Praedestinatorum, anathema sit. Sess. 6. Can. 15.
that he is bound of faith to believe that he is certainly in the number of
Gods called ones, or justified ones, or elect ones, let him be Anathema, let
him be accursed. That man that would so much as take this assurance to
himself, they would hold that man accursed. And the reason why they do it,
is, because they hold another error, to wit, falling from grace; which they
could not maintain, did they not hold this also: This is the first extreme.

2. Another extreme is of the Lutherans; they being opposite to the Papists in
this point of assurance, to confute them who deny all assurance, they run into
this extreme, to hold that assurance is of the nature of faith, and whosoever
has faith, has assurance: but this is another extreme, and an uncomfortable
Doctrine for doubting Christians, were it true. Therefore to keep this truth in
the middle betwixt two extremes, I shall lay down this position by way of
Answer: That though sometimes persons effectually called, may be without a
particular assurance of their own call, yet this assurance is attainable by
Christians in this life; and Christians may be assured of their own effectual
calling. And this I shall prove by four Mediums.

First, Because the Apostle injoyns it here in my Text, Give dilig^^ce to make
your Calling and Election sure. Now this is a rule in Divinity, No man is bound
to do a thing impossible, and therefore in that we are commanded and bound to
do it, it is clear that it is possible, and may be made sure

Secondly, because it is the office of the Spirit of Jesus Christ to work this
particular assurance in the hearts of those that are effectually called, that
they are in the state of grace, and shall be brought to glory. 1 Cor. 2.12. We
have received not the Spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things that are freely given us of God. 1 John 5.10. He
that believes, he has a witness in himself; a witness to his own soul that
he does believe. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. There the Spirit is called a Seal; you are
sealed by the Spirit of promise; and verse 14. it is called the earnest of our
inheritance. Now a seal, and earnest, is to give more assurance to a promise;
and here the Spirit of God is given to Believers as a seal, and earnest-penny,
that as they have the first fruits in grace, they shall have their harvest in
glory. 1 John 4.13. Hereby we know we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
has given us his Spirit. It is the office of the Spirit of Jesus Christ to
assure our hearts in this particular. Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God.

Thirdly, Particular servants of God in Scripture, that have been partakers of
this mercy, they have had this firm assurance of their effectual calling, I
shall instance in three. First in Paul, and the Scripture tells us of him, that
he had a clear evidence of his effectual calling, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I,
but Christ that lives in me, who loved me, and gave himself for me. There he
had a particular assurance that Christ loved him, and gave himself for him. So
2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded also, that what I
have committed to him, he will keep till the last day. So 2 Timothy 4.8. I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
henceforth there is a Crown laid up for me. Nay not only Paul, but Job also,
Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives, and I shall stand up before him at
the last day: he knew Jesus Christ was his Redeemer. And so David also says,
Thou art my God, and I will praise thee. Psalm. 118.28. and Psalm. 23.6. Surely
the goodness and mercy of God shall follow me all the da^es of my life. So
that put these together: God commands it, it is the Spirits office to work
assurance in the heart, and particular servants of God have had this assurance,
therefore why may it not be obtained? But if you say, these were not ordinary
servants of God, these were servants of a higher rank and form; but may
ordinary weak Christians know this also? Yes. Therefore,

Fourthly, Not only particular Saints have had this, but the people of God in
General; they have declared in Scripture that they have enjoyed this particular
assurance of their effectual calling, and safety of their condition by Christ.
Instance in a few. Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father. They made no
doubt of it, they were so persuaded they feared it not. Isa. 45.24. Surely
shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength. Surely: a word
of confidence, they were assured they had righteousness for their
justification in Christ Jesus. So 2 Cor. 5.1. We know, that if our earthly
Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God eternal in the heavens. They
knew that when they died, they should see God in Heaven; not only Paul, but
other godly Christians with him. So Heb. 10.34. You know in your selves, that
God has provided for you a better and more enduring substance. They were
assured within themselves, that when they should die, or lose their Estates
here, God had provided for them a more enduring substance. So 1 John 3.19.
Hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before
God. So ver. 14. We know we are translated from death to life, etc. So that
what can be more clearly proved then this, that this assurance is to be
attained in this life: because God commands it, it is the Spirits office to
work it, particular Christians have had it; and the people of God in General
they have enjoyed and professed this Temper.

Use.
Is it so then that Assurance is attainable in this life? Then how much too
blame are our Adversaries the Papists, who hold their followers in suspense,
that they must live without the assurance of their own estate, that their
souls must hang in fears and doubts all their days, that the most they can
have is only a conjecture: Oh into what a gulf of discomfo^ts do they plunge
them! Beloved, the Lord in the Book of Deuteronomy, chap. 29. did pronounce it
as a curse, that their lives should hang in suspense, it is a greater curse that
men's souls should hang in suspense, that men shall not know whether they shall
be save^ or damned, it is a hell on this side hell; and therefore they are much
to be blamed, that hold their followers in hand with a peradventure they shall
be saved, peradventure not; when the Scripture is so clear in this thing.

Secondly, Let not the thoughts either of the impossibility or the difficulty
of attaining this assurance, discourage you from looking after it. It is not
impossible, though it is difficult indeed; and the difficulty should be so far
from discouraging you, that it should quicken your endeavors, to make your
calling and election sure.

Thirdly, Seeing assurance is attainable in this life, enquire into the cause
why you who are effectually called, have not attained this assurance before
now. And this puts me upon handling of the second case of conscience, seeing
this assurance is attainable, Therefore

Secondly, what is the reason that many Christians who are called effectually
by Jesus Christ, do live in many doubts and fears about their effectual calling?

In Answer to this I shall lay down these three particulars, that the doubts
that do arise in Christians about their calling they flow from this threefold
fountain.

Either first from some seeming defect they apprehend in the manner of their
calling. Or

Secondly, some seeming defect they apprehend to be in the means of their
calling. Or e^se

Thirdly, some seeming defects they apprehend in the eff^cts of their calling;
and these three grounds are the rise from whence many Christians effectually
called, do doubt of their call, and are not assured of it,

First, it does arise from some seeming defect they apprehend to be in the
manner of their calling: They say, I am not called in such a manner a^ I see
others are. As thus. Think they, I see other men when they are converted, that
their humiliations are great, I see that they have horror of conscience, that
they are wrought upon by the terrors of the Law, that they are exceedingly
humbled before God: Now for my part, I never found this manner of Gods working
in my soul, I never found that I could see my sins clearly, or could b^ humbled
for them greatly; I never found those humiliations and legal terrors which I
hear many men talk of, and this makes me doubt whether I am eff^ctually called
or no. Now to take off this, I shall only speak three things by way of Answer.

First, That it is true; God does proceed after this manner with some, yet God
is not ti^d and confin^d to one and the same way of working with all. What if
he come to you in a calm, when he comes to others in a Tempest, if God come to
me to you in a more peaceable and peaceable and quiet way? What if God do not
pierce your heart, as he did those 3000 in the Acts, if he kindly open thy
heart like Lidia's without noise? God is not to be tied to one and the same way
in converting all. As it is said John 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, so
how it lists also.

Secondly, You have no cause to doubt for this; because it is Gods usual manner
to proceed after this way, only with such men who have been loose in their
lives, who have been obstina^e in their wills, who have been very scandalous in
conversation before their conversion and call. But it is not Gods usual way to
work thus upon Christians who have been religiously brought up from their
youth; it is not Gods way to dowse them into such a pit of horror, and plunge
them into such a depth of fears, that have been of a fair and ingenuous and
moral life before their call. As you know it is with Carpenters, they give more
blows to knot^y Timber, then they will do to smooth and tender wood; thus does
God when he meets with a knotty sinner, a wretched stout-hearted sinner, God
must give many blows by humiliation, before he will be humbled, before he can
bring him to be a serviceable piece in Gods building, whereas Christians of a
mild and softer temper, they shall have fewer blows, and shall not have the
terrors of God stick so fast in their hearts, as others shall. Hence you read
that phrase, Hos. 6.5. says the Lord, I will hew them by my Prophets, etc. God
does hew some men, hew them with judgments, and hew them with terror: Yea, but
others that are not so loose as they: I taught Ephraim to go, I led Ephraim by
the Arms, and I drew him with cords of a man, and with the bands of love, Hos.
11.4. God you see would hack and hew some men with terror and wrath, but
others he would draw with love, and the cords of a man* Now suppose God has
not hacked and hewed thee with judgments, if God melt thee with loving
kindness, and if God gain upon thy soul with mercy, and with love and grace,
thou must not blame God, thou must not confine God; for this is Gods way of
working sometimes, as well as by wrath. God works upon some with wrath; ^he
will allure others with loving kindness; so that you have no cause or ground
of fear that you are not effectually called, because you apprehend some defects
in the manner of your call; because it is Gods usual way to plunge them in most
humiliation, and most terror, that have been most wicked lived men before
their call, and so ordinarily with men religiously trained up from their youth.

Thirdly, God when he goes to call a sinner to conversion, he looks upon the
temper of those that are to be called, and God sees some men of a rugged
temper, that their tempers will not be won but by wrath, and by fire, and by
hell, and by judgment. And so it is like Felix was, his temper was such that
nothing could conve^t him but wrath and judgment to come, terrible Doctrines.
Some are of this temper, that nothing but wrath and hel-fire can work upon
them. As children, there are some that are of such soft and tender tempers that
the shaking of a rod may do them good; there are other children, if a man
should whip them every day, they would never leave their childish tricks: It is
so with sinners, God sees some of a more tender and soft temper, that love will
gain upon them; others are of a rugged disposition, that nothing but wrath can
affright them: Now God in the dispensations of his grace, he observes their
temper, and if he sees love will gain more upon them then wrath will do, he
will take that course; but if God see nothing but wrath, and fire, and horror
will do it, then he will work that way. This you read in the Epistle of Jude,
ver. 22, 23. On some, says the Holy Ghost, have compassion, making a
difference; but others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. The
meaning is this, There are some that you must show tenderness and compassion
to; in calling and working upon them, they are of a tend^r temper; but others
there are that you must save with fear, that is, preach terrible Sermons to
them, and fright them with hel-fire and judgment to come. For God does observe
the different tempers in men, and hereupon does proceed in different ways of
Administration in working upon them. Now it may be, thou that do thus
complain, thou never had these terrors in thy soul, and yet art effectually
called, it may be God saw thy temper more to be won by kindness, and more
gained upon in a way of love, therefore wrought upon thee this way; God is not
bound to one way: And therefore we may justly count them blameworthy who
preach only free grace, and Gods love, and so tie God to one Method: and they
are too blame on the other side likewise (if there be any such) that preach
only terror and wrath; for God observes the temper of men's dispositions, some
to be knotty, and some soft, and accordingly proceeds ceeds in his way of
working with them. This ground therefore for your doubts is insufficient.

Secondly, A second ground that makes men doubt of their effectual calling, is
upon the apprehension of some seeming defect that may be in the means of their
calling. As thus: Think they, I have read in the Word, that it does please God
to use preaching as the ordinary means to call and convert sinners to Christ.
It pleased God by preaching to save them that believe. I read this also that
faith comes by hearing. (Now many a poor soul has this that gravels his
conscience, and troubles his spirit) but alas I find a defect in this means.
For my part I cannot say I was converted by hearing a Sermon, that which did
work upon me was some other means. One of these three, either I was converted
(says one) by living in a godly family, among good Christians, seeing their
example, that first gained upon me: Or, says another, I was gained upon by
reading a Chapter in the Bible, or in some good Book, and that first wrought
upon me: Or, says a third, it may be, if it was the Word, it was the Word
preached by a wicked man, that is now turned either erroneous in judgment, or
profane in practice: and this occasioneth a great deal of jealousy. The word
preached by the mouth of a godly Minister is Gods ordinary way, but I was
altogether out of this way, and therefore this does make him suspect the truth
of his effectual calling. Now Beloved, I beseech you lend me your thoughts a
little, for I would fain make this Doctrine as comfortable to every called one
as I can. I shall speak of all these in order, and show you, that put case
either of these have been the means of thy calling, yet thou have no reason to
doubt of thine effectual calling.

First thou suspectest thy call, because the means has been, say thou, not
by hearing a Sermon, or the word preached, but by living among good Christians,
and seeing their example and their living, thou came by this means to love
the ways of God; and this was the first means that converted thee. Beloved, I
doubt not but I speak to a great many, that cannot say a Sermon ever converted
them, but only, that they were gained to Gods ways, to embrace the truth, this
way: now what shall I say to such men as these? why, I would say thus much;
that though the Lord did not use his Word preached, the ordinary means of
converting souls, in calling thee, yet God is not tied and bound up to his
word preached, but he may use other means to convert thy soul.

Secondly, and more particularly, that living among good people, and seeing of
their example both in life and worship, we find in Scripture to be a very
efficatious means oftentimes to convince, sometimes to convert; and if you can
find out this in Scripture, you may have abundance of comfort. It has been a
means oftentimes to convince, 1 Pet. 3.16. They shall be ashamed to speak evil
of you, while they behold your conversation in Christ. When they shall see that
you live-in Christ, and walk according to Christ, they shall be ashaemed;
ashamed of what they have done, and what they have spoken; it shall convince
them. So 1 Pet. 2.15. And the Apostle when he speaks of the orderly and regular
managing the worship of God, 1 Cor. 14.23.25. If there comes an unbeliever
among you, and he sees your order (says he) he shall fall down in the midst of
you, he shall be convinced, and shall say, Of a truth God is among you. Seeing
this, (says the Apostle) godly men holy in their lives, and holy in their
worship, though he be an unbeleiver, he shall fall down and say, Of a truth God
is among you: that is, by way of conviction. Nay further, sometimes God does
bless the gracious lives, and blameless example of Christians to be a means
to convert some, when the Gospel cannot do it; and you would think this very
comfortable, could it be made good. I would commend but one Text of Scripture
to you, to prove what a blessing it is to live in a good family, where either
husband or wife, or any one in the family is godly, 1 Pet. 3.1. Wives be
subject unto your husbands, what then? that your husbands that are not won by
the Word, may be won without the Word, whilst they behold the conversation
of their wives. A notable text, There were many wicked Husbands, that all the
Sermons they heard would not convert them; yet the Apostle tells them, that if
the wife did live a godly and holy life, their lives sometimes should be more
efficatious to convert their Husbands, then the Word should be. And this,
Beloved, does clearly take off this first plea of yours, that because you were
converted by example, and by living among good Christians, and seeing their
walkings, this gained upon you; this is no cause of discouragement, because
sometimes, (I say) the Lord does bless examples of gracious lives, to make
them win and gain upon men that are brought home to Jesus Christ.

Secondly, they go yet further, There is another poor soul brought home to
Jesus Christ, and what says he? I do misdoubt the means of my call, for a
Sermon never wrought upon me; the first thing of all that ever gained upon me,
it was the reading some Chapters in the Bible, or some other holy man's book,
and that made me first to hate sin, and love the ways of God, and look after
his Word for my salvation. And here I doubt not but many Christians have found
the Word read the first means of gaining upon their hearts. And therefore to
take off this likewise, I shall speak two or three things in way of Answer. As

First, that God is not tied to any means, but can work with the meanest means
to bring home people to Jesus Christ. If Peter's conversion was by a Cock; a
Cock crowing, and a look of Christ's eye, why may not Christ use the Scriptures
read to be a means of a man's call? If from stones God can raise up children
unto Abraham, why cannot God do it by the Word also? to make the Word read a
means in his own hands to effect it? God that can do all things with nothing,
without means, can bring to pass great things by weak means.

Secondly, and more particularly, That though ordinarily preaching, and hearing
of the Word preached be ordained by God, and crowned by him chiefly to be a
means instrumental to convert souls, yet God sometimes has blessed the reading
of the Word to be a means of converting souls likewise. Yet, Beloved, I would
not do as the Prelates did, who would fain have brought in reading to justle
our preaching. Preaching is the more noble work, and must be highest in our
thoughts, yet if God will go out in an unusual way, who can control him? If God
will do it by a Chapter read, when not by a Sermon preached, who can resist
God? if he will show his power by weaker means. Who shall gainsay it? God
sometimes honors the reading of the Word, to give encouragement to reading, to
be a means of some men's call. I have read of S. Austine that he was converted,
not by hearing a Sermon, but by opening the Bible, and reading that place, Romans
13.13. Let us walk honestly as in the day time, not in rioting and drunkeness,
not in chambering and wantounesse: and the reading of this verse wrought upon
him. I have read of Cyprian, that he was converted by reading the Prophecy of
Jonas, hearing of Gods mercy to save such a wicked people, and of Gods mercy to
Jonas, when he was in so pettis^ a mood as to be angry with God. I have known
likewise another famous Minister, that going by a Book-binders shop, he was
converted by reading a Sermon of Repentance that cost but two pence; and has
been a famous Minister since for the conversion of many hundreds to Jesus
Christ. Junius was converted by reading the first of John; so the Eunuch was
converted by reading Isa. 53.7. Beloved, God is not bound to any one way in
saving man; He that wrought upon Austin by a verse reading, and upon another by
a Sermon, he can do so by thee. Reading is an ordinance of God, and God is not
bound up, but may use that as a means of thy effectual call likewise.

Thirdly, Yea but, says another doubting soul, Peradventure I was never
wrought upon, neither by seeing godly people among whom I lived, and observing
their example, nor was I wrought upon by reading good books; but I was first
wrought upon by hearing such a Minister, that I now see is run into error; or a
Minister that is grown loose in his practice, (hapily in these present times
gone to join with the enemy against the Kingdom) and become a vile liver; and
the Minister being bad that wrought upon me, makes me question, whether the
work be not an unsound and bad work also, and this gravels many a Christian
likewise. To which I answer briefly.

First, That suppose the Minister were bad that wrought upon thee, yet the
badnesse of the Minister is no just ground of making us suspect our calling.
For then we should never be sure of our call. A man may be sure of his own
conversion, though a man may not be sure of the conversion of him by whose
means he was called.

Secondly, Again in is clear in Scripture, God may use Ministers that are
wicked themselves to convert others. The Ministers of the seven Churches of
Asia, doubtless some of them were bad men; Paul tells you, 1 Cor. 9.17. I keep
under my body, lest when I preach to others, I my self may be a castaway.
Intimating, that a man may preach to others, and may be a means to save others,
and yet not be saved himself. So 1 Cor. 13.1. Ministers in this case may be as
Cooks are. A Cook may dress many a dish, and let them go through his hands to
furnish a large and stately Table, yet of all these dishes himself hardly taste
one; So Ministers, they may dress many a dish for their hearers, yet they not
lick their fingers, or taste of this spiritual food themselves. As in the
building of the Ark, there were many men built Noah's Ark, to save others, that
were drowned themselves; so many men may build an Ark by preaching the Word,
and the ways of God to save other men's souls, when they may be drowned
themselves. Hence it is the Scripture tells us of Stars that fell from heaven;
many Ministers, that seemed godly Ministers, like Stars in their Generation,
yet they fell, and became wicked and loose. And I remember Doctor Pembleton a
famous Minister in the days of Queen Mary; and a man whose Ministry had
converted many Christians, yet at length he himself turned to be a Papist. Now
these Christians did never misdoubt or suspect their conversion, because the
man that converted them, was a bad man; They might be good people, though he
was a bad Minister: so that this is no ground in the world; though I confess
it is not ordinary, that God makes wicked men means of conversion, but God
ordinarily crowns the Word most in the mouth of a godly Minister, yet sometimes
I say, God may use a means to convert souls. And I would give you these reasons
to prove, that a wicked man may convert souls, and that God ties not conversion
to a godly Minister. Because first, the efficacy of the word does not depend
upon men, but upon Jesus Christ; and Christ may make use of whom he pleases.

Secondly, If only a good man could convert, then this would follow, that we
could be as well sure of another man's conversion, as we are of our own; which
is a thing most untrue. For if only a godly man could convert, then if I were
sure of my own conversion, I were as well sure of his conversion that wrought
upon me also; which cannot be, so that clearly this should lay no block in your
way because you discern the Minister that wrought upon you to be no good man,
seeing conversion is not tied only to a godly Minister.

Thirdly, a third ground from whence doubts arise in called ones, is from some
seeming defects they apprehend to be in the concomitants that acompany, or in
the effects that should follow effectual calling: and this makes them fear,
that sure they are not effectually called. I will name to you three or four.

First, (says a doubting Christian) I do hear in Scripture what effects will
follow, and what will accompany a man effectually called, and I find them not
wrought in my soul. As now first, I apprehend that when a man is effectually
called, he shall be enabled by God to call upon him in prayer: I find in
Scripture, 1 Cor. 1.2. That all that are called to be Saints, they shall call
upon the Lord in every place; but alas, woe is me, I do not find this in my
soul. I find I have a dull, dead, listlesse, unpraying heart all the days of
my life; and therefore I doubt whether I am effectually called or no. Now to
this I shall lay down three things for answer.

First, peradventure you judge that you are not enabled to pray, because you
want expressions in prayer, though you have affections. Now if you judge your
inability to pray, because you want expressions only, you judge amiss, because
prayer is to be judged by the affections, not by the expressions. Expressions
they are but the breath of nature, a natural voluble tongue may tumble out
expressions; whereas affections in prayer, they are the breath and fruit of the
holy Spirit. Therefore do not judge you cannot pray, because you have not such
fluent expressions as others use, for the very essence of a prayer lies in the
heart, and therefore it is said, when the Spirit of God teaches men to pray,
it teaches them not only in expressions, but with sighs and groans that
cannot be uttered. Romans 8.26. When the Spirit moves the heart, and makes you
sigh out your requests, and sorrow out your supplications, you pray best of all.

Secondly, you that judge your inablity to pray, and therefore think you are
not called, because you cannot call upon God, I would say this unto you: That
the best of Gods children have found a great difference in their spirits in
reference to paying duties; the best of Gods children do not always pray
alike. Sometimes the affections of godly men are as swift in prayer, as the
Chariots of Aminadab; otherwhiles they drive as heavily as Pharaohs Chariots
when the wheels were off. Sometime the people of God are burning in their
affections, hot as fire; otherwhiles they are frozen in their affections, cold
as ice. None of Gods people are in their carriage always alike toward God in
prayer. Psalm. 77.4. It is the speech of Asaph, O Lord, my spirit is overwhelmed
within me, I am sore troubled, I cannot speak. The man was so troubled, he
could not speak, yet Asaph spoke these words with his mouth; but the meaning
is, though Asaph was a godly man, yet he was so overwhelmed with trouble, he
could not speak to God, he could not call upon God with that inward vigor of
spirit. Though thou may sometime call upon God with affection, yet when
trouble rests upon thee, thy heart may be out of frame.

Thirdly, many times Gods people are subject to a state of desertion, and
abatements in their s^iritual affections, and then they are out of a praying
vein; when you loose affections, the wheels of prayer are knocked off. Many
times it falls out with Gods people, that they are even brought into a
languishing and low condition, they are in such a swoune as if they had neither
a principle, nor the actings of spiritual life. Rev. 3.2. Strengthen that which
remains, says the holy Ghost; that is ready to die. Godly people may be a
dying people, and then the tongue fails, when it is a dying: the people of God
may be in a dying condition; though they never die wholly in grace, yet they
may be so weakened in their spirits, that they cannot pour out their requests to
God as in wonted time, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. Jehosophat he walked in the first ways
of David his father: implying that David's first ways were better then his
last. So many men may have their first ways good, yet sometime in the end
before they die, they may have much failing, and deadness of spirit upon them.

Fourthly, If a man does but mourn, that he cannot call upon God, God looks
upon that as calling upon him. If you can but sigh out your requests, and mourn
that you cannot mourn, and pray that you might pray; the Lord hears your
prayer. This is the most melodious music you can make in the ears of God.
Therefore David says, Psalm. 6.8. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping:
There is a voice in Tears, as well as in Words. If the Lord see thee to weep
over thine own straightness, and mourn over thine own deadness, the Lord
looks upon this with a more pleasing eye, then if thou could pour out the
enlargements of thy tongue, with most fluent and voluble expressions.

SERMON. VIII.
2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Callin^ and Election sure.


THE Doctrine I am yet upon, is this, That Christians ought to put forth a
great deal of diligence to make this sure to their souls, that they are
effectually called by Jesus Christ. In the prosecution of which I have gone
over many particulars, and answered some doubts, in reference to godly men who
are effectually called. As first, in regard of some seeming defects they
apprehend to be in the manner of their calling. Secondly, in the means of their
calling. And thirdly, (which I am yet upon,) of some defects they apprehend
about the concomitants that accompany those that are effectually called, of
which I have spoken only of one in particular, to wit, that they cannot call
upon God in prayer; I now pass to the second.

Secondly, They apprehend that those that are effectually called, they have
this to accompany their calling, that they are brought out of a state of
ignorance into a state of knowledge, out of a state of darkness into a state
of light; hence they will urge this against themselves, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are to
show forth the praises of him, who has cal^'d you out of darkn^sse into his
mavelous light. And Acts 26.18. He sent forth his Word to call them from
darkness to light, and from the Power of Satan unto God. Now says the poor
soul, Alas, I do not find this concomitant to be in my heart, I do not find
this mavelous light the Scripture here speaks of, 2 Cor. 4.6. Alas, my heart
is like a dungeon of darkness, and like a house that has no inlets, no
windows to let in the Sunshine of the Gospel upon it: and many times this
gravelleth many a godly mind. Now to those that make this doubt, I shall only
speak two or three things to take it off.

First, to you that make this complaint, I would say this: that those that know
most, they know but little in the mysteries of Jesus Christ; as you are not
perfect in other graces, so you are not here perfect in knowledge; You know but
in part. 1 Cor. 13.9. therefore you have no need to be discouraged at this.

Secondly, and more particularly, you that complain of ignorance; though you
are ignorant, and cannot find that mavelous light shine in your souls, which
you exspect, yet if your ignorance have not these three ill qualities, you may
rest confident your ignorance will never prove a damning sin unto you, but it
may be consistent with your effectual calling; As

First, If your ignorance be not a stubborn and wilful ignorance. Secondly, If
it be not a sottish and brutish ignorance. And thirdly, If it be not a
fundamental ignorance.

First, If it be not a stubborn and wilful ignorance. Though you are ignorant,
yet if you are willing to learn, and know the ways of God revealed in his
Word, such an ignorance will never damn you: But when ignorance comes to be
wilful, that a man does not know, and he will not learn; a man is an ignorant
man yet he thinks he knows more then all the Preachers can tell him; this is a
sad sign you are not effectually called Hence you read, Prove. 1.22. How long,
ye simple ones, will you lov^ simplicity, etc? Godly people may be in a state
of ignorancee but they love it not; therefore, 2 Pet. 3.5. the Scripture tells,
us of wicked men, that they are wilfully ignorant. So that if your ignorance
have not this bad quality in it, to be a stubborn and wilful ignorance, it may
stand with your effectual calling.

Secondly, Provided that your ignorance be not a sottish and brutish ignorance;
that is, that you do not so lie clouded in a state of darkness, that you are
incapable to discern the goodness of the Word, and incapable to apprehend any
thing that is taught you; that you are not like those, Jer. 4.22. My people
have no understanding, they are a sottish people, wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no understanding. Many men are ignorant men, yet not so
sottishly ignorant, as not to be capable of learning; if you will teach him, he
is willing to be instructed; but some men are so ignorant, they are not capab^e
of learning; you may as well ^^ach a block as them. Hence it is the Prophet
complains Esa. 1.4. The Ox knows his own, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but
Is^ael knows not the Lord his God.

Thirdly, In case your ignorance be not a fundamental ignorance, I mean such an
ignorance, as not to know those necessary and fundamental points in the Word,
that must be known, if ever you be saved; as about Jesus Christ and salvation,
and justification by his blood, and faith in his Name, etc. though you may be
ignorant about circumstantials, yet if it be not in fundamentals your ignorance
may be consistent with effectual calling. But now

Thirdly, If a godly man be satisfied in these two points, and thinks happily I
may have the first concomitant to call upon God, and so evidence my effectual
call; and then happily the second may not be wanting in me, that I do not lie
under the state of a wilful sottish and fundamental ignorance. But alas says
he, I want a third concomitant that accompanies effectually calling, and that
is; I find in the Word, that they that are effectually called, they are
brought into an Obediential frame of heart to all the ways of God, that what
ever God commands them to do, their hearts can readily obey, and this I find,
Romans 1.5.6. God has called them by his grace unto the obedience of faith. Now
alas, says a poor soul I find a defect in this concomitant likewise, I
cannot discern that I am called to an obedience flowing from faith as its
principle, I cannot find this frame of heart to be in me, and therefore I
doubt of my effectual calling. This I shall labor to take off likewise.

First, When I say that obedience is a concomitant that will accompany one
effectually called, I do not say nor intend it of obedience in the actings of
it, but of obediential frame of spirit in the purposes of it. Many men may be
effectually called, when they may not always live in the acting of obedience
to Christ, but every man effectually called has an obedient frame of heart;
that is, he has purposes and intentions and resolutions to obey God, though he
cannot act what he would do; he has obedience in the habit, and obedience in
his purposes and resolutions always attending him.

Secondly, you find in Scripture, that the strongest and ablest Christians who
have done most for God, have sometimes been very defective in the Actings of
obedience, that they could not do what they would do for God. And therefore Paul
complains, Romans 7. The good that we would do, we cannot do. Paul himself that
was a pillar in Gods house, yet he tells you, he could not go out in those
Actings of obedience which in his heart he would do; and therefore if you would
willingly do more then you do, God accepts of the little you do.

Thirdly, Though you can not put forth many Actings of obedience to God; where
there is readiness of mind and heart, God accepts the p^rposes of the mind for
the Action it self, 2. Cor. 8.12. Where there is a willing mind; it is accepted
of God, as if the deed were done. And thus much be spoken to the second case of
conscience, why men effectually called do so much doubt of their own call.

Thirdly, Doubt. 3.
Seeing Christians must put forth diligence in making their calling sure;
therefore now whereabouts must this diligence of ours be conversant? or in what
Channel must our diligence run, that we might be sure of our effectual calling?
This is a very mate^ial question; and in resolving of it* I shall answer it in
these two generals.

First, if you would get assurance of your effectual calling, you must put
forth diligence to remove those things that will hinder you in making sure your
calling. And

Secondly, use diligence to set upon the practice of those duties that may
further you in making this sure, that you are effectually called.

First, You must remove those things which do much hinder you from being
assured, and those hinderance that are to be removed I shall comprize under six
heads; As

First, you must use diligence to remove Melancholy from your Thoughts; This i^
a natural hinderance of assurance: Melancholy is a temper in man arising from a
black blood running about the body, that does naturaly occasion distrust and
fear in men's minds; this temper being in the body, does work much upon the
disposition of the ^oul. Now if your temper Melancholy, and so dispose you to
distrust and fear, this will be a great stop to your having of the joys and
comforts of the Lord in your hearts, in assurance of his love. It is a note
Perkins has upon Nebuchadnezzar, when he ate grass like a beast; he writing
upon that place thinks, that Nebuchadnezzar was in a deep Melancholy, and that
did so poss^sse him, that he could not tell whether he was a man or a beast,
though says he, he did not eat grass, but his deep perplexity seazing upon
him did make him think that he was from a man turned into a Beast. Beloved,
Melancholy in a Christian, it will make him think himself an Hypocrite, when he
is a Saint; and therefore take heed of a Melancholy, lumpish and sad temper; it
is a very great hinderance to this grace of assurance. This I lay down only as
a Natural remedy.

Secondly, A mind filled with worldly cares, and running into incumbring
employments in the world, this is a great hindrance of assurance. The cares of
this life, Mat. 13.15. are compared to thorns: Now thorns they choke the
seed, by drawing the juice that is in the seed to themselves, and so the Corn
does not grow, where thorns spring. The cares of this life they are like thorns
in this, they are of an attractive power to suck and draw the juice of your
spirits and comforts to themselves, so that you cannot have the juice of your
spirits in gathering your evidences for heaven; the more encumbered you are in
the world, the less clear you will be touching the evidence of your
elerlasting condition; The cares of this life, they pierce the soul through
with many sorrows. Now when a man is pierced through with many sorrows, he is
in a very unfit temper to be raised up in spiritual joy; the more you incumber
your selves in the employments of this world, the less you will be in the
comforts of heaven. I remember it was the speech of a Pope when he lay a dying,
When I was a painful preaching Minister, then I had hopes of my salvation; when
I came to be a Cardinal, I doubted of it: but when I came to be a Pope, I
despaired of it; I was so entangled in the Aff^irs of this life: Beloved, so I
may say to you, When you were but ordinary Christians in the world, you were
in a way to get assurance of your salvation, but since you have been taken up
with the affairs of the world, it does so distract your mind, that y^u may ^^
in no compos^d temper to have any setlednesse of heart about your everlasting
estate. It is the observation of Philosophers, that the Sun is eclipsed by the
interposition of the Moon, the Moon coming between the Sun and our sight:
Beloved, the Sun of your comforts comes to be eclipsed by the Moon, (which is
made an Emblem of the world, Rev. 12.9.) Now if the Moon of the world comes
between your comforts and you, it will miserably darken and eclipse your
comforts to you. Nothing in the world does so much impede your comfort in
assurance, as incumbring and carking cares about the things of this world.

Thirdly, Take heed you do not harbor the guilt of any one known sin upon your
conscience. Keeping of sin upon the conscience, is a great impediment to your
inward comforts. You will never be assured while you do thus; and therefore if
ever you would have assurance, remove this. It is an observation of Mr.
Hildersham upon Psalm. 51.12, 14. What does David do, when he prays for
assurance? saying, Restore to me the joys of thy salvation, establish me with
thy free Spirit; Restore my comforts, and my evidences to me. And what course
does he take? Read verse 14. Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O Lord: As much
as if he should say, All the while that sin lay upon conscience unrepented of,
(as it did for nine months together) all that while David lost the joys of
the Spirit, and lost the comforts of Heaven; And therefore when he comes to
renew his comforts, and restore his assurance, he does with begging of God for
assurance, beg of God also to deliver him from blood-guiltinesse; as knowing,
that if this sin should be upon conscience unrepented of, and unpardoned, he
should never have the joys of Gods Spirit restored. Beloved, you will never
have assurance of your effectual calling, till your consciences are freed from
having sin upon them with approbation. It is an observation that Aristotle has
about earthquakes, that they are occasioned by wind got into the Caverns and
hollow places of the earth; which having no place for vent again, it makes
rupturs, and overturns houses and mountains and all before it: Sin upon the
conscience unrepented of, is like wind in the earth, it will make a heart
quake there, that there shall not be that calmness, and quietness, and
setlednesse of mind which there would be, were sin away. Hence we read, Esa.
33.^6. The sinners in Sion are afraid, and fearfullness has surprised the
Hypocrite. The sinners are afraid; those who had guilt upon them, their sins
bred terror and fear; and hypocrites that are conscious to themselves of their
own guilt, fearfulness surpr^zeth them, but the upright and sincere in heart
were not so; To note that this is a great enemy to inward peace, and to
assurance about your everlasting estate, if so be you harbor sin upon the
conscience unrepented of. And it is just with God it should be so; because if
you keep sin in your hearts, that will be ever jarring with Heaven, it is just
with God to be at odds with you.

Fourthly, Avoid the easting of your eye, in a way of dejection, upon others,
who are more eminent in grace then you, and have got a precedence of you in the
ways of godliness. It Is true indeed, a man that is given to spiritual pride,
and self-conceitednesse touching his own goodness, it is fit that he should
look upon those that have a precedence before him in grace, the more to humble
him: But for a man that lies under trouble of mind, and doubtings touching his
everlasting estate, that man should not look upon others more eminent then he
in grace, because it will rather increase discomforts, then any way work
assurance in you. If you look up-the glittering beams of the Sun shinning in
its full strength, the more you look upon that orient and resplendent body, the
more it will dazzle your eyes, that you can behold but dimly things upon the
earth: It is so with Christians; some Christians they shine like so many Suns
in the firmament, their graces do so shine and sparkle, that if you look upon
them, they will even dazzle your eyes, and make you blind, that you cannot see
those small scantlings and sparks of grace that are in your own hearts. In case
therefore you would get assurance, avoid the casting of your eye too much upon
those that have a precedence in grace before you.

Fifthly, Take heed you make not sense and feeling the Touchstone to try your
effectual calling by; sense and feeling will deceive you in the matters of your
calling. I may allude ^o ^^a^ p^^s^g^ in the b^ok of Ge^^sis: yo^ know old
Isaac was ^imm^ sig^ed, and by reason of his old age, he ran into a mis^^^e by
^^eling; H^ had Jacob by the hand, and by feeling thought it ^ad been E^au.
Beloved, many of us are dimmesighted in our comforts, and in our graces, and if
we trust to feeling, we may be deceived as Isaac was. You may think when you
have Jacob by the hand, I mean grace in the heart, that it is but an Esau, it
is but a reprobate. Therefore take heed of making sense and feeling the
Touchstone to try your calling by. A child is born, yet knows not that it is
born; lives yet knows not that it lives; but those about it do: so a Christian
may be born again, live the life of grace, and yet not be sensible of it.

Sixthly, Give diligence to remove this hinderance, to wit, Pride in your
gifts, and dependence upon you graces. Pride and dependence, they are not
only murderers of comforts, but they murder our graces also; and if God sees
you swell with pride, because you abound in grace, he will soon prick that
swelling bladder. It is the observation of a Modern Divine, that exaltings of
spirit after assurance attained, it will inevitably expose a Christian, either
to great discomforts, or to great sins. Hence the Scripture makes mention, that
pride of your gifts is not only an enemy to the comfort, but an enemy to
grace; not only an enemy to the comforts from grace, but to the very having of
grace. Hab. 2.4. If a man's heart be exalted, his spirit is not upright within
him. James 4.6. God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. So that
pride is not only an enemy to your comforts, but to the very getting of grace
likewise; when the branches of a Vine grow luxuriant, they shall have the
pruning hook. And thus you have the first sort of helps laid down to you; In
case you would get assurance, you must use diligence to avoid those things that
may be a hinderance to you in getting assurance of your call.

Secondly, A second sort of helps in case you would get assurance, is to use
diligence in the practice of those things that may be helps and furtherances to
the obtaining of assurance about your effectual calling. And here I shall name
only six or seven particulars.

First Exalt arguments of faith against present feelings, If so be that you
will once enter the lists to dispute with the devil, he will out-cavill you,
and Nonplus you. The devil is a cunning Logician, and it is not safe, says
Dr. Preston, to argue with the devil; the devil will out-dispute, and out-argue
you. It is a Christians work to exalt arguments of Faith against present
feelings. In case you would get assurance, you are to do as Abraham the father
of the faithful did, when he was to believe a thing that sense and reason would
tell him should never come to pass; It is said of Abraham, Romans 4.18, 19. That
in hope he believed against hope. He would exalt faith against sense. And how
was it? God promised Abraham a child; reason and sense would have told
Abraham, Abraham, thou art a hundred years old, thy wife ninety nine, her womb
is barren, and it is not likely you should have children; but Abraham would not
argue thus, but would exalt arguments of faith, and apply Gods Promises, and
Gods Word, exalting these; Abraham did believe in hope against hope. Beloved,
so must you: though you say you have barren womb, Grace is not likely to grow
in you, and though you are old, and decrepit, and feeble Christians, yet
advance arguments of faith from Gods love, and from Gods power, and from Gods
Providence, and Gods Promises, and that is the way to get your comforts clear
and full. I may apply what Fox in his Acts and Monuments reports of a good
woman, that was called before Bonner, and the rest in Queen Mary's Reign that
sat in Judgment about her Religion; they see her, though a poor and silly
woman, yet keep firm to her principles, and would not deny her Religion. At
length Bonner sent some learned Doctors to dispute with her, and argue the case
about some points she held; they coming to see her she puts them off with this
saying, Well, you are Scholars, and you come to dispute; I must needs tell you,
I cannot dispute, but I can burn for my Religion. Beloved I would have you
answer the devil thus. If he comes to outwit and cavil with you about your
comforts, say you cannot dispute, but you can believe; you can lay your help on
Jesus Christ, upon one that is mighty, and exalt arguments of faith, and this
will much strengthen your comforts. Luke 8.42. There came a ^uler to Jesus
Christ, and besought him for his daughter that lay a dying: And while he was
telling Christ this, there came another messenger after, him, Thy daughter is
dead, ^rouble the man no farther: What says Christ, hearing this? Fear not,
only b^lieve. As if he should say, sense and reason would have told him it
were a needless thing to beg of Christ for his daughter when she was dead; but
says Christ, Do not stoop to sense and reason, Fear not, only believe, and
the work shall be done: So I say to you, Consult not with flesh and blood, but
exalt arguments of faith against present feelings; and this is the way to get
assurance of your comforts.

Secondly, Keep conscience clear, that no sin be harbored there, and you are
in the way to get your comforts full. God, says David, will speak peace to his
people, but they must not return unto folly. As if he should say, though God
does speak peace, and assure you of your pardon and salvation; yet if you
return to sin, God can tell how to break your peace, and turn his smiles into
frowns and angry looks. Take heed of sin, and keep your conscience clear, and
that's the way to have peace settled in thine heart. Job 11.14, 15. If iniquity
be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy
Tabernacle. What follows? and then shall thou lift up thy face before God
without spot, thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear. A strange expression,
That if you will keep sin far away, then you shall be steadfast before God, and
not fear; that is, you shall not be exposed to those fears and doubts and
anxieties which other men are exposed to. Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near to God
with an upright heart, in full assurance of faith. Now what shall a man do to
come to God in full assurance? Mark the next words, Draw nigh to God in full
assurance of faith, having your hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. Here
is the way, if you are sprinkled from an evil conscience, you may be bold to
come to God in full assurance. Whereas, alas, if thy conscience tell thee thou
art a Whoremaster, and thou art a deceiver, and a liar, and loose liver, thou
can not come with full assurance; thou may come in presumption indeed, but
not with the assurance of faith: and therefore keep a conscience clear from
harboring guilt upon it, and that is the way to have the heart full of joy.

Thirdly, Be diligent in keeping company with the most godly experienced
Christians where you live, this is a very special way to increase your
comforts. Ye read an excellent passage, 2 Cor. 1.4. We are c^mforted of God,
says the Apostle, that we might comfort others with the comfort wherewith we
are comforted of God. Godly Christians they will comfort you with the same
comforts wherewith they themselves are comforted. If we are comforted, it is
for your consolation. Godly men, if they have any inward comfort from God, they
will impart their experiences to you, and tell you as David did, Psalm. 66.16.
What God has done for their soul. There is no way better then this, to keep in
communion with godly and knowing Christians. Mr. Bradford that famous Martyr,
who was in prison about his profession of Christ, the story says, he lay a
long time under trouble of mind, and horror of conscience, that he could not
find a real and clear evidence of his effectual calling: there came many men
to him, and could not settle him. Yet a poor Weaver, an ancient and experienced
Christian, that did usually accompany Mr. Bradford in prison, by his frequent
communion with this poor man, he got more inward comfort then ever he got all
his life before. Beloved, this I speak to you to make you the more to study the
the worth of godly society, and the more you are conversant with Christians
that live in the enjoyment of the light of Gods countenanc^, and in the
assurance of his favor all the day long, the more you are in the ready way to
increase your comforts and assurance.

Fourthly, Submit thy self to the approbation of others, and be willing to
have them pass a verdict upon thee. When thou art asleep or in a swoun, then
thou can not tell thy self what thou do, but others must tell thee; So it
may fall out with the godly; they may be in such a spiritual swoun, that they
are not fit judges of their own condition; in this case submi^ to the judgment
of others, they may see grace in thee, when thou thy self can not see it; so
Mr. Throgmorton was comforted by the testimony of a company of godly Ministers.

Fifthly, live in the daily improvement of grace, and that is the way to get
assurance. And this means the Holy Ghost lays down in the Chapter out of
which my Text is taken, Add grace to grace. And I remember that Beza upon this
Text does write, that in the Greek Translations these words are put in, Give
diligence by good works to make your calling sure: whether it be so or no, I
cannot affirm, but this I am sure of, and the context will clearly prove it,
that the way to make your calling sure, is to add grace to grace. For after
the Apostle had spoken of adding grace to grace, he comes in with this, Give
diligence to make your calling sure: Implying, that the more you live in the
actings of grace, the more you shall live in the enjoyment of comforts. Isa.
32.17. The works of righteousness shall be peace. Not the habit, but the work;
if you act righteousness, and live in the workings and thrivings in grace,
this shall be peace, and the effect of it quietness and assurance for ever. So
John 16.24. The more you pray, the more you increase your joy. So that the more
you live in the improvement of grace, the more likely way you are in to get
assurance.

Sixthly, If you would get assurance, spend more time in strengthening your
evidences for heaven, then in questioning of them. It is the great fault of
many Christians, they will spend much time in questioning and not in
strengthening their comforts. They will reason themselves into unbelief, and
say, Lord, why should I believe? why should I take hold of a promise, that am
so unholy and so unmortified a creature? And so by this they reason themselves
to such a pass, that they dare not lay hold upon Christ; whereas it should be
your work to reason your selves into Christ as much as you can. Labor to
strengthen your comforts, and reason thus, Why should I not believe in Christ?
Thus David did, Psalm. 42. Why art thou troubled O my soul, and why art thou
cast down within me? Is not the mercy of God more then sin in the creature? Is
not there free grace where there is guilt? Are not there pardoning mercies,
where condemnation is deserved? you should reason up your comforts, rather then
reason them down, and spend more time in strengthening, then in questioning of
them. You would count him a very unwise man, that has a Leaf of much land,
and he himself shall create scruples and doubts, and shall use no means to
make his Title good: And truly many Christians are as unwise for heaven; they
have, as I may say, good bond and seal that God will bring them to heaven, and
yet they will question, and cavil themselves into unbelief. Beloved, this
should not be, but you ought rather to strengthen your comforts, then question
them.

Seventhly, Be diligent in the earnest study of the Covenant of grace: Beloved,
all a Christians doubts arise from ignorance of the Covenant of grace. And here
that I may speak a little to it, I beseech you follow me, study the Covenant of
grace; which if you do, you shall discern five particular props in it to bear
up your hearts against discomforts, and to strengthen you in a way of assurance
touching your effectual call.

First, the Covenant of works it commands perfect obedience upon pain of
damnation; but the Covenant of grace does command and accept of imperfect
obedience, if it be sincere: there is your first prop.

Secondly, the Covenant of works is not contented with good desires, unless
there be good works; the Covenant of grace accepts the good will and good
des^res; when the deed is wanting, and is content with the will for the deed.

Thirdly, the Covenant of works does require that you should obey the will of
God perfectly in your own person; the Covenant of grace requires only that you
obey in the person of Christ; so Christ obeys for you, it is accepted, though
you do not.

Fourthly, the Covenant of works requires you to obey the whole will of God by
your own strength; the Covenant of grace accepts of it, though not our own
strength, but the strength of Christ be put forth in doing any spiritual action.

Fifthly, the Covenant of works requires the performance of the condition,
before it gives the Promise; As, Do this and live; you cannot live, says the
covenant of works, without you do this: but the covenant of grace, it first
tenders the Promise, and then requires the condition: Bids you first take
Christ, and first believe, and then show forth the effects of faith. First, lay
hold upon the promise, and then hold forth and practice the condition of that
Promise. First believe, and then take Christ, though thou art unworthy, and a
wretched creature, if after taking of him thou will be conscientious to
practice those obligations that lies upon thee, and I will accept thee. Now
would you lay these to your heart, to study that vast difference between the
Covenant of works, and the Covenant of grace, doubtless these would be great
props for your inward comforts.

SERMON. IX.
2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE point of Doctrine I am yet upon in the prosecution of these words, is
this: That Christians ought to put forth a great deal of diligence to make this
sure to their souls, that they are effectually called by Jesus Christ. In the
handling of which I have gone over many particulars, and resolved several cases
of conscience. I have yet two cases more to resolve, and then shall wind up
all in a general use. Therefore

Fourthly, When, or at what time does God fill the souls of his people most
with the assurance of their effectual calling? And then

Fifthly, Wherein lies the difference between that assurance a godly man has
of his effectual calling, and those presumptuous persuasions that wicked men
have, that the^ are called effectually, when they are not.

First, when, or at what time does God give to his people most and strongest
assurance of their effectual calling? And here in answer to this, I shall
comprize all I have to say under four heads; that in four cases or times God
does usually give to his people most strong assurance.

First, After the Lord has greatly humbled the hearts of his people, and
broken them for sin, then does he usualy give in most assurance of a man's
effectual calling, and of the happiness of his future condition. When you can
say as David did, Psalm. ^8.3, There is no rest in my bones, by reason of my
sin. When you can say as the Psalmist does Psalm. 51.8. Let the bones which
thou have broken rejoice. Then is the time for God to make you break forth with
joy, when he has broken your hearts with sorrow. God had broken David's heart
under the sense of that uncleanness he had committed: O says David, Thou have
broken my heart, now let my broken spirit rejoice; and God gave him comfort,
and did restore the joy of his salvation to him. You have a phrase, Psalm.
34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, to save them that
are of a contrite spirit. The Lord is nigh to them. Nigh, what to do? not only
to give them deliverance from outward trouble, but from inward sorrows; to give
them inward joy, and inward comforts, that the bones which he has broken might
rejoice. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken spirit, to give them
comfort. Luke 4.18. It Is said there, that the Spirit of the Lord was upon
Christ, what to do? It was to bind up the broken in heart, and to comfort
those that mourn. So Esa. 61.1, 2, 3. To those that mourn, he should preach
comfort, and bind up the brokenhearted. When the Lord has broken you under
sin, and humbled you under the sight of your evils, then is the time when God
will break in upon you with great joy. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all you that
are weary, and heavy laden, and I will give you rest; Rest, there has not
only reference to our rest in heaven, that we shall rest there from sin, and
rest there from sorrow, and rest there from temptation, but I will give you
rest; it has reference also to a promise in this life, that if you are heavy
laden, that you count your iniquities a burden too heavy for you to bear,
Christ has promised you peace, inward peace in your own consciences, in the
assurance of your everlasting estate, in assurance that you are called to a
state of grace, and shall come to a state of glory. You know when the ground is
plowed, the clods are broken, and the breaking of the clods makes way for the
deeper rooting of the corn, and that it may spring up with greater increase. It
is so when ye plow up, in the Prophets language, Jer. 4. the fallow ground of
your hearts; when you break the clods of your hearts by humiliations, this
makes way for the corn and grain, that precious grain of assurance to spring
and grow up to a fuller measure; so that you are out of Gods way then to have
strong assurance, that never have been humbled in the sight of sin. I say it is
Gods ordinary way. I do not deny but God may bring you to heaven, though you
have no legal workings and horrors upon you; yet God will never give you such
strong assurance, and such ravishing comforts, as he gives them that are most
broken in spirit. Look through the whole verge of Scripture, and you shall
find that those that were most broken in heart, they were most strong in
comfort. That house that has the deepest foundation, is like to be the most
beautiful Fabric and Building; whereas your tents and lesser cottages, a
little rooting in the earth will serve their turn: It is likely God may make
thee as a little cottage, though not deeply rooted; but thou will never be
reared up a beautiful building, to become an amiable Christian in point of
comfort and assurance, if God have not bottomed thee low in humiliation. It Is a
true rule in grace, They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. The deeper you
are in sorrow, the higher you shall be lifted up in joy.

Secondly, after the people of God have been tossed and tumbled, and turmoiled
with the violent assaults and temptations of the devil, then is Gods time of
filling his people with greatest joy and most comfort. You know at the Mill, at
the Flood-gate, when the stream goes strongest, then the Mill goes fastest.
Beloved, God lets the stream of temptation grow strong against thee, but to
make thy Mill to go, to make thee grind thy lusts to powder, and to make thee
grind thy sins as corn under the Millstone. God does but make the flood to
be strong at the gate, to make thy comforts to be more strong, and thy graces
to be more firm. When God lets in a flood of temptation, and tosseth thee upon
those waves and billows, then is the time for God to give thee in strongest
comforts. Esa. 54.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. O thou afflicted, tossed with Tempest,
and not comforted. Mark their estate. Now what will God do with a soul thus
tossed with a Temptation? Read the verse before, My Covenant of peace shall not
depart from thee, O thou afflicted. God does here speak most peace, and tenders
most freely his Covenant in this condition, when they were most tossed and
tumbled. And verse 13. Thy children shall be all taught of God, and great shall
be their peace. And verse 14. In righteousness thou shall be established, and
thou shall not fear. Here you see how God as it were boulsters and bears up a
dejected heart; O thou tossed with a Tempest, Behold, I have made a Covenant of
peace with thee, and Behold, thou shall not fear. See how God keeps up the
hearts of his people in this condition; when you are most tossed and tumbled
with the tempest of temptation, then does God ordinarily speak to you most
inward peace and strongest assurance. As you know it is with an Oak, the more
they are shaken by tempestuous winds, the firmer and faster are they rooted in
the bowels of the earth: It is so with Christians; they are compared in
Scripture to an Oak, whose fruit and sap is in them: Now a Christian, the more
he is shaken by a tempestuous temptation, the Lord makes him by that to be the
more firm, and to be the more fastened and settled in strong comforts and
assurance.

Thirdly, when God has any extraordinary work for his people, either to do or
suffer, this is a time when he fills his people with most assurance. Should God
put his people upon outward sufferings, and give them inward fears, they were
not in a capacity to undergo the condition with joy or patience: and therefore
when he calls his people to some extraordinary measure of suffering, this is
the time when God will fill them with more then ordinary comforts. I have read
in the book of Martyrs of Mr. Robert Glover, a famous man in his generation,
who during the time of his imprisonment, was much troubled in mind for want of
his assurance, yet the story tells us, when he was brought to the stake to be
burnt, as soon as ever he saw the fire, he broke out in the hearing of the
people and said, He is corn, he is come; I am now as full of joy as my heart
can hold. All the while he was in prison, he was blubbring and much troubled,
till God brought him to an eminent suffering, to suffer death for him, and then
he was full of comfort. I have read also of one Adolphus Clarebachius, who was
a man subject to Melancholy, and lay under many doubts and fears, yet as soon as
ever he was brought to the stake he openly declared to the people, I have been
naturally of a sad Temper, but now I profess before you all, I think there is
not a merrier heart in all the World then mine is. Thus they being to go
through extraordinary sufferings, God gave them extraordinary assurance.
Beloved, this is Gods time, when he will give you most assurance, when he calls
you to most sufferings. When you are to go through an Ocean of sufferings and
afflictions, the Lord will make you swim in a Sea of inward peace and spiritual
joys.

Fourthly, God gives his people most strong assurance, when they walk most
closely in communion with their God. Great peace shall they have, says David,
that love thy Law; they shall have peace, and great peace, while they walk in
love to God and his ways. Keep in communion with your God, and that is the time
for God to give you greatest comfort; If ye lash out from God and break his
Law, he will break your hearts. When the shepherd has a Lamb, or a Sheep, that
straggles from the fold, it shall meet with a Crook, happly with the bite of a
dog. It may be God may catch you with his hook, happily you shall be bitten
with a Temptation, and bitten with desertion, if you straggle from his fold;
but the more you keep in communion with God, the more likely you are to keep in
your comforts; walking with God is the very fuel that kindles the fire of
comfort in a Christians breast, that keeps comfort alive. The more you flag in
your communion, the more shall you flag in your assurance, and the more shall
your comforts die. Communion with your God, it has two particulars in it.
First, in keeping you free from sin, Jo^. 11.14, 15. Secondly, in keeping in
the exercise of grace, Esa. 32.17. Now, the more you keep out sin, the more you
keep in comforts; the more you increase in grace, the more you increase in
comforts. Grace and comfort, the one promotes the other; Grace promotes
comfort, and comfort heightens you in the increase of grace: Therefore Paul in
his salutations puts them both together, 1 Cor. 1.3. And t^us having finished
this Query, there is only one more, which (God willing) I shall dispatch at
this time; And that is

Fifthly, Wherein appears the difference between that man that has assurance
of his effectual calling upon good ground, and between those men that only
have presumptuous persuasions of their effectual c^lling, when they are not?
Beloved, this question is worthy the discussion; and to resolve it, I shall lay
down nine or ten differences; As

First, That man that has sound and true assurance of his effectual calling,
he is very careful to take heed of s^n, that so he might not eclipse his
comforts, or lose his assurance. He is careful (I say) to free his heart from
sin as much as may be, as considering, that though he cannot sin away his soul,
he may sin away hi^ comforts; though he cannot sin away his salvation, he may
sin away his consolation. A man that has this assurance, he knows the worth
of assurance, and he knows how soon it i^ lost, and how hardly it is gained;
and that makes him very tender of sin, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having these Promises, let
us cleanse our selves. When a godly man knows that God is his God, (For that is
the Promise spoken of in the verse before) knowing that he belongs to God, and
the Promises belong to him; he knowing this, it makes him cleanse himself from
all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit; that he keep no sin in the spirit,
nor no sin in the body. A man that has assurance, it makes him very t^nder of
every sin: But now, a man that has presump^uous persuasions of his own
goodn^sse, his persuasions will make him more bold, and more ^enturous to run
into sin, he will make no bones of sin, and he cares not for falling into one
sin to day, and another sin to morrow, and commi^ wickedness day after day; he
is bold and venturous upon every sin. Jer. 3.4, 5. Thou have cried to me, My
Father, my Father: thou art the guide of my youth; will thou reserve anger for
ever, and shall there be no end of thy indignation? Yet what says God? Yet
thou did evil as much as thou could: As if he should say, You cry, My
Father; you persuade your selves God is your Father, and yet you will speak and
do evil as much as you can: Here God brands them for a presumptuous people. To
persuade your selves that God is your Father, and yet to do wickedness as much
as you can, and to be drunk as often as you can, and swear as often as you can;
alas, you deceive your own hearts in this: for God cannot be your Father in
this sense. And Beloved, I beseech you in my going over these heads, that you
would lay them to your own hearts, and see if you my be distinguished from
those presumptuous persuasions, that go over the world.

Secondly, a man that has real assurance of his effectual calling, that man
meets with more assaults and Temptations from the devil to annoy him in his
peace, then other men do that have only a counterfeit assurance, As you know
those shops that have the best wares, and richest Treasures, Goldsmiths shops,
they are most exposed to Robbery; when men will not meddle with a petty stall.
Those ships that are most richly laden, they are in most danger to meet with
Pirates at Sea, when your smaller barks laden with goods of lesser value escape
free: It is so with Christians. Those Christians, that are most richly laden
with the Treasure of assurance, that have in their hearts this precious Jewel,
they are in most danger of the devils temptations, to be as a Pirat or Robber
by force to set upon them, to annoy them. It is those that have most assurance,
that the devil does envy most, that he will never let them alone, but hunts
them as a Partridge over the Mountains by dejections, and by suggestions, and
by variety of Temptations. Satan's fieriest darts; and by distrust, and by
injected scruples, and by cavils of carnal reasonings, and by consulting with
flesh and blood, and for want of comfortable feelings; the devil will be still
putting them on, to see if he can damp their comforts, and make them cast away
their confidence, which has a great recompense of reward. Hence it is the
Apostle presses that Christians should not cast away their confidence, (a
Metaphor some think drawn from a Ship at Sea; Heb. 10 35.
Merchants, when they are at Sea, when their ship by a storm and tempest is
tossed upon the billows, and likely to suffer shipwreck, being heavy laden,
they will cast away their wares, to save their lives. Now some in allusion to
this, think that the devil so tosseth a poor soul in point of comfort, as a
ship is tossed upon the Sea by the wind. Now if you are tossed upon the Sea of
Temptation, and upon the waves of Trouble and Assaults, do not cast away your
wares, do not throw away your comforts) which implies, that godly men are often
set upon, and often assaulted; that though the devil cannot bring you to hell,
he would fain have you to have a hell in your consciences while you live; he
does not only envy your happiness, but comforts also: Whereas on the
contrary, men that harbor persuasions they are called, when they are not; the
devil lulls them asleep, he lets them alone, and never troubles them. Luke
11.21. When the strong man possesses the house, the goods are at peace: That
is, when the devil of hell has whole possession of the soul of a man, he is no
whit tempted, his thoughts are at quiet. When the devil sees a man build upon a
sandy and corrupt foundation, he will never shake that by a Temptation lest you
should by shaking be awakened to look after a better and more enduring
substance. When the devil sees you lul'd asleep in a golden dream of
presumption, he will never awaken you by temptation, but lets you sleep on,
because he knows that sleep will be a sleep to death. As a man lying asleep on
a steep rock, dreams merrily of Crowns and Kingdoms, but suddenly starting in
joy, breaks his neck, and tumbles into the bottom of the Sea; so is it with a
man* that harbors ungrounded persuasions of his good estate. That which a
carnal man makes his evidence, that he is in a good condition, is an undoubted
demonstration he is in a bad. You shall have a wicked man, when he hears a
godly man to be troubled in mind and wounded in spirit, he will tell you, he
thanks God he was never troubled since he was born, the devil never disturbed
him, and he has had a strong faith ever since he can remember. Alas, Beloved,
this is a sad sign; thou make ^his a sign of thy comfort, whereas indeed it
is a demonstration of thy want of a sound assurance; for were thy assurance
good, the Devil would never let thee alone, but would still be laboring to
make thee cast away thy confidence; but being bad; he would have thee nourish
it still. We say those Oxen that are fed in greenest pastures, they are nearest
the slaughter; when the poor lean Ox that has the yoke and whip every day,
and is at daily labor, is long-lived, and in a better condition. Those men
that the Devil lets alone, and never tempts, that are as fatted Oxen, never
come under the whip and yoke, and never are troubled; it is an argument they
are near the slaughter, and under a great deal of danger of their souls: but
those that are under the yoke, that are often tempted, and the pricks of Satan
lie upon them; this is an argument their comforts are right, and their evidence
good, because so assaulted and opposed by the Devil.

Thirdly, true assurance is more or less in a man's spirit, by how much more or
less that man keeps in communion with God. If a man does remit in his converse
with God, and grow careless and formal, and a stranger to God, he shall grow a
stranger to himself in the end, and to his comforts also: but if a man keep
close to God, and keep close to duties, can retire and recollect himself to
converse with God in a more solemn and serious manner, is preparedly and
fruitfully exercised in Ordinances, can pour out his soul into Gods bosom;
that man is in the way to have his comforts raised up. Whereas now for men that
have false comfort and persuasions, whether they are much or little with God,
all is one to them, their comforts are at the same stand still. Come to a man
that has false comforts, and at all times he is alike peremptory, he is in the
same persuasion he was 3.4.7. years ago. Ask him any week in the year, any day
in the week, any hour in the day, and he will tell you he has the same
comforts, and the same evidences still: he had a strong faith in God, and he
has it still; he had strong hopes to be saved, and so he has still; he is
still peremptory in his comforts, though he never so much alter in communion
with his God: this is an argument thy persuasions are false, because a
Christians communion and converse with God does feed his comforts. Now as the
body, by how much the more or less it is fed, by so much the more it is
weakened or strengthened: so it is with your comforts; so much as they are
cherished by your walking with God, so much they grow weak or strong. Now let a
wicked man grow never so vile, and never so sinful, it interrupts not his
peace; he has hopes and assurance still, and he will trust in God still,
though he sin ever; this is an argument his comforts are unsound. You have a
lively picture of this, Mic. 3.11. The heads of the people judge for reward,
the Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets divine for money: and yet they
will lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? That is, though
they have these sins among them, and did walk thus and thus, yet they would
hope in God God to be saved for all this. Why, Beloved, thou will find God to
fail thee; though he never faild an assured Christian, yet he will fail that
man that leans upon him, when he belongs not to him. When thou do intermit
walking with God and do lanch forth into a gulf and sea of lusts, and yet
can still say thou art the same in thy comforts, and the same in thy
persuasions; it is an argument all thy comforts are but false, and thy evidence
unsound.

Fourthly, Real assurance of your estate, it does bear up the soul under the
greatest outward sorrow and sufferings that it can meet with in this world.
Heb. 10:34. They suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in
themselves that they had in heaven a better and more enduring substance. What
made them so to rejoice to see their houses plundered before them, their
estates taken from them, but this, they knew in their own selves, and had
assurance in their own hearts that Christ was theirs, and heaven was theirs;
and this made them suffer joyfully the spoiling of their goods. So Psalm.
119.50: This is my comfort in affliction, that thy word does quicken me: That
is, this bears up my heart when I am afflicted, that I have a word to build
upon, that I have assurance, I have interest in a promise to build upon; this
quickens and bears me up under my sorrows. So Psalm. 119.81. My spirit had
fainted within me, only that I hoped in thy word. That is, I had hope and
confidence built upon thy Word, and that kept me from fears, and fainting, and
discouragement under my affliction. So Isa. 33.24. The Inhabitant shall not
say, I am sick; the people that dwell therein, shall be forgiven their
iniquity. The sense of the pardon of their sin shall take away the sense of any
outward suffering.
Beloved, Assurance will lift up and bear up the heart under all sorrows.
Assurance in a Christian is like oil. Now pour oil into a sea or ocean of
water, and the oil will never be kept under, but still be uppermost; so this
oil of comfort, and this oil assurance, it will bear thee up on the top,
though thou should be cast into a flood of troubles, and an ocean of
sorrows. I have read in Latimers writings a notable saying of his to Ridley
that famous Martyr. Sometime, says he, when I live in a settled and steadfast
assurance about the state of my soul, me thinks then I am as bold as a Lion, I
can can laugh at all trouble, no affliction daunts me; but when I am eclipsed
in my comforts, I am of so fearful a spirit, that I could run into a very
mouse-hole. Beloved, it is so with godly men, when they want assurance of their
estate, and the soundness of their call, every affliction daunts, and every
trouble startles them. O but when they can live in a settled assurance of their
interest in Christ, and calling by him; they are as bold as Lions and they are
born up with comfort, under all the sorrows, and sufferings they meet withal.
But now men that have false persuasions, their persuasions can never bear up
the heart under a trouble, and at a loss, and a^ a pinch; because it is not a
saving and inward comfort, it can never create inward peace. The co^forts of
wicked men when they come to suffer, they are like cloth that is ill woven.
Cloth that is well made, let a man be in a shower of rain, it will never
shrink; but ill woven cloth, let it be but in a show^e, it shrinks presently:
It is so with men's comforts; Bring comforts well wrought into a shower of
tr^uble, and that man will not shrink under his trouble; but bring an ill
wrought and unsound assurance, and that will shrink, and fail, and pull in, and
will not bear up the heart under the sorrows and sufferings he may meet
withal. Presuming Pindleton, that boasted his fat flesh should fry in the fire
before he would forsake his Relgion; when he came to the trial, flagged
presently.

Fifthly, Sound assurance, wherever it is, makes the heart more humble toward
God and man, and makes men more vile in their own eyes. Gal. 2.20. There you
have this character; I live, says Paul, by the faith of the Son of God; and
Christ has loved me, and given himself for me. Here is his assurance: what
then? Does this lift up Paul? No, it makes him more vile; I live, yet not I,
but Christ lives in me: Paul recollects himself, I live, no; it is not I that
live, but Christ that lives in me. See how Paul was beaten off from a
supercilious pride and exaltation of spirit in himself. It is not I that live.
The thoughts of his comforts made him recollect himself, and seem vile in his
own eyes: Whereas (alas) false persuasions puff up the soul with pride, and
makes a man supercilious, and high conceited, crying out as Jehu did, Jonadab,
is thy heart like mine? Come see my zeal for the Lord; they make him proud
like Jehu in his false persuasions.

Sixthly, sound comforts, and real assurance do engage the soul to walk before
God in a course of holiness, Psalm. 26.3. Thy loving kindness is before mine
eyes; that is, I am assured, if I saw the thing with mine eye, that Gods loving
kindness is toward me. What then? and I will walk in thy truth. I will walk
before thee with a holy and sincere heart; and I will not haunt with vain
persons, ver. 4, And I will wash my hands in innocence, ver. 6 etc. So that you
see David would walk in a course of holiness, because he had an evidence and
assurance of Gods love to him. So 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as Christ is pure; that is, a man that does nourish
hopes and persuasions of heaven, his hopes will make him a Christian
endeavoring to purify his own heart, and to be holy as Christ is holy. This
is the nature of true assurance. But now for false assurance, the man that has
it, does not look after holiness at all; he thinks himself well enough, Si
dixeris sufficit periisti. Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 18.
that he has attained that which every wise man should rest in, without
meddling any furth^r; nay, he is so far laying bonds upon himself to walk in a
course of holiness, that he will rather take encouragement from thence to walk
in a way of looseness and profaneness: Because grace abounds, he will abound
in sin; this is the ill use that false comfort makes of Gods grace. And
therefore, Beloved, look over your hearts. Do the comforts you pretend to have,
and the assurance you pretend to enjoy, make you more to pursue holiness? that
you can say as David did, I see thy loving kindness is before me, and
therefore I will love thy ways; and hate sinfulness; or can you say, you have
comforts, therefore yo^ will run into sin, and wallow in wickedness? this is an
argument thy comforts are not true.

Seventhly, True assurance, it is got and kept with a great deal of diligence
and industry. Your best things are hardest to get, and hardest to keep. Stones
are to be had in every place; but gold you must dig deep, and take pains to
dive into the bowels of the earth, before you can get that. Weeds grow easily,
but your fine garden-flowers, they must be often watered, and carefully looked
unto, or else they will not grow: Beloved, this weed of false persuasion and
assurance, it is a weed that will grow under every hedge, and thrive in every
garden without looking after; whereas alas, the flower of true comforts and
saving assurance, it is hard to make it grow; and when it is grown, it is hard
to keep it from withering and blasting. Assurance it costs a man the waiting
many a year, the shedding many a tear, the making of many a prayer, before he
can get or keep it; whereas alas, false assurance it is easily gotten, and
easily kept. A man may get presumption without any pains at all; the Devil
will egg you on both to get and keep it: Therefore you that easily get your
comforts without prayers, and keep your comforts without pains, you may be sure
your comforts are but false.

Eighthly, True assurance it is gotten by the Word, and grounded upon the Word.
It is got by the Word, Isa. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lip, peace, peace,
to them that are nigh, and to them that are afar off. The fruit of the lips,
that is, the fruit of the Ministers preaching; the word which falls from the
lips of a godly Minister, God has ordained and created that to be the way to
work and create peace, peace; that is a sound peace in the hearts of his
people. And it is not only got, but it is bottomed upon the Word also. It is
the Word, and somewhat in the Word, that bears up the hearts of the people of
God, Psalm. 119.49. Good is the Word of the Lord, wherein thou have caused thy
servant to hope. So ver. 50, 51. It is the Word of God that bottoms the
comforts of the people of God; whereas look now upon wicked men, and they
neither got their comforts by the Word, nor do they ground upon the Word; but
first, they have had strong hopes in God ever since they could remember; and
secondly, they keep and ground them either upon their good meaning, that they
mean well toward God; or else thirdly, they ground them upon this, that they
are not so bad as other men are. A poor weak ground. The Pharisee could say so;
I am no extortioner, no drunkard, no adulterer, and the like: yet never came to
heaven for all this. Or else fourthly, they ground their comforts on this,
because they receive from God abundance of outward mercies. And this you find
was their ground of presumption, Hos. 12.8. Ephraim said, I am become rich, and
I have found me out substance; in all my labor they shall find no iniquity in
me, that is, sin. Ephraim would say, I am become rich, and have gotten me an
estate, and now I am an honest man, and they shall find no sin in me: yet this
was a mere presumption, because God tells us, Eccl. 9.1. No man knows either
love or hatred by the things that are before him. And sometimes, says Solomon,
God gives m^n riches to their hurt; And therefore this can be no evidence of a
grounded assurance.

Ninthly, That man that has a good assurance, he is willing to be tried either
by God or man, touching the truth of his assurance. This you find, Psalm, 26.2,
3. Try me, O Lord, examine me, prove me; and try my ^ei^es, and my heart, for
thy loving kindness is before me. As if he should say, Lord, I make a
profession, that I have thy loving kindness in mine eye, that I am assured
thou love me; Lord, I put my soul upon the trial: Do thou try me, if my
heart be not right in my assurance. And not by God only, but they are willing
to be tried by man also. And therefore you have that phrase of the Apostle, 1
Pet. 3.15. that when men ask you an account of the hope that is in you, you
should be ready to give answer; that is, when men ask you what hopes you have
of heaven, and upon what ground do you hope to be saved? the Apostle says, you
should be ready to give answer of that hope that is in you. And who were they
that should do so? they were those that had a good conscience, those men that
had consciences free from sin, and had evidence in their own consciences, that
they belonged to God, they were ready, whoever asked them, to give a reason why
they hoped for heaven. Whereas a man that has false persuasions of heaven and
of his effectual calling, that man cannot endure to be tried either by God or
man. He is like the man that has stolen goods in his house. A man that is an
honest man, let the Constable come, let search be made, it never troubles him,
because they are his own goods that he has bought with his own money: but the
Thief, when the Constable comes, and search is made, every Trunk that is
opened, his heart trembles: It is so with an unsound-hearted man; a man that
has false assurance, lest there should be a flaw found in it. Come to a man
that has false persuasions, (as to you Formalists, and those that are
presumptuous wretches) come to these men, and put this question unto them, Upon
what ground do you hope for salvation? What evidence can you give of your
effectual calling? How can you make out upon Scripture-grounds, that you shall
go to heaven? Such questions as these will puzzle an unsound heart, that he
cannot give you any reasonable answer at all. And herein the difference is
palpable between a grounded assurance and those false persuasions that wicked
men have.

Tenthly, True assurance, wherever it is, it makes a man so to value the
comforts of the Spirit of God, that he does undervalue all other comforts in
the world in comparison of them, Psalm. 4.6. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon me; what then? and this shall more glad my heart, then when my
corn and wine and oil increases. Beloved, assurance, it does so transport and
raise up the heart, that it makes all things in the world, all comforts here
below to be nothing in comparison of that. The favor of Princes is nothing to
that man that has the favor of God; Life, and all the comforts of life, are
nothing to that man that has comfort in referrence to his eternal life; Psalm.
63.3. Thy loving kindness, O Lord, is better then life. David did not value his
life, nor all the comforts of it, so as he valued the loving kindness of his
God. But now, a man that has false persuasions, these do not so transport his
spirit, and take up the whole man, and fill the soul with j^y unspeakable and
full of glory; these do no whit abate his comforts in the world. A man you know
that has tasted honey, other things are of an unpleasant taste to him that are
eaten after: Beloved, assurance is like honey; nothing so sweet to a godly
palate, as that is. Now when a godly person taste^ of the honey of assurance,
all other outward comforts, they are but as gall and wormwood, things
unpleasant to his taste and palate. And thus you see I have laid down ten
particulars to you. I would entreat you to distinguish in your own hearts,
whether you are the people that have a true assurance, or only false
persuasions of your effectual calling. And let me tell you, the reason why I
speak of this, is, because the most of men in the world do miss of heaven by
false persuasions. Where desperation damnes one soul, presumption damnes a
thousand. I might say of this, as it was sung in the Triumphant song of David
and Saul, Saul has slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands: So I
might say, desparation has slain a thousand, but presumption ten thousand.
Thousands and ten thousands are slain and undone for ever, by harboring
presumptuous and groundless persuasions of their effectual calling, when they
are not.

SERMON. X.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, Give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE Doctrine I am yet upon, drawn from these words is this, That Christians
ought to put forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure to their souls,
that they are effectually called by Jesus Christ. In the prosecution of which I
have handled many particulars, I now come in the close of this Point to make a
particular use of all that has been said, and so pass on to that other
branch, to make your Election sure. And the Use I shall speak of, shall only
be an Use of Exhortation, and Direction. My Exhortation shall be directed to
two sorts of men. First, to them that do enjoy and are assured of their
effectual Calling; who are called, and are assured they are so. Secondly, to
them that have sometime enjoyed this assurance, but now have lost or eclipsed
the comfortable feeling of their assurance. Into these two heads I shall branch
my discourse.

And first, the exhortation or counsel I am to give, Use
is to them that are assured of their effectual calling; that have done the
work the Apostle here injoynes them; that have made sure their Vocation, and by
unquestionable evidence can say so. And these I would advise to three
particular duties.

First you should be directed rightly to use your assurance.

Secondly, Carefully to preserve your assurance.

Thirdly, Daily to improve your assurance. This is the three f^ld task that
lies upon you, that enjoy this rich Jewel of ass^rance.

First, You are ^o take care, that you rightly use and manage your assurance. A
thing hardly gotten, if it be not well managed, a man may enjoy it in a way of
loss to himself. To use assurance well is the great Art of a Christian. And
here (that I might speak distinctly to this direction) I shall lay down ^ight
particulars, as concomitants, or gracious qualifications, which must accompany
you in a condition of assurance; As

First, You must use and manage your assurance with humility, in case you use
it well. Assured Christians must be humble Christians. The more high you are in
comforts, the more low you should be in Spirit. You know the fullest ears of
corn hang down their head lowest, when light and flashy darnel that has
nothing of worth in it, lifts up its head on high. Assured Christians, they are
like your full and ripe ears of corn; the more full they are of this fruit of
the Spirit, assurance, the more low do they, and should they hang down their
heads. It is your empty barrels make a noise, when your full vessels though you
strike them, will not sound: It is those Christians that are most empty of
faith, and most empty of assurance, that make most noise, and are most proud of
their gifts and graces; when your assured Christians they are like vessels
full of the best liquor; that make the least noise. The fuller God has filled
you with this comfort, the more you should shine forth in humility. As Paul
when he says, Christ loved him, and gave himself for him; when he was most
full of comforts, he was most filled with humility, and said, I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me.

Secondly, You must manage your assurance with a high valuation of the comforts
of God in you. A man that has received a benefit, if he do not value it, it is
a provocation to the man that gave it, either to repent of his gift, or take it
away. David when he had assurance, mark how he values it: Psalm. 63.3. Thy
loving kindness is better then life. He valued the comforts of his God, and the
shinings of Gods countenance better then life. And Psalm. 4.6. Lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon me, and that shall more glad me, then when my
corn and wine and oil increases. David would more value the comforts of Gods
Spirit, then any other comfort in the world. Assured Christians, that use
assurance rightly, they must put a high valuation and worth upon it. And the
reason is, Because you will not then easily part with your assurance for a base
and beggarly lust, and for a fruitless sin, if once you know the value and
worth of it.

Thirdly, Your assurance must make you to live with a weaned heart from the
comforts of this world, 2 Cor. 4. the last verse, compared with Chapt. 5.1. The
Apostle tells you, We do not look after the things that are seen, that are
temporal. What made the Apostle not to look after worldly things; he gives the
reason, For when this house of ours is dissolved, we have a dwelling with God,
eternal in the heavens. As if he should say, That Is the reason we do not look
after the world as worldly men do; for we know that when we leave this world,
we have a heaven to go to. The assurance of the blessedness of their future
being, did make them undervalue the world, as a thing not worthy the glance of
the eye; Persons that have assurance, can say as Philip said to Christ, John
14.8. Show us says Philip, the Father, and it suffices us. Thus says a
gracious heart, O sweet Jesus, show us but thy favor; assure but my soul, that
thy Father is a reconciled Father to me in thy self, that he is my Father as
well as thy Father; Show me but the Father, and it suffices me; though I have
little or nothing in the world, this shall suffice me. Gracious hearts, that
live in the enjoyment of assurance, they ought to live with a weaned heart from
the comforts of this world. Men that have tasted honey or some other sweet
morsel, they do distaste all other things, though of themselves very pleasant:
So men that have tasted of this honey of Gods love, and the sweetness of this
grace of assurance; it will make them distaste and disrelish all the things of
this world, though of themselves pleasant and good. If a man look on the Sun it
dazles hi^ eyes, that he cannot discern colors about him; so he that beholds
the light of Gods countenance, will not look upon the things here below. I may
allude to that place, Luke 5.39. No man says Christ, having drunk old wine,
straight way desires new; for he says, The old is better. His meaning is
this, No man that has had a taste of Jesus Christ, and has had communion and
fellowship with Jesus Christ, and lain under the Ministry of Jesus Christ; no
man that has drunk of this old wine, will say, new is better; to have other
comforts, and other pleasures, is better; no man will say this, says Christ.
And so he compares his Ministry, and his Doctrine, and the comfort Gods people
have thereby, to old wine: Beloved, so I say, men that have drunk draughts of
this wine of consolation, and men that are setledly assured, and have had a
taste that the Lord is gracious, no man will now say, that the world is better,
and the comforts below better. No, the assuance of Gods love should wean a man's
heart from all the comforts of the world. As old Jacob said, when he saw his
son Joseph in his old age, after he had made many a prayer, and shed many a
tear; O Joseph my son is yet alive, I have enough. As was the carriage of
Jacob to Joseph, the same should be the carriage of a Christian toward Christ.
If he can say, My Joseph, my Jesus is alive in my heart; I having him, have
enough; this comfort should ravish his spirit. Paul when he was rapt up into
the third heaven, was so transported that he knew not whether he was in the
body or no; so are the people of God ravished with heavenly consolations, Cui
incipit dulcescere Christus, ei necesse est ^marescere mundum.
that they mind not these earthly things. It is a speech that Bernard, has,
That to whosoever Jesus Christ once becomes sweet, that he can taste the
sweetness of his love, and the sweetness of his mercy, the very sweetness in
Christ's love will imbitter the world unto him.

Fourthly, you are to manage and use your assurance with tenderness of
conscience against sin. Assured Christians should be tender-conscienced
Christians. Psalm. 85.8. God will speak peace to his people; but mark the duty:
they must not turn again unto folly. They must not ^un again into sin, they
must be tender of sin, and then God will speak peace to his people. Sin (as I
once told you) will be like wind in the bowels of the earth. Philosophers say,
E^rthquakes and ruptures are occasioned by wind got into the bowels and
cavernes of the earth, which having no place for vent, it overturnes Mountains
and Buildings: Beloved, sin in the heart will do the like; it will make the
heart quake and tremble if it be there; it will prove the grave of thy
comforts, and the resurrection of thy fears. Therefore Christians that are
assured, they must take he^d of sin; if they would keep their comforts, they
must keep their hearts that sin get not into their consciences. Beloved, they
that are assured Christians, they know how difficultly they did attain this
assurance, and they know how sweetly they enjoy this assurance, and that will
make them very tender, that they do not lose a thing so hardly gotten and
sweetly enjoyed for a trivial lust; that thy lose not their former evidences,
and revive former ter^ors.

Fifthly, Assurance mus^ be managed with patience in bearing any outward
affliction that you may meet with in the world. Assured Christians must be
patient Christians, Heb. 10.34. They suffered joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, knowing that they had in heaven a b^tter and more enduring substance;
and that made the Saints of God tush and scorn at all the losses they met with
in the world. Suppose a man be at Sea, and have precious Jewels and Pearls
aboard with him; if the man can be but sure he shall save his own life, and
save his Jewels, though he lose the Casket, though he lose the box, that will
not much trouble him: Thou that art sure of heaven, thou can never lose that
Pearl, thy soul; thou may lose the shell, thy life; thou may lose the
Casket, thou shall never lose the Jewel; and shall that trouble thee? If thou
art an assured Christian, be sure whatever storm of Temptation blow upon thee,
thou shall only lose the box, never lose the Pearl. This therefore should
make assured Christians to be patient Christians, what ev^r they shall undergo
here in the world. I have read a story in Fox his Acts and Monuments, of a
woman, who when she came to be tried for her Religion before Bonner, that
bloody Bishop; he threatened her, he would take away her husband from her;
says she, Christ is my husband; I will take away thy child: Christ, says
she, is better to me then ten sons; I will strip thee, says he, of all thy
outward comforts: yea but Christ is mine, and you cannot strip me of him, says
she. The thoughts of this bore up the woman's heart, spoil her of all, and take
away all, yet Christ was hers, and they could not take him away. O Beloved,
when thy soul lives in the assurance of Gods love, and of thy calling to grace
and glory; this shall make you wonde^ful patient to endure what ever you should
meet with here below. It was the speech of that famous servant of God, holy
Bradford, when a company of his fellow prisoners were that morning to go to be
burnt, says Bradford, O my fellow-suff^rers, be cheerful, for though we are
all of us to have a bitter breakfast, yet truly we shall have a cheerful
dinner. Here you see how assured Christians, their comforts in God did so
transport their hearts, that it made them overlook, and with patience bear all
afflictions they were to meet with. You have a remarkable phrase, Isa. 33.2^.
The Inhabitants of Sion shall not say, I am sick, the people that dwell therein,
shall be forgiven their iniquity. A strange passage; he does not say, they were
not sick, but the Text says, they should not say so. And what is the reason?
why should the people forget their sorrows, and forget their pains? this should
make them, the Lord had forgiven them their iniquities. The sense of pardon
took away the sense of pain. And Beloved, Christians should walk thus to show
that trouble should not daunt them, and afflictions never startle them; you
that are assured Christians, you should be patient Christians under all
sufferings. And take this for a rule, that God takes impatience more unkindly
at assured Christians hands, then at the hands of any men in the world besides:
Because if God give thee assurance, he has given thee a seal in thy own breast,
that all shall work for thy good; and will thou be impatient? He has given
thee a seal in thy own breast, that heaven shall make amends for all; and will thou be angry? God will take this more unkindly at them then any.

Sixthly, Assurance should be managed with indeared love to Jesus Christ.
Assured Christians should be Christ-loving Christians: When Christ told Mary
Magdalen, Thy sins which are many are forgiven thee. When she had assurance her
sins were pardoned, what says Christ? Much was forgiven her therefore she
loved much: because she was sensible much was forgiven her, she would show
forth much love to Jesus Christ. And the reason is, because it was Christ's love
brought those Christians into a state of salvation, and his love likewise that
gave them assurance of their own call, and this should indear their hearts to
Jesus Christ.

Seventhly, Assurance should be managed with abundance of compassion toward
those Christians that are tempted and troubled by Satan. Assured Christians
should be compassionate Christians. If God have given you assurance of his
love, you should carry compassionate breasts toward your Brethren, who remain
behind in great distress and perplexity, that lie tossed and turmoiled by
Temptations. When a ship is brought safe to the Haven, if they have any bowels,
when they see another ship in the main Ocean struggling for life in the midst of
the waters, they will pity them: You that have got assurance, you are come to a
safe harbor; but your tempted brethren, they are tossed upon the waves and
tempests of temptation, you should now have compassionate hearts toward
tempted Christians. 2 Cor. 1.4. The Apostle tells us, The Lord has comforted
us in all our tribulation, that we might comfort others with the same comforts,
wherewith we our selves are comforted of God, It was the work and task of the
Apostle, and them with him, that they having comforts and assurance from God,
they would labor to comfort others, and bear up others, and establish others,
that they might rejoice, and receive the same comforts with themselves. Hence
you read, 1 Pet. 3.8, 9. Be pitiful, be compassionate to your Brethren, love
as Brethren. Now upon what ground does the Apostle press this compassion? Read
verse 9. Knowing, says he, that as you are hereunto called, that you should
inherit a blessing. As if he should say, upon this ground I woo you to be
compassionate, because you are called to inherit a blessing; that is, you know
and are assured that you are a blessed people, and you shall be a saved people,
therefore have compassion on your Brethren, who are tempted and troubled, that
you might bring them to the same pitch of comfort you are brought to.

Eighthly, Assurance should be managed with cheerfulness of heart: Assured
Christians should be cheerful Christians. We read Nehem. 2.1, 2. That Nehemiah
all the while he was before the face of the King, and in the presence of the
King, the Text says, Nehemiah for a long time was no^ sad: the Kings presence
did so cheer up Nehemiahs heart. Now to this I would allude: If the presence
and face of King Artaxerxes did make Nehemiah, that for a long time he was not
sad before him; Oh how much more should the face of God, and the presence of
God in a man's soul, and the favor of God toward a man, how much more should
this keep thee from being sad in Gods presence, from a lumpish and melancholy
and sad spirit? Thou art in the presence of a King, in ^he favor of God, and
this should keep thee from being sad and heavy. None in the world have greater
grounds of joy then those that live in a constant assurance of the love of God
toward them. It is for condemned men, that are condemned to the gallows, to
hang down their heads and wring their hands; but let the pardoned people of the
Lord rejoice. The man that is condemned, he hangs down his head; but the man
that comes pardoned from the bar, with what a cheerful countenance will that
man come? You are all a people pardoned by your God, you may well be a
rejoicing people: I remember a passage I have read in D. Halls Works, in his
Meditations upon the Creatures, speaking of a little Bird called
Robbin-red-brest, that when he was in his study, came chirping at the window,
and leaping upon his book, and singing a great while together; upon this fight
he breaks out into this contemplation. O this little silly Bird, that does not
know where to pick up the next crum, that does not know where ^o pitch and rest
it self for the next night, yet behold, how cheerfully does this Bird sing,
when man, and a Christian man that knows God to be his Father, that has not
only crumbs of outward blessings, but whole morsels of inward comfort, and can
drink draughts of inward consolation: Christians, that have a God, and a
heaven, that have Christ and glory, yet they cannot be merry, as a poor Bird
can be: and truly it is a good Meditation. Many times people that are called by
Jesus Christ, and have ground and assurance of their everlasting happiness by
him, yet they cannot be so merry as a poor Bird will be: Birds in the morning
will be chirping and singi^g (...) ^^t^^ng l^y ^t the Lea^^, when ^ Christian
i^^^d* and ^^^ing, an^ ^^^a^yin^ (...) his (...) in di^^ont^nts and (...)
b^comes not a Chr^^^ian. Ass^red Christians they sho^^^ be cheerful Christ^^^s.

Ninthly, ^^sured Ch^^stians they should b^ ^hankfull Christians. F^r one to
give a man a pro^^^e* it is ^orth thanks, but when a man shall not ^nly give,
but ^ssure that promise, that he will m^ke i^ good; that is ^ore t^anks-worthy.
Beloved, if God had only promis^d you a heaven, and had given no assurance, it
was thanks-worthy; but when God shall give thee his Broad Seal, that shall seal
thee up to the day of Redemption, and when God shall give the^ an assurance in
thy own breast thou shall go to heaven, and go to God, this should much more
make thee in thy spirit bless thy God. It is a speech of the Prophet David, My
soul, bless thou the Lord for his mavelous loving kindness. Thou have
kindness, and thou have mavelous loving kindness; My soul bless God for
this. David would not keep back Gods praises, seeing God would not keep back
David's comforts. In heaven we shall break forth into admiration, because we
have good things in possession; here we should break forth into thanksgiving,
because we have them in expectation. And thus I have done with the first part
of my direction to you that are assured Christians, you should labor first
rightly to use your assurance

Secondly, All you that are assured Christians, you are to be directed carfully
to keep and preserve your assurance. There is no less skill, says the Poet, to
be put forth in keeping virtue, then in getting of it. It is said of Hannibal,
Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri.
he was a a skilful Soldier to get Victories, but he had no skill to keep
them, when gotten: It may be said so of us, Christians can get assurance, but
they have not the skill to keep it when they have got it. This therefore
therefore I am now to press, that you would be car^full to preserve your
assurance. And here in speaking of this, I shall lay down two particulars; that
in case you would keep your assurance, there are some things you must do; and
some things you must avoid and take heed of.

First, There are some things you must do, and those I shall comprize under two
or three heads.

First, In case you would keep assurance, you are to keep close in communion
with your God, in the exercise of the duty of godliness. The more you keep
grace, the more you will keep your comforts. And here that I may branch out
this direction, I shall comprize these duties under four heads, and show you
from Scripture, that keeping close to God in the use of four duties, will be a
ready way to keep your assurance in you.

As first, keep close to God in the duty of prayer, John 16.24. Ask, says
Christ, and your joy shall be full. Ask, that your joy may be full; implying
that if you keep close to God in the duty of prayer, after assurance; your
spirits shall be complete and full.

Secondly, keep close to God, in the duty of reading the Word often. By often
reading the Word you will often meet with Promises and Supports for your
comfort. That Is the reason men lessen in comforts, because men do not
frequently read the Word; you cannot read a Chapter, but you will find there a
prop for faith, and a prop for assurance. Keeping constant to the Word, and
that is the way to keep your assurance, 1 John 5.13. These things have I written
to you that believe, that you might know that you have eternal life. These
things have I writ, not only that you have life, but that you might know it. By
reading the writings of John, John tells them they might the better know they
should live for ever, and everlastingly be saved. Keep close to God in reading
his written Word, and this will be of great use. Because there are promises
scattered throughout the veins of Scripture. Not a Scripture almost you can
read, but there is a promise or support for your faith one way or other,

Thirdly, Keep close to God in a constant and conscientious hearing of his
Word, and ^his is a great means to get assurance, Luke 1.76. Thou shall be
called the Prophet of the Highest, for thou shall go before the face of the
Lord, to prepare hi^ way; that is, thou shall go to prepare ^he peoples hearts
that they may receive Jesus Christ that follow^ ^^^er. This is ^poken of John
Baptist. And what was the effect of hearing John preach? To give knowledge of
salvation to his people, for the remission of their sins; not only to give them
salvation, but to give them knowledge and assurance of this salvation. O live
under the Ministry, and under John Baptists Ministry, that preaches
repentance and humiliation, and that is the Ministry will give most assurance
of your salvation.

Fourthly, Keep in communion with God, in a daily trying and examining your own
hearts, Gal. 6.4. If any man think himself to be somewhat, when he is nothing,
he deceives himself; but let every man prove his own works, and then he shall
have rejoicing in himself. That is, let a man examine himself, and prove his
heart, and this will be a means to work joy in the heart, that they shall have
comfort and joy in themselves in the assurance of their happiness. Beloved,
what is the reason you do not keep assurance? the reason is, you keep not close
to God in a way of communion in these duties of holiness, you keep not to God
in a way of prayer, and reading, and examining your hearts, and proving your
comforts, and your own estate, and that is the reason you are no more full, and
no more firm.

Secondly, if you would keep your comforts, keep your conscience clear from
harboring the guilt of sin, Job 11.14, 15. If iniquity be in thy hands, put
it far away; if sin be in thy conversation, away with it. Let not sin be in
thy heart, nor in thy house, then shall thou lift up thy face to God without
spot, thou shall be steadfast before him, and not fear. This will balance thy
spirit, and keep thy heart from fear, and keep thee in a steadfast assurance,
if thou keep thy conscience clear.

Thirdly, if thou would keep assurance, gather and heap together all the
experiences thou have had of God in thy heart in times past. I called to
^emembrance the days of old, Psalm. 77.7. Call to remembrance all the
experiences thou have had of God, and had of Christ, and of thy own grace, and
the fruits of Gods Spirit ^n ^hy own soul, and this will wonderfully keep up
thy assurance Romans 5.4. The Apostle tells us, Experience works hope. The more
experimental you are, and the more you gather experience together, the more you
strengthen hope, and the m^r^ hope is strengthened, the more assurance is
gained. The^e are the particulars you must practice, in case you would preserve
in your breasts this assurance of your effectual calling.

Secondly, there are some things you are to avoid and take heed of, in case you
would perpetuate assurance in your hearts, and those I shall comprize under six
heads.

First, Take heed you do not wallow in, and give your selves to sensual joy and
pleasure. There is nothing in the world will more eat out spiritual joy and
that effectual assurance in your hearts, then giving your selyes too much to
carnal joy and sensual pleasure, which takes away the hearts. The more your joy
runs in that channel after sensual pleasure, the less it runs toward God, and
the comforts that are above; godly sorrow is the seed-plot of spiritual joy.

Secondly, The evil of earthly-mindedness, take heed of that, if ever you would
keep your comforts. There is nothing in the world will more blast your
comforts, then an earthly mind to be still poring upon the things of the
world. What the Philosophers say of the Eclipse of the Sun, that it is
occasioned by the intervening of the Moon between the Sun and our sight is is
true in this case. The Moon is an Emblem of the world. If the world get
between Christ the Sun of righteousness and our fight, it will darken our
sight of Jesus Christ, and bring Eclipses upon our comforts and graces. Those
men that dig deep nito the bowels of the earth, they are oftentimes choked and
stifled by damps that come from the earth: So it is with Christians, those that
will be ever poring and digging about the things of this world, it is a
thousand to one if from worldly things a damp does not arise to smother their
comforts, and quench their graces; the world pierces with sorrow, therefore
must needs damp your joys. A candle, though it may shine to the view of all,
yet put it but under ground, and (though there be not a puff of wind) the very
damps will stifle the light of the flame. Beloved, though you shine like
candles in your comforts, yet bring them but under the earth, and a clod of
earth will stifle your candle, will damp your comforts. There is nothing lays a
Christian under more loss in his assurance then worldly-mindedness.

Thirdly, avoid remisseness in Religious duties. If you slack in duties, you
will slack in comforts; less duties and less comforts go together. If a man
does let loose the tacklings of his ship, and let slack the sails, that ship
cannot go with so swift a motion; specially if wind and tide be against it,
the ship must needs go backward: Believers that are assured Christians, they
are like a ship under sail; you go against wind and tide, against nature, and
against corruption, against temptation and the devil and all: now if you let
slack your sails, and grow remiss in duties, you will quickly slack in your
comforts; whatever weakens your graces, and straitens your duties, will impair
your assurances, and eclipse your comforts; and therefore take heed of
remisseness in a way of duties; oh do not less work, when you have most
encouragement.

Fourthly, Take heed of spiritual pride. If once you begin to admire your
selves, then you lose your selves. If once you are proud of your graces, it is
a provocation to make God take away your comforts, and to make you lose your
graces; I mean, lose them, not in the very being, but in the comfort and
exercise of them; pride it is the great murderer of a Christians comforts.

Fifthly, Take heed of grieving the spirit of God; Grieve not the holy spirit,
says the Apostle, whereby you are seal^d to the day of Redemption. The Spirit
of God is a sealing Spirit; O grieve not this Spirit. The Spirit deals with us,
as we deal with it; if we grieve the spirit of God, God will grieve you, and
your spirits shall be grieved, that you shall not keep the joys of the Lord in
your br^st in the assurance of his love and favor to you. You read Isa. 63.10.
They grieved his Spirit, so he was turned to be their enemy, and fought against
them. Beloved, though God may be your friend, yet he will frown upon you as an
enemy, and seem to fight against you too, in case you grieve his Spirit; if
thou grieve Gods Spirit, God will grieve thine, and when thy spirit is grieved,
thou must needs lose thy comforts.

Sixthly, Take heed of the sin of hypocrisy, false grace will breed a false
joy. False hearts must needs have false comforts. You will never keep true
comforts, if you have an unsound heart, The upright in heart they shall shout
upon their beds for joy; they shall do it, but hypocrites shall not. Take heed
therefore of this evil, and you are in a way to preserve your assurance.

SERMON. XI.
2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE Doctrine I am yet upon is this, That Christians ought to put forth a great
deal of diligence to make this sure to their souls, that they are effectually
called by Jesus Christ. In the managing of which I came to an use of direction,
to those who are assured of their effectual calling, and to them I gave three
directions. First, That you would rightly manage your assurance. Secondly,
Carefully preserve your assurance. Thirdly, Daily improve your assurance; the
last of which I have yet to handle. And touching this third direction, daily to
improve your assurance, I shall give you but three heads; which if you make use
of, you may every day improve your assurance, and bring it from a little to a
great measure, As

First, In case you would do this, improve your graces. The more you increase
in grace, the more you will grow in comfort. Grace and comfort, they are two
Twins, that the more one grows, the better the other thrives. Hence you read,
that in the salutation of every Epistle, the Apostle puts both together, Grace,
mercy, and peace be multiplied to you in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.3. There the
Apostle makes the multiplying of grace to be the multiplying of peace. The more
you multiply and grow in grace, the more you will increase peace, inward peace
of conscience: they are both joined together. You have a passage, 2 Pet. 1.5,
11. compared together, Add to your faith virtue, etc. The Apostle there urges
our diligence to add grace to grace; that is, to live in the improvement of
grace. And what will follow? ver. 11. If you do these things, you shall never
fall; for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. You shall not only go to
heaven, but you shall have an abundant entrance ministered before you come
there; you shall have abundance of assurance and inward peace before you come
there. And here to give you a more particular direction, there are these four
graces chiefly you are to improve.

First; Improve the grace of humility, Isa. 57.15. The Lord does promise there
to revive the spirit of the humble. It is a particular promise to that grace,
that God will revive you, and give you a new life if you have it. And reviving
there, is not meant of the first life of grace, but of a life of comfort. They
had grace before, but God would give them a life of comfort, he will restore
your consolation to you in case you are an humble people. Hence it is, Iam.
4.6. The Lord gives grace to the humble. Yea, he gives more grace. The Lord
gives more grace to the humble person then to any man in the world. Now the
more grace you have, the more comfort you must needs have. Humility is a
foundation of more grace, therefore needs must be a foundation of more comfort.

That building whose foundation is laid lowest, is of all the most beautiful
and comely Fabric above ground: So those Christians that lay a foundation low
in humility, they are likely to rear up a most beautiful Building in way of
comfort.

Secondly, Improve the grace of faith in believing, and that is the way to
increase comfort. 1 Peter. 1.8. Whom though you have not seen, yet believing,
you rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Though they did never see
Christ, yet believing in Christ, and improving their faith, they had not only
an ordinary measure of comfort, but they had more comfort in their hearts, then
they could utter with their Tongue; They rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory, So Romans 15.13. The God of peace fill you with all joy and peace in
Believing, that you may abound in hope through the Holy Ghost. Believing makes
you full of all joy, and makes you abound in it. The more you are in Believing,
the more you will be in assurance.

Thirdly, Improve the grace of love to Jesus Christ. John 14.23. If any man
love me, my Father shall love him, and we will come in unto him, and make our
abode with him. If you improve in your love to Jesus Christ, God the Father and
God the Son will make their dwelling in your hearts. Now he must needs be a
comfortable Christian, that has so good a guest as God the Father and Jesus
Christ to come in, and make their abode with him. As you know, to your
bosome-friend whom you love, and you know loves you, you will communicate all
your secrets: Thus will God the Father, if he knows you are his
bosome-friends, and sees you love him, he will communicate all his comforts to
you; you shall never want comforts, if you increase in love to Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, Improve the grace of godly sorrow; you will never find sweeter
music in comfort, then when you are laid down in tears. As the sound of the
Trumpet is never more pleasant then when they are upon the water; so when God
sees you flow with the water of repentance and godly sorrow, then you are
likely to hear the most melodious harmony in the apprehension of Gods love;
Psalm. 126. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. You shall not only have
a dram, but a handful of joy; as Reapers they cut down handfuls of corn at
once. And as you know in seed, though you sow but one grain of corn, there may
a dozen ears come from that one seed: so if you sow but a little godly
sorrow, a grain of godly sorrow may be a root to a great deal of spiritual joy.

Secondly. If you would improve your assurance, preserve a clear conscience,
both toward God and man. A good conscience is a continual Feast, Prove. 15.15.
Assurance, I may say of it as the Father speaks of the Holy Ghost, and the
comforts thereof, The Spirit of God is a very nice thing, every thing will give
the comforts of Gods Spirit a check and distaste; Res d^^ica^a est Spiritus Dei.
now if you harbor sin upon conscience, you will never thrive in comfort;
every thing will give comfortable motions a check. And as Philosophers say when
the Air is foggy, it arises from vapors that are exhaled from the earth,
which makes the Air so cloudy as it is; So it is filth drawn from our earthly
hearts, that makes such foggy mists to arise between our comforts and us, and
between God and us. You must keep conscience clear, else you will never keep
heaven clear. Heaven will be clouded, if the heart be filthy. Job. 11.14, 15.
If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away; If sin be upon the conscience,
harbor it not; for then thou shall lift up thy face before God, thou shall be
steadfast, and not fear. You shall not only not fear but you shall have a
degree of assurance. You shall be steadfast, if you put sin far away from you. A
sullied and a polluted conscience shall never be in a Christian strong in
assurance. You will not grow in assurance, if your conscience harbor guilt.

Thirdly, If you would improve your assurance, keep close in communion with
God. Nothing that feeds comforts so much as a Christians holy walking. Esa.
32.17. The work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect thereof
quietness and assurance for ever. If you walk in works of righteousness, and
in a way of keeping lose communion with God; this shall be peace, and this
shall be quietness, and great assurance. Mark how the Holy Ghost makes a
g^adation; not only peace and quietness, but assurance also: you shall have
the highest degree of peace, and the highest step of comfort, if you walk
diligently in a way of holiness with your God. And thus much be spoken to the
first sort of men, those that live in the enjoyment of the assurance of their
effectual calling.

I have now a word to those men that live in the want of this assurance, who
happily have in times past had some glimmering, and some dim sight of
comfort, touching their everlasting estate, and yet are now much clouded and
eclipsed in their comforts, or have lost the comforts they once h^d, what they
should do to recover it. And to these I shall by way of direction speak only
four things.

First, That you would set upon searching work. Secondly, Upon humbling work.
Thirdly, Upon praying work. And fourthly, that you would set upon meditating
work: These four helps will through Gods blessing be very conducible to restore
your wonted comforts to you.

First, My counsel shall be to you, that you would set upon searching and
examining work. When you have lost any thing, the first thing you do is to look
after it, where you have lost it, that you may find it again. If you have lost
this precious Jewel of assurance, be thus wise for your selves; O set upon
seeking and searching work. The Scripture gives you this hint, Gal. 6.4. Let
every man search his own work, and then he shall have rejoicing in himself.
This is the way to bring in spiritual joy and spiritual comfort, to be often
dealing with your own hearts. David when he lay under some foul distemper, mark
how he deals with his own soul: Why art thou troubled, O my soul, and why art
thou disquieted within me? he puts his heart upon the trial. And here in your
searching work, I would commend five things to your examination.

First, Search how you got your assurance.

Secondly, Search how you grounded your assurance.

Thirdly, Search how you managed your assurance.

Fourthly, Search what should provoke God to take away your assurance.

Fifthly, and lastly, Search what you would give to God, so you might regain
your former and wonted assurance. Put these questions to your hearts; As

First, Put upon the search, how you go^ your assurance. It may be it was such
an assurance as you have had ever since you were born from your mothers womb:
that you got without care, and without pain; and if so, this is presumption,
not assurance: and if you have lost this, it is well. It is better to be in a
state of discouragement, then in a state of presumption.

Secondly, Examine how you grounded your assurance. It may be you bottomed it
but upon self, not upon Christ. It may be, you bottom^d it but upon the
fantastical delusions of your own hearts, and not upon the grounded evidence of
Gods Word; if so, that your assurance have had an ill bottom, it is no wonder
if God turn it upside-down. If it be not rightly grounded, it will never long
be continu^d. Examine therefore upon what grounds you have bottomed your
assurance, and if you find the foundation of your comforts to be ill laid, you
must pluck up all again.

Thirdly, Search how you managed your assurance. It may be you managed your
assurance with pride, not humility; it may be with unwatchfulness, and
carelessness of spirit, and did not take notice of those temptations and
suggestions that might impair your comforts; and if so, it is no wonder if the
devil sows tares among your wheat; it is no wonder if the devil have stolen
away your comforts, if you have laid down your watch.

Fourthly, Examine what special cause there was in your hearts, that might
provoke God to cloud you in your comforts, and to take away your assurance from
you. And here that you might a little be directed in this search, you may
reduce the caus^ of your eclipse, and of the removal of your assurance, unto
this twofold head. Either it has been the commission of some great
transgression, or else the omission of some weighty duty, that may provoke God
to darken your comforts. As,

First, the commission of some great transgression. Great sins they lay a
foundation for great discomforts in tender consciences. Great sins they lay the
conscience waste; to make it that was as a well-trimmed and impaled garden, to
be as a ruinous wilderness. Great relapses they bring ordinarily dark eclipses
upon the soul. And here that I might put you on this search, I would advise you
to seach what particular sin it was, and how you might know the transgression
that might provoke God, to take away your comforts from you. As,

First, if so be God did take away your comforts immediately after the
committing of any gross sin, then you may be sure that sin was the occasion.
Or,

Secondly, If the commission of one sin, do bring upon you more then an
ordinary measure of hardness of heart, then you may be sure that was the sin,
Or,

Thirdly, If any sin makes you remiss in spiritual duties, that was the sin
provoked God to take away your comforts from you. And by such a search as this,
you might find out, and give a shrewd guess at the particular provocation.

And here the particular transgressions I would have you search about, they are
ordinarily these four, that ingages God to take away comforts from a people. As,

First, the sin of superciliousness, and uncompassionateness of spirit toward
doubting Christians. If a soul carries a proud and supercilious eye over poor
Christians, and carries no compassion toward doubting souls. God for that sin
of wanting bowels of compassion, may bring him to the same estate, which he
could not compassionate in other men.

Secondly, the sin of grieving the Spirit; if you grieve Gods Spirit, God will
grieve yours, Esa. 63.10. Or,

Thirdly, The sin of spiritual pride; ordinarily this may be the sin. Or,

Fourthly, The sin of worldly-mindednesse, or eager pursuit after the things of
this world. As digging in the earth does endanger a man to be stifled with
damps; so digging and poring in the world brings but a damp upon a Christians
comforts, and many times stifles their assurance. As the Sun is eclipsed by the
interposition of the Moon between it and our sight, so if the world once get
between the Sun of righteousness and you, it will eclipse the Sun that you
shall not see the glory of Jesus Christ, and shall not perceive nor gain that
interest in Jesus Christ you had in former time.

Secondly, Another cause you are to search; If it be not the commission of some
great transgression, yet it may be the omission of necessary and weighty duty,
and the Lord may bring you upon the stage of discomfort for omission as well as
commission. If a man do let but a wound go undressed, he may as well die, as if
you knock him with a Beetle upon the head: Beloved, If you let your wounds be
undressed, and let your discomforts be unlooked after, and let all run at sixes
and sevens; if you interrupt in your duties, it is just with God to interrupt
you in your comforts. If you keep not your watch, it is no wonder if you are
surprised. There are many Christians that grow careless in keeping communion
with God, that love seldom reading, and seldom praying, and seldom examining
their own hearts; (alas) men casting away their duties, it makes God in
judgment make stoppage in a way of comfort.

Fifthly, In your searching work examine your selves what you would do in case
God should restore to you your former evidences; could you bring your hearts to
this temper, that you would think no pain; too much to take, no cost too much
to give, nothing should be irksom to you that God would have you perform, in
case he would give you your wonted comforts? If you find this temper of spirit
in you, this is a very ready way to bring on your comforts, and restore the
joys of your salvation to you.

Secondly, Set upon humbling work: the only way to gain what you have lost, is
to mourn over your losses. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. See how Ephraim comes to have
his comforts restored, when he wept over his own discomforts: I have heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself, says God, and I said, Is Ephraim my dear son, I
saw him smitting upon his thigh, humbling his soul for his sins; and since I
saw him, I do earnestly remember him, and I will show mercy to him. Here you
see lamenting Ephraim; God in the very time of his bemoaning himself, restored
his comforts to him: we hear many lament for their outward losses, but who
laments for the loss of inward comforts? And David after he had lost his
comforts by that great sin of adultery, makes seven penitential Psalms,
Psalms of lamentation or repentance; and he calls one of them, A Psalm to call
to remembrance. And as an Author well notes, when David came to renew his
comforts, he makes a Psalm to call to remembrance those sins that might provoke
God to take away his comforts from him: So Beloved, let it be your work to make
such Psalms in your Closets, and make it your practice to call to remembrance
those evils that provoke God to eclipse your comforts to you, and let that
humble you. If you cannot find out the Particular sin, labor to humble your
souls for every sin, and then to be sure you cannot miss that.

Thirdly, Would you restore your wonted comforts? then set upon praying work.
This course you sinde David took; Psalm. 51.8. Make me, O Lord, to hear the
voice of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken might
rejoice. Create in me a new heart, and establish me with thy free Spirit, verse
12. Here you read of David's praying work, how he poured forth his soul in
prayer, that God would restore to him the joys of his salvation. And here in
your praying work I would only cast in three directions.

First, pray for a distinct sight of those evils that provoked God to take your
comforts from you.

Secondly, After you have got a sight, bend the strength of your prayers most
against those evils that did so provoke God to cloud your comforts. Pray
against them, as against the deadliest enemy you have in the world.

Thirdly, Pray for attaining those graces that may be inlets to spiritual
comfort, as the graces before named: the grace of godly sorrow, the grace of
humiliation, the grace of faith, and of love to Jesus Christ. Thus if you set
upon searching, upon humbling, and upon praying work, you are in a likely way
to have your comforts restored.

Fourthly, Set upon the work of Meditation; and in this work, I shall commend
four meditations you are to take into your thoughts, which may be very helpful
and useful to you in restoring your comforts. As,

First, Let your meditations run upon this, that sometimes you are not so
competent Judges of your own spiritual estate, as others may be; As,

First In a time of desertion, when God has left you and frowns upon you.

Secondly, In times of temptation, when the devils temptations are violent
against you.

Thirdly, In times of Relapse, when you are fallen into some great sin; at this
time you are not so competent Judges of your own estate, but standers by may
see more of your own good, and your own sincerity, then your selves may do; as
the Proverb is: Many tim^s Lookers on see more then he that plays the game; it
is true in this. A Looker on may see sincerity sparkle in thy practice, and thy
graces shine in thy conversatio^, when thou can not do it thy self. A child
when it blubbers and cries, can see nothing of his book: So when Christians are
sad, and sullen, and lumpish, they can hardly read any thing of their evidence.
Mr. Throgmorten got his assurance this way, by the Testimony of a company of
godly M^nisters that they could lay their souls in his souls stead. Let this
therefore run in your Meditations, that many times standers by and Christians
that behold your walkings, and see your Actions, they may see more ground of
comfort in you then your selves can do.

Secondly, Meditate and think upon the comforts God gave you in wonted time,
and call them to mind. Do as David did, Psalm. 77. I called to mind the days
of old, and the years of many generations. Call to mind ancient days, did not
God show thee his face? did not God bear thee in the palms of his hands? did
not God give thee many a smile of his countenance, and many a pledge of his
love, even by affliction it self? did not God set many a seal upon thy heart,
that thy comforts were true, thy evidence clear, and thy ends sincere toward
God? Beloved, call to mind the former frame of thy spirit, how thou waft in
wonted times, and this Meditation being backed by Gods Spirit, may be a great
means to restore thy comforts to thee; past goodness should be present
encouragement.

Thirdly, Meditate what way it was that you got your former comforts and
assurance; Ex qu^ gignimur eo them nutrimur.
and the same way God will sanctify to restore you your comforts again. What
Physicians say of the body, We are nourished of those things, of which we are
begotten and generated. So I say of comforts: The very same thing that begot
comforts, the same will restore your comforts again. Now think upon this in
your practice, and consider, What way did I gain my comforts in years past?
did I gain my comforts by godly sorrow, and by lamenting after God, and by
mourning over those abominable failings in my practice? now take the same
course to restore thy evidences. Go and mourn in thy closet over thy uneven
walking before God. Go lament for thy sins, mourn after thy Father, and tell
him thou art grieved at the heart that he is so great a stranger to thy soul.
Did thou gain thy assurance in days past by humbling thy soul often before
God? Set upon humbling work again. Did thou gain thy comforts in days past
by walking closely with thy God? Amend thy paths, and direct thy ways unto thy
Maker for days to come there is the very same way to restore your comforts,
that was at first to gain your comforts.

Fourthly, Let your Meditations work upon those comforting Promises in the
Gospel, that hold forth most comfort to a dejected soul. And truly I am
persuaded, Christians Meditations running more upon their own failings, and
their own jealousies, and upon their own mistakes, then upon Gospel-promises,
has been the great occasion they have layn so long under a spirit of bondage,
and under a dark eclipse in the want of the comforts of Gods Spirit. Therefore
now let your Meditations work upon those Promises that hold forth most comfort
to a dejected and deserted soul. And here I shall name five or six most
comforatble Promises in the Word; As Isa. 57.15 The Lord that dwells in the high
and holy places, he does revive the spirit of the humble, and of the contrite
one. So Isa. 66.2. The Lord dwells in the Heavens, and yet with him also that is
of an humble and contrite spirit, that trembles at his Word; with him will God
dwell. So Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that are ^f a broken heart,
even them that are contrite in spirit. So Luke 4.18. Jesus Christ was anointed,
that is, appointed by God the Father, to preach the Gospel to the poor, to
bind up the broken in heart, and to comfort them that mourn. So Isa. 66.10.
The Lord will restore comfort to thee, and to thy Mourners. And Heb. 12.12. The
Lord will stre^gthen the weak hands and feeble knees. And with that remarkable
and most glorious Gospel-promise I shall end, Isa. 353, 4, 5, 6. Strengthen the
weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. This, says God, to weaken
Christians, whose legs can hardly carry their bodies, and their hands hardly
reach to their mouths. Say unto the weak Christian in grace, comfort, and
confirm and strengthen them: And say unto them that are of a fearful heart, Be
strong; Poor fearful doubting souls, that fear every temptation, and fear
every corruption, and fear they shall lose the recompense of their reward: Say
unto that fearful heart, Be strong and fear not. For your God will come with
vengeance, even God will come with recompense and save you. And then the eyes
of the blind shall be open, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; it
is not meant of the bodily eye, but those that were blind, and could not see
the myste^ies of Christ, and could not read their own comforts; then their eyes
shall be open. And the deaf that, as Isaiah says, refused to be comforted,
that would not hearken to comfort, but would stop their ears against all
comfortable doctrines, and only give way to sorrow, their ears shall be
unstopped. And the lame men shall leap like a Heart; the poor halting Christian,
that halts in his comforts, that is now believing, anon staggering; now
rejoicing, anon despairing; the poor lame man shall leap like a Heart: And the
tongue of the dumb shall sing: the poor man that could not speak one word of
his own graces, and of his own comforts, and touching his own evidence, The
tongue of the dumb shall sing. O Beloved, here is your work, in case you would
be Christians to restore your comforts again; set upon the work of Meditation,
to think upon these precious Promises of the Gospel, that hold forth most
comfort to a drooping and dejected sinner.

SERMON. XII.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, Give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE Doctrine I am yet upon is this, That Christians ought to put forth a great
deal of diligence to make this sure to their souls, that they are effectually
called by Jesus Christ to grace and glory. In the prosecution of which I have
gone over many particulars.

Use.
There remains now only one Use more to dispatch about this subject, and then I
pass to the third point drawn from these words. And the Use shall be of
Consolation; from all that has been said touching the assurance of our
effectual calling, I shall only direct my discourse to lay down six or seven
Consolatory Conclusions to those Christians who are effectually called, yet
happily have not a sensible assurance of their own calling.

First, take this for a truth, that Assurance is necessary, not for the being*
but for the wel-being of a Christian. It is not necessary to his estate, but to
his comfort. It is not necessary as food is to the life, but only as Physic is
to the body. A man cannot live without food; a man may live without Physic.
Assurance is but as a comfortable cordial to the soul; Grace is as food to keep
the soul alive; though you do want assurance, this Cordial to bear you up.

Secondly, that many of Gods dear children, they may lie a very long time in
the want of this assurance, touching their effectual calling. Psalm. 88. It is
said of Heman, 14, 15, 16. verses Lord, why have thou cas^ ^ff my soul? and
why have thou hid thy face from me? Mark his complaint: I am ready to die. And
was this only a fit of desertion, or was it a continued act? yes; Verse. 16.
From my youth up I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted, and thy fierce wrath
goes over me. Heman lay under the state of desertion from his childhood; for
here he tells you his estate, that he was not troubled for a day, or two, or
three, and then his troubles were over; but from his youth up he lay under this
perplexity, that he thought God had cast off his soul, and the terrors of God
lay upon him: And yet this man none questions his goodness. For he was the
man, as Ainsworth thinks, that made this Psalm; and sure God would never honor
a wicked man to be a Penman of the Scripture. The Psalm is called a golden
Psalm; and it is so called, because hereby he would teach afflicted
consciences, that they may from their youth up lie under great horror, and lie
under sad suspense* concerning their everlasting estate, and yet they may have
grace at the root for all this. And Heman does not only express it, as if he
had an ordinary trouble of mind; but he expresses it, that he lay under an
extraordinary weight of Gods wrath, Verse. 7. Thou have laid me in the lowest
pit of darkness, and in the deep, and thy wrath it lies heavy upon me. He did
even lie, and sink, in his own thoughts under the sense af Gods wrath upon him.
This therefore is another comfortable conclusion, That godly men may not only
by fits and starts, but for a long time, for many years together lie under a
state of spiritual desertion. For some men think of Heman, that he was above
threescore years of age, when he wrote this Psalm; yet from his youth up till
that age, he lay under this horror and perplexity.

Thirdly, That many of Gods dear children may be so long plunged under
desertion, and under the want of Assurance, that they may refuse and withstand
comforts, when God offers it to them in the Gospel, and yet may have grace
still. As a man in a fever, or distracted by some violent disease, though you
bring him a Cordial that may abate his disease, the man in a fit will through
the glass against the wall, though it be the only means of his remedy. It is
so with godly men; many times they are so accustomed to sadness in the want of
assurance, that they may refuse comforts when God offers them. Psalm. 77.2. It
is the speech of Asaph, my soul refuses to be comforted; a strange speech:
Though he was offered comfort, yet his soul refused it. Here then, Beloved,
this may be a very great prop to thee, that thou may so long be accustomed to
a course of doubting, that thou may refuse comfort when God tenders it, and
yet be a gracious heart still.

Fourthly, and this is more comfortable yet. That rather then God will let his
people live and die without assurance, he will work assurance in you by a
miracle, or by some unusual or extraordinary way. A famous instance you have
for this, of a Gentlewoman that once lived in this City, (its Mr. Bolton that
relates the story) one Mris Honywood; who was a famous professor of Religion,
and a woman that for many years was much troubled in mind for the want of her
assurance. At length there came a Minister to her, who endeavored to settle
her hopes and comforts in Jesus Christ; and he urging promises to her, she took
it with a kind of indignation and anger, that he should offer to present any
promise to her, to whom she thought it did not belong; and having ^ Venice
glass in her hand, she holds up the glass and said, Speak no more to me of
salvation, for I shall as surely be damned as this poor Venice glass shall be
broken against the wall, throwing it with all her force to break it. But it
pleased God, by a miraculous providence to preserve the glass whole. The
Minister seeing this, took up the glass, and said, Behold, God must by a
miracle work faith in you, before you will believe. And from that day, the
story says, she was a woman very strong in the assurance of Gods love. Here
you see how God did indulge the infirmity of his poor servant. Rather then thou
shall live and die without assurance, God will bring it about even by a
Miracle, this woman, it may be, had died unassured, if God had not confirmed
her by some unusual way. I have read likewise in the Book of Martyrs, of Mr.
Glove^, that all the while he was in prison, he was under a state of desertion,
and very much clouded in his comforts, and could not have any apprehe^sion of
Gods love to his soul. Yet when he came to Smithfield, and saw the stake, and
the fire in which he was to be burnt, he cried out, I have found him, I have
found him; and professed of himself, he was as full of joy as his heart could
hold. The Lord made the very sight of the stake to be an inlet to present joy.
One would have thought that the sight of the stake should have daunted him;
whereas he then grew most confident.

Fifthly, That though grace in thy heart be unchangeable, yet the sense and
feeling of thy own graces is subject to great variation and change. Grace in it
self is unchangeable. All the Devils in hell cannot pluck the meanest believer
out of Christ's hand. Those whom thou have given me, I will keep, says Christ,
and none shall take them from me. The foundation of God stands sure; though thy
knowledge that thou buildest upon that foundation may not be sure to thee. The
Lord knows who are his, though thou may not. Grace it self is not
changeable, though thy feeling of grace is subject to many alterations and
changes. Though grace it self be an unshaken foundation, yet our feeling of
grace is not so. In our feeling of grace, we are like the air, sometimes
clear, sometimes cloudy; we are like the Sea, sometimes ebbing, sometimes
flowing; ebbing in your comforts, as well as flowing in your graces. Believers
in their feeling of grace, are like the trees of the field, sometimes
flourishing green and growing; another time at the fall of the leaf, like a
withered stump. So are Christians touching their own feeling; their
apprehension of their graces is subject to much change, though their graces be
not so.

Sixthly, That the want of Assurance is not simply prejudicial to the salvation
of a Christian, though it be prejudicial to the consolation of a Christian. It
is no way prejudicial to your salvation, but you may be saved, though you are
not assured. For first, this want of assurance is no prejudice to your free
access to the Throne of grace: you may come freely to present your requests to
God, though you are not assured of acceptance. As it is the saying of an
Author: Though God shows thee not his face, yet he may lend thee his ear,
when thou come to him in prayer; God lends many a Christian an ear in
prayer, though they see not his face, nor the glimpse of his favor. Secondly,
Thy want of Assurance shall not hinder thy success in prayer, but thou may go
away with an ample return, though thou do not go away with fullness of
comfort. Benjamin when he was with Joseph in Egypt, he had a token of love
from Joseph, a golden Cup in his sack, though he knew it not. This is a lively
Emblem of the carriage of our Joseph, Jesus Christ, to his young Benjamins,
who may put a love token in your hearts, and may give you a golden cup, and
give you grace, and you not know that grace is there. And lastly, It does not
hinder your reconciliation, but you may be at peace with God, though you know
not that the agreement is made up; there may be real friendship between God
and a Believer, though there may be some seeming enmity. Thou hold me for
thine enemy, satth Job, yet God did not, though he thought so. Zion said, the
Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me, Isa. 49.14. But God had
not done so, for he tells them a little before, almost in one breath, Though a
Mother may forget her sucking child, yet will I not forget you: So that there
may be some seeming jars when there is no enmity at all between God and you.

Seventhly, That Christians, who have attained the strongest and highest degree
of faith, have yet had many defects and doubtings mingled with their faith.
Lord, I believe, Mark 9. Yet help my unbelief, yet that man attained to a high
pitch of faith, 1 These. 3.10. Night and day we pray exceedingly for you, that
we may see your face, and perfect that which is wanting in your faith. Now you
must not take these Thessalonians, as if they were new Converts, o^ a people
weak in the faith; but herein lies the Emphasis, that though these
Thessalonians were the most eminent Christians of all the world, yet they had a
great defect in their faith. Therefore compare this with 1 These. 1.7, 8. You
were examples to all that believe in Macedonia, and Achaia, for from you
sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in
every place your faith to Godward is spread abroad. The people in every place
spoke of the great measure of faith that was in the godly people of this
Church, and yet though their faith was so eminent, and they Christians so
eminent as they were, yet they had some defects, and they had somewhat lacking
in their faith for all this. See also Psalm. 55.5. and Psalm. 77. So that here is
very great comfort for Believers, that the strongest Christians in the Faith
have had great defects that have attended their graces.

Thus having finished these seven comfortable Conclusions, because I would have
no deluded sinner nuzzled up in presumptuous persuasions of his own
blessedness, when he is a cursed man, and designed for hell; I have two or
three sad conclusions to lay down, for all you that harbor groundless and
presumptuous persuasions of your effectual calling, when you are not. As,

First, You that nourish presumptuous persuasions of your effectual calling,
when you are not, take this conclusion to dread your hearts, That it is likely
you shall never be effectually called by Jesus Christ. There is no man so
unlikely to be truly called by Christ, as that man that thinks he is called,
when he is not. Matthew. 9. I came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to
repentance. Righteous men i.e. that thought they were righteous, and in their
own eye thought they had grace, and were as good as the best, I came not, says
Christ, to call them, but sinners, i.e. sinners that see their sin, and see
their need of a Savior, and are sensible of their lost and undone condition
without Christ, Christ came to save them, and to call them to repentance: Of
all men in the world, you are most unlikely to be called that nourish
ungrounded persuasions of your effectual calling.

Secondly, whilst you live in this world, you are mere strangers to that
inward and spiritual joy which every true Believer feels and finds by Jesus
Christ. You do not intermeddle with those inward solaces, and sweet enjoyments
of heart, which every sincere Believer has in Jesus Christ. A man that has
assurance upon good ground, he is so filled with joy, that it will bear him up
against all the sufferings and sorrows he may meet with here in the world. He
that has assurance, no suffering can daunt him. As Adolphus Clarebachius, when
he was burning at the stake, he was so filled with the assurance of Gods love*
that he says of himself, I think in my heart, there is not a merrier heart in
the world, then mine is. And so another Martyr burning at the stake says, I
taste as much sweetness, and find as much ease now I am in the flames, as if I
lay upon a bed of Roses. The fullness of his joy in the assurance of Gods love,
made him willingly undergo any torment. Mr. Sanders was in prison, till he was
in prison; Bainam said when he was in the fire, I feel no more then if I were
in a bed of down. Whereas, thou that harbourest false persuasions, thy hopes
will shrink when thou come to suffer, like cloth not well woven, on a rainy
day; thy delusions will never bear up thy spirit to so high a pitch as these
are, This is thy misery, thou will never have that sweet peace and rejoicing in
thy heart Believers have, who are assured upon Scripture grounds.

Thirdly, take this for thy dread, that thou will be thrown into hell before
thou art aware. It is the speech of Mr. Bolton. That man that takes up a false
persuasion of his effectual calling, when he is not, he is like unto a man that
is in a pleasant dream, who dreams he is a King, and has a Kingdom, and has
Treasures full of Silver and Gold; yet when he awakes, behold the man has
nothing. He compares him likewise to a man that is asleep upon the Mast of a
Ship; he is in a golden dream, and dreams of Kingdoms, and of thousands which
he has, and happily in a moment the wind arises, the ship is tossed upon the
waves, and the man is tumbled into the Ocean and drowned. It is so with many
men, who nourish golden dreams and hopes that heaven is theirs, and Christ
theirs; when as (alas) they are tumbled and thrown into hell, before they are
aware. And this should be a dreadful meditation to thy heart, that harbourest
presumptuous persuasions of thy effectual calling, when thou art not.

Thus I have done in eleven Sermons with this Doctrine, touching effectual
calling. I pass now to the third and last point, drawn from these word: and
that is,

That Christians ought to put forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure
to their souls, that they are eternally elected by God to life and salvation.
Give diligence to make your calling and election sure.

There are many profitable points to be handled in the dispatch of this
Doctrine, I shall only in this remnant of time prosecute a few. And first I
shall show you what rlection is:

Secondly, whether a man may be sure of his own Election, seeing election is an
act from eternity. How can a man be sure of that which was done in Gods council
before we had a being? Thirdly, by what discoveries may a man infallibly judge
that he is elected.

In the discussion of this Doctrine, I begin with the first, What election is?

Which that you may know, I shall lay down this brief description of it.

Election is an eternal decree or purpose of God, whereby he has freely chosen
out of the mass of mankind, a small eompany of men and women, that shall come
to everlasting life and salvation by Jesus Christ. This is election.

And here in this description there are these things to be taken notice of.
First, I call it an eternal purpose; because, though a man be not justified
from eternity; yet he is elected from eternity. God from eternity had a purpose
that man should be justified, and should be called, and should be saved.
Election is from eternity, though vocation, justification, and glorification be
not so. Hence you read in Scripture, when it speaks of Election, Ephesians. 1.4. He
has elected us in Christ, before the foundation of the world. But it is never
said so of Justification. God had a purpose to make us happy, and a purpose to
call us in time, and a purpose to justify us from ^ternity, though the acting
of this purpose is in due time fulfilled. Secondly, I call it a purpose,
whereby he does freely choose. And this I do in opposition to that Papistical
Tenet, that God does predestinate or elect men to salvation upon the foresight
of good works. A most abominable opinion, and takes off the freeness of this
act of Gods election, 2 Timothy 1.9. Not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace: so I say thirdly, Whereby God does freely choose out
of the mass of mankind a few to obtain life and salvation. In opposition to
those that hold for universal redemption, and universal Grace; As Origin, and
from him many more have been tainted with this error, to hold Election
universal. And so many of the Papists: Now the Scripture tells us, that many
are called, but few are chosen. Election signifies a choice; now a choice, the
very word emports a rejecting of some, and a culling out of others. The word
Election imports, that all shall not be saved. Origin held this, that all men
should be saved; that Election shall extend to every man. Yea, the very Devils
at the day of judgment shall be saved: which is an opinion among Christians not
to be named; for Election belongs but to a few. Fourthly, I say, that it is to
bring them to eternal life and salvation; therefore called ordination to
eternal life, Act. 13.48.

Q. 2.
Secondly, Whether may a Christian in this life be assured of his eternal
Election; forasmuch as Election was done in the decree of God, before ever he
had a being, or the world was? Therefore seeing we are not privy to Gods decree
and council, how can it be said, that we may know and be assured of our Eternal
Election? Indeed the Papists they beat down this Doctrine. And hence it is that
in the Council of Trent there was this Canon made, that if any man should say
he was bound to believe that he was of the number of them that God has
predestined, or elected to life, let him be an accursed man. They did
endeavor to beat down assurance, and held, that all that a man could have,
must be only a conjectural assurance, or some kind of hopes of salvaiton, and
no other. Now that you might not err in this point, see what the Scripture
speaks in this case. That though Election be an act of God from eternity, yet a
believer may firmly and fully know his own election: And this I shall make good
by several places of Scripture. Read Luke 10.20. Rejoice not, says Christ to
his disciples, that you have power to cast out Devils, that they are subject to
you, but rather rejoice in this, that your names are written in the book of
life. That is, rejoice not that you can work miracles; that wicked men can do
that are not elected; but rather rejoice that your names are written in the
book of life; that is, that in Gods decree you are elected to salvation. Now,
how could they rejoice, unless they knew this? So, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. Knowing
brethren, beloved, your election of God. The Apostle takes it for granted, that
believers did know they were elected. So Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. The Lord has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ, according as he has chosen
us in him, before the foundation of the world was, having predestined us to
the adoption of children by Jesus Christ. Many more Scriptures I might urge,
but in the mouth of two or three witnesses, it is enough to confirm every
truth:

But now, though the Scripture be thus clear, yet there are some objections
that seemingly oppose this truth, which I must satisfy. The Papists, as far as
I have read in their writings, I find five objections they draw from Scripture
against this truth, that a man may be assured of his Election: for, say they,
it was an act of Gods, done before we had a being, and how can we be assured of
that? I will therefore, beloved, first produce those Scriptures that they
pretend will overthrow this point, and then take off what seems to make against
it. The first Text they urge, is 1 Pet. 1.17. Pass the time of your sojourning
here in fear. This Scripture (say they) bids us pass our time in fear; and if
so, then we cannot be assured of our Election, but we must fear all the days
of our life, whether we are elected or no.

To this I shall answer briefly. You must know the fear that the holy Ghost
here presses, that men should pass their time in fear, is not meant of a fear
about our election; but it is meant of a fear of sin; that we must not sin
against God, but fear God, and fear to provoke God by our sin. And if you
ask how this appears, I make it appear plainly thus; for verse. 18. it is said,
Knowing beloved, that you are not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver
and Gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, etc. Now this verse proves
clearly, that they knew they were redeemed by Christ's blood, and so by
consequence knew their Election. Therefore the Apostle did not press a fear,
to beat down the knowledge of their election; b^t, pass your time in fear,
i.e. fear to offend God, and fear to sin against him.

Another objection they urge ^s this: The Scripture, say they does often
commend fear to us; and surely fear and assurance cannot stand together. Prove.
28.14. Blessed is the man that fears always. Now, if a man must always
fear, then the m^st a man can have is hope; and so hang between hope and fear
all our days. To which I answer.

That the fearing always, iwhich Solomon annexed blessedness unto* is not
meant of the fear about a man's election, but only a fear to sin against God.
And if you ask me how that appears, read the whole verse, Blessed is the man
that fears always, but he thaet hardens his heart shall run into mischief.
Now mark, by the Antithesis it is apparent, that fear there, is not a fear of
our everlasting estate, but only a fear in opposition to hardness of heart
in wicked men, that go on in a course of sin.

Another place they urge is 1 Cor. 10.12. Wherefore let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall. Now, say they, the Scripture tells us, that
every man, though never so firm, as he thinks, about his election; yet he must
take heed, he may fall from grace, and be damned for all this. Now by way of
answer to this, I would lay down two things.

First, The Apostle does not speak of men that have a grounded assurance of
their election; but to men that lie in carnal security, and have deluded
persuasions of their good estate, and this appears by the Text; for he says,
let him that thinks he stands. He does not say, let him that stands; for he
cannot fall, but he that thinks he stands. Those men that nourish presumptuous
and ungrounded persuasions, that they are in a good estate, and in a happy
condition, let them take heed; lest they fall.

Secondly, the falling here is not meant a falling away from grace, or a
falling away finally after election, for that is impossible; but it is only
meant of a falling into sin: and so the meaning is this, Let him that thinks he
stands, i. e. that thinks he is strong in grace, and stands upon his own legs,
let that man take heed lest he fall into sin. Now a man may take heed of
falling into sin, yet no way question his assurance. And if you ask how I
make it appear that this is the intendment and scope of the place; I answer, by
the Context. Read the foregoing verse, Let us not tempt Christ, as they tempted
him; let us not us murmur, as some of them murmured, for these things happened to
^h^m for ensamples, and are written for our admonition. Therefore let him that
thi^keth he stands, take heed lest he fall. As much as if he should say, you
have here seen some men fall into sin, you have heard some men murmur, so^e
men tempt Christ; this sho^^^ make you afraid, lest you fall into sin, and
suffer the punishment they did. But what is this ^o the denying of assurance,
that m^n cannot be assured of their Election?

Another place they urge also, is Phil. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling. Now say they, if a man must work out, and ca^ry on the business
of his salvation with fear and trembling, then ^urely a man can never be
assured in this life of his election. To which I answer.

That fear and trembling ^here spoken of, is not a fear and trembling in
opposition to the assurance of our election; but in opposition to that carnal
security, and sinful dependence upon our own strength; This is apparent in the
next words, For it is God that works in you the will and the deed: And
therefore, because you have no strength of your own, and no power of your own
to do any thing, therefore fear and tremble in that regard.

Secondly, fear and trembling may very well be consistent with this grace of
assurance; for we read, Psalm. 2.11. Rejoice in the Lord with trembling. You may
fear, and yet rejoice also. So Psalm. 5.7. As for me, I will come into thy house
in the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear I will worship toward thine
holy Temple. Here is fear, and confidence in the mercies of God joined
together; to show, that fear and assurance may very well be consistent each
with other. But then they object, how can this be? for John says, perfect love
casts out fear. I answer, that though John says, perfect love casts out
fear: yet John does not say, that imperfect love casts out fear. Now in this
life our love is imperfect, and therefore mixed with fear; but in Heaven our
love is perfect, and so casts out all fear. So that still this mak^s nothing
against us, but that ^ man may have a grounded assurance of his eternal
Election.

Another place they object is Romans 11.20. Be not high minded, but fear. To this
I answer: These words are not spoken of fea^ing our Election, that we should
fear whether we are elected or no. But serves to beat down any opinion of our
own ^ighteousness, as if we were therefore accepted of God; and to ke^p us from
insulting over the rejected Jews; now that we are taken in, in their room.

One Scripture more (which indeed is the main Pillar they rest upon) is, Romans
11 34. Who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his Counselor?
Here, say the Papists, the Scripture challenges any man in the world to come
forth, and say that he knows Gods mind; by Gods mind is meant Gods decree. And
here Paul challenges all, that no man knows the decree of God from eternity.
Therefore, if no man knows the mind of God, then certainly none know their
own Election, for that is Gods mind, and Gods decree: this they hold an
undeniable Argument.

And here to satisfy you in this Scripture, I shall lay down ^hree things.

First, When it is said, No man knows the mind of God; nor no man is his
Counselor: this does hold true, that no man knows the mind or decree of the
Lord, touching other men's Election. The Apostle does not speak this, as if no
man knew Gods mind about his own, but about other men's Election, who are
elected, and who are not; for that is the scope of the place. The Gentiles,
they thought all the Jews were damned men; and they censured and vaunted over
them. Now, says Paul, None knows Gods mind concerning others, whether ^hey
shall be saved or damned, while they are in this world.

Secondly, no man knows the mind of the Lord in this sense, that is, so as to
give a reason of Gods decree; why God did decree this, and decree that; why God
did choose Peter, and not elect Judas; no man knows the reason of Gods decree,
and of his ways.

Thirdly, No man knows the mind of the Lord, that is, no man knows Gods decree,
by looking upon it alone; but by bringing down Gods secret will to his revealed
will; and so we may know his decree. I may make use of that place, Romans 10.8.
Let no man say, I will ascend up to heaven to fetch Christ thence, but what
says the word? the word is is nigh thee, even in thy mouth. Trust to that. As
if he should say, Let no man think to know Gods decrees by going into heaven,
and there searching into Gods decrees, for that he cannot do; but look upon
the word, and there he shall find whom God has elected, and decreed to save,
1 Cor. 2.16. No man can know by looking barely upon the decree; but if we
compare Gods decree with his word, and from the word look upon them that are
elected, we may easily know whether we are elected or no. Which puts me upon
the third head premised, How a man may be assured in his own soul, that he is
elected to life and salvation by God the Father.

SERMON. XIII.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, Give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


IN the prosecution of this subject, you may remember the last Doctrine I drew
forth was this, That Christians should put forth a great deal of diligence to
make this sure to their souls, that they are eternally elected by God the
Father. In the handling of which, I have shown you, 1. What Election is. 2.
That the people of God may make sure their own Election, though done from all
eternity.

I come now to show you how the people of God may be assured in their own
hearts that they are eternally elected. And h^r^, to compass this knowledge or
assurance of our Election, I do not only carry it so far as the Papists
do, that say, you may have a persuasion, which they call Fides conjecturalis,
a conjectural faith, or hope you may be sav^d; but will not come up so far as
the words of my Text, to be sure of it. Now should a man use no more then the
words of the Text, in that it is pressed as a command, it is an argument it may
be made sure to a man's own self. For no man is bound to an impossible thing;
and in that it is a thing required, to be assured of our election, Nemo tenctur
and imposs^ile.
the Scripture would never oblige our obedience to that which is impossible in
it self. I do not drive so far only, but further. What should an elect man
do to be certainly persuaded that he is eternally elected by God to obtain
life and salvation. I am now handing a doctrine to be trembled at, while you
are attending to it. And in the resolving this quere, you must take this rule;
that you cannot get assurance by ascending into Gods decree, but by descending
into your own hearts, searching them by the word whether those saving effects,
which God does work in an elect person, be wrought in your souls or no: and
that is the way to come to a sure and certain knowledge of your elec^ion. The
knowledge of your election is not attainable by ascending into Gods decree; for
who has made you his Counselors. Nor is it enjoined you by way of Revelation,
That is an unsure ground, and you may run into Enthusiasme, as well as
persuasion about your election. It is not done by Revelation, neither against
nor without the word. What ever t^stimony there is, if it come not from the
word, you may suspect it to be a delusion. Now the safest way, (though I know
much cried down) for you to go by in searching wheth^r you are in the number of
Gods elect, is to search into your own hearts, whether those things be wrought
in you, which are wrought in those whom God has elected to life and salvation:
and here I shall content my self with the naming of six saving effects.

First, every man that is elected, sooner or later, shall be effectually
called, and savingly converted by the power of the word. This the Apostle lays
down, 1 These. 1.4, 5. Knowing brethren, beloved, your election of God. How
should this be known? Verse. 5. For our word came not to you in word only, but
in power, and in the holy Gh^st: that is, o^^ Gospel did not come in word
onel^, to affect you^ e^rs, and rest there; but our word came with power, being
b^^k^ with the operation of the Spirit, for your conve^^ion. This work all men
that are elected, sooner or later must come under, to have the power of the
word come with auth^rity upon Conscience, for his effectual calling. So Romans
8.30. Whom he predestined, whom he appointed to life, t^e^ he called. And
therefore, Beloved, who ever you are, if you live and die without having the
power of the Word to pass upon your soul, for your ^ffectual Calling, you may
lay your h^ar^s under this Conclusion, that you are no elected by God to ob^ain
life and salvation. For, Whom he has predestined, them he calls.

Secondly, a man that is elected by God to life, sooner or later God will
sanctify him by renewing and regenerating grace: And this is only different
from the former in degree; for calling is sanctifica^ion begun. Now, when God
elects a man, he does not only begin the work of grace, but he carries it on
in a course of sanctification. And of this your read 2 These. 2.12, 13. We are
bold to give thanks to God always for you, beloved of the Lord, because God
has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the
Spirit, and belief of the truth. If God has from the beginning chosen a man
to salvation, the Lord does it through sanctification; not for sanctification,
as the Papists say, or for faith foreseen, but it is through it, as a means
whereby we are brought to salvation; sanctifica^ion shall run through our
lives, as water through a channel. So, 1 Pet. 1.2. They that are elected
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by Christ, through
sanctification. So 2 Timothy 2.21. And therefore beloved, if men live and die, and
have not the power of sanctifying grace upon their hearts and consciences, and
working in their lives, doubtless those men are not elected; because this you
see clearly, that at one time or other God will work this in such men. Jude 4.

Thirdly, men elected by God to life and salvation shall sooner or later be
brought into a state of believing, Acts 13.48. As many as were ordained to
eternal life believed. No man that is ordained to eternal life, but shall be
brought to a believing estate. And therefore men living and dying in a state of
unbelief, are not elected. Hence you read, Tit. 1.1. it is called, the faith
of Gods elect; implying, that all that are elected, before they die shall have
faith; and none shall have faith, but only they; and therefore in a peculiar
manner, called the faith of Gods elect, appropriated only to them.

Fourthly, That man that is elected, sooner, or later before he dies, God will
work in his heart a special delight in, and an entire love to the word
preached. This you have expressed, John 8.47. He that is of God, hears Gods
word; therefore ye are not of God, because ye hear not his words. To be of God,
that is, to belong to God by election. Now, he that is of God, God will in time
make him hear his word with delight and love; but he that takes no delight
therein, is no^ elected of God. 1 John 4.5, 6.

Fifthly, The Lord will sooner or later work in the heart of an elect man, love
to the people of God, and compassion to those who are not the elect and chosen
one of God, Col. 3.12. Put on as the elect of God, bowels of mercy and loving
kindness. The Apostle there by the manner of phrase does seem to intimate thus
much, Put on as the elect of God, etc. As if it were a thing ordained to, and
inseparable from an elect man, after his effectual calling, that he should have
bowels of mercy toward those that are not called, and that he should have
loving kindness toward those that are called. For a man that is once elected,
and has the execution of that decree in effectual calling, it is proper to him
to have bowels of mercy.

Sixthly, God will sooner or later work an elect man into a new course of
living, and of obedience, from what he had in times past. 1 Pet. 1.2. You are
elected according to the foreknowledg of God through sanctification to
obedience; that though you were disobedient before, serving diverse lusts, yet
God, if he has chosen you, will bring you in a course of obedience, Romans 8.29
He has predestined us. What to do? that we might be conformable to the
image of his Son. God intends, that that person whom he chooses to life,
should be conformable to Jesus Christ, and that he shall live another manner of
life then before; that though he has formerly been subject to sin and satan,
yet then he shall walk in ways of obedience to Jesus Christ.

Thus having briefly finished these heads, I have only four or five cautions
to lay down, to bound what has been said within the limits of truth. As,

First, Take notice, that these six defects do not extend to children who die
while they are children, but to men and women that are grown in years. A child
that cannot act reason, as he is a child, cannot have any of these particulars
wrough in him, at least in that way and manner men of years have. A child, as
it is an infant, has not conversion in that way a man has, though it has
somewhat equivalent to it; as somewhat like sanctification, and somewhat like
that faith men of years have; but what that is, and how wrought, man cannot
determine. In pressing of this therefore, I say, it does not extend to children
who die in their infancy, but only to men come to years of discretion, if they
live and die without having these six effects, they may conclude, they cannot
be elected.

Secondly, that the want of these six particulars for a time, is no Argument of
a man's non-election; for before conversion (which is Gods first dealing with a
sinner) an elect man may be as vile, and as bad as any wicked man alive. As the
Apostle Paul tells us, Titus 3.3. In times past we were also disobedient, and
served diverse lusts, and lived in pleasure and excess, etc. So 1 Timothy 1.12. So
that the want of this for a time, is no argument of a man's non-election, for
then it would follow, a man unconverted is no elect man, which would cross the
whole tenor of Scripture: But a man living and dying without these, does not
belong to the election of grace.

Thirdly, I do not press the having of these effects actually, if you have
them habitually. My meaning is this: A man may be elected, and yet may not act
any thing answerable to effectual calling, nor act with any delight and love to
the word, nor act any thing in a way of sanctification; yet, if you have these
habitually, in the habit of them, these may be testimonies or evidences of
election.

Fourthly, I do not press the having of these effects sensibly to be an
evidence of election, if so be you have them really. There are many men have
these really, when they have them not in their own apprehension.

Fifthly, I do not press the having of these effects gradually, so you have
them sincerely. My meaning is this, that a man may be elected; yea, and he may
not only be chosen in Gods eternal decree, but the execution of that decree
may be passed upon him, that he may be effectually called, and yet he may not
have all these six effects in a great measure in the highest degree, yet he may
have them sincerely, and so be a pledge to his own heart of his eternal
election.

And thus having finished this third Quere, I come now to enter upon another,
depending upon the former; which indeed is a very dreadful subject, and a point
to be trembled at, while it is handling, and that is this: what probable guess
may be given of a man, that he is not within the compass of Gods election?
This is a very high point, and must be handled with a great deal of
seariousnesse, and sadness; it being a point concerning the salvation or
damnation of all the men upon earth. And therefore I would entreat you to look
about you. Gods decrees they are in Heaven, and it is only a real, work of
grace upon your hearts on earth, that can give you evidence that those decrees
are for good to you, As good wrought is an evidence of Gods purpose to save
you; so the contrary work may be an evidence of Gods purpose never to save you,
but of leaving you without the compass of his eternal election. There can be
nothing laid down absolutely and certainly, yet there may be many probable
guesses given of the men that are not within the compass of Gods election: Of
which I shall name but six or seven sorts. And I wish to God that none of you
that are before the Lord this day, have your names written in this black book*
lest you have just cause to fear your names are no written in the book of life.

First, That man that falls back from a course of profession to a course of
profaneness, without timely returning; the Scripture gives a shrewd guess of
such a man, that he is not within the compass of Gods purpose to save. I do
not say, every backsliding, and every decaying affection, but a total and final
relapse; when a man falls, and rises not again; w^e^ a man's runs from God, and
^eturns not again; the Scripture gives a guess at him, that he is not within
the compass of Gods election. Heb. 10.38, 39. If any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. Interpreters observe, that in these words there
is a figure, wherein there is less expressed, then is intended, My soul shall
have no pleasure in him. It is as much as if God should have said, My soul
shall hate, or I will exceedingly hate him. But we are not of them that draw
back to perdition; but of them that believe, to the saving of their souls:
which words clearly import, that men that draw back without returning, they
draw back to perdition, to damnation; but we are not of them, says the
Apostle. And here then, beloved, does this word fall upon any man before God
this day? Have thou left a course of strictness, and fallen into a course of
profaneness and loosnesse? Have thou fallen from thy God, and never think of
a returning? I shall not censure thee now, but if thou live and die in this
estate, it is an undoubted argument, thou art not within the compass of Gods
decree to save.

Secondly, Men that do make the mercies and goodness of God as arguments to
embolden them the more in sin, such men are not likely to be the persons whom
God has elected to life and glory. In the Epistle of Jude, v. 4. It is spoken
there of men, that turned the grace of God into wantonness. And what says the
Apostle of them, they are men ordained of old to damnation. The Scripture there
makes it the badge of a man ordained of old to damnation, when he shall persist
in this sinful temper, to turn Gods grace into laciviousnesse; that is, to take
arguments from the grace, and mercy, and goodness of God, to walk in ways of
sin. And therefore look to it, and with your hearts bewail it, all you that
are apt to abuse doctrins of grace; and because God is good you will be evil;
because God is merciful, therefore you will be sinful; if you die in this
temper, the Scripture declares, that you are the men ordained of old to
condemnation.

Thirdly, a man that does walk in a course of sin, wilfully, with malice, and
knowingly against conscience, and obstinately without reluctance; and persist
in this, and live and die thus, that man is not within the compass of Gods
election. There is a phrase, Psalm. 59.5. Be not merciful, O Lord, unto wicked
transgressors. It is in some translations, be not merciful to them that sin of
wicked malice, or of malicious wickedness. Now there is this rule which Divines
give; that those prayers which were made by David, they are rather Prophesies
of what should be, then mere prayers that this might be. As David prayed
against the Jews, Psalm. 69.2^. that their table might be a snare to them, and
that they should always bow down under their prays which was a prophecy, and
they did so. And so he burden: here, that God would not be merciful to men that
s^n of wicked malice; which is as much as a prophecy, that God will not be
merciful to men that sin of malicious wickedness. And therefore, beloved, all
you that so live, and resolve you will die, and happily do die, and yet sin
obstinately; that, let God command what he can, you will do what you please; let
the Minister say what he will, you will do what you lift; that sin against
knowledge, and against conscience, and without any reluctance; resolve to live
and die in a course of sin: the Lord be merciful to such persons; for certainly
there must be no Bible, if such men fall within the compass of Gods election.

Fourthly, That man that by living under the powerful Ministry of the Word, is
more hard in heart, and worse in life; if a man grows thus, it is an argument,
he is not within the purpose of Gods election. Matthew. 13.14, 15. By hearing,
you shall hear, but not understand; by seeing, you shall see, but not perceive;
^his peoples heart is waxed gross, their ears dull in hearing, their eyes shut,
lest at any time they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears,
understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should sa^e them. Here is
the judgment God lays upon such ^inne^s, that they shall have eyes, and not
see, they shall be ig^orant, their hearts shall ^axe gross, they shall be
incapable ^f taking any impression of the word upon them. And wha^'s ^he end of
all this? left they should be converted, and I should ^ave them; implying, that
if God lets you that live under the Mi^i^^ry, to have dark eyes, and hard
hearts, it is an argument God has no intent to save you, and therefore his
purpose is to condemn you. So John 12.40. He has blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hearts, lest they should see with their eyes, and understand
with their hearts, and be converted. Here is laid down as an act of Gods, that
God did harden their hearts, and God did blind their eyes, lest they should be
converted; Implying, that if men do live and die, in this temper, that they
have lived year after year under a powerful Ministry, and yet they grow more
blind in judgment, and more profane in life, and more hard in heart, after 20,
30, 40 years hearing, then they were before; that the word does but draw out
their wickedness, and makes them more profane, and more to oppose godliness;
the Lord have mercy upon such souls, for certainly if God leave you thus, it
is an argument he never intends to save you; for the Lord does thus with such,
that they might not be saved. There is a passage Romans 11.7. Israel has not
obtained that which he seeks for, but the election has obtained, and the rest
were hardened. By election is meant the elected, (the Abstract put for the
Concrete.) As often in Scripture, Circumcision put for Circumcised; and so
here; Election put for elected, The elected have obtained it: what did they
obtain? they obtained salvation and glory; but the rest that were not elected,
they were hardened. The Lord there makes it the badge of them that are not
elected, that they are a blinded people, and a hardened people. Imitating, that
men that are not elected, they shall live under the word, yet shall be blind in
mind, shall be hard in heart, shall be wicked in life, and the Ministry of the
word shall never reform them. And if any of you be such, O that the Lord would
make you tremble this day, tremble lest you are not in Gods thoughts, to do you
any good another day.

Fifthly, when God does give up men to strong delusions, not only to believe
lies themselves, but to teach lies to seduce others, when the Lord leaves them
to live and die in that estate, the Scripture makes it an argument of them that
are not chosen by God to life and glory. You shall read therefore in that great
delusion of Antichrist, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. God gave them up to strong
delusions, to believe lies, that all might be damned, that believe not the
truth? It is made a brand of damnation, when God shall give them over to
believe lies. Though a godly man may die in a corrupt opinion, for every error
is not a badge of damnation; but errou^s that are foundamental, that strike at
the foundation of Religion, wherein men run so far, as never to repent of
their error; that, the Scripture makes the badge of a man, whose soul is in a
world of danger. Read that Text, 2. Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. There were false Prophets
among the people, like as their shall be false teachers among you. And who are
they? verse. 2. They shall deny the Lord that bought them, they shall bring in
damnable heresies. (Every error is not an heresy,) but these men shall bring
in damnable heresies, and many shall follow their pernicious ways. Now what is
their censure? whose judgment now of a long time lingers not, and their
damnation slumbers not. Their damnation was not asleep, but for a long time
damnation did attend them, and they were in danger of it. So that, beloved, it
is great danger for men to be patrons of error, especially when they are
gross and palpable; and when in Scripture language they may be called damnable
heresies. It is an argument, if men live and die thus, that they are not within
the purpose of Gods Counsel to do them good.

Sixthly, Men that live and die in a continual spurning and opposition against
the Gospel, and word of God powerfully preached, it is a dreadful sign they are
not within the compass of Gods election. 1 John 4.5, 6. You are not of God, for
you hear not his word. So John 12. He that hears the word, is of God, but you
hear not his word, therefore you are not of God. Therefore you belong not to
him. But more pregnant to this purpose, is that place, Act. 13.46, 47, 48. It
was necessary the word of God should first have been spoken to you, but seeing
you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we
turn to the Gentiles. Now compare this with verse 48. And when the Gentiles
heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed. The opposition lies thus: As many as
God purposed to save, they glorified God for his word, and they rejoiced, and
were glad in his word: but those that were not decreed to salvation, they put
off from them the word of the Lord, they spurned at it, and opposed it, and
could not endure the word of the Lord. Therefore the Text says, The Jews
stirred up the devout and honorable women, and they raised up persecution
against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coast. It was said to
Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. By this I know, that the Lord has purposed to destroy
thee, because thou have not harkned to my counsel. Thus you see, the Scripture
makes it the badge of a man, that does not fall within the compass of Gods
election, to bring him to life and glory, to live and die in opposition to the
word of God.

Seventhly, and this we may speak more confidently and positively, that that
man is not within the compass of Gods election, who sins the sin against the
holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32. He shall neither be forgiven in this life, nor in the
life to come. This is an unpardonable sin, 1 John 5.16. Now I know there are
many men, who confine this sin only to the Pharisees, as if they only were
guilty of it. There are others, that say this sin is seldom committed; and so
many Divines speak favorably of it: but, Beloved, I am persuaded, this sin is
oftener committed, then most men in the world dream of; and many men are plunged
into this sin, that think well of their own souls. The sin against the holy
Ghost is only this:

It is a wilful and deliberate act in a professor of Religion, whereby he does
not only fall from his profession; but he runns into, a course of sin
knowingly, against conscience; obstinately, against counsel; and maliciously,
against Jesus Christ. This is briefly a descrption of this sin. Now I am
persuaded there are many in the world that have professed Religion, that are,
if not in this sin, yet at the very next door to it. And if a man be gone thus
far, this is called in Scripture, a sin unto death; a sin, which if a man
fall into, he may be sure he shall be damned. And thus I have in brief given
you an account of these seven particulars, whereby every man may give a guess
in his own thoughts, whether he be within the purpose of Gods election unto
salvation or no.

I have now, from this sad Doctrine, only a few comfortable positions to lay
down, and so conclude. As,

1. That though these part^culars may give you a guess of those that are not
within the compass of Gods election, yet no man is bound to make this sure to
himself, that he is not elected. You are bound to make your election sure, but
you are not bound to make your reprobation sure. For these heads I have given
out, not to make any godly man question his election, but to startle wicked
men, who live quite contrary, and opposite to the elect of God.

2. That a man may come very nigh to the worst of these sins, and yet may be an
elected man. We were (says Paul) sometimes disobedient, deceived, and served
diverse lusts. Titus 3.3. And Ephesians. 2.2. In times past you walked according to
the course of the world, according to the power of the Prince of the air, who
works mightily in the children of disobedience. In times past ye were
children of wrath, as well as others. In times past before calling, you may
come very near to these evils, yet be within the compass of Gods election,
Provided that you do not live and die in those evils. For if so, there is no
hope of mercy.

3. That for men to question their election, merely because they do not find
the saving effects of election in their hearts and lives, is rather an argument
of their being, then of their not being elected. Because men not elected, they
never look after their election, to make it sure, they will trust all upon the
mercy of God, and grace of God, and never look after holiness; sin never
troubles them, profaneness never grieves them, want of holiness perplexes not
them. The questioning therefore of your election arising from the evils of your
conversation, is rather a sign that God has chosen you to life and glory.

4. Election it runs often times to those, that are the worst sort of men in
the world. Election runs to them that have been worst in their lives, before
they were called. And thereby God magnifies the riches of his grace. Election
passes by civil honest men, and ingeniou^ ^emperate m^n, and commonly runns to
men, that have been scandalous, loose, Atheistical, profane livers, before they
were called. Matthew. 21.31. Whores and Harlots shall come to Heaven before you.
Manasseh, that was a cruel murderer, and Idolater, yet election ran to him.
Mary Magdalen, a common strumpet, out of whom Christ cast seven Devils, yet
election ran to her. Rahab, a Harlot; Paul, a persecuter, a blasphemer, a man
injurious to the Saints; yet Acts 9.15. He was a chosen vessel unto God, and
obtained mercy. God, to magnify the riches of his free grace, lets election
run to the worst of men that are in the world. And this should be great comfort
to you; though you have been drunkards, and though you have been Sabbath
breakers and adulterers, and though you have been profane, yet if you can but
now close with Jesus Christ, and look after heaven, if you can but now mourn
over your condition, and repent of your former failings, and come in to Jesus
Christ; Election has run unto men as bad as you, and though you may be now men
profane in your lives, yet you may be obj^cts of Gods election.

SERMON. XIV.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, Give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THe last Doctrine I drew from these words was this, That Christians should put
forth a great deal of diligence to make this sure to their souls, that they are
eternally elected by God to life and glory. In the prosecution of which, I have
gone over some queries. There are four difficulties or queries I am further to
insist upon in treating of this point. As namely,

First, whether this election be universal, or no?

Secondly, whether a man that is once elected by God to salvation, may come to
be damned, yea, or no?

Thirdly, whether God, in electing a man to life and glory, does it out of any
foresight of faith, or any other grace he sees in man?

And fourthly, whether this doctrine of election, that God in his own counsel
has determined who shall be damned, and who saved, does not take men off from
any endeavors after their own salvation, to make them desperate, and neglect
the use of means; that they shall say, if I shall be damned, I shall be damned;
and if saved, I shall be saved, let me live as I lift? whether this doctrine
will favor this desperate conclusion, yea, or no?

First, whether election be universal, or no? This is that the Arminians and
Papists do mightily, drive at. And here they lay down this conclusion, which
they make unquestionable: That there is such a thing as a certain universal
election of God, without limitation or restraint of persons, whereby God did
determine to save all mankind by Christ, who were fallen in Adam. This opinion
was first drawn from Origin, who held that all creatures should be saved; and
the Papists and Arminians mincing the matter, to make it a little more
plausible, then he did, they say, that God in his purpose did intend to save
all mankind by Jesus Christ; but man falling away, and walking contrary to
their principles, the defect lies in them, that they are not saved: and this
Divines call universal redemption.

Now against this, I shall lay down several Scriptures and then take off the
objections that seems to strengthen this opinion.

First, for Scripture. In the Epistle of Jude, verse 3. you read of some that
were ordained of old to condemnation. Therefore sure all could not be saved. 1
These. 5.9. Some men are appointed to wrath, but we to obtain salvation through
Jesus Christ. Therefore all men could not be within the purpose of Gods first
intention to save. Matthew. 22.14. Many are called, but few are chosen. So Romans
11.7. The Jews did not obtain what they sought for, but the elect obtained it,
and the rest were hardened. 2. Tim. 2.20. There are vessels of honor, and
vessels of dishonor. The Scripture makes it a discriminating act in God, that
some he chose to life; and others from eternity in his counsel he chose to
wrath and condemnation. And these Scriptures will fully overthrow this opinion.
And indeed the very word choosing confutes it, which intimates a taking off
some, with an overlooking of others.

But now let us view a little the Arguments of Script^^es they abuse, to
strengthen this unsound opinion of theirs* ur

One is, 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all died, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. Now, say they, Every man did die in Adam; every mothers child by Adams
fall became subject to death: even so, in Christ shall every man be made alive;
the Lord did intend that every man should have benefit by Jesus Christ.

Now to take off this; I shall answer it in showing you the true intent and
scope of this Scripture. This universal phrase of making alive, has not
reference to the saving of the soul, but to the resurrection of the body: And
so the sense is this* That as in Adam, by virtue of his sin, every man came to
die a natural death; So in Christ shall all be made alive; that is, so by
Christ's power shall every man rise from the dead. And if you ask how I make
that appear to be the intendment of the Text. I answer, the words themselves
will make it plain. Verse. 11. It is said, By man came death, by man also came
the resurrection from the dead: that is, as by that man Adam came death, so by
that man Christ shall come the resurrection from the dead: for as in Adam all
died, etc. so that here you see, this is brought in as a proof of the 21.
verse: Intimating, that this being made alive, has no reference to the life of
the soul, but only to the Resurrection of the body; that as Adam by his sin
brought death to all men, so Christ by his power shall raise all men from the
dead; every man in his own order. However, should this be granted, that this
making alive should have reference to the life of the soul; it would bear no
more but this, that all that are damned, are damned as in Adams loins; and all
that are saved, shall be saved as in the loins of Jesus Christ. And so make
nothing at all to prove this which they call universal election.

Another Scripture (undeniable they think) is, Romans 11.32. where it said, God
has concluded all men under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. Now
say they, If God did do an act to make men see their unbelief, and did intend
by this action to have mercy upon all, then God in his counsel intended to save
all.

Now to this, that he might have mercy upon all; I answer: This phrase (all) is
not to be taken in an unlimited sense, that God shut up all men in unbelief;
that is, God made all believers see their own misery; that he might have mercy
on all them that believe. And if you ask how I prove this to be the meaning of
the Text, I answer: The Scripture makes it clear, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has
concluded all men under sin. (The very words forequoted.) But what is the
limitation? Shall all men be saved? No, For mark the next words. The Scripture
has concluded all men under sin, that the faith of Jesus Christ should be
given to them that believe. Now, though Paul does not say thus to the Romans,
yet the words being the same, the Restriction holds good in both places. So
that it is clear, That he might save all, or have mercy upon all. It is not
meant all universally; but all, with limitation of Paul here; all them that
believe. Again,

Another objection, or Scripture, they abuse is, 1 Timothy 2.4. Who will have all
men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. This Text Origin does
grossly abuse; holding hence, that it is the intendment and will of God, that
all men should be saved. Now, to take off this objection; We must first
distinguish here of Gods will, and then of this phrase, All. Who will have all
men to be saved.

First, of Gods will; and the Schoolmen give this distinction about it. That
there is a will of Gods good pleasure; and there is God signifying will.

Now the will of Gods good pleasure is, that real purpose in God to save a man.
And there is no man that in this sense God wills to be saved, but he must be
saved; but in this sense God wills not all men to be saved.

But secondly, there is Gods significative will, that is, whereby in Scriptures
God tenders salvation to every man that will lay hold upon Jesus Christ: and so
God^ signifying will excludes no man from salvation; but the Ministers, if they
preach to ten thousand people, they must tender Christ universally to all,
because they know not which of them are elect, and which reprobate; which of
them shall be saved, and which damned. This is Gods signifying will, and though
God by this will tell you what Ministers must do, to tender Christ and
salvation to all; yet this does no way follow, that the determinate will of
Gods good pleasure is involved under this, as if all men should be saved.
Perkins in his writings has this distinction of it. That there is Gods
absolute will, and so he wills not all men to be saved: and Gods conditionate
will, that in case every man did believe, they should be saved; for God envies
no man's salvation; there is grace enough in God, to save every man in the world.

But secondly, there may be more distinct answer given to this place. God will
have all men to be saved. All, is taken sometimes in a destributive sense, and
sometimes in a collective sense. In a destributive sense, for every man under
heaven; and so God wills not all men to be saved. But secondly, in a collective
sense; for all sorts and degrees of men, and so God intends to save all; that
is, some of all sorts, and of all degrees of men in the world. And this appears
if you mark the context. He will have all men to be saved, that is, some of all
sorts. Some Kings, some great men, some rich, and some poor, some Princes, and
some beggars. And therefore the Apostle bids them pray for all men. Pray, says
he, for Kings and for them in authority: for God will have all men to be saved.
As much as if he should say, Pray for Kings, because God of his grace may save
Kings, as well as poorer men, that have less encumbrances, and less
employments in the world, and less withdrawings in their own soul, then they
have. God will save all: salvation shall come to all sorts of men, and
therefore you may lawfully pray for them. And so Calvin judiciously expounds
this place; that God will have all sorts ^f men to obtain salvation by Jesus
Christ: but it is not to be extended universally, as if every individual man
and woman should be saved. 3. These words are to be taken with those that
follow after, God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowleg of
the truth. Now that God will be willing to save those that come to the
knowledge of the truth, is unquestionable all that repent, Acts 17.30. all
opposition to the time of the old Testament, Romans 16.25.

Use.
Now, is this true, that election is not universal; but that some men are
elected, and others reprobated? Then, to wrap up this quere in a short use;
this should teach you all, who are in the Land of the living, not to deceive
your selves; lull not your selves asleep in security, for it may be, you may be
in Gods counsel to save, it may be not. Peradventure you may be in Gods
thoughts for salvation, peradventure you may be in his counsel for damnation;
and this should put you upon the work my text calls upon you for, to endeavor
to make your calling and election sure.

2. A second Queee is this, Whether may one that is an elect man, fall away
from his election, and come to be a damned man, or no? This the Protestant
Divines against the Arminians and Papists have had large controversies about,
but I will not handle it in a controversal way; only, as it best becomes a
Pulpit show you those positive Scriptures and reasons that may clear the truth,
and then answer the strongest objections they produce to the contrary.

Whether may a man that is elected fall away, and afterward perish? Q.
To this I answer. No. A man that is once elected by God can never perish. And
this I shall give Scripture, and reason to plead for it. Matthew. 24.24. Christ
tells us of error, that it came in so easily, that if it were possible, it
would deceive the elect. Intimating, that it is impossible so to seduce the
elect, as to make them finally fall away. So, John 6.37. All that the Father
has given me, shall come unto me: that is, all that God the Father has
decreed to save by Christ, shall come unto Christ. Verse. 39. This is the
Fathers will, that ha^h sent me, that of all that he has given me, I should
lose none. This is the Fathers will, and Commission to Christ, that of all
those that by his decree he had given to Christ to ^ave by r^demption, he
should lose none. And says Christ, I ^ave lost nothing. So John 10 28, 29. I
g^ve unto my sheep ^ternal ^ife, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
man take them out of my hand^; my Father that gave them me, is greater then
all, and no man shall pluk them out of my Fathers hands. By his Fathers hands,
he me^ns his decree; God by his decree intended to save so many, and Christ to
vindicate his Father, tells us, that so many as God The Father had decreed to
salvation, neither man nor Devil should prevail to pluck them out of his
Fathers hand. So Romans 11.1. God has not cast away his people whom he foreknew.
That is, whom God did predestinate, he casts none of them away, none of them
shall perish. Many many more Scriptures I might multiply, to show, that a man
once elected, can never perish; as 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Cor. 18.9.2 These. 3.3. But I
would name reasons as well as Scriptures. And

First, if election were changeable, then God must be changeable; which to
think, there is nothing more absurd. If Gods decree be changeable, Gods essence
and nature were so also; election being nothing else, but God himself cusing:
for every thing in God, is God. And this the Scripture tells us, is far from
him; for there is no variableness or shadow of change in God. Jam. 1.17. Isa
46.10. Mal. 3.6.

Secondly, if the elect could perish, then Jesus Christ should be very
unfaithful to his father, because God the father has given this charge to
Christ, that whomsoever he elected, Christ should preserve them safe, to bring
them to heaven. Now should not this be accomplished, Christ would be unfaithful
to his father. John 6.39. This is the fathers will, which has sent me into the
world, that of all that he has given me, I should l^se nothing, but that I
should raise them up at the last day. This is the will of God, to save many by
Christ. Now, should not this be made good, Christ must needs be unfaithful to
the Commission of his father.

Thirdly, should this be true, then Paul's golden chain should be broken. P^^^.
8.30. Whom he did predestinate, them he calls; whom he calls, t^^^ ^e
justifies; whom he justifies, them he glorifies. Now, should this chain break,
that whom he elects, them he calls, whom he call^, them he justifies, and there
cease (as the Pap^sts hold) and m^n be after damned, then the great and main
links would be lost, that whom he justifies, them glorifies, and so bring an
obsu^dity upon ^he Scripture thereby.

Now to answer some tex^s of Scripture they abuse, (which at first view you
would think very plausible) to maintain, that a man may be an elect man, and
brought into Christ, yet afterward damned. The first is, John 6.70. Have not I
chosen twelve, and one of them is a Devil? Now say they, there were twelve
chosen, or elected, and one of them is a devil, did perish; intimating, that
men may be elected, yet perish for all this. To which I answer.

That there is a double Electing. First, a choosing to some peculiar Office.
Secondly, there is an electing to grace, life, and glory. Now, when Christ
says, Have I not chosen you twelve? it is meant of his choosing of them to an
Office, to the place of an Apostle, to be his disciples. Now it is true, that a
man may be chosen to some peculiar Office in the Church of God, and yet be a
perishing and damned man; but this phrase has no relation to the decree of God
from eternity, only to a temporal electing of twelve men to a temporal Office,
to the Office of an Apostle.

Another Scripture they abuse is, Exodus 32.32. it was Moses prayer, If thou will not (says Moses to God) forgive their sins, then blot my name out of the
book of life. Now, say they, the book of life is Gods election: and here Moses
prayed, that God would blot his name out of the book of life. Intimating, say
they, a man may be elected and written in that book, and yet afterward blotted
out and perish.

To which I answer. That this prayer of Moses is only a wish or supposition,
as Paul's was, when he wished he were accursed from Christ, for his kindred in
the flesh. Now a man may suppose mountains of Gold, and suppose things that
never were, nor never shall be in being: bare suppositions put nothing in
being; so here, that Moses makes a supposition in a pathetical prayer, this
does no way argue, as if his name could be blotted out of the book of life.

Secondly, Rivet he expounds it thus, that there is a double book of life. The
book of life being sometimes taken for the eternal council and decree of God,
as Phil. 4.3. sometimes for the special providence of God over men, in
preserving them amongst the living. So we read Psalm. 139. In thy book, says
David, were all my members written: meaning, not in the book of Gods decree,
but only in the book of his providence, that all the members of David's body,
they were all under the providence of God, that none could hurt him. And so
Rivet, with others, think that by the book of life here is meant, that God,
would blot out Moses from the book of his special protection and let him die as
other men, rather then this evil should come upon the people of Israel. q.d.
Destroy my name from among men, and do not protect me any longer.

Again, they object that in Psalm. 69.28. it is said, Let them be blotted out of
the book of life. Now, say they, That is Gods election, and to be blotted out,
implies, that a man may be elected, and yet perish.

To this I answer, as formerly, that the book of life in that place has no
reference to the decree of Gods Election, but only to his book of providence,
that God would not protect wicked men, as he does his own people, in a way of
providence. And other phrases in Scripture will somewhat favor this
interpretation. As Ezekiel. 13.9. They shall not be written in the writings of the
house of Israel. What Is that? i. e. let them not any more be thought Israelites,
nor numbered among the people. And Ainsworth, I remember compares Psalm. 69.19.
with this place in Ezekiel. 13.9. and he makes the sense to be one and the same;
that to be blotted out of the book of life, is nothing else then to be out of
Gods protection; to be blotted out of the catalogue of the living, and have
ones life in danger to be brought to death. And this wish David wished for
those wicked men.

But then they object further from Rev. 22.19. If any man shall take away from
the words of this book, God shall take away his part in the book of life. Here,
say they, by book of life is unquestionably meant Gods decree; and the
Scripture says, They that take any thing from this book, God will blot him out
of the book of life, and will undoubtedly damn him.

To which I answer. I confess in this place the book of life is taken for Gods
decree; and that a man may be said to be blotted out of this book, and yet this
no way follow, that a man elected may be damned. And here let me give you
Austins words upon the place, which is a very clear and satisfactory answer.
That a man may be said to be blotted out of the book of life in two regards:
First, it is equivalent to this phrase, that this name shall never be written
in the book of Life. And you have often such phrases in Scripture. As it is
said in Matthew, He that does evil himself, and teaches men so to do, he
shall be least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Intimating, not as if he should come
to heaven, but that he should not come there at all. To be least there, is
never to be there. So here, to be blotted out is equivalent to this, that they
were never in.

Secondly, A man's name may be said to be blotted out of the book of life, not
as if it were there in deed and in truth, but in their own opinion; they
thought they were elected, and thought their names were written there, they had
strong conceits of this; and though they are now deluded, and mistaken, yet God
will make them know one day, when they are in hell, that their names are
blotted out of the book of life. Again,

Another Scripture they abuse is, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands,
take heed lest he fall. Now, say they, if it were not possible for a man
elected to fall, and fall finally, to what end is this caution of the Apostle?
it were a needless caution, were it not possible to come to pass.

To which I answer two things. First, the Apostle does not say, Let him that
stands, take heed left, etc. but the Apostle says, Let him that thinks he
stands, take heed lest he fall. Intimating, that men that think they are
elected, and think they are in a good condition, they should take heed, lest
they miscarry to all eternity.

Secondly, Take heed lest they fall. This falling here is not meant a falling
from grace finally, and falling into hell, and perishing; but the falling here
is only a falling into sin, and so an elect ^an should do. An elect man,
though he stand firm in Gods decree, yet he should take heed all the days of
his life, that he fall not into sin. And if you ask me, how I make that
appear, I answer, from the context. This is a conclusion, or caution the
Apostle gives upon the enumeration of several instances of the people of God,
that in former ages did sin against God. As some that tempted Christ, and fell
in one day 23000. Others that fell to fornication, and provoked him in the
Wildern^sse. With many such sins reckoned up, and the sum of all is this,
that seeing they that were Gods people fell into sin, and were punished,
therefore you that think you stand, and think you are elected, you should take
heed you fall not into sin, as they did. And thus I have done with resolving
this second query.

Thirdly, Q.
whether does God elect any man to life and salvation upon foresight of his
faith or good works? foreseeing that this man will believe, therefore I elect
him to salvation; and the other man will not believe, therefore I choose him to
damnation. Whether, I say, does God in his eternal decree elect any man to life
upon foresight of works. Here the Papists and Arminians join both together in
maintaining of this. The reason, say they, why God elects some, and not others,
is because God did foresee from eternity that that man would be holy, and would
believe in Christ, and therefore God elected him to salvation. These are the
hard imputations they lay to Gods charge.

And in the resolving of this, I shall answer it in the Negative. That God, in
electing a certain number of men to life and salvation, did not do it upon the
foresight of any good works he saw would be in them; whether Faith, Repentance,
Sanctification, or any other grace. Indeed it is true, the Papists many of them
do not grossly say that it was foresight of good works in general, but the
foresight of faith only, and so the Arminians.

But now, to overthrow this ungrounded opinion, First, I shall lay down
Scriptures to confirm this, that God in electing of men to salvation, does no^
do it upon foresight of good works, and then lay down reasons; and after that
take off those objections which seem to darken this truth.

First, for the Scriptures that confirm this, we have Romans 11.5. He has saved
a remnant according to the election of grace. Intimating, that the remnant that
are saved, it is only of grace, not of foreseen works. So Ephesians. 1.5, 11. He
has elected us according to the good pleasure of his will. Gods mere good will
was the impulsive cause of man's e^ection, and nothing in man. So likewise, Romans
2.11. That Gods election might stand, not according to our works, but according
to the good pleasure of him that called us. So 2 Timothy 1.9. Not of works, but
according to his own purpose and grace. Upon his good pleasure, and his good
will to mankind, upon that ground election stands.

But now to add some reasons why it cannot be that God should determine in his
own council, to save man upon the foresight of his works. I shall name four or
five. A^,

First, because the inferior privileges that God bestows upon his peoples,
as vocation, and justification, are not for their good works (though they are
in actual being) therefore much less is election for good works only
foreseen. First, for Vocation, 2 Timothy 1.19. We are called, not according to our
own works, but according to the purpose of his own grace. And then for
Justification, we are not justified for works neither. Romans 3.24. We are
justified freely by his grace, for by the works of the law shall no flesh be
justified. Now, if vocation and justification be not for works, much less is
election for works, and for works foreseen, not being actually in us.

Secondly, because then it would follow, that children dying in infancy could
not be elected; for the child being in the mothers womb, if it has life, it
has a soul, and so must either be saved, or damned. But a child, while it is
in the womb, neither acts good or evil. Now if God did elect persons to life
upon foresight of works, then children dying in the womb could not be elected;
because there are no works God could foresee in them. And then this would be a
very uncomfortable doctrine for parents that have children dying young.

Thirdly, then would man have somewhat whereof to boast before his God, as if
he could lay claim to salvation from him. If God were bound to choose men to
salvation upon foresight of good works, then man might say, I thank not God,
but I thank my believing, and thank my good works, for these were the motives
for which he chose me to glory; and ^hus would poor man boast against his Maker.

Fourthly, Because God has elected the worst of men; when others that have
more natural worth and goodness are passed by. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God has
chosen the weak things of the world, etc. and base things of the world, and
things that are despised has God chosen, etc. And Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee O
Father, that thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have
revealed them unto babes. Those that had the greatest worldly wisdom, and
natural abilities, that most excelled in outward strictness, and moral
virtues, are rejected, when those that are but babes in understanding, who many
times are the worst for their moralities, are elected; which is a clear
demonstration, that election is not grounded upon faith, or works foreseen; for
then the best had been chosen before the rest.

Fifthly, Our works carry no proportion to what God has elected us unto; we
are elected to eter^al glory, but our works are finite, imperfect, no more then
our duty, yea not done by our own strength, but by the power of Gods grace, and
therefore cannot be that which moves God to elect us.

Sixthly, because God does not choose men to life for the sake of Jesus Christ,
therefore much less for their works sake.

It is true, and mistake me not, I confess, (and so all Divines that are
confess this) that God saves a man for Christ's sake, but God elects not a man
for Christ's sake, but merely for his own good pleasure^ sake. God in choosing a
man to life, has no reference to Christ, as if Christ were the motive. Christ
was predestined himself, therefore could not be the cause of our
predestination, 1 Pet. 1.20. We are chosen in him, its true, Ephesians. 1.4. as the
common person; God elected Christ first in order, and all believers in him, but
it is not for Christ's sake, but according to his own will. As suppose a
Kingdom to be newly set up, a King is chosen, and his suecessors to follow
after; why then all the succeeding Kings are chosen in him that was first
elected: so are we chosen in Christ. God does choose a man as freely, as if
Christ did never die; and yet God saves none, but for Christ's sake; and this
makes election on Gods part most free. God does not consider Christ, nor the
good works we have, but it is only his own good will engages him to save some,
and neglect others. And thus much for proving this point. There are some
objections now that lie in the way which must be removed.

God, say they, does elect men upon the foresight of their good works; and they
allege four Scriptures to prove this. James 2.2. Has not God ch^sed the poor
of this world to be rich in faith? now, say they, their laying out their
estates for good uses, and so becoming poor, that is the reason why God chooses
them, and neglects richer men.

To which I answer. That poor here is only spoken of, as the quality of the
persons that are chosen, not as the cause wherefore they are chosen. And this
answer Mr. Perkins gives: that poverty is not the cause why, but the
description of the persons that are chosen, that Gods decree of election does
commonly run among the poorer sort of men, the more to advance his own grace;
that man shall not say, election is intailed upon works: for if poverty should
be the cause of their election, then all that are poor should be elected, which
is false. Again further they object,

2 These. 2.13. God from the beginning has chosen us to salvation, through
sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. Now say they,
sanctification, and faith is made as the channel, through which el^ction must
run, and therefore that is the cause or motive why God did elect them. To
this we answer.

That it is true, God elects men through sanctification and faith, as the end
God aims at in elect persons, not as the motive for which he elects them. And
this answer Rivet gives. All elect men shall be sanctified, and all elect men
shall believe; though it is not for this sanctification and belief that they
are elect^d. It is not for grace, but unto grace they are chosen. This
distinction the Sc^ipture gives, 1 Pet. 1.2. Ye are elect according to the
foreknowledge of God, through sanctification unto obedience. N^^ for, as the
motive; but to, as the end.

Ag^in T^t. 1.1. i^ i^ called the faith of Gods elect. Now, say they, i^ is
called so, because God elects them foreseeing their faith. To which we answer.

That faith is h^re called, the faith of Gods Elect; not as if G^d forese^ing
faith did elect men, but because all elect men shall believe; because faith is
a peculiar privilege belonging only to elect men, therefore it is called
their faith.

And then lastly, one Scripture more they allege, 2 Timothy 2.20. If any ^an
shall purge himself from sin, he shall be a vessel of honor. Now here, say
they, purging, that is, sanctification, and good works, it is made a condition
of election, of being a vessel of honor. God makes this condition, if he
foresee a man will purge himself, and will live holily, that man shall be
elected, shall be a vessel of honor. To which we give this answer, That
purging and san^tification is here lai^ down, not as the cause, but as the
sign of their election; not as the cause why men are vessels of honor, but
the sign or evidence that they are so. If you are purg^d, you shall be v^ss^ls
of honor; that is, if you are sanctified, it is a sign to you that you are
elected.

SERMON. XV.
2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, Give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE last Conclusion o^ Doctrine drawn from these words was this, That
Christians should put forth a great ^eal of diligence to make this sure to
their souls, that they are eternally elec^ed by God to life and glory. In the
prosecution of which, I have dispatched several queries. I am now to proceed
further in the dispatch of what yet remains to be spoken concerning this
subject. A fourth query follows.

Fourt^ly, Whether the decree of El^ct^on, Q.
or Gods purpose to ^ave a company of men, being from eternity, and being
immutable, whether does not this give way to man to be secure, and careless in
the use of the means of grace, that they take no care to get grace, and to get
heaven, while they are in the world? This is a very useful point to insist
upon, seeing the Arminians charge us with this, that if we hold election
without respect to Gods foresight of works in men, then this lays open a gap
for men to live as they list; that they say, If God has determined they shall
be saved, they shall be saved; if that they shall be damned, they shall be
damned, whether they are holy, or profane; if God has elected them to life,
they shall be saved, let them live as they lift. Thus the Arminians plead. This
therefore is the quere, whether this doctrine of election does administer any
ground for such a cavil as this to be in the minds of men?

To answer which, I shall first lay down this general Conclusion, That the
decree, or the purpose of God about the election of man to life and salvation,
does no way administer any just ground to men, to make them live as they list,
and to make them neglect the means of grace and salvation. In the cl^aring of
which, I shall lay down three particulars, to satisfy you about this matter.
As,

First, that Gods decree about Civil and Temporal matters, does no way give
encouragement to men to neglect the use of means, and live careless of the
accomplishment of his decree; and therefore not so in spiritual. As now for
instance: God has determined from all eternity, how long every one of us shall
live in the world; our days are numbered in his counsel. Now, though God has
determined how long we shall live, this no way gives us encouragement to say
therefore I will never put on a rag of clothes to cover me in Winter, and I
will never put a morsel of meat in my mouth; for God has determined how long I
shall live, and therefore whether I eat or no, till then I shall not die.
Again, God has determined from all eternity, touching every one of us, whether
we shall be poor or rich in this world, and therefore to draw this conclusion,
that it is no matter whether I be industrious in following my calling, and
looking after my trade, or whether I spend my estate in rioting and
drunkenesse; God has determined whet^^^ I sh^^^ be rich or poor; if he has
decreed I shall be poor, I shall be poor; or that I shall be rich, I shall be
rich, let me live as I please: this reasoning is very fond and foolish in
Temporal things, therefore much more in Spiritual. God has determined from all
eternity thou shall be saved or damned, and the decree of God cannot be
changed; but now to draw hence, that it is no matter how I live, whether in
ways of holiness, or in ways of sin, this is an abusive collection from Gods
decree. Because, as Dr. Preston says, if a man does not use those means that
may evidence to his soul that he is elected, it is an argument he is not
elected. If thou say, if God has determined it, he will save me, whether I am
holy or profane, and therefore I will never hear Sermon, never pray in my
family, never use holy duties; Says Preston, if thou neglect these means, it
is an argument thou art not elected; because, as God has elected thee to the
end, he has also ordained thee to use the means. I have read a story of an
Italian, who lying upon his deathbed, fent for a Physician, the most exquisit
and exact Artist in all Italy; and this man held this opinion I am now speaking
of, that seeing Gods decrees were unal^erable, a man might live as he lift, and
yet be saved; that let a man be as holy as he could be, if God had decreed his
damnation, he should be damned; and let a man be never so wicked, if God have
decreed his salvation, he should be saved; and that the decree of God took off
the use of all means, that a man need not use any means, but only trust in
God. The Physician being a man acquainted in the mysteries of Religion, after
he had asked him the state of his body, and where the disease lay, the party
desiring him to prescribed some physic; the Physician gave him this answer:
says he, God has determined how long you shall live; therefore, if I give you
physic, if God has determined you shall die, you shall die for all that; and
if he has decreed you shall live, though I give you no physic, yet you shall
live. And this answer (says the Historian) took such place with the Italian,
that it converted him in this very principle, and he became a man very diligent
in following the means of grace, upon this very saying. And indeed, a just and
ground^d speech it is. This ^^erefore is my answer, that if ^uch r^asonings as
these in temporal things are unreasonable, they are much more in spiri^ual.

Secondly, to you that make this plea, I would say this: That at that very
instant wherein God did decree or determine to bring a man to life, at that
very instant God did decree that that man would b^ holy before he died; he
shall use all holy and sanctified means conducible to his salvation. Romans 8.29.
Whom he did pred^stin^te, them he ^id predes^in^te to be conformable to the
Image of his son. God the Father, in that very decree wherein he does ordain
man to life, did ordain, that those men elected should live confo^mable to
Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of
the world was laid, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love.
God did decree, that our lives should be holy; he ordains holiness as the
means, as well as heaven as the end. So Ephesians. 2.10. God has created us in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which he has before ordained, that we should
walk in them. 2 These. 2.13. God, before the world was, at that very instant
wherein he ordained, and chose men to life, did also ordain, that men should
live a holy and blamel^sse life here upon earth. Now then, for men to make this
objection, that seeing God has decreed men to life, therefore men may live as
they list, is absurd: for if men do live as they list, it is an argument God
did not decree them to life, because God in decreeing men to life and
salvation, did decree they should walk in a course of sanctification, and holy
living in this world.

Thirdly, suppose this should be taken for granted, that God had decreed to
damn thee for me; that God in his purpose had appointed he would not save us;
yet God, as a Creator, deserves thy service. God, as a Creator, may lay claim
to thy duties. Though God should condemn us, yet he making us, deserves
obedience, and deserves duties of thankfulness from us. And therefore, under
this notion only, though no other consideration be looked after, this should
engage you to righteous living; and this should engage you in a way of duties,
though he never save you. Adam, though he never should come to heaven, being in
innocence, yet being made and created by God, was engaged to live a holy life.
And so it is with every man alive, as we are creatures, and have a being from
God, and the comfo^ts of this life from God, all this does oblige us to a
course of obedience, and righteous liv^ng toward God, though he should throw us
into hell, when we have done. And thus much for resolving the fourth Quere,
that the decree of God touching man's election to life, does no way give
encouragement to men to live as they list, upon the forementioned grounds. I
now pass to the fifth Quere.

Fifthly, what temptations does the devil suggest into the minds of godly men,
to make them doubt within themselves, that they are not elected by God, when
indeed they are, to make them think they are reprobate silver, when they are
vessels of honor, meet for their Masters use? Happily I may speak to some,
whose spirits are perplexed in this case. And the answer hereunto, I shall
reduce to three heads, and as I lay them down, labor to take them off, that
they may be no just ground or reason to make you doubt of your election.

First, the devil tempts a godly man with this, that sure you cannot be
elected, Because that before your calling you were so exceeding sinful and
profane in your lives; so exceedingly profane, vile, wicked liver^, that
certainly (the devil will say) such as you could not fall with in the compass^
of Gods purpose to save.

Secondly, the devil will tell you, that certainly you cannot be elected to
life, because that after your calling into Jesus Christ, you have fallen so
foully into capital, and scandalous crimes and sins.

And thirdly, because that God does continually pursue his people with outward
and great afflctions; thence the devil will gather, you are not the chosen and
beloved of God. These three grand temptations he does many times fasten upon
tender consciences, merely to create a world of doubts and perplexities in the
chosen vessels of mercy. I begin with the first.

First, the devil tempts you, that sure you are not elected, because your lives
were so exceedingly profane, and you were such abominable ill livers, before
you took upon you the profession of Jesus Christ, this the devil lays before
many a poor soul to stumble at.

To satisfy you in this therefore, I shall lay down four particulars by way of
answer.

First, Many of the servants of God before their calling, have been very lewd,
wicked, notorious, profane livers, and yet have been within the compass of
Gods election to life and glory. Cast your eyes upon Paul, and there you shall
find what he was before his call. He tells you himself, I was a blasphemer, (a
horrible sin) I was a persecuter, I was injurious to Gods Church. I haled men
to prison for professing the name of Jesus. (These are great sins) Nay further,
says he, I was exceeding mad against the Church of God. A man enraged with
malice against the people of God. Now what could be more vile then these? And
yet you will find this man, a choosen vessel of mercy. Nay, you shall find,
God to strengthen the confidence of men upon their election, puts a scandalous
liver and election together, to make men see, that a scandalous life before
conversion, is no prejudice to a man's election. Acts 9.13, 14. And Ananias
said, Lord, we have heard of this man by many (speaking of Paul) how much evil
he has done to the Saints at Jerusalem. We have heard by many what an evil man
this is, and that he has ^uthority from the chief Priests to bind all that
call upon thy Name; and that this man did do it, did execute his commission;
here was a wicked liver: but now mark what the Lord says, Go thy way, for he
is a chosen vessel to me. Here you see Ananias lays his offense, and his
wickedness before him; and yet, Go thy way, says God: Go thy way, for he is
a chosen vessel to me. The like instances we have in Manasseth and Mary
Magdalen. This therefore is my first answer, that many of the servants of God
have been men of very ill and notorious lives, before conversion, and yet they
have been within the compass of Gods election to salvation:

Secondly, though men have been notoriously wicked, in their lives before
calling, yet if this notorious wickedness does lay any engagement upon them, to
make them labor to be more eminent in grace after calling; this is rather a
sign of election, then reprobation. It is observable in Paul, he was a
notorious wicked man before his call; but now this exceeding wickedness of his
before call, did engage him to labor to exceed all others in goodness after
he was converted; and the more evil he was before, the more holy he labors to
be after. As he labored before to hale men to prison for professing Jesus
Christ, he is now as zealous to draw men to Jesus Christ after his call; he was
very industrious to do evil before his call, and this made him after his call,
as he says himself, I was in labors more abundant then they all. And so Mary
Magdalen, who before her calling was a vile woman, one that was a common
harlot; a woman out of whom Jesus Christ cast seven devils; and yet this woman,
after her calling, she labored to be more eminent in godly sorrow, then any
woman before or since; she washed Christ's feet with her tears, and wiped them
with the hairs of her head. The like of which you do not read of any woman in
Scripture. And this was a very good sign; when your notoriousness in waias of
sin before calling, shall lay such an engagement upon you to become more
eminent in grace after calling; this is a very good encouragement or evidence
that you are within the compass of Gods election; and therefore you have no
cause to be discouraged. Suppose before the word laid hold upon your
conscience, you were guilty of filthy sins, not fit to be named in the
congregation; if you will the more honor God, and praise God now, and walk
more humbly, and labor to excel each other in grace now, as you did in sin in
times past. This is a great sign that you are in the compass of Gods Elect
ones.

Thirdly, you that have been scandalous in your lives before calling, for your
comfort know, that God in his eternal counsel does commonly make the profane
and wicked and the worst of men, the objects of his election, rather then civil
honest men, rather then men that are of an honest and civil, and moral
conversation here in this world. And the Lord does it upon this ground, the
more to magnify the freeness, and the riches of his own grace in electing men
to life. For should God only choose moderate and civil honest men in the world,
men would be apt to think it is that man's morality, and that mas civility, that
was the motice which provoked God to elect them; and therefore God, to
overthrow these thoughts, he lets electfon run rather unto men that have been
notoriously gross and sinful in their lives, then other men; Manasseh a
notorious bloody man, yet falls within the compass^ of Gods election, when many
a civil man is left out. Ma^y, a common harlot, yet chosen, when many a modest
chaste woman was cast into hell. Matthew. 21.31, 32. That Christ urges a parable
of two men. One that said he would go and follow Christ, but did not; and the
other said he would not go, but did; now which of these twain did the will of
Christ? and they said, the first. And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto
you, that publicans and harlots shall go into heaven before you. But you will
say, was this common? this was only one single time: therefore mark the next
words, For Joh^ came to you in the way of righteousness, and you believed not;
but the publicans and harlots believed in Christ. John came preaching, and you
would not believe, you Phrisees, strict moral men, that did not fly out into
such scandals as other men did, you would not believe, says Christ, but
Publicans, men that were most addicted to extortion, and unconscionable gain,
they embraced Jesus Christ, when moral men would not. This therefore should be
another comfort for you, that many times election runns rather to the profaner
sort of men, then to men that are civil and righteous dealing men here in the
world; and this God hoth to magnify the riches of his own grace.

Fourthly, that it is no matter what you were before your call^ng, if you are a
repentant and holy people after; your former miscarriages shall no way
prejudice your future blessedness, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Neither Fornicator, nor
Idolater, nor Adul^erer, nor envious, nor thief, nor covet^us, nor reviler
shall enter unto the Kingdom of Heaven: and such were some of you etc. Here
you see a Catalogue of vile evils heaped together, and such were some of you;
but now you are washed, now you are sanctified, and^. So that no matter what
you were before conversion, though guilty of great sins, so you are now a
reformed people, now a sanctified people, Titus 3.3. We our selves were
sometime^ foolish, dis^bedient, decieved, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
and living in malice and envy, etc. You were so, but after the kindness and
love of God appeared to you, after they were converted they were not so. So
that these four particulars will clearly take off this objection, that no matter
what you were before conversion, if you are now a repentant people, and bewail
your evils, and reform your ways, your former ill led life will be no
hindrance at all to your election. Indeed this I must needs say, that you that
have been most notorious in sin, God expects this at your hands, that you be
most eminent in grace, most deep in humiliation, most eminent in godly sorrow,
though your former evils do no way prejudice your election.

Secondly, if the devil cannot fasten this upon you, he will come upon you with
this ass^ult, viz. your frequent falling into scandalous and foul, and gross
enormities, after you took upon you a profession of Jesus Christ. And this the
devil will lay close: happily sin before conversion was not so great; but now
since you have followed Sermons, and since you have professed Jesus Christ,
since that time you have fallen foulely into gross and scandalous sins, and
surely this is inconsistent with grace, and cannot befall persons within the
compass of Gods election.

And I confess this is both sad and hazardous; yet I shall lay down three
things to uphold thee, that yet for all this thou may be within the compass
of Gods election. As,

First, that diverse persons that were within the compass of Gods election,
have fallen foulely into gross sins after their call. Lot, after he was
called, fell to be incestuous, and fell to drunkenesse; David, after he was
called, fell into Adultery; Peter, after he was called, fell to a denial of
Jesus Christ. Yea, you read of Solomon, 1 Kings 11.9. That his heart was tu^ned
from the Lord, after the Lord had revealed himself unto him twice. After God
had revealed himself to Solomon, and converted him; after that time he did evil
against his God. Nay, you read further, Nebem. 13.26 27. That Solomon's wives
turned away his heart from the Lord, though he was the beloved of his God.
Though he were beloved by God, and were elected by him, yet his wives turned
away his heart from the Lord. The like phras^ you have Numb. 14.23. After all
these works, I have done among them, and the miracles I have shown them in
Egypt, and in the Wilderness, they have provoked me, says the Lord, these ten
times. After they were the Lords by covenant, and after they were a delivered
people; after this they provoked him many a time, by sinning against him, and
yet diverse of them were elect vessels of mercy. So that, I say, many of Gods
servants after their calling, are fallen foulely into scandalous sins, and yet
have been within the compass of Gods election.

Secondly, if you falling into gross and scandalous sins, have not these four
sinful ingredients, your falling into sin after calling, may be consistent with
election. First, if you fall not into sin voluntarily. Secondly, if you fall
not into the same sin frequently. Thirdly, if you fall not into sin with
complacency. And fourthly, if you lie not under your fall impenitently. If
these ingredients be mixed with your sinning after your call, they are
inconsistent with election. First, if you fall into sin voluntarily, that you
rush into sin, as a horse into the battle. Secondly, if you fall into the same
sin frequently, then it is hazardous and dangerous. It is true Peter denied
Christ, but it was but in one fit of a temptation. D^vid fell into Adultery,
but it was never but once; Lot was guilty of drunkenness, but only in one
fit: For the Servants of God, though they fall, yet they fall not frequently
into the same sin, if gross and scandalous. Thirdly, if you fall into sin with
complacency, that you take pleasure in the evils you fall into; if you do as
Job says, wallow sin under your tongue, counting it sweet and delightsome to
you. And lastly, if all this be joined with impenitency, that you have not a
heart to repent of the evils you fall into, the Lord have mercy upon you; for
certainly, if you fall into sin with these ingredients, you are not within the
compass of Gods mercy to save. But now, though you do fall into sin, if it be
not voluntary, but through the force of temptation: if it be not with
complacency, but a dislike of the sins you fall into; and as soon as you do
fall, and see your sins you repent and rise again, though you do fall in this
way, it will be no prejudice to your election.

Thirdly, falling into sin after calling and profession made of Jesus Christ,
may be consistent with Election in these four cases. First, if the sins you
fall into be clearly discerned. Secondly, if they are sensibly bewailed.
Thirdly, if they are strongly resisted; and lastly, if they are daily labored,
and prayed against. Though you do fall into sin, yet in these cases sin will
not be damning to you, or be an impediment to your election. And thus I have
done with the second case of conscience. Only let me urge this one thing before
I leave it, (for I would not have you make this Doctrine a Doctrine of liberty;
but I would have you lay this to heart) that if any of you fall foulely after
conversion, believe it, God will make you smart for this, though not in hell,
yet you shall have a hell in your conscience, you shall have the very
pregustations of hell, a wounded conscience, and God will expect deep
humiliation, and great repentance, if you sin after profession made of Jesus
Christ. It may have that influence upon you, as upon David, who cried out, I
have no quietness in my bones, by reason of my sin. God will give you no rest
night nor day by reason of sin, if you run into it after profession made of
Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, men do doubt of their election, because God pursues them with
continual afflictions, and lays the continued strokes of his heavy wrath upon
them; and this makes many a godly man think that he is not in the number of
Gods elect ones. To which I shall briefly answer.

That this is nothing else but a temptation, and not a truth; and it was the
very controversy that Jobs friends had with him; they would fasten this upon
Job, that he was a Reprobate, and an Hypocrite, because God did so afflict him:
yet Job maintained his sincerity, and shows his grounds, that God was his
friend, and that he did not reject him, though he did afflict him. But to speak
more particularly.

First, no man can infallibly and certainly judge of Gods purposes about man's
election, or reprobation, by any of the dispensations of God toward their
bodies in the things of this life. Eccl. 9.1, 2. No man knows either love or
hatred by any thing that is before him. All things fall alike to all. The same
event to him that fears God, and to him that fears him not, to him that
swears, and to him that fears an oath.

Secondly, Afflictions from God are so far from being grounds, or evidences
that a man is not elected, that in some cases they may prove evidences that
they are the very elect of God. Heb. 12.6, 7. He chasteneth every son whom he
receives; they are bastards, and not sons, whom he chastises not. As ^any as
I love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent. Rev. 3.19. In
some cases afflictions from God are rather tokens of love from God, then the
contrary. As now, in case afflictions be as a spur to you, to make you quicken
your pace in heavenway. 2. In case your afflictions be as pruning hooks to you,
to cut and lop off the luxuriant buddings and workings of sin in the heart.
3. In case affliction be as a hedge to you to keep you in, and to make you walk
in a close communion with God, and not to wander or go astray from him: 4. In
case affliction be as a file to you, to file off that rust that cleaves to your
nature. 5. In case affliction proves a furnace to refine you from that dross
of corruption that is mixed with your services. In these cases afflictions are
so far from being grounds to doubt of your Election, that they may rather
give you evidence, you are the very elect of God,

Thirdly, That God in his wisdom does many times expose his own people to
greater troubles in this life, then he lets wicked and reprobate men undergo.
God will not give reprobates their hell here, that so he might give them hell
hereafter. God will not give the elect heaven here, to make heaven more
desirable to them while they live here; and more welcome when they come there.
It is Gods pleasure in the dispensations of his providence amongst men, to let
his own people lie under more outward sorrows, then wicked men shall do, Psalm.
73.5. Their eyes burst out with fatness, they are not in trouble, as other men,
neither are they plagued as other men are. The Lord in his dispensations does
so deal with wicked men, that they are not plagued, they are not troubled as
godly men are in this world. And therefore surely affliction is no argument of
Gods displeasure, or of their not being within the compass of Gods purpose to
do them good.

SERMON. XVI.
2. Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure.


THE Doctrine I am yet upon is this, That Christians ought to put forth a great
deal of diligence to make this sure to their souls, that they are eternally
called by God to life and salvation. In the prosecution of which Doctrine, I
have gone over several particulars; and have now only one Query more to
satisfy about Election, and then to wind up this Doctrine, in laying down
some explicatory propositions, very conducible to illustrate this Doctrine of
Election. And the Quere to be resolved is this.

What are those delusions of the Devil whereby he nourishes presumptuous
persuasions in the minds of men, that they are elected by God, when they are
not? And to answer this, I shall reduce all I have to say under these three
heads.

First, The Devil persuades wicked men that they are elected upon this ground:
Because they do not break forth into such gross and scandalous enormities in
their lives, as many men that live about them do: and therefore the Devil
boulsters them up in this, Surely if you were not elected, you would be as bad
as any, and as vile and exorbitant as any. Now seeing God keeps you in, that
you act not such things in your lives, as other men do; this may be a
comfortable evidence to you, that you are in the number of Gods elect ones. And
this delusion deceives thousands of people, especially morallized and
civillized men; they run hoodwinkt to hell, nourishing hopes of life and
salvation, and never feel the contrary, till they come to death and hell. I
shall declare this to be a delusion, in laying down four or five particulars. As

First, That there are many men, that are mentioned in Scripture, not to have
been within the compass of Gods election, who yet were men of very bl^^lesse
and honest lives, not bl^mished with any gross and scandalous evils. Read Luke
18.11, 14. of the Pharisee. He tells you, he thanks God he was no extortioner,
no adulterer, no covetous pers^n, no d^unkard, nor was he as wicked as the
Publican was. Her^ you see a man that spoke vauntingly and truly, that he was
not a man that broke out into those miscarriages other men did; yet what was
this man? An elect vessel? No. Read ver. 14. and the Text tells you, the
Publican went away justified rather the other; the Phasee, though he was free
from scandalous and gross enormities in his life, yet he was not a justified
man, and so by consequence not an elect man. You read of hypocrites, Mat. 23.
that cleansed the outside of the cup, and of the platter, that is, cleansed
their conversations, and cleansed the outward man of gross scandals, and yet
within were full of filth; and Christ tells us, they were hypocrites, that
should have their portion in hell. And should you view over Historians that
write of the Scribes and Pharisees, and strict men among the Jews, they will
tell you what wonderful holy-lived men they were; they were often in duties,
fasted twice a week, prayed every day in the corners of the streets; none so
strict as they in observing the Sabbath; would go veiled, left they should be
ensnared by lascivions objects; and yet these very men so wonderful strict and
cautious, were men that had no dram of grace in them at all. Though they were a
people thus well dressed in their lives, yet the Scripture tells us of them,
that Whores and Harlots should go to Heaven before them. This therefore is the
first, that many men have had their lives free from gross scandals, and yet
were men that were not elected by God to life and salvation.

Secondly, That a man's conversation may be free from scandalous sins, yet if
this freedom from scandals proceed from a wrong principle, it may be in a
person not elected. As I will make it appear. There may be a freedom from
gross sins proceeding from a threefold principle, and yet a man be in a state
of damnation and of reprobation. As first, There may be a freedom from
scandals, proceeding from religious education; secondly, from a natural
disposition; and thirdly, from the power of restraining grace. First, there may
be a freedom from gross sins, proceeding from the power of education. So
the young man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19.18, 19, 20. when Christ told him what
the Law was. Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not steal, thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, thou shall do no murder, thou shall not bear
false witness, etc. Says the young man, All these have I kept from my youth.
He was a Pharisee, and his parents strict in their course of living, and
brought him up so from his youth; and yet this man no elect man, ver. 22.
Secondly, a man may be free from scandalous sins, arising from an ingenious
natural disposition. A man's disposition may sometimes be utterly averse to some
sins. Plu^arch a heathen could say this, I had rather it were said, there
were no such man as Plutarch in the world, then to say that Plutarch was
unchaste, Plutarch was a drunkard, or Plutarch was a swearer. Man's natural
temper may sometimes be free from gross sins, and yet he not an elect person
for all this. And then thirdly, a man may be free from gross sins, as
proceeding from the power of restraining grace, Genesis 20.6. I also withheld
Abimelech from sinning against me. He was a Heathen, and a wicked man, and yet
God, by the power of restraining grace, did keep Abimelech from running into
that exorbitant course of sinning against him. So that if a man be free from
gross sins, and yet proceeding from false principles, a man may not be an
elect man for all this. Unless your freedom from sin proceed from a renewed
nature, from a sanctified heart, and from the saving operation of the holy
Ghost; unless it comes from these principl^^, your freedom from gross sins
can be no pledge to your souls, that you are elected by God to life.

Thirdly, that a man having a good life, free from scandalous sins, if he
have not a good heart, that is no argument of a man that is within the compass
of Gods election, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; nor
is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew, which is
one inwardly, and circumcision is of the heart, whose praise is not of men, but
of God. Intimating, that he is not a Christian; he is not an elect Jew, that
was one outwardly; that is, that was conformable to the rites and customs of
the Jews; but he was one that was one inwardly, that had his sins mortified
his nature changed, and his heart cleansed, he was an elect Jew. So that to
have a holy life, if a man have not an holy heart, is no sign that a man is
within the compass of Gods election.

Fourthly, God in electing men to life, does pass by moral and civil honest
men, that trust and depend upon their own righteousness and strict living,
rather then any sort of men in the world. Matthew. 21:31, 33. says Christ, John
Baptist preached the Gospel of repentance, but you believed not, but Publicans
and ^arlots believed. Those Pharisees that did depend upon their own
righteousness, and their own goodness, Christ did not call them, Christ did not
own them, God made them not the objects of his election. Hence it is said,
Matthew. 9.13. Christ came not to call the righteous, but sinn^rs to repentance:
that is, men depending upon their own righteousness, and their own parts, they
are left out by Christ, as if he came not for them; but Christ came to call
sinners, that see their sin, and were vile in their own eyes, Christ came to
call such. Again,

2. The second delusion, whereby the devil makes men think they are elected by
God, is drawn from their external vocation; that they are not only civilized
and moralized ones, but they find the power of the word to call them; and upon
this vocation they bottom the hopes of their election. And they have Scripture
for it, Romans 8.30. Whom God predestinates he calls. Now God has called them by
the word, and they have found the word come with power upon t^eir conscience,
to reform the evils of their life. (And the power of vocation they deem higher
(as indeed it is) then the power of education, or natural temper;) and
therefore, think they, I having vocation, this is an evidence to me of my
election. To this delusion I shall only say two things, by way of answer.

First, it is true indeed, the Scripture says, all whom God predestinates, he
calls; but the Scripture does not say, that all whom he calls, he
predestinates. No man that God appoints to life, but before he dies, God will
call him by the word; but God does not say any where, that those whom he calls,
them he did predestinate to life.

Secondly, many men are outwardly called by the word into a profession of
Christ, when they are not eternally elected by God to salvation. Mat. 22.14.
Many are called, but few are chosen. Many are called, but all those that are
externally called by the word, are not chosen, nor all ordained to life. A man
may be called from ignorance to knowledge, yet not elected Heb. 6.4. After they
were enlightened, and had tasted the word of God, and the power of the world to
come, yet they fell away. A man may be called from profanesse to profession,
from the world into the Church, as Simon Magus was, yet not elected, but remain
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Thirdly, A third delusion whereby men are deceived by the Devil, to think they
are elected, when they are not, is this. If they cannot plead their education,
and moral manner of living, or if they cannot plead their vocation, their last
plea is, the mercy of God, they hope God is a merciful God, and God made them
not all to damn them; they are Gods creatures, made by him, and God that made
them, will save them; and hereupon they fasten their hopes, that they are in
the number of Gods elect ones. This is a strong delusion, especially amongst
ignorant people. And to this I answer in two particulars.

First, when as men say, God is a merciful God, therefore they hope they are
elected, I answer: It is true, God is a merciful God, yet God is as just as
merciful; he is mercifully just, and justly merciful; his mercy cannot intench
upon his Justice, nor shall his Justice entrench upon his mercy; one Attribute
shall not clash with another; he is no more merciful then he is just, nor is he
more just then he is merciful.

Secondly, though God be a merciful God, yet Gods saving mercy is not so large
as to extend to all creatures that live, that he has made. You read Isay
27.11. This is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will
not have mercy upon them, and be that formed them will show them no favor.
Here you see the Prophet tells them, that that God that made them, will damn
them, and that God that formed them, that God will show them no favor. So that
Gods mercy extends not so far, as to reach to all the works of his hands; for
if so, the devils might claim salvation as well as man; for God made them when
they were glorious Angels, as well as man: and therefore, if all the works of
Gods hands should plead for salvation, they might as well come within the
compass of Gods election as wicked men do.

And thus you see in these several Sermons, I have finished the Doctrines of
Effectual Vocation, and Eternal Election. I will now a little illustrate the
point, by laying down ^en Propositions, which will serve to clear the Doctrine
of Election in many points about it, and so conclude.

First, That all men are not the objects of Gods election, or of Gods choice.
And this proposition does confute the opinion of Origin. Origin was of this
mind, that all mankind should be saved, nay, the very devils themselves, they
should all be saved by Christ. A most groundless and unheard of opinion; for
all men are not elected to salvation. Jude tells us in his Epistle, there were
some of old ordained to condemnation; and if so, surely they could not fall
within the compass of Gods election, 1 These. 5.9. There are some ordained to
wrath; but we are not amongst them, says the Apostle, but we are ordained to
obain salvation by Jesus Christ. All are not objects of Gods election to life.

Secondly, that the fewest sort of men and women that God has made are the
objects of his election. God in his own council has elected to life and
salvation the fewest sort of m^n and women in the world. And this is a very
dreadful point. Many are called, but few are chosen. Matthew. 22.14. Romans 11.5. A
remnant, according to the election of grace. And here in pursuing this head, I
shall lay down two things under this proposition: First, that there are but few
rich men chosen by God to life and salvation. Secondly, there are but few civil
honest men chosen by God to life and salvation. There are but few rich men that
fall within the compass of Gods purpose to save, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many mighty,
(h^ does not say, not any; but not many mighty) not many noble, not many great
ones of the world are chosen. You read Matthew. 19.24. That it is as easy for a
Camel to go thorou^h ^ N^edles eye, a^ for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of God. As easy for a Camel. It is not meant in this sense, as some
expound it. That there was a gate in Jerusalem called the Needles eye; a
little and low gate, which their Camels being lad^^ could not go through and
therefore they must unload the burden, and the Camel stoop before they could
enter. Some ^hink Christ's speech had relation to that Beza says, that instead
of (...) a Camel, they read (...) a Cable, which, if untwisted may be put
through the eye of a Needle, but the knot is not untied, but cut by this
Exposition. But the words were a proverbial speech among the Jews, who had
this proverb amongst them, that when any one spoke things either unlikely or
unprobable, they would say, This can be as easily done, as a Camel can go
through a Needles eye. And Christ, alluding to this Proverb, says, that rich
men, that do^e upon their riches, and cleave to their wealth, and rather part
with heaven and Christ, and soul and all, then part with their riches, Christ
makes it an unpossible thing for such rich men to come into heaven. As I once
told what Buchanan said, lying upon his deathbed in a message to King James, I
am going to that place, where few Kings come. And Beloved, the speech is true,
for not many wise, not many mighty, not many noble has the Lord chosen.
Secondly, few civil hon^st men do fall within the compass of Gods choice to
save. Moral men, that trust upon their civility and moral honesty, and plain
dealing; few or none of these come to heaven. Publicans and Harlots shall come
to Heaven before you. Matthew. 21.32. Whores and Harlots believe in me, when you
do not, says Christ.

Thirdly, That though God in his own counced has determined, or made choice
but of the fewest number of men and women men to life and salvation, yet this
does no way entrench upon the mercy of God, this does no way lessen or impeach
the mercy of God. Men may think, as if surely God had cast off all bowels, and
cast off all mercy. What? God make such a world of men as he has done, and
save but a few of these? Man might think, as if God were a hard Master, that
delighted in the destruction of man, that had forgotten to be gracious; such a
hard charge will they be apt to lay upon God. But now, Beloved, that God has
elected so few a number to life, this does no way impeach the mercy of God. And
this I make appear thus: because God was bound to save none at all; therefore
you cannot challenge God either with unmercifulness, or unfaithfulness, if he
should save none. It was a mere act of his bounty and good will, that he would
save any. Nay, secondly, there is that in man, in the best of men, that might
justly provoke God not to save any: And therefore, if God save any, it is of
grace. And this is a certain rule, that God does show more mercy in saving of
one, then he would have done rigor of Justice, had he damned all. As may be
made plain by this comparison. Suppose forty men guilty of Rebellion were
arraigned for their lives, and were condemned to die by the Law; if the Prince
pardon four of these forty he shows more mercy in pardoning the four, then
he does rigor of Justice in condemning the forty. Why? because the Fact
deserved death in all alike. So it is with God: Every man upon earth deserves
death and damnation; and if God cull out any of the mass of mankind, to save
them, he shows more mercy, then he had done rigorous Justice, should he have
destroyed all, because he is bound to save none at all.

Fourthly, God in electing a certain number to life, does it without foresight
of any good works which he saw would be in them. Indeed the Papists and
Arminians join their strength, to maintain this; God, say they, foresaw men
would believe in Christ, and would be holy in their lives, and therefore God
did choose them to life. This you may remember I spent some time in overthowing
formerly, and therefore pass it over now. viz. That God did not choose men to
life, with reference to any good works he foresaw in them. This indead is an
undoubted truth; All men whom God did elect to life, he foresaw they would have
good works in them; but Gods foreseeing of this, was no: the cause for which he
did elect them. No, the motive was his own will, according to the pleasure of
his own grace, Romans 9.11. and Romans 11.5. A remnant are saved according to the
election of grace, for if it were of works, grace is no more grace. Were
election upon foresight of good works, then it would follow, that infants dying
in infancy were not within the compass of Gods election, because an infant so
dying, could not perform any good works; and so their case would be most
miserable. Besides, we are not justified by actual works, therefore not elected
upon works foreseen. Romans 3.24. for there is the like reason of these two.

Fifthly, That Gods election is so free, that in choosing and electing men to
life and salvation, he does not do it for the sake of Jesus Christ himself.
Understand this well, that therein you might both give Christ his due, and God
the father his due: for mistake me not. God does save none but by Christ, but
God did elect men without reference to Jesus Christ as the motive of election,
merely according to the purpose of his own will. All modern and latter Divines
lay down this for a truth, that it was the mere pleasure, and good will of God
to man, that was the motive of Gods electing us, and not Christ. Christ could
not be the cause, because he was the effect. Now what is the effect, cannot be
the cause. Gods love in electing mankind, did produce Jesus Christ to be the
means of our salvation, and of bringing about Gods election, therefore he being
the effect of election cannot be the cause. The cause of election was eternal,
but the merits of Christ were not so. Again, Christ was elected himself. 1 Pet.
1.20. He was preordained of God before the world was. Now he that was elected
himself, could not be the cause of our election. Besides the elect are said to
be given to Christ to be saved, John 17.2. therefore he was not the cause of
our election. It is true, the Scripture tells us, Ephesians. 1.4 We are elected in
Christ, i. we are elected in Christ as a common person. God first chose Christ,
and then believers in Christ, as members of his body. But God elects no man for
Christ's sake, but man is chosen merely of Gods bounty, without reference to
Jesus Christ. And here Divines say, Gods love in electing man to life was as
free, as if Christ had never died; and it was so free, that man was not
beholding to Christ for his election; and yet Christ's sufferings were so full,
as if men were not bound to God for their election. Thus they are pleased to
express it. And the reason why the Scripture speaks thus, that we are only
chosen in Christ, not for Christ, is to give God the Father his due in electing
men to life: that God did it merely of his own grace, and therei^ Gods love and
favor is apparent to all the world, that he did elect man without Christ, as
the motive of his election: and yet Jesus Christ being come into the world, he
carries on our salvation, and he is the cause of it; though he was not the
cause of Gods first thoughts, in electing man to life.

Sixthly, All men that are elected by God to life and salvation shall sooner or
later before they die be called into a state of conversion, and believing, Romans
8.30. whom he did predestinate, them be also called: and Acts 13.48. As many as
were ordained to eternal life believed. So that God the father, in ordaining
man to life, has ordained this also, that before they die, they shall be a
converted and believing people, and therefore men remaining unconverted,
uncalled, unbelieving, they are not the objects of Gods election.

Seventhly, that God in choosing or electing men to life, does let his election
run ordinarily unto the meanest, and unto the worst sort of men in the world,
^en that have least natural endowments, least moral excellencies, least worldly
gallantry; ordinarily election runs that way. God has chosen the poor things
of this world, and things despised, and things that are not has be chosen. 1
Cor. 1.27. Jam. 2.5. Has not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in
faith. Ordinarily the Lord chuse^h poor and mean men, that have no natural or
moral excellencies. Hence it was that when Christ left the learned Pharisees,
and Doctors among the Jews, the ignorant and poor people, they flocked after
Jesus Christ; they looked after Jesus Christ, when the rich and great men of
the world had no sh^re in him.

Eighthly, that a man may be an elect child of God, and yet not express the
fruit of his election in many years here in the world, and this is a very
comfortable point. An instance you have of this in Paul. It is observable of
Paul, the Scripture tells us he was a chosen vessel, Acts 9.15. and yet Paul
lived many years, before the fruit of his election appeared in him. Some
Historians say, Paul lived 37. the least say 30 years, before the fruit of
election appeared in him, for he was converted the very year after Christ's
death; and all the while before, he did express fruit that was seemingly
repugnant to an elect estate, as if a man could not be an elect vessel, that
was so vile as he: he was a blasphemer, a persecuter, injurious to the Church,
^aled men to prison, mad with rage against the professors of Jesus Christ. Nay,
he was a man that had a hand in putting Steven the first Martyr to death. So
long he lived in a course of iniquity, for 30. years together, and yet this man
was an elect vessel then. So the Thief upon the Cross, an elect child of
God, yet did not express the fruit of his election in repentance and
conversion, until the last hour of his life. So that I say a man may be an
elect child of God, and yet not express the fruit of his election in his life
for many years.

Ninthly, that God for the great love he bears to his elect that are in the
world, lets Reprobates and wicked men enjoy many mercies and outward
deliverances, for their sakes* Mark 13.19, 20. There shall be tribulation,
says Christ, such as was not from the beginning of the world, nor shall be the
end thereof: but for the elect sake those days shall be shortened. For his
elect sake, God did mitigate, did shorten, God did take away that trouble from
them. So Esa. 1.9. Had not God left us a small remnant, we had been like
Sodom, yea like unto Gomorrah. Had not God left a handful of his elect and
godly men amongst them, all the rest had been destroyed. So Esa. 65.8. And the
Lord said, destroy not the people, for a blessing is among them. That is, my
people is among them, and my elect is among them, therefore destroy them not.
God did not destroy the Nation of the Jews, because God had his own people
mixed among them. Lo Job. 22.30. And this conclusion administers matter of
thankfulness, to all men upon earth, to make you bless God, that he keeps his
people alive among you, for it is for the elects sake you have all the outward
blessings and mercies you do enjoy.

Tenthly and lastly, take in this conclusion: That this world shall continue no
longer, then till the number of Gods elect be accomplished; when God has
accomplished, and brought in to Christ the number of his elect; the world shall
not stand one minute longer after this work is done. God does but uphold the
world, till the full numbers of Jews and Gentiles be come in. If the number
were filled, Jesus Christ would surrender up the Kingdom to his Father. The
Heavens should gather together like a scrowle, and the Elements should melt
with fervent heat, and this world should come to a dissolution. It is the elect
in the world, that keep up the world, that it does not fall about our ears. And
thus having spent these 16 Sermons touching man's Effectual calling, and eternal
Election, I have now brought all unto a conclusion. And I earnestly entreat
you, let it be your work, to put forth your diligence to make this sure to your
own souls, that you are effectually called, and that you are eternally elected
to obtain life and salvation by Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
WE must give diligence to gain Assurance of our calling, p. 21. and why, p.
22. and seq. Whether Assurance of our calling be attainable in this life, p.
93. and seq. Two extremes about this p. 17. Hindrances to be removed in getting
Assurance of our Calling. p. 115. and seq. Means to be used to get Assurance p.
119. and seq. At what time God fills his people with most Assurance, p. 128. and
seq. Difference between Assurance and groundless presumption, p. 121. and seq.
Directio^n to such as have Assurance p. 144 How to use Assurance p. 145. and
seq. How to preserve Assurance p. 152. and seq. what must be done, ibid. what
avoided p. 154. and seq. How to improve Assurance p. 157. and seq. How to
recover Assurance when it is lost p. 166. and seq. What sins chiefly forfeit our
Assurance p. 161 Comforts to those that want Assurance p. 180 We should use
diligence to get Assurance of Election p. 165 whether it be attainable in this
life p. 166. and seq. objections against it answered p. 167 Not to be gotten by
ascending into Gods decree, but descending into our own hearts p. ^73
Afflictions no argument that we are not elected p. 205. and seq.
C
A Twofold Calling, external and internal p. 3 Why Calling set before Election
p. 4 Use diligence to get assurance of our Calling, p. 23 see assurance What
effectual Calling is p. 21, 22 Signs of effectual Calling p. 24. to 37 Gods
method in Calling a sinner p. 24. and seq. Mistakes about it ibid. Who are most
terrified in their Calling p. 28 We should resemble him that calls us p. 38 Not
blemish our high Calling ibid. How great a mercy our effectual Calling is p.
39. and seq. Ten sad Conclusions to those that are not effectually Called p.
44. and seq. Many called to profession, who are not called to possession of
Christ ibid. To be called outwardly, and not inwardly, brings heavier
condemnation. ibid. Many presume they are called, when they are not p. 45
Self-conceited persons most unlikely to be called ibid. That others are called,
and we not, much aggravates our sin p. 46 The Word preached the ordinary means
of calling; a sad Word, to whom p. 47 Those that have long enjoyd the Word, and
are not yet called, are never like to be p. 48 Poor and mean persons most
commonly the objects of Gods Call, and why p. 49, 50 Consolations to the godly,
and what need they have of it, p. 51 Christ calls us before we look after him p.
52. When he leaves our betters p. 53 Most sensible of our own vileness and need
of Christ, most likely to be called p. 54 An elect person may live long in
sin before he be called ibid. A man may be called, and yet not know it p. 55
yea though he knows not how nor when ibid. Those that are once called shall
never fall away p. 56 Nothing shall hinder our calling, when Christ has a mind
to call us p. 57 Cases concerning effectual calling ibid. Whether a man can
resist his own call ibid. A twofold call, significative and operative ibid.
What temptations Satan suggests to hinder a call p. 58 Young men should not
neglect the call of Christ p. 60. and seq. Our wordly callings should not cause
us to neglect our effectual calling by Christ p. 65. and seq. The poverty of
Christians hinders many from embracing Christ's call p. 69 Antidote against this
ibid. Fear to be deprived of all comfort and mirth p. 73 This hindrance removed
p. 74. and seq. By what delusions men are persuaded to think they are called,
when they are not p. 76 Hearing the Word with delight, not always a sign of
effectual calling ibid. Nor all love to the godly p. 81. and seq. Nor every
change of life and conversation p. 86. and seq. Nor to be reproached by wicked
men p. 88 Why those that are effectually called do sometimes doubt of their
calling. p. 96 want of great terrors, and deep humiliations, no ground to
question your calling. p. 97. and seq. Nor that we were not called by preaching
the Word p. 99 Weakness in knowledge may stand with sound calling, p. 105 What
defects of obedience may stand with effectual calling p. 107 Covenant of grace
helpful to assurance many ways p. 116 Calling to profession, no sure evidence
of Election p. 215 Christ not the cause of election p. 148
D
SEveral Doctrines raised p. 5 Great diligence to be used in matters of
soul-concernment p. 7. and why p. 8. and seq. Cautions about thy diligence p.
13. and seq. In what our diligence is to be employed p. 17, 18 Delusions about
our Calling and Election p. 76 p. 216. and seq. Papists doctrine of doubting
uncomfortable p. 100 Upon what grounds Christians doubt of their calling p. 101
Difference between true assurance and vain presumption p. 130. and seq.
E
WHat Election is, and how we can make that sure p. 5 Gracious Examples may be
a means of conversion p. 101 The nature of Election p. 168 Signs of Election p.
173 Cautions about using them p. 175. and siq. What guess may be made of
persons not Elected, and several sorts of persons under that suspicion p. 176.
and seq. Comfortable positions about Election p. 208 Whether Election be
universal p. 181 Whether any that is Elect can fall from his Election p. 186
Objections against it answered p. 187. and seq. Whether men be Elected for
faith or works foreseen p. 191 Objections answered p. 194 Whether Gods Election
do make men secure and carlesse p. 196. and seq. Upon what grounds the godly
often times question their Election p. 199 Sinfulness before calling no ground to
question our Election ibid. and seq. Falling into scandalous sins after calling
may stand with Election p. 204 By what delusions men are persuaded they are
Elected when they are not p. 207. and seq. Freedom from a scandalous
conversation no sure argument of Election p. 208 It may proceed from other
principles p. 209 That God is merciful no certain evidence that we are Elected
p. 213 The Elect very few p. 214 We are not Elected for Christ's sake, though
saved for his sake, 216. See Calling and Assurance An Elect person may not
express the fruit of Election in many years p. 217 Wicked men enjoy many
mercies for the Elect sake ibid. The world continues but till the number of the
Elect be accomplished. p. 218
F
FEw Elected p. 214 Friends of the Elect no prejudice to Gods mercy p. 215
G
WE should labor to thrive in Grace p. 3 Of the sin of the Holy Ghost p. 175
H
HYpocrites will be discovered p. 45 Hearing the word not always a sign of
effectual c^lling p. 77. and seq.
I
WHat Ignorance may stand with Effectual calling p. 105 Christians not always
competent Judges of their own estate p. 162
L
TImothies love to Paul p. 30 Light into which we are called, how a marv^llous
light p. 31 All Love to the godly no sign of effectual calling p. 81
M
Wicked Ministers may be a means of conversion p. 104 God mercy no ground to
believe we are elected p. 213 P^^^city of the Elect no prejudice to Gods mercy
p. 215
O
DEfects in Obedience may stand with Calling, and what p. 112
P
GOds people (...) s^attered people p. 2 though they live in different places,
yet all have the same faith p. 3 The Poor most commonly called p. 49, 50
Poverty hinders many from embracing the call of Christ p. 6^ We may be truly
called, though not by the preaching of the Word p. ^01 Comfort against want of
a spirit of ^^^yer p. ^08. and seq. Difference between assurance and
presumption p. 131 and seq. Comfortable promises to dejected souls p. 166
Terror to those that presume on their Calling p. 184
R
Whether a man can resist his own call p. 57 Reproach from wicked men always
a sign of effectual calling p. 88 Reading the Word may be a means of
conversion p. 100
S
THe evil of Slothfulness p. 17 Sad conclusions about calling p. 42 Five
things to be searched for p. 162 What Sins most damp our assurance p. 159
T
TEmptations of Satan to hinder our call p. 60 Want of great Terrors no ground
to doubt of our call p. 110 and who are usually most terrified in their calling
ibid. and p. 28 Te^rour to those that presume of their calling p. 184
W
THe Word preached the ordinary means of calling p. 47 The Will of Gods good
pleasure, and his signifying Will 231
Y
YOung men not to neglect the call of Christ p. 60. and seq.
FIMIS.

