THE KING of France HIS NEW ORDER TO HIS SUBJECTS professing the PROTESTANT
RELIGION at Charenton: Forbidding them to use several Expressions, contained in
their Public Prayers, and Confession of Faith: And commanding them to redress
diverse other pretended Grievances.
By the King. And M. the Bailiff of Charenton.
TO all whom these Presents concern. Nicholas Fromont, Counselor at Law,
Bailiff, Ordinary, Civil and Criminal Judge of the Baylywick of Charenton St.
Maurice, for Monsieur Francis le Bossu, Knight, Baron of Merry on the Seine,
Lord of the aforesaid Charenton, Maison Rouge, and other Places, Counselor,
and Master in Ordinary of the King's Household, Greeting.

Forasmuch as it has been represented to us by our Attorney, That
notwithstanding those professing the pretended Reformed Religion, ought to
demean themselves with that Moderation and Modesty enjoined them by the
Statutes, and to use no injurious Terms against the Catholic, Apostolical, and
Roman Religion, our Holy Father the Pope, and Ecclesiastical Persons; seeing
that by the Statutes, Declarations, and Ordinances, as well ancient as modern,
this is forbidden them; and especially by the King's Declaration of Jan. 17.
1561. registered in Parliament the 6th of March then next ensuing. By which, in
the tenth Article, the Ministers of the pretended Reformed Religion are
strictly forbidden, upon pain of Death, to use in their Sermons any opprobrious
Terms against the Mass, and Ceremonies received and observed in the Catholic
Church: Which is confirmed by other Declarations of the King, dated October. 24.
contained in the second Article; December. 14. 1563, registered in Parliament,
Artic. 13. by the Edict of Nantes, Artic. 17. by several Orders in the Council
of State, of Jan. 11. 1657. October. 5. 1663. September. 18, and 22. 1664. and by
the King's Declaration, Feb. 1. 1669, registered in Parliament the 28th of the
ensuing May, Artic. 5, and 8. By all which it is strictly forbidden, as well to
the Ministers, as others, professing the pretended Reformed Religion, to use in
their Sermons or Discourses, injurious and offensive Terms against the
Catholic Religion, and Civil Government; but to demean themselves with that
Moderation enjoined them by the Edicts, not to mention the Catholic Religion
but with respect, nor irreverently to speak of the Holy Things and Ceremonies
of the Church, nor call the Catholics by any other Name than that of
Catholics. Nevertheless those professing the aforesaid pretended Reformed
Religion, in contempt of our Catholic, Apostolical, and Roman Church, and the
Edicts of this Kingdom, do use in all Rencounters, opprobrious and blasphemous
Terms against the Church, and its most holy Mysteries, which are the
Fundamentals of the Catholic and Christian Faith: For as well of old, as now
of late, in all their Sermons and Writings, they treat the Catholic Religion
as a Superstitious Religion, the Catholics as Idolaters, and our Holy Father
the Pope, the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and St. Peter's Successor, with the Name
of Antichrist, which is not to be mentioned but with horror. And in all their
Books which they publicly sell, (although this is prohibited by the Edicts) in
their Confessions of Faith, Prayers, and Discipline, which they call
Ecclesiastical, all these Terms are contained; as may be seen by several Books
wrote by them expressly on this Subject. As for instance Calvin, in several
places of his Works; and Lambert Daneau, in a Book he wrote, printed at Geneva,
entitled, A Treatise touching Antichrist; wherein, after several Lies, and
scandalous Terms against the Catholic Religion, he blasphemously insinuates,
That Antichrist is our holy Father the Pope; and that the Church of the
Papists, which is the Name he gives the Catholics, is a Congregation of
superstitious and id^latrous Persons. Melancthon, in his Preface to the Book he
wrote against the Council of Trent, qualifies the Pope by no other Name than
that of Antichrist: Sciat autem Carolus, and sciat Antichristus Romanus, etc.
Leonardus Seirekelius, in his Annotations on the same Melancthon, under the
Title, De Ecclesia, etc. calls the Catholic Church, the Church of Antichrist:
Sio coetus Antichristi, etc. There are an infinite Number of other Passages of
these Sectaries, wherein they disperse these Blasphemies against the Catholic
Religion.

But not to proceed further, these things are but too common at this time
amongst those of that aforesaid pretended Reformed Religion, and they make of
them points of Faith: For a further confirmation of this, it is but reading
their Confession of Faith, Discipline and Prayers, which they call
Ecclesiastical; and which they now use. In their Discipline, the word Idolater,
which is the Name they commonly give the Catholics, and that of Superstition,
are several times mentioned therein. By their Confession of Faith, made in an
National Synod held by them at Gap the first of October 1603, is said, the
Article touching Antichrist, shall be inserted in the Confession to be the one
and thirtieth, in these Words: And forasmuch as the Bishop of Rome has raised
up to himself a Monarchy in Christendom, and exalted himself so far as to call
himself God, and would be worshipped, etc. We believe and maintain, that he is
properly the true Antichrist, and Son of Perdition, etc. This Article was by
them confirmed in the Synold assembled at Rochel, in March and April 1607, by
the Name of the VIIth General Article; and that it should be henceforward
printed in the Copies to be put now again in the Press; but for particular
Considerations, and because of the Prosecutions made against them that had
preached, written, or taught this Doctrine; the said Synod, was obliged to
suppress this Article, but yet protested it was the certain Doctrine of their
Church, and that they would never cease believing it, and in effect, these
Terms are at this day in their Prayers, which they call Ecclesiastical, which
the Minister loudly utters every Sunday, and other Meeting-days before his
Sermon, in these Terms; Especially we recommend unto thee, O Lord, all our poor
Brethren dispersed under the Tyranny of Antichrist, etc. In the 24th Article
of the Confession of their Faith, amongst other Words there are these: We
believe Purgatory to be an Illusion invented by Satan, etc. And in the 28th
Article; We condemn therefore, the Assemblies of the Papists, in which the
Sacraments are corrupted, perverted, falsified, if not wholly annihilated, and
amongst whom all manner of Idolatries and Superstitions find Entertainment. So
that if we compare all these Terms with the manner after which the Ministers
and others professing the Reformed Religon, ought to speak and behave
themselves according to the Edicts and Decrees, we cannot find therein any
Conformity, and that things of this nature, ought to be passed over in silence,
and tolerated, seeing there can be nothing more contrary to the Holiness of our
Doctrine and the respect which those of the said pretended Reformed Religion,
ought to show to the sacred Mystery of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman
Religion. And their manner is the more blamable in that they by their Practices
contradict their own Discipline, which they term Ecclesiastical; for by the 23d
Article of the 14th Chapter they say, That all outrageous and injurious
Speeches aegainst those of the Roman Church, whether Priests, Monks, or others,
shall be retrenched and suppressed: So that in forbidding them to use the said
Terms, and they in suppressing them, will do no more than what their Discipline
requires of them.

And forasmuch as these Disorders are practiced in Charenton, which is the
principal Place of their Exercise, wherein the said Attorney in respect to his
Charge and Conscience, ought not to suffer them; but on the contrary, strictly
to oppose, and put in Execution the Edicts, Ordinances, Declarations of the
King, and Decrees of his Council recommended to the diligence as well of the
Clergy as others, and especially to him in the extent of this Bayly-wick; which
has the honor to belong more immediately to the Parliament, enjoying the same
Privileges of Peerdom, as the Abbey of St. Denis in France; the Jurisdiction of
the said Charenton, being a part of it; required conformably to the said
Edicts, Declarations, and Decrees, Prohibitions to be made to those professing
the pretended Reformed Religion, to use any injurious or scandalous Terms
against the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, against out Holy Father
the Pope, and others in Ecclesiastical Dignity; or to call the Catholics by
any other Name, than that of Catholic, under penalty of being fined 500
Livers, and undergo corporal Punishments, that there shall be suppressed and
retrenched out of the Books of the aforesaid pretended Reformists, as well in
their Confessions of Faith, as Prayer and Discipline, which they call
Ecclesiastical, the Words and Terms above mentioned in the said 24 and 28
Articles, with strict Prohihitions to the said Ministers to say hence forward
in the Prayer used by them after Sermon; these Terms, Especially we recommend
to thee, O Lord, all our poor Brethren, dispersed under the Tyranny of
Antichrist, under a certain Penalty: That all Books wherein the Terms
abovementioned are inserted, shall be suppressed, with a strict charge not to
use them henceforward; And to the Stationers, who expose these Books to sale,
within the Jurisdiction of this Bailywiek, to sell or deliver them, wherein
there are the said Terms, upon penalty of a Forfeiture and Fine of an Hundred
Livres.

We having regard to the Request of the said Attorney, have strictly forbidden,
and do now forbid those professing the pretended Reformed Religion, to utter
any injurious Terms, within the extent of this Bailywick, against the
Catholic, Apostolical, and Roman Religion, its holy Mysteries and Ceremonies,
our Holy Father the Pope, Prelates, and others constituted in Ecclesiastical
Dignities; to call the Catholics Papists; nor to say, when they speak or meet,
The most Holy Sacrament of the Altar, that it is the God of the Mass; but shall
respectfully behave themselves, according to the Veneration due to such an
adorable Mystery, under penalty of paying a Fine of Five Hundred Livres, and
undergoing exemplary Punishment: Forbidding them to use henceforwards, within
the Jurisdiction of this Bailywick, those Terms contained in the 24th Article
of their Confession of Faith, That whatsoever Men have invented, touching the
Intercession of Saints deceased, is a mere Trick and Fallacy of the Devil:
Finally, we hold Purgatory to be an Illusion delivered by the same hand; from
whence likewise have proceeded the Monastical Vows, Pilgrimages, Prohibitions
to marry, Abstinence from Flesh, superstitious Observation of Days, Auricular
Confession, and Indulgences. In the 28th Article of the said Confession of
Faith, Yet do we condemn the Congregations of the Papists, seeing the pure Word
of God is banished from among them; in which the Sacraments are corrupted,
sophisticated, falsified, or wholly annihilated, and by whom all manner of
Idolatry and Superstition is entertained. And to the Ministers to say, in the
Prayer they read after Sermon, Especially we recommend to thee, O Lord, all our
poor Brethren, dispersed under the Tyranny of Antichrist: Together with the
Terms of Idolaters, Idolatry, and Superstition, contained in their aforesaid
Confession of Faith, Discipline, and pretended Ecclesiastical Prayers. All
which Terms shall be suppressed, and retrenched from the said Books. For which
purpose the Ministers and Elders of those professing the abovesaid pretended
Reformed Religion, shall in fifteen days time, (without further delay,
reckoning from the Day of the Date of these Presents,) deliver into our
Registry-Office, their Books of the Confession of their Faith, Discipline, and
Prayers, which they call Ecclesiastical, and which they use at the said
Charenton, for to have, in their presence, or in the presence of one deputed by
them, the abovementioned Passages, suppressed and retrenched from the said
Books; concerning which they shall have a Certificate given them, to be read on
the three next Sundays following, by the Minister, before Sermon, to the end
those of the aforesaid pretended Reformed Religion may not plead Ignorance; of
which Publication the said Ministers and Elders shall bring a Certificate to
our Registry-Office, which said Certificate shall be subscribed, and delivered
in eight days after the third time of publishing.

And moreover, We strictly tharge and forbid all Persons of the said pretended
Reformed Religion, to use henceforward at Charenton the said Books, wherein the
said Passages are contained; and the Stationers to expose them to sale, upon
penalty of Confiscation, and being fined an hundred Livers, and ten Livers to
any one that shall buy them, without any delay.

And this present Order shall be read, published, and fixed, as well on the
Gates of the Temple of the said pretended Reformists, as also on the usual
Passages and Places, and in all other requisite Places, to the end it may be
fully known and signified to the said Ministers and Elders of the abovesaid
Religion, as well for them, as others professing the same Religion, and
Stationers that sell and expose Books at the said Charenton. All which is
committed to the Care and Diligence of the said Attorney, to be put in
Execution, notwithstanding any Appeals or Oppositions whatsoever, seeing it is a
Matter wherein the Civil Government is concerned.

This was made and delivered by Us, the Judge and Bailiff aforesaid, of the
abovementioned Charenton. October. 2. 1681.
Compared with the Original.

FINIS.
London: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1681.


