THE TREATY OF PEACE, CALLED THE Pyrenaean Treaty, Between the CROWNS of FRANCE
and SPAIN. Concluded and Signed By his Eminency Cardinal Mazarin AND Dom Lewis
Mendez de Haro, Plenipotentiaries of their most Christian and Gatholick
MAJESTY'S, The Seventh of November, 1659.

Printed in Paris by His Majesty's Command, and now faithfully rendered English.

LONDON: Printed for T. Collins. J. Wright, T. Sawbridge, and M. Pit, 1678.

The Treaty of Peace between the Crowns of France and Spain, concluded and
signed by his Eminency Cardinal Mazarin, and Dom Lewis Mendez de Haro,
Plenipotentiaries of their most Christian and Catholic Majesty's, in the Isle
called of the Pheasants, in the River of Bidassoa, upon the Confines of the
Pyrenaean Mountains, the seventh of November, 1659.
LEWIS BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF FRANCE AND OF NAVARRA, To all those who
shall see the present Letters, Greeting: Whereas, by virtue of the Powers
respectively given by us, and the most High, most Excellent, and most Potent
Prince the Catholic King of Spain, our most Dear and most Beloved good Brother
and Uncle, unto our most Dear and most Beloved Cosen the Cardinal Mazarin; and
to the Lord Dom Lewis Mendez de Haro and Gusman, they have in the Isle called
of the Pheasants, in the River of Bidassoa, upon the Confines of both the
Kingdoms, toward the Pyrenean Mountains, the Seventh of the instant month of
November, concluded, agreed and signed the Treaty of Peace and Reconciliation,
the tenor whereof is as follows.

IN THE NAME OF GOD THE CREATOR. To all present and to come, Be it known; That
whereas a long and bloody War, has many years since caused great miseries and
oppressions to be suffered by the People, Kingdoms, Countries, and Dominions
under the obedience of the most High, most Excellent, and most Potent Prince
Lewis the XIV, by the Grace of God, most Christian King of France and Navarra;
and of Philip the IV, by the Grace of God Catholic King of Spain: In which
War, other Princes and Republics, their Neighbors and Allies having also
taken part, many Towns and Countries of both the parties have been exposed to
great evils, miseries, ruins, and desolations. And although at other times,
and by several ways, diverse Overtures and Negociations for an accommodation,
have been made; yet none of them, through the mysterious secrets of the Divine
Providence, could take the effect most earnestly desired by their Majesty's,
until at length that supreme God who has in his hand the hearts of Kings, and
has particularly reserved to himself alone, the precious Gift of Peace, has
had the goodness, through his infinite Mercy, to inspire at the same time, both
the Kings, and so to guide and direct them, that without any other
interposition or motives, but the only (...) of compassion they have had of the
sufferings of their Good subjects, and of a Fatherly desire of their good and
relief, and of the Peace of the whole Christendom, they have found the means
how to put an end to so great and long calamities, to forget and extinguish the
causes and the seeds of their divisions, and to settle to the glory of God, and
the exaltation of our holy Catholic Faith, a good, sincere, entire and lasting
Peace and Fraternity between them and their Successors, their Allies and
Dependants; By means whereof the damages and miseries suffered, might quickly
be repaired in all parts, Which to attain unto, both the said Lords and Kings
having given order unto the most eminent Lord Messire Julas Mazarin, Cardinal
of the holy Roman Church, Duke of Mayenne, Head of the most Christian Kings
Councils, etc. and unto that most excellent Lord, the Lord Dom Lewis Mendez de
Haro and Gusman, Marquis of Carpier, Earl-Duke of Olivares, perpetual Governor
of the Royal Palaces, and of the Arcenal or Magazine of the City of Sevella,
great Chancellor perpetual of the India's, one of his Catholic Majesty's
Council of State, great Commander of the order of Alcantara, Gentleman of his
Majesty's Chamber, and Gentleman of his Horse, these two first and principal
Ministers, to meet upon the Confines of both the Kingdoms, toward the
Pyrenaean Mountains, as being the two persons who are best informed of their
holy intentions, of their Interests, and of the most intimate secrets of their
hearts; and consequently the most able to find out the necessary expedients to
end their differences; and to that end having given unto them most large
Powers, the Copies whereof are inserted at the end of these presents, both the
aforesaid principal Ministers, by virtue of their said powers, acknowledged on
both sides, to be sufficient, have granted, established, and concluded the
following Articles.

I. FIRST; it is concluded and agreed, that for the future, there shall be a
good, firm and lasting Peace, confederation and perpetual alliance and amity
between the most Christian and Catholic Kings, their Children borne and to be
born, their Childrens Successors, and Heirs; their Kingdoms, Dominions,
Countries and Subjects, who shall love one another as good Brethren, procuring
with all their power the mutual good, honor and reputation one of the other,
and shuning bona fide, as much as in them shall lie, the damage one of the
other.

II. In consequence of that good reunion, the Cessation of all manner of
Hostility, concluded and signed the eight day of May of this present year,
shall continue according to its tenor, between the said Lords and Kings, their
Subjects, Vassals, and Adherents, both by Sea and other Waters, and by Land;
and generally in all places, where the War has been hitherto between their
Majesty's. And if any new thing, or ways of Fact should hereafter be attempted
by the Arms, or in any manner whatsoever, under the name of the Authority of
either of the said Lords and Kings, to the prejudice of the other, the damages
shall be presently repaired, and things put again in the same state, as they
were in upon the eighth day of May aforesaid, when the said suspension of Arms
was agreed on and subscribed, the tenor whereof ought to be observed until the
publication of the Peace.

III. And for hindering lest the differences, that might hereafter happen
betwixt any Princes or Potentates in Alliance with the said Lords and Kings, be
able to alter the good correspondency a^^ amity between their Majesty's, which
every one of them is desirous to make so sure and lasting, that no accident may
disturb the same, it has been concluded and agreed, that in case hereafter any
difference should arise betwixt their Allies, which might carry them to an open
breach between themselves, neither of the said Lords and Kings shall assault or
disturb by his Arms, the Ally of the other; or shall give an assistance,
public or private, against the said Ally, without first, and before all things,
treating in the Court of the other King, by his Ambassador, or some other
particular person, about the occasion of the said difference, hindering as much
as in them shall lie, and by their authority, the taking up of Arms betwixt
their said Allies; until either by the judgment of both the Kings, if their
Allies will yield to their decision, or by their interposition and authority,
they might have endeavored an amicable composure of the said difference, so
that every one of their Allies be satisfied with it; shunning on both sides,
the taking up of Auxiliary Arms. After which, if the Authority of both the
Kings or their Offices and interposition, cannot produce the accommodation, and
the Allies do at last take the way of Arms, every one of the said Lords and
Kings shall be free to assist his Allie with his Forces, without incurring
thereby any breach betwixt their Majesty's, or any alteration of their Amity:
Each of the two Kings even promising in that case, that he will not suffer that
his Arms, nor the Arms of his Allie should enter into any of the Dominions of
the other King, there to commit any hostility; but that the quarrel shall be
ended within the limits of the Dominion or Dominions of the Allies, that shall
fight together; so that no warlike action, or any other done in that
conformity, shall be deemed a breach of this present Treaty of Peace.

As likewise, whenever any Prince or State in Alliance with either of the
said Lords and Kings, shall be directly or indirectly assaulted by the Forces
of the other King, in what he shall hold and be possessed of at the subscribing
of the present Treaty, or what he ought to possess in consequence of it, it
shall be lawful to the other King, to help or assist the assaulted Prince or
State; and yet whatsoever shall be done in conformity to the present Article,
by the Auxiliary Forces, whilst they shall be in the service of the assaulted
Prince or State, shall not be deemed a breach of the present Treaty* And in
case it should happen that either of the two Lords and Kings should be first
assaulted, in what he now is possessed of, or ought to possess by virtue of the
present Treaty, by any other Prince or State whatsoever, or by many Princes and
States in League together, the other King shall not joint his Forces to the
said assaulting Prince or State, though otherwise his Ally, nor to the said
League of the likewise assaulting Princes or States, as aforesaid, nor shall
give to the said Prince and State, or to the said League, any assistance of
Men, Money or Victuals, nor passage or retreat in his Dominions, to their
Persons or Forces.

As for the Kingdoms, Princes and States, that are now in War with either of
the said Lords and Kings, and could not be comprehended in the present Treaty
of Peace; or that having been comprehended therein, would not accept of it, it
has been concluded and agreed, that the other King shall not have power, after
the publication of the said Treaty, to give them, directly or indirectly, any
manner of assistance, of Men, Victuals or Money; much less to the Subjects that
might hereafter rise or revolt against either of the said Lords and Kings.

IV. All occasions of enmity or misunderstanding, shall remain extinguished and
for ever abolished: and whatsoever has been done, or has happened, upon
occasion of the present Wars, or during the same, shall be put into perpetual
oblivion: so that for the future, of neither side, neither directly nor
indirectly, shall any inquiry be made for the same, by Justice, or otherwise,
under any pretense whatsoever: nor shall their Majesty's, or their Subjects,
Servants, or Adherents, of either side, show any manner of remembrance of any
offenses or damages suffered during the War.

V. By means of this Peace and strict amity the Subjects of both sides,
whatsoever* shall have liberty, they observing the Laws and Customs of the
Country, to go to and fro, to dwell, trade and return into one another
Country, Merchandising or as they shall think best, both by Land and by Sea, or
any other Fresh-waters, to treat and trade together: and the Subjects of the
one shall be maintained and protected in the others Countries, as their own
Subjects, paying reasonably the Duties in all accustomed places, and such
others, as by their Majesty's and their Successors shall be imposed.

VI. The Towns, Subjects, Merchants, and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms,
Dominions, Provinces, and Countries belonging to the most Christian King, shall
enjoy the same Privileges, Franchises, Liberties, and Sureties, in the Kingdom
of Spain, and other Kingdoms and Dominions belonging to the Catholic King, as
the English have by right enjoyed, by the last Treaties made between the two
Crowns of Spain and England; and no greater Duties or Impositions shall be
exacted of the French and other of the most Christian Kings Subjects, either in
Spain, or any where else, within the Lands or other places of the Catholic
Kings obedience, than have been paid by the English before the breach, or than
are paid at this time, by the Inhabitants of the United Provinces of the
Neatherlands, or any other strangers that shall be there the more favorably
entreated. The same shall be done, within the whole extent of the obedience of
the said Lord the most Christian King, unto all the Subjects of the said Lord
the Catholic King, of what Country or Nation soever they be.

VII. In consequence of this, if the French* or any other of his most Christian
Majesty's Subjects, are found in the said Kingdoms of Spain, or upon the Coasts
thereof, to have shipped, or caused to be shipped upon their Vessels, in what
manner soever it may be, any prohibited goods, to transport them out of the
said Kingdoms, the penalty shall not extend further than has been heretofore
practiced, in such cases, toward the English; or than it is, at this time
practiced toward the Hollanders, in consequence of the Treaties made with
England or the United Provinces: and all Inquiries or Processes hitherto made,
about the same, shall remain null and be extinguished. The same shall be
observed toward the Towns, Subjects and Inhabitants of the Kingdoms and
Islands belonging to the said Lord the Catholic King, who shall enjoy the same
privileges, Franchises, and Liberties, throughout all the Dominions of the
said Lord the most* Christian King.

VIII. All the French and other Subjects of the said Lord* the most Christian
King, shall have liberty, freely and without any hindrance, to transport out of
the said Kingdoms and Countries of the said Lord, the Catholic King, the
proceed of the sale by them made of Corn within the said Kingdoms and
Countries, after the same manner as they wanted to do before the War* And the
same shall be observed in France toward the Subjects of the said Lord, the
Catholic King.

IX. Of neither side, shall the Merchants, Masters of Ships, Pilots, or
Mariners, nor their Ships, Merchandises, Commodities or other Goods to them
belonging, be arrested or seized on, either by virtue of any general or
particular Mandate, or for any cause whatsoever of War, or otherwise; nor even
under pretense of using them for the preservation and defense of the Country*
And generally, nothing shall be taken from the Subjects of the said Lords and
Kings, within the Lands of the obedience of the other, but with the consent of
those to whom such things shall belong, and paying ready money what shall be
desired of them. Yet it is not understood that therein should be comprehended
such Seisures and Arrests of Justice, by the ordinary ways, because of Debts,
Obligations, and valid Contracts of those, upon whom such Seisures shall be
made; whereunto it shall be proceeded, as it is wonted, according to Right and
Reason.

X. All the Subjects of the most Christian King, shall* with all security and
liberty, fail and trade in all the Kingdoms, Countries and dominions, that are
or shall be at peace, amity, or neutrality with France, (excent Portugal only,
with their Conquests and adjacent Countries, whereof it is otherwise disposed by
an Article of the present Treaty) and shall not be troubled or molested in that
Liberty, by the Ships, Galleys, Frigots, Barks, or any other Sea-Buildings,
belonging to the Catholic King, or any of his Subjects, because of the
Hostilities that are or might be hereafter between the said Lord the Catholic
King, and the aforesaid Kingdoms* Countries, and Dominions, or any of them,
that are or shall be at Peace, Amity or Neutrality with France: Provided, that
the exception made of Portugal, in this and following Articles, concerning the
Commerce, shall only be in force, during the time the said Portugal shall
remain in the condition it is at present: And that if it should happen that the
said Portugal should be reduced under the obedience of his Catholic Majesty,
the same should be then observed; as to the Commerce in the said Kingdom of
Portugal, in regard of the French, as in other Dominions now possessed by his
said Catholic Majesty, according to the contents of the present and following
Articles.

XI. That transportation and that Traffic shall extend to all kinds of
Merchandises and Commodities, which were wonted freely and securely to be
transported into the said Kingdoms, Countries and Dominions, before they were in
was with Spain: Provided yet, that during the said War, the most Christian
Kings Subjects shall abstain from carrying thither any Merchandises of the
growth of the Catholic Kings Dominions, such as may be serviceable against him
and his Dominions; much less shall they carry thither any Contrebanda-Goods.

XII. By that kind of Contrebanda-Goods, are only understood all sorts of
Firearms, and all things belonging to them; as Canons Muskets, Mortar-pieces,
Petards, Bombes, Grenades, Saucidges, Pitchd circles, Carriages, Forks,
Bandaliers, Gunpowder, Cords, Saltpeter, Bullets, Pikes, Swords, Caskes,
Headpeices, Cuirasses, Halberts, Javalins, Horses, Saddels for Horses, Holsters
for Pistols, Belts, or any other Warlike Furnitures.

XIII. In that kind of Contrebanda-Goods, shall not be comprehended, Wheat,
Corn, or other Granes, Pu^^e, Oils, Wines, Salt, nor generally any thing
belonging to the nourishment and sustentation of life; But they shall remain
free, as all other Merchandises and Commodities, not comprehended in the
aforegoing Article, And the transportation of them shall be free, even to
places in enmity with the Crown of Spain, except Portugal as aforesaid, and the
Towns and places besieged, blockt up, or surrounded.

XIV. For the execution of the Premises, it has been agreed, that it shall be
done in the manner following, viz. That the Ships and Barks, with the
Merchandises belonging to the Subjects of the Lord, the most Christian King,
being come into any Haven of the Lord Catholic King, where they used to come
and trade before the present War, and being willing from thence, to pass unto
the Ports belonging to the said Enemies, they shall only be bound to show to
the Officers of the Spanish Port, or of any other of the said Lord and Kings
Dominions, from whence they are to go, their Passes, containing the
specification of the lading of their Ships, attested and marked with the
ordinary hand and seal, and acknowledged by the Officers of the Admiralty of
the places from whence they came first, with the declaration of the plate, for
which they are bound; the whole in the ordinary and accustomed Form. After
which exhibiting of their Passes, in the form aforesaid, they shall not be
disturbed or molested, detained nor retarded in their Voyages, under any
pretense whatsoever.

XV. The same shall be done, as to the French Ships and Barques that shall go
into any Roads of the Catholic Kings Dominion, where they used to trade before
the present War, and shall be unwilling to enter into the Harbors, or being
entered there, yet will not unlide or break Bulk; who shall not be obliged to
give any account of their Lading, but only in case of suspicion, that they are
carrying any contrebanda-Goods unto the Enemies of the said Lord the Catholic
King, as aforesaid.

XVI. And in the said case of apparent suspicion, the said Subjects of the most
Christian King, shall be obliged to show in the Ports, their Passes, in the
form above specified.

XVII. But if they be entered into the Roads, or be met in open Sea by any of
the said Lord the Catholic Kings ships, or by private Men of War of his
Subjects; the Spanish Ships, to avoid all kind of disorder, shall not come
nearer to the French, than the reach of the Canon, and shall have power to send
their Cock-boat or Shallop abord the said French Ships or Barques, and cause
two or three of their men only to go into them, to whom shall the Passes be
showed by the Master or Patron of the French Ship, in the manner aforesaid,
according unto the Form that shall be inferred at the end of this Treaty:
whereby it might appear, not only of their Lading, but also of the place of
their abode and residence, and of the name both of the Master and Patron, and
of the ship it self: That by those two means, it may be known whether they
carry any prohibited goods: and that it may sufficiently appear, both of the
quality of the said ship, and of its Master and Patron; unto which Passes and
Sea Letters, full Faith and Credit shall be given. And to the end their
validity might be the better known, and that they might not in any wise be
falsified and counterfeited, there shall be given in, certain marks and
subscriptions of both the said Lords and Kings.

XVIII. And in case there be found in the said French vessels and barques by
the means aforesaid, any Merchandises and Commodities, before declared to be
prohibited and contrebanda, the same shall be unladen, denounced and
confiscated before the Judges of the Admiralty of Spain, or any other competent
Judges; yet for all that, neither the Ship and Barque, nor any other of the
lawful and permitted goods, Merchandises and Commodities found therein, shall
in any wise be seized on or confiscated.

XIX. It has further been agreed and concluded, that whatsoever shall be found
to have been laden by the Subjects of his most christian Majesty, aboard any
ships belonging to the Enemies of the said Lord and Catholic King, although
not contrebanda goods, shall be confiscated, together with all that shall be
found in the said ship, without any exception or reservation: But, on the other
side, whatsoever shall be found in the ships belonging to the Subjects of the
most Christian King, shall be free and freed, although the lading, or part
thereof should belong to the Enemies of the said Lord the Catholic King,
except the prohibited goods; in regard whereof they shall carry themselves
according to what has been disposed in the aforegoing Articles.

XX. All the Subjects of the said Lord the Catholic King, shall mutually enjoy
the same Rights, Liberties and Immunities in their trade and commerce, within
the Ports, Roads, Seas and Dominions of his most Christian Majesty. And what
has been abovesaid, that the Subjects of the said Lord, the most Christian
King, shall enjoy in his Catholic Majesty's Ports, or in open Sea, ought to be
understood, that the equality shall be mutual, in all manner, on both sides,
even in case hereafter the said Lord the Catholic King, should happen to be at
peace, amity and neutrality with any Kings, Princes and States, that should
become the Enemies of the said Lord the most Christian King; each of both the
parties being mutually to use the same conditions and restrictions expressed in
the Articles of the present Treaty, concerning the Trade and Commerce.

XXI. In case of either side there happens any contravention to the said
Articles, touching the Commerce, by the Officers of the Admiralty of either of
the two Lords and Kings, or any other person whatsoever, the complaint thereof
being addressed by the interessed Parties, unto their Majesty's themselves or
their Councils for the Navy, their said Majesty's shall presently cause the
damage to be repaired, and all things to be executed in the manner aforesaid.
And in case, in progress of times, any frauds or inconveniences should be
discovered touching the said Commerce and Navigation, nor sufficiently provided
against by the aforesaid Articles, new ones shall be added thereto, of such
other precautions, as shall be thought convenient on both parts: The present
Treaty remaining yet, in the mean while, in its force and vigor.

XXII. All Goods and Merchandises arrested in either of the Kingdoms, upon the
Subjects of the said Lords and Kings, at the time of the Declaration of War,
shall be uprightly, and bona fide restored to the Owners; in case they be found
in esse, at the day of the publication of the present Treaty. And all Debts
contracted before the War, which upon the said day of the publication of the
present Treaty, shall be found not to have been actually paid unto others, by
virtue of Judgments given upon Letters of Confiscation or Reprisal, shall be
bona fide acquitted and paid: And upon the demands and pursuits that shall be
made about them, the said Lords and Kings shall give order unto their Officers,
to render as good and speedy Justice unto the Forreiners, as unto their own
Subjects, without any distinction of persons.

XXIII. The actions that have been heretofore, or shall hereafter be intented
before the Officers of the said Lords and Kings for Prises, Spoils, and
Reprisals against such as are not Subjects to the Prince, in whose jurisdiction
the said actions shall have been intented or begun, shall, without any
difficulty, be returned before the Officers of the Prince, whose Subjects the
Defendants shall be.

XXIV. And the better to secure, for the future, the Commerce and Amity between
the Subjects of the said Lords and Kings, for the greater advantage and
commodity of their Kingdoms, it has been concluded and agreed, That there
happening hereafter any breach between the two Crowns (which God forbid) six
months time shall always be given to the Subjects on both sides, to retire and
transport their persons and goods, where they shall please: Which they shall be
permitted to do, with all liberty, without any hinderance; and during that
time, there shall be no seizure made of their said goods, much less their
persons arrested.

XXV. The Inhabitants and Subjects of either side, shall every where within the
Lands of the obedience of the said Lords and Kings, make use of such Advocates,
Proctors, Notaries, and Sollicitors as they shall please; whereunto also, they
shall be committed by the ordinary Judges, when need shall be, and when the
said Judges shall be desired so to do. And it shall be lawful to the said
Subjects and Inhabitants of both sides, to keep in the places of their abode,
the Books of their trade and correspondence, in such a Language as they shall
like best, either French, Spanish, Flemish, or any other, without falling
thereby into any molestation or trouble.

XXVI. The said Lords and Kings shall have power, for the commodity of their
Subjects trading in one another Kingdoms and Dominions, to settle some Consuls
of the same Nation of their said Subjects, who shall enjoy the Rights,
Liberties, and immunities belonging to their exercise and employment: And that
the establishment shall be made in such places, where with a mutual consent it
shall be thought necessary.

XXVII. All Lettees of Mart and Reprisals that may have been formerly granted,
for what cause soever, shall be suspended; and none shall be granted hereafter
by either of the said Lords and Kings, to the prejudice of the Subjects of the
other, unless in case of a manifest denial of Justice only; whereof, and of
the Summons made about the same, such as shall sue for the said Letters, shall
be bound to bring good proofs according to the form and manner required by the
Law.

XXVIII. All the Subjects of both sides, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, shall
be restored to their Goods, Honors and Dignities, and to the enjoyment of such
Benefices as they were invested with before the War, either by Death or
Resignation; either by way of coadjutorship or otherwise. In which
re-establishment into Goods, Honors and Dignities, are namely understood to be
comprehended all the Napolitan Subjects of the said Lord, the Catholic King,
except only the Charges, Offices and Governments, they were possessed of. And
it shall not be lawful for either side, to refuse to place, or to hinder the
taking of possession to any of those who have been invested with Prebends,
Benefices, or Ecclesiastical Dignities before that time; nor to maintain therein
such as have obtained any other Provisions of the same, during the war; unless
it be for the Curates canonically provided, who shall remain in the enjoyment
of their Parsonages. Both the one and the other shall likewise be restored to
the enjoymeet of all and every one of their Goods, unmoveables, and Rents,
either perpetual, or during life, or to be redeemed, seized on or taken from
them since that time, either upon the occasion of the War, or for following the
contrary part; together with all their rights, actions and successions to them
accruing even since the beginning of the War; yet so, that they shall not
demand or pretend any fruits or revenues received since the seisures made of
the said Goods, Immoveables, Rents and Benefices, until the day of the
publication of the present Treaty.

XXIX. Nor likewise make any demand of such debts, goods and movables, as have
been confiscated before the said day: So that the creditors of the said debts,
nor the depositaries of such goods, nor their Heirs or Assigns, shall never be
admitted to prosecute or pretend the recovery of them. Which reestablishments,
in the aforesaid form, shall extend to those who have followed the contrary
part; so that, by means of the present Treaty, they shall be restored to their
King and Sovereign Princes Grace, as also to their Goods, such as shall be
found extant upon the conclusion and subscribing of the present Treaty.

XXX. And the said re-establishment of the said Subjects on both sides, shall
be made according to the tenor of the XXVIII Article aforegoing,
notwithstanding any Donations, Concessions, Declarations, Confiscations
committed, Sentences preparatory or definitive, given by contumacy in the
absence of the Parties, and without hearing of them: Which Sentences and all
Judgments shall be void and of none effect, and as not given or happened, with
full and entire liberty to the said Parties, to return into the Countries from
whence they had formerly retired themselves, to enjoy in person their goods,
unmovables, rents and revenues, or to settle their abode out of the said
Countries, in such places as they shall think best, it remaining in their
choice and election; so that, in that respect, no manner of compulsion shall be
used against them. And in case they rather choose to inhabit elsewhere, they
shall have power to depute and appoint such persons, not suspected, as they
shall think best, for the Government and enjoying of their goods, rents and
revenues, but not of such Benefices as require a Residency, which ought
personally to be administered and served. Yet so, that the liberty of a personal
so journing mentioned in this Article, shall not extend it self to those, of
whom it is otherwise disposed, by any other Article of the present Treaty.

XXXI. Such as shall have been provided on either side with benefices being of
the Collation, Presentation, or any other disposition of the said Lord, and
Kings, or any other, either Ecclesiastical or Lay persons, or such as shall
have obtained provisions from the Pope, of any other Benefices situate within
the obedience of either of the said Lords and Kings, by whose consent and
permission, they shall have enjoyed the same during the War, shall remain in
the possession and enjoyment of the said Benefices during their lives, as being
well and duly provided. Yet so, that thereby no prejudice is intended for the
future, to the right of the lawful Collators, who shall enjoy and use the same,
as they were wonted to do before the War.

XXXII. All Prelates, Abbots, Priors, and other Ecclesiastical persons, that
have been nominated to their Benefices, or promoted to the same by the said
Lords and Kings, before the War, ordering the same, and whereunto their
Majesty's were in possession to provide and nominate, before the breach between
the two Crowns, shall be maintained in the possession and enjoyment of the said
Benefices; and shall not be molested therein, for any cause or pretense
whatsoever; as also in the free enjoyment of all the Goods that shall be found
to have belonged to the same of old, and in the right of conferring the
Benefices depending of the same, in what place soever the said Goods and
Benefices be found situate. Provided yet, that the said Benefices be filled
with able persons, having the requisite Qualifications, according to the
Reglements observed before the War: And for the future, it shall not be
lawful, of either side, to send any Administrators to govern the said
Benefices, and enjoy the fruits thereof, which shall not be received but by the
Titulars only, lawfully provided unto the same; as also all places that have
formerly acknowledged the jurisdiction of the said Prelates, Abbots and Priors,
in what part soever they be situate, shall likewise acknowledge the same for the
Future. Provided their right appears to have been settled of old; although the
said places should be found within the extent of the Dominions of the contrary
Party, or depending of some Chastellenies or Bayliwicks belonging to the
contrary party.

XXXIII. And to the end, this Peace and Union, Condeferation and good
correspondency, might, as it is desired, be so much the more firm, lasting and
undissolvable, both the said principal Ministers, the Cardinal Duke, and the
Marquis Earl Duke, by virtue of the special Power they have had, for that end,
of the two Lords and Kings, have concluded and agreed, in their names, the
marriage of the most Christian King with the Serenissime Infanta the Lady Maria
Theresa, eldest Daughter to the Catholic King, and the same day, bearing the
date of these presents, have made and subsribed a partcular Treaty, whereupon
they refer themselves, touching the mutual conditions of the said Marriage, and
the time of its celebration; which Treaty by it self, and Capitulation of
Marriage, are of the same force and vigor with the present Treaty of Peace, as
being the chiefest part thereof, and the most worthy, as well as the greatest
and the most precious earnest of the surety of its duration.

XXXIV, Because the length of time, and the difficulties that would have met in
case the several rights and pretentions of the said Lords and Kings, should
have been put to a particular discussion, might have much retarded the
conclusion of this Treaty, and put off the good that whole Christendom does
expect and will receive by it; it has been concluded and agreed, in
consideration of the Peace, touching the retention and restitution of the
Conquests made during the present War, that all the differences of the said
Lords and Kings, shall be ended and composed, after the manner following.

XXXV. Inprimis, It has been concluded and agreed, concerning the Low
Countries, that the Lord the most Christian King shall remain seized, and shall
effectually enjoy the Places, Towns, Countries and Castles, Dominions, Lands
and Lordships following,

First, Within the County of Artois, the Town and City of Arras, and the*
Government and Bailiwick thereof* Hesdin and the Bailiwick thereof; Bapaume and
the Bailiwick thereof; Bethune and the Government or Bailiwick thereof; Lillers
and the Bailiwick thereof; Lent and the Bailiwick thereof; the County of St.
Pol; Terroane and the Bailiwick thereof; de Pas and the Bailiwick thereof; as
also all the other Bailiwicks and Chastellenies of the said Artois, whatsoever
they be, although not here particularly named and mentioned, except only the
Towns, Bailiwicks and Chastellenies or Governments of Air and St. Omer, with
their Appurtenances, Dependences and Annexes, which shall remain all unto his
Catholic Majesty: as also the place of Renty, in case it be found to be of the
said Dependences of Air or St. Omer, and not otherwise.

XXXVI. Secondly, within the Province and County of Flanders, the said Lord the
most Christian King shall remain seized, and shall effectually enjoy the places
of Graveling, the Forts Philip, of the Sluice, and Hannuin Bourbourg and the
Chastelleny thereof; and St. Venant, whether it belongs to Flanders, or to
Artois, and their Dominions, Appurtenances, Dependences and Annexes.

XXXVII. Thirdly, within the Province and County of Hainaut, the said Lord the
most Christian King shall remain seized, and shall effectually enjoy the places
of Landrecy and Quesnoy, and their Bailiwicks, Provostships, or Chastellenies,
Dominions, Appurtenances and Dependences.

XXXVIII. Fourthly, within the Province and Duchy of Luxembourg, the said Lord
the most Christian King, shall remain seized, and shall effectually enjoy the
places of Thionville, Montmedy and Damvilliers, their Appurtenances,
Dependences and Annexes, Provostships and Lordships: the Provostship of Ivoy,
Chavancy, Chasteau and the Provostship thereof; and the place and Post of
Marville situate upon the small River called Vezin, and the Provostship of the
said Marville; which place and Provostship did formerly belong, partly unto the
Duke of Luxembourg, and partly unto the Dukes of Bar.

XXXIX. Fifthly, His most Christian Majesty having strongly declared that he
could never consent to the restitution of the places of la Bassee, and Bergh
St. Wynox, Chastelleny of the said Bergh, and the Royal Fort erected upon the
Chanel, hard by the Town of Bergh; and his Catholic Majesty having
condescended that they should remain to the French, unless an exchange of the
said places, with others of the like consideration and mutual conveniences
could be agreed upon, both the said Lords Plenipotentiaries, have at last
agreed that the said two places of la Bassee and Bergh-St. Wynox, the
Chastelleny and Royal Fort of the said Bergh, should be exchanged with the
places of Marienbourg and Philippeville, situate on the Rivers Sambre and Maez.
their Appurtenances, Dependences, Annexes and Dominions: And therefore his said
most Christian Majesty restoring, as it will be said hereafter, unto his
Catholic Majesty, the said places of la Bassee Bergh-St-Wynox and the
Chastelleny thereof, and the Royal Fort, with they Appurtenances, Dependances,
Annexes and Dominions, his Catholic Majesty shall at the same time put into
the hands of his most Christian Majesty, the said places of Marienbourg and
Philippeville, his said most Christian Majesty to remain seized of them, and
effectually enjoy them, and their Appurtenances, Dependences, Annexes, and
Dominions, in the same manner, and with the same rights of possession,
sovereignty, and others which his Majesty shall enjoy, or may enjoy, by the
present Treaty, in such places, as have been gained by his Arms during the War,
and which are to remain unto him by this Peace. And even in case hereafter, his
most Christian Majesty should happen to be troubled in the possession and
enjoyment of the said places of Marienbourg and Philippeville, by reason of the
pretensions of other Princes, his Catholic Majesty does bind himself to concur
to their defense, and to do on his part whatsoever shall be necessary, that his
most Christian Majesty might peaceably, and without dispute enjoy the said
places, in consideration of that his Majesty has yielded in exchange the said
la Bassee and Bergh-St-Wynox, which his most Christian Majesty might have kept
and possessed without trouble, and with all security.

XL. Sixthly, His Catholic Majesty, for certain considerations hereafter
particularly expressed in another Article of the present Treaty, does promise
and oblige himself to put into the hands of his most Christian Majesty the town
and place of Avennes, situate between the Sambre and the Maez, with the
appurtenances, dependences, annexes and dominions thereof, with all the
Artillery and Warlike ammunitions that are therein now, to remain to his said
most Christian Majesty seized of the said place of Avennes, and effectually to
enjoy the same, and the said appurtenances, dependences, annexes and dominions,
after the same manner, and with the same right of possession, sovereignty and
other things, which his Catholic Majesty does now enjoy there. And because it
has been reported, that within the said place of Avennes, and the
appurtenances, dependences, annexes and dominions thereof, the ordinary
jurisdiction, the Rents and other profits do belong to the Prince of Chimay, it
has been declared and agreed between the said Lords and Kings, that whatsoever
is contained within the walls and fortifications of the said place, shall
remain to his most Christian Majesty; so that the said Prince shall have no
kind of right, rent, or jurisdiction within the said walls and fortifications;
it being only reserved unto him to keep whatsoever in time past did belong to
him out of the said place, in the Villages, Countries and Forests of the said
dependence of Avennes in the same manner as he has hitherto possessed the
same, provided also, as has been said before, that the sovereignty and the
high dominion of the said Villages, Countries and Forests of the said
dependence of Avennes, shall belong and remain to his most Christian Majesty;
the said Lord the Catholic King having taken upon himself to indamnify the
said Prince of Chimay for the interest he may have in what is taken from him by
the present Treaty within the precincts of the said place as aforesaid.

XLI. The said places of Arras, Hesdin(...) Bethune, and the Towns of Lillors,
Lens, County of St. Pol, Teroan^ and their Bailiwicks; as also all the other
Bailiwicks and Chastellenies of Artois (except only as aforesaid the Towns and
Bailiwicks of Air and St. Omer, their appurtenances, dependences, annexes and
dominions) as also Renty, in case it be not found to be any of the dependences
of Air or of St. Omer; together with the places of Graveling, and the Forts
Philip, the Sluice and Hannuin, Bourbourgh and St. Venant, in Flanders; the
places of Landrecy and Quesnoy, in the Haynaut; as also those of Avennes,
Marienbourgh and Philippeville, which are to be put in the hands of the most
Christian King, as aforesaid: And likewise the places of Thionville, Montmedi,
and Damvillers, the Town and Provostship of Ivoy, Chavency, Chasteau and the
Provostship thereof, and Marville, in Luxembourgh, their Bailiwicks,
Chastellenies, Governments, Provostships, Territories, Dominions, Lordships,
Appurtenances, Dependences and Annexes, shall remain, by the present Treaty of
Peace, unto the said Lord the most Christian King, and to his Successors and
Assigns, irrevocably and for ever; and with the same rights of sovereignty,
propriety, regality, patronage, wardianship, jurisdiction, nomination,
prerogatives and preeminences upon the Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, and
other Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Parsonages, or any other Benefices
whatsoever, being within the limits of the said Countries, places and
Bailiwicks so yielded, of whatsoever Abbeys the said Priories may hold and
depend, and all other rights formerly belonging to the said Lord the Catholic
King, though not particularly related here. And his most Christian Majesty
shall never hereafter be troubled nor molested by any way whatsoever, either of
right or of fact, by the said Lord the Catholic King, his Successors, or any
Prince of his house, or any other whatsoever, under any pretense or occasion
that may happen, in the said sovereignty, propriety* jurisdiction, prerogative,
possession and enjoyment of all the said Countries, Towns, Places, Castles,
Lands, Lordships, Provostships, Dominions, Chastellenies and Bailiwicks, and of
all the places and other things depending of them. And for that effect, the
said Lord the Catholic King, for himself and for his Heirs, Successors and
Assigns, does renounce unto, quit, yield and transport, as his Plenipotentiary
in his name by the present irrevocable Treaty of Peace, has renounced to,
quitted, yielded and for ever transported, in the behalf and to the benefit of
the said Lord the most Christian King, his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, all
the rights, actions, pretensions, regalities, patronage, wardianship,
jurisdiction, nomination, prerogatives and preheminences upon the Bishoprics,
Cathedral Churches, and other Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Parsonages, and any
other Benefices whatsoever within the precincts of the said Countries, places,
and Bailiwicks so yielded, of what Abbeys soever the said Priories do hold or
depend: And generally, without retaining or reserving any thing, all other
rights which the said Lord the Catholic King, or his Heirs and Successors have
and pretend, or may have and pretend for what cause and occasion soever, upon
the said Countries, places, Castles, Forts, Lands, Lordships, Dominions,
Chastellenies and Bailiwicks, and upon all the places depending of them as
aforesaid: Which, together with all the Men, Vassals, Subjects, Boroughs,
Villages, Hamlets, Forests, Lands, and other things whatsoever depending of
them, without keeping or reserving any thing, the said Lord the Catholic King,
both for himself and for his Successors, does consent to be from this time
forth and for ever united and incorporated to the Crown of* France; all Laws,
Customs, Statutes and Constitutions made to the contrary, even such as may have
been confirmed by Oath, in any wise* notwithstanding: To which, and to all
clauses derogatory to former derogatory clauses, it is expressly derogated by
the present Treaty, for the effect of the said renuntiations and cessions;
which shall be valid and shall take place, the particular expression or
specification not derogating to the general, nor the general* to the
particular, and excluding for ever all exceptions, upon what right, title,
cause or pretense soever they may be grounded. And the said Lord the Catholic
King does declare, consent, will and understand, that the men, vassals and
subjects of the said countries, towns and lands, yielded to the Crown of France
as aforesaid, be and remain quitted and absolved from henceforth and for ever
of the faith, homage, service and oath of fidelity, they* all, or any of them
may have done to him; or to his predecessors the Catholic Kings; and withal
of all obedience, subjection and vassallage which they for that cause might owe
unto him. The said Lord the Catholic King Willing that the said faith and
homage, and oath of fidelity become and remain void and of none effect, as if
they had never been taken.

XLII. And as concerning the countries and places taken by the Arms of France,
during this War toward Spain: As it had been formerly agreed by the
Negotiation begun in Madrid, in the year 1656. upon which this present Treaty
is grounded, that the Pyrenean Mountains, which anciently had divided the Gauls
from Spain, should also make henceforth the division of both the said Kingdoms.
It has been concluded and agreed, that the Lord, the most Christian King,
shall remain in possession, and shall effectually enjoy the whole County and
Viquery of Roussillon, and the County and Viquery of Conflans, the countries,
towns, places, castles, buroughs, villages and places, which make up the said
Counties and Viqueries of Roussillon and Conflans: And to the Lord, the
Catholic King, shall remain the County and Viquery of Cerdana, and the whole
principality of Catalonia, with the Viqueries, places, towns, castles,
buroughs, hamblets, places and countries, that make up the said County of
Cardena, and the principality of Catalonia. Provided, that if there be found
any place of the County and Viquery of Constans only, and not of Roussillon,
that be in the said Pyrenean Mountains toward Spain, it shall likewise remain
to the Catholic Majesty: As likewise, if any place be found of the said County
and Viquery of Cardena only, and not of Catalonia, that be in the said
Pyrenean Mountains toward France, it shall remain to his most Christian
Majesty. And that the said division might be concluded, commissioners shall be
presently appointed on both sides, who shall together bona fide, declare which
are the Pyrenean Mountains, which according to the tenor of this Article, ought
hereafter to divide both Kingdoms, and shall mark the limits they ought to have:
And the said Commissioners shall meet upon the place at the furthest, a month
after the subscribing of the present Treaty, and within the space of another
month after, ought to have concluded the matter, and declared, with common
consent, the premises. Provided, that if then they cannot agree among
themselves concerning it, they shall presently send the grounds of their
opinions to the two Plenepotentiaries of both the Lords and Kings, who taking
notice of the difficulties and differences happened thereupon, shall conclude
the business betwixt them: So that it shall not be suffered, that Arms be taken
up again about the same.

XLIII. The whole County and Viquery of Roussillon, County and Viquery of
Conflans, except the places that shall be found to be situate in the Pyrenean
Mountains toward Spain, in the manner aforesaid, according to the Declaration
and Agreement of the Commissioners that are to be appointed for that purpose;
as also that part of the county of Cerdana, that shall be found situate in the
Pyrenean Mountains toward France, according unto the same Declaration of the
commissioners, the countries, towns, places, castles, that make up the
Vigueries of Roussillon and Conflans, and part of the county of Cerdana, in the
manner aforesaid, Appurtenances, Dependences, and Annexes, with all the Men,
Vassals, Subjects, Borroughs, Villages, Hamblets, Forests, Rivers, Lands, and
any other things whatsoever depending of them, shall remain irrevocably, and
for ever, by the present Treaty, united and incorporated to the crown of
France, to enjoy the same by the said Lord, the most Christian King, his Heirs,
Successors and Assigns* with the same Rights of Sovereignty, Propriety,
Regalities, Patronage, Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogatives, and
Preheminences, upon the Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, and other Abbeys,
Priories, Dignities, Parsonages, or any other Benefices whatsoever, being
within the limits of the said county of Roussillon, Viguery of Conflans, and
part of the county of Cerdana, in the manner aforesaid (except, as to Conflans,
what shall be found to be in the Pyrenean Mountains toward Spain) of
whatsoever Abbeys the said Priories be holding and depending; and all such
other Rights formerly belonging to the said Lord, the Catholic King, though
not here particularly mentioned: And that his most Christian Majesty shall
never, hereafter, be troubled or molested by any way whatsoever, either of
Right or of Fact, by the said Lord, the Catholic King, his Successors, or any
Prince of his House, or by any other whosoever, or under any pretense or
occasion that might happen in the said Sovereignty, Propriety, Jurisdiction,
Power, possession and enjoyment of all the said countries, towns, places,
castles, lands, Lordships, Dominions and Bailiwicks: And withal, of all the
places and other things whatsoever, depending of the said county of Roussillon,
Viguery of Conflans, and part of the county of Cerdana, in the manner aforesaid
(except, as to Conflans, what shall be found to be in the Pyrenean Mountains
toward Spain.) And for that end, the said Lord the Catholic King, both for
Himself, and his Heirs, Successors, and Assigns, does renounce unto, quit,
yield and transport, as his Plenipotentiaries, in his name by the present
Treaty of Peace, irrevocable, has renounced to, quitted, yielded and
transported, perpetually, and for ever, in the behalf, and to the benefit of
the said Lord, the most Christian King, his Heirs, Successors, and Assigns, all
the Rights, Actions, Pretensions, Regalities, Patronage, Jurisdiction,
Nomination, Prerogatives, and Preheminences upon the Bishoprics, Cathedral
Churches, and other Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Parsonages, or any Benefices
whatsoever, being within the limits of the said County of Roussillon, Viguery
of Conflans, and part of the county of Cerdana, in the manner aforesaid (except
as to Conflans, what shall be found to be in the Pyrenean Mountains toward
Spain) of what Abbeys soever the said Priories be depending: And generally all
other Rights, without keeping or reserving any thing, which the said Lord the
Catholic King, or his said Heirs and Successors, have and pretend, or may have
and pretend, for what cause and occasion soever, upon the said county of
Roussillon, Viguery of Conflans, and part of the county of Cerdana, in the
manner aforesaid, (except as to Conflans, what shall be found to be in the
Pyrenean Mountains toward Spain) and upon all the places depending of them as
aforesaid; which together with the Men, Vassals, Subjects, Buroughs, Villages,
Hamblets, Forests, Rivers, Lands, and other things whatsoever depending of
them, without keeping or reserving any thing, the said Lord the Catholic King,
both for himself, and for his Successors, does from henceforth and for ever
consent, to be united and incorporated to the Crown of France: All Laws,
Customs, Statutes, Constitutions, and Conventions made contrary thereunto, even
such as may have been confirmed by Oath, in any wise notwithstanding: To which,
and to the Clauses derogatory of any other derogatory Clauses, it is expressly
derogated by the present Treaty, for the effect of the said renounciations and
cessions, which shall be valid, and shall take place, the particular expression
or specification not derogating to the general, nor the general to the
particular: Excluding for ever, all exceptions, upon what Rights and Titles,
causes, or pretenses soever the same may be grounded; and namely, that that
might hereafter be pretended, that the separation of the County of Roussillon,
Viguery of Conflans, and part of the County of Cerdana, in the manner
aforesaid, (except as to Conflans, what shall be found to be in the Pyrenean
Mountains toward Spain) and of their Appurtenances and Dependences, should be
against the Constitutions of the Principality of Catalonia; and that therefore
the said separation cannot have been resolved nor concluded, without the
express consent of all the people assembled in their General Estates: And the
said Lord the Catholic King, does declare, will and intend, that the said Men,
Vassals, Subjects of the said County of Roussillon, Viguery of Conflans, and
part of the County of Cerdana, in the manner aforesaid, (except as to Conflans,
what shall be found to be in the Pyrenean Mountains toward Spain) their
Appurtenances and Dependences, be and remain quitted and absolved, from
henceforth and for ever, of the Faith, Homages, Service, and Oath of Fidelity,
all and every of them, may have made unto him, and to his Predecessors the
Catholic Kings; and withal of all obedience, subjection, and vassalage, which
therefore they might owe unto him: Willing that the said Faith, Homage, and
Oath of Fidelity, remain void and of none effect, as if they had never been
done or taken.

XLIV. The said Lord the Catholic King, shall re-enter into the possession and
enjoyment of the County of Carrolois, to enjoy it by him and his Successors,
fully and peaceably, and hold the same under the Sovereignty of the most
Christian King, as he held it before the present War.

XLV. The said Lord the most Christian King, shall restore to the said Lord the
Catholic King, in the Low Countries the Towns and Places of Yperen, Oudenaerd,
Dixmude, Furnes, with the fortified Posts of La Fintelle, and La Quenoque,
Merville upon the River of Lys, Menene, and Comines, their Appurtenances
Dependences, and Annexes. As also his most Christian Majesty shall put again
into the hands of his Catholic Majesty the places of Bergh, St. Wynox, and its
Royal Fort, and the place of La Bassee, by way of exchange for the places of
Marienburgh and Philippeville, as has been said in the XXXIX Article.

XLVI. Secondly, The said Lord the most Christian King, shall restore in Italy,
unto the said Lord the Catholic King, the places of Valance upon the Po, and
of Mortara, their Appurtenances, Dependences and Annexes.

XLVII. Thirdly, In the County of Burgundy, the said Lord the most Christian
King, shall restore unto the said Lord the Catholic King, the Places and Forts
of St. Amor, Bleverans and Joux, and their appurtenances, dependences and
annexes, and all the other Posts, fortified or not fortified, which the Armies
of his most Christian Majesty have taken in the said County of Burgundy,
without keeping or reserving any thing.

XLVIII. Fourthly toward Spain, the said Lord the most Christian King, shall
restore to the Catholic King, the places and Ports of Roses, the Fort of the
Trinity, Cap-de Quers, La Seau a'Vrgel, Toxen, the Castle of La Bastide, the
Town and place of Baga, the Town and place of Ripol, and the County of Cerdana,
wherein are Belvet, Puicerda, Carol, and the Castle of Cerdana, in such a
condition as they be now, with all the Castles, Ports, fortified or not
fortified Towns, Boroughs, Villages, and other places, appurtenances,
dependences and annexes, belonging to the said places of Roses, Cap-de Quers,
Seau d'Vrgel, and County of Cerdana, although not named nor specified here:
Provided, that if any of the said Posts, Towns, places and Castles aforenamed,
should be found to be in the Viguery of Cerdana, in the Pyrenaean Mountains
toward France, they shall remain to his most Christian Majesty; according
unto, and by virtue of the 42 Article of the present Treaty, any thing in the
present Article contained, notwithstanding; whereunto in that case, and in that
respect it is derogated.

XLIX. The the said Lord the Catholic King, shall restore unto the Lord the
most Christian King, the Towns and places of Rocroy, Le Catelet, and Linchamp,
with their appurtenances; dependences and annexes; so that for any reason*
cause, or excuse whatsoever, foreseen or not foreseen, even this, that the said
places of Rocroy, Le Catelet, and Linchamp, are at this present in the power,
and in other hands, than of his Catholic Majesty, he shall not be dispensed of
the said restitution of those three places, to the said Lord the most Christian
King; His said Catholic Majesty engaging and taking upon himself the real and
faithful execution of the present Article.

L. The respective restitution of the said places, as it is aforesaid in the
five next foregoing Articles, shall be made by the said Lords and Kings, or by
their Ministers, really and bona fide, without any delay or difficulty, for
what cause or occasion soever, unto such as shall be appointed by the said
Lords and Kings respectively, within the time, and in the manner that shall be
here under appointed, and in such condition, as the said places are at this
time, without demolishing, weakening, imbezzeling, diminishing or damnifying
any thing therein, in any wise; and without pretending or demanding any
reimbursement for the fortifications made in the said places, nor for the
payment of what might be due to the Soldiers and Garrisons that are in them.

LI. The said Lords and Kings, in restoring of the said places respectively,
shall have liberty to take and carry away all the Artillery, Powder, Bullets,
Victuals or other warlike Ammunitions, that shall be in the said places, at the
time of the restitution. Likewise, the Officers, Soldiers and others, that
shall go out of the said places, shall have liberty to take and carry away the
moveable goods, to them belonging; but it shall not be lawful to them, to exact
any thing of the Inhabitants of the said places, nor of the Country people, nor
to wrong their Houses, or carry away any thing belonging to the Inhabitants: As
also the said Lords and Kings, shall be bound to pay unto the said Inhabitants
of the places, from whence they shall withdraw their Arms, and which they shall
restore, all what may be justly due unto them by the said Lords and Kings, for
things taken by the Governors of the said places, or other Ministers of the
said Lords and Kings, to be employed to their services, whereof they shall have
given Receipts or Bonds, to such as have furnished them with the same. As also
the Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrisons shall be obliged to pay what
they lawfully owe to the Inhabitants upon their Receipts or Bonds; Provided,
that for the performing of that satisfaction to the Inhabitants, the yielding
and restoring the said places be not retarded; but that the same be done by the
time and day that shall be agreed on and prescribed hereafter, in the other
Articles of the present Treaty. The Creditors, in that case remaining in all
the right of the just pretensions they may have*

LII. As the place of Hesdin and the Bailiwick thereof, ought, by the present
Treaty of Peace, to remain to the most Christian King, as before has been
expressed, it has been concluded and agreed, in consideration of the Offices
of the said Lord the Catholic King, who had taken under his protection the
Officers of War, or the Soldiers of the Garrison of the said Hesdin, who had
revolted in that place, and had drawn themselves from the obedience of the said
Lord the most Christian King, since the death of the Governor of the said
place, that in conformity to the Articles, whereby the said Lords and Kings do
pardon each of them, all such as have followed the contrary party, provided
they be not found guilty of any* other crimes, and do promise to settle them
again in the possession and enjoyment of their goods: His most Christian
Majesty shall cause his Letters of Amnisty and Pardon to be dispatched, in good
form, in the behalf of the said Officers of War, and Soldiers of the Garrison
of the said Hesdin; which Letters being offered and put into the hands of the
Commander of the place, upon the day designed and appointed between their
Majesty's, for the restitution of the said place, into the power of his most
Christian Majesty, as shall be said hereafter upon the same day, and at the
same time, the said Commander, Officers and Soldiers, shall be bound to go out
of the said place, without any delay or excuse, under what pretense soever,
foreseen or not foreseen, and to surrender the said place, in the same
condition it was when they revolted, to the power of such as his most Christian
Majesty shall commit for to receive it in his name; and that without altering,
weakening, imbezzeling, demolishing or damnifying any thing, in any sort or
manner whatsoever, in the said place: And in case the said Letters of Amnisty
and Pardon, being offered to the said Commander himself, or the other Officers
and Soldiers of the said Garrison of Hesdin should refuse or delay, under what
cause or pretense soever, to surrender the said place in the said condition,
into the power of such as his said most Christian Majesty shall have appointed
to receive it in his name; the said Commander, Officers and Soldiers shall
forfeit the grace of Amnisty and Pardon procured unto them by his Catholic
Majesty, and his said Majesty shall make no further instance in their behalf:
and in the same case his said Catholic Majesty does promise, upon the word of
a King, not to give, directly or indirectly, unto the said Commander, Officers
and Soldiers, nor suffer to be given them* by any in his Dominions, any
assistance of Men, Arms, Victuals, Warlike Ammunitions or Money: But to the
contrary, shall assist with his Forces, in case he be desired, the said Lord
the most Christian King, for the assaulting of the said place, that it might
the sooner be reduced to his obedience, and the present Treaty may the sooner
have its full effect.

LIII. As the three places of Avennes, Philippeville and Marienbourg, with
their Appurtenances, Dependences and Annexes, are yielded by the present
Treaty, as aforesaid, unto the Lord the most Christian King, to be united and
incorporated to the Crown of France, it has been concluded and agreed, that in
case between the said places and France, there be found any Boroughs, Villages,
places or Lands, which not being of the said Appurtenances, Dependences or
Annexes, ought to remain in the propriety and sovereignty of the said Lord the
Catholic King, neither his said Catholic Majesty, nor the Kings his
successors, shall have power at any time to fortify the said Boroughs,
Villages, Posts, or Countries, nor to make any new fortifications between the
said places of Avennes, Philippeville, and Marienbourg, by means of which
fortifications, the said places or any of them, might be cut off from France,
or the communication between them disturbed: as likewise it has been concluded
and agreed, that in case the place of Renty in Artois remain to his Catholic
Majesty, as it ought to remain to him, in case it be found to be of the
Dependences of Air or St. Omer, neither his said Catholic Majesty, nor the
Kings his successors shall have power, at any time to fortify the said Renty.

LIVE. All Papers, Letters and Documents, concerning the Countries, Lands and
Lordships that are to remain to the Lord the most Christian King, by the
present Treaty of Peace, shall be furnished and delivered him, bona fide,
within three months after the exchanging of the Ratifications.

LV. By virtue of the present Treaty, all the Catalonians and other Inhabitants
of the said Province, as well Prelates, Ecclesiastical persons, Religious
persons, Lords, Gentlemen, and Burgesses, as other Inhabitants, both of the
Towns and of the Country, none excepted, shall have power to re-enter, and
shall effectually re-enter, and be left and established in the possession and
peaceable enjoyment of all their goods, Honors, Dignities, Privileges,
Franchises, Rights, Immunities, Constitutions, and Liberties, and shall never
be prosecuted, troubled, or molested, either in general, or in particular, upon
any cause or pretense whatsoever, for any thing done since the beginning of the
present War. And for that end, his Catholic Majesty shall grant and cause to
be published, in good form, his Declarations of Amnisty and Pardon, in the
behalf of the said Catalonians, which publication shall be made upon the same
day, as the publication of the Peace; in consequence of which Declarations, it
shall be permitted to all and any of them in particular, either personally to
return to their houses, and to the enjoyment of their goods; or in case they be
willing to settle their habitation any where else out of Catalonia, they shall
have liberty to do it, and to send into the said Country of Catalonia, their
Agents and Attorneys, to take in their names, and for them, the possessions of
the said goods, to improve and administer the same, receive the fruits and
revenues, and transport the same whether they shall please; so that they shall
not be obliged personally to go and do homage for the Lands and Manors,
whereunto their Attorneys shall have power to satisfy in their name: And their
absence shall not hinder their free possession and enjoyment of the said goods;
which they shall have also liberty and all faculty to exchange, or alienate, by
sale, gift, or otherwise. Yet upon that condition, that those they shall so
commit for the management and improvement of their said estates, be not
suspected to the Governors or Magistrates, of the places where such Estates
are situated; in which case, the owners shall appoint other persons, that be
acceptable and no way suspected. Yet it remaining at the will and power of his
Catholic Majesty to prescribe the place of the abode to such of the said
Catalonians whose return into the Country shall not be acceptable to his
Majesty. Yet so that the other liberties and privileges granted unto them, and
which they enjoyed, shall not be repealed nor altered. As also it shall remain
at the will and power of his most Christian Majesty to prescribe the place of
abode to such of the County of Roussillon, Appurtenances and Dependences, who
have retired themselves into Spain, whose return into the said County, shall
not be acceptable to his Majesty. Yet so, that the other liberties and
privileges granted to the said persons, shall not be repealed nor altered.

LVI. The Testamentary Successions, or any other Donations whatsoever between
living persons or others of the Inhabitants of Catalonia, and of the County of
Roussillon, mutually made to one another, shall remain equally permitted and
inviolable; and in case about the said Successions, Donations, or other acts
and contracts, there should happen betwixt them any differences whereby they
should be obliged to plead and go to Law, Justice shall be done on both sides
with equality and bona fide, although they be under the obedience of the other
party.

LVII. The Bishops, Abbots, Prelates, and others, who have been promoted during
the War, to Ecclesiastical Benefices, with approbation of our holy Father the
Pope, and by Apostolical authority, dwelling in the lands of either of the
parties, shall enjoy the fruits, rents and revenues of the said Benefices,
which shall be found to be within the limits of the lands of the other party,
without any trouble or molestation, upon what causes, reason, or pretense
soever: And for that end they shall have power to appoint* for the said
enjoyment and receiving of the said fruits, such persons as are not suspected,
having first obtained the good liking of the King, or of his Officers and
Magistrates, under whose nomination the said fruits, rents and revenues shall
be found to be situated.

LVIII. Such Inhabitants of the principality of Catalonia, or of the County of
Roussillon, who shall have enjoyed, by donation or confiscation granted by
either of the two Kings, such goods or estates as were belonging to any persons
of the contrary party, shall not be bound to make any restitution to the owners
of the said estates, of the fruits by them received by virtue of the said
donations or confiscations, during the present War. Provided that the effect of
the said donations or confiscations do cease from the day of the publication of
the Peace.

LIX. Commissioners shall be appointed on both sides, two months after the
publication of the present Treaty, who shall meet at such a place as shall be
respectively agreed on, there to end in an amicable way all such differences as
might be yet betwixt both parties: which Commissioners shall have care to see
the subjects on both sides to be equally and well entreated, and shall not
suffer the one to re-enter into the possession of their Estates, but at the
same time when the other shall also re-enter into the possession of theirs: As
also the said Commissioners, if it be so judged fit, shall be injoined to make
a just valuation on both sides of the estates of such as shall not be willing
to return into the Country they have forsaken, or of such as the two Kings
shall not be willing to receive, having prescribed unto them their abode
somewhere else, as aforesaid; that the said valuation being made, the same
Commissioners might manage in all equity the exchanges and compensations of the
said estates for the greater convenience, and with equal advantage to the
interessed parties, being careful that none be wronged. And in a word, the said
Commissioners shall regulate all things concerning the commerce and the mutual
frequentation of the Subjects on both parts, and all such things as they shall
think the most conducible to the public utility, and to the strengthening of
the Peace. And whatsoever has been said in the four immediately foregoing
Articles, and in this concerning the County of Roussillon and the Inhabitants
thereof, ought in the same manner to be understood of the Viguery of Conflans,
and that part of the Country of Cerdana, that may or ought by the present
Treaty to remain in the propriety of his most Christian Majesty, by the
Declaration of the aforesaid Commissioners, and of the Inhabitants of the
Viguery of Conflans, and the aforesaid part of the County of Cerdana: As also
it ought reciprocally to be understood of the County of Cerdana, and of the
part of the Viguery of Canflans, that may or ought to remain to his Catholic
Majesty, by the present Treaty, and the Declaration of the said Commissioners.

LX. Although his most Christian Majesty has never been willing to engage
himself, notwithstanding the pressing instances made to him heretofore, backed
even with very considerable offers, not to make the Peace without the exclusion
of the Kingdom of Portugal, because his Majesty has foreseen and feared least
such an Engagement might be an unsurmountable obstruction to the conclusion of
the Peace, and might, consequently reduce the two Kings to the necessity of a
perpetual War; Yet his said most Christian Majesty, wishing, with an extreme
passion, to see the Kingdom of Portugal enjoy the same quietness, which so many
Christian States shall get, by the present Treaty, has for that end, proposed
a good number of parties and expedients, such as his Majesty thought might be
satisfactory to his Catholic Majesty; among which, though as aforesaid his
Majesty was no way engaged in that Affair, his Majesty has even gone so far
therein, as to be willing to deprive himself of the principal fruit of the
happiness and success his Arms have had, during the course of a long War,
offering, besides the places his Majesty does now restore by the present Treaty
unto his Catholic Majesty, to restore yet unto him all the rest of the
Conquests generally made by his Arms during this War, and wholly to restore the
Prince of Condae; Provided, and upon that condition that the affairs of the
Kingdom of Portugal should be left as they are now: which his Catholic Majesty
having refused to accept, but only offering that in consideration of the mighty
Offices of the said Lord the most Christian King, he would give his consent for
setting all things in the said Kingdom of Portugal, in the same state they were
before the change arived there in the Month of December, in the year 1640,
pardoning and giving a general Amnisty for all what is past, and granting the
re-establishment into all Estates, Honors, and Dignities, to all such, without
distinction of persons, as returning under the obedience of his Catholic
Majesty, shall put themselves again in posture to enjoy the effect of the
present peace, At length, in consideration of the peace, and considering the
absolute neeessity his said most Christian Majesty has been in, to perpetuate
the War by breaking off the present Treaty, which his Majesty found to be
unavoidable, in case he would have any longer insisted upon the obtaining, upon
that affair of his Catholic Majesty, other conditions than such as he offered,
as aforesaid: And his said most Christian Majesty willing to prefer, as it
ought to be, and is most just, the general quietness of Christendom, to the
particular interest of the Kingdom of Portugal, for whose advantage, and in
whose behalf, his said Majesty has never omitted any thing of what depended of
him, and did lie in his power, even to the making of such great offers as
aforesaid, it has been at length concluded and agreed between the said Lords
and Kings, that it shall be granted unto his said most Christian Majesty, a
space of three months time, to begin from the day of the exchanging of the
Ratifications of the present Treaty, during which his said Majesty may send
into the said Kingdom of Portugal, to endeavor so to dispose things there, and
to reduce and compose that affair, that his Catholic Majesty may remain fully
satisfied. Which three months being expired, if his said most Christian
Majesty's cares and offices have not had the desired effect, his said Majesty
will no further meddle with that affair, and does oblige and engage himself and
promise upon his Honor, and in the word of a King, for himself and his
Successors, not to give unto the said Kingdom of Portugal, either in general,
or to any person or persons in particular, of what dignity, state, condition,
or quality soever they be, now or hereafter, any help or assistance, public or
secret, directly or indirectly, of Men, Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, Ships, or
Money, upon any pretense, nor any other thing whatsoever, by Sea or Land, nor in
any other manner. As also, not to suffer any levies to be made in any parts of
his Kingdom and Dominions; nor to grant passage to any that might come from
other Srates, to the assistance of the said Kingdom of Portugal.

LXI. His Catholic Majesty does renounce by this Treaty, both in his Name, and
of his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, unto all the Rights and Pretensions,
without keeping or reserving any thing, which his Majesty may, or might
hereafter have upon the Upper and Lower Alsatia, the Zuntgaw, the County of
Ferrese, Brisac, and Dependences thereof, and upon all the Countries, places,
and rights left and yielded to his most Cristian Majesty by the Treaty made at
Munster, the 14 of October, 1648 to be united and incorporated to the Crown of
France: His Catholic Majesty approving, for the effect of the said
Renunciation, the Contents of the said Treaty of Munster and not any other
thing of the said Treaty, as not having intervened therein. In consideration of
which present renuntiation, his most Christian Majesty do offer to satisfy to
the payment of Three Millions of Livers, his Majesty is obliged to pay, by the
said Treaty, to the Archdukes of Inspruek.

LXII. The Duke Charles of Lorraine, having showed much sorrow for his conduct
toward the Lord the most Christian King, and to have a firm intention to give
him more satisfaction for the future, both of himself and of his actions, than
the time past, and the occasions have formerly enabled him to do, his most
Christian Majesty, in consideration of the mighty offices of his Catholic
Majesty, does from this time receive the said Duke into his good Grace, and in
contemplation of the Peace, without looking to the Rights his Majesty may have
acquired, by several Treaties made by the late King his Father, with the said
Duke, after the demolishing, which shall be first made, of all the
Fortifications of both the Towns of Nancy, which he shall not have power to
raise again, and the drawing and carrying away of all the Artillery, Powder,
Bullets, Arms, and Ammunitions of War, that are at present in the Magazines of
the said Nancy, shall put again the said Duke Charles of Lorrain into the
possession of the Dukedom of Lorrain, and even of the Towas, Places and
Countries, by him formerly possessed, depending of the three Bishoprics of
Metz, Thoul and Verdun, except first, Moyenvie, which though within the Marches
of Lorrain, yet belonged to the Empire, and has been yielded to his most
Christian Majesty, by the Treaty made at Munster, the 21 of October, 1648.

LXIII. Secondly, Except the whole Dukedom of Bar, Countries, Towns, and
places, making up the same, as well that part thereof as does hold from the
Crown of France, as that which might be pretended not to hold of it.

LXIV. Thirdly, Except the County of Clermont, and the Dominion thereof, and
the places, Provostships, and Lands of Stendy, Dun and Jametz, with the whole
Revenue thereof, and the Territories belonging to them. Which Moyenvie, Dukedom
of Bar, therein comprehended the part of the place and Provostship of Merville,
which part, as it has been said before, did belong to the Duke of Bar, Places,
County, Provostship, Lands, and Dominions of Clermont, Stenay, Dan and Jametz,
with their Appurtenances, Dependencies, and Annexes, shall remain for ever
united and incorporated to the Crown of France.

LXV. The said Duke Charles of Lorrain, before his re-establishment into the
Dominions aforesaid, and before any place be restored unto him, shall give his
consent to the tenor of the three immediately foregoing Articles: And to that
effect, shall deliver to his most Christian Majesty, in the most valid and
authentic form his Majesty might desire, the Acts of his renunciation and
cession of the said Moyenvie, Dukedom of Bar, therein comprehended the part of
Merville, both the part holding and pretended not to hold of the Crown of
France, Stenay, Dun, Jametz, the County of Clermont, and the Dominion thereof,
Appurtenances, Dependencies and Annexes* And the said Duke, not his
successors, either now or ever hereafter, shall pretend or demand any thing of
the price the late King Lewis XIII. of glorious memory, had bound himself to
pay unto the said Duke, for the said Dommion of the County of Clermont, by the
Treaty made at Liverdun, in the Month of June, 1632. because the Article
containing the said Obligation has been annullated by the subsequent Treaties,
and again afresh, in as much as need might be, is wholly annullated by this
present Treaty.

LXVI. His most Christian Majesty, in restoring unto the said Duke Charles, the
places of his Dominions as aforesaid, shall leave therein, except only in such
as are agreed to be demolished, all the Artillery, Powder, Bullets, Arms,
Victuals, and Ammunitions of War, that are in the Magazines of the said places,
without imbezling, weakening, and damnifying the same in any manner whatsoever.

LXVII. Neither the said Duke Charles of Lorrain, nor any other Prince of his
House, or of his adherents and dependents shall have power to remain in Arms,
but both the said Duke, and the other aforesaid, shall be bound to disband
their Forces at the Publication of the said Peace.

LXVIII. The said Duke Charles of Lorrain, before his re-establishment into his
Dominions, shall likewise prepare an Act in good form, unto his most Christian
Majesty, that he does desist and give over all Intelligences, Leagues,
Associations and practices, he has or may have, with any Prince, State, and
Potentate whatsoever, to the prejudice of his Majesty and the Crown of France:
And that for the future, he will give no retreat into his Dominions to his
enemies, Rebels, or suspected Subjects, and will not permit any Levies there,
nor gathering of Soldiers against his Service.

LXIX. The said Duke Charles shall likewise give, before his re-establishment,
an Act in good form unto his most Christian Majesty, whereby he shall bind
himself, both for himself and all the Dukes of Lorrain his Successors, to
grant at all times, without any difficulty, under what pretense soever the same
might be grounded, free passage upon his Dominions, both to such persons and
forces, Horse and Foot, whom his said Majesty and the Kings of France his
Successors, shall have occasion to send into Alsatia, or to Brisac and
Philipsbourg, as often as he shall be desired of it by his said Majesty, and
his said Successors; and to cause Victuals, Lodgings and other necessaries to
be afforded unto the said forces in his said Dominions, by way of Estap, the
said forces paying their expenses at the ordinary rate of the Country.
Provided, they be but mere passages, at regular marches and reasonable
journeys, without so journing in the said Dominions of Lorrain.

LXX. The said Duke Charles before his re-establishment into his Dominions,
shall put into the hands of his most Christian Majesty, an Act in good form,
and satisfactory to his Majesty, whereby the said Duke shall oblige himself for
himself, and for all his Successors, to cause the Farmers and Administrators
of the Salt Pits of Rosieres, Chasteau-Salins, Dieuze, and Marsal, which his
Majesty does restore unto him, by the present Treaty, to afford unto his
Majesty, all such quantity of Measures of Salt, as shall be necessary for
furnishing all the Salt Storehouses, that ought to be filled for the use and
ordinary consumption of his Majesty's Subjects, within the three Bishoprics of
Metz, Thoul, and Verdun, Dukedom of Bar, and County of Clermont, Stenay,
Jametz, and Dun, at the same rate for each measure of Salt, as the said Duke
Charles was wonted to afford it to the Storehouses of the Bishopric of Metz,
in time of Peace, during the last year of the said Dukes possessing his whole
Dominions; and neither he, nor his Successors shall have power to raise the
price of the said measures of Salt.

LXXI. And because since the time the late most Christian King of glorious
memory, has conquered Lorrain by his Arms, a great number of the Subjects of
that Dukedom have served their Majesty's, in consequence of the Oaths of
Fidelity their Majesty's have desired of them, it has been agreed, That the
said Duke shall not like them, nor use them the worse for it, but shall
consider and use them as his good and faithful Subjects, and shall pay them off
such Debts and Rents, whereof his Dominions may be charged* Which his Majesty
does so particularly desire, that had it not been for the assurance his Majesty
takes of the Faith the said Duke will engage to him for that purpose, his
Majesty would have never granted him so much as he does by the present Treaty.

LXXII. It has been farther agreed, that the said Duke shall not have power to
alter any thing in the Provisions of the Benefices granted by the said Lords
and Kings, until the day of the present Treaty; and that such as have been
provided, shall remain in the peaceable possession of the said Benefices;
wherein the said Duke shall not disturb or molest them, nor have power to turn
them out of their possession.

LXXIII. It has been further agreed, that the Confiscations given by his
Majesty, and his Father the late King, of the Estates of such as were in arms
against him, shall be of force, as to the enjoyment of the said Estates, until
the day of the date of the present Treaty; and such as have enjoyed the same,
by virtue of the said Gifts, shall not be troubled, nor molested for the same,
in any wise, and for no cause whatsoever.

LXXIV. It has been further agreed, that all Proceedings, Judgments and
Arrests, issued by the Council, Judges and other Officers of his most Christian
Majesty, upon any differences and processes, prosecuted both by the Subjects of
the said Dukedoms of Lorrain and Bar, and others, whilst the said Dominions
were under the obedience of the said Lord the most Christian King, and of the
late King his Father, shall stand and shall have their full and entire effect
as if the said Lord and King should remain Lord and Possessor of the said
Country: And the said Judgments and Arrests shall not be called to any
question, nor recalled, nor the execution of them any way retarded or hindered.
Yet it shall be lawful to the Parties, to sue a Revision of the Cause,
according to the order and disposition of the Laws and Ordinances; the said
Judgments remaining in the mean while, in their force and virtue.

LXXV. Moreover it has been further agreed, that all other gifts, graces,
remissions and alienations, made by the said Lord the most Christian King, and
the late King his Father, during the said time of things escheated and accrued
unto them, or adjudged to them either by confiscation for crime or offense,
(other than of War, for having followed the said Duke) or by reversion of
Lands, or for want of lawful Successors or otherwise, shall be and shall remain
good and valid, and shall not be recalled; nor shall those, to whom the said
gifts, graces, and alienations have been made, be disturbed or molested, in the
enjoyment of them, in any wise, and for any cause whatsoever.

LXXVI. As also that such as* during the said time, have been received to faith
and homage, by the said Lords and Kings, or their empowered Officers, because of
the said Lands and Lordships, held and depending of the Towns, Castles or
places, possessed by the said Lords and Kings, in the said country, and have
paid for the same the Rights and Duties belonging to the Lord, or have obtained
a gift and remission of the same, shall not be troubled nor molested, by reason
of the said Rights and Duties, but shall remain acquitted, and shall be liable
to no demand about the same.

LXXVII. In case the said Duke Charles of Lorrain, be not willing to accept and
ratify what has been agreed by the two Lords and Kings, concerning his
Interests, in the manner aforesaid: or having accepted of the same, he should
happen hereafter to fail in the execution and performance of the Tenor of the
present Treaty, his most Christian Majesty, in the first case of nonaccepting
of the Treaty by the said Duke, shall not be bound to execute on his part, any
of the Articles of the said Treaty; and yet he shall not be deemed, for this
cause, to have in any thing infringed the same: As also in the second case,
that the said Duke having accepted of the aforesaid conditions should hereafter
happen to sail on his part, in the execution thereof, his said Majesty has
reserved and does reserve unto himself all the rights he had acquired upon the
said Dominions of Lorrain, by several Treaties made, between the late King his
Father of happy memory, and the said Duke, to prosecute the said rights in such
manner as he shall think best.

LXXVIII. His Catholic Majesty does consent that his said most Christian
Majesty be not obliged to the foresaid re-establishment, unto the said Duke
Charles of Lorrain, but after the Emperor shall have approved and ratified by
an authentic Act, which shall be delivered to his most Christian Majesty, all
the Articles stipulated as to the said Duke Charles of Lorrain, in the present
Treaty, none excepted: And his said Catholic Majesty does oblige himself to
procure of the Emperor, the speedy expedition and delivery of the said Act: As
also in case it be found that of the Dominions, Countries, Towns, Lands or
Lordships, remaining to his most Christian Majesty, in propriety, by the
present Treaty, of such as formerly belonged to the Dukes of Lorrain, there be
any Fief held of the Empire, for reason whereof his Majesty had need and should
desire to be invested with the same, his Catholic Majesty does promise,
sincerely and bona fide, to solicit the Emperor for the obtaining of the said
investitures, in the behalf of the said Lord most Christian King, without delay
or difficulty.

LXXIX. The Prince of Conde having let Cardinal Mazarin the Plenipotentiary of
the most Christian King his Sovereign Lord to understand, that he might
acquaint his said Majesty with it, how extremely sorrowful he was to have some
years since followed a course displeasing to his Majesty; that he wished he
could redeem with the best part of his blood, all the hostilities he has
committed within and without the Kingdom of France; whereunto he protests
that his sole unhappiness, rather than any evil intention against his Majesty's
service, has engaged him: And that if his Majesty be pleased to have so much
generosity as to use toward him his Royal bounty, forgetting what is past, and
keeping him in honor of the his good graces, he will endeavor as long as he
shall live to acknowledge that benefit, by an invioable fidelity, and to repair
what is past by a full obedience to all his commands: And that in the interim,
to begin and show by the deeds that might be presently in his power with how
great a passion he desired to recover the honor of his Majesty's benevolence,
he pretends nothing in the conclusion of that Peace, for all the interests he
may have therein, but from the mere bounty, and of the own motion of the said
Lord the King his Sovereign Lord; and does even desire his Majesty should be
pleased fully to dispose, and according to his good pleasure, in such a manner
as he shall please, of all the indamnifyings, the Lord the Catholic King shall
be pleased to grant him, and which he has already offered him either in
estates or lands, or in places or money, which he submits all to his Majesty's
feet: And besides that he is ready to disband all his Forces, and to put in his
Majesty's power the places of Rocroy, le Chastelet and Linchamp, whereof the
two first were remitted to him by his said Catholic Majesty: And that as soon
as he may have obtained leave, he will send an Express to the said Lord the
King, his Sovereign Lord, to protest yet more expressly of all the same
intentions, and of the truth of his submissions, and to deliver unto his
Majesty such Act or Writing subscribed by him, as his Majesty shall be pleased
to prescribe for assurance that he renounceth to all Leagues, Treaties and
Associations he might have made heretofore with his Catholic Majesty: And that
for the future he will not take nor receive any establishment, pension, nor
benefit of any Foreign King or Potentate: And finally, for all the interests he
may have, in what thing soever they may consist, he wholly remitteth them to
the good pleasure and disposition of his Majesty, without any pretension. His
said most Christian Majesty being informed of all the premises by his said
Plenipotentiary, and being sensible of the said Princes proceeding and
submission, has desired and consented that his interests should be regulated
in this Treaty, after the manner following, granted and agreed on between the
two Lords the Kings.

LXXX. First, That the Prince shall lay down arms at the furthest within eight
weeks, reckoning from the day of the subscribing of the present Treaty, and
shall effectively disband all his forces both horse and foot, French and
Foreigners, who make up the body of the Army he commands in the Lowcountries;
and that after such manner as his most Christian Majesty shall be pleased to
prescribe; except the Garrisons of Rocroy, le Chastelet and Linchamp, which
shall be disbanded at the time appointed for the restitution of the said three
places. And the said laying down of arms and disbanding shall be made by the
said Prince really and bona fide, without transporting, lending or selling
either really or feignedly, unto any other Princes or Potentates whatsoever,
either friends or foes, or either Allies of France.

LXXXI. Secondly, that the said Prince, sending an Express to his Majesty to
confirm more particularly unto him all the things aforesaid in his name, shall
deliver unto his Majesty an Act subscribed by him, whereby he shall submit to
the execution of what has been concluded between the two Lords and Kings as to
his person and interests, and as to the persons and interests of those that
have followed him. And in consequence thereof, he shall declare that he
sincerely departs from, and bona fide renounceth to all Leagues,
Intelligences and Treaties of Association or Protection he may have made and
contracted with his Catholic Majesty, or any other Kings, Potentates or
Foreign Princes whatsoever, or any other persons within or without the Kingdom
of France; with promise never to take or receive at any time hereafter of the
said Foreign Kings or Potentates, any Pensions, establishments, or Benefits,
that may oblige him to a dependence of them, or to any tie to any other Kings
or Potentates, but to his said Majesty his Sovereign Lord; upon the penalty, in
case of breach of the said Writing, to forfeit from that time the restoring and
reestablishing granted to him by the present Treaty, and to return to the same
condition he was in about the latter end of March in this present year.

LXXXII. Thirdly that the said Prince, in execution of what has been before
concluded and agreed between the said two Lords and Kings, shall really and
indeed put into the hands of his most Christian Majesty the places of Rocroy,
le Chastelet and Linchamp, upon the time and day appointed by another Article
of this same Treaty.

LXXXIII. Provided that what is abovesaid be executed, his most Christian
Majesty, in contemplation of the Peace and in consideration of the offices of
his Catholic Majesty, using his Royal clemency, shall sincerely and with a
good heart receive the said Prince into his grace, will pardon him, and with
the same sincerity will forget all what for the time past he has done and
undertaken against his service, within or without the Kingdom; and will like
his return into France, even where his Majesty's Court shall be. In consequence
whereof his said Majesty shall restore and re-establish the said Prince really
and indeed into the free possession and enjoyment of all his Estates, Honors,
Dignities and Privileges of first Prince of his blood: Yet so, that as to the
said Estates and Goods, of what nature soever, the said Prince shall never
pretend any thing, for the time past, for restitution of the fruits of the said
Estates, by whomsoever they may have been enjoyed by order of his Majesty, nor
for payment and restitution of his Pensions, Salaries, or any other Rents and
Revenues he had upon Demaines, Farms, or General Receipts of the said Lord the
King, nor by reason, or under pretense of what he might pretend to be due unto
him by his Majesty, before his going out of the Kingdom; nor for demolitions,
degradations, or damages made by his Majesty's orders or otherwise, in what
manner soever, upon the Estates, Towns, places fortified or not fortified,
Lordships, Chastellenies, lands and houses of the said Prince.

LXXXIV. And concerning the Charges and Governments of Provinces or places,
whereof the said Prince was provided, and which he possessed before his going
out of France, his most Christian Majesty has for a long time constantly
refused to restore him thereunto, until being sensibly affected with the
proceeding and the submission aforesaid of the said Prince, when he wholly
referred to his good pleasure and disposition all his interests without any
pretension, and whatsoever was offered to him by his Catholic Majesty for his
in damnifying, his most Christian Majesty has at length inclined to grant him
what follows, upon certain conditions hereafter specified, concluded and
agreed on by the said Lords and Kings, viz. That in case the Lord the Catholic
King, on his part, instead of what he intended to give to the said Prince
toward the in damnifying of him, will draw out the Spanish Garrison that is in
the Town, place and Citadel of Juliers, and leave the said place and Citadel
free of the said Garrison unto the Duke of Newburgh, upon the conditions, and in
the manner that shall be hereafter more particularly specified in another
Article of this present Treaty: As also if his said Catholic Majesty, besides
the drawing out of the Town and Citadel of Juliers, the aforesaid Spanish
Garrison, does put in the hands of his most Christian Majesty, the Town and
place of Avennes, situate between the Rivers of Sambre and Maez, with the
Appurtenances, Dependances, Annexes, and Dominions, after the manner his said
Catholic Majesty has above obliged himself to do, by an Article of this
present Treaty, (which place of Avennes his said Majesty intended also to have
given among other things, unto the said Prince.) Provided, his Majesty does
perform the premises as aforesaid, that is to say, by way of compensation for
the said remitting and yielding of one of the said places to the said Lord the
most Christian King, to be for ever united and incorporated to the crown of
France; and of the going of the Spanish Garrison out of the other, in the behalf
of a Prince, who is a friend and an Ally of his said most Christian Majesty,
whom his Majesty has desired to oblige, by virtue of the Treaty of the said
Alliance: His said most Christian Majesty, for all things generally whatsoever
that may concern the charges and Governments formerly possessed by the said
Prince, or which any of those that belong to him had ground to hope, none
excepted, will give unto the said Prince the Government of the Province of
Burgundy and Brescia, wherein are understood to be comprehended the Countries
of Bugey, Gex, and Veromey: As also will give him the particular Governments of
the Castle of Dijon, and of the Town of St. John de Laune; and to the Duke of
Enguien his son, the charge of Grand master of France, and of his Household;
with Briefs or Declarations of Assurance unto the said Prince to secure it, in
case the said Duke of Enguien should die before him.

LXXXV. His said Majesty shall cause his Letters Patents of Amnesty to be
dispatched, in good form, for whatsoever the said Prince, his Kindred,
Servants, Friends, Adherents, and Domestics, either Ecclesiastical or Secular,
have or may have done or undertaken, heretofore, against his service; so that
neither he, nor they shall ever be prejudiced or suffer for it, at any time,
nor their Heirs, Successors and Assigns, as if those things had never
happened. And his said Majesty shall never at any time, make any inquisition
against the said Prince, nor his, nor against his Servants, Friends, Adherents,
or Domestics, either Ecclesiastical or Secular, for any moneys he or they have
taken out of the general or particular Receipts, or out of his Customs and
Farms. And his Majesty shall not oblige them to any restitution of the said
moneys, nor of all the Levies, of contributions, impositions, exactions upon
the people, and acts of hostility committed in France, in what manner soever it
might be: The which shall be more particularly expressed in the said Letters of
Amnesty, for the entire security of the said Prince and of those who have
followed him, that they shall never be prosecuted, troubled, nor molested for
the same.

LXXXVI. After the said Prince of Conde has on his part satisfied unto the
contents of the three Articles, 80, 81, 82. of the present Treaty, all
Dutchies, Counties, Lands, Lordships, and Dominions, even those of Clermont,
Stenay and Dun, as he had them before his going out of France, as also that of
Jamets, in case he had it then, which formerly belonged to the said Prince;
together with all his other Estates and Goods, real or personal, of what
quality soever, in the manner aforesaid, shall be restored unto him really and
indeed, or to such as the said Prince, being in France, shall commit and
appoint, to take in his name the possession of the said Goods, and to serve him
in their Administration: As also shall be restored unto him, and to his said
Deputies, all Titles, Documents and other writings left, at the time of his
going out of the Kingdom, in the houses belonging to his said Lands and
Lordships, or elsewhere. And the said Princes shall be re-integrated into the
true and real possessions of all the said Dutchies, Counties, Lands, Lordships
and Dominions, with such Rights, Authorities, Justice, Chancery, Royal Cases,
Garners or Salt Storehouses, Presentations and Collations of Benefices, Graces
and Preheminences, which he or his Predecessors have enjoyed, and as he
enjoyed before his going out of the Kingdom, provided that he shall leave
Bellegarde and Montrond in the state they are at present. Whereupon shall be
dispatched unto him, in as good form as he shall desire it, all Letters Patents
of his Majesty necessary thereunto; and he shall not be troubled, prosecuted,
nor molested in the said possession and enjoyment by the said Lord the King,
nor by his Heirs, Successors or Officers, directly nor indirectly,
notwithstanding any Donations, Unions, or incorporations that might have been
made of the said Dutchys, Counties, Lands, Lordships and Dominions, Estates,
Honors, Dignities, and Prerogatives of first Prince of the blood, and any
derogatory Clauses, Constitutions, and Ordinances contrary thereunto. As also
neither the said Prince, nor any of his Heirs and Successors by reason of
things that he may have done, either in France before his going out, or out of
the Kingdom, after his said going out, nor for any Treaties, or Intelligences
whatsoever, by him had or made with any Princes and persons whatsoever, of what
condition and quality they be, shall not be molested, troubled, nor prosecuted:
But all kinds of Proceedings, Arrests, even that of the Parliament of Paris, of
the 27 of March, 1654. Judgments, Sentences, and other Acts, that may already
have been made and issued against the said Prince, both in Civil and Criminal
matters, unless in the Civil matter he has voluntarily debated it, shall
remain void and of none effect, and no pursuit shall ever be made concerning
the same, as if those things had never happened. And in respect of the Dominion
of Albres, which the said Prince enjoyed before his going out of France, and
whereof his Majesty has since otherwise disposed, his Majesty shall give unto
the said Prince the Dominion of Bourbonois, upon the same conditions upon which
the exchange of those two Dominions had already been agreed, before the said
Prince went out of the Kingdom.

LXXXVII. As to the Kindred, Friends, Servants, Adherents and Domestics of the
said Prince, either Ecclesiastical or Secular, who have followed his party,
they shall have liberty, in Consequence of the Pardon and Amnesty in a
foregoing Article mentioned, to return into France, with the said Prince, and
settle their abode in such place as they shall think best; and they shall be
re-established, as the other subjects of the two Lords and Kings, into the
peaceable possession and enjoyment of their Estates, Honors and Dignities,
except the Charges, Offices and Governments which they were possessed of, asore
their going out of the Kingdom, to enjoy by them the said Estates, Honors and
Dignities, as they held and possessed them. Yet they shall not pretend any
restitution for the enjoyments of the time past, either from such to whom his
Majesty had given the same, or in any other manner whatsoever. As likewise they
shall be re-established into their Rights, Names, Reasons, Actions, Successions
and Inheritances to them accrued, or to the Children and Widows of such as are
deceased, during their absence out of the Kingdom; as also such movables by
them left, shall be restored unto them if they be found in esse: and his
Majesty, in contemplation of the Peace, does declare null and of none effect,
(except as to their said Charges, Offices and Governments) all Proceedings,
Arrests, even that of the Parliament of Paris of the 27 of March, 1654.
Sentences, Judgments, Adjudications, Donations, Incorporations, and other
Acts, that may have been made against them or their Heirs, for having followed
the said Princes party; and that both in Civil and Criminal matters, unless in
the Civil matters they have voluntarily debated: and neither they nor their
Heirs shall ever be prosecuted, troubled or molested for the same. Upon all
which things aforesaid, his most Christian Majesty shall cause to be dispatched
both unto the said Prince, and to his Kindred, Servants, Friends, Adherents and
Domestics, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular, all the necessary Letters
Patents, containing the premises, in good form: which Letters Patents shall be
delivered unto them, when the said Prince shall have performed on his part the
contents in the three Articles 80, 81 and 82, of the present Treaty.

LXXXVIII. In conformity to what is contained in the 84. Article of the present
Treaty, whereby his most Christian Majesty does oblige himself to give unto the
said Prince of Conde, and unto the said Duke of Enguian, his son, the
Governments and the Charge therein mentioned, his Catholic Majesty does
promise and oblige himself, of his part, and in the word of a King, to draw out
of the Town, Citadel or Castle of Juliers, the Spanish Garrison that is in the
said Town, Citadel or Castle, and all such other Forces as might have lately
gone into the same, or might yet go in to reinforce the Garrison thereof,
leaving in the said Town and Citadel all the Artillery marked with the Coat of
Arms of the House of Cleveland or of Juliers, or that has belonged to them:
And as to the rest of the said Artillery, Arms, Ammunition, and Instruments of
War, which his Majesty has in the said Town and Castle of Juliers, delivering
them unto the Duke of Nubourgh, or such as shall be appointed by him to receive
the same, in the same quality he has the possession of the Estate of Juliers:
the said Duke delivering before into the hands of his Catholic Majesty a
Writing in good form signed with his hand, satisfactory* to his said Catholic
Majesty, whereby he shall engage not to sell, alienate nor, pawn the said Town,
Citadel or Castle to any Princes, or any other private persons; and that he
shall not put therein, nor settle there any other Garrison but of his own
Forces: As also to grant unto his said Catholic Majesty, whenever he shall
have need of it, the passage for his Forces, either through the said Town, or
through the State of Juliers* his said Majesty paying at his own charges the
expense of the passage of the said Forces, which shall be regulated journeys
and reasonable marches, and shall not sojourn in the Land* the said Duke
taking, in such occasions, the necessary precautions for the safety of the said
Town and Citadel. And in case the said Duke should fail in the performance of
what he shall oblige himself unto, as well of not alienating the same, as not
of putting any other Garrison in the said place and Citadel, but what is his
own, or that he refuses to give passage to his Catholic Majesty's Forces, in
paying their expenses, the said Lord the most Christian King does promise in
the word of a King, not to assist the said Duke with Money or Soldiers, nor in
any other manner, by himself, or by interposed persons, to uphold the said
contravention; but to the contrary he will lend his own Forces, if need be, for
the accomplishing of the Premises.

LXXXIX. It has been expressly concluded and agreed between the said
Plenipotentiaries* That the Reservations contained in the 21 and 22 Articles of
the Treaty of Vervins, shall have their full and entire effect; and no
explication contrary to their meaning shall be used: And that in consequence
thereof to the said Lord the most Christian King of France and Navarre, his
Successors and Assigns are reserved, notwithstanding any prescription or space
of time that might be alleged to the contrary, all the rights, actions and
pretensions he conceives to belong unto him, because of the said Kingdoms,
Countries and Lordships, or any where else, for any cause whatsoever, whereunto
it has ever been, either by himself, or by his predecessors, expressly
renounced, to prosecute the same by an amicable way and of Justice, and not by
Arms.

LXXXX. Likewise shall be reserved unto the said Lord the Catholic King of
Spain, his Successors and Assigns, notwithstanding any prescription or space of
time that might be alleged to the contrary, all the rights, actions and
pretensions he conceives to belong unto him, because of the said Kingdoms*
Countries and Lordships, or any where else, for any cause whatsoever, whereunto
it has never been, either by himself or by the King's his predecessors
expressly renounced, likewise to prosecute the same by an amicable way and of
Justice, and not by Arms.

LXXXXI. Whereas the said Cardinal Mazarin, his most Christian Majesty's*
Plenipotentiary, has represented, that for the better obtaining of a good
Peace, it is necessary that the Duke of Savoy, who has intermedled in this
War, joining his Arms to those of the Crown of France, whose Ally he is, should
be comprehended in the present Treaty: His most Christian Majesty loving the
welfare and preservation of the said Duke, as much as his own, because of the
propinquity of blood and alliance whereby they are related; and his Catholic
Majesty finding it reasonable that the said Duke be comprehended in that Peace:
upon the instances and by the interposition of his most Christian Majesty; It
has been concluded and agreed, that for the future there shall be a cessation
of all manner of acts of hostility, as well by Sea and other waters, as by
Land, between his Catholic Majesty and the said Duke of Savoy, their Children,
Heirs and Successors, born or to be born, their States, Dominions and
Lordships, a restablishment of Amity, Navigation and Commerce, and good
correspondency between the Subjects of his said Majesty and the said Duke,
without distinction of places or of persons: And the said Subjects shall be
restablished, without difficulty or delay, into the free and peaceable
possession and enjoyment of all their Goods, rights, names, reasons, pensions,
actions, immunities and privileges of what nature soever, which they possessed
in the Dominions one of the other, before the present War; or that might have
escheated to them during the same, and which by reason of it may have been
seized on: Yet so that they shall not pretend or demand any* restitution for
the enjoying of the same for the time past, during the War.

LXXXXII. In consequence of the said Peace, and in consideration of the Offices
of his most Christian Majesty, the said Lord the Catholic King shall restore
unto the said Duke of Savoy, really and indeed, the Town, place and Castle of
Verceil, and all the Territories thereof, Appurtenances, Dependences and
Annexes: And shall therein demolish nothing, nor damnifie the Fortifications
that have been made there; but shall restore it in the same condition, as to
the Artillery, Ammunitions of War, Victuals, and any other things, as it was
when the said Verceil was taken by his Catholic Majesty's Arms. And as to the
place of Cencio in the Langs, it shall likewise be restored to the said Duke of
Savoy, in the same state it is now in, with the Dependences, and Annexes.

LXXXXIII. As for the Dower of the late Serenissima Infanta Catharina, about
which there has been some difference betwixt the Houses of Savoy and of
Modena, his Catholic Majesty does promise and engage, to see effectively paid
unto the Duke of Savoy, the Arrears that may be due to his House, since the
said Dower was appointed, until the 17 of December, in the year 1620. At which
time the late Duke Charles Emanuel of Savoy gave in Appanage the said Dower, to
the late Prince Philbert his Son, as it shall be verified by the date, out of
the Books of the Royal Chamber of the Kingdom of Naples. And for the payment,
for the future, of the current of the said Dower, and other Arrears, what is
further disposed about it, hereafter, by another Article of the present Treaty,
shall be followed.

LXXXXIV. And because the Divisions, or contrary pretensions of the Houses of
Savoy and Mantua, have several times caused some troubles in Italy* because of
the assistances the said Lords and Kings have at diverse times given, each of
them to his Ally; that for the future, no subject or pretense may be left, that
might afresh after the good intelligence and amity of their Majesty's* It has
been concluded and agreed, for the good of the Peace, that the Treaties made at
Querasque, in the year 1632* about the differences of the said Houses of Savoy
and Mantua, shall be executed according to their form and tenor. And his
Catholic Majesty does promise and engage his Royal Word, never to oppose, nor
in any wise to do any thing contrary unto the said Treaty, nor to the execution
thereof, for any reason, action, or pretense whatsoever, and not to give any
assistance or favor, directly nor indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, to any
Prince that shall offer to infringe the said Treaties of Querasque; whereof his
most Christian Majesty shall have power to maintain the observation and
execution of it, by his authority, and if need be, with his Arms. And his most
Catholic Majesty shall not have power to make use of his own to hinder it; any
thing of the third Article of the present Treaty (whereunto it is expressly
derogated this present Article, only for that regard) contrary thereunto,
notwithstanding.

LXXXXV. Whereas the difference remaining betwixt the said Duke of Savoy, and
the Duke of Mantua, about the Dower of the late Princess Margaret of Savoy,
Grandmother to the said Duke of Mantua, could not be composed in several
conferences had by the Commissioners of the said Dukes about the same, both in
Italy and in this place, before the Plenipotentiaries of their Majesty's,
because of the too great distance of the one, and the exceptions of the other:
So that they could not agree before the conclusion of the said Peace, which
ought not to have been retarded, because of that interest only: It has been
concluded and agreed, that the said Dukes shall cause their Commissioners to
meet in Italy, within thirty days after the subscribing of this Treaty, and
sooner, if it may be, at such a place as shall be agreed on between the Duke of
Navailles, and in his absence, between the Ambassador of the most Christian
King residing in Piedmont, and the Count of Fuensaldana, or in such manner as
they shall think it most fit; to the end, that with the intervention of the
Ministers of both the Lords and Kings, which may happen to contribute much for
facilitating and carrying on of that accommodation, they might attend the
composure of that difference; so that within other forty days, after their
first meeting, the said accommodatoin may be concluded, and the parties may
agree about the sum that is due. And in case that new conference do not produce
the intended effect, before the Spring, then both the Plenipotentiaries of the
two Lords and Kings shall meet again together, upon this same Frontier of both
the Kingdoms. And then their Majesty's, having been acquainted by their
Ministers of the reasons on both sides, and of the expedients propounded unto
them shall make choice of that which they shall judge to be just and
reasonable, to mediate the accommodation of that business in an amicable way;
so that the said Dukes might and be obliged to remain satisfied on both sides.
And their said Majesty's shall concur afterward, unanimously to procure that
their determinations may be executed, so that nothing might remain that may
alter the public tranquillity of Italy.

LXXXXVI. And because, since the death of the Duke of Modena happened in
Piedmont, the last year 1658. his Catholic Majesty has been informed, by his
Ministers in Italy, that the Duke of Modena his Successor has showed his
pleasure for the things happened during this War, and to have a firm intention to
give satisfaction to his said Majesty concerning his person and his actions,
and to merit by his conduct his Royal good will, the said Duke having made for
that end, diverse offices to the Count of Fuensaldana, Governor and
Captain General in the State of Milan. Upon this consideration, and of the Lord
the most Christian Kings interposition, his Catholic Majesty does from
henceforth receive into his Grace, the person and the house of the said Duke,
who shall for the future live and proceed in a good and free neutrality with
the two Crowns of France and Spain, and his Subjects shall have power to have
and to hold a Free-commerce within the Dominions of both the Crowns: And the
said Duke and his Subjects shall enjoy such Rents and Graces, as they have
obtained, or hereafter may obtain of their Majesty's, as they wonted to enjoy
them, without difficulty, before the taking up of Arms.

LXXXXVII. Likewise his Catholic Majesty has consented and granted never to
send any more into the place of Correggio, the Garrison he used to have there,
for the time past: So that the possession of the said place of Correggio shall
remain free of the said Garrison, And even for a greater security and advantage
of the said Duke, his Catholic Majesty does promise to make most pressing
offices toward the Emperor, that he may be pleased to grant unto the said
Duke, to his satisfaction, the investiture of the aforesaid Dominion of
Correggio, as the Princes of the said Correggio formerly had it.

LXXXXVIII. As to the Dower of the Serenissima Infanta Catharina, assigned upon
the Customs of Foja in the Kingdom of Naples, of 48000 Ducats of yearly
revenue, or such other quantity as shall appear by the Books of the Royal
Chamber of that Kingdom; about which Dower, there is some difference betwixt
the Duke of Savoy and the Duke of Modena, his Catholic Majesty acknowledging
without any difficulty, that he owes the same, and having intention to pay it
to any of the said Dukes, to whom the propriety of the said Dower shall be
adjudged by Justice, or by any particular convention or agreement made between
them, it has been concluded and agreed, That his said Catholic Majesty shall
forthwith settle all things concerning the said Dower, in the same state they
were, when the payment of the said Dower began to cease to be paid, upon the
occasion of the taking up of Arms; That is to say, if at that time, the Moneys
of the said Dower were sequestered, they shall continue so still for the future
until the differences betwixt the said Dukes be ended, either by a definitive
Judgment of Justice, or by a mutual agreement between them: And if at the
aforesaid time, the late Duke of Modena was in possession of* enjoying the same
Dower, and the Moneys thereof not sequestered, his Majesty shall continue from
this time, to pay unto the Duke of Modena his Son, both the Arrears that shall
be found to be due for the time past, and what shall run for the future, of the
revenew of the said Dower, yet defalking upon the Arrears all the enjoyment of
it during the time the House of Modena has been in Arms against the State of
Milan. In that last case, shall, in the mean while, remain to the said Duke of
Savoy, all reasons, actions and rights to prosecute the same in Justice, and
cause it to be declared, to whom does the propriety of the said Dower belong.
After which Judgment or particular Convention, that may intervene between the
said Dukes, his Catholic Majesty shall pay, without difficulty, the revenew of
the said Dower, to such of them to whom the same shall be found to belong by a
definitive sentence of Justice, or by an accommodation made between the said
Dukes of Savoy and Modena.

LXXXXIX. And because the said Lords and Kings have considered, that the
differences of the other Princes their Friends and Adherents, have often drawn
them, against their Wills, and the Kings their Predecessors, of glorious
memory, to the taking up of Arms: Their Majesty's desiring, as much as in them
lies, to remove, by the present Peace, in all places, the least occasions of
dissension, the better to secure the continuation thereof, and chiefly to
settle the tranquillity of Italy so often troubled by the particular differences
happened between the Princes, who do possess any Dominions there; The two Lords
and Kings have concluded and agreed, that they will jointly interpose,
sincerely and pressingly, their Offices and Supplications toward our Holy
Father the Pope, until they may have obtained of his Holiness that he might be
pleased to cause the difference to be ended without delay, either by an
agreement or by Justice, which the Duke of Modena has had so long since, with
the Apostolical Chamber, touching the Propriety and Possession of the Valleys
of Comachio: The said Kings and Lords hoping of the Sovereign Equity of his
Holiness, that he will not refuse the just satisfaction that shall be due to a
Prince, whose Ancestors have so well deserved of the holy See, and who, in a
most considerable Interest, has hitherto consented to take even his own
Adversary's parties for Judges.

C. The two Lords and Kings, upon the like consideration of plucking up the
seeds of all differences, that might trouble the peace of Italy, have also
concluded that they will jointly interpose, sincerely and pressingly, their
Officers and Supplications toward our Holy Father the Pope, until they may
have obtained of his Holiness, the grace which their Majesty's have so often
demanded of him singly, in the behalf of the Duke of Parma, that he may have
power to discharge, at several convenient intervals of time, the debt he has
contracted to the Apostolical Chamber by like intervals; and that by that
means, and with the engaging or alienating of part of his Dominions of Castro
and Roneiglione, he may find such moneys as are necessary unto him for the
preservation of the rest of his Dominions. The which their Majesty's do hope of
the goodness of his Holiness; no less by the desire he will have to prevent all
occasions of discord in Christendom, then by his disposition to favor a House
so well meriting of the Holy Apostolical See.

CI. The said Lords and Kings judging that they can not better acknowledge
toward God, the grace they have received of his mere Sovereign bounty, who
has inspired them the desire, and opened them the means of reconciling
themselves, and granting Peace unto their people, then by applying themselves,
and endeavoring, with all their power, to procure and preserve the like
tranquillity unto all other Christian States, whose peace is either troubled, or
like to be suddenly altered; Their Majesty's seeing, with a great grief* the
present disposition of Germany, and of other Northern Countries, where the War
is kindled, and may yet inflame the Empire, by the division of the Princes and
States thereof, have concluded, agreed and resolved, to send without delay,
their Ambassadors, or cause those they have already in the Empire, jointly to
act for the managing, in their name, and by their interposition, a good and
speedy accommodation, both of all differences that may trouble the Peace of the
Empire, and of such, as some years since, have caused the War in the other
parts of the North.

CII. And because informations have been had, that notwithstanding the
accommodation made some years since, of the divisions happened then betwixt the
Cantons of the Leagues of Switzerland Catholics and Protestants, there remains
yet under the ashes, some sparks of that fire, that might if not wholly
quenched, take fire again, and cause new troubles and dissentions betwixt those
people allied with both the Crowns; the two Lords and Kings have judged it
necessary to apply themselves, on this part to the prevention of that danger,
as much as in them shall lie, before things grow worse: And therefore it has
been agreed and concluded between their Majesty's, that they shall send, upon
that occasion, some particular Ministers every one of them to the Cantons of
his Alliance (unless they judge those they have there in ordinary to be
sufficient for the end they have proposed unto themselves,) with orders, when
they have exactly informed themselves of the motives and causes which have
occasioned the misunderstanding and disunion of the said Nation, to meet and
endeavor, jointly and uniformly, to procure there a good concord, and cause all
things there to return to the Peace, quietness and Fraternity, wherewith the
said Cantons were wonted to live formerly: acquainting their Superiors with the
satisfaction their Majesty's will receive of it, because of the affection they
bear to their States, and how much that establishment of union will be pleasing
to them, because of the great desire they have for their welfare and public
tranquillity.

CIII. The differences happened in the Countries of the Grisons, about the
Valtoline, having several times obliged both the Kings and several other
Princes to take up Arms; To avoid, lest for the future, they might alter the
good intelligence of their Majesty's, it has been agreed, that within six
months after the publication of the present Treaty, and after information had,
on both sides, of the intention of the Grisons, touching the observation of the
Treaties heretofore made, it shall be agreed, in an amicable way, between the
two Crowns, of all the Interests they have in that affair: And that for that
end each of the said Lords and Kings shall give sufficient power to treat of
it, to such Ambassadors as he will send to the Court of the other after the
publication of the Peace.

CIV. The Prince of Monaco shall be restored, without delay, into the peaceable
possession of all the Goods, Rights and Revenues belonging unto him, and which
he enjoyed before the War, in the Kingdom of Naples, Duchy of Milan, and other
places of the obedience of his Catholic Majesty: with liberty to alienate the
same as he shall please, by sale, donation, or otherwise: and shall not be
troubled nor molested in the enjoyment thereof, for having put himself under
the protection of the Crown of France, nor for any other subject or pretense
whatsoever.

CV. It has been likewise agreed and concluded, that his Catholic Majesty
shall pay ready money to the Lady Duchess of Cheureuse the sum of 55000
Philippuses, each of ten Reals, amounting to 165000 Livers French money: And
that for the price of the Lands and Lordships of Kerpin and Lommerscin, with
the Aids and Dependences of the said Lands, the said Duchess had purchased of
his Catholic Majesty, according to his said Majesty's Letters Patents of the
second of June 1646. Out of which Lands and Lordships, the said Lady has since
been turned by his Catholic Majesty's Ministers, because of the present War?
And his said Majesty has disposed of them in the behalf of the Elector of
Cologne: And shall the said Payment of 55000 Philippuses, each of ten Realls,
be made by his said Catholic Majesty, unto the said Lady of Cheureuse, by the
two Terms, the first within six months from the day and date of these Presents;
and the rest six months after; so that in a years time they may have received
the whole sum.

CVI. All Prisoners of War, of what Nation or condition soever, being detained
on either side, shall be set at liberty, in paying their expenses, and what
they may otherwise owe; but without paying any ransom, unless they have agreed
before otherwise? in which case the Treaties made by them before this day, shall
be executed according to their form and sense.

CVII. All other Prisoners and Subjects of the said Lords and Kings, who by the
calamity of the Wars might happen to be detained in their Majesty's Galleys,
shall be speedily delivered and set at liberty, without any delay, for any
cause or occasion whatsoever, and without demanding any thing for their Ransom,
or for their Expenses. As also, shall be set at liberty, after the same manner,
all French Soldiers that shall be found to be detained prisoners in the places
held by his Catholic Majesty upon the Coasts of Africa, without demanding of
them, as aforesaid, any thing for their Ransom or Expenses.

CVIII. Provided all the Premises be duly observed, it has been concluded and
agreed, That the Treaty made at Vervins in the Year 1568, is again confirmed
and approved by the said Plenipotentiaries, in all its Points, as if the same
was here inserted word for word, and without innovating any thing therein, nor
in any of the other former Treaties, which shall remain in their full force in
whatsoever it is not derogated unto by this present Treaty.

CIX. And as touching the things contained in the aforesaid Treaty of 1598, and
in a former made in the Year 1559. which have not been executed according to
the tenor of the said Treaties, the execution shall be made and performed, in
such things as are yet unperformed: And for that end Commissioners shall be
appointed on both sides, within two months, with sufficient power to agree
together; within the space that shall be mutually agreed on, concerning all
things to be yet executed, either touching interests of of the said Lords and
Kings, or the interests of the Commonalties and private persons, their
Subjects, who shall have any thing to demand, or complaint to make on either
side.

CX. The said Commissioners shall likewise have care, by virute of their
powers, to regulate the limits, as well between the Dominions and Countries
that of old have belonged to the said Lords and Kings, about which there have
been some debates, as between the Dominions and Lordships that are to remain to
each of them, by the present Treaty, in the Low Countries. And particularly a
separation shall be made by the said Commissioners of the Chastellenies and
other Lands and Lordships that are to remain to the said Lord the most
Christian King, from such Chastellenies. Lands and Lordships as are to remain
to the said Lord the Catholic King; so that hereafter there may arise no
dispute about the same, and that the Inhabitants and Subjects on both sides
might not be disturbed. And in case they cannot agree touching the contents of
the present Article, and of the next foregoing, Arbitrators shall be appointed
by common consent, who shall take conusance of whatsoever shall remain
undecided between the said Commissioners: And the Judgments that shall be
rendered by the said Arbitrators, shall be executed on both sides without any
delay or difficulty.

CXI. For the satisfaction and payment of what may be due on both sides for the
ransom of the prisoners of war, and for such expenses as they may have made
during their prison, since the beginning of the war until the day of the
present Peace, in conformity to the Treaties made for the exchanging of the
said prisoners, and namely that of 1646, made at Soissons, the Marquis of
Castle Rodrigo being Governor of the Low Countries, it has been concluded and
agreed, that the expenses of such prisoners as have been already released, or
are to be released without ransom by virtue of the present Peace, shall be
presently paid, ready money on both sides; and that as to the other prisoners
that have been released by virtue of the particular Treaties of Exchange made
during the War, and before the present Treaty, Commissioners shall be appointed
on both sides, within a Month of the Exchange of the Ratifications of the
present Treaty, who shall meet at such place as shall be agreed on, toward
Flanders, whither also the Accounts concerning the prisoners made in the
Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, and their dependences in the State of Milan and
in Piedmont, in the Principality of Catalonia, and in the Counties of
Roustillon and Cerdana, and other places of Spain, besides what concerns the
Frontiers between France and the Low Countries, shall be carried; and the said
Accounts being stated by them, both for their expenses for Diet, and for this
ransom, after the manner practiced upon other Treaties of that nature, the Lord
and King who shall be found Debtor to the other, by the stating of the said
Accounts, does oblige himself to pay ready moneys, bona fide, and without
delay, unto the other of the said Lords and Kings, the sums of money whereof he
shall remain debtor to him, for the expenses and ransoms of the said prisoners
at War.

CXII. As it might well happen that the particular persons interested on both
sides, in the restitution of the goods, into the propriety and enjoyment
whereof they ought to re-enter, by virtue of the present Treaty, should find
under diverse pretenses, difficulties and resistance in their re-establishment
by such as are now in possession of the said goods; or that any other
obstructions should arise in the full execution of the Premises, it has been
concluded and agreed, that the said Lords and Kings shall appoint each of them
one of their Ministers to repair to the Court of the other, and other places if
need be, to the end that hearing jointly, at the place where the said Ministers
shall meet, such persons as shall apply themselves unto them about those
affairs, and taking conusance of the contents of the Articles of the Treaty,
and of what the said Parties shall offer unto them, they might Declare together
unanimously, briefly and summarily, without any other formality of Justice,
what ought to be executed, issuing thereupon the necessary. Act and Instrument
of their Declaration, which Act shall be performed without admitting or leaving
any room to any contradiction or reply.

CXIII. The execution of the present Peace, in what regards the restitution
and surrendering of the places which the said Lords and Kings are to restore and
put in the hands one of the other respectively, or of their Allies, by virtue
of, and in conformity to this Treaty, shall be made at the time, and after the
following manner.

CXIV. First, without staying for the exchange of the Ratifications of the
present Treaty, to the end the Forces which make up the Army of the most
Christian King, and the Garrisons of the places he holds in Italy, might
repass the Alps before the Ice does shut up the passages, both the said
Plenipotentiaries have concluded and agreed, That they take upon themselves to
have the Orders of their Majesty's respectively, forthwith sent by Expresses
unto the Duke of Navailles, and the Count of Fuensaldagne; as also to the
Marquis of Caracent, for what concerns him, to make, upon the 30th. of the
instant November, the following Restitutions, viz. Upon that day shall be
restored by the Lord the most Christian King unto his Catholic Majesty, the
places of Valence upon the Po, and of Mortara in the State of Milan: As
likewise upon the same 30th. day of November, shall be restored by the Lord the
Catholic King unto the Duke of Savoy, the place and Citadel of Verceil in
Piedmont; and toward the low Counties, unto his most Christian Majesty, the
place of Castelet; the said Lords and Plenipotentiaries having taken upon
themselves, by virtue of the particular Orders they have of their Majesty's for
that purpose, the punctual execution of that Article, before the exchange of the
Ratifications of the present Treaty, as aforesaid.

CXV. The exchange of the Ratifications being made within the day that
hereafter shall be named, on the 27th. day of December, of this present year,
shall be restored, by the said Lord the most Christian King, unto his Catholic
Majesty the places of Oudenard, Marville, Menene, and Comine upon the River
Lys, Dixmude and Furne, with the Posts of La Fintelle and La Quenoque. As also,
upon the same 27th. day of December, shall be restored by the said Lord the
Catholic King, unto his most Christian Majesty, the places of Rocroy and
Linchamp.

CXVI. Eight days after, which will be the 4th. of January, of the next year
1660. shall be restored by the said Lord the most Christian King, unto his
Catholic Majesty, the places of Ypre, La Bassee, Bergh St. Wynox, and the Fort
Royal thereof; and all the Posts, Towns, and Castles, taken by the French Arms
in the Principality of Catalonia, except Roses, Fort of the Trinity, and Cape
De Quiers: As likewise upon the same 4th day of January, shall be restored by
the said Lord the Catholic King, and put into the hands and in the power of
his most Christian Majesty, the places of Hesdin, Philippeville, and
Marienbourg.

CXVII. After the Prince of Conde has rendered his respects to the most
Christian King, his Sovereign Lord, and is settled again into the Honors of his
Grace, the places of Avennes and Juliers shall be by the Lord the Catholic
King, put into the hands and in the power of his most Christian Majesty and of
the Duke of Newbourg. And the same day, the said Lord the most Christian King
shall restore unto his Catholic Majesty, the Posts, Towns, Forts, and Castles
taken by the French in the County of Burgundy, after the manner, and at the
time more particularly agreed upon by their said Majesty's.

CXVIII. Upon supposition and condition that the said Commissioners, that are
to be appointed to declare the places that ought to belong to each of the said
Lords and Kings, in the Counties and Vigueries of Conflans and Cerdana, shall
have before concluded and unanimously made the declaration that is to regulate
for the future the Limits of both Kingdoms: As also, when all the aforesaid
restitutions are made and punctually performed, his most Christian Majesty
shall restore upon the 5th. of May of the next year 1660. unto his Catholic
Majesty, the places and Posts of Roses, the Fort of the Trinity and Cape de
Quiers, upon the conditions more particularly agreed on by their Majesty's.

CXIX. It has likewise been concluded and agreed, that in the Exchange that
shall be made of La Bassee and Berg St. Wynox, and its Royal Fort, with
Philippeville and Marienbourg, there shall be left in the said places as much
Artillery, both in number, and of the same weight and quality, as well in the
one as in the other; as also as much Ammunition of War of all sorts, and
Victuals, as the Commissioners appointed on both sides shall agree bona fide,
and shall see it performed: So that what shall be found over and above, as well
in the one as in the other, may be taken out of the said places, and
transported any where else; where the Lord and King shall please, to whom that
greater quantity of the things aforesaid shall be found to belong.

CXX. Their said Majesty's have likewise concluded, agreed, resolved and
promised, upon their Royal Word, to send, each on their part, their Orders to
the Generals of their Armies, or Governors of their Arms and Countries, to have
them give their assistance for the execution of the said respective
Restitutions of places upon the certain days before prefixed, advising
together, bona fide, about the means and all other things that may regard the
faithful execution of what has been promised and agreed between their said
Majesty's, after the manner, and at the time aforesaid.

CXXI. The Duke Charles of Lorrain accepting, as to what concerns him, this
present Peace, upon the conditions before stipulated between the said Lords and
Kings, and not otherwise, his most Christian Majesty shall re-establish within
four months, from the day of exchanging of the Ratifications of the present
Treaty, the said Duke into the Dominions, Lands and places expressed before,
except such as are to remain to his most Christian Majesty, in Propriety and
Sovereignty, by the said present Treaty; Provided, the said Duke, before his
re-establishment, besides his accepting of the Conditions that concern him in
the present Peace, does furnish unto his most Christian Majesty, and at his
satisfaction, all the several Acts and Obligations, he is to put into his
hands, according to this Treaty. and after the manner specified and stipulated
before.

CXXII. Besides the Duke of Savoy, the Duke of Modena, and the Prince of
Monaco, who, as Allies of France, are of the chiefest Contractors in this
Treaty, as aforesaid, by the common consent of the said Lords the most
Christian and Catholic, shall be comprehended in this Peace and Alliance, if
they will be comprehended therein, on his most Christian Majesty's part, first,
Our Holy Father the Pope, the Holy Apostolical See, the Electors and other
Princes of the Empire, Allies and Confederates with his Majesty for the
maintaining of the Peace of Munster, viz. the three Electors of Mentz, Cole^,
and the Count Palarine of the Rhine, the Duke of Newburg, the Dukes Auguste
Christian, Lewis and George William of Brunswick and Luneburge, the Landgrave
of Hessen-Cassel, and the Landgrave of Darmstat, the Duke and the Seigniory of
Venice, and the Thirteen Cantons of the League of Switzerland, and their Allies
and Confederates, and all other Kings, Potentates, Princes and States, Towns
and particular persons, to whom his most Christian Majesty, upon a decent
requisition made by them for it, will grant on his part, to be comprehended in
this Treaty, and will name them, within a year after the publication of the
Peace, unto his Catholic Majesty by a particular Declaration, to enjoy the
benefit of the said Peace, both by the aforenamed, and by such as his Majesty
shall name within the said time. Their Majesty's giving their Declaratory and
Obligatory Letters, required in such case respectively; and the whole with an
express Declaration, that the said Catholic King shall not have power,
directly, nor indirectly to molest, by himself, or by others, any of those who
on the said Lord the most Christian Kings part, have been above, or hereafter
shall be comprehended by a particular Declaration; And that if the Lord the
Catholic King has any pretensions against him, he shall only have power to
prosecute him by right, before competent Judges, and not by force, in what
manner soever it may be.

CXXIII. And on the said Lord the Catholic Kings part, shall be comprehended
in this Treaty (if they will therein be comprehended) our holy Father the Pope,
the Apostolical See, the Emperor of the Romans, all the Archdukes of Austria,
and all the Kings, Princes, Republics, States and particular Persons, who, as
Allies of this Crown, were named in the Treaty of Peace made at Vervins, 1598.
and who shall have preserved, and do at this day preserve themselves in that
Alliance. To whom are added now the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and
the Duke of Guastale; as also, shall be comprehended all such others, as by
common consent of the said Lords and Kings, shall be named within a year after
the Publication of the present Treaty, to whom, as also to the aforenamed, if
they desire it in particular, Letters of Nomination respectively Obligatory
shall be given to enjoy the benefit of the said Peace, and with express
Declaration, That the said Lord, the most Christian King, shall not have Power
directly nor indirectly, by himself, or by others, to molest any of them: And
if he has any pretentions against them, he shall have power only to prosecute
them by Right before competent Judges, and not by Force.

CXXIV. And for greater security of this Treaty of Peace, and of all the points
and Articles therein contained; the said Treaty shall be Published, Verified
and Registered in the Court of the Parliament of Paris, and in all the other
Parliaments of the Kingdom of France, and in the Chamber of Accounts in the
said Paris. As likewise the said Treaty shall be Verified, Published and
Registered as well in the Grand Council, and other Councils, and chambers of
Accounts of the said Lord the Catholic King, in the Low Countries, as in the
other Councils of the Crowns of Castile and Arragon, according unto, and after
the manner contained in the Treaty of Vervins, of the year 1598. whereof the
Expeditions shall be delivered on both sides within three Months after the
Publication of the present Treaty.

Which Points and Articles before set down, together with the whole Contents of
any of them, have been Treated, Granted, Passed and Stipulated between the
aforesaid Plenipotentiaries of the said Lords, the most Christian and Catholic
King, in the name of their Majesty's. Which Plenipotentiaries, by virtue of
their Power, the Copy; whereof are inserted at the bottom of this present
Treaty, have promised and do promise under the Obligation of all and every the
Goods and Estates, present or to come of the Kings their Majesty's, That the
same shall be by their Majesty's Inviolably observed and performed, and to
cause them to Ratify the same merely and singly, without adding any thing
thereunto, and to give and deliver Reciprocally one to the other, Authentical
and sealed Letters, wherein the whole present, Treaty shall be word for word
inserted; and that within 30 days, from the day and date of these presents, and
sooner if it may be. Besides, the said Plenipotentiaties have promised and do
promise, in the Names aforesaid, That the said Letters of Ratification, being
exchanged and Furnished, the said most Christian King, as soon as it may be,
and in the presence of such person or persons as the said Lord the Catholic
King shall be pleased to appoint, shall Solemnly Swear upon the Cross, the holy
Evangelists, the Canons of the Mass, and upon his Honor, to observe and
perform Fully, Really, and Bona fide, the whole Contents of the Articles of the
present Treaty. And the like shall be done also, as soon as possibly may be, by
the said Lord the Catholic King, in the presence of such person or persons as
the said Lord the most Christian King shall be pleased to appoint. In witness
whereof the said Plenipotentiaries have subscribed the present Treaty with
their Names, and set the Seals of their Coat of Arms thereunto.

We, having the aforesaid Treaty acceptable, in all and every the Points, and
Articles therein contained and declared, have, both for us, and for our Heirs,
Successors, Kingdoms, Countries, Lands, Lordships and Subjects; Accepted,
Approved, Ratified and Confirmed, and do Accept, Approve, Ratify and Confirm
the same; and do promise, in the Faith and Word of a King, and under the
Obligation and Engagement of all and every our goods, present and to come,
Inviolably to Keep, Observe, and Maintain the whole, without ever doing any
thing contrary thereunto, Directly, nor Indirectly, in what sort and manner
soever. In Witness whereof, We have signed these Presents with our Hand, and
thereunto caused our Seal to be set and apposed. Given at Thoulose the four and
twentieth of November, 1659. and of our Reign the Seventeenth.

FINIS.

