A VINDICATION Of Mr. Christopher Love, FROM Diverse scandalous reproaches cast
upon him by the Malignant party. Who charge him to be a hinderer of the Treaty
at Uxbridge, and a disturber of the Peace of this Commonwealth. WHEREIN He
cleereth himself from those aspersions; and shows that he always constantly
endeavored that Peace with Truth might be established; to the Glory of God,
and the comfort of this NATION.

Written with his own hand, before his death, and now published for General
satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by R. Wood, 1651.

A Vindication of Mr. Christopher Love from diverse reproaches cast upon him by
the Malignant party.
IF a man's good name be as precious Ointment, there will not be wanting many
Flies (to carry about flying Reports) to corrupt it: Although I deserve not a
name among the children of the most high God, yet would I not lose that room
which any has vouchsafed me in their hearts, not be made an abhorring to them.
It Is true, this Sermon which I preached at Vxbridge exposes me to the envy of
the bad, the jealousy of the good, yea the scandalous Reports of all; should I
now be silent, I should strengthen those reports, and ratify the rumors
unjustly raised against me. I confess the meannesse of my gifts, and fewness
of my years, (being no more then 28.) does lay a great discouragement upon my
spirit to come into public view, to hold forth the dim light of a candle now
the Sun shines; to bring in my poor mite, when men now adays cast in of their
abundance into Gods Treasury; had I not been pressed under the pressure of
reproaches, I should never have brought my Sermon (which I preached at Vxbridge)
to the Press; when I Preached it, I accounted it no other then as an untimely
birth, that should never see the Sun; the reason why I now bring it to light,
is not any high conceit that I have of it, but a false conceit that many have
both of the Sermon, and my self that preached it. I am presented to the world as
an enemy to Treaties, or a peace by that way; I can make my Appeal to Heaven,
where my witness is, that in the travel of my Soul I have uncessantly cried
unto God for a good success to that Treaty, that by it Peace and Truth might
flourish in our days, only an unsound and an unsafe peace have I preached and
prayed against.

I have only two things faithfully and humbly to present to your
consideration. First, the Call that I had to preach at Vxbridg at that day.
Secondly, the Matter which I preached. For the first, viz. the Call that I had
to preach, I shall briefly relate: On Wednesday night the 29 of January, (being
the monthly Fast) I had notice that the Commissioners were come to Vxbridg,
and that Mr. Martial or some other Minister that attended upon the Honorable
Commissioners, was to preach the Thursday following; (which was the first day
of the Treaty) hearing of this, I rode from Windsor Castle to Vxbridg on
Thursday morning; went forth with to Mr. Martial, to know whether he Preached,
who told me he did not, yet said that there was a Sermon: soon after I went
toward the Church to be an Hearer. As I was going, I met the Governor of the
Town, who told me that he with others had been waiting in the Congregation for
a Sermon, but the Minister expected to preach was not come; whereupon he
desired me that I would preach, else the Congregation would be disappointed. To
whom I answered, that I had no thoughts of preaching, but to be an hearer, yet
rather then the Congregation should be disappointed, I would spend some half an
hour to give them a word of Exhortation, which accordingly I did. Now whether
this was not a hand of Heaven to cast me upon the work, let my accusers
themselves be Judges. I am constrained to write the manner how I came to
preach, to wipe off those scandals that are cast upon me. Some say that I
intruded my self on the work, when diverse can tell how earnestly Capt. Hampton,
the Governor of the Town, did solicit me, telling me else the Congregation
would be disappointed. Some were so shameless as to say, that I thrust M.
Martial down the Pulpit stairs, when it is well known M. Martial was not there
all that day; besides, had he been there to preach, I am so far from doing any
such unchristian action, as to rob the Congregation of the Labors of him whose
Books I am no^ worthy to carry after him, yea (if it were an expression meet
for a mere man, I could say, whose shooe-latchet I am not worthy to untye.
Others say, that one Mr. Kem was to preach; others say, some adjacent Minister,
(whose turn it was to supply the lecture that day) whether the one or the
other, I knew not then; only this I know, it was almost a 11 of the clock when
I was entreated to preach: the Governor and some of the people came out of the
Congregation, thinking they had been disappointed of a Sermon; yea, I did my
self also bid the Clark call a long Psalm, that so if the Minister who was
appointed to preach had come in the mean time, he might have supplied the place.

Object. What ever your Call was to preach that day, yet the matter which you
preached was unseasonable in that place, before that Auditory, and at that time.

To which I answer, First, it was their usual Lecture-day; but a Country
Auditory, none of the Commissioners of either fide were there. Secondly, Had
they been there, I spoke not a word touching the Commissioners of either side,
only prayed for our own. Thirdly if any thing were unseasonable, it must be
this; I advised the Auditors not to dote too much on Treaties of Peace: What
unseasonablenesse was in this? I hope a Minister may advise a people not to
dote too much upon ordinances, or upon duties, yet this no disparagement to
either, or to the authority of God that enjoins both; one may advise another
not to dote too much upon Wife and children, yet this advice does not reflect
to the disgrace of either: in the like manner, might not a Minister advise a
Congregation not to dote too much upon that Treaty, yet this advice no ways
reflects on the Treaters, or Treaty it self. I said further, that whiles our
enemies go on in their wicked practices, and whiles we keep to our principles,
we may as soon make fire and water to agree, and (I had almost said) reconcile
Heaven and Hell, as their spirits and ours; either they must grow better, or we
must grow worse, before it is possible for us to agree; wherein is this
unseasonable? show me, and I will fall down with an acknowledgment at your feet.

Object. Why did you not write this Vindication sooner; had there not been a
fault you would not have been so long silent, and suffer many aspersion thus to
spread.

To which I briefly answer, First, I acknowledge such a sense and apprehension
I have of these poor fruits o^ my studies, that I had no thoughts at all to
print my Sermon, had not the importunity of diverse friends, who are both godly
and wise, prevailed with me, as also the consideration that these scandals
would not only reflect upon my self, but on other Ministers also who cleave to
the Parliament proceedings, as if they were of the same spirit that I am
unjustly presented to the World to be of, had not there considerations swayed
with me, I should not have brought my Sermon to public view, but have waited
in silence, submission, and patience on my God for a Vindication, knowing
assuredly the innocence and integrity of my heart and carriage to be clear in
this matter; I bless God, the integrity of my spirit (being in nothing about
this matter conscious to my self) has been as a brazen wall against all the
scandals which have hence been darted against me, that none of them have entered
to to pierce the quietness and content of my spirit; I remember what the Poet
said,

-- Hic muru^ abeneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
Secondly, it was meet I should be thus long silent, lest I should have
anticipated the Parliament (before whom some accusations against me were
presented) I should have been pragmatical, unwise, yea also have blemished my
own vindication, should not I have waited for their determinations; who have
(by an Order of the House of Commons) cleared and acquitted me touching this
matter.

It was requisite I should stay until the Treaty was over, lest it might
exasperate the spirits of our enemies, and so father that on me as if I had not
a peaceable disposition, which indeed is the bastard that ought to be laid
before their own doors; though their words be smoother then butter, yet war is
in their hearts, but Peace in mine.

Fourthly, I deemed it my best way to wait a while in silence that I might the
better hear and know the scandalous aspersions cast upon me, that I might the
easier clear my self. Some report that I ran out of Vxbridge as soon as I had
preached the Sermon, as being ashamed of what I had done, whereas it is known by
diverse I went publicly up and down the Town, and staid at least four hours
after the sermon in the Town; others say that I retired my self, and kept out
of the way when I was sent for by the Parliament, when diverse can testify I
went up and down the City; yea, was so far from hiding my self from any Court
of Judicature, that I used means that I might be heard; that I might come to
answer the accusations that were against me. Malignants (who would have it so)
reported that I was whipped out of Vxbridge, or committed close prisoner in
Vxbridge by our Commissioners, brought in a Cart to London, committed by the
Parliament close Prisoner to Newgate, with many other lying reproaches would
they fasten upon me, whereas it is well known I was never before either
Paaliament, or Honorable Commissioners employed by them, or any else about
this business, only I was sent for by an Order of the House of Commons, but in
regard nothing was brought in against me, I was by them acquitted.

Thus Courteous Reader, referring my self to thy favorable censure, I humbly
take leave for this time; pressing my self to be

An earnest well-wisher to Truth and Peace, with them who love both in
sincerity, Christopher Love.

FINIS.

