ORDONNANCE Du ROY TRES-CHRESTIEN, Touchant les Vaisseaux Anglois, Escossois,
and Irlandois, Qui seront rencontres en Mer par ses Vaisseaux, Ou par ceux de
ses Sujets Arms en Course.
DE PAR LE ROY.

SA Majeste estant informee des diverses plaintes faites par les Anglois,
Escossois, and Irlandois, que les Vaisseaux qui leur appartiennent sont souvent
arrestez dans leur Navigation, and amenez dans les Ports du Royaume, sous
diverse pretextes, par les Vaisseaux de Sa Majeste, ou ceux de ses Sujets qui
sont armez en Course pour fair la Guerre a ses Ennemis; and qu' encore qu'ils
obtiennent mainlevee desdits Vaisseaux, neanmoins leur Commerce en est
extremement retarde par le longtemps que lesdits Vaisseaux demeurent dans les
Ports en attendant les Arrests de mainlevee. A quoy Sa Majeste voulant
pourvoir, and donner toujours des marquis de la consideration particuliere
qu'Elle a pour les Sujets du Roy de la Grande Bretagne, Sa Majeste a fait and
fait tres-expresses inhibitions and defenses a tous ses Officiers commandans
ses Vaisseaux de Guerre, and a tous Capitaines des Vaisseaux and Bastimens de
ses Sujets armez en Course, d'arrester aucun Vaisseau Anglois, Escossois, and
Irlandois, qu'ils trouveront en mer, qui seront munis des Passeports signez du
Roy de la Grande Bretagne, des Commissaires de l'Admiraute etablie dans
Londres, and des Passeports ou Lettres de mer signez par les Maires and
Eschevins, and les Commissaires des Coustumes des Villes maritimes
d'Angleterre, Escosse, and Irlande. Veut Sa Majeste que lors que lesdits
Vaisseaux de Guerre, ou armez en Course, trouveront en mer quelques Vaisseaux
desdites Nations, ils envoyent leur Chaloupe a board pour demander lesdits
Passeports, and apres les avoir veus, ils les laissent en liberte de continuer
leur route, sans leur donner aucun empeschement ni retardement; le tout a peine
d'estre punis suivant la rigueur des Ordonnances. MANDE and ordonne Sa Majeste
a Mons. le Comte de Vermandois Admiral de France, aux Vice-Admiraux,
Lieutenants Generaux, Intendans, Chefs d'Escadres, Commissaires Generaux,
Capitaines, and autres Officiers de Marine, de tenir la main a l'execution de
la present Ordonnance. Enjoint Sa Majeste aux Officiers de l'Admiraute, de la
fair lire, publier, and afficher par tout ou besoin sera, a ce qu'aucun n'en
pretend cause d'ignorance.

Fait a Saint Germain en Lay le seizieme jour de Novembre mil six cens
soixanteseize. Sign, LOUIS.
Et plus bas, COLBERT.

The Most Christian Kings Edict or Proclamation Concerning English, Scottish,
and Irish Ships that shall be met at Sea by his said Majesty's Ships, or By
Privateers Acting by His Commission,
Translated out of the French, and Published by Authority.
By the King.

HIS Majesty being informed of diverse Complaints made by the English, Scottish,
and Irish, that the Vessels belonging to them are stopped in their Voyages, and
brought into the Ports of this Kingdom under diverse pretenses, by his Majesty's
Ships, or those of his Subjects acting as Privateers against his Enemies; and
that although they do obtain the Release of their said Ships, yet nevertheless
their Commerce is thereby extremely retarded, by reason of the long stay of
their Ships in Port, before they have their Orders of Release: His Majesty
being willing to provide against the same, and likewise to evidence upon all
occasions the particular consideration He has for the Subjects of the King of
Great Britain, has prohibited and forbidden, and does straightly prohibit and
forbid all His Officers Commanding His Ships of War, and all Captains of Ships
and Vessels of His Subjects acting as Privateers, that they do not Stop or
Detain any English, Scottish, and Irish Vessels met by them at Sea, which shall
be furnished with Pass-ports signed by the King of Great Britain, or by the
Commissioners of the Admiralty at London, and with Pass-ports or Sea-Briefs
signed by the Majors and other Chief Magistrates, or the Commissioners of the
Customs of the Maritime Towns of England, Scotland and Ireland. And His Majesty
does require, that when the said Ships of War or Privateers shall meet at Sea
any the Ships of the foresaid Nations, they send their Boat on board them to
demand the said Pass-ports; Which when they have seen, they are to leave them
at liberty to continue their course, without giving them any molestation or
hindrance: And all this under pain of being punished according to the rigor of
the Laws. And His Majesty does require and command the Count of Vermandois
Admiral of France, the Vice-admirals, Lieutenants General, Intendants,
Commanders of Squadrons, Commissaries General, and Captains of His Ships at
Sea, that they see this present Order put in execution. And His Majesty does
enjoin the Officers of the Admiralty to cause the same to be read, published,
and affixed in all places requisite, to the end no one may pretend ignorance.

Given at St. Germain en Lay the 16th day of November 1676. Signed LOUIS.
And Countersigned COLBERT.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1676.


