Vindiciae Evangelii: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE GOSPEL, WITH THE Establishment
of the Law. BEING A Reply to Mr. Steven Geree's Treatise, ENTITLED, [The
Doctrine of the Antinomians Confuted:] WHEREIN He pretends to Charge diverse
Dangerous Doctrines on Dr. Crisp's SERMONS, as Anti-Evangelical and Antinomical.

The Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the
Law and the Prophets, Romans 3.21. Do we make void the Law through Faith? God
forbid; yea, we establish the Law, v. 31. Who shall lay any thing to the Charge
of God's Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is
Christ that dyed, etc. Romans 8.33,34. The Stone which is set at naught by the
Builders, is become the Head of the Corner, Act. 4.11. Psalm. 118.22. By ROBERT
LANCASTER, Late Minister of the Gospel, sometime at Quarly, and Amport in
Hampshire.

LONDON, Printed for a Friend of the Authors, and Sold by Will. Marshall at the
Bible in Newgate-street, 1694.

To the Reader.
READER;
IT may be expected by thee, to have some short account of the late Reverend
and Learned Author of this Treatise, concerning whom, they that knew him well,
can say, That his Worth was little known in the World; his whole LIFE being
spent in a Retiredness from it, for the most part.

It is the same Robert Lancaster who Wrote the Preface prefixed to Dr. Crisp's
first Sermons; where may be seen, what design he prosecuted in his
after-Writings, in the Defense of the Doctrines delivered by the said Dr.
Crisp, and where may be had a taste of his sweet and gracious Spirit, wherein
he was a Teaching Example to all that were acquainted with his ordinary
Conversation; He walked in a cheerful, serious practice of Holiness, and though
his pilgrimage here was attended with a succession of great outward
Afflictions, yet he seemed to bear them without Murmurring, and to live by
Faith much above them.

Not long before he finished his Course here, it was, that he, together with
others, were Removed from the Public Exercise of his Ministry, which was
attended with many difficult Circumstances, as to his outward concerns. But yet
the Bitter Opposition that had been, and continued to be made against some
great truths of the Gospel, by persons of no small Figure, caused him to set
himself to the Vindication of them, and to show the great Mistakes of Mr.
Rutherford, Mr. Gataker, Mr. Burgess, and Mr. Geree, and their Misrepresenting
great Truths, and in their Injurious charging of persons, which he performed in
a spirit of Meekness, wherein he excelled, and manifested it in public, as
well as private Disputes upon the same account, when called thereto; and with
no less dexterity, being thereto furnished, not only by a distinct
Understanding of Divine Mysteries, but a great. Accurateness in the knowledge
of the Originals, and of all the Oriental Versions, being (it may be) one of
the exactest Gramarians in all those Languages (as well as in the other) of his
time.

He Published little in his Life, being a man of a most peaceable and humble
Disposition, of great backwardness to show himself; whether this his
Inclination, or some other Reason, hindered him from Publication of his
Writings, it is not easy to determine now, neither is it of concern to us; but
whatever was the Reason, delayed it was, and God called him home to himself, to
rest from his Labors; some of which the Intelligent Reader may see, do here
follow him; for so God would have it to be, his Friends entrusted with his
Manuscripts (of which more may follow this as a First Part) being fully
persuaded, that they had a loud Call of Providence, to bring out this Light
that had so long been kept under a bushel, and hold it forth now as in a
seasonable time to the Church of Christ.

And lest any should be hindered from the benefit of it by a prejudicate
opinion, That the said Author was an Antinomian and Libertine, an unbyast mind
may be satisfied from his Preface to Dr. Crisp, that he was neither, if he
retain a right Understanding of what those Sects hold, and will but duly weigh
what this Holy Man says there in the just Vindication of himself, and others,
from that Charge: Part of which only for brevity sake, and for the information
of such as have not read the said Preface, or, have it not by them, we may
rehearse here.

As for us, we make not void the Law, but establish it: We Affirm, That it
remains in its full force and power, not only of commanding, but also of
Exacting and Terrifying, of Cursing and Punishing every Son of Adam that is
under it, without abatement of the least jot or tittle, and whether this be
Antinomianism or no, let the Church of Christ consider, and Judge by the Word
of Christ.

And as for the Imputation of Libertinism, if they mean that which Calvin
Charge the Libertines with, in his Book against them, We utterly disclaim it,
etc.

Here it is most manifest, That he is not for the vacating of the Law, neither
as to Precept or Sanction, but holds exactly with the Assembly in this Point,
whereto Others that are so ready to make this Charge, have sufficiently
declared their Contrariety.

But yet it is not to be avoided, but notwithstanding this, or what else can be
spoken, some Men regarding not so much as common Ingenuity, may charge the
Doctrines here defended for Antinomianism, as the Antagonists to them in his
time did, and many at this day do; and no wonder, if we are not without such
now, who brand the Preaching of the Gospel to distressed Consciences. The
pardoning of Sinners as Sinners. And diverse other Vital Doctrines of the
Gospel, for such Heresy; yea, ridicule and scoff at the inviting of wretched
miserable Sinners unto Jesus Christ. Must we therefore loath and abhor these
Glorious Fundamental Truths, because some men (pretending their Figure in the
Churches) do thus reproach them? No, God forbid, though this may be a
stumbling block laid before the eyes of the Blind, yet Wisdom shall be
justified of her Children, and none shall always beguile them with enticing
Words, or affrighten them, by clothing Truth in a Bear-skin. For such as have
once truly tasted the Lord is gracious, will not be soon moved from him who
has called them to Glory and Virtue, according as his Divine Power has given
unto them all things that pertain to Life and Godliness through the Knowledge
of him: But as they have received Christ, so they will walk rooted and built up
in him, established in the Faith, as they have been taught, abounding therein
with Thanksgiving.

As for the ensuing short Treatise, and what may follow, if God please, they
will undoubtedly recommend themselves to the candid acceptance of the
Intelligent and Unprejudiced Reader, by their own Weight and Evidence taken
from the Word of God, and therefore need not a Prefatory Recommendation,
neither is it any way meet to impose upon the Reader, or anticipate his
Judgment by any Human Authority in Divine Mysteries. The Benefit, Advantage and
Service of the Church, and the promoting the Truths of Christ, were designed in
this Holy Man's Undertaking at first, and it is now in the Publishing of it,
which great and desirable Fruit, may it but be reached and attained, Let the
GOD of all Peace and Truth have the Glory of it, and the Lord JESUS CHRIST, the
Way, the Truth and the Life, be for ever Magnifyed. Amen.

BOOKS Sold by Will. Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-street.
THE Labors of John Bunyan, Author of the Pilgrims Progress, late Minister of
the Gospel, and Pastor of the Congregation at Bedford, Collected, and Printed
in Folio, by procurement of his Church and Friends, and by his own Approbation
before his Death, that these his Christian Ministerial Labors might be
Preserved in the World. This Folio contains ten of his Excellent Manuscripts,
prepared for the Press, before his Death; and ten of his Choice Books already
Printed, but long ago grown scarce, and not now to be had. Their Titles are as
follows, viz. MANUSCRIPTS. 1. An Exposition of the Ten first Chapters of
Genesis. 2. Justification by imputed Righteousness. 3. Paul 's Departure and
Crown. 4. Israel 's Hope Encouraged. 5. Desires of the Righteous granted. 6.
The Saints Privilege and Profit. 7. Christ a Complete Savior. 8. Saints
Knowledge of Christ's Love. 9. The House of the Forest of Lebanon. 10. A
Description of Antichrist. BOOKS formerly Printed. 11. Saved by Grace. 12.
Christian Behavior* 13. A Discourse of Prayer. 14. The Stait Gate. 15. Gospel
Truths opened. 16. Light for them in Darkness. 17. Instructions for the
Ignorant. 18. A Map of Salvation, etc. 19. The New Jerusalem. 20. The
Resurrection. Price Bound 14 s.
Mellificium Chirurgicae: Or, The Marrow of Chyrurgery. An Anatomical Treatise.
Institutions of Physic, with Hypocrates's Aphorisms largely Commented upon.
The Marrow of Physic, showing the Causes, Signs and Cures of most Diseases
incident to Human Bodies. Choice Experienced Receipts for the Cure of several
Distempers. The Fourth Edition, enlarged with many Additions, and purged from
many Faults that escaped in the former Impressions. Illustrated in its several
Parts with Twelve Brass Cuts. By James Cook of Warwick, Practitioner in
Physic and Chyrurgery. Price Bound 6 s. Otto Tachenius his Hippocrates
Chymicus, discovering the Ancient Foundation of the late Viperine Salt, with
his Clavis thereunto annexed; Translated by J. W. Price Bound 3 3 s. Select
Observations on English Bodies of Eminent Persons in desperate Diseases. First
Written in Latin by Mr. John Hall, Physician: After Englished by James Cook,
Author of the Marrow of Chyrurgery. To which is now added, an hundred like
Counsels and Advices, for several Honorable Persons; with all the several
Medicines and Methods by which the several Cures, by the Blessing of God, were
effected; and they be of great use to several Practitioners in Physic and
others; by the same Author. In the Close is added, directions for drinking of
the Bath-Water, and Ars Cosmetica, or Beautifying Art: By H. Stubs, Physician
at Warwick. Price Bound 2 s. 6. d.
BOOKS lately Printed in Vindication of Dr. Crisp's Works.
A Conciliatory Judgment concerning Dr. Crisp's SERMONS, and Mr. Baxters
dissatisfaction in them; by Mr. Beverley, Price 2 d. A Conciliatory Discourse
upon Dr. Crisp's Sermons on the Observation of Mr. William's dissatisfaction in
them, in which the unsearchable Riches of Christ in the Covenant of Grace:
Passing Knowledge is that which is aspired to be made known; by Mr. Beverly,
price 6 d: The True State of Gospel Truth, established upon the Free Election
of God in Christ, the agreement and yet difference between Law and Gospel. So
that the Gospel cannot be styled Law, the inconditionateness of the Gospel
Salvation. the precedure of the Day of Judgment, in the way of a Consiliatory
Discourse upon Mr. Williams his Concessions: By Mr. Beverly. price 6 d. Christ
made Sin, from 2 Cor. 5.21. Evinct from Scripture, upon occasion of an
Exception taken at Pinners-Hall, at Reprinting of Dr. Crisp's Sermons: By
Samuel Crisp Esquire a Son of the said Dr Crisp. price bound 2 s. Christ alone
Exalted in Dr. Crisp's Sermons; in Answer to Mr. Daniel Williams: By S. Crisp
Esquire price 6 d. A Plain and Impartial Inquiry into Gospel Truth; Especially in
reference to the Doctrine of Justification; In answer to Mr Williams: By Thomas
Edwards Esquire price 1 s. A Short Review of some Reflections, made by a Nameless
Author upon Dr. Crisp's Sermons: With some Remarks upon the Union and the Late
Agreement in Doctrine among the Dissenting Ministers in London: By Thomas
Edwards Esquire price 6 d. Dr. Crisp's Works, Entitled, Christ alone Exalted:
Containing 42 Sermons on several Select Texts of Scripture, which were formerly
Printed in three small Volumes: To which is now added ten Sermons, eight
whereof were never before Printed: Faithfully Translated from his own Notes.
Price Bound 8 s.
Where you may likewise be supplied with what Dr. Chauncy has writ in
Vindication of Dr. Crisp's Works.

Reader, Correct these ERRATA 's with thy Pen, or any other that may occur.
Page 4. l. 24. before a Moral read was. p. 5. l. 28. for sins charged r. sin
charged. p. 8. l. 24. r. Mic. 5.5. p. 13. l. 22. r. Pemble. l. 25. for
believers r. a believer. l. 30. for as Consonant r. as far as Consonant. l. 31.
for and rejected r. or rejected. p. 15. l. 28. r. Ephesians. 2. p. 17. l. 14. r. Is
it because it is said. l. 30. for follow r. folly. p. 24. l. 3. for desires r.
defines. l. 23. after so r. they. p. 25. l. 8. for that r. the. l. 13. r.
abstractly. p. 28. l. 40. for one r. thing. p. 29. l. 16. r. for refuge. p. 31.
l. 1. r. and the like hardly. l. 19. r. seeing it was grounded. l. 35. for and
r. to. p. 34. l. 35. r. Pemble. p. 38. l. 21. r. Ephesians. 2.1,2. p. 43. l. 35. r.
proofs. p. 48. l. 21. for but r. on. p. 50. l. 6. r. Assembly. p. 51. l. 41.
for it touches r. touch. p. 56. l. 12. before in the presence dele and. l. 22
r. for whose sake God. p. 59. l. 38. for yea r. yet. p. 61. l. ult. r. primary.
p. 63. l. 33. r. not of Faith.

A DEFENSE OF THE First Sermon.
THE first Crime that is laid to Doctor Crisps Charge, is that he calls the
matter about which he is speaking, to wit, The benefits of Christ: I. Hidden
Manna, II. Marrow and Fatness. III. Admirable Music to the Heart. And, IV. To
have An Inebriating Virtue.


These Expressions Mr. Geree calls strains of Rhetoric, and Enticeing Words of
Man's Wisdom, etc. with many other bitter words; whereas indeed they are the
very Expressions of the Holy Ghost.

For the First; Christ, says he, will give to his people of the hidden Manna,
Rev. 2.17. which cannot be meant of any thing but of the enjoyment of Himself
and his Benefits.

So Secondly, David, in the 63 Psalm, after he had said, That the Loving
kindness of the Lord is better than Life, in the 3d. Verse: He adds in the 5th.
Verse, That his Soul is filled as it were with Marrow and Fatness; namely, in
the enjoyment of that loving kindness which is only manifested in his Son. So
when the Prophet Esaias foretells the times of Christ, chap. 25. ver. 6,7. When
the Lord will destroy the face of the covering cast upon all people, then he
will make unto all people a Feast of Fat things, a feast of Wines on the Lees,
of fat things full of Marrow. Which, with out all doubt, is the glorious Feast
of the Gospel, and the Benefits therein published unto the World.

Thirdly, That he calls the same Doctrine Music, is not an unusual metaphor to
the Holy Ghost. We have Piped unto you, says Christ, and ye have not Danced,
Mat. 11.17. And what did all those Instruments of Music in the Old Testament
represent, but the delight that came by the preaching of the Gospel, which
caused great Joy wheresoever it came? The Eunuch, after he had learnt it, went
on his way Rejoicing, Acts 8.39. And upon the preaching of it by Philip, there
was great Joy in the City of Samaria, Act. 8.8. But the last expression, that
it has an inebriating virtue, is most urged and excepted against; which yet
the Holy Ghost will own, Cant. 5. ver. 1. (...) drink and be inebriated O my
Beloved ones; so the best Translations extant have rendered it, viz. the Greek
Septuagint, Junius and Tremellius in Latin, and our last English in the
Margin. And they are the very same words (though spoken in a spiritual sense)
with those said of Noah, that he drank of the Wine, and was drunken, Genesis 9.21.
neither is it unusual for the Holy Ghost to draw comparisons from things which
are Vicious in themselves, which in the spiritual sense of the scripture are
nothing so. Behold I come, says Christ, as a Theif in the Night. Whereby, I
hope, Christ does neither draw any stain of that Vice upon himself, nor
encourage, nor maintain it in others. So although the beloved ones of Christ
are said to be inebriated with the sense of the overflowing of the Lords grace
and mercy upon them, yet thereby is not signified any vicious distemper in
them, or any patronizing of that loathsome sin of carnal drunkenness in others.

But more of this it may be at the 16 Sect. of the 4th. Sermon; all which he
spends in exagitating this phrase: Only for the present I desire the Godly
Reader to take notice what an indignity is offered to the Holy Ghost, that his
words should be called the Enticing words of Man's wisdom. Neither can he evade
by saying, that he had reference to the Drs. meaning contained under those
words; for it must be words not meaning, that he calls enticing words. And I
believe himself will not deny that it was the very word inebriate, which he
excepted so against.

In the 2, 3, and 4 Sections, there is not any matter of moment, but false
accusations without proof, and reviling words, whereof his whole Book is full,
to which any indifferent Reader will bear me witness: Whereunto our Answer
shall be only to beseech the Lord, that they may not be laid to his charge.
That the Dr. any where speaks against humble, obedient, and sanctified spirits,
as Mr. Geree charges him in Sect. 2. I doubt not but the contrary will be made
evidently to appear by his own words, when they come to be scanned.

Sect. 5. For the perfect discharge of Gods people from the fault and guilt of
sin, the Dr. urged Psalm. 51. Wash thou me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Here. Mr. Geree, although he confesses the truth of the Doctrine, Sect. 3. yet
he supposes that he has gotten a double advantage.

1. That the Dr. alleges Texts out of the Old Testament, which (as he says)
we will not admit of in matter of justification.

2. That David in this Text prays for forgiveness of sins; which (says he) is
contrary to the Antinomian Tenet: To these Two briefly.

To the First, concerning the state and condition of the Old Testament, I
confess there is some difficulty, and almost in all Ages since Christ, there
has been some dispute about it. I shall not enter into any large discourse, as
not being suitable to our present occasion. Only because we have been
exceedingly slandered, and that by some in pulpits, (when men stand to speak in
the Name of the God of Truth, and therefore should have been so wary as not to
speak a word, but what the God of Truth would own for his) that we denied the
whole Law; by others, that we denied all the Old Testament; and by others, that
we deny the whole Scriptures: I shall briefly express what we hold in this
matter, and leave it to the judgment of the godly-wise to be examined by, and
judged of according to the Word of God.

First, We do, and have always acknowledged the whole Scriptures, as the
Apostle says, to be by Divine Inspiration: And the Old and New Testament both
of them to be of equal and indisputable Authority.

Secondly, We acknowledge, That all the People of God in the time of the Old
Testament, were equally justified before God, and saved with those in the New;
And that by that one and only means of justification before God and Salvation,
even Jesus Christ the Righteous, who in that respect, is the same yesterday,
and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. Hitherto I conceive there is an Agreement.
All the rest, and that wherein the difference lies, I shall sum up in this
third Conclusion.

Thirdly, We say, That the whole Administration and Dispensation of the Old
Testament, so far as it. was typical, ought not to be urged upon the Children
of the New Testament. And even in this Conclusion, as it lies in Thesi, and in
the general there will be little or no difference; only in Hypothesi, and in
particular, and in explaining how far this old Administration was typical,
there may be some ^ariety of Judgments, which is a great cause, as I conceive,
of the being and continuation of the present differences.

Fourthly, Therefore to discern how far the Administrations of the Old
Testament were typical, I conceive there is not a more sure and infallible Rule
than this, namely,
That where any thing peculiar and proper unto Christ alone is attributed unto
any action, person, or thing, whether Ceremonial or Moral, that Attribution is
to be accounted Typical, and to relate unto that action, person or thing, only
as they were types and shadows of Christ to come: And therefore Christ being
already come, now in the times of the New Testament, no such Attribution ought
to be given unto them, although they be of such a nature, as that they remain
in use also since Christ's time, because that typical administration is wholly
ceased. I desire to be fully understood, and therefore shall explain my self a
little further. Observe therefore;

First, That the Administrations of the Old Testament, were of things which
were of themselves of several natures; some were Ceremonial, as the Sacrifices,
their Temples, their Tabernacles, their Altars, and such like; some were Moral,
as their Prayers, Repentance, Reformations, and all the Duties of the Moral Law.

For the Ceremonies, that they were Types of Christ, and so ceased by the
coming of the substance Christ himself, is generally acknowledged; only some
attribute unto them no efficacy at all, but only a shaddowing out of Christ and
his benefits, who was to come; others say they had a typical, carnal, and
t^mporal efficiency, in the Mosaical Church and Commonwealth, proper to that
Administration, and answerable in some way to the benefits in the New: That
they by the Ordinance of God brought down upon that People temporal and outward
blessings answerable to the spiritual and eternal blessings by Christ. Which
Question is largely discussed by Vossius, wherein I shall not interpose,
because they that attribute most unto those Ceremonial performances, yet bound
the effect of them within the compass of the Old Testament, so that they
resigned up their keys and power unto their Lord and King (whose harbingers
they were) at his appearing.

But for the Actions and Administrations of the Moral Law, that they also were
in some sort typical, is not so usually observed as the former; yet it is no
less true. Who can deny but that Phineas his praying or executing of justice,
whether soever it was (for the Hebrew will probably bear either) a Moral
Action, and yet typically shadowing out unto us Christ our Great High Priest,
by whose interceding for us with the Father, he is pacified toward us? So not
a few Protestant Writers have interpreted it. But what speak I of one Action,
when as Dr. Tailor has published a Book wherein he discovers all along a
Typical shadowing forth of Christ* not only in the Ceremonial, but also Moral
Actions of most of the Ancient Patriarcks, Priests, Judges, Kings and Prophets.
But here I do not desire to dispute the Question, but only as briefly as I can
to explain my Judgment. Therefore in such Moral Actions as these, I observe
Three Things.

First, Their Moral Nature whereby they are of perpetual use both in the time
of the Old Testament and of the New; as Prayer, Repentance, and other Actions
of Duty toward God and man are as necessary as ever they were in the time of
the Old Testament, and shall be by the true Children of Faith as much
practiced, and in a more spiritual manner contrary to that false slander that
passes abroad concerning us, That we let men loose from all duties of piety
toward God, or charity toward man; against which false reproaches the Lord
will in time arise to the Vindication of his People. In the mean time, they may
be bold to commend their names and reputations unto Him into whose hands they
have already committed their souls.

Secondly, In these actions there is their typical effect, whereby, if they
were good Actions in that Administration, they wrought proportionable effects,
as Phineas his praying stayed the plague: If they were evil actions, they
brought evil effects, as David's numbering the People brought the plague; his
Adultery the death of the Child, etc. These effects I call typical, because
they are attributed to these actions, as they do typically relate unto Christ,
and setting aside that relation, such an effect should not have been attributed
unto them. As for Example, the prayer of Phineas had not stayed the plague, if
he had not therein stood as a Type of Christ, who is the only one that turns
away all evil from those that are his, who because he was not so revealed in
those times, therefore it was requisite that it should be shaddowed out unto
them in this and such like Types; so that the effect is only ascribed to the
Type in umbra in the shadow, but to the thing typified in veritate in the
truth. So I think I may say that all actions, even of the Moral Law, do in this
manner point unto Christ. In like sort, David's Adultery brought the death of
the Child, as the typical effect of that sin: So that David in that
consideration bare his own sin; But how? Only as a Type of Christ, as
manifesting that the Savior of the World that was to bear their sins, was yet
to come. Yet did he not really bear his own sin, no not in any degree: For so
it was wholly reserved for the Lord Christ, upon whom it was charged to the
uttermost, who made a full satisfaction, not only for the eternal, but also the
temporal punishment of all that belong unto him, not only for those since
Christ, but even for all from the beginning of the world: so that neither
David, nor any other of the Children of God in the Old Testament, had ever had
any sins charged on them, had they not stood as Types of him that was to come
to bear the sins of many; neither ever had they sins charged upon them in the
real positive nature of it, (if I may so speak) for so it was only and wholly
born by Christ for them; but only as I said in this typical consideration: For
Christ only has with one sacrifice perfected for ever those that are
consecrated, Heb. 10.14. He only is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John
2.1,2. And this he did not only for those since Christ, but also for the sins
that were past, Romans 3.25. to wit, under the former Covenant, Heb. 9.15. So
then in the time of the New Covenant, since the death of Christ, there is no
remembrance of sin, neither upon Christ who is risen again from the dead
without sin, nor upon the faithful, seeing they cannot now be shadows of Christ
to come, who is already come, and by the luster of his presence, has made all
shaddows flee away.

So that the whole amounts to that which I laid down in the beginning,
namely, That where any thing is attributed to persons or actions, which is
Christ's own peculiar, that is to be understood of those persons or actions,
only as they do typically relate unto Christ, and ought not to be ascribed to
any other person or action (though otherwise of the same kind) which have not
this typical relation unto Christ. The Reason is taken from that main
foundation of Christian Religion, to wit, The satisfaction of Christ is
complete, and all the Scriptures hold it forth as All-sufficient and complete.

Thus have I, Christian Reader, given thee a short abridgment of my thoughts
concerning the difference of the Testaments, so far as it concerns the present
matter in debate, and as the present occasion would permit, being willing
rather to trespass upon thee by this digression, than to suffer this matter
altogether to pass untouched, being of such moment, both for the Vindication of
the Truth and Us from so many slanders: Hereafter, if God permit, I may have an
opportunity to explain my self more largely in this matter, and to show the
consonancy thereof, both to the current of the Scriptures, and also to the best
and most Orthodox Protestant Writers. Now to Mr. Geree's Advantages.

1. To the First, that the Dr. alleges places out of the Old Testament: I
Answer so he may, so as that he allege none proper to the Old Administration,
as many do to bring the Children of the New Testament into the same servile
condition with those of the Old, who albeit they were Sons, and thereby truly
Heirs of Life and Glory, and as the Apostle says, Lords of all: Yet in regard
of that subservient Covenant and Administration, they differed nothing at all
from servants. But only such Scriptures as do prophesy and foretell the
sufferring of Christ, and the glory that should follow, such as the Scriptures
mentioned are. Although a man may not allege the Old Testament, (as I doubt
not but Mr. Geree will confess) for circumcision and observation of the Jewish
Sabbath, or sacrificing beasts: Yet may he allege it, to prove, that Christ is
the substance, exhibiting unto the Children of the New Testament all that was
shadowed out by these Ceremonies. Now there is the same reason of the whole
Mosaical Administration. So says Pareus upon Gal. 4.3. By the Elements of the
world, says he, the Apostle understands not only the Ceremonies, but the
whole polity of Moses, the Levitical Priesthood, and the very Moral Law it self
affrighting them, and compelling them to Obedience with threatenings of
punishment, and the fear of the Curse. How proves he this? For, says he,
Christ is said a little after to have delivered his Church from all these. And
therefore all these must be understood by the Elements of the world and
bondage. In a word, although the Old Testament may not be urged upon the
faithful, as establishing the Old Covenant, yet it may as foretelling the New.

His other Advantage he thinks he has got by the Example urged, is, That David
though justified prayed for forgiveness, which he says we deny. Where or when?
O Mr. Geree, you pretend you have matter enough in the Book to confute, and do
you leave that and run after slanders of your own devising? This may well be
put up on the file of those false and injurious reproaches which we daily lie
under: For the contrary has been publicly delivered by us both in print and
pulpit, namely, That the faithful and justified are to pray for forgiveness of
sins, according as Christ has taught. Only this we say with the best
Protestant Writers, that forgiveness is to be understood, not of that in foro
Coeli, in the Court of Heaven, which prevents and goes before all our prayers;
but in foro Conscientiae, in the Court of our own Consciences. That we may more
and more have the fruition and enjoyment in our Consciences, of that
forgiveness established in Heaven before. And so is that Petition of the Lords
Prayer to be understood, according to Mr. Walker in his Socinianism discovered,
page But the truth is, men destitute of true Christian Love, which thinks no
evil, have made their own Uncharitable Collections from our Tenets, and then
fathered those Collections upon us.

Sect. 6. To evince the perfection of our justification the Dr. cited, (as is
usual in extemporary expressions) according to the matter, though not exactly
according to the words, Ephesians. 5.25. and so forward, that Christ presents his
Church to himself not having spot or wrinkle; wherein he takes notice that the
Participle, [not having spot] is of the present tense, and therefore it is not
only to be understood of their future estate in the Life to come. This
Testimony, says Mr. Geree, is clear against him. How can that be I pray you?
His Point he desires to prove by this Text, is the perfection of our
justification, which Point, says Mr. Geree in the last words of the former
Section, is granted. How then can this Scripture be clear against it, or
against him if not against it? Is one truth of Scripture clear against another?
Yea, but he cites it, says Mr. G. for justification, when as it is special for
sanctification. See what a Reason is given here. Is it therefore clearly
contrary to justification, because it is specially for sanctification? He dares
not deny but it touches also upon justification. And if it did but so, I hope
it does not in that touch show justification to be imperfect, but rather
perfect and without spot; if so, how is it then against the Dr. who alleges
it to that purpose? Does the Dr. deny that they have reference to
sanctification also? No, but he urges them only for justification, because
that was the matter only in hand. But the words are not in the present tense.
What Words? (...), that he might present. Did he say it was? No, but (...), not
having spot: I hope that is the present tense. Yea, says Mr. G. but when was
this to be in the present tense? Even, says he, when it was presented
glorious, that is in Heaven, as Interpreters expound it; See Piscat. in locum.
But is it only to be expounded of the estate of God's Children in Heaven? I
think he dares not affirm it: And if not, why may it not also signify our
compleatness here on earth, whereby we are said to be complete in him even in
this life? Col. 2.10. Mr. G. might have noted, that (...), the Aorist noting
the time past, having cleansed us, will rather evince, that the spotlessness
which immediately follows upon the cleansing, is past, than barely future in
Heaven.

In the Conference at the Hague, the Arminians say, that this is their
Judgment, That to be Holy and without blame before God, is the same with, to be
glorified in Heaven, in this place, Ephesians. 5.26,27. To which purpose they urge
Piscater, as Mr. Geree does here. Whereunto Amesius answers in his Coronis,
Artic. 1 Ca^ 12. That the sanctification spoken of, (by which word Mr. G.
thinks he has gotten something) comprehends not only Renovation but also
Justification, as Joh. 17.17. Heb. 9.14. and 20. and 13. Because, says he, the
whole fruit of the love and death of Christ is placed in that sanctification,
which cannot be contained within the bounds of Heaven, but presents the
Church married unto him without spot, even whilst she sojourneth and warreth
here on earth. And for Piscator, he answers, That he does not only limit it
to the state in Heaven, but speaks upon verse 26. (in Analys.) of that
cleansing which consists in remission of sins. And to this same purpose have
many other approved Writers cited this Text, and those parallel to it. As the
Holy Martyr Frith ( page 69.70.) against Rastal, where he says, That they to
whom God imputes not their sins, are blessed, righteous, without spot, wrinkle
or blame. And Mr. Ellis before the Parliament, upon Micah 55. page 17. where he
has these faithful words, That God is reconciled by the blood of his Son,
which takes away all sin, so clearly, that it leaves no spot or wrinkle, no
blame or accusation; so that it being applied by Faith, God himself has
nothing to lay to our Charge, but we have full peace with him, and joy and
glory in him.

But poor man, says Mr. Geree, he took it upon trust; for his Mr. Eaton takes
it just so in his Honeycomb, of whom he has borrowed most of his New
Divinity. O Mr. Geree, where was the gravity of your silver hair, or rather of
a Minister of Christ, when such light taunting, jeering stuff fell from your
pen, against a man so free from all gall and bitterness toward any Friends or
Foes, as thus against the Laws of Common Humanity, to rend up the sepulcher of
the dead, and to trample upon his bones? Know therefore, that although it is
not, neither did he account it any disparagement to learn from the meanest,
much less from Mr. Eaton, whose Name shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance
among the truly Faithful, though you mention him frequently with so much scorn:
Yet he had both learned and preached abundantly this faithful Doctrine of God's
Free Grace, which you after your scoffing manner call New Divinity, not only
before any thing of Mr. Eatons was extant, but even before he had so much as
heard of his Name.

Sect. 7. Whereas the blind World usually is wont to gather false Inferences
from true and sound premises, they according to the principle that is within
them, understand that carnally which is spoken spiritually: Therefore the Dr.
here by Answering an Objection, prevents a scandalous Inference that some made
through the misunderstanding of his former doctrine of our compleatness before
God in Justification, whereupon they were ready to infer that he denied that
Believers do sin. And that because he asserted a perfection in the Spirit and
in Christ; he must needs also grant a perfection in the flesh, and in works, as
the Papists and Familists would have it. For although they both of them call
their perfection which they dream of, a perfection in Christ, yet in deed and
in truth, if it be diligently sifted, it will to truly spiritual eyes, appear
to be only a perfection made up of works and inherent qualities. But this is
not the business in hand, only I desire to give the faithful an intimation,
least by any means their minds should be drawn away from the simplicity that is
in Christ. Now to the Objection the Dr. Answers, that even the Faithful, if
considered in the doctrine of works, do commit sin, and the truth is, in
themselves, they do nothing else but commit sin. If they have any thing they
have received it, if they do any thing that is good, it is to be ascribed to
the Spirit of God, not to them who of themselves do nothing but sin, their
souls being even mints of sin. This is the substance of his Answer.

This Mr. G. ( Sermon. 6. Sect. 19.) says, it seemed very strange to him, till
he found the same in Mr. Eaton. But why did it seem so strange? You might have
considered that the Prophet Esaias calls all our Righteousness as a menstruous
cloth, Isa. 64.6. whereby not only sin, but the extreme filthiness of sin is
expressed. And that the Apostle counted all things but dung and loss, that he
might gain Christ, among which things he reckons all his own righteousness, to
wit, of works, Phil. 3.8,9. And that of Christ, who teaches us to confess our
best performances, even when we have done that which is commanded us, to be but
unprofitable service. Oh what are they then, when nothing is done as it was
commanded to be done! May we not truly say with Bernard, Hom. 5. If all our
very righteousnesses being looked upon by the light of Truth, be found to be as
menstruous rags, what then shall our unrighteousness be accounted to be? If the
light that is in us be darkness, how great then is our darkness? I doubt not
but that if Mr. G. had considered these Expressions of the Holy Ghost, that of
the Doctor's would not have seemed altogether so strange unto him. But it is
true which Learned Chamier says upon the same occasion. For when Calvin had
said, That no work comes from the Saints which does not deserve the just reward
of shame and confusion, Inst. l. 3. c. 14. Sect. 9. And Luther, That the just
man sins in every good work, and that therefore all good works are so many
venial sins, and venial not in their own nature, according to the Popish
Definition, but only by the Mercy of God, Cham. Tom. 3. lib. And these places
of Luther and Calvin, with such like of other Protestant Writers, when as some
Papist, as Mr. G. does here, did exceedingly resent and think strange; Chamier
answers, That it is no wonder if such expressions seem strange and horrid
unto them, who used and delighted to hear nothing but the high-prizing and
advancing of their own Works. If this be not the same disease that Mr. G. and
some others are sick of, I am deceived. But let us go on and hear this learned
man's Resolution of this Question, which I shall the rather recite, because he
proves his Conclusion by an Unanswerable Demonstration from the Word it self in
the forecited place, Sect. 5. Good Works, says he, may be two ways
considered, either abstractly in that nature, and according to those dimensions
of Goodness which they ought to have; or concretely, that is, not in that
simple nature and consideration of Goodness, but as they are clothed with
circumstances, and as they are done by that nature whereby they are done.
Having premised this distinction, he proceeds in the 6th. Section to his
conclusion or assertion, with the proof of it. We affirm, says he, that such
is the frailty of Humane nature, corrupted with sin, that no such works can be
given, that were ever done by any mere man, which do not decline more or less
from the exact rule of Gods Law. And because sin is defined to be ((...)
exorbitatio a lege) a transgression of the Law, it must necessarily follow,
that these works which do thus deflect from their rule, are sins. And in like
manner Augustine of old concluded, That it is sin, either when there is no
Charity, or when it is less than it ought to be. Now in our best Works, I hope,
it will be granted by all that are truly Protestant, that there is less
Charity, less Love of GOD and Man, than there ought to be. So then, I hope,
here are some before Mr. Eaton, who have affirmed, The best that we do, to be
sin.

But what has Mr. Geree to the contrary. He conceives that of Paul, Romans
7.12. to be against us, so then with my mind I (my self) serve the Law of God,
but with my flesh the Law of sin. But how did he serve the Law of God? By
performing all or any one Action without declining from it even in that Action?
No such matter. He himself in the same place confesses the clean contrary.
How, says he, to perform that which is good I find not. And the good that I
would I do not, but the evil which I would not, that do I. How then did he
serve the Law of God will you say? Read and observe the whole current of that
Chapter, that he never arrogates unto himself that service of the Law which
consists in performing of it, or that which is good according to it, but only
by an acknowledgment that the Law was holy, just, and good, and spiritual, ver.
12,14,16. This is all I can find the Apostle challenging to himself all along
that Chapter. Now whereas it might be objected against Mr. G. the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 15,10. as the Dr. does here, Not I but the Grace of God which was
with me; He answers, that the meaning is, Not he chiefly or of himself. Which
exposition although it be true in some sense, yet is it not suitable to the
matter in hand. It is true, I say, that Paul was in some sort active in this,
laboring not only in the work it self, but also in the goodness of it, so far
as the goodness of it is kept here below, and commends us for good among men.
But if we ascend higher, and bring it before the Tribunal of God, so it had no
goodness but what is passive and imputed, it needed forgiveness of Sins. So
that although Paul was opperative in the work, yet not properly in the goodness
of it; When I would do good, evil is present with me, Romans 7. It is God that
works both the will and the deed, Phil. 2. In reference to which, Calvin (
Inst. lib. 2. Cap. 3. Sect. 9.) Argues vehemently. We steal from the Lord what
we arrogate to our selves, either in will or deed. And again, ( Ibid. lib. 3.
Cap. 15. Sect. 3.) says he, we do not as the Sophisters do, part the glory of
good works between God and man, but reserve it whole and untouched unto the
Lord. This only we assign unto man, that those things which were good, he by
his impurity does pollute and defile.

But says Mr. G. This is contrary to John, 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God
sins not; which, says he, Mr. Eaton expounds thus: He cannot choose but
wrestle and strive against all Sin, and Zealously follow Holiness. I answer,
that supposing this exposition, he cannot evince that any thing we do is not
Sin or Sinful. Paul strove and wrestled as it appears in that 7. to the
Romans, yet he concludes, that when he would do good, evil is present with him;
and that how to perform that which is good, he finds not. It is one thing to
strive, another to attain; the one is the task of Works, the other the Crown of
Faith.

But says Mr. G. If a Believer can do nothing but Sin, then he must. needs be
subject to the Law; For, Sin is the Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.

I answer, that Mr. G. is good at digressing and running from his Subject. For
Dr. Crisp has no where meddled with this Question. Against whom then does he
make this inference? Surely it must be against him that was the first Author of
that assertion, That Believers are not subject to, or under the Law. Who was
that? Even the Holy Ghost by Steven; and Paul seven times (as Whitaker
observes in defense of Luther, against whom the Papists exclaimed for the same
thing) affirms, that Believers are not under the Law, but under grace. And to
say truth, it is no new thing for them to be accounted Antinomians, or Enemies
to the Law, for these and such like sayings: The Pharisees that were of Old,
charged this same imputation upon them. For Steven, he is charged to have
spoken blasphemous words against the Law, Act. 6.13. And it was not without
cause that Paul was forced to Apologize. Do we then make void the Law through
Faith? God forbid, nay, we establish the Law, Romans 3.31. In like manner Mr. G.
thinks he has somewhat against us in the same matter; although he has found
nothing in the book concerning that matter. In the preface indeed something is
briefly spoken concerning our judgment herein, whereunto although he pretends a
virtual confutation, as he calls it, yet the Christian Reader may observe that
he has not spoken one syllable concerning this subject of the Law, which being
the main matter in the world, and in the front of Mr. G's. book, he ought not
to have baulked it, but either to have showed that which is there spoken of the
Law to have been unsound, or else to have approved it. Notwithstanding, because
we desire not to walk in darkness, I shall more explain my Judgment herein.

First, We say that the Law (I mean the moral Law, according to the Mosaical
and typical administration of it, as it is as Paraeus before-cited Says, one
of those Elementa Mundi under which the Church of God in the nonage of the Old
Testament was) the Law I say in that Administration is now ceased. To evince
this, is the main drift of the Apostle in the 3, 4, and 5. Chapters of the
Epistle to the Galathians, and in a great part of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
where Chap. 10. ver. 1. the whole Law is called a shadow of good things to
come; and in the 9. Chap. v. 19. and 20. even the Moral Law is included within
their Covenant, to wit, as it stands in this Typical consideration, not as a
pure Covenant of works unvailed, for so they were not able to bare it.

Secondly, We say, That the true Believer is not under the Law in that higher
sense, as it is a pure unvailed covenant of Works. So it is a yoke indeed, that
neither we nor our fathers were able to bear, Acts 15. so we are delivered from
it by him that was made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the adoptions of sons, Gal. 4.4. Yet not by abolishing or
making void the law even in this sense: For it remains an everlasting covenant
of works in full force unto all that are under it, Romans 3.19. but only by a
peculiar exemption of a little flock from under it: Which exemption yet is not
without a full and complete satisfaction exhibited to the Law; so that it
loses not one jot or tittle, no not by those exempted persons; but rather is
by the exemption more fully established. For a particular exemption, as the
Lawyers speak, establishes a Law; for where no Law is in force, there needs no
peculiar exemption. And Secondly, because that exemption is grounded upon a
full and present Satisfaction to the Law: Whereas in regard of the persons not
exempted, it must be a receiving satisfaction world without end, and yet never
have one in actual being, a present satisfaction. Even as a man going out of
the Kingdom, and so from under the Laws of the Kingdom; the Laws of the Kingdom
are not abolished or destroyed by his departure, but remains in the same force
as they were before: Especially even in regard of himself the Laws are no
losers, if he went not out without making a sufficient satisfaction to the Laws
of the Kingdom for all duties and services which he should owe thereunto; which
is the very case of the children of God in reference to the Law, as a covenant
of Works. They are translated out of the Kingdom of the Law and Works, into the
Kingdom of Christ and of Grace, there to be directed, and ordered and judged by
the perfect Law of Liberty, Jam. 2.

These two Exemptions being premised, I see not but we may admit of any other
use of the Law in the Church which does not make Void either of these
Exemptions; And particularly those which are contained in Mr. G's. preface
collected out of Mr. Reinolds Mr. Penible, and Luther, according to the Authors
own genuine meaning.

And further that we may not contend about words, I shall also grant the Law to
be a Rule of conversation even to believers understanding it materially, and in
his Doctrine and Duties, and passively as a Rule barely lying before a man. To
constitute a Rule in this sense, I suppose no more is meant, but that if the
actions and conversation of a Child of God be examined before an Humane
Tribunal, they are, and are to be approved as consonant to the Law. The Law is
that Rule whereby they are to be examined and approved, and rejected
accordingly. For before the Tribunal of the Lord, they are only approved and
accepted as they are washed in the Blood of Christ, and have his Cleanness put
upon them: That is, not in their active consonancy to the Law, but passively in
the Grace of the Gospel, which is that incense which makes the prayers of the
Saints to be accepted, Rev. 8.3.

But the Law may also be considered formally and actively, to wit, not only in
the matter, but in the bond of it. What is that some may say? I answer, it is
that which formally binds to the performance of it. Even that Covenant or
Condition which lies in the Law, and constrains to the performance of it. Do
this and live: Do not this and be Accursed. Here what is that which formally
ties to the doing or not doing of this? but life upon doing, and the curse upon
not doing? It is true, the Authority of the Lawgiver is the efficient cause of
the Law, and of the obligement of it; but the intrinsecal, formal and legal
obligement consists in that relation which the thing commanded or forbidden
has either to reward or punishment, without which there is no Law. In this
consideration, I say it cannot be a rule unto the faithful: for the 2.
Exemption, which I mentioned before, is an acknowledged freedom from under the
Law in this consideration. Thus much for a brief Explanation of my judgment in
this Matter.

Now to that which Mr. G. Objected; That if the Believer sin, then is he under
the Law. Hereunto I Answer, that a Believer may be considered Two ways: I.
Properly. Or, II. Improperly.


1. Properly, as a Believer; i. e. As having a perfect satisfaction agreeable
to the Law, as a justified person, as one freed from sin: For he that is
justified, is free from sin, Romans 6.7. and stands without fault before the
Throne and Tribunal of GOD, and so as without Law. But,

2. If you consider this Believer Improperly here below among men in his
conversation, as a Worker, so there is Law for him as the material and passive
rule of his conversation, as I said before, and so there is transgression by
him; yea, as is said, and proved before, in every action he sins.

But says Mr. G. How can this stand with that which they hold, That they which
are Justified, are so Sanctified and purged, that they are now for the present
without spot or wrinkle. I Answer, very well by the former Distinction: And
further Sanctification may be taken in a twofold sense.

1. For that Holiness, which is Inherent, Active, and of Works; which as it is
in it self Imperfect, so it is not able to present us Perfect and Clean in the
sight of GOD, because it self has need of a perfecter and cleanser. Or,

2. For that Holiness, which is imputed passive, and of Faith; in which sense I
showed it to be taken, by certain Scriptures cited by Amesius; which Holiness,
in as much as it is perfect, in it we also are presented perfect, and without
spot or wrinkle before God, Col. 1.20. and 2.22. Ephesians. 5.26,27.

Sect. 8. In this, and the subsequent Sections to the end of this Sermon, Mr.
Geree finds fault with the Doctor, because he denies our peace to depend upon
works of Sanctification which we perform. This Mr. G. calls flinging against
Sanctification and Holiness, but Wisdom is justified of all her Children. When
Esaias called it menstruous rags, Esaias 64.6. Christ, unprofitable service; And
Paul esteemed it dung. Will you call these flings at Holiness? No, they are
only the attributing to them their true worth and weight by the balance of the
Sanctuary. For seeing all our works have an admixtion of sinfulness, whereby
they are truly sinful works; and every sinful work, as the proper wages of it
deserves, eternal death, we may thereby take a true estimate of their proper
worth and efficiency. Mistake me not; This I mean, not as they are Good, and as
they are Holy; but as they are not so Good, and so Holy as they ought to be;
and in regard they are thus Imperfect, they are not able to speak Peace unto
us. Peace is fruit and effect of Righteousness, Esaias 32. Therefore Christ is
our Melchisedec, our King of Righteousness; and afterward, or thereupon, our
King of Salom; that is, King of Peace, Heb. 7.2. Therefore all our peace is
attributed to Christ alone: He alone is our Peacemaker, and in him alone is
the full message and manifestation of our peace contained; and therefore God is
said to have come and preached peace by Jesus, Ephesians. 2.17. And as our peace is
ascribed unto Christ, and the message concerning it, so it is denied unto our
works: Which that it may the better appear, we are to consider our peace in a
double Notion; Either 1. As it is made with God: Or, 2. As it is manifested and
sealed unto our Consciences.


If we attribute it to our works in the first sense, we do manifestly put them
in the place of Christ, and thereby rob him of the dignity of his Priestly
Office, whereby he is our Peace, Ephesians. 6.14. Our propitiation with the Father,
Romans 3.25. Joh. 2.1,2. Our reconciler unto God, Romans 5.10. For all these are so
peculiar unto Christ, as the only Mediator between God and man; that whosoever
attributes them unto any other person or thing, must of necessity attribute
thereunto the Mediatorship either in whole or in part. Peace in this sense is
ordinarily acknowledged by Protestant. Writers not to depend on Works.
Notwithstanding in some late ones there are some very dangerous expressions
tending exceedingly to the dishonor of Christ, attributing even the abolishing
of the hottest wrath that can be in God unto our performances: which, it were
meet, they should rather humbly, for the honor of Christ, retract, than for
the maintaining of their own reputation, go about to salve and maintain; and
that they who will not admit of any expression, which they conceive may
derogate from their own Works and Holiness, should not dare to be so bold with
the peculiar honor and dignity of the Lord Christ, which he will not give unto
another, as to arrogate it to themselves, and their own doings. Is this that
Humiliation and Repentance so much spoken of? I thought it had been the utter
denial of our selves, even the reserving unto our selves nothing but shame and
confusion and of faces; that we might with regard of any thing in us lie naked
and destitute, and hopeless and helpless before the Mercy Seat of the Lord. Not
a proud Luciferian advancing of our Humiliation, with such terms and titles,
that greater cannot possibly be given to the Lord Jesus Christ himself, the
King of Saints.

2. This peace is considered, as manifested unto us, and sealed to our
Consciences, and in that regard also it does not depend upon works of
Sanctification that we have or can do. Now this peace is nothing but the stamp
and impression of the other upon our hearts: And as it is performed without
works, so it is manifested without works, only by Faith, which is a gift of
God, whereby we look out of our selves for Peace and help, that so (says the
Apostle) it might be by Grace, that the promise might be sure to all the Seed.
Here the Apostle plainly affirms, That the Promise, wherein is comprehended
our peace with God, is made sure unto us only by Faith; which, as I said, looks
out of our selves for its ground and object, and not by Works: For then the
Apostle plainly implies, that the Promise should not have been sure to all the
Seed. And therefore in Chap. 5. Ver. 1. upon our being justified by Faith, he
immediately infers, without the intervening of the sight of any Works, that we
have peace with God. And that this may not be understood only of the former
peace, he shows it plainly in the following words, by the effects of a
manifested peace in the Conscience, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of
God. Neither is this a weak unsettled peace, which must be strengthened and
under-propped by Works; But it is a firm, and settled peace, even such a one as
bears up the Heart, even to Rejoice in Tribulation, ver. 3. So that only by
this believing in Christ, We rejoice with joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. Yea, by
Believing, we are filled with all joy and peace, Romans 15.13. Hereunto Calvin
gives testimony, In Christ we have boldness and access with confidence, by the
Faith of Him. This surely does not befall unto us by the gift of Regeneration,
which as it is always imperfect in this flesh, so it contains in it self
manifold matter of doubting, Calv. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 13. Sect. 5. Here he
not only challenges our assurance, and thereby our peace, wholly unto Faith;
but also, he plainly denies it unto the gift of Regeneration, which he affirms
by the weakness and imperfection of it to be rather the cause of doubting, than
believing. And therefore the truly Faithful have always found it necessary in
the search for peace to go out of themselves, to lay aside their own
Righteousness as an hinderance rather than a furtherance, as Calvin says, and
to make mention of the Lords Righteousness only, mentioned in the free
Promises of his Grace without works. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom
I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. And this was a promise not only for weak ones, not
yet well confirmed in works of Holiness, but even for an Apostle to lay claim
unto, and that upon no others terms or plea than that expressed, that he was
the chief of sinners.

Contrariwise, that inherent works or holiness have to do in the business of
peace and salvation of the soul, Mr. G. endeavors to prove by two Scriptures.

The First is Psalm. 8^8. God will speak peace to his Saints, but let them not
turn again to folly* He might have done well to have showed us how he would
draw his Inference from hence: It is, because it said that God will speak peace
to his Saints, therefore their sanctity or holiness is the ground, means or
evidence of their peace and salvation? Then I Answer,

1. That he might as well infer from the forementioned place, Christ came to
save sinners; therefore sin is the ground, means, and evidence of salvation,
whereas it is only a bare expression of the Object. And even so it is in this
place.

2. It is Observable, that which Junius and some other of the Learned have
observed, That (...) (coming of (...), benignity, kindness, or gratiousness)
ought rather to be translated in propriety his Elect Ones, his Beloved Ones,
those to whom he is bountiful, and so he translates it in this place, erga eos
quos benignitate prosequitur; so that it signifies how God is affected toward
them, not how they are qualified toward Him. And then your Collection of the
dependence of peace upon inherent holiness cannot be deduced from hence. As for
the latter words, but let them not turn again unto follow: They are not a
commination or threatening, but a gracious dehortation grounded upon the
goodness before revealed. And therefore Vau here is rather illative than
discretive, as it is most frequently; and then the Text should run thus, That
seeing the Lord follows them with loving kindness, therefore let them not
turn again unto folly.

The other Text is that of Paul, Tit. 3.5. That not by works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of
Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy Ghost: Whence he infers, that as Mercy is
the moving Cause, so Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy Ghost, is a means of
saving our souls.

The ambiguity here lies in the words Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy
Ghost. I confess some Learned Men do understand by the washing of Regeneration,
(as Calvin and others) an inherent Alteration in us, but I take it rather for
our Justification (as Melanct. on Joh. 3.) or forgiveness of sin. For as our
Natural Generation makes us the Natural Sons of our Natural Parents, so our New
Birth or Regeneration, is that which constitutes us the Sons of God. Now we are
not made Sons by any inherent Qualifications, but by our Adoption, which is the
immediate effect of our Justification, neither of which are inherent in us, but
are only Relations from God upon us. And in this place to me it is very
evident: For otherwise the Apostles words would include a Contradiction, as if
he should say, Not of works of ^ighteousness that we have done, but by the
washing of Regeneration, that is by inherent Qualifications, Viz By works of
Righteousness. For although in these Qualifications, in the first infusion we
be conceived merely passive, and therefore in that respect they may not be
called our works of Righteousness; yet as they can be said to save, so they
must come forth into Acts and Workings, wherein we have some hand, and so we
should be said to be saved by works of Righteousness that we have done, if we
be said to be saved by them.

Secondly, For the word Renewing, it is no new thing to take it for that
passive newness, whereby we are made new in the Righteousness of Christ, and in
the perfection of that Reconciliation which is brought upon us by him, whereby
only we are new in the sight of GOD which may well be said to be of the Holy
Ghost, because it is revealed unto us only by him, who takes of Christ's, and
shows it unto us, Joh. 16.

Sect. 9. Against those that attribute salvation, or the giving of peace to any
thing besides Christ, the Dr. applys that of Jerem. 2.13. That therein, and so
far they forsake the fountain of Living Waters, and dig unto themselves broken
Cisterns that will hold no water.

" This, says Mr. G. is not to the matter. Why? Because the Prophet speaks of
turning from God unto Baal and such Idols. But h^ (the Dr.) has applied it
against those things which God has commanded and commended as necessary; yea,
and wrought in us by Christ himself, viz. Holiness, Sanctification and
Sincerity."

I Answer, First, That the distinction I formerly alleged out of Chamier is to
be observed, namely, That although those things, as they are in themselves
commanded of God, or wrought by Christ or his Spirit, be good; yet as they are
ours, so they are imperfect, weak and sinful; so they are not commanded, to
wit, to be done imperfectly and sinfully. And therefore I hope in that regard
they may be called Cisterns, and broken Cisterns, and Cisterns of our own
digging.

Secondly, Things may be considered, either in their own nature, as they are
the Ordinances of God, so they are good and commendable, or else in their
corrupt uses, so they are by us made Cisterns, and broken Cisterns. The
Ordinances of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, they are in their
nature very good, Genesis 1. But now if a man go about to worship them, to expect
help and deliverance from them, as the Old Israelites and the Heathens did,
therein I hope, and in that use they may (notwithstanding they be the
Ordinances of God in other regard,) be justly called broken Cisterns that will
hold no Water. Even so our works and duties, as they are misapplyed unto
corrupt uses, so they are broken Cisterns. All our Righteousness are as
menstruous rags, Isa. 64.6. Rags are but broken Clothes, they will not cover
us: If we go about to cover our selves with them, we cover our selves with our
own Confusion, as with a Cloak. For even shame and confusion of face belongs
unto us, and that even in regard of our most Holy Performances, not because
they are done, (this is the great mistake of Mr. G. and others, who thereby
conceive he speaks against the doing of goods works.) but only because they
are not done as they ought to be, that so we might in true Christian
Humiliation and self-denial, take our right estimate of our works, and of our
selves, as considered in reference unto them, and know that we are nothing.
Accounting our very Righteousness as all the Faithful have done in their
Generations, to be but as menstruous rags: Not only Rags, as I said, but
menstruous, filthy, unclean, that when we go to cover our selves therewith,
they are so far from making us clean, that they defile. If, says Job, I make
my hands never so clean, my own Clothes shall make me polluted, or abhorred. O
how far are they then from saving, from turning away wrath, from making
propitiation, things ordinarily attributed unto them by some; to which uses,
without all question they are but broken Cisterns, and will in a time of
drought prove like the brooks in Summer, which Job mentions. "But, O Lord,
keep thy servant and thy people by that Fountain of Living Water which is
opened for sin and for uncleanness, wherein only are the waters of comfort, by
which thou as a faithful Sheepherd leadest thy flocks, that they may draw water
out of those Wells of Salvation, that bubble out unto Eternal Life, that so we
may never thirst again, nor hanker after those broken, empty, muddy Cisterns,
that will hold no water."

But, says Mr. G. how can he say we forsake Christ, that by these duties seek
salvation? These are not Cisterns of our own digging, but of his appointing,
and we use them and humiliation, etc. only in conscience to his command, and
not as meritorious causes, but subordinate means of our salvation in the Name
of Christ.

Indeed, do you seek for salvation by your duties? Is this to acknowledge no,
other Name, i. e. no other thing that can be named under Heaven, by which we
must be saved? Is this to confess that his own Arm has brought salvation, and
that of the People there was none with him? Have you so soon forgotten the Text
you so lately cited, that not by works of Righteousness that we have done, but
according to his own Mercy has he saved us? You say these are not Cisterns of
your own digging, but of his appointing, and you use them as subordinate means
of salvation. You should have done well to have showed where he appointed them
to be subordinate means as causes of salvation; Christ will not so be shuffled
out of the Throne of his Glory: Salvation belongs unto the Lord; it is his
peculiar. Besides me there is no Savior: He has not ordained any subordinate
Saviors for the effecting of salvation. If any thing besides him, be said to
save, it is but as an effect, and by way of manifestation and declaration of
his salvation; not by way of effecting or producing it, either principally or
subordinately; either inchoatively, by giving any beginning of salvation, or by
way of completing or perfecting salvation by way of efficiency. There he is
said to save to the uttermost, (...), those that come unto God by him; that is,
those that are brought unto him, those whom the Father draws. Neither (says
Calvin, Inst. lib. 3. cap. 14. Sect. 11.) does Paul to the Ephesians say, that
we have the beginning only of salvation by Free Favor or Grace; but that by
Grace we are saved, not by Works, lest any man should boast.

Salvation in Scripture is taken two ways:

First; For the First Constituting of us in the state of salvation. And in this
Act, without question, we are merely passive, we are dead in trespasses and
sins, and we are merely passive in receiving Life. A dead man can be no way
active, not instrumentally and subordinately in giving Life unto himself.

Secondly; It is taken for the full Complement and Revelation of salvation in
Heaven, in the state of Glory; and that also we have freely from God for
Christ's sake only. How shall he not with him also freely give us all things,
says the Apostle, Romans 8.32. Our works and conversation here on earth, goes
before the Revelation of that Glory in Heaven, but they have no influx into it,
as a motive or moving Cause, why God does bestow it upon us, either in whole or
in part: For Eternal Life is the Free Gift of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord; Neither as an efficient producing Cause.

1. Because the proper and native efficiency of the best of our works, by
reason of their imperfection, is the Curse: Cursed is he that continues not in
all things.

2. Because they can have no other efficiency with God, but that of a moving
cause, which must needs be according to some Covenant or Engagement; for
otherwise, God cannot be Debtor to any man. Then the Covenant must be that of
works, which promises nothing but to perfection; and therefore, by that we can
claim nothing; Or else by the Covenant of grace, and there all the promises of
God are Yea, and Amen, in Christ only. It is most absurd, that works perfect
or imperfect, should be the conditions of a Covenant of Pure Grace: And
therefore, neither by nor for our works, can we be said to have either the
beginning or complement of our salvation, but it is wholly to be attributed
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Author and Finisher, as of our faith, so
of our Salvation.

Mr. G. thinks the Dr. is in a contradiction, because heretofore he ascribed
all goodness wholly unto God, whereas here he calls our duties a righteousness
of our own. In this contradiction a caviller may find the Holy Scripture. When
the Lord challenges to himself to Work all, both the will and the deed of his
own good pleasure, yet the Prophet Esaias calls it our righteousness, when he
says all our righteousness is as menstruous rags. It is called ours because
we are agents in the action of it, though it be Gods only, in reference to the
goodness of it, as is fully proved and explained before.

" But what is this then ( says Mr. G.) but to disgrace Righteousness and
Holiness?"

Why, because they are acknowledged to be what they are as they come from us?
why should we not own the dung of our Solemnities, and the uncleaness of our
Holy things? That we may not think of any man or work above that which is
written, namely that there is none that does good, no not one; no not the great
Apostle, who found no means to perform that which is good, Romans 7. That so God
may have the full glory of his grace, and man might be taught true Christian
Repentance, consisting in a real and faithful renouncing of themselves and
their best doings, as unavailable to commend them before God; not in a glorious
magnifying, and setting of great rates upon their Repentance, and other
performances, which are direct ways to puff up; and how they should thus be
ways of humiliation I know not: The Lord preserve the Kingdom from the fruits
of such Humiliation.

Sect. 10. The Dr. had denied that there is any ground of Peace by Works; This
Mr. G. acknowledges in regard of our peace with God; But, says he, peace of
Conscience has much dependence upon Sanctification and Sincerity.

Let us first take that which is granted, namely, that our peace with God does
not depend upon our Works: And then let it be a dangerous course, and an high
intrenchment upon our Peacemaker, to think or go about to make our peace with
God by our Sanctification, or Sincerity or any of the effects thereof. The Lord
teach all his ministers and people to acknowledge this, not in word only, but
in deed and in practice.

"But, Secondly, Whereas he says that peace of conscience has much dependence
upon Sanctification and Sincerity, out of that (2 Cor. 1.12.) Our Rejoicing is
this, the Testimony of our conscience, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation
in the world."

Here we are to distinguish of a double Peace of conscience and thereby a
double Rejoicing.

First, A peace of conscience with God; whereby we are assured that God is
pacified toward us in the blood of his son. And this is meant by that place
cited by Mr. G. Romans 5.1. That being justified by faith we have peace with God,
whereby it is not only meant a bare atonement with God, whereof we are not
conscious, but a manifested peace, which is therefore said to bring forth joy
and rejoicing, which an unknown peace could not do. And this peace of
conscience, de jure, of right, ought to have no dependence upon Works: That is,
though we are weak, and as much as lies in us, Covenant breakers; yet we ought
to know, that the Lord is faithful: He has promised to do for his own sake,
and not according to our Works, but according to his Grace. This Peace of
Conscience therefore, ought, notwithstanding all our fallings, to be
acknowledged and believed; although, I confess, that, de facto, and in
practice, the Children of God are not always able to consider, and remember,
and keep their hearts up unto this Rock of peace and safety; especially when
the Heaven above them seems to be black, and the Sea under them tempestuous,
with wave upon wave; so that, although by reason of their little Faith, with
Peter they begin as it were to sink; yet still at the length, they find a
gracious issue, and the hand of Christ stretched out to save them, and the
voice of Christ calling unto them, My Grace is sufficient for thee; yet
notwithstanding they ought with David to confess, that it is their own
infirmity that they did not cleave unto the faithfulness of the Promise, and
remember the years of the right hand of the Most High. This Peace of Conscience
therefore with God, although de facto, as they say it be sometimes darkened by
Works, yet de jure, it ought to have no dependence upon them. And this is that
Peace which the Dr. speaks of, which causes rejoicing and glorifying in the
Conscience before God: But,

Secondly; There is, another Testimony of the Conscience, or Peace thereof, and
thereby rejoicing as the effect of it, which has relation unto men: And here,
when we have done our duty toward men in simplicity and godly sincerity of
heart, then have we peace of Conscience toward men. And this is the peaceful
Testimony which the Apostle speaks of here: For the former, that depends upon
the All Sufficiency of the satisfaction of Christ, whereby God is perfectly
reconciled and fully at peace with us. But this depends upon our sincere and
upright walking toward all men. The Apostle comprehends both, when he says,
that he endeavored always to have a good Conscience toward God and toward
men: Toward God, in the Righteousness of his Son; toward men, in the
Righteousness of a Christian Conversation, which is matter of rejoicing amongst
men. But Mr. G. goes on: " And hence, says he, is St. John's Phrase: By this
we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, 1 John 2.3. and v. 29.
Ye know that every one that does Righteousness is born, of God."

1. Concerning our estate toward God, and consequently our peace with God, We
believe the fundamental Evidence to be the Testimony of the spirit of God: The
things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. You have an
unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. 1 John 2.20. And hereby we
know, that he abides in us by the spirit which he has given us. The Evidence
whereof we conceive not to a Doctrinal Evidence or Revelation besides the Word,
but the manifestation of that unto us, which is contained in the Word. It is,
as I may say, Revelatio revelans, distinct from the Word, but not properly
Revelatio revelata, as some I think have misconceived; of which revealed
Evidence we are not now a speaking, but only of that revealing Evidence,
whereby our hearts are effectually inclined to close with the Word, in which
kind we believe the spirit of God, not only to be the principal, but
irresistible and only effectual in his own Power. And what light soever the
other Evidences besides this, have, they have it together with their being from
this spirit, as by the forecited Scriptures is apparent.

2. The next Evidence: We believe to be Faith laying hold upon the free Promise
of God's Grace toward us in Christ: This the Apostle desires to be the
Evidence or Conviction of things not seen; i. e. that, whereby we are convinced
of our interest in the invisible Treasures of the Gospel, which otherwise eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have they entered into the heart of man to
conceive: And as the spirit of Christ, is by Analogy, the soul of a Christian;
namely, That whereby all the Members are knit together into one Body, (for he
that is joined to the Lord is one spirit) so Faith is as it were the eye of
this soul, whereby it is able to discern things not seen: And as the eye only
is that which sees bodily and earthly things; so faith only is that which is
held forth in the Word, as the means to see spiritual things. This is held
forth not only in Heb. 11.1. but also in all those Examples which are there
mentioned by way of Induction to prove the same. And it is also a great part of
the meaning of those places in Romans, and elsewhere, in which we are said to
be justified by faith only, or by Faith without Works: So the Reverend
Prolocutor of the present Assembly, affirms, when he says, That the
Righteousness of Christ is said to be imputed to us by Faith, because it is not
discerned to be imputed to us of God, put by Faith, contra Armin. lib. 1. part
2. sect. 25.

3. Works of sanctification may be conceived to evidence. 1. To others. 2. To
our selves.

First to others: So are ordinarily to be conceived of, when they are spoken of
in the nature of Evidences. Show me thy Faith by thy Works, Jam. 2.18. By this
shall all men know that ye are my disciples if ye love one another, Joh. 13.35.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your Father, which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. In this way they are only
Evidences unto the judgment of Charity, which judgment is sufficient for one
man to have toward another, reserving the judgment of certainty to an higher
or more concerned Tribunal.

Secondly to our selves: So they may be considered two ways.

1. Barely as they are Works squared out according to such a rule, and to be
judged of accordingly. So the Law of God being the Rule, and thereby the
Evidence of the goodness of Works, no Work in the Moral Nature of a Work, can
be judged good, which is not every way consonant thereunto; for it curses, and
thereby, utterly disalloweth the Action, and thereby the Actor, wherein there
is the least dissonancy or aberration therefrom. No Action therefore of Man
having any other goodness, but its consonancy to this Rule, and no other
Evidence thereof, but the approbation of this Rule, can be judged to be truly
good, so as to give evidence to the Conscience, that things are well with it.
For the curse which hangs over the imperfection of the doing, is of far more
efficacy to scare the heart out of all its peace, than any pretended goodness
can be to pacify it. For, as Calvin says, A man must not deceive himself,
gathering, that therefore his work is not altogether evil, because it is
imperfect, and that therefore that good which is in it is nevertheless accepted
of God, Instit. lib. 3. c. 2. sect. 4. Whosoever therefore judges of himself
by that inherent goodness of his work, either he has no peace, or deceives
himself, as Calvin here says; and that which he has, is false and groundless.
For the law, or the testimony thereof unto our works barely considered, it is
impossible it should speak peace, unless it can first speak or evidence
Righteousness. For peace is the fruit of Righteousness, not simply and
abstracted considered, but as it is evidenced. Now the Apostle says, That the
Righteousness of God, wherein we are accepted, is manifested without the Law,
Romans 3.21. And therefore, as the Papists and others destroy all peace with God,
and assurance of his favor, Doctrinally and in downright terms, so they which
have all their peace this way, destroy all peace and assurance of Gods favor
by consequence and in effect.

2. As they are the effects of Faith, and in which it is evidenced, so we
confess, that not only in the pure and prime act of Faith, there is an
evidence, but also in all the acts of Christian Love, even to our selves. But
how? Not by discovering an inherent legal goodness in them, (for that we
rejected in the last) but only as true Christian faith is active and evidenced
in them. For otherwise my Prayers, though they be never so zealous; my Love, if
it be never so vehement, if Faith be not evidenced in them, can appear to be no
more than the prayers and love of an Unbeliever. But if Faith, to wit, the
assurance of Gods favor be manifested in them, then there is not only in them
an evidence of Goodness unto them, but also of Peace unto them, by this Faith
which is manifested in them. As for Example; I Love my Neighbor? Why? What is
it that sets me about this work, which kindles this Love in me? It is, because
I know God in Christ has loved me freely, and has given his Son to me and for
me. And this known primarily only in the free promise of his Grace laid hold
upon by Faith. Notwithstanding it is also exercised, and has an influx into
this act of Love to my neighbor. For We Love him, because he Loved us first;
That is, because we know he loved us first. For unknown Love has no efficacy
to produce a reflection of Love in him, upon whom it is terminated. And as we
love Him, so we love others for his sake who has so loved us. So then, so far
as our Love is truly Christian; so far is the Love of God to us manifested by
Faith in it. And so in all the acts of true Christian Love, there an is
evidence of peace, as in it Faith is acted, and the Grace of God to us therein
taken notice of, and manifested. Now although some of those places in John may
well be interpreted of the evidence of Works in reference to others: As the
latter of these here cited by Mr. G. if not the former; yet I believe there are
others that speak of that evidence to our selves, which I last explained. In
all or most of which places, I believe it is not altogether unobservable, that
it is (...) herein, (not (...) hereby) which, as I conceive, is more proper to
the sense expressed. Now to the former place, 1 John 2.3. (...), herein or
hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments: To let pass that
which some have observed, that (...) is and may sometimes be translated
Agnovimus, we have acknowledged him so, that the words should then be
translated thus: Herein we know, that we have acknowledged him, if we keep his
Commandments: To let pass this, I say, or to leave it to the consideration of
the judicious Reader; I Answer, that John in chap. 3. v. 23. has explained
himself what he means by his Commandments. This (says he) is his
Commandment, That we should believe in the Name of his Son JESUS CHRIST, and
love one another as he gave us Commandment. These are his Commandments, not
in a legal way, but as written in the hearts of the Faithful, by the finger of
his Spirit, and as we are called forth to the exercise of them, in the strength
of the same Spirit, by the glorious manifestation of his grace in Jesus Christ,
unto us expressed, by those, and infinite such Exhortations contained in the
Word. By the exercise of these two, Faith and Love, there is then we
acknowledge an evidence of our good estate, and thereby peace.

First, In Faith, primarily by its own proper act going out of a man's self, and
laying hold on JESUS CHRIST, for our sufficient Atonement, and Peacemaker. And

Secondly, In Love, as I said, not by consideration of the inherent goodness of
it, but in its ground, and as the influence of Faith is in it, and upon it; for
so only it is evidenced unto us, and conceived by us to be a truly Christian
Act.

Mr. G. adds, We do not, says he, look for peace of Conscience from the
subduing of our lusts, as the primary cause, but as a sure sign and
concomitant of the same.

To this I Answer as before, that subduing of Lusts of it self, without the
light of Faith shining, and giving evidence, that they are expiated before God
in the death of Christ, is no evidence at all; and therefore no sure sign or
concomitant, no more than that subduing of Lusts which we read of in Heathens,
in Jews, in Turks, and Papists in their Monasteries at this day; theirs is
without true Faith, and so is this. But if you grant the assurance and evidence
of faith in your subduing of lusts, then I grant there is an evidence of peace
in it, as that Faith shines forth in it, which gives the light of the
knowledge of the appeased countenance of God toward us in the face of Jesus
Christ, and no otherwise.

Sect. 11. In this Section Mr. G. as he has done diverse times before, instead
of dis^roving what he had before him, makes an inference of his own or some
others slandrous coin, and that he lays to our charge, but he must either own
it himself, or else he must name the Author of it. It is, that we slight Godly
Sorrow which the Apostle so much commends, 2 Cor. 7.9,10,11. I profess that I
am a stranger to any person or Author, I mean, of those that profess the
Gospel, that slight Godly Sorrow. It is an ungodly and unbelieving Sorrow which
we speak against; That Sorrow which is stirred up upon the apprehension of Gods
faithful and constant love toward us, and our weak and unanswerable walking
toward him; this Sorrow, so far as it does not entrench upon true faith, nor
any way darken or question the ground of it, we have always approved; and we
say, where true faith is, it will always be as occasion is offered. But when
this is degenerated into a Sorrow of unbelief, or into a Popish and dead
contrition (as Luther calls it) then we cannot allow of it: of which
degeneration this is a sure sign, when by it the appeased face of God our
Father is covered and kept out of sight by it. All this sorrow and sadness,
says Luther, is of the Devil, and it is a sacrifice very acceptable unto him.

Whereas the Dr. had asked, whether we could choose but fall foul upon our own
Spirits, when we see the filthiness and infirmity of our wrestling with sins; I
Answer, (says Mr. Goree) we cannot choose indeed but fall foul upon our selves,
and say with the Apostle, O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from
this body of death, Romans 7.24. And also with the publican, Lord be merciful
unto us Sinners, Luke 18.13. But now, says he, let us ask them, whether upon
the sight of their defects they fall thus foul upon themselves or no? I am
afraid (says he) they follow the Pharisee rather than the Publican, boasting
rather than praying for pardon of Sin.

Surely if we should do as Mr. Geree does here in effect, say we are humbler
than you, we should indeed play the Pharisees and boasters. But yet we may very
well say that Mr. G. had no ground for this sentence upon us. We acknowledged
the evil of all our actions, and that (as he ought to have judged in christian
charity) in true humiliation and self-denial, to be so great, that they deserve
the displeasure of God even unto eternal death, acknowledging nothing in our
selves as of our selves, but matter of shame and everlasting confusion; which
you were so far from consenting unto, that you call it a disgracing of
righteousness and holiness, Sect. 9. whereas in the same Sect. you affirmed of
your duties that you seek Salvation by them. Whether this be nearer the
Publican or the Pharisee, let the godly reader judge.

Yet if we add to the acknowledgement of what we are, in, and of our selves,
even in the best of our works, that is, wretched men: I say, if we add that
which follows in the Apostle, viz. that we thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord; namely, that there is an alsufficiency in him for us, though of our
selves, even in our best works, we be worse than nothing: yet you ought not to
call it following the pharisee, or boasting; or if you do, yet we shall always
desire thus to make our boast of the Lord, and to glory in his strength.

Sect. 12. The Dr. had said, that Christ subdues sin in the faithful, as well
as satisfies for sin; But yet, says he, we are not to seek or receive our
peace from this subduing of Sin, but from Christ alone. These two Mr. G. thinks
cross one another, but yet he does not show wherein, and therefore I shall not
go to seek a knot in a bulrush. Only I shall examine his reasons against the
latter of these; the first is this.

" Let me tell them (says he) that if Christ's power be seen as well in
Sanctification, as in Justification, what wrong can this be to Christ, to seek
and settle peace in our consciences, as well by Sanctification as
Justification?"

To the matter of this, and what we hold in this Point, I have answered before.
To the inference, I say there is no strength in it, that because they are both
effected by the same power, therefore the same effects are to be attributed
unto both. Mr. G. himself, I doubt not, will grant my inference unsound, if I
should reason thus, Sanctification is effected by the same power of Christ with
Justification, therefore Sanctification presents just before God, as well as
Justification. If he allows not this argument, then he may see the face of his
own in this glass. As for our peace, it is necessary that we have a firm rock
to seek it from, that is able to speak peace at all times, even in the deepest
plunges; which our Sanctification is not able to do: being feeble, and dark,
and weak at all times, especially when it self is questioned. And therefore
David said, I will make mention of thy righteousness only. And our Savior
says, in me ye shall have peace. And therefore we dare expect no peace from
any one below him.

Besides, he demands, where we read in all God's Word, that he was ever angry
with his People, for seeking comfort in sincere sanctification and holiness. I
Answer, That when the Apostle would show the true positive Grounds, where
Consolation is to be sought, he fixes them only upon two things. First, the
free promise of God without any respect had unto, or condition of works, Heb.
6.13,14,15,16,17,18. Surely, says he, in blessing I will bless thee, and in
multiplying I will multiply thee. And the Apostle says, Gal. 3. That that same
blessing of Abraham comes on the faithful through faith freely not through
works. And the other thing that the Apostle mentions, is the Oath of God to
perform his promise, which Oath, as the Psalmist says, admits of no
repentance, or recalling back that which is sworn unto. The Lord swears (says
he) and will not repent. And these two the Apostle acknowledges to be
sufficient ground of consolation, and that is the end of God's proposing them,
to wit, That by two immutable things, in which it is impossible that God should
lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled to the refuge, to lay hold
upon the hope set before us. Now because Christ with all that he has done,
suffered, and purchased for us, is the substance of this Promise, therefore it
is called, Consolation in Christ, Phil. 2.1. who is the consolation of Israel,
Therefore, till there be an insufficiency of consolation in Christ, and in what
he is unto us, we need not seek for consolation elsewhere in any other thing
whatsoever. And in particular, if we seek for it, in or by our own doings, we
shall surely be disappointed. The consolations of a Christian are in the ground
of them, and therefore ought to be in the exercise of them, everlasting
consolation. But the truly experienced Christian finds daily, that when he sets
himself before the glorious Tribunal of the Lord, all his goodness becomes as
the Morning Dew, and vanishes in a moment. And if it be not able to stand by
me there, what comfort can it be unto me, that thus leaves me in my greatest
straits and terrors? What Is all my comfort, but to be found there without spot,
and blameless? That only, that can stand me instead there, is able to comfort:
All other are miserable Comforters, and Physicians of no value. Consider I pray
thee, good Reader, that of Calvin, worthy to be written in Gold; and I beseech
the Lord, thou may be so affected, as I was in the consideration of it. "
Consider thy Judge before whom thou stand, as he is in himself, not
according to thine own imagination, but such an one as he is painted out to us
in Scripture, with whose brightness the stars are darkened, with whose strength
the mountains are melted, by whose anger the earth is shaken, by whose wisdom
the prudent are caught in their own cunning, and by whose purity all things are
found to be defiled, whose righteousness the very Angels are not able to
endure, who will not account the guilty inncocent, whose vengeance, when it is
once kindled, peirceth unto the neither most Hell: Let him I say, sit in his
Throne to examine the Actions of Men, [that according to his sentence of them,
they may receive comfort] and then who can stand secure before his Throne? Who
can dwell with devouring Fire? Who can abide with everlasting Burning? He that
walks in Righteousness, and speaks the Truth, etc. let such a man come
forth whosoever he be: Nay verily, that Answer makes that we dare not appear:
For on the contrary, that terrible voice sounds out, If thou Lord shall
observe iniquities, Oh Lord, who shall abide?" Instit. lib. 3. c. 12. Sect. 1.
It may be, some will Object, That Calvin speaks this of Justification, which I
confess he does; yet notwithstanding he speaks fully to the Point in hand: For
whereas there are but two Tribunals, at which the Conscience of a man needs
securing, and accordingly gathers Peace and Comfort, viz. The Tribunal of Man,
and the Tribunal of GOD: At Man's Tribunal, the Conscience is at peace, and
comforted when it has a Righteousness as is acceptable among Men; and here we
grant Works of Sincerity and Love, their place: But at the Tribunal of GOD, we
say with Calvin, That before this terrible and consuming Fire, this stubble
vanishes into nothing, it is able to yield no peace, to give no comfort. Here
there is no comfort, but by being in the hole of that sure Rock Jesus Christ
the Righteous, whilst that dreadful and unapproachable Presence passes by:
This is the only refuge of safety, wherein exercised Consciences perceive that
they may safely breath. But if Men yet will needs be tampering with comfort
from their own Works, and not be content with what may be had by that sole sure
Rock of Eternal Comfort, I shall leave them to meditate upon the terrible
sentence of the Lord, which shall surely be performed in its season, Isa.
50.11. Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with
sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled,
this shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

" But, says Mr. G. see how good Hezekiah pleads with the Lord, Isa. 38.3.
Remember me O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Hereupon
he was not rejected, but received a most gracious Answer, ver. 5. Go, say to
Hezekiah, thus says the Lord, I have heard thy Prayer, I have seen thy Tears,
Behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years."

Hereunto I shall not Answer with Luther, that in this Prayer, Hezekiah
manifests some spice of that temper he was in, when he showed unto the
Ambassadors of the King of Babel, all his glorious Treasure, although the Event
and Answer, will not show the contrary. The lying of the Midwives of the
Israelites in Egypt, had a prosperous Event, and a gracious Answer from the
Lord, who built them houses; yet the Act must not therefore be concluded to be
approved of the Lord: And indeed this Expression is very singular, and hardly
to be found in the whole Scripture, in the mouth of any of the Servants of God.
Yet I conceive, that it ought rather to be taken notice of, as agreeable to the
Tenure of that Typical and Subservient Covenant, under which he was with the
rest of the Fathers of the Old Testament, until the Death of Christ: In which
Covenant they had outward Blessings, among which, length of days was one, Deuteronomy.
6.2. according to their upright walking with God in the performance of that
Covenant. The Covenant is at large expressed in the 27, 28, 29 Chapters of
Deuteronomy, wherein all outward Blessings, even to the prolonging of their
days in that good Land of Canaan, flowing unto them with all store and
abundance of milk and honey; and wherein also all outward Curses were threatened
against the Transgressors to the rooting of them out, quite out of that good
Land, and also out of the Land of the Living, that they should not prolong
their days. Hezekiah having therefore walked uprightly before the Lord in that
Covenant, and restored the Right Worship of the Lord, he prayed that the Lord
would do unto him according to his Promise in that Covenant; which manner of
Plea seeing grounded upon that peculiar Administration and Covenant, proper to
that People, it ought not to be urged in the Times of the New Testament, where
that shadowish Administration even of the Moral Law is done away, 2 Cor. 3.11.
and abolished, ver. 13. I have a little explained my self in this before; yet
that, if possible, things may not be mistaken, I shall add a few words more.

First, Although I say that this Covenant did properly relate unto temporal
Blessings and Curses only; yet far be it from me, to think that the Faithful
then had nothing else but temporal Blessings. I confess, that by the Ancient
Promise from the beginning, Genesis 3. renewed, Genesis 17. They had all spiritual
Blessings in Christ; for so I before cited it out of the Apostle, that they
were Heirs and Lords of all; so that accordingly they were by Christ freely and
fully blessed, and justified, and saved.

Yet Secondly, I say, that according to this subservient Covenant and
Administration, as the same Apostle says, they differed nothing at all from
Servants: They were upon doing their Work, and have their Wages; they were upon
neglect of their Task, to be punished or thrust out of doors. They had great
Rewards of Glorious Prosperity upon performance: They had sore Afflictions and
Calamities upon the neglect thereof.

Now Thirdly, The Question may be, How this subservient Covenant could consist
with the promise of all blessing in Christ? I Answer, very well, as the Apostle
says, observing the right time; namely, that the child at the same time,
whilst he is a child, may be Lord of all; yet in all administrations toward
him, he may differ nothing at all from a Servant. If indeed you take the Heir,
when he is come to Age, and then make him differ nothing from a Servant, then
it is apparent you destroy his Heirship, and alienate the Inheritance from him;
But whilst he is a Child, says the Apostle, he differs nothing at all from a
Servant, though at the same time he be Lord of all: Even so was the difference
between our Fathers before Christ and Us, as the Apostle himself applies the
Comparison.

But how can this be conceived, may some say? Could they be Blessed and
Accursed at the same time? Could they be perfectly Justified, and yet Sin
charged upon them at the same time? This is the main difficulty at which so
many stumble: I shall therefore desire the Christian Reader to take notice of
what is said, and I doubt not but the Lord will afford Light for a solution
hereof, according to the Analogy of Faith, contained in the Holy Scriptures. I
Answer,

First, That the Blessings and the Curses of the Old Testament were of such a
nature, as they had reference to this subservient Covenant, that the greatest
Blessings might have a real Curse under it; and the greatest Curse might have a
real Blessing under it. And so their outward Justification might have a real
charge of Sin upon them, and their outward charging of Sin might veil a
Spiritual real and invisible discharge and justification from sin. This will be
more easily conceived, if we remember Two things.

1. That this subservient Covenant was carnal. It consisted, says the Apostle,
in carnal Ordinances, Heb. 9.10. serving to the purifying of the Flesh, ver.
13. It consisted in the rudiments of the World, as the Apostle says elsewhere.

2. This subservient Covenant was Typical. Things happened unto them, (...), in
Types, 1 Cor. 10. They were shaddows of good things to come, but the substance
was Christ, Heb. 10.1. And shaddows of Heavenly things, Heb. 8.5. So then, that
which in the judgment of the flesh is a Blessing, as all the prosperity of the
Wicked is, may indeed and in truth be a Curse; I will Curse their Blessings,
Mal. 2.2. And also that which is a Curse in the judgment of the flesh, being
grievous unto it, may indeed, and in the judgment of Faith, be a Blessing; and
so are all the Afflictions of the Faithful. And

Secondly, A Typical charging of sin, will not prove a real charge of sin upon
the same subject; as upon the scapegoat it did only signify the real charge
of the sin of the Israel of God was to be upon him, who was typified by that
Scapegoat. So the Typical charge of sin upon many of Gods people, as David,
and others, did not signify that he did really bear any dram of that Spiritual
curse and punishment due to his sin, but only that he in the flesh bare it as a
Type of him that was to come.

1. It did signify, that he that was to take away, and bare sin in his own
body, was not yet come.

2. It did shadow out that when he did come, he should utterly take it away;
so that none afterward that belonged unto Christ, should bare it, either
Typically, as the Sacrifices and Children of the Old Testament, or Really, as
Christ only has done for all his.

And this is the reason why there were sacrifices of Propitiation in the Old
Testament, viz. Typically to shadow out the real atonement of Christ, which
was to dome, Exodus 30.10,15, etc. Lev. 16. and very frequently elsewhere:
Whereas in the New Testament there are none, none at all either Typical or
Real, since the death of Christ. And therefore the Mass is justly abhorred of
all true Christians, as blasphemous against the death of Christ, if it be
counted an atonement or propitiation for sin, either Typical or Real. If the
former, then it is a denial of Christ to be already come; For the Types did all
prefigure and confess that Christ was not come; If the latter, then they must
of necessity deny in whole, or in part, the sufficiency of that sacrifice of
propitiation that Christ offered once for all. And therefore I do utterly
dislike the Expressions of some Ministers, who call our Fasting Days, Days of
Atonement; whereby, if they mean, that any thing that is done in them, can
make an atonement or propitiation either Typical or Real, then they bring an
Idol of Jealousy indeed into the very Holy of Holies, and jump with the
Papists in setting up an abomination, to make desolate, rather than to heal the
Land, and bring a blessing of peace upon it. However men may excuse their
meanings, I am sure some men's expressions are broad beyond all sobriety. I am
sure the Holy Ghost is very wary of giving any words of that kind, as Priests,
Altars, propitiations to any ordinances or actions of the New Testament,
besides those which are peculiar to the person of Christ alone.

But if any understand by a day of Atonement, no more but a day of Humble
Address unto the Throne of Grace (in confidence of that one atonement offered
once for all) for the effects of that one atonement and propitiation to be
manifested upon himself, and upon the Land: Then, as Augustine once said in
another case, so I think I may as justly say in this, Teneat mentem, sed
compescat linguam: Let him retain this Meaning, but refrain that Expression,
being every way as dangerous as that of Merit, and Priests, and Altars, or any
such like exploded phrases But I have digressed sufficiently; I must now return
to Mr. G. who goes on in this manner.

Moreover, when the Lord had condemned their Hypocritical Holiness and
Services, Hay 1.11,12, etc. Being much offended with them, see what course he
prescribes them to make their peace with him, ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. Wash ye,
make ye clean, take away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease
to do evil, learn to do well: Then what follows? Come now, let us Reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
White as Snow. If ye be willing and Obedient, ye shall Eat the good of the Land.

Here Mr. G. tells us, he does but cite the very words. Yes, he tells us also
to what end he cites them, namely, as a course prescribed of God to make our
peace with him. So that here it is evident Mr. G. makes works not only
evidences of our peace, but even peacemakers; which office we dare not to
attribute to any, but to the Lord Jesus, who has made peace only by the blood
of his Cross, Col. 1.20. For as we acknowledge but one Mediator between God and
man, so but one peacemaker; For that was his office to mediate and effect a
peace. Reconciliation and peacemaking is his own, his sole Act. It is always
in Scripture spoken of in reference to a sacrifice, Dan. 9.24. 2 Cor. 5.18.
Heb. 2.18. And that a sacrifice of propitiation of appeasement, which Christ
only was able to offer. But the best of our works are aspersed with manifold
defilements, they have need of an atonement to make peace for themselves, so
far are they from making peace for others. But Mr. G. seems to infer out of the
place, that we our selves, and that by our own doings must make our selves
clean, must take away the evil of our doings, from before the eyes of God; must
cease to do evil, and learn to do well; and all this while we are the enemies
of God before our sins be forgiven. So the Papist, and others before him, have
desired to infer from the place. And this the Lord requires. How then shall we
answer to it? Sure our abilities are not the measure of Gods commands. Such
passages as these may well show what is due unto God from man, not what man is
able to pay unto God. Mr. G. himself, if he would have taken notice of it, has
collected for us out of Mr. Penible, a satisfactory answer hereunto in his
preface, Page 4. The Law (says he) was added because of transgressions; that
is, to convince man of sin, that he might be put in remembrance what was his
duty of old, and what was his present infirmity in doing of it, and what was
Gods wrath against him for not doing it. That seeing how impossible it was to
attain unto life by this old way of the Law, first appointed in Paradise, he
might be humbled and driven to look after the New way, which God had since that
time laid forth more heedfully, attending the promise, and seeking unto Christ,
who is the end of the Law, unto every one that believes on him. And thus our
peace is made, we are washed, the evil of our doings is done away, out of the
sight of God. And thus we cease to be evil doers, and become truly well. doers,
not in our own actions, but in him who did all things well And so for his sake,
being joint heirs with him, we Eat and enjoy the good of the Land of the
living, we have a sure and unshaken interest, not only in Heaven, but in earth
also; so far as our fathers infinite wisdom sees them good for us.

Here, lest we should plead some difference between the Testaments, Mr. G.
prevents us, saying, That the New Testament differs not from the Old, in this
particular. But mark the Text he alleges, Christ was exalted to be a Prince,
and a Savior, to give repentance unto Israel and remission of sins, Act. 5.31.
And is there no difference in this? Here Christ is plainly expressed, as a
giver of Repentance and Forgiveness: In that of Esaias it is barely required of
them. I confess, it was Christ that gave Repentance, and Remission of Sins, in
all ages of the Church of God; yet this was not so clearly manifested unto the
people of the Old Testament, as it is to those of the New. The Old Testament is
more frequent in Requiring of Righteousness (save only in those places where it
speaks Prophetically of the New) than in manifesting the free gift of
Righteousness. In the Old Testament it was, but my Salvation is near to come,
and my Righteousness to be Revealed, Isa. 56.1. But in the New Testament, the
Righteousness of God is already Revealed in the Gospel, Romans 1.17. The
difference, so far as it concerns the present particular, is most remarkable in
the Apostles citing, and inverting that place of Isay 59.20. The Redeemer shall
come to Sion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob; which the
Apostle citing, does wonderfully invert after this manner; The deliverer shall
come out of Sion, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. In that of the
Prophet, turning from iniquity, seems to be pre-required to the coming of the
Messiah: But by the Apostle, it is plainly revealed to be the effect of his
coming: He shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

Moreover, from the forecited place, and that in Luke 24.47. wherein Christ
charge his Apostles to Preach Repentance, and Remission of sins among all
nations, Mr. G. infers, mark first Repentance, and then Remission of Sins. This
(says he) is Christ's Order. What? that Repentance should go before Remission
of Sins; Surely such a Repentance, can be no better, than the Repentance of
Cain and Judas in it self; for I speak not of the Event. For what can the Act
of an enemy unto God be accounted to be, but fruits of enmity? The Protestants
use to say with Christ, that, first the tree must be made good by
justification. Wherein is contained forgiveness of Sins before the fruit can be
good, before we can do any thing acceptable unto God. But repentance, you will
say, is mentioned first. To this I Answer with Calvin, that whilst men stick
in the order of letters and syllables, they do not mark the coherence of the
Sense, Inst. lib. 3. Cap. 3. Sect. 2. For as he says there, it is impossible
that a man should seriously repent, unless he know himself to be Gods. But none
is truly persuaded that he is Gods, but he who first has apprehended his
grace; see Calvin (ibid.) further, there where he solidly proves, that faith,
or the assurance of the forgiveness of sins, does precede, and bring forth all
true repentance, which is the general judgment of all Orthdoox Protestants. For
my own part, I conceive, that it is so frequently set before faith, and
remission of sins, not because it self does either in order of time or nature
precede them; but because it relates properly unto that estate of unregeneracy,
which both in order of time, and nature, goes before conversion, and
regeneration, whereunto faith does properly refer. But still this must be
firmly holden, That we love him because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19. That
because many sins are forgiven us, therefore we love much, Luke 7.47. That with
the Lord is propitiation, and therefore shall he be feared, Psalm. 130.4.

And now I desire the Christian Reader, to set himself, as Calvin says, not in
umbraculo, at ease, full of the works of his own hand, and of the applause of
men, but seriously sensible of the dreadful terrors of the Lord, that not he
that commends himself is approved, but he whom the Lord commends; And then
let him say, whether he will lean unto such a peace as his works will be able
to make, or that only which the great Peacemaker has made by the Blood of his
Cross, Col. 1.20.

THE DEFENSE OF THE Second Sermon.
Sect. 1, 2. THE Substance of the First Section Mr. G. would gladly seem to
grant, namely, That God does no longer stand offended with a Believer, though
after he be a Believer, he does sin often: Yet in the end he will not let it
pass for current without some Qualification, which he explains more fully in
the second Section, in his Answer to that of Esa. 27.4. Anger is not in me.
Here says he, the word Chama (he or his Printer should have said Chemah) in
the Original is rendered Excandescentia, Burning, or fiery Wrath, which the
last Translation calls Fury very fitly, which teaches what kind of Anger is
not in God, to wit, consuming wrath, or anger of an Enemy to destroy; yet may
God be said to have a Fatherly Anger, which may stand with Love: For the
Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men. Hence, Rev. 3.19. As many as I
love, I rebuke and chasten. Rebukes and Chastisements are effects of Anger, as
well as of Love.

I shall first of all Explain what we hold in this particular, and then proceed
to Answer what Mr. G. has here Objected.

Anger may be attributed unto God Two Ways: Either, I. In the Affection of it.
Or, II. In the Effects of it.


First in the Affection of it, although in propriety of speech, there be no
affection congruent to our humane conceiving, and answerable to the affections
and passions of men. For as God is not like man in Repenting, Numb. 23.19. So
in no other passion, so in no other thing, conceiveable by an human
understanding. Thus He dwells in the Light, that no Man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.16. Yet hereunto may be referred the dreadful punitive Justice of God,
whereby he pays unto sin, and to the sinner, his just Wages. For, because it is
expressed in the Scripture by that which is an affection in man, and because
the effects of it are in some way proportionable to those of Anger in Man;
therefore may we, with the Learned, call it Anger in the Affection: Yet not
conceiving of it in the notion of an humane passion, but of punishing Justice.
So Romans 13.4. The higher powers are said to be the Ministers of God, (...), a
Revenger in Wath, or to Execute Wrath. What! To execute his own or other men's
passion upon the Offender? No such matter; but a Revenger, by punishing
Justice, or to execute Justice upon him that does Evil. This word Anger, or
Wrath, I confess, may be drawn up higher to that dreadful Sentence passed
within God himself from all eternity upon the vessels of Wrath; but this
signification is less pertinent to our present matter.

Secondly, There is Anger in the Effects of it; which as it is originally and
radically upon all the sons of Adam, both Elect and Reprobate, seeing all are
originally under the Law, and by breaking of it, their mouths are for ever
stopped, to wit, from pleading innocence by that Covenant, and all the world is
become ((...), Romans 3.19.) subject to the Judgment of God, and Children of
Wrath, even as others. Ephesians. 2.12. So it is by derivation from the Elect, as
their sin is translated, upon their surety. For there is no Anger in the
Effects, but in reference to Sin, as the cause. Wheresoever there is a rupture
in the House, there the storm drives in: So whilst the Elect stand as Sinners,
they stand liable to Judgment. I do not say there was ever an actual or
positive Execution of the VENGEANCE of GOD, due for sin, upon the Elect: For in
that regard, they have obtained not only a Reprieve, but a Discharge: But as
their sin was by imputation derived upon Christ, so punishing Justice, Anger or
Wrath pursued him; and from him received a full Satisfaction for whatsoever the
Elect had committed, and so in him ceased, in reference unto them.

But seeing Imputation of sin may be considered two ways, so also may the
Anger, Wrath or Execution of Justice likewise be considered either in the Type,
or Antitype.

First in the Type; thus all the people of God in the Old Testament, did more
or less in a typical way bare iniquity, not only in their sacrifices, but also
in their own persons, yet so as nothing of what the Antitype did, be darkened or
impaired. Their Sacrifices usually, and their Works sometimes, are said to
expiate or appease Wrath or Anger (2 Chronicles. 12.12.) which is all one. What, did
they herein any of Christ's work of Satisfaction? No, they did only pre-figure
it; and according to the nature of their Covenant, as Types bare, and as Types
take away the imputation of Sin, according to that carnal administratation then
in being. For otherwise, if a real taking away of sin by these should be
asserted, then the Apostles reason would not stand strong in force; that it is
impossible that the Blood of Bulls or Goats should take away sin, Heb. 10.4.
(yet the same Apostle affirms, that they Sanctified to the purifying of the
flesh, Heb. 9.13.) so also we may, by the same reason, say, that it is
impossible that the imperfect and sinful works of man should take away sin. Yet
might they in themselves, by virtue of their subservient covenant, sanctify to
an outward purifying of the flesh, and in their Typical relation shadow out
that perfect and everlasting Expiation which was to come by the Death of CHRIST.

Now whereas it might be Objected, That Moses by Prayer, is said to stand in
the breach, to turn away his wrath, Psalm. 106.23. That Phineas, by executing
judgment, staid the plague: That Noah, Daniel and Job, should deliver their own
Lives by their Righteousness, Ezekiel. 14.14. with infinite other such Examples in
the Old Testament, which have these, with such like effects attributed unto
them, without any express mention of their Typical nature or reference unto
their Antitype Christ; I Answer, that herein consists a great part of the
Veil of the Old Testament, that it did but very darkly point out to the
Messiah. So that Expiations and Attonements are to a carnal eye attributed to
the very Ceremony, there being seldom or never, with the Type, any express
mention of the Antitype, whereby the more carnal Jews terminated their thoughts
in the ceremony or action done. But the New Testament has clearly revealed,
that the whole Paedagogy was but a shadow under which the people of God of Old
were shut up unto the Faith that should afterward be revealed, Gal. 3.23. And
that fundamental argument of the Alsufficiency of the death and satisfaction of
Christ so fully prosecuted by the Apostle in the 7, 8, 9, 10. Chapters of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, puts the matter beyond all Controversy. That the Anger
or Wrath of GOD could only be born Typically by the Children of the Old
Testament, seeing it could only be born really by the Son of God.

But now Secondly, As imputation of sin, and thereby anger and wrath, or
execution of justice, are considered in the Antitype; so it is apparent, that
Christ did both really bare and take away all Anger due to the Elect for their
sins, as well of those that were before his time, as of those that came after.

1. He Bare all Anger.

First, Because he bare all sin, the cause or ground of this Anger, Isa. 53.5.
1 Pet. 2.24.

Secondly, Because he bare all Punishments due to sin: He was bruised for our
Transgressions: He suffered the Just, for the Unjust.

Thirdly, It appears by the real effects in his sweating great drops of blood,
when no bodily Torment was upon him, which is more than ever befell any man upon
earth, by the most extreme torture, but most eminently in that terrible hideous
Outcry, wrung from him by the unconceivable weight of that wrath that lay upon
him, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me?

2. He took away all Anger.

And therefore it is said to be the Chastisement of our Peace which was upon
him, Isa. 53.5. He is the (...), placamentum; the appeasement of our sin, 1 John 2.1,2. By him we have received (...), the atonement or reconciliation. So
that now to those that are in him, there is no Anger, but everlasting
well-pleasedness, and perfect favor established by a Covenant of Salt, like
that of Noah's, without condition. As I have sworn that the Waters of Noah
shall no more go over the earth; so have I sworn, that I will not be angry with
thee, Isa. 54.9. And that our sins and iniquities he will remember no more,
Heb. 8.12.

Now to what Mr. G. has Objected. First, For his Criticism, that (...)
signifies consuming wrath, and the anger of an Enemy to destroy: I Answer,
That his Observation will not hold, for it is also used concerning the Anger of
a Father, or otherwise a Friend among men. And David m^kes it Synonimous with
(...), which is most usually rendered Anger, as Psalm. 6.1. Rebuke me not (...)
in thine anger, whereunto is added, after the usual exegetical manner of the
Psalmists and Prophets, Neither chasten me (...) in thy hot displeasure, where
the latter Phrase is of the same signification with the former. And David
deprecates both alike, so Psalm. 90.7. where if there be any difference, the
greater matter, viz. Consumption is attributed to (...), and the latter, viz.
Trouble, to (...). Both are promiscuosly spoken of the Anger of a Friend, and
that of an Enemy. It may be you will say, that in this place is meant of the
Anger of an Enemy. I Answer, That in God (excepting that Typical Expression of
Anger, whereof I spoke before) there is no Anger at all in God toward a
reconciled People, such a one as he speaks of in the immediately foregoing
words, [God has no little Anger]: If his Anger be kindled but a little, it is
well with them that are out of the reach of it. Blessed are all they that put
their trust in him: For who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry,
Psalm. 76.7. Christ has satisfied for the whole Anger, little and great, which
was due to our sins. Yea, say they, but the undergoing of this, is not to make
satisfaction: But Christ did not his Work by Words. Neither is it enough to
acknowledge his satisfaction in Words only. Was his satisfaction a full
Appeasement? Did it fully answer the whole demand of God's Justice, for all the
sins of those that are his, to the uttermost farthing? If not, then the
acknowledgment of satisfaction is but verbal, it is the full payment that makes
satisfaction nothing less: If a man owe an 100 l. and pay but 99, he has not
made satisfaction. He cannot say as Christ did, consummatum est, it is
finished. But say they, it it but a fatherly anger and displeasure. I Answer,
That is in some respect the greatest and heaviest Anger that can be. An
ingenuous Child had rather have all the World angry with him than his Father. I
am sure the True believing Child of God had. But if a Father have received a
full satisfaction for the fault of his Son, will he yet be displeased and
retain his Anger? Surely none can justify that in an Enemy, much less in a
Father: How then can it be in such a gracious Father as we have, who is an
infinite everlasting Ocean of Love, Compassion, and Well-pleasedness unto his
Children. Yea, but say they further, This expression of Anger and Correction
for sin is from his Fatherly Love. I Answer, That who so is compelled to
undergo Anger, (though it be but a man's) for that fault, for which a full
satisfaction has been exhibited, even to the uttermost, will not easily be
persuaded, that that Anger is out of, or agreeable to love, but rather out of
extremity of rigor. It is true indeed, that all the afflictions of Gods
Children (or Chastisements and Corrections, for so they are called in regard of
the distastefulness to the flesh, and in regard of some effects per accidens,
which they have, bearing some Analogy to the effects of Parents chastising
their Children): I say, all the Afflictions of Gods Children are from his
Fatherly tenderest Love. The Lord never manifests himself more sensibly unto
their hearts, than in the heaviest of their Afflictions. He takes away earthly
comforts out of their sight, that he may satisfy them with Heavenly. Insomuch,
that hereupon the Martyrs have in the midst of the flames, been as it were in
Beds of Roses, and triumphed as more than Conquerors, through him that loved
them, which they could not have done in the sense, though but of a Fathers
Anger, and in the just desert of their sins, if they had suffered from the hand
of God as evildoers. And therefore, that Rebukes and Chastisements are always
effects of Anger as well as Love, and namely, that they are such toward Gods
Reconciled Ones, needed Mr. G's Proof, not his bare Affirmation.

The Godly Martyrs, and First Restorers of Religion in this and other Nations,
have born witness to this Truth. Patrick Hamilton, that Noble Witness of Gods
Truth in Scotland, makes the Voice of the Law indeed, to be, The Father of
Heaven is angry with thee: Whereunto he makes the Voice of the Gospel to give a
satisfying Answer, Christ has pacified him toward me. In his places Translated
by Frith. So Luther, in Gal. 5.15. " Let us learn, says he, even in great and
horrible Terrors, when our Conscience feels nothing but sin, and judges that
God is angry with us, and that Christ has turned his face from us, not to
follow the sense and feeling of our own hearts, but to stick to the Word of
God, which says, That God is not angry."

So Calvin, (Instit. lib. 3. cap. 19. Sect. 6.) " Although the Faithful do not
feel sin to be extinguished, nor Righteousness altogether to live in them, yet
there is no reason, why they should fear, or be cast down, as if still they had
God offended with them, for the remainders of sin:" And elsewhere, " Judicio
castigationis non ita saevit Deus ut irascatur," Instit. lib. 3. cap. 4. Sect.
31. God is never so much as angry in chastising his People; and in Sect. 32. He
answers the Objections to the contrary.

So Peter Martyr, in Romans 5.9. " We ought to determine with our selves, that
seeing the Anger of God is ended and taken away, that nothing is sent upon us
by Him, but with a Fatherly and friendly mind; otherwise Afflictions and
Adversities might in their own nature make us afraid, and persuade us that God
is angry with us, which can no way possibly be, seeing reconciliation is made
by the death of Christ."

Sect. 3. To prove the full deliverance of the Faithful from Wrath, the Dr.
cites that of Isa. 53.11. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied. Here, although Mr. G. I conceive, grants the matter, yet, This Proof
(he says) is merely mistaken: For (says he) it is all spoken of Christ
himself, who shall see of the travail of his own soul and be satisfied; that
is, says he, the fruit of the travail of his soul.

Hereunto I Answer, That in all safe ways of expounding Scripture, Two Things
ought principally to be taken notice of, 1. The Analogy of Faith. 2. The
Circumstances of the Text. Let us lay these Two to the present Text.

1. The Analogy of Scripture holds forth every where, that Christ came not to
make satisfaction to himself as Mediator, but to his Father, who as the Learned
speak (...) stands for the whole Trinity. Take his own Testimony; I came not to
do my own will, but the will of him that sent me, Joh. 5.30. When he offered
himself a Sacrifice of propitiation, or satisfaction (as Mr. Tindal translates
it) to whom was his Sacrifice presented, that it might propitiate and satisfy?
The Apostle tells us, He offered himself without spot to God, Heb. 9.14. not to
himself: For although he be indeed God, yet in this office he is considered as
Mediator, and as the person offering and Mediating; and God is considered as to
whom the Mediation is made, and the sacrifice offered. There is one God, (there
is the person Mediated) and one Mediator between God, and man, the Man Christ
Jesus. There is the person Mediating; together with the person, in whose behalf
the Mediation is made. Christ therefore came not to satisfy himself; and
therefore it is not probable, nor consonant to the Analogy of faith, that here
it should be meant of the satisfaction of himself.

2. Consider, will not the circumstances of the Text it self yield as much? In
the words immediately before, he says, That the pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand. How shall the pleasure of the Lord prosper in his hand?
Mark here first, that he is here speaking of the pleasure of the Lord, not of
the pleasure of Christ. But how prospers the pleasure of the Lord in his
hands? How, but (as the next words express) by being satisfied with the Travail
of the Soul of his Son? That which Mr. G. objecteth, That the words are, he
shall see of the Travail of his Soul, as pointing to the effect of Christ's
sufferings, not to the sufferings themselves, does nothing infring what I have
said: For supposing that (...) here does signify [of] or proceeding from,
whereunto for the present I do not remember a parallel; yet supposing it does
denote the effect, what is the proper, and immediate effect of the Travail of
the Soul of Christ, but satisfaction active, as it is in the satisfier Christ,
which immediately produces satisfaction passive, as it is in God the party
satisfied. That other effects are afterward mentioned, they ought not to
exclude that which is Primarily, and expressly set down, to wit, satisfaction;
which is a point of faith, which ought not to be darkened, upon such slight or
weak ground as Mr. G. has here brought.

In Sect. 4. Mr. G. would gladly bring in the Dr. as finding fault with the
cloudiness of Protestant Divines, whereas he mentions none, either in general
or particular. And as he was a modest man, far from the bitterness and
invectives of many, that have spoken against him both in press and pulpit; so
did he never in his Sermons, maintain any professed opposition to any one, much
less to all Protestant Learned men. And for my own part, I dare undertake by
the assistance of Christ, to maintain that there is no matter of moment in all
his Sermons, which the best, and most Orthodox Protestant Divines that are
extant, have not asserted before, for which the odious imputation of
Antinomianism was never cast upon them. And this I hope, I shall partly
manifest to the indifferent Reader in this present answer.

Sect. 5. To prove, that Christ alone underwent the wrath of God for us, the
Dr. cites that of Isaiah 63.3. He has trodden the wine press alone. And in
this, and his other proves Mr. G. acknowledges, he has trod in the steps of
the Protestant Writers. So then he is not altogether so opposite to them, as
Mr. G. would bear us in hand. But, says he, in this place both he and they
were mistaken, which (says he) is not meant of Christ's sufferings for Sin. His
Reasons are two:

1. Because Christ is said to be an agent in treading the wine press, both
here, and Rev. 19.13. Whereas in his sufferings he was passive.

2. Because in his sufferings, and satisfaction, he looked for none to help;
but here it is said, he looked for some to help.

To the 2. I answer, that metaphorical speeches, are not to be stretched beyond
the intention of the Holy Ghost. In propriety of speech, Christ could not look
for help from man in any kind, and miss of his expectation, for he knew what
was in man, Joh. 2.25. And therefore neither could he wonder, which is the
effect of Ignorance. What then may be the Scope of the Holy Ghost? Surely to
beat down the pride of man, who is always arrogating something to himself,
especially in the matter of Salvation. But says the Prophet, when the work was
a doing, when the wine press was a treading, then none would, none durst
appear. The Son of God might have looked long, but he should have found no help
in them in any kind, Psalm. 146.3. And he might wonder as it were at the
confidence of man, in his great promises what he will do, and at his
challenging what he can and does do; but the issue will be, that it will surely
fall in the Suds, if the Lord Jesus bring not Salvation by his own Arm. This
exposition, I am sure is consonant to the Analogy of faith, whereas Mr. G's.
attributing in a proper sense unto Christ, a frustrate expectation is not.

2. In that he says, that Christ here is active, whereas in his Suffering, and
Satisfaction, he was passive. I Answer, that herein he has little observed the
manner of the expression of the Holy Ghost, which speaks of Christ even in his
sufferings, under the notion of a Conqueror, and that even upon the Cross, when
he was a paying the satisfaction, he was in the Conquest of his enemies. He
spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made a show of them, openly triumphing
over them in it, Col. 2.15. The Sufferings of Christ, do not hinder him from
being actively Victorious; nay, they are his actual and active Victory. And so
he makes his members likewise, even in their sufferings, more than Conquerors,
through him that loved them, Romans 8.36,37. Even when they are killed all the
day long. Suffering and Conquest, Spiritual Conquest are not so inconsistent,
as Mr. G. would persuade us.

As for his scoff of Doctor infallibilis in the Margent, he might have kept it
at home till he had met with a man which arrogated any such thing to himself,
or a people that ascribed any such thing unto any. We say of him as Paraeus
does of Calvin (Par. in 2d. cap. ad Gol. Lect. 22.) We pretend not his Name, we
were not Baptized into it, although his Doctrine we do deservedly hold and
defend as being agreeable to the Holy Scriptures; yet not because it is his,
but because it may be evidently shown to agree with the Truth of the Gospel.

" Sect. 6. The Dr. says, A Believers Afflictions are not For, but From Sin.
This Distinction (says Mr. Geree) is silly, contradicts it self, is pure
nonsense.

Mr. G. speaks such Language as he has Learned, but not in the School of
Christ. Mr. Calamy, in a Sermon before the House of Commons, December 22. 1641.
has these Expressions: It is not enough to be broken For sin; we must also be
broken From sin. And a little after, Let me most earnestly Exhort you to Repent
From sin, as well as For sin. Now, if I should take Mr. Geree's Expressions and
Reasons, to confute this distinction, I should call it silly, and contradictory
to it self, and nonsense; because a Medicine is said to be For, not From the
Plague, and it is to preserve From it, in that it is For it, might not any man
justly, for saying it is Nonsense, etc. account me a Ridiculous Reviler?
Surely there are no Reasons against Afflictions for and from sin; but they may
with equal Weight (that is none at all) be applied against repentance for and
from sin. That the same distinction will not well suit with his similitude of a
Medicine for the Plague, is because such medicine has but a single relation,
i. e. only to the Disease it is to Cure: But Afflictions may have a double One,
to sin, considered as past, and unavoidable; in reference unto which, it may be
said to be Affliction For sin; another, to sin, considered as future, or rather
not committed; in reference unto which, it may, in some respect, be said to be
affliction From sin; that is, to preserve from sin: not as the effect per se,
of the afflictions, but as afflictions, do some way occasionally stir up Faith,
which stirs up in the true Believer, a real wrestling against all sin. And
herein did the Dr. sufficiently express himself, what he meant by For and From
sin, if Mr. G. had not been willing to mistake, that I may say no more.

Yea, (but says Mr. G.) for sin is nothing else but from sin. Herein your
Medicine for the Plague deceived you; otherwise you might have observed that
for sin, notes sin to be the impulsive cause of the Affliction; whereas from
sin, notes sin to be avoided, to be the final cause of the Affliction. And
these are not all one. The Learned Grotius ( De satisfactione Christi cap. 1.)
has observed, That as often as this phrase [for sins] is joined to words of
suffering, it always signifies the impulsive cause. Which is most true, if
only the difference of the Type and the Antitype be observed, and the
impulsive cause accordingly distinguished. For if you grant Socinus but that
which Mr. G. here affirms, That for sin, is all one with from sin, he will
easily frustrate the satisfaction and expiation of Christ. For if his dying for
sin, note nothing else but the final cause, viz. That he might thereby teach us
to avoid sin, then Christ, in regard of any Expiation of Sin, has utterly dyed
in Vain.

Now concerning punishments and chastisements for sin, whether they be incident
to Believers or not; Although Mr. G. by his slight and perfunctory passing it
over, has not given occasion of any full and large discourse, but have taken
up the most trivial Arguments; whereunto (he cannot be ignorant), That
satisfactory Answers have been given, unto which he has said nothing at all,
for the satisfaction of the Reader: I shall say a few things briefly.

1. These words of Punishing and Chastizing for Sin, can denote nothing else
but the Meritorious and Impulsive cause, namely, That sin is the meriting
cause, and chastisements and punishments are the merited effects. This Grotius,
whom I cited before, has fully evinced against Socinus, whose words are these:
It cannot be shown, that these words [ ob peccata, or propter peccata, that is,
for sin] especially where they are joined to sufferings, are ever taken
otherwise in the Holy Scripture, than in this signification of merit. Where
also he gives satisfaction to those Scriptures which were by Socinus cited to
the contrary. Now if any part of the just merit or desert of the sins of
believers, be (notwithstanding the satisfactory sufferings of Christ) laid upon
believers to bear them in their own persons; then it is most evidently
apparent, that Christ did not, or did not sufficiently bear the full merit and
desert of sin. And that these sufferings being inflicted in a way and course of
justice, Christ has not, by his death, fully satisfied the demands of Justice,
then which nothing can be said more dangerous and destructive to the very
foundation of Christian faith. Yet

2. I believe that sin, as the impulsive cause and punishment, or chastisement,
as the effect of sin, may be considered two Ways. 1. In a Typical
consideration. 2. In a Moral.


I do not say, that he did bear the whole Typical charge of sin (pardon the
expression, I cannot meet with one more fit at this present) for that were to
make him the Type of himself. That charge of sin was born wholly by the people
of the old and typical Covenant, both in their persons and administrations,
even until the very death of Christ; wherein was exhibited the full Antitype,
who only bore the sins of his people, in the full merit and desert of them
Morally or Really, as (Real) is opposed to the Type. For in the Death of Christ
the Old Covenant, with all its Types, had an end; and the New Testament or
Covenant, became in force, Heb. 9.16, 17. A Testament is of force after men are
dead, otherwise it is of no force at all whilst the Testator lives. But the
Old Covenant did thereby decay, wax old, and vanish away, Heb. 8.13. Yet, as I
said before several times (and say it again, that if it be possible, the truth
of what we hold might appear unto all men, breaking through those many clouds
of slander wherewith we have been and are encompassed) I say, that by the
promise of the Messiah, or by the promised Messiah, they were all freely and
perfectly before God justified, they as we, and we as they, Act. 15.11. Christ
bore the full Moral or Real charge of their sins, in the same measure as he did
ours. Only, I say, with all approved Protestants, that the Typical and
Subservient Administration or Covenant, did exceedingly darken this upon their
spirits; not to hinder the benefits of Christ, that they should not so
spiritually come upon them: But only, that the enjoyment should not be with
that Luster and Glory as they are set forth to be enjoyed in the New Testament;
whereunto therefore in some measure the Gospel is restrained, and it is by way
of glorious eminence, styled the Kingdom of Heaven. Even that administration of
the Gospel of the grace of God here on earth, Mat. 3.2. and 26.29. So then, we
say, that as all Types ceased at the death of Christ; so likewise did all
Typical charging of sin therewith all cease.

3. Albeit we acknowledge the same, or rather more hard things to flesh and
blood, do usually befall the children of the New Testament, then did those of
the Old, in regard of the sharpness whereof, and the event also that they have
in their conversation, they are sometimes called chastisements, or corrections,
or Rebukes: Yet their great consolation is, that it is not the good pleasure of
God, their well pleased, and fully reconciled Father, that they should in any
way bear the desert and merit of there own sin charged upon them, either
typically, as though the true Lamb of God which was to bear the sins of the
world, and take them away, were not yet come; or Really, as though there were
no Lamb of God at all for them, that either had or ever would suffer for their
sins. So that their present sufferings be they never so smart, yet are but
trials and exercises of faith, and therein pure testimonies of love, not of
Anger or of Punitive Justice, to the spiritual eye, which discerns all things
even as they are the dispensations, not only of a Father, but also of a
well-pleased Father, in and through his beloved Son, Matt. 3.17. For although
here below, and to the eyes of flesh, all things seem to be black, cloudy and
tempestuous; yet the eye of faith mounts up above the clouds, and there
discerns the full serenity of Heaven, notwithstanding the contrary appearances
here below. And if in the ways of God herein toward us, there seems to be
some reference unto sin, yet is it not to sin in its own nature, as it is the
transgression of Gods Law, calling for justice from God in some way or other;
for so it was utterly purged and done away by the Death of Christ, Heb 1.3. 1 John 3.5. But as they are grievances unto Gods people, as they are a continual
trouble and vexation unto them in dishonouring the Lord, before their own
hearts or the eyes of others; and so making the way of the Lord to be evil
spoken of, then which nothing goes more to the quick, even to the heart of the
truly faithful in most serious compunction. In this accidental consideration,
I say affliction may have some relation unto sin. 1. Taking out of the way
Earthly and Visible things; and thereby, 2. Making way for faith to look upon
the invisible things of the Gospel. By the activity and power whereof, we are
at least in some measure freed from that thorn in the flesh which before did
more infest us. So the Lord makes all things work for the best, to them that
are the called according to his purpose, Romans 8.28.

4. We say that in regard that Kingdoms, Congregations, and Churches, are mixed
assemblies at least before God, consisting of persons that are in several
states and conditions Spiritually, though things may generally be spoken in
reference to such collective bodies, yet ought they to be particularly applied
and understood properly only to relate unto such a party, and such persons, in
that collective body, in regard of whom such things are attributed unto such a
general body, so Romans 11.15,18. where the Jews are said to be cast away, and
broken off: Calvin observes, and it is clear enough in the Text, that it ought
to be understood of such as had not a real, but only a seeming union unto the
true Olive, according to that of our Savior; from him shall be taken away even
that which he seems to have, Luke 8.18. [And Paraeus; but Gal. 5.4. Ye are
fallen from Grace.] Answers, " That the Apostle, after the manner of the
Scripture, attributes that to all which belonged but to a part; to the whole
body of the Church, which belonged but to a few members." So that although
punishments or chastisements for sin may be applied to the Churches of God in
general, as to that of Corinth or Sardis, etc. it may not thence be inferred,
that those sufferings for sin had a particular relation to the truly Faithful
in those Churches, but rather the manner of the Scripture phrase, as Paraeus
says, is to be considered, which is to attribute to the whole that which may
not be attributed to every Member. And therefore the suffering of collective
Bodies and Churches is impertinent unto the present Question.

But the true state of the Question, is, Whether true Believers in particular,
under the time and state of the New Testament, may be said any way, either
typically or really to bear the merit, or just desert of their sin, either in
whole or in part? This we utterly deny; because the Affirmative is, 1. Against
the Promise of God, Luke 1.72,74. 2. Against the Oath of God, Esaias 54.9. 3.
Against the New and Everlasting Covenant of God; Your sins and iniquities will
I remember no more, Heb. 8.12. 4. Against the full satisfaction of Christ, Heb.
10.14. 5. Against that perfect Reconciliation we have with God our Father, 2
Cor. 5.19. 6. Against our complete Justification, Romans 5.8. 7. Against that
necessary Distinction of the Two Testaments in their Administrations, Gal.
4.1,2,3,4,5. Now let us weigh Mr. G's Arguments to the contrary.

First, He grants us, They are not properly Punishments. Howbeit, we have it
preached here by some of no small Note, That God punishes his own Children
soonest, sorest, and longest, through a wilful (shall I say) Neglect of the
searching into the difference of the Testaments, which Calvin well observed
when he makes it the Privilege of the New Testament, that in it there is no
more remembrance of sin, upon Heb. 10.18. whereas in the Old Testament there
was often a fresh remembrance of sin, not in their sacrifices only, but also
in their sufferings, as appears largely in the Examples of Moses, David,
Jehosaphat, and others: But if still (says Calvin, Instit. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Sect. 30.) we are punished for our sins, what I pray you had Christ performed
for us? Where also, he following the footsteps of the Holy Ghost, makes
Punishments, and Chastisements, and Corrections (if they be for sin) all one;
neither is there any ground in Scripture to distinguish them. This same, ( viz.
that we are not punished for sin) says Calvin, Esaias declares, when he says,
That the Chastisements or Correction of our Peace was upon him. What is the
Correction of our Peace, but the Punishment due to our sins, which was to have
been suffered by us, before we could be reconciled to God, unless he had taken
our Turns? Behold thou see plainly that Christ suffered the punishment of
sins, that he might free his from them. But Mr. G. to prove, that the
Chastisements of Gods Children are for sin, urges Rev. 3.19. As many as I
love, I rebuke and chasten: But because he finds not [for sin] here, he
fetches it out of Psalm. 39.11. When thou with rebukes do chasten man for
sin, thou make his beauty to consume away. I Answer, These places do not well
suit together: 1. The one speaks of Gods beloved Ones, as many as I love; the
other mentions only man, when thou with rebukes do chasten man: Which
Expression does not necessarily include the Faithful.

Secondly, The one belongs to the Old Administration, the other to the New.

Thirdly, The one speaks of Rebukes of Love, the other of consuming Rebukes,
which Mr. G. in Sect. 2. of this Sermon, grants not to be fatherly; these Texts
therefore ought not to be so jumbled together, as if they had both one Matter
in hand.

His second Scripture is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.30,32. Where he says,
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, etc. Even among them that
are judged of the Lord, that they might not be condemned with the World. This
place I confess is the only one in appearance in the whole Scripture: Yet is
not the evidence of it such, that it can be able to shake the Faith of that
which has been before established upon such firm and fundamental Grounds of
the full satisfaction and propitiation by the blood of Christ, expressed in
such legible and clear Characters, in the free and new Covenant of Grace, Your
sins and iniquities will I remember no more. For the right understanding
therefore of this Text, I refer the Reader to that which I have said before, in
the fourth Conclusion concerning mixed assemblies, wherein, although things be
spoken in general of all, both good and bad, as they stand in relation to such
an Assemble; yet as they are considered absolutely in their own particular
Persons, without the consideration of such a Relation, so such an Attribution
has no reference unto them. If an Englishman should be put to death in a
National Quarrel, it is therein the suffering of the whole Nation, as injury
and disgrace of the whole Nation, yea, and every particular person in the
Nation, as they are considered in that link and Union National, with all and
every particular Englishman: So in the natural body, the suffering of a Toe,
is by Natural Union the suffering of a Head, although no part of the Head be
touched. So might it be said of the Church of Corinth, that She, to wit, in
some of her Members, was judged of the Lord for sin that She might not be
condemned with the World; although neither the whole Church was so judged in
all its particular Members absolutely considered, no nor in any one of those
who were truly Members, by being united to the rest by one spirit: And also
She, that is the Body of the Church of Corinth might be said to be chasten'd of
the Lord, in the removal of Corrupt Members from her, that she might not be
condemned with the World, although those Corrupt Members in their absolute
consideration in themselves, were indeed condemned with the World. The not
observing the difference of Predications in this kind, has occasioned a
wonderful Confusion in all points of Divinity; whereas the diligent observing
of them would very much clear and explicate great difficulties: So then, both
according to the scope of the Text, and the Analogy of Faith, it may be
expounded thus: For this cause (that is, for the Profanation of the Lords
Supper, by drunkenness and such like, ver. 21.) many among you are weak and
sickly, and many sleep; (that is, many of those Offenders, of which he spoke of
before, which ye retained among you) (...); for if we did judge, so the last
Translation, but it ought rather to be, if we did discern; not (...), but
(...), if we did discern or sift our selves, (that is, separate the Precious
from the Vile, put away from our Communion such Notorious Offenders) we (that
is, the Church of Corinth being a Collective Body) (...), should not be judged,
( viz. in such Corrupt Members, and in the whole, as relating to such Members)
but being judged, (...), (that is, being punished in such Members, and so in
the whole Body, as having relation to them) (...), we (that is, the Church of
Corinth in our whole Body collectively taked) are chastised (nurtured or
instructed) of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World, (that
we might not be accounted a profane Society, such as the World affords, and
that we might not in process of time become only a Field, consisting only of
Briars and Thorns, by the admittance and continuance of evil doers, and the
departure of the faithful, we become a reprobate Society, which shall be
condemned with the World;) From hence, without question, it cannot be proved,
that any particular. Elect Person ^bsolutely considered, suffers in any measure
the just desert of his sins, which Christ only has effectually, and
perfectly, and all-sufficiently undergone.

Thirdly, Mr. G urges, that Zachary was struck dumb because of his unbelief,
Luke 1.20. I Answer, that this is within the verge of the Old Testament, which
ends not till the death of Christ, where the New begins, Heb. 7. which appears
by our Saviors submitting to all the Ordinances thereof, even to the day of
his death; for he ate the Passover immediately before: And by that
Administration, Zachary with the rest of the Children of God belonging to that
Testament, was yet under the Schoolmaster, and so under the Whip; which the
Children of ripe Age are freed from, Gal. 4.1,2,6,7. chap. 3.25. When the
Apostle says, Now (in the time of the New Testament) ye are all the sons of
God, Gal. 3.26. He understands (says Paraeus on the place) such sons of God
as are not little ones, under the schoolmasters ferula, and the custody of
Guardians, as the Fathers were, but such as are of ripe age, made free, and
capable of their Fathers Inheritance. He says therefore, that the condition of
the Fathers and ours, differs as much as an Heir that is an Infant, differs
from a Son that is of ripe Age. So Calvin, vid. ipsum and Mailor.

Fourthly, His last place is that of Peter, 1 Pet. 4.17,18. The time is come
that judgment must begin at the house of God, (as they are opposed to the
wicked and ungodly) says Mr. Geree; for it follows, and if it begin at us,
what shall be the end of those that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the
Righteous are scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?

I Answer, 1. That the House of God, although it be by Vocation and Profession,
a Company of Saints and Godly People, yet notwithstanding there may be in it
Wheat and Tares, good and bad; not secret only, but sometimes open Offenders,
through the fault or connivance of those whom it concerns; in reference unto
which Offenders, the Church may be said to have Judgments come upon it: That
God may first cleanse his own House, by casting out of it that which offends
and is unclean; so that there are some that are only in, some that are in and
of the House of God: Now Judgment may begin at the House of God, and yet, as a
Judgment, it touches only the former. And whereas it is said, the Righteous
are scarcely saved, it is not because their salvation is in doubt or hazard;
for this same Apostle says, they are kept by the mighty power of God through
faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. But he speaks in regard of the rending of
their Members, and the sore trials which in their own persons they should
undergo, so that they should in outward appearance have their faith sifted to
nothing, if it were not that the foundation of the Lord stands sure, 2 Timothy
2.19. That the Lord changes not, and therefore the sons of Jacob, the faithful
are not consumed, Mal. 3.6.

2. That which Mr. G. takes for granted, that this judgment is for Sin, whereof
he ought principally to have made proof, is so far from being asserted in this
Text, that the clear contrary is evidently held forth. 1. In ver. 11. he calls
this affliction, a fiery trial to try them: a metaphor taken from Gold, which
is not cast into the fire to be punished but purified; Yet this is the darkest
expression. In the next, ver. 13. he calls it, a partaking of Christ's
Sufferings, and bids them therein rejoice. Surely it were very unseemly, and
incongruous to see an offender rejoice, in suffering the just desert of his
offenses. I am confident if we should make such an exhortation, Mr. G. would
say (as he does very falsely, and without ground in the end of this Section,)
that we went about to keep people from godly Sorrow. In the next words, ver.
14. he goes higher, calling it Reproach not for Sin, but for the name of
Christ, and says, that therein the Spirit of God, and of Glory did rest upon
them. And in the last place both negatively, in ver. 15. and affirmatively, in
ver. 16. he calls it suffering not as a murderer, not as a thief, not, as an
evil doer, etc. but as a Christian; wherefore he exhorts them not to be ashamed
of it, but to glorify God in this respect, and then subjoyns the words which
Mr. G. has alleged. And thus, if the Christian Reader will wisely observe,
the drift of the Holy Ghost, he will not easily be carried away with such
impertinent, and perfunctory allegations of Scripture. Also he may easily see
that this is an effectual, and truly Christian humbling Doctrine, (not a
snarling against Humiliation, as Mr. G. would persuade,) To see the overflowing
bowels of the Lords tenderness toward us, that he will not any more call our
sins to remembrance, or suffer the least evil for them to come nigh our
dwellings. The discovery of this unmeasurable, and undeserved love, opens the
heart effectually to a true serious and humble acknowledgment with Jacob, that
we are less than the least of all his mercies, and loving kindnesses that have
been ever of Old, Genesis 30.10.

Sect. 7, 8, 9. Here the Dr. affirms, that although a faithful man should be
overtaken with some gross fault, yet ought he not to add thereunto unbelief, by
serving a writ of Damnation upon himself, neither ought any other to do it:
For, (says he) thou that art ready to charge damnation upon thy self, thou
do the greatest injury to the Lord Jesus Christ that can be. For in it thou
directly overthrowest the fullness of the grace of Christ.

Here Mr. G. although he grant the matter, that none ought to charge Damnation
upon another: Yet, lest he should altogether want matter of a Quarrel, he lays
to him, 1. The unnecessary use of Logic, because he proves what he says,
though for any Terms of Logic, he here uses none. 2. Of Law-Terms, because he
uses the Phrase, of serving a Writ of Damnation. 3. Of Exceeding Heat, because
he says it is a desperate thing in any man to serve such a Writ. I entreat the
Christian Reader to pardon me, if I pass by such trivial Cavils, which to
recite, is to refute, which serve to nothing but to blot Paper, to engender
strife, to hinder men from more weighty and serious Matter.

Sect. 8. But, is the charging Damnation upon a man's self, the greatest injury
that can be done to Christ? I Answer, that to stretch such expressions as these
upon the tentors, is a very uncourteous thing. When a man dehorts another from
any vice, what is more usual then to tell him that such a vice, such a course,
is the most dangerous way he can go in, that such company is the most dangerous
company he can consort with. Were it not a frivolous thing, to draw such manner
of speeches to the exact laws of comparison. " What sin (says Luther) can be
more execrable or horrible, than to reject the grace, and refuse that
righteousness that comes by Christ: Which every one does for the time he does
not believe it." And a little after, This Blasphemy is more horrible than can
be expressed: There is no sin which Paul and the other Apostles did so much
detest, as the contempt of grace and the denial of Christ, and yet there is no
sin more common. And a little after, he tells us further, that all the world do
so. And upon the next, ver. 21. He adds, that as the whole world do this, so
especially such as will be counted more Holy and Religious than others. Were it
not a frivolous thing to alledg, that the false Teachers amongst the
Galathians, might have been more execrable in their Blasphemy, if they had
utterly excluded Christ; For now they went about to join the Law together with
him for justification?

But this (says Mr. G.) is the next way to make men believe they have sinned
against the Holy Ghost. Is it so, to tell them that they ought not to charge
Damnation upon themselves? To charge the sin against the Holy Ghost upon
themselves, is inevitably to charge Damnation upon them, which he so earnestly
dehorts.

Yea, but the greatest injury to the Lord Jesus, is to sin against the Holy
Ghost: So that if they that have charged Damnation upon themselves, have done
the greatest injury to Christ, then have they sinned against the Holy Ghost. I
Answer, that where Christ has distinguished, we ought not to confound. Christ
has said there is Sin and Blasphemy against him, and there is Sin and
Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. He says, that all Sin and Blasphemy against
him, shall be forgiven unto men; but the Sin against the Holy Ghost shall never
be forgiven. Now here Mr. G. goes about to overthrow this distinction of
Christ, telling us, that the greatest injury to Christ is the sin against the
Holy Ghost, but he must pardon us, if we take Christ's word before his, at least
till he have proved it better, for here he offers no proof at all, but his
own word directly against Christ's, Matt. 12.31.

But surely, says he, those that curse and swear by the name of the Lord
Jesus, by his blood and wounds, etc. And such as deny Christ at Peter did, and
persecute him as the Scribes and Pharisees did, do greater injury to Christ,
than they that charge Damnation upon themselves for their past sins. Oh Mr. G.
You look with the Pharisees, to much upon the outside. These sins are more
outward and obvious, and are more sensible than the secret unbelief of the
heart; Is unbelief therefore less wicked? Is it not the fountain from whence
all these wickednesses flow? Was it not want or weakness of faith, that brought
out all these you mention? You should rather have gathered from such horrible
effects, the greater horribleness of the cause. You know the ordinary Axiom,
Quod facit tale, est magis tale.

1. As unbelief brings forth all wickedness, so it is the greatest of all
wickedness.

2. Which is more pertinent to the present purpose: Unbelief (as I have often
heard Mr. Reinolds, whom you cite in your Preface, say) is that which binds all
the load of a man's other sins upon his back, and thereby it is the main
condemning sin. If a man have received many deadly wounds, yet if there be one
medicine that would certainly heal them all, and but one, the rejection of this
one medicine, must needs be worse, and more dangerous and destructive than all
the wounds.

And the Dr. says, that such unbelief, directly overthrows the fullness of the
grace and satisfaction of Christ. See here the Courtesy of Mr. G's. Language:
He will not say this is a direct lie: But it is utterly false. Why? For, says
he, when they thus charge damnation upon themselves, they do not question
Christ's Satisfaction or Fullness of grace, but their own Faith and Condition,
fearing they are none of Christ's.

Here is a good boulster, and Apology for unbelief. It does not question Gods
Grace, but the Apostle John is of another mind. He that believes not, has
made him a Liar, because he has not believed the Testimony that God gave of
his Son. This is the Testimony, that God has given unto us Eternal life, and
this Life is in his Son, 1 John 5.10,11. Here by unbelief it is apparent, that
not only the truth of God, but also the sufficiency of that life laid up for us
in his Son, is questioned by him that charge Damnation upon himself.

Nay, says Mr. G. they do only question their own faith. Surely he that
questions his faith, so as to charge Damnation upon himself, questions the
Author and Finisher of his Faith. For how is he the Finisher of it, if it fail
even to Damnation? He Questions the Virtue of the Death and Satisfaction of
Christ, whereby a faith that shall not fail is purchased, Phil 1.29. He
Questions the Power of God, which is engaged to maintain our Faith even unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

But that is unsufferable, which Mr. G. has vented in the foregoing words;
That they do more wrong to those poor souls, in saying so, than these do unto
Christ. Is there any comparison between man and God? Is the greatest injury
that can be done unto man (precisely in that consideration, which is the case
in hand, seeing it is opposed unto the injury done to Christ) comparable in
heinousness to the least injury against Christ? Surely as the least work of
Christ, by the dignity of the person, is of more Worth and Merit, than any,
than all the Works of the rest of the sons of Adam; yea, of Adam himself in his
Innocence, yea, of the Angels in Heaven: So questionless the injury done
against Christ, is by the same dignity of his person of a deeper stain and
demerit (as the School speak) than the greatest injury that can be done to the
best of the sons of men, which are but worms, Job 25.6. Yea, all Nations in
comparison of him, are but as the neglected drop of a bucket, but as a small
dust in a balance, that has no weight to turn the scale hither or thither;
yea, less than nothing, Esaias 40.15,17. The Lord preserve his People from such
undervaluing words or thoughts of the Lord our Righteousness.

Sect. 9. The Doctor Objecteth, from the mouths of some; That if there be no
fear of Damnation, then men may do what they list. No, (says the Dr.) Christ
is the guide of his people, he takes as strict order to restrain and keep in
the Spirit of a man as to Save him. Here observe, that that Slander which is
frequent in Mr. G. and others, namely, That a man Believing in Christ, may
continue still in his Wickedness, was always far from his mouth and thoughts.

But (says Mr. G.) may not a man suspect himself to be no True Believer, when
he cannot see that Christ has taken such strict order, as to restrain and keep
his spirit from such sins? I Answer no, he may not add Unbelief unto his other
sins. He ought to walk by Faith, though he cannot by Sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. He
ought to remember, That this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, (and therefore of his present acceptance) that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. He ought to imitate David,
Wherefore should I fear in the day of evil, when the iniquity of his heels
compasses him about, Psalm. 49.5. He ought rather to give unto the Lord the
glory of his Grace, the glory of the Righteousness, and Expiation of his SON.
Thou need not fear (says Dr. Preston, of Gods alsufficiency, page 91.) that
thy disobedience, if thou be once within the covenant, will cause the Lord
to depart from thee (that so thou should charge Damnation upon thy self) for
he will not be unfaithful to thee, though thou be weak in thy carriage to him:
For he keeps covenant for ever. He does not suspend his promise of help upon
our Disobedience. That weighty saying of Luther, is very considerable upon Gal.
5.2. When that great Dragon, that old serpent the Devil, who deceived the whole
world, and accuses our brethren, and in the presence of God day and night,
comes and lays to thy charge, that thou have not only done no good, but have
also transgressed the Law of God; say unto him, Thou troublest me with the
remembrance of my sins past, thou put me also in mind that I have done no
good; But this is nothing to me: For if either I trusted in mine own good
deeds, or distrusted, because I have done none, Christ should both ways profit
me nothing at all. See also what the Holy Martyr, Mr. Bradford, answers to
this inference of Mr. G. (in a Letter to Mrs. H.) If we want this obedience and
worthiness which he requires, should we doubt whether he be our Father? Nay
(says he) that were to make our obedience and worthiness the cause, and so to
put Christ out of place, for whose God is our Father.

But (says Mr. G.) I do not say, that any sin can cut off a true Believer from
Christ, or hinder his Salvation. If this be true, then may he not suspect the
contrary, which Mr. G. affirmed in the immediately foregoing words: " But
(says he) it must needs shake his hope and confidence, and hinder his
consolation. What a thing does de facto, and what it ought to do de jure, and
of right are not all one: And therefore this is not to the purpose. We confess
that all sins, both original and actual, great and small, have this as their
natural and continual effect, that they wound the Conscience, that they
enfeeble the confidence, that they damp the consolation of a Christian, and so
do as it were becloud the Heavens between us and the appeased face of God our
Father; which cloud is no otherwise dispelled, but by the appearance of the Sun
of Righteousness, Faith ascending up even through the blackest cloud that is
all darkness, and no light, and laying hold on the Propitiation.

But he tells us, We are not of David's spirit, that are so little troubled for
gross sins, but can presently close with Christ upon such foul Falls.

Answer 1. Here Mr. G. goes beyond his knowledge: No man knows the things of
man, but the spirit of man which is in him, 1 Cor. 2.11. But the heart knows
its own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle with his jo^ Prove.
14.10. But

2. Suppose the Children of God having less light of the Redeemer, were thereby
more under the spirit of bondage unto fear, than the Children of the New
Testament are, who have received the spirit of Adoption, to cry, Abba Father (
Romans 8.15.) we have the more cause to praise the Lord, that has reserved
better things for us ( Heb. 11.40.) than he did for many Prophets and Kings who
have desired to see the things which we see, and have not seen them; and to
hear the things which we hear, and have not heard them, Luke 10.24. to wit, the
full Revelation of the Mystery of the Gospel of Peace, which in other Ages was
not known, as it is now in the time of the New Testament reavealed, Ephesians. 3.5. I
say, if God has been pleased to establish our hearts, with his free Spirit
which David Prayed for, Psalm. 51.12. and restore us somewhat sooner than he did
David, to the joy of his Salvation, are we therefore not of David's spirit? And
so as the Apostle says, we having the same spirit of faith, according as it is
written (to wit of David) I believed and therefore have I spoken; we also
believe, that the Lord for his own SONS Sake alone, has done away our
iniquities as a cloud, and our transgressions as a mist, and that he will
remember our sins no more, and therefore speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. But what is to be
thought of Godly sorrow for sin, and how we approve of it and practice it, if
there be not instead thereof, obtruded upon us an enforced howling for wine and
oil, and self-love inconsistent with true faith, and the genuine effects
thereof, I have spoken of it before.

Sect. 10. Hence the Dr. infers by way of answer to an objection; That it is
the power of Christ, and the Beauty of Holiness that draws out the spirits of
Gods people to a willing service unto him, and not the fear of Damnation, Psalm.
110.3.

Here Mr. G. Answers, that therein the Dr. contradicts what he said before,
Page 37. That God hampers Ephraim, meaning by chastisements. Why so? Has God
no way of chastising, but by threatening Damnation? Has a father no other way
to nurture his son, but by threatening to hang him up strait, or to run him
through? I Answer, that here he speaks of a people as converted and believing:
But what he spoke of Ephraim, he spoke of him in reference to his unconverted
estate, and so not speaking of the same, M. G. may easily perceive there can be
no contradiction. That which he adds, that Christ threatened the damnation of
Hell to some Pharisees, Matt. 23.33. And diverse other times, to several
Churches in the Revel. Chap. 2. and 3. is altogether as impertinent as the
former; because none of these places speak of particular believing Christians,
but either of notorious hypocrites and unbelievers, or else of mixed
congregations consisting of chaff and wheat, which when he says he will burn
up with unquenchable fire, he is to be understood of the chaff only: for he
has promised to gather the wheat into his garner, Matt. 3.12. Neither does the
Scripture any where determine by way of Sentence, or denounce by way of
threatening, that the truly faithful if they sin so or so they shall be damned;
but the clean contrary, namely, that, he that believes in the Son of God has
Eternal life, and shall not enter into condemnation, but is passed from death
to life, Joh. 5.24.

Sect. 11. The Dr. here affirms, that the grass and pasture that Christ has
put a believer into, is so sweet, that though their be no bounds to keep in
such a Soul, yet it will never go out of this fat pasture to feed in a barren
common. "This he has said, says Mr. G. but not proved that the Pasture is so
sweet.

Surely he might well have thought, that none professing himself a Christian
would have denied it: For the common pasture of all the faithful, is that
which David speaks of Psalm. 23.2. He makes me to lie down in green pastures,
he leads me beside the still waters, or the waters of comfort. This is the
table which the Lord prepares for his people, at which he makes their cup to
run over, ver. 5. How can they then but conclude with David in ver. 6. surely
goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: And therefore I
will dwell in the House of the Lord for ever. I shall have no desire or
delight, to follow after lying vanities, for they are vain. He cannot but
rejoice that his lot is fallen in so good a ground, that he has so goodly an
heritage; for the Lord is the portion of his inheritance, therefore does he
conclude with Peter, here are the words of Eternal Life, and whether shall we
go, Joh. 6.68. The grace and favor of God through Christ enjoyed by faith, is
that fountain of living water which is in the bellies of the faithful,
continually bubling forth unto Eternal life, whereby they never thirst again,
to wit, after those loathsome and stolen waters, which although they may seem
sweet to them that have tasted no better, who therefore long after them, yet to
the faithful that have tasted that the Lord is gracious, who have found that
the loving kindness of the Lord is better than Corn, than Wine and Oil, than
any of the pleasures of Sin, or promises of the World, yea, than life it self:
They cannot forsake those fountains of living water, to hunt after broken
cisterns, which they know will hold no water.

But says Mr. G. His Christ differs from the true Christ. Oh! Mr. G. take heed
what you do. Our Christ is no other but the only begotten Son of God, The King
of Kings, and the Lord of Lords: The Christ of the Patriarchs, of the Prophets,
of the Apostles, of all the Saints of God in all Ages. We have no peculiar
Christ, but him that came into the world to save sinners. Take heed of
stumbling at that stumbling stone, which on whomsoever it falls, it grinds them
to powder. And I beseech every one who has the least dram of reverence unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, to consider seriously, whether here was any the least
occasion given to speak thus reproachfully of the Lords Christ, or of imagining
any other Christ.

But the true Christ, says Mr. G. told his Disciples that dreamed of such
dainties, that they must drink of a bitter cup of Affliction. What then? Shall
Christ therefore not be sweet unto them? Does not he himself say, that in him
they should have peace, though in the world they should have tribulation? Is
not he an hundred fold recompense unto them even in this life for all their
losses, Mat. 19.29. whereby the bitter cup of affliction is so sweetened unto
the truly faithful, that they even rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5.2.

Some of the Disciples indeed dreamed of carnal dainties, and a temporal
Kingdom, to sit upon Thrones. And let them be told of such dreams of dainties
that look for Quiet, and Wealth, and freedom from the Cross, that hope, by the
assistance of the Sword of the Magistrate, to crush all, not only that oppose
them, but that do so much as dissent from them even in the smallest matter; let
those, if there be any such be told of their carnal dreams: As for us, we have
no such thought of freedom from the Cross, so long as Ishmael is alive, and
abides in the house, that is, until the Lord of the house shall come, who shall
utterly cast out the bondwoman and her son, who shall gather out of his
Kingdom every thing that offends. And notwithstanding, we know, that although
the Cross be not joyous, but grievous to the flesh; yet is the spiritual
bitterness of it taken away ever since the Lord Jesus made it a trophy of
victory. So that we dare boldly say with Calvin, (Instit. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect.
28.) That whatsoever miseries and calamities befall those who are beloved of the
Lord, they cannot hinder that his loving kindness should not be co^leat
felicity. And a little after, If all things abound unto us, according unto our
desire, and we be uncertain of the love or hatred of God, our felicity will be
accursed, and therefore miserable; But if the fatherly face of God shine upon
us, our very miseries will be blessed.

But (says Mr. G.) that which keeps us from breaking our bounds, is rather
bitterness than sweetness, as the Scripture, says he, testifies, but
alleges none, only he brings two Scriptures, 1 John 3.9. and 1 Pet. 1.23. to
prove that which none denies, that the remaining of the seed of God within us,
which is immortal, keeps us within bounds. Yea, we deny not, but that
Afflictions are very useful, as I said, to Gods Children: Yet so, that they
also do some way sweeten, rather than imbitter the pastures where the Saints do
feed; though not to the flesh and outward man, yet to the spirit and inward
man. For it is grace revealed, that teaches effectually to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11.12. Psalm. 26.3. Thy loving kindness is
ever before mine eyes, and therefore I have walked in thy truth. Christ is able
to rule his own Wife by the scepter of his Grace.

Sect. 12. In the three last Sections, the Dr. attributes unto christ; 1. The
giving of Spiritual Sight, to see in a gracious manner, both our own filthiness
and vileness, where a closing with Christ begins: This, says he, we have not
from the Law, which though it be a perfect looking-glass, yet it gives no eyes.
2. Repentance. 3. Faith.

1. Here Mr. G. after his manner, has found a contradiction: Why? Because
hereafter he affirms Justification to be before all qualification; But here, he
says, there is first the opening of the eyes, and from the opening of the
eyes, proceeds a closing with Christ. Whereupon says Mr. G. follows
Justification. So that this Justification after closing, is Mr. G's. Inference,
not the Dr's. Assertion. But I Answer, and Grant, that our Justification is
considered two ways: 1. In the Court of Heaven; so it is antecedent to any
qualification. So says Dr. Twiss, The Righteousness of Christ, as it is
Christ's, in that it is performed by Him; so it is ours, in that it was
performed for us, and that before Faith, as meriting for us effectual Faith.
For the Righteousness of Christ is said to be imputed to us, and his Merits to
be applied to us by Faith, not before God, but in our own Consciences. But of
this, as Mr. G. says, more hereafter. Only this we must always carry along
with us, that without Christ, that is, without being implanted into Him, as the
Branches into the Vine; and so without being united to Him, and justified by
Him, We can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.

2. Here at length Mr. G. has found something, that he can, as he thinks, with
some confidence call Antinomianisme, that the title of his book may not seem to
be a mere slander. Here, says he, the Dr. bewraies his malice against the Law
of God. And this he repeats again. What is the ground of this heavy charge?
Surely only this, that he says that a gracious sight of our own vileness, is
the work of Christ alone, and that the Law gives no eyes to see. Surely if this
be such deep Antinomianism, there are more Antinomians than many are aware of.
For, First, He grants the Law to be a perfect Looking-Glass, to represent the
filthiness of a person. Secondly, He does not deny, but by the Law a man may
have a deep sight of his own vileness, as Cain and Judas had. Thirdly, He only
affirms, that although the Law compared with the heart and conversation of
men, afford the object, to wit, the filthiness, that is to be seen; yet it
gives neither eyes to see, nor a gracious manner of seeing. These two are only
from Christ, from his Grace, not from the Law. Both in nature and grace, there
is the same fountain of Life, and of the effects of Life, as eyes and sight.
That only which gives life, gives sight. Now the Apostle utterly denies the
former, that the Law can give life, and thereby he denies it able to give
sight. But contrariwise, as Christ only gives life, so He only gives sight,
Ephesians. 1.17,18. And that not by the Law, but by mere Grace. But how does Christ
give a gracious spiritual sight or eyes? I Answer, by the Unction of his
Spirit, 1 John 2.20. who is therefore called the spirit of Wisdom and
Illumination, Ephesians. 1.17. And the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit
of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. But does Christ give these spiritual eyes without any
outward means. I Answer, that I conceive that spiritual eyes, with other gifts
of grace may be considered two ways; In their Root, and in their Fruit: In
their Being, and in their Actuating. In the former sense they are the immediate
effects of the spirit, per modum causae Physicae; But in the actuating or
putting forth of Faith or Sight, there is the intervening of the word, per
modum causae moralis sive objecti, as the object to be seen, which is therefore
said to enlighten the eyes, Psalm. 19.8. And so Faith is said to come by
Hearing. Here the Word and the Spirit are always conjoined, Esaias 59.21. Well
then, seeing without Christ and his Spirit, there is no enlightening, either by
the word of the Law, or the Gospel; Why may he not enlighten as well by the
Law, as by the Gospel? This is Mr. G's Objection. I Answer with the Apostle,
The Gospel only is the ministration of the Spirit, and not the Law, Gal. 3.2. 2
Cor. 3.8. But the Law contrariwise, is the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. It
is the Killing Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. It is the Ministration of Death, ver. 7. It
is the Ministration of Condemnation, ver. 9. We must observe, says Paraeus,
That the Law is not the Ministry of the Spirit, that is, by the Preaching of
the Law the Holy Ghost is not given; and therefore neither Faith, nor
Confidence, nor any hope of Adoption or Salvation, Par. in Gal. 3.2. I may add,
(nor any other thing which is a proper effect of the Spirit, such as is a
gracious sight of our own vileness) The Law Commands only, but it Helps not:
But if it did give Eyes, or Sight, it should Help as well as Command. Neither
is this any reproach unto the Law of God, which is Holy, Just, and Good. It is
Our fault, not the Laws, that it is not able to give us Life, nor the effects
of it. It is weak, not through any impotency in its self, but through our
flesh, Romans 8.3.

"But Mr. G. cites against us, out of Psalm. 19.7,8. That the law converts the
soul, makes wise the simple, enlightens the eyes." But here he has deceived
himself with the ambiguity of the word Law, which any smatterer in Divinity
knows sometimes to be taken; 1. Generally for the whole word of God, as Psalm.
1.2. And most frequently all the Psalms through. 2. Particularly and properly,
for the Decalogue or covenant of works, given from the beginning, but renewed
upon Mount-Sinai, Romans 10.3,4,5. 3. For the Gospel, Isa. 2.3. where it is said,
the Law shall go out of Sion. So then, as the Law in its primacy, and proper
signification, does signify a doctrine; and secondarily, but most usually, the
doctrine of God; so in Psalm. 19. it signifies the whole word of God, which is
in reference to that part of it only which holds forth Christ, and Salvation,
gives life and light, and wisdom; that is, the Gospel, which is the power of
God unto Salvation to the believer, Romans 1.17. So says Calvin upon the place.
David here commends the whole doctrine of the Law, as comprehending the Gospel,
and therefore including Christ in it. So says Mr. G. the ministers are said to
open men's eyes by Preaching the word, Act. 26.18. True, but it is the word of
the Gospel which is the ministration of the spirit, Gal. 3.2. Which is the
joyful news of the grace of God, Act. 20.24. Whereby alone we are partakers of
the promise, Ephesians. 3.6. In which spiritual eyes are contained, Isa. 42.6. Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10.14. By hearing of what, or of whom? The next ver.
will show you. As it is written, how beautiful upon the mountains, are the feet
of them that bring glad tidings of peace. For the Law is not of faith, Gal.
3.12.

Sect. 13. The Dr. says, that the giving of Repentance, is merely the work of
Christ; here Mr. G. begins: what shall I call it, but to boast himself? If I
miscall it, let the Reader judge. " We teach Repentance more and better than
they. Hereunto I shall say nothing, but desire the Lord to open the mouths of
all the Ministers of Christ, that they may more abundantly preach true
christian Repentance, to a full and serious self-denial in all things: That man
may be taught to own the shame of his own doings, that God may have the full
glory of his free grace in Christ.

"But Mr. G. suspects this word (merely) when it is said, that it is merely the
work of Christ to give Repentance."

Here I confess, he has picht upon the very point of all our differences. All
our controversies, in a manner, ly in this word (merely) or (only) That Christ
only and merely Saves; that he only and merely gives Repentance and Faith. If
we could but dispense to leave out this word, the world would be at peace with
us. That it might be lawful for them to say, Christ and we Save: Christ and we
give Repentance and Faith: Christ and we pacify Gods Anger. But utterly to
thrust out man, that he may have no finger in these matters, makes him storm
and fume, and devise all manner of reproaches against us. This word, only
Faith, i. e. only Christ, was the Apple of contention, among the first
reforming publishers of the Gospel. " What (said one of the Worthies of former
times) [Fulk de Christo gratis justificante] do we seek after in Preaching, in
Writing, in Laboring; what do we else, but that Christ (only and merely) may
be received by all, as the Savior and Redeemer of all? Contrariwise your
Popish opinions, what do they breath, what do they beat upon, whither do they
tend, but to this one thing, that Christ only may not Reign alone in his
Church? That he only may not Save and Redeem us by his self alone; That he
only and merely may not be our high Priest, who both made Satisfaction for our
sins, with one only Sacrifice once made, etc." Though God has established a
ministry to preach Repentance, yet has he established none to give Repentance:
That is the peculiar prerogative of Christ. After the Minister has done his
office by instructing in meekness, those that are contrary-minded, it remains
still to be expected, if God will give them Repentance to the acknowledgment of
the Truth, 2 Timothy 2.25.

Sect. 14. Of Faith I have spoken before, in Sect. 12. how it comes by hearing.
Mr. G. demands further, How he will make this good, that Faith is the root of
all gifts of grace, seeing he says Knowledge is wrought first. Why did he put
Repentance before Faith, unless it went before it? Or else, does he make
Repentance and Faith the same?

To the first Question I Answer, that the knowledge the Dr. speaks of, is
nothing else but the beginnings of Faith: Neither does the Scripture make such
an accurate distinction between them, Joh. 3.15. It is said, that he that
believes on Christ, has Eternal Life, Joh. 17.3. It is said, that to know him
is Life Eternal; where Believing and Knowing are words of the same
signification. By his knowledge, shall my Righteous Servant justify many, Isa.
53.11. That is by Faith, in him. Also, where Faith is called the evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11.1. This Evidence must needs include a knowledge. So
then, knowledge, as the beginning of Faith, may be said to be wrought first, and
yet no gift precede Faith.

To the second, why Repentance is mentioned before Faith? I Answer as before;
that although Repentance go not before Faith, yet has it reference to that
state which goes before Faith. But that in nature nor time, it does not go
before Faith, I have partly manifested before. And surely whatsoever is not
Faith, is Sin.

To his third Question, whether we make Faith and Repentance all one? I Answer,
no, not adaequately. Yet we say there is no Repentance truly acceptable unto
God, in whose difinition Faith is not. And if Mr. G's. observation be true, we
may call Repentance Faith, and Faith Repentance, and that by the Authority of
the Scriptures ( Page 73. in marg.). Surely this is putting a less difference
between them.

4. He finds much fault with the Dr. (although for ought I see, he is guilty of
the same himself) that he has not defined Faith and Repentance. And this he
tells us ( Cato-like) he must needs note as a gross oversight, if not a wilful
neglect.

To this I Answer, 1. That the same definition of these that he shall find in
the Scripture, I will find in these Sermons. And therefore Mr. G. should not
have passed his Censure, till he had made a better search. 2. If he had made an
exact and logical definition, it may be Mr. G. would not have been satisfied.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Will. Marshall at the Bible in Newgate-street. Books Lately
Printed of Dr. Owen's.
1. THE True Nature of a Gospel Church, and its Government, wherein in these
following particulars are Distinctly handled: I. The Subject Matter of the
Church. II. Formal Cause of a particular Church. III. Of the Polity, Rule, or
Discipline of the Church in General. IV. The Officers of the Church. V. The
Duty of Pastors of Churches. VI. The Office of Teachers in the Church. VII. Of
the Rule of the Church, or of Ruling Elders. VIII. The Nature of the Polity or
Rule, with the Duty of Elders. IX. Of Deacons. X. Excommunication. XI. Of the
Communion of Churches. In large Quarto, Price Bound 3 s.
2. A Treatise of the Dominion of Sin and Grace. Price Bound 1 s. 3. A Brief
and Impartial Account of the Nature of the Protestant Religion, its State and
Fate in the World, its Strength and Weakness; with the Ways and Indications of
the Ruin or Continuance of its Public National Profession. Price 6 d. 4. A
Brief Instruction in the Worship of God, and Discipline of the Churches of the
New Testament; by way of Questions and Answers, with an Explication and
Confirmation of those Answers. Price Bound 1 s.
Where you may be Likewise supplied with the Rest of Dr. Owen's Books that are
in Print.


