AN EPISTLE TO ALL Young Convinced FRIENDS, WHOM The Lord has reached by His
mighty Power, and separated from the World, and turned their Hearts, so as to
forsake Father, and Mother, Wife, and Children, for his Name sake.

By way of Exhortation and Encouragement, by one whom the Lord has greatly
Encouraged, and fulfilled the saying of the Prophet Malachi, by turning the
Hearts of his Parents and Dear Relations to Him.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street.
1696.



AN EPISTLE TO ALL Young Convinced Friends, etc.
Dear Friend,
WHoever thou art, in the Love of God was my Heart enlarged to write to thee
this following Account, that thou may be encouraged to abide in the Patience
and Hope of that which thy Natural Eyes cannot behold, to wit, the Great and
Wonderful Work of the Great Invisible God, which in his own time he will
perfect to his own Praise, and thy Comfort, and as thou do stand in thy own
Nothingness, with the Eye of thy Mind single unto the Lord, thou may come to
behold that Work done by him, which all thy power is not able to do, although
thou be never so earnest in it, for the Lord will do his own Work himself, and
thou must stand still, and wait his time, having thy Eye to the inward power of
God, to keep and preserve thee in patience, to bear what Exercises thou may
meet with, from those who are, (as to the outward) very near and dear unto
thee, that thou may, by thy patient bearing of those Reproaches and
Afflictions, thou may meet with from them, which may seem to thee very hard,
reach the Witness in their Consciences, whether Father, or Mother, or Husband,
or Wife, or whoever they be, so that thou may become a Preacher of
Righteousness in thy Conversation to them, which speaks with a far louder Voice
than words can do, and is more effectual to reach to the Witness in their
Consciences, than a great many words are, though words, (as thou do wait for
the Lord to fit thy words before thou do speak them) thou will find them of
advantage to those to whom they are spoken; and though they be never so few,
yet as they are spoken by thee in the savoury Life, they shall not return to
thee in vain, but in the Lord's time effect the end for which thou were made
to speak them.

So, dear Friend, I being at my Labor, at my own Home in Canterbury, upon the
first of the Twelfth Month 1695. and considering the great Sufferings of my
dear Parents, whom the Lord has born up in it in a wonderful manner, beyond
what we could conceive, before it came on them, I became concerned to write on
this wise.

The Impropriator in the Parish of Ash in the County of Kent, Sued, for a
Demand of 20 s. for Tithes, to a Sequestration, and then took and stripped
them; so that although they were both Ancient People, they left them not a Bed
to lie on, nor a Blanket to cover themselves, nor scarce any Necessaries to
succor themselves; so that for a demand of 20 s. they took upwards of the
Value of 57 l. so that they were for some time compelled to Lodge on Straw; but
the Lord's power was felt to make hard things easy to them.

So now, dear Friend, I shall (as one who have in my Measure tasted of the
large Love of God to me in my Heart, and known him to bear me up, when tried)
give this short account to thee of my Trials with my Parents, and of the
Encouragement the Lord has given me, that thou may not faint in thy Mind,
nor be discouraged at the Frowns of thy Friends, and near Relations, which lay
on me as a Concern to give forth this Testimony of the Lord's Dealings with me,
and my dear Relations, since my first Convincement, which was about Twelve or
Thirteen Years ago; when I was but a Lad, the Lord brake in by his mighty
Power, and filled my Heart with his Judgments, and did Rip up all the whole
Course of my Life, and made me to bow to them, though against my will; for I
would fain have put the Day of the Lord's Visitation off longer, but the more I
did endeavor, the heavier were the Lord's Judgments on me, so that I was
forced to bow under them before I could find Mercy, for the Lord wrought in me
by his own inward Power at the first, and not by any outward Instrument, and
caused me to know Nights of Sorrow, and Days of Mourning; and it was to me a
time of deep Exercise, though but a Child, (as it were) and my Fellow Servants,
who was Apprentice to the same Master with whom I was, though he was a Lad
naturally of a more sober Behavior than my self, yet the Lord made my
Convincement of good effect to him, so that he was reached to and convinced,
and by the mighty Power of God, remains to this day an Honest Sober Friend:
Thus did the Lord by his Invisible Power give me a Companion, and brought us
both forth to bear a Testimony for his Name within a very little time after our
Convincement, which was in a time of great Persecution; for we were both
required by Two Magistrates to Swear Allegiance to the King, but the Lord by
his mighty Power bore us up, who were as poor little Children; so that we stood
as Innocent Lambs before them, and were both by them Committed to Prison, where
we were born up by the Lord's Power, till in a little time we were delivered by
them out again, and then my Parents made suit for the residue of my time of
Apprenticeship, and took me (with Consent of my Master) Home to them, and set
me up of my Trade by them, which was a Shoemaker; then was my Father a Follower
of the Priest, and all his Family; so then began on me a very sore Exercise
from them, it being still a time of hot Persecution; so I was in my Father's
Family, when but about 18 Years, (or little more) of Age, as a Gazing-stock to
them all, or as a Sparrow alone upon the Housetop: And many times my Father
would labor to have me with him to hear the Priest, but the Lord kept me; so
that when my Father saw he could not prevail, he would then break out into
Displeasure and Anger against me; and sometimes if he could catch any thing
against me, or any of my Friends, then he would cast that on me; and sometimes
I have expected him to have beaten me, but the Lord's Power did restrain him
from it; and some would be advising him to take me by force with him to hear
the Priest; but I hearing of it, was made to answer to it, That although my
Father might carry me by force there, he might bring a greater Burden on
himself than he was aware of, for it was out of his power to stop me from
speaking, if I should by such means have anything from the Lord to say there;
so he was stopped there also, and did not proceed in that; but in a very little
time the Priest of the Parish, for not coming to hear him, did Excommunicate
me, which was no small Terror to my Father, so that he began to be outrageous
at me, but the Lord did bear me up under it, and did give me a very large
Encouragement, so that I beheld him to be at work in the Heart of my Dear
Mother, and she was made to take a part, and a share of Exercise with me; yet
thus my Father finding that way to fail, made proof of another with me, and did
in some measure prevail on me, which was this, he desired me to stay at Home
upon a First Day, and not go to the Meeting, in expectation of my Sister coming
to see them, who was then a Servant, which I did, but she came not, and I was
greatly burdened in my Spirit for giving way in that case, and was (till I
came to another Meeting) like a Man shut up in a Dungeon, and found very hard
work to get to the next Meeting, as if my work had been almost to begin again:
My Father seeing he could not prevail with me again, notwithstanding a great
deal of Labor he took to persuade me, and had got strength too by my yielding
to him before, he then seemed to be more outrageous than usual, so that I did
expect I should have been severely beaten by him when I came home from the
Meeting; but when I was gotten clear of him, I went like a Man Traveling for
his Life, and I had no sooner set me down in a Retiredness to the Lord in the
Meeting, but the Lord (although in silence, as to words) outwardly did set open
the Stream of Life in my Soul, so that I was taken up above the fears or frowns
of any Mortal, and felt in my return home that Life and Love to spring in my
Heart, that I could have laid my self under the Soles of my Fathers Feet; but
when I came home (contrary to my expectation) I found my Father very loving to
me, and the Lord had gotten a belief in me that he would bow my Father, and
bring him in obedience to the Truth, which I did upon occasion tell to my
Mother, and I did then begin to find my Father to be something condescending,
and sometimes would be ready to bargain with me, that if I would go with him
once, he would go with me, but the Lord preserved me out of that Snare, and in
a little time I did get my Father and Mother to the Meeting, but my Father was
ashamed to be seen or met by any coming from the Meeting, but my Mother has
continued ever since, and my Father would confess to me it was the Truth, and
the Lord did begin to work on him, and to bow him in some measure in obedience
to Truth; then was his Love to me more than before, and he was then glad of
Opportunities of Meetings, and the Lord was with him, and his power did bear
him up, and this was a joyful time to me, to behold the Lord's Visitation to
both my Parents; and in a little time the Lord brought in my Eldest Sister in
Obedience to Truth, and then I had Three Companions, but the Outcry of People
was, I had deceived my Parents; but the Lord's Power did work wonderfully, and
brought my Father still further and further, and fitted him more and more, so
that now he is as an Instrument in the Lord's Hand, to bear a public Testimony
in Meetings; then a little after the Lord brought my two Brothers into
Obedience to his Truth; and then my Eldest Brother was under a great Travel and
Exercise, beyond I think any of us; and as for my Youngest Sister, within about
a Years time after, the Lord laid his Hand heavy upon her, and made her to come
forth as a Monument of his Mercy, through the midst of Judgments; so that now
we could all sit down together at the Lord's Table, and drink of the one Cup;
and we have several times felt the Lord to break the Bread of Life in our
Souls, and living Praises with one accord, as with one Heart, to go forth to
the Lord from the Arisings of Life in our Hearts by the Lord's Power, in which
we have been made to sit together in the Enjoyment thereof.

So, dear Friend, I being in the Love of God drawn forth to thee after this
manner, not to set forth the Praise of my Relations, nor lay open their
weakness, nor to glory in any of my own, but in the Lord, who has wrought
wonderfully; so that of a poor little weak one, even as a Worm before the Lord,
I can behold his Hand to be full of Blessings, and his Increasing Government to
be endless; so that thou may be Encouraged, whoever thou art, that be in the
like Exercises, this I leave to thee as an Encouragement to be true of Heart,
and faithful to the Lord, and to stand in the true patience of the Saints, that
thou may know an overcoming of the Enemy in thy own Heart, and so in the
Lord's time may be made a Conqueror of those who may oppose thee, by having thy
Conversation as becomes the Truth; then the Lord, as thou do herein abide,
and keep'st thy Mind close to the Lord in a true stability, thou will find him
to bear thee up, and to make hard things easy to thee, and to level the
Mountains before thee, and make the Rough-ways smooth; and so (by a retired
waiting in a holy Resignation of thy Will, in a subjection to the Lord) thou will feel his Power to keep and preserve thee fresh and green, and the
Enjoyment of his presence will be to thee as Dew on the tender Grass; therefore
in all the whole Conduct of thy Life, let the dread of the Great Everlasting
God be on thee, which is only able to keep thee in the Hour of Temptation,
which will come upon the whole World, to try them that dwell therein: Oh
therefore see that thy Building be on the unmovable Rock, which will endure
the fiercest Winds and Storms thou may meet with; and when any Trials or
Exercises do arise, then art thou to come to stilness and quietness in thy
Mind, thou will know an Overcoming of that part in thee which may be subject to
Heat or Passion, or to Doubts or Distrustings, and so in the Morning of the Day
that God has caused to dawn on thee, in which thou have (in thy Measure)
beheld the Bright and Morning Star, if thou do continue faithful, thou will
come to behold the Sun of Righteousness to arise with healing under his Wings;
and as thou do continue faithful, the Lord will bring thee to the Meridian of
the Day, in which thou shall feel the brightness of his Rays to warm thy Heart,
and make thee strong; so that at the close of the Day thou may come to be
gathered out of a troublesome World into Everlasting Peace and Joy: So having
eased my Spirit, and cleared my Conscience, I shall commit thee, with my own
Soul, to the Grace of God which was sufficient for the Apostle Paul: And
blessed be the Lord we have in our Measures known the sufficiency of it; and
shall conclude with my Breathing to the Lord for the preservation of all who
have tasted of the good Word of God, and of the Powers of the World to come.

John Love, the Younger.

FINIS.

