THE STRANGE AND WONDERFUL PREDICTIONS OF Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, Minister of the
Gospel at Laurence Jury, London: WHO WAS BEHEADED ON TOWER HILL, IN THE TIME OF
Oliver Cromwell's Government of England. GIVING AN ACCOUNT OF BABYLON'S FALL,
And in that Glorious Event, A GENERAL REFORMATION OVER ALL THE WORLD. With a
most Extraordinary PROPHECY, OF THE LATE REVOLUTION IN FRANCE, AND THE Downfall
of the Antichristian Kingdom, In that Country.

BY M. PETER JURIEU.

ALSO, NIXON's CHESHIRE PROPHECY.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE following Prophecies, some of which have been accomplished in our own
time, must appear interesting, and as such we publish them; those of Mr. LOVE
promise great events, which must happen before the present generation passes
away: and as to Monsieur JURIEU's predictions, relative to the French
Revolution, they point out so clearly part of what has already come to pass, in
France, that it may be reasonably presumed the rest will be verified in due
time.

PREDICTIONS OF Mr. CHRISTOPHER LOVE,
A FEW nights after he was sentenced to be b^^eaded, on Tower Hill, which was
on the 22d day of August, 1651, ten days before his appointed time, by the
sentence he received at the bar, being one night visited by two of his intimate
acquaintances, or bosom friends, as he himself called them, they began to
complain of the cruelty of the times, and the malice and usage of time-serving
brethren; to which Mr. Love answered, And think you this is an evil time? No,
no; this is the very time when grace and true god^iness can be distinguished
from hypocrisy: many have followed Christ hitherto for the loaves, and are now
turned back for the roughness of the way, and the sore trial and tribulation
which others met with who are gone before them.

There are many in London at this very day, who think to go to heaven in their
gilded coaches, and have denied Christ's cause before men (against whom I now
witness) and Christ in his never failing word has promised to deny all such
before his father and the holy angels. This is the time to discern be^ween him
that s^rveth God, and him that serves him not. They formerly were my familiar
acq^ain^ance, in fellowship and sweet converse. I sent this day to have a few
words with them here in prison; but they would not come; for their countenance
is fallen, their consciences wounded, -- they cannot look me in the face;
because I knew of their resolution, and was a witness to their perjuration, --
But, ah! how will they look the blessed Jesus in the face in the morning of the
resurrection? what answer or excuse will they have for what they have done? O
foolish people! who think to escape the cross, nay, you must all suffer
persecution who follow the Lamb; we must be hated of all nations for Christ's
sake; we must come through great tribulation, through the fiery furnace of
affl^ction, before we can enter the land of joy and felicity. Know ye not that
the souls that were slain for the testimony of Jesus are placed under the
altar? Happy, happy are those men at this day, and ever shall be happy, who
suffer for Christ's sake in a right and charitable way -- through love to his
cause, and honesty of heart: not through pride and hypocrisy, without the root of
the matter, to have it said they died (...): these are they who will miss their
mark; and those who denied the call and looked back shall never have the honor
to find it I am now pointed out by many to be in a destitute and forlorn
condition; but I would not exchange my state, no, not for all the glory that is
on the earth; I find my R^deemer's love stronger in my bonds, than ever I did
in the days of my liberty; therefore I hold living here as death itself. I am
as full of love and joy in the Holy Spirit, as ever bo^^le was fi^led with new
wine. I am ready to cry out, The spirit of the Lord is upon me; I will not take
upon me to prophecy; neve^theless the spirit of the Lord causes me to utter:
-- This usurped authority of Cromwell, shall shortly be at an end; England
shall be blessed with meek Kings, and mild governments; powerful preachers, and
dull hearers: good sermons to them will be as music to a sleepy man; they shall
hear, but not understand, nor lay the word (...) the heart, to practice it in
their lives, to walk by it. O England, thou shall wax old in wickedness; thy
sins abound like those of Sodom; thy voluptuousness shall cry aloud for
vengeance; the Lord shall threaten and chastise thee, yet in mercy and love
will he look upon those that fear him, and call upon his name: he will spare of
his anger, when the wicked shall be sifted from amongst you as the chaff is
sifted from amongst the wheat; for out of thee, O England, shall a bright star
arise, whose light and voice shall make the heathen to quake, and knock under
with submission to the gospel of Jesus; he shall be as a sound of thunder in
the ears of the wicked, and as a ^anthorn to the Jews, to lead them to the
knowledge of Jesus, the only son of God, and true Messiah, whom they so long
mistrusted, for the short work spoken of by the apostle, which the Lord is to
make upon the earth, in the latter age of the world, cannot be far off.
Observe, my dear friend, while you live my calculation of the dates in the book
of the Revelation, and in Daniel, which the Spirit of the Lord led me into; for
the Lord will reveal it to some of his own, ere that time come; for the nearer
the time is, the seals shall be taken away, and more and more shall be revealed
to God's people; for the Lord does nothing without he reveal it, by his Spirit,
to his servants the prophets: He destroyed not the old world, without the
knowledge of Noah -- He did not overthrow Sodom and Gomorrah, without the
knowledge of Abraham. I do not mean now, that any new prophet shall arise; but
the Lord by his Spirit shall cause knowledge to abound among his people,
whereby the old prophecies shall be clearly and perfectly understood. And I die
in that thought, and really believe that my calculations are right, on the
Revelation by St. John, and the prophecy which St. Jerome copied off and
translated out of the Hebrew language, as it is written on Seth's pillar in
Damascus, which pillar is said to have stood since before the flood and was
built by Seth, Adam's son, and written by Enoch the prophet; as likewise the
holy precepts whereby the patriarch walked before the law was given to Moses,
which were also engraven on the said pillar. whereof many Jews have copies, in
their own language written on parchment, and engraven on brass and copper; but
the alteration of the date makes them to stagger at it, not knowing that the
dates were to be altered by the birth of Christ. First, This prophecy is
enti^led. A short work of the Lord's in the latter age of the world. Great
earthquakes and commotions by sea and land shall come in the year of God 1779.
Great wars in Germany and America, in 1780. The destruction of popery, or
Babylon's fall, in the year 1790. God will be known by many in the year 1795.
This will produce a great man. The stars will wander, and the moon turn as
blood, in 1800. Africa, Asia, and America, will tremble, in 1803. A great
earthquake over all the world, in 1805. God will be universally known by all:
Then a general reformation, and peace for ever, when the people shall learn war
no more. Happy is the man that lives to see this day!

PROPHECY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, FROM A PUBLICATION BY THE LATE MR. PETER
JURIEU, IN 1687.
Rev. xi. 13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the City fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand,
and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to God.
NOW what is this tenth part of this city, which shall fall? we cannot doubt
that it is France. This kingdom is the most considerable part or piece of the
ten horns, or states, which once made up the great Babylonian city: it fell;
this does not signify, that the French Monarchy shall be ruined; it may be
humbled; but in all appearance Providence does design a great elevation for her
afterward. It Is highly probable, that God will not let go unpunished the
horrible outrages which it acts at this day. Afterward, it must build its
greatness upon the ruins of the papal empire, and enrich itself with the spoils
of those who shall take part with the papacy. They who at this day persecute
the protestants, know not whither God is leading them: this is not the way by
which he will lead France to the height of glory. If she comes thither it is
because she shall shortly change her road. Her greatening will be no damage to
protestant states; on the contrary, the protestant states shall be enriched
with the spoils of others; and be strengthened by the fall of Antichrist's
empire. This tenth part of the city shall fall, with respect to the papacy; it
shall break with Rome, and the Roman religion. One thing is certain, that the
Babylonian empire shall perish through the refusal of obedience by the ten
Kings, who had given their power to the beast. The thing is already come to
pass in part. The kingdoms of Sweden, Denmark, England, and several sovereign
states of Germany, have withdrawn themselves from the Jurisdiction of the Pope.
They have spoiled the h^rlot of her riches. They have eaten her flesh, ie.
seized her benefices and revenues, which she had in their countries. This must
go on, and be finished as it began. The Kings, who yet remain under the empire
of Rome, must break with her, leave her solitary and desolate.

But who must begin this last revolt? It Is most probable that France shall. Not
Spain, which as yet is plunged in superstition, and is as much under the
tyranny of the clergy as ever. Not the Emperor, who in temporals is subject to
the Pope, and permits the Archbishop of Strigonium in his states, to teach that
the Pope can take away the Imperial crown from him. It cannot be any country
but France, which a long time ago has begun to shake off the yoke of Rome.
It Is well known, how solemnly and openly war has been declared against the
Pope, by declaration of the King (ratified in all the parliaments) by the
decisions of the assembly of the French clergy, by a disputation against the
authority of the Pope, managed in the Sorbon, solemnly, and by order of the
Court. And to heighten the affront, the theses were posted up, even upon the
gates of his Nuncio. Nothing of this kind had h^^herto happened, at least in a
time of peace, and unless the Pope had given occasion by his infolencies.

Besides this, superstition and idolatry lose their credit much in France. --
There is a secret party, though well enough known, which greatly despises the
popular devotions, images, worship of Saints, and is convinced that these are
human inventions; God is beforehand preparing for this great work.

To this it may be objected, that for the last fifty years, the Pope's empire
has not been made up of ten Kings, because England, Sweden, Denmark, etc. have
thrown off his government; and consequently, France is not at this day the
tenth part of the Babylonian empire; for it is more than a tenth part of it. But
this is no difficulty: for we must know, that things retain the names which
they bore in their original (without regarding the alterations which time does
bring along). Though at this day, there are not ten kingdoms under the
Babylonian empire, it is notwithstanding certain, that each Kingdom was called,
and ought to be called in (...) prophecy, the tenth part; because the prophet
having described this empire in its beginning, by its ten horns or ten Kings,
it is necessary for our clear understanding, that every one of these ten Kings,
and kingdoms should be called one of the ten Kings or of the ten kingdoms, with
respect to the constitution of the Antichristian empire.

Seeing the tenth part of the city that must fall, is France, this gives me
some hopes, that the death of the two witnesses has a particular relation to
this kingdom. It Is the street or place of this city. i. e. the most fair and
eminent part of it. The witnesses must remain dead upon this street, and upon
it they must be raised again. And as the death of the witnesses and their
resurrection have a relation to the kingdom of France, it may well fall out,
that we may not be far distant from the time of the resurrection of the
witnesses seeing the three years and a half of their death are either begun, or
will begin shortly.

And in the earthquake were slain seven thousand; in the Greek it is, seven
thousand names of men, and not seven thousand men. I consess, that this seems
somewhat mystericus: in other places we find not this phrase, names of men, put
simply for men. Perhaps there is here a figure of grammar called hypallage
casus, so that names of men are put for men of name, i. e. of raised and
considerable quality, be it on account of riches, or of dignity, or of
learning. But I am more inclined to say, that here these words, names of men,
must be taken in their natural signification, and do intimate, that the total
Reformation of France shall not be made without bloodshed, nothing shall be
destroyed but names; such as are the names of Monks, of Carmelites, of
Augustines, of Dominicans, of Iacobins, of Franciscans, Capuchins, Jesuits,
Minimes, and an infinite company of others, whose number it is not easy to
define, and which the Holy Ghost denotes by the number seven, which is the
number of perfection, to signify, the number of monks and nuns shall perish for
ever. This is an institution so degenerated from its first original, that it is
become the arm of Antichrist. These orders cannot perish one without another.

These great events deserve to be distinguished from all others; for they have
changed, and shall change, THE WHOLE FACE OF THE WORLD.

INTRODUCTION TO NIXON's CHESHIRE PROPHECY, BY THE AUTHOR of his LIFE.
THIS remarkable Prophecy has been carefully revised, ^orrected, and improved;
also some account given of our author, Robert Nixon, who was but a kind of
idiot, and used to be employed in following the plough. He lived in some
farmers' families, and was their drudge and jest.

At last, Thomas Cholmondeley, of Vale-Royal, Esquire. took him into his house, and
he lived there when he composed this Prophecy, which he delivered with as much
gravity and solemnity as if he had been an oracle; and it was observed, that
though the fool was a driveler, and could not speak common sense when he was
uninspired, yet in delivering his Propecies he spoke plainly and sensibly; how
truly will be seen in the following pages.

As to the credit of this Prophecy, I dare say it is as well attested as any of
Nostradamus's or Merlin's, and come to pass as well as the best of Squire
Bickerstaff's. It is pain enough that great men have in all ages had recourse
to prophecy as well as the vulgar. I would not have all grave persons despise
the inspirations of Nixon. The late French King gave audience to an inspired
farrier, and rewarded him with an hundred pistoles for his prophetical
intelligence; though by what I can learn, he did not come near our Nixon for
gifts.

The simplicity, the circumstances, and history, of the Cheshire Prophecy, are
so remarkable, that I hope the public will be as much delighted as I was myself.

By the way, this is not a prophecy of today; it is as old as the Powder plot,
and the story will make it appear that there is as little imp^sture in it as
the Jacobites pretend there is in the person it seems to have an eye to: but
whether they are both impostures alike or not, I leave to the reader to
determine.

J. OLDMIXON.

THE PROPHECY.
IN the reign of King James the First, there lived a man, generally repu^ed a
fool, whose name was Nixon. One day, when he returned home from ploughing in
the field, he laid the things down which he had in his hands, and continuing
for some time in a seemingly deep and thoughtful meditation, at length he
pronounced in a loud voice, Now I will prophesy. And spoke as follows:

When a Raven shall build in a stone Lion's mouth on the top of a Church in
Cheshire, then a King of England shall be driven out of his kingdom, and never
return more.

When an eagle shall sit on the top of the house, then an heir shall be born to
the Cholmodeley's family; and this heir shall live to see England invaded by
foreigners, who shall proceed so far as a town in Cheshire; but a miller named
Peter, shall be born with two heels on one Foot and at that time living in a
mill of Mr Cholmondeley's, he shall be instrumental in delivering the nation.

The person who then governs the nation will be in great trouble, and (...)
about: The invading King shall be killed, laid across a horse's back like a
calf, and led in triumph. The miller having been instrumental in it, shall
bring forth the person that then governs the kingdom, and be knighted for what
he has done; and after that England see happy days. A young new set of men
shall come, who shall prosper, and make a flourishing Church for two hundred
years.

As a token of the truth of all this, a wall of Mr. Cholmondeley's shall fall:
If it fall downwards, the Church shall be oppressed, and rise no more: but if
upwards, next the rising hill on the side of it, then it shall flourish again.
Under this wall shall be found the bones of a British King.

A pond shall run with blood three days, and the Cross-stone Pillar in the
Forest su^k so low into the ground, that a crow from the top of it shall drink
of the best blood in England.

A boy shall be born with three thumbs, and shall hold three King's horses,
while England shall be three times won and lost in one day.

THE original may be seen in several families in Cheshire, and in particular in
the hands of Mr. Egerton of Oulton, with many other remarkable circumstances:
as that Pecferton Wind mill should be removed to Ludditon Hill, that horses
saddled should run about 'till their girts rotted away. But this is sufficient
to prove Nixon as great a prophet as Partridge, and we shall give other proofs
of it before we have done.

Now as for authorities to prove this Prophecy to be genuine, and how it has
hitherto been accomplished, I might refer myself to the whole county of
Chester, where it is in every one's mouth, and has been for these forty years.
As much as I have of the manuscript was sent me by a person of sense and
veracity, and as little disposed to believe visions as any body. There is
something so very odd in the story, and so pat in the wording of it, that I
cannot help giving it as I found it. The family of the Cholmondeley's is very
ancient in this county, and takes its name from a place so called near
Nantwich. There are also Cholmton and Cholmondeston; but the feat of that
branch of the family, which kept our Prophet Nixon, is at Vale Royal, on the
river Weaver in Delamere forest. It was formerly an Abbey founded by Edward I.
and came to the Cholmondeley's from the famous family of the Holcro^ts. When
Nixon prophesied, this family was near being extinct, the heir having married
Sir Walter St. John's daughter, a lady not esteemed very young, who,
notwithstanding being with child, fell in labor, and continued so for some
days. During which time an eagle fat upon the housetop, and flew away when she
was delivered, which proved to be a son.

A Raven is also known to have built in a Stone Lion's mouth, in the steeple of
the Church of Over, in the forest of Delamere. Not long before the abdication
of King James, the wall spoken of fell down and fell upwards, and in removing
the rubbish, were found the bones of a man of more than ordinary size. A pond
at the same time ran with water that had a reddish tincture, and was never
known to have done so before or since.

Headless Cross, in the Forest, which in the memory of man was several feet
high, is now sunk within half a ^oot of the ground.

In the parish of Budworth, a boy was born with three thumbs; he had also two
heels on one foot* -- Lady Egerton, wishing well to another restoration, often
instigated her husband to turn Peter, the miller of Negenshire mills, out of
the mills; but he locoked upon it as a whimsy, and so permitted Peter still to
ontinue there, in hopes of becoming as good a knight as Sir Philip his landlord
was.

Of this Peter I have been told that the Lady Narcliff, of Chelsea, and the
lady St. John of Battersea have often been heard to talk, and that they both
asserted the truth of our Prophecy, and its accomplishment, with particulars
that are more extraordinary than any I have yet mentioned. The noise of Nixon's
predictions reaching the ears of King James the First, he would needs ^ee this
fool, who cried and made a^o that he might not go to Court; and the reason that
he gave was, That he should be starved.

(A very whimsical fancy of his: Courts are not places where people use to
starve in, when they once come there, whatever they did before.) The King being
informed of Nixon's refusing to come, said he would take particular care that
he should not be starved, and ordered him to be brought up. Nixon cried out, He
was sent for again, and soon after the messenger arrived, who brought him up
from Cheshire.

How or whether he prophesied to his Majesty, no body can tell; but he is not
the first fool that has made a good Court Prophet.

That Nixon might be well provided for, 'twas ordered that he should be kept in
the kitchen, where he grew so troublesome in licking and picking the meat, that
the cooks locked him up in a hole, and the King going on a sudden from Ham^ton
Court to London, they forgot the fool in the hurry, and he was really starved
to death.

There are a great many passages of this Fool-Phrophet's life and sayings
transmitted by tradition from father to son in this county palatine; as, that
when he lived with a farmer, before he was taken into Mr. Cholmondeley's
family, he gored an ^x so cruelly, that one of the ploughmen threatened to beat
him for abusing his master's beast. Nixon said, My master's beast will not be
his three days. A life in an estate dropping in that time, the Lord of the
manor took the same ox for an herriot. This account, as whimsical and romantic
as it is, was told to the Lady Cowper, in the year 1670, by Dr. Parric^, late
Bishop of Ely, then Chaplain to S^r Walter St. John; and that Lady had the
following farther particulars, relating to this Prophecy, and the fulfilling of
many parts of it, from Mrs Chute, fister of Mrs. Cholmondeley, of Vale-Royal
who affirmed, that a multitude of people gathering together to see the Eagle
before mentioned, the bird was ^rightened from her young* that she herself was
one of them, and the cry among the people was, Nixon's Phrophecy is fulfil^ed,
and we shall have a foreign King. She declared, that she read over the prophecy
many times, when her sister was with child of the heir who now enjoys the
estate. She particularly remembered membered that King James II. was plainly
pointed at, and that it was foretold he would endeavor to subvert the laws and
religion of this kingdom, for which reason they would rise and turn him out;
that the Eagle of which Nixon prophesied perched in one of the windows at the
time her sister was in labor. She said it was the biggest bird she ever saw;
that it was in a deep snow, and that it perched on the edge of a great
bow-window, which had a large border on the outside, and she and many others
opened the window, to try to scare it away, but it would not stir till Mrs
Cholmondeley was delivered; after which it took flight to a great tree over
against the room her sister lay in, where having staid about three days, it
flew away in the night. She affirmed further to the Lady Cowper, that the
falling of the garden-wall was a thing not to be questioned, it being in so
many people's memory; That it was foretold that the heir of Vale-Royal should
live to see England invaded by foreigners, and that he should fight bravely for
his King and his country: That the Miller mentioned is alive, and expects to be
knighted, and is in the very mill that is foretold: That he should kill two
invaders who would come in, the one from the West, and the other from the
North: That he from the North should bring with him of all nations; Swedes,
Danes, Germans, and Dutch; and that in the solds of his garments he should
bring fire and famine, plague and murder: That many great battles should be
fought in England, one upon London Bridge, which would be so bloody, that
people would ride in London streets up to their horses bellies in blood; that
several other battles should be sought up and down most parts in Cheshire; and
that the last that ever would be fought in England should be on Delamere
fo^est: That the heir of Oalton, whose name is E -- n, and has married Earl
Cholmondeley's si^ter, shall be hanged up at his own gate.

Lastly, He foretells great glory and prosperity to those who stand up in
defense of their laws and liberties, and ruin and misery to those that should
betray them. He says, the year before this would happen, bread-corn would be
very dear, and that the year following more troubles should begin which would
last three years; that the first would be moderate, the second bloody, and the
third intolerable; that unless they were shortened no mortal could bear them;
and that there were no mischiefs but what poor England would feel at that time.
But that George, the son of George, shall put an end to all. That afterward
the Church should fl^uri^h, and England be the most glorious nation upon Earth.
The same Lady Cowper was not content to take these particulars from Mrs. Chute,
but she inquired of Sir Thomas Aston of the truth of this Prophecy, and he
attested it was in great reputation in Cheshire, and that the facts were known
by every one to have happened as Nixon said they would, adding, that the
morning before the gardenwall fell, his neighbor Mr. Cholmondeley going to
ride out a hunting, said, Nixon seldom fails, but now I think he will; for he
foretold that this day ^y garden wall would fall, and I think it looks as if it
would stand these forty years; that he had not been gone a quarter of an hour
before the wall split, and fell upwards against the rising of the hill, which,
as Nixon would have it, was the presage of a flourishing church.

As to the removal of Pecserton mill, it was done by Sir John Crewe, the mill
having lost its trade there, for which he ordered it to be set upon Ludditon
hill; and being asked if he did it to fulfill the Prophecy, he declared he
never thought of it. I myself have inquired of a person who knows Mr.
Cholmondeley's pond as well as Rosamond's in St. James's Park, and he assured
me the falling of the wall, and the pond running blood as they call it, are
facts which, in Cheshire, any one would be reckoned mad for making the least
question of. As there are several particulars in this Prophecy which remain
unfulfilled, so when they come to pass some other circumstances may be added,
which are not convenient to be told now for private reasons, but will shortly
appear.

If I had a mind to look into the antiquities of this county, I might ^ind that
Prodigies and Prophecies are no unusual things there. Cambden tells us, that at
Brereton, not many miles from Vale Royal, which gave name to a famous, ancient,
numerous, and knightly family, there is a thing as strange as the perching
Eagle, or the falling of the wall, which he says was attested to him by many
persons, and was commonly believed; that before any heir of this family dies,
there are s^en in a lake adjoining, the bodies of trees swimming upon the water
for several days together. He likewise adds, that near the Abbey of St.
Maurice, in Burgundy, there is a fish pond, in which a number of fishes are put
equal to the number of Monks of that place; and if any one of them happens to
be sick, there is a fish seen floating on the water: and in case the fit of
sickness proves fatal to the Monk, the fish foretells it by its own death some
days before. This the learned Cambden relates in his description of Cheshire,
and the opinion of the trees swimming in the lake near Brereton prevails all
about the country to this day, only with this difference, that some say it is
one log that swims, and some say many.

J. OLDMIXON.

Strange and Remarkable Prophecies and Predictions, Of the Holy, Learned, and
Excellent JAMES USHER, Late Lord Bishop of ARMAGH, And Lord Primate of IRELAND:
Giving an Account of his Foretelling.

I. The Rebellion in Ireland forty Years before it came to pass. II. The
Confusions and Miseries of England in Church and State. III. The Death of King
Charles the First. IV. His own Poverty and Want. V. The Divisions in England in
Matters of Religion.
Lastly, of great and terrible Persecutions which shall fall upon the Reformed
Churches by the Papists, wherein the Pope should be chiefly concerned.

Written by the Person who heard it from this excellent Man's own Mouth, and
now published e^rnestly to persuade us to that Repentance and Reformation which
can only prevent our ruin and Destruction.

And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham the Thing which I do?

Genesis xviii. 17. Strange and Remarkable PREDICTIONS Of that Holy, Learned, and
Excellent Bishop JAMES USHER, Late Lord Primate of IRELAND.
THE Author of the Life of this excellent and worthy Primate and Archbishop,
gives an Account that, among other extraordinary Gifts and Graces, which it
pleased the Almighty to bestow upon him, he was wonderfully endued with a
Spirit of Prophecy, whereby he gave out several true Predictions and Prophecies
of Things a great while before they came to pass, whereof some we have seen
fulfilled, and others remain yet to be accomplished. And though he was one that
abhorred Enthusiastic Notions, being too learn^d, rational, and knowing, to
admit of such idle Freaks and Whimsies: Yet he professed, That several Times in
his Life he had many Things, impressed upon his Mind concerning future Events,
with so much Warmness and Importunity, that he was not able to keep them
secret, but lay under an unavoidable Necessity to make them known.

From which Spirit he foretold the Irish Rebellion forty Years before it came
to pass, with the very Time when it should break forth, in a Sermon preached in
Dublin in 1601, where, from Ezekiel. iv. 6, discoursing concerning the Prophets
bearing the Iniquity of Judah forty Days, the Lord therein appointed a Day for
a Year: He made this direct Application in relation to the Connivance at Popery
at that Time. From this Year (says he) will I reckon the Sin of Ireland, that
those whom you now embrace, shall be your R^in, and you shall bear this
^niquity. Which Prediction proved exactly true, for from that Time 1601, to the
Year 1641, was just forty Years, in which it is notoriously known, that the
Rebellion and Destruction of Ireland happened, which was acted by those Popish
Priests, and other Papists, which were then connived at. And of this Sermon the
Bishop reserved the Notes, and put a Note thereof in the Margin of his Bible;
and for twenty years before, he still lived in the Expectation of the
fulfilling thereof; and the nearer the Time was, the more confident he was that
it was near Accomplishment, though there was no visible Appearance of any such
Thing; and, (says Dr. Bernard) the Year before the Rebellion broke forth, the
Bishop taking his Leave of me, being then going from Ireland to England, he
advised me to a serious Preparation, for I should see heavy Sorrows and
Miseries before I saw him again, which he delivered with as great Confidence as
if he had seen it with his Eyes; which seems to verify that of the Prophet,
Amos iii. 7. Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he will reveal it to his
Servants, the Prophets.

From this Spirit of Prophecy, he foresaw the Changes and Miseries of England
in Church and State; for having in one of his Books, called De Prim. Eccl.
Brit. given a large Account of the Destruction of the Church and State of the
Britons, by the Saxons, about ^50 Years after Christ: He gives this among ^ther
Reasons, why he insisted so largely upon (...); that he foresaw, that a like
Judgment was ^^et behind if timely Repentance and Reforma^^on did not prevent
it; and he would often ^ourn upon the Foresight of this long before it ^ame.

From this Spirit he gave mournful Intima^^ons of the Death of our Sovereign
Charles the (...), of whom he would be often speaking (...) Fear and Trembling,
even when the King (...) the greatest Success; and would therefore (...) pray,
and gave all Advice possible (...) prevent any such Thing.

From this Spirit he foresaw his own Poverty in worldly Things; and this he
would often speak (...) with Admiration to the Hearers; when he was in his
greatest Prosperity, which the Event did most certainly verify.

From this Spirit he predicted the Divisions and Con^usions in England in
Matters of Religion, and the sad Consequences thereof; some of which we have
seen fulfilled; and I pray God, the rest which he feared may not also be
accomplished upon us.

Lastly, From this Spirit he foretold, That the grea^^st Stroke upon the
Reformed Church^s was yet to come; and that the Time of the utter Ruin of the Sea of Rome should be when she thought herself most secure: And as to thi^
last, I shall add a brief Account (...) the Person's own Hand who was concerned
therein which follows in these Words:

The Year before this Learned and Holy Primate Archbishop Usher, died, I went
to him, an^ earnestly desired him, to give me in Writing his Apprehensions
concerning Justification, an Sancti^ication by Christ: because I had for merly
heard ^im preach upon those Point^ wherein he seemed to make those great
Mysteries more intelligible to my mean Capacity, tha^ any thing which I had
ever heard from (...) other: But because I had but an imperfect (...) confused
Remembrance of the Particulars, took the Boldness to importune him, that (...)
would please to give a brief Account of them (...) Writing, whereby I might the
better impri^^ them in my Memory; of which he would (...) have excused himself,
by declaring his (...) of not writing any more; adding, That if he did write
any thing it should not exceed above a Sheet or two: But upon my continued
Importunity, I at last obtained his Promise.

He coming to Town some Time after, was pleased to give me a Visit at my own
House where I failed not to challenge the Benefit of the Promise he had made
me: He replied, That he had not writ, and yet he could not charge himself with
any Breach of Promise; For (said he) I did begin to write, but when I came to
write of Sanctification, that is, of the New Creature which God forms by his
Spirit in every Soul which he does truly regenerate, I found so little of it
wrought in myself, that I could speak of it only as Parrots by Rote, and
without the Knowledge and Understanding of what I might have expressed, and
therefore I durst not presume to proceed any further upon it.

And when I seemed to stand amazed, to hear such an humble Confession from so
great and experienced a Christian, He added, I must tell you, We do not well
understand what Sanctification and the New Creature are; It is no less than for
a Man to be brought to an entire Resignation of his Will to the Will of God,
and to live in the Offering up of his Soul continually in the Flames of Love,
as a whole burnt Offering to Christ; and how little (says he) are many of those
who profess Christianity experimentally acquainted with this Work on their
Souls?

By this Discourse, I conceived he had very excellently and clearly discovered
to me that part of Sanctification which he was unwilling to write.

I then presumed to enquire of him what his present Apprehensions were
concerning a very great Persecution which should fall upon the Church of God in
these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, of which this reverend Primate
had spoken with great Confidence many Years before, when we were in the highest
and fullest State of outward Peace and Settlement. I asked him whether he did
believe those sad Times to be past, or that they were yet to come? To which he
answered, That they were yet to come, and that he did as confidently expect i^
as ever he had done, adding, That this sad per^ecution would fall upon all the
Protestan^ Churches of Europe; I replied, That I did hope it might have been
past as to these Nations of ours, since I thought that th^ugh we, who are the
People thereof, have been punished much less than our Sins have deserved, and
that our late Wars had made far less Devastations than War commonly brings upon
those Countries where it pleases God in Judgment to suffer it; yet we must
needs acknowledge, that many great Houses had been burnt, ruined, and left
without Inhabitants, many great Families impoverished and undone, and many
Thousand Lives also had been lost in that bloody War, and that Ireland and
Scotland, as well as England, had drank very deep of the Cup of God's Anger,
even to the Overthrow of the Government, and the utter Desolation almost of a
very great Part of those Countries.

But this Holy Man turning to me, and fixing his eyes upon me with that serious
and ireful look which he usually had when he spoke God's Word, and not his own,
and when the Power of God seemed to be upon him, and to constrain^ him to
speak, which I could easily discern much to differ from the countenance
wherewith he usually spoke to me; He said thus:

Fool not yourself with such hopes, for I tell you all you have yet seen, has
been but the beginning of Sorrows to what is yet to come upon the Protestant
Churches of Christ, who will, ere long, fall under a sharper persecution than
ever yet was upon them; and therefore ( said he to me) look you be not found in
the outward Court, but a Worshiper in the Temple before the Altar, for Christ
will measure all those that profess his name, and call themselves his People;
and the outward Worshippers he will leave out to be trodden down by the
Gentiles. The outward Court ( says he) is the formal Christian, whose Religion
lies in performing the outside duties of Christianity, without having an inward
Life and Power of Faith and Love, uniting them to Christ, and these God will
leave to be trodden down, and swept away by the Gentiles; but the Worshippers
within the Temple, and before the Altar, are those who do indeed worship God in
spirit and in truth, whose souls are made his Temples, and he is honored and
adored in the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts, and they sacrifice their
lusts and vile affections, yea, and their own wills to him; and these God will
hide in the hollow of his hand, and under the shadow of his wings; and this
shall be one great diffe^^nce between this last, and all the other preceding
Persecutions; for in the former, the most eminent and spiritual Ministers and
Christians did generally (...) most, and were most v^olently fallen upon, but
in this last Persecuti^^ these shall be preserved by God as a Seed to p^rtake
of that glory which shall immediately fo^^ow and come upon the Church, as soon
as eve^ this storm shall be over; for as it shall be the ^^arpest, so it shall
be the short^st Persecution (...) them all, and shall only take away the gross
^^ypocrites and formal Professors, but the (...) spiritual Believers shall be
preserved till (...) calamity be (...).

I then asked him by what means or instruments this great trial was to be
brought on? ^e answered, by the Papists; I replied, that it (...) to me very
improbable they should be able to do it, since they were now little
countenan^ed, and (...) in these nations, and that the hea^^s o^ the People
were m^re set against (...) than eve^ (...) the Reformation. He (...) again,
That it would be by the hands of Pa^is^s, in a time when they would be in great
power, and in the way of a sudden (...), and that the Pope should be the chief
instrument of it.

All this he spoke with so great assurance, and with the same serious and
concerned (...) which I have before observed him to have, when I have heard him
foretell some things which in all human appearance were very unlikely to come to
pass, which yet I myself have lived to see happen according to his prediction,
and this made me give the more earnest attention to what he then uttered.

He then added, That the Pa^ists were the Gentiles spoken of in the 11th of the
Revelations, to whom the outward Court should be left, that they might tread it
under foot, they having received the Gentiles worship in their adoring Images,
and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many Mediators; and this (said
he) the Papists are always designing among themselves, therefore be sure you be
ready* and not found wanting.

This was the substance, and, I think, for the greatest part, the very same
words which this Holy Man spoke to me at the time before mentioned, not long
before his death, and which I writ down, that so great and notable a prediction
might not b^-lost and forgotten by myself nor others.

This gracious man repeated the same things in substaace to his only daughter
the Lady Tyr^il, and that with many tears, and much about the same time that he
had expressed what is aforesaid to me, and which the Lady Tyrril assured me of
with her own m^uth to this purpose:

That opening the Door of his Chamber, she found him with his Eyes lift up to
Heaven, and the Tears running apace down his Cheeks, and (...) continued for
about half an Hour, not taking the least Notice of her, though she came into
the Room; but at last turning to her, he told her, That his Thoughts had been
taken up about the Miseries and Persecutions that were coming upon the Churches
of Christ, which would be so sharp and bitter, that the Contemplation of them
had fetched those Tears from his Eyes.

The same Things he also repeated to the Lady Bysse, wife to the then present
Lord Chief Baron of Ireland, but with adding this circumstance, woe unto them
that are found unprepared for it.

^o conclude in the words of Dr. Bernard, speaking of this excellent person,
Now howsoever I may be as far from heeding of Prophe^cies this way as any, yet
with me it is not improbable, that so great a Prophet, so sanctified from his
youth, so knowing and eminent throughout the Universal Church, might have at
some special times more than ordinary motions and impulses in doing the
Watchman's part of giving warning of judgments approaching.

From M`Auliffe's Prophecies.
AND in those days it shall come to pass, that the nations of Europe will be
moved to war, and that mighty men and princes will unite from all corners of
the earth to maintain their power, and that they will gather from all quarters
thousands and tens of thousands to fight their battles, and establish their
dominions over multitudes and nations; but their arms shall avail them naught:
in their union they shall find destruction, and their mighty hosts shall be
scattered like chaff before the wind; pestilence and famine shall overtake
those who escape from the sword, and few shall live to bring home the news of
their mishap* and defeats. The stars of nations shall then fall, and desolation
shall reign among the great and proud of the earth; for their ways are the ways
of ungodliness, and their paths are those of injustice and oppression. In those
days (and they are at hand) the mighty Lord of truth shall avenge the injuries
of his people, and his name shall be known throughout. The reign of his justice
shall succeed that of his mercy, and long forbearance; his mighty arm shall
exalt the humble, and prostrate the proud. It shall also come to pass in those
days, that the blood of Africans shall be repaid, and slavery shall be no more;
the beams of truth all strike on the eyes of all nations, and Evangelical love
shall pervade all hearts, equa^ rights shall be the foundation of continua^
peace; and the glory of all people shall be to know the Lord of armies, and
obey his eternal laws.

It is to be lamented that the Compiler could not collect the whole of this
great man's predictions, but hopes to get them shortly, being promised them by
a friend, who will interpret them faithfully from the old Irish. The families
of M`Auliffes were formerly an ancient Irish family in the County of Cork, and
possessed of large estates there; some of which are now enjoyed by the
respectable families of the name of St. Ledger, who purchased them; this great
prophet foretold the transferring of all the family property, and the total
extinction of his name, which he said would be forgotten, and hardly remembered
by the rising generations; which has all turned out as ^e foretold. He also
foretold a gentleman in his days, named Anthony St. Ledger, that he would live
to a great age, providing he would never pass over Bennet's Bridge in the
county of Kilkenny, and if he would, that there he most undoubtedly was to lose
his life; but as destiny in human circumstances is by some deemed unavoidable,
it was most unfortunately verified in Mr. S. who lost his life by a gun shot at
Bennet's Bridge, by the following accident: -- One of his carriage horses had
dropped a shoe traveling through that country, from which accident Mr. S. could
not pursue his journey without getting a shoe on his beast, and being told
there was a smith's forge at Bennet's Bridge, on his way, he drove to the fatal
place (where a forge remains to this day) but there had not been any person at
work in it; the smith was found, and applied to, to put a shoe on the horse
with all convenient dispatch; who excused himself, saying he had no iron. The
horse being lame, and not able to go on further without a shoe, necessitated
Mr. S. to get out of his carriage and im^ortune the smith to search diligently
for iron sufficient for the purpose* when after a long research it could not be
obtained, without having recourse to an old rusty gun barrel, from which a shot
had not been fired p^rhaps for half a century before, and being in some useful
position, was at length put into the furnace by the smith with reluctance, for
the ^urpose of taking off sufficient to make an horse^ shoe: little did Mr. S.
think of M`Auliffe's prophecy, or eternity at hand, whilst he stood in the
forge all the time. The rusty old gunbarrel, which had been load^d with powder
and ball of a long time, no sooner had got the heat of the fire, than the
contents went off, and unluckily killed Mr. S. on the spot, which shows that
Mr. S. had either disbelieved or had forgotten the Prophet's caution, which too
often has been the case of many, who are ashamed of taking council in pe^ilous
cases. least they may become thereby subjects for the ridicule of their more
hardened acquaintances.

The following other prophecy of M'Auliffe's, has not yet come to pass, and is
dev^utly hoped it never may. -- When every running water in Ireland shall turn
a mill wheel, the^ shall the Protestants and Romanists (Papists) kill each
other with great slaughter. But as his prophecies have been spoken and wrote in
Irish, it is left with the wise and sagacious to explain his words, which
signify battles between the Sasanoughs and Irish. The Irish word Sasanough
signifies an English Protestant, and what is difficult to explain; whether
between the people of the Romish persuasion, aginst the other dissenting sects
in Ireland, or nation against nation, is not easy to say.

Another of his prophecies is as follows: In seventeen hundred ninety and five,
Whoever will be at that period alive,
Will see plenty revisit this fortunate land,
And Ireland emerg'd from her slavish command;
Ere the period arrives will a torrent of blood,
Discolored, be forced from it is primitive flood;
The verdure of Spring will be shaded with red,
And the fruits of the earth oppressed with the dead.


It should be seriously remarked, that the year 1795 has been pointed out
particularly by different Prophets, as a year of greater destruction and human
slaughter than any year previous; even Mrs. Shipton prophesied a century or two
back, that E -- 's ruin would begin in 1792, and terminate in 1795. The wicked
in all nations and ages ridicule prophecies, never acknowledging the ordained
will of an angry Providence; yet they are always more fearful than such as
believe: and though it appears in holy writ, that revolutions happen from the
foundation of the world, and will to the end of time; yet the Almighty always,
and without exception, gives some people the gift of foretelling such changes
in human affairs, and expressly declares he will not do any such things, but he
will first impart to his servants the Prophets. And as often as he threatens
his creatures with any dreadful change, it is to convince them it proceeds from
his wrath and indignation, originating from their intolerable wickedness, and
changing his love into hatred, yet always and at all times promises to withhold
the scourge or persecution, if the threatened nations of people will cry out
for mercy, and call in fervency upon his holy name, to come to their
a^^istance, and avert his dreadful wrath and vengeance from them, but they
seldom or never do, though he quotes examples (to every succeeding generation
in vain) viz. Noah's flood, the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, with many others,
when the people laughed at predictions, and timely advice, as they do still. In
the whole course of human affairs holy writ proves his threats and promises are
all conditional, calculated to stimulate people to call always on him for
mercy, and to execute his easy commands, particularly his doctrines in the new
Testament; be their accursed hearts are hardened, and the shut the gates of
their understanding against him, and in the blind career of their lives have
insensibly bid defiance to him and his laws. that the text of scripture in the
book of Esdras may be fulfilled to their eternal condemnation, wherein the Lord
God desires Esdras not mind who shall be damned, but seek after them who shall
be saved, for Hell was created for the multitude, and Heaven for the few. Let
all who read this book strive to be of that few, and mind the rules mentioned
therein, and also in the new Testament, and if they do not, they will be
outcasts in Hell, and all their finery and ^rippery here, will be their open
and everlasting shame there. If the bible was universally ^^ad, and fulfilled
to the utmost of human power, the mighty God would not have so great cause
against his creatures, or to warn them to turn to him (the merciful and loving
Father) by the voice of Prophets and other warnings, than that blessed book. Is
he not constantly looking down from his holy mountain (the variety of the
glories and pleasures of which never yet entered the heart of mankind to
conceive the least idea of,) on the wicked universe with grief and sorrow,
saying, O my people, my people, how often would I have gathered ye together, as
a hen gathers her chickens, but ye would not. Hear now, Readers, you have a
loving God, a weeping God, and a God who tells you in the bible his nature and
his name is Love, with outstretched arms, open to receive ^very one that will
turn unto him, but ye will not; therefore, if you do not, when you die (after
performing faithfully all the works of the Devil, by greedily desiring and
pursuing with your wicked hearts and inclinations, the alluring ways of this
world, in which all your thoughts are enveloped) expect the dreadful sentence
from him, who will then, he says, appear to ye as a roaring Lion, and say I
know ye not; go ye accursed into everlasting torments, prepared for the Devil
and his servants. Let none be alarmed at the revolution in France, such
revolutions must happen in all idolatrous nations; they corroborate with the
holy bible, a nation shall be converted in a day, that is, emerging from
idolatry and idolatrous persecution, at destined periods, in the fullness of the
time of the Most High, and so on previous to the coming of the great Judge,
idolatrous Monarchs must be all cut off. But if mighty men should plan and
scheme for centuries to reduce things to their own human weak and wicked
wishes, their labor is in vain, they are mocked by God, they cannot see into
the great causes; they are greedy for dominion and filthy lucre, they are cruel
and unjust, and all their ways are an abomination before the face of the great
One; they are poor, blind, naked, miserable, foolish and wicked. Give attention
now ^ll who never go^ the gift of repentance from above, read the new
Testament, and the most imaginary innocent among ye, will find yourselves
fitted for Hell's torments; rouse to immediate repentance, call on the Most
High for mercy, cease from Hell-born wickedness, such as gambling, night
parties, revelling, balls, assembli^s, drums, hellish masquerades, drunkenness,
glu^tony, dress, and pride, which Christ says is of your father the Devil;
cease from superfluous dress, be a Quaker entirely in dress, and a very plain
one, for your soul's sake, to obey Christ, and fulfill the holy scriptures, cry
aloud to the Most High (with the true baptismal tears of repentance) which is
the real water baptism of salvation, previous to the operation of the Holy
Ghost, and externally described in the third chapter of St. John in the new
Testament. Beware of hypocrisy, ostentation, and falsehood, banish these hydras
from the inmost recesses of your hearts; make room there for the Holy Ghost to
dwell in, for with them hydras he cannot dwell, and without him do not trouble
yourselves to look forward to salvation; do not strive to please human
creatures, or you cannot please God; talk no more of fashions or of the circle
of your acquaintances, such conversation is abominable to God; boast no more of
your acquaintances, Lord such a one, or Lady such a one, they are earth and
dirt, titles are sacrilegeous and blasphemous, which is always the consequence
of accursed wealth, for wealth is a curse from God, because it never was and
never will be applied as God commanded it, therefore he declares it is harder
for a wealthy person to enter the kingdom of Heaven than for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle; when a person gets wealth he gets pride, and
contempt for all who do not possess the same curse, wealth, and in consequence
of that wealth and pride, the Devil instigates him to renounce his name, and
take the ridiculous name of a river, a town, a hill, or a province, and tacks
God's name and title to it. Then he is exalted, and God positively declares and
says, whoever exalts himself shall surely be abased, that is, cast into Hell;
and thus does the Devil sport with all wealthy people, and proud people, and
dressy people. Dress draws every curse from God down upon the soul; the more
dressy, the more vicious; clothing was first invented to cover sin and shame,
and ought therefore be as plain as possible, besides God strictly commands it
should be so. Now, hear the declaration of a fine shewy dressy person to God,
viz. I will dress, powder, curl, and paint, to spite you, God, because you
desire me not; I will flirt, laugh, please and be pleased, praise and be
praised, read plays, romances, and all other devilish books, because you say
all those will corrupt me, and that I must account for every idle word I speak;
I will not read the bible, nor do therein, because you desire me, for every
thing you command me I will not do, and every thing you forbid me I will do,
God, because my father and mother brought me up this way, and they follow the
same life themselves, for we all prefer the damnation of Hell, to you and your
old book filled with stories of love, terrors, Heaven, Hell, and all such
tedious nonsense, to people of fashion going into Perdition. The more wicked
and abominable a person is before God, the more glaringly they wish to adorn
the filthy carcass, iniquity invented new fashions, it originated in France;
every married woman there was despised if she was not a w --; the bible was
forbid to be read by order of Ant^christ and his Deputies, least the people
should perceive their own damnation, and rebel against idolatry; the contagion
is in England, Ireland, etc.; the world is teeming with wickedness, the Lord
God is like a roaring lion, filled with wrath, fury, and revenge, he is
thundering down his vengeance in a variety of ^hapes, previous to the general
judgment, which is now the general dread of the people, teeming with iniquity,
and filled with terrors without one single exception among the wicked. whenever
the Almighty intendsany great event he puts it more or less in the people's
minds before the execution, to induce them to holiness; for there is no other
way to prevent his wrath. But instead, they continue to act as if they were
never to die, and blinding each other with praise, flattery, hypocrisy, and
deceit. Suppose Christ was this instant to come down and judge all people,
showing Heaven's great expanse of innumerable pleasures on one side, and Hell's
yawning torments on the other, how would the proud and dressy appear? Would the
not with their pride and fashionable dress in Hell, where it originated? Are
they the pious holy people, marked with the Holy Ghost to sa^vation, that could
run to meet Christ, whose face is of flaming fire? Or are they those pointed
out in the bible, who are marked by the Devil, to devote themselves to the
pleasures and passions of this Hell-grown world? Let them answer for
themselves; (...) if they cannot, I can; they are of the latter description,
they are an ab^mination before the Lord, and before his holy people on earth;
they have stipulated with the Devil their pre^ious souls for fashionable dress
and pride; and as God says, cannot escape the damnation of Hell. Therefore,
Readers, do not ye be of this accursed number, but follow the advice given in
this little pamphlet of very great value; cast away instantly your fashionable
dress, pride, ^rippery, and all accursed worldly show, and you will make the
Devil fly away from you, roaring with despair; and God and the innumerable host
of Heaven will shout for joy, and the windows of Heaven will be opened unto
you. Give atrention now, ye wealthy, ye great wicked ones, who are squandering
thousands and tens of thousands yearly in superfluous excesses, which are the
works of the son of Perdition. Squander your thousands on the purchase of
millions of bibles, new testaments, hymn books, and psalm books, scatter them
among the people like corn before the plow, by which all the human race will
learn to know the Lord, and do his blessed will; propagate the gospel of Christ
in its original purity, until all the people shall know that the gospel sound
alone is sure salvation, and not the abominable works of man's hands; renounce
idolatry; sue for the property of the distressed, when wronged by the unjust;
distrib^te justice without favor or affection, and God will love you and keep
you in safety. Read the bible the ensuing long winter evenings, ye and your
families; expound it to each other every night, and if at leisure in the day
time also. Glorify God, let your conversation turn on every verse, on every
chapter you read, of the wonderful works of the Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles: then your conversation will be in Heaven, and this is also the
communion of Saints, so little understood in this world. Let that same Jesus
never leave your thoughts; this is what the Apostle means, where he says, pray
without ceasing; this incessant silent meditation on Jesus, is certain
salvation; this is worshipping in spirit and in truth, because God is in Christ,
your souls then feed on him, and grow rich in grace, and grace is the gradual
operation of the Holy Ghost, which brings you from glory to glory. Let all men
and women be exhorters to good, by their profound knowledge of the bible, which
will abolish evil from the human race; empty your purses to put all the
indigent to industry, who have the inclination but not the means; and after
doing all these things, and ten thousand times more, do not take the least
merit to yourselves; it is not ye that do it, it is the Holy Ghost in ye;
therefore give all the merit to God, and all the glory; and then know he has
only done ye the honor of choosing ye to be useful machines to do his business;
and if ye are conscious in your hearts it is so, and that ye firmly believe
that property which ye so distribute is his, and not your own, (as all wealthy
fools imagine) then the wide expanse of Heaven is open for your enjoyment as
soon as your fervency of love for him desire it, with millions of millions of
pleasures, with him on his holy mountain; do all those things if you can, and
if you can and do not, read your dreadful sentence in the new testament. Give
attention again, ye wealthy; cast away all your ^rippery, your variegated
head-dr^sses, and all other ornaments calculated to adorn your carcas^s for
praise and admiration, which is certain c^^demnation to your souls; play no
cards or other gambling; never enter them hellish seminaries of corruption
called play houses; do not suffer a play book of any kind, romance or novel,
inside your houses; they are the keys that unlock the doors of Hell; propagate
industry, the arts and sciences, travels, voyages, geography, the globes, the
maps, etc. among the poor; squander God's money in all such employments, but
let holy writ be always uppermost in your thoughts, and the subjects of your
conversations, when the others are not absolutely necessary; become domestics,
and ^ay no more ridiculous fashionable vis^ts; do not continue to make Gods of
your filthy carcases, with made dishes, Iuscious meats and ^rinks, or other
vicious extravagancies; you must certainly give an account of every shilling
you unnecessarily lay out on your persons and families, and if contrary to the
observations made here and in the new testament, th^n the dreadful and
intolerable sentence is (...) for an endless eternity.

A Seasonable Hint
Dear F^llow Traveller through the Wilderness of this World.
YOU and I must soon appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and as we may
possibly never meet again in this ^if^, a (...) Hints concerning that most
joyful or most awful Event may not be unseasonable. The Bible is the word of
the living God; for all Scripture is given by inspiration of GOD: holy men of
GOD s^ake and worte as they were move^ by the HOLY GHOST

The follwing Hints taken from that Divine Book deserve your immediate and most
serious consideration.

The word of GOD assures us, that you and I are Sinners, for GOD has n^lu^ed
all under Sin, -- There is none that does Good and (...) not, no not one, --
we were even sh^p^n in Iniquity, and in Sin did our Mother con^^ive us.

Another awful Truth contained in Scripture is, that the wages of Sin, is Hell
-- and that it is appointed unto all men once to a^e, and after Death the
Judgment; that heart searching judgment, where not an action in your life, --
not a word of your tongue, nor a thought of your heart, -- will escape the
notice of that JESUS, who will be the Judge of both the quick and the dead;
then the righteous and the wicked will recei^^ according to the Things done in
the Body, whether (...) be good or evil. The righteous shall go away into
everlasting Life, -- but the wicked will be ^ast down to Hell, to be tormented
with Devils and damned Spirits for ever and ever.

Oh, how dreadful will that be to you and m^ if through our Sins we should come
into that ^lace of torment!

I would further ^int to you that the blessed GOD has manifested his grace and
love and has shown his tender pity and compassion in giving his dear Son, the
LORD JESUS CHRIST to be a REDEEMER, and SAVIOR of poor lost Sinners; that
JESUS is both God and Man in one Divine Person, that he might be able to save
the very worst of Sinners who come unto GOD through him. His blood was shed on
the cro^s for your Redemption, from Sin, Death, and Hell, -- His spotless
Righteousness was wrought out for your eternal justification, if you indeed,
and in Truth believe in him.

He obeyed the Law of GOD in your room and (...); and be died, that you might
not die eternally; and is that glorious SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS that will arise
and shine upon his People for ever and ever.

In order to your saving Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, your having ^aith in him,
and a living Union with him, a very great change must pass in your heart and
li^e. This change is the peculiar work o^ the HOLY GHOST, and is called in
Scripture, RE^ENERATION, or the NEW BIRTH. Except a Man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. You know, that this divine Change manifests
itself by a heart deeply humbled under a sense of Sin; and an earnest desire
after Salvation.

It further shows itself by a discovery of JESUS CHRIST, as a suitable,
compassionate, and all ^ufficient Savior, and by a holy life and conversation.
To them that believe CHRIST is percious. -- He is the Chief among ten thousand,
and altogether lovely. -- Oh is he ^o to you and me! ^xamine your heart daily
on this weighty Question -- Do you know JESUS CHRIST? Do you love him? Are you
devoted to him, and do you put all your trust in him? If you do, you are happy.
-- If not, your condition is most miserable.

Let me beseech you by the mercies of GOD, by the Love of JESUS, and by the
worth of your precio^s Soul, that you earnestly pray, O! my Heavenly FATHER,
forgive my Sins, and ^eveal thy dear SON in me; blessed JESUS! let me be
redeemed by thy Blood, and clothed with thy Righteousness. -- Oh! holy and
blessed SPIRIT, ^anctify my heart, be in me a Spirit of frequent and fervent
prayer. Give me faith in JESUS CHRIST -- Teach me to love him, and give me
Grace to grow like him -- and make me what thou would have me to be. Guide me
by thy counsel and fit me for thy Glory.

Let me beg of you, (my dear) to give up your heart to these Things, that we
may meet in Heaven, and be for ever with the LORD.

I conclude with entreating you most affectionately to consider these things
directly. Life is uncertain -- DEATH -- JUDGMENT, -- HEAVEN and HELL, are at
hand, and are awful Things -- devote your time to seek an interest in JESUS
CHRIST as your SAVIOR and REDEEMFR -- ask and you shall re^^ive, seek and you
shall find, kno^k and it shall be opened unto you.

That the Lord may bless these hints to your Soul, is the earnest Prayer of

your hearty wellwisher, For JESUS' sake. CHRISTIANUS.

The Quaker's Advice.
AS I have often, in passing along the streets and highways, heard the Most
Sacred Name very profane^y made use of, both by men and women, and many
grievously calling for damnation on themselves and one on another, my heart has
been, and is, deeply afflicted t^ereat: and therefore I beseech you, in the
Name of JESUS CHRIST, do not defile your Souls which are dear and precious, by
any wilful sin: and amongst other things, do not ta^e the Holy Name of God in
vain, for the Lord will not hold him or her guiltless that takes his holy Name
in vain.

GOD is willing to save you; why should any of you lose and destroy yourselves?
Observe this attentively; for notwithstanding all that the LORD has done, and
is d^ing for us, such as die in their sins, where he is gone, they can never
come.

Abstain from drunkenness, and all excess, and from every appearance of evil,
love one another, as JESUS CHRIST has loved you; apply yourselves to the
witness of God within you, which reproves you for evil; submit to, and obey its
holy manifestations and discoveries and it will do much more for you than a^^
you can hear from any man. This witness of GOD is the word of his Grace, even
the word of Life, the Holy Ghost, which is able to save your souls. In the love
of the Gospel, I invite you all to come and taste how good and merciful the
LORD is toward all those that return to him with their whole hearts. If you
are such a one, who can, through an ill habit and bad custom, curse, swear, and
do any other bad action, almost without reproof or feeling; though your case be
so desperate, there is yet mercy with God that he may be feared: and I advise
you to endeavor to be still a few minutes in the morning, when you awake,
before you rise up, and then think seriously with yourself thus: I have not
given my being to myself: I am accountable to the Author and Creator of it; and
this day He (the LORD of all) will take notice of all my actions; this day he
will hear all my Words; this day he will know all my thoughts; and at a certain
time (yet unknown to me when) my soul must give him a full account. I am not
without some degree of hope, that such serious reflections may be conducive to
raise desires like these: Oh! that I may be watchful. Oh! that I may sin no
more as long as I live: For we must cease to do evil before we can learn to do
well. Therefore silence before the LORD, and attention to his reproofs of
instruction in your own heart, which are the way to life, are the first steps
to come to CHRIST, and to be made a real Christian.

Self Enquiries for Every Morning.
1. Was God in my thoughts at lying down and ^ising up? and were the thoughts
of him sweet and refreshing to my soul? 2. In what frame is my heart this
morning? Do I admire the goodness of God in the last night's Sleep, and for
adding more time to my life? and am I heartily thankful? 3. Can I r^ally commit
myself and all my affairs to God this day, to be guided by his counsel, and
protected and provided for, by his care, and to be entirely at his disposal? 4.
Am I resolved to speak for God and his Glory? and in the strength of Christ,
will I neither be afraid, ashamed, nor weary of well-doing? 5. Am I a child of
God and an heir of Glory? and does the Spirit of God testify that I am born
again. If I am God's child, should I not wear the garments of righteousness,
and take heed of defiling myself with sin? should I not do more than others? 6.
Who is the greatest deceiver? if my heart should I not be jealous. and watchful
over it: where are the greatest dangers, and m^st p^rnicious mistakes? if in
so^l concerns, should I not venture the loss of all things rather than lose my
precious, never-dying soul? 7 Who are my most implacable, powerful and
soul-destroying Enemies, but the World, the Flesh and the Devil? and should I
no^ w^^ch and be sober; so as neither to idoli^e the (...)* pamper the second,
nor listen to the third? 8 Who is or can be my best Friend* but God? And should
I not fear his displeasure more than death, desire his favor more than life,
and through all this day love, honor, and obey him. 9. Where is the greatest
vanity and vexation, but in the World? And should I not live above it? (...)
not Godliness the greatest gain? and should I not make it my chiefest business.
10. What is my heavenly work* but to Strive, R^^, W^estle, Fight? and can ^ do
all this without Care, Diligence and Watchfulness? 11. Whose eyes will be upon
me all this day, to observe my head and heart, my Lip, and Life, but his who is
the Judge of all the Earth? And dare I Sin in his presence, and affront him to
his Face? 12. If I should spend this day in Vanity, Idleness, or Sin, will it
not be sorrow^ul at night? if I spend it holily and p^ofitably, shall I not
pray with greater confidence, lie down more peacefully, and have (...)
^estimony of a good conscience for my rejoicing. 13 How would I have this day
appear at the day of Judgment? Ought not my Though^s, Words and Actions to be
such now, as I (...) then wish them to have been? 14. How may I this day order
my secular business with most prudence and wisdom, integrity and upligh^ness
and for my real advantage? 15. Am I now fit to draw nigh to God in pray^^, and
can I seek first. and as my chief concern, the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness? 16. Am I now willing to take Christ alone for righteousness? and
to devote all my time and (...) to him? And to offer him praise continually?


Self Enquiries for every Evening.
1. What have I done this day for God and his Glory? what can I look back upon
with comfo^^? 2. In what frame has my heart been all this day? Have I more
desired heavenly or earthly things? has my jo^s been more in God and in the
hopes of ^uture Glory, than in worldly Riches, Honors or Pleasures* was my
g^^ef more for sin or for the troubles of Li^e? Have I more derived comfort
from the broken cis^erns of created good, or from God the living fountain? 3.
What were m^ intentions? Have I been sincere, and maintained a conscience void
of off^^c^ toward God and toward man? Did I eat and drink, pray, and converse
to the Glory of Ged, or was Self ^ppermost in all? 4. What spiritual duties
have I performed this day? Did I regard the manner as well as the ma^^er, and
do them from conscience not from custom? Did I pray servently, and ^ead and
m^ditate so as to affect my heart? 5. How faithful diligent* and care^ul, have
I been in my place and calling? And have there been no idle hours in the day?
6. What has been my company this day? What good have I done them or received
from them? Did ^ reprove, exhort and strengthen* encourage, comfort and w^rn,
as the matter required? 7. How have I bo^^e the crosses and troubles of the
day? Did I neither despise them, nor saint under them; neither entert^in hard
thoughts of God, nor utter rash words against him? 8. What were my temptations
this day? was I easi^y d^awn into Sin, or restrained and overawed by God's
all-seeing eye, merciful heart, or a^enging hand? What convict^on, merey, or
warning did I sin against? and have I repented of my sin? 9. What were my
enjoyments, and how was my hear^ ^ffected under them? Was I affected with the
goodness of God to me in my health, ^riends and estate, and unfeignedly
thankful for them? 10. What have I learned this day? have I got more
heart-affecting knowledge of God and of his Glory; and of myself and of my
sins? Of this word and that which is to come? 11. What have I remembered of the
word of God, whether read or heard? Was any (...) sweet (...) my soul, and did
I by ^aith make any promise my ow^ Did any particular precept (...)? 12. What
graces have I (...)? have I lived by ^ai^h. loved God, and (...) for Christ:
have I had (...) to God the (...), as my (...) and (...); to (...) savior,
(...) and (...); and to the holy (...) as my (...) strength and com^o^^er? 13
Have I been suitably affected with the (...) or miseries of others, whether
(...) have I had a compassionate heart, and (...) hand to any in want? 14 Have
I especially done good to them who a^e of the (...). however (...)? 15. Did the
C^^^ch of God (...) of Christ ^e near my heart? Have I (...) the welfare of
Christ's Church, and (...) its desolations, and (...) Heav^n abo^e my (...) Joy.
16. Have I really set death before me, and (...) my life as a vapor? if God
should this ^ight clo^e my eyes in death, how is it like to be with my soul?
17. lo^^nceivably great, glorious and terrible as the day of Judgment will be,
dare I meet Christ at his coming? Will my graces bear the t^ial of that day?
Can I now with joy say, even so, Come (...) Jesus?


Lady JANE GREY'S Letter TO HER SISTER, The Evening before she was beheaded in
the Towe^ of London.
Translated from the Original Gre^k.
I HAVE sent you, my dear fi^^er Catharine, a book, which, though ^t be not
exte^nal^y (...) with gold, or curious embroidery of nee^l^ work, ^ internally
of more value than a^ the precious mines in the wide world, my only dear and
best beloved (...), it is the book of the law of our great and dear Redeemer;
his testimony and last (...)* bequeathed to lead us to e^ernal happiness. Read
it with attention and an earnest desire to follow its precepts, and it wi^
^urely bring you to immo^tal and everlasting life, teach you to live and die,
win you to God. e^dow you with happiness and glory. Labor to live acco^ding to
the rules it contains, and you shall inherit such riches, as the covetous
cannot wi^hd^^w, the thie^ steal, nor the moth corrupt. My dear sister, ask
wisdom from above, and desire with David to understand the law of the Lord our
God, (...) on the (...) of thy heart by divi^e love, live still to die, that
through death you may obtain eternal life. Let not your youth blind you from
knowing that at all hours, times, and seasons, are alike to the most high God,
when he (...) are they (...) ^amps are (...) when he comes; the Lord is equall^
glorified in the young as in the old; my dear good si^ter, (...) to die, deny
the ^en (...) of the wo^^d, the (...), and the D^vil, and delight (...) in the
Lo^d. Jesus Christ; be sorry for your sins; love God, do^ ^e^lpair, be strong
in faith in Christ, live and die him the dear Redeemer, and with St. Paul, wh^
fi^led with the fullness of divine love, you will (...) to be d^ssolved, to be
with Christ, wi^h whom (...) love and life eternal; be the good servant, that
wh^ ^eath steals on, like a thief in the n^gh^, you b^ not found in da^k^ess,
with the children of the world, who know not God, and be not without oil in
your lamp, like the foolish Virgins, least yo^ be re^used ad^it^ance to the
marriage ^upper of the Lamb; or w^thou^ the w^dding ga^ment, least (...) be
cast into outer da^kness; Rejoice in the Redeemer, follow our great master
Christ, ^heerfully bear your cross or crosses, lay a^l your sins on hi^
shoul^ers, and embrace him always. Rejoice with me, at my death, my dearest
sister. that I shall be delivered from this body of corruption, and clothed
with the garment of incorruption; for by (...) this mortal life, I shall obtain
one immor^al, joyful, glorious, and eve^lasting, which I pray the Almighty God
to give you when he shall please to call you hence, and send you all sufficient
grace. ^o live in his love and fear, and die in true Christian ^aith, in Christ
Jesus, who redeemed us, and all who love him, and long for his coming; and I
now exhort you, in the name of our Almighty Father, never to swerve either from
the hope of life or ^ear of death: for if you deny his truth to prolong a we^ry
and corrupt being, Omniporence himself will (...) you, and cu^ sho^^ by his
vengeance, what (...) were desirous of prolonging, by the loss of your precious
soul. Cleave to him* and he will ex^end: your days to a (...) circumsribed to
his own glory; to which I (...) God bring me now, and you hereaf^er, when it
shall please him to call you Farewell. once more, my beloved (...), put your
whole ^ru^t in the great (...) who alone ca^ help you -- AMEN

Your loving Sister, J^NE DUDLEY.


She was a Lady of the m^st amiable person, most engaging disposition, and
(...) ^^c^mpl^shed parts. She (...) greatest (...) in acq^^^ing every part of
poli^e Li^e^^^ure* had a (...) knowledge of the Ro^^a^ and Greek languages,
(...) modern tongues, and the elega^^ arts* the best of wives to the most
aff^cti^nate husband, she re^u^ed being placed on the ^hrone, till (...) by her
Father, Father-in-law and H^sb^^d: when she had been warned to prepare for
death, which she had long expected, she received the dreadful news with jo^,
The Queen's bigo^^ed zeal (under color of tender mercy to the prisoner's soul)
induced her to send Priests, who tormented her wi^h perpetual disputations, and
^ (...) was granted her on conditions that she would embrace the ^do^atrous
wo^ship of the Church of Rome: (...) she he^d Death and Christ in greater
esteem. Lady Jane had presence of mind (in them (...) and (...) circumstances,
to d^fend her religion with a christian for^itude, supported from holy writ*
and also wrote a letter to her Sister in the ^reek ^angua^e, exhorting her to
maintain, in every reve^se of fortune, the like steady ^erse^erance* On the da^
of her execution. she re^used to see her ^^sband Lord Guil^ord, but sent him
word* that the ^e^derness of their ^arting, might probab^^ (...)* (...) from
that co^^^ancy which their approaching end ^^qu^red of them. Their separation
would be only for a m^m^nt, and would soon r^join each other in (...), where
their affections would be (...); and where death, disappointments, and (...)
co^ld no longer have access to them, (...) break on their happin^^s.

Extracts relative to the Church of ROME. (By Lady Wallace.)
TO be able to judge of the discontent which is now general in all Roman
Catholic countries, as well to draw natural conclu^ions from those com^^^tions
which seem to be inevitable, from the a^arice of the c^ergy, you must go back
to the infancy of Christianity, and make you^self acquainted with the increase,
abuse, and decrease of the power of the church of Rome, which now, even its
once most supe^stitious adherents begin to revolt against, from the avarice and
depravity of the clergy.

Begin from A D. 66, when we find the marty^^dom of Pe^er and Paul upon record:
and the appointment of St. Lin, to be bishop of Rome; happy for Ch^istianity,
the cruel (...) which cru^hed and ha^assed the ens^^ved people, rendered them
greedy to adopt a doctrine which promised comfo^t to their sufferings, eternal
rest and blessings herea^^e^, in proportion to their oppression and sufferings
in this world.

In the three first ages of the church. the bishop of Rome* in common wi^h the
other ^ishops* preached the ^^ctrine of Christianity in all tha^ purity which
ou^ S^viour commanded to all his disciples, vested all with equal powers:
piety, moderation, and priva^^on ma^ked their lives, and there never was
mention m^de of any superior power being invested in the bishop of Rome, till
the days of Constantine the (...) new mode^^ed the empire, and gave the (...)
power of regulating all religious disputes (...) church rites and re^orms; but
always re^erving to the emperor the power of au^horizing. or a^^ulling, the
decisions of the bishop This power, ^he e^npero^s continued to exercise,
without any bishop having ever hinted, that by divine authority he poss^ss^d
any superiority over the other bishops, or over the government of his own
country, far less in that of his ^eighbours.

At the period when civil discord and foreign wars so convul^ed and dis^embered
the empire, that no (...) could take upon him the government of the (...), the
emperor invested the bishops as his agents; and they assumed af^erwards this
power as their right, in the fourth century, and no emperor afterward was
powerful enough to reassume his rights.

Upon the popes becoming ve^ted with the civil government, their luxury and
v^ces became scandalous. They were followed by ^l^ves and mistress^s in the
streets in the greatest pomp, and from their riches and power they were able to
usu^p that superiority over the other bishops which they some time a^^er
a^^empted to m^ke their credulous adherents believe they had been empowered by
Christ to assume.

The high (...) and affluence bestowed by Constantine upon the s^e of Rome,
made all the (...) bishops anxiou^ to succeed to it, and ^^storia^s tell us,
that the sa^e co^^up^ion and in^rigue were u^^d in those days as there is now
to make a pope.

In 378. the emperor Gratian formed a spiritual court, which confisted of the
bishop of Rome, and seven ^^her bishops; to judge finally of all church (...);
and he (...) that all his subjects should ^ddp^ the belief of the Trinity, and
become of the Christian church, whi^^ proved that he (who was bec^me a
Christian) was head of the Church and supreme in power* and this was frequently
shown by the emp^rors making the monks serve as soldiers, and the bishops of
Rome as ambassadors: one of the popes, Sylverius, was starved to death when on
an embassy.

^Till the eighth century, we (...) the popes power no greater than that o^ our
archbi^hops; after that (...), the imbeci^^^y, superstition, and often the
poverty and difficulties of the emperors, tempted them to give the popes
sovereign power over provinces, titles, and homage, to gain (...), or pardon of
their (...).

So soon as (...) were declared head of the. church, they (...) those Pagans
who had turned (...) Christianity to (...) same ideas to them that they had to
their (...) Druids, that the person who was exc^mmunicated by them, was
degraded, and deprived of the common (...) of the people; and thu^ (...) began
first to (...) damnation on nations and king; who devia^ed from (...) politics.

In this same century, Pep^^, in (...), finding his sovereign, Childeric, a
weak prince, ^o (...) the ambitious scheme of (...) him, and (...) his throne,
which pope Z^cheria encouraged him (...) do; knowing that if Pepin succeeded,
he could not do without the influence of the church, over the minds of the
people, as well as the riches of its treasury: for which Pepin promised to aid
him with his arms, and every art to establish his power; and after Pepin by
these means had completed his (...), the; pope was attacked by Allulph, a
Lomb^rd prince. when Pepin hastened to his succor, and forced (...) totally to
give^up to the pope the (...) of Rome.

In the time of pope Adrian, who succeeded Zacheria, Charlemagne, who succeeded
Pepin, again rep^l^ed the Lombard princes, who wi^hed to reduce the ^avished
power of the papal splendour. Char^emagne ^ound the Pope a very powerful friend:
from the bigotry, the natural produce of ignorance, which reigned in those
day^, the princes and people impover^shed themselves to make presents to the
pope, whom they believed to be endowed with su^ernatural powers, from the
miracles and (...) they daily (...) by their know^edge in (...) and chemistry,
which knowledge was (...) confined to the priesthood.

Thus by reading history, you will (...) by what almost imperceptible degrees
the church of Rome emerged from all the simplicity and (...) of the (...)
doct^ines of Christ, to e^joy that splendor and corruption which have (...)
many ages distinguished it.

Surely the leading (...) to become a traitor and a (...) was (...) ^o the
doc^rines of our Savior.

One of the pope^ causes of the great success of the (...) was, that (...) were
elected; they were (...) always men of ^ho^en abilities, and a^ts, (...) to the
study of enr^ching and agrandizing the (...): if any pope turned out a man of a
different cast, the cardinals lost no time to murder or depo^e him; whereas the
princes who succeeded their (...) were either fools or wise men, as the chance
of fortune directed.

The popes, under pretense of managing the (...) of the church and the
con^ciences of kings, were a^ways fending men to undermine the polities of
every cabinet; either by encouraging the weaknesses of the leading men, or by
denouncing thunders which (...) the weak minde^ and (...); and thus with the
aid of all powerful gold (...) i^fluence. Therefor, it is (...) to be wondered
at, that they should so long have kept all Europe in a state of blood,
barbari^m and bigotry, which (...) would have been i^s wretched (...), had not
England, Swi^zerland, and many of the German Principalities, by the will of
Providence, re^o^med* an^ (...) from the u^j^st vsurpa^ion of the Church of
Rome. Re^igion (...) that period has ce^sed to be the (...) of state intrigues
in those rival nations which gave laws to the world.

Should a general reform of that Church now h^ppen, which is very probab^e, the
minds of its ad^e^ents seem ripe for revolt, from their groaning severely under
the tyranny of a corrupt avar^cious clergy; and we may expect to see all Europe
enjoy pe^manent peace ^ut the restless spirit of domination in the Romish
Clergy will leave no attempt u^^ried to secu^e their power; and it is only by a
conflict which must produce va^ied (...) of blo^d, that they will submit to
restore their usurped spoils: we find that already many of them have kept the
chair by ass^ssinations, cruelty and treachery.

Sergiu^ the Third made one of his numerous bas^ards, Pope, under the name of
John the Eleventh. John the Twel^th was also a bastard of Pope Agape^us; for in
those days, (...) those heroes willingly made the sacrifice to God of that
generally troublesome appendage to a libe^^ine -- a wife, yet the^ could not
dispense with a variety of mistresses. Gregory the Se^ond profited the most by
his amors; for the Empr^ss Matilda, and the daughter of the Duke of Tuscany
left him large legacies. Pascal the Second stirred up and supported Henry the
Fifth to act so bad a part by his Father; for it was those scan^^lous
^epresentatives of divine virtue which armed ^ons against their fathers, and
made them be^^me ra^^ors to their oath and allegiance. Alexander the (...) is
reco^ded as a wonder of brutal crimes-Clement the Seventh had the mortification
to see (...) his cha^^, and could work no miracle to prevent his being dr^ven
out of Rome. He also (...) the Emperor (...) cry loudly against the power and
u^urpation of the (...), which awed him so ^uch that he lost England, as he
dared not give (...) to Hen^y the Eighth to divor^e Catharine of A^^agon,
because she was the Aunt of Charles whom he was afraid more to irritate. Henry,
enraged against every thing which stood in opposition to his wishes, bu^ned the
Pope in ^ffigy in Lon^on, and ordered every ore to change their ^eligion with
as little remoise as he changed his wife: thus an (...) people are for ever
persecuted by despotic ^ools. Paul the Third was famous for being the most
luxurious and licen^ious man of his time; he made his ba^^ards cardinals when
boys.

At this period the ^lergy made a violent effort to re-establish their power in
Englan^; and Mary with that cru^l, revengeful spirit, which seems to have been
the most powerful engine of the church, by burning and ex^irpating all those
who dared oppose her, did all she could to bring England again under the yoke
of pop^^y: but such a co^^uct was not calculated to make pro^elytes of the
minds of men, enlightened by the mild i^fluence of truth, and it soon pleased
God to purge the ear^h of such a monster.

But it was (...) to Paul the Fourth to see the mortal blow given to the power
of the S^e of Rome, in the glorious reign of Elizabeth, whose want of
^oleration, which stained her name with a Sister's death, arose from a
conviction that tolerating such opposite doct^ines in the chur^^, must
inevitably, sooner or later, involve the (...) in civil disco^d.

Six^us the (...) was (...), at England's having not only thrown off the (...)
of Rome but her sudden rise to grand ^r and (...), that he promised Philip the
Second to secure to him the (...) of Britain, prov^ded he would do h^m^ge to
him, but all his hol^ (...) and masses would not save the invin^^b^e armada.

In latter times, the popes have (...) a ver^ (...) conduct in com^arison to
(...) former. Their intrigues are now chie^ly (...) to (...) money on the
superstitious, and in that debau^her^ which so eminently distinguishes the
clerg^ in the Roman Catholic count^ies, where the harrassed people revo^^ at
seeing the divine representatives of Christ such avaricious (...); and poor,
miserable and di^contented they only wait an opportunity to throw off the yoke,
and worship God in purity and sincerity

No p^i^ce is now so ignorant as to tremble at the thunders of the Vatican: yet
the pope c^^tinues to impoveri^h the neigh^ouring ki^gdoms, b^ selling every
year his bulls nec^ss^ry for all ranks of the priesthood, to their being in
orders; it would appear very wonderful that sovereig^s should continue to
submit to what so evidentl^ impoverishes their people, did not that love of
despotism. which is imbi^ed with the name of king, render them unwilling to
destroy its chief source.

On a view of the many vicious characters who have filled the chair, one
shudders to think in this enlightened age, that any part of mankind should
attribute to such sinners the virtues of Christ, and lo^k on men polluted with
every crime, as ves^ed with a supernatural power.

At first, by degree^, by treac^ery and us^rpation on the part of the (...) of
Rome, by interested motives on the part of the Emperor, and b^ big^try in the
people, they a^^ved a^ that wealth, splendour and power. which they make their
(...) followers falsely believe th^^ have derived ^^om Heaven: but now the
mi^ds of men are ope^ing to the treacherous delusions which have so long duped
them. and reformation o^ an absolu^^ revolution, will most likely soon be
^ffected in all (...) governments.

An Answer to Doctor PRIESTLY, And all other Deis^ical Unitarians, who deny
Christ's Divinity; By a Christian Unitarian, who believes in Christ's Divinity.
THIS is a subject of the greatest importance to mankind, par^i^ularly as their
eternal happiness depends on the knowledge of this great divine m^ster^, which
the people who imagine they are Christians* concei^edly (...) themselves they
have a perfect knowledge of; and some independent people will spurn with
contempt at the impudence of any spiritual, enlightened person, who will dare
intrude so trifling a subject on their idle fashionable hours: yet a great many
who read this will acknowledge that not one in a million know any thing of the
matter, not know how to-call-on the Deity, or what Deity to-call-on.

Mankind may be informed in the new testament, that in the last days, (which is
shortly before the general judgmen^) fa^se Prophe^s shall appear and deny the
Lord Jesus Christ, who bought them with his blood, and will almost deceive the
very el^ct. The word elect means such as are filled with the Holy Ghost.

In the book of Isaiah the Propher, in the old testament, God speaks frequently
of his intention of essuming flesh and becoming man, and even speaks to the
humanity, and the humanity to his divinity; which confound the unconverted, not
knowing how to separate the divinity from the humanity. The followi^g remarks
and explanations will prove there (...) but one God* or one Being to be
worshipped, which is the invisible God in the visible Christ, and the Holy
Ghost in God This is well known to the elect only and is also called grace,
which word grace (...) understood by the unconverted externally only, not
internally. Whosoever worships Christ, includes the Godhead.

In Isaiah, cha^. 1, and ver. 4, God calls himself the holy one of Israel,
verse 11, he never delighted in offerings. Verse 13. incense an a^omination,
verse 18, though your sins be red as scarlet they shall be made white as snow,
verse 24, Lord of Hosts. mighty one of Israel. Chap. 7. verse 14, shows how the
Virgin Mary was to conceive and bear a son, whole name should be ^manuel (which
is God). Chap 8. verse 13, 14, the Lord of Hosts himself shall be your fear and
dread, he shall be for a sanctuary (a holy place to resort to), but to some
people a stumbling none, a rock of offense, and a sna^e, ^such as despise
information to holiness and Christ. The same words are mentioned of Christ in
the new testament. Chap. 9, verse 6, shows the birth of Christ, that his name
shall be Wonderful, Counselor, the migh^y God, the everlasting Father, the
prince of peace There shall be no end to his government, it shall hold for ever
This chapter and verse is sufficient to prove Christ God. Chap 11, and five
first verses, show the birth of Christ, that is in his human nature, saying,
there shall appear* a rod, or branch of the root of J^sse [J^ss^-was David's
father.] and the (...) of the Lord shall rest-upon him, he shall be filled with
wisdom, understanding, counsel, might, knowledge, righteousness. Ver. 11. the
Lord shall set his hand the second time [Christ] to recover the remnant (...)
people. Chap 12, his people will praise him, and say, behold God is my
salvation, the Lord Jehovah (...) my strength, etc. Chap 17, verse 6, 7, Lord
God of Israel, man's maker, and holy one of Is^ael. Verse 10, the God of
S^lvation* and the Rock. Chap 40, ^erse 1. 3. the voice of John the Bap^ist in
the wilderne^s [^his worl^] p^epa^e the way of the Lord in the (...) make a
straight way for our God [Christ]. Ver. (...) all s^^sh shall see it, which was
God's sanctua^y, Christ. v 9. b^^ old your God. Verse 10, behold the Lord God
will come, with a strong hand he shall rule, his reward is with him, his work
[on earth] is (...) him. Verse 11, he shall (...) his (...) like a ^hepherd,
gather his lambs, carry them in his bosom, and gently lead those that are wi^h
young, etc. Chap. 41, verle 4, Iam the first and the last. Verse 13* 14* he i^
Lord God, the Redeemer and holy (...). Chap. 42, first five verses, God speaks
of assu^ing fle^h, and then says he h^s cr^at^d Heaven and Earth, and all
things, and gave breath to the people. Chap 43* verse 3* I am the Lord God, the
holy o^e of Is^ael,, the (...). Ver. (...) I am he Lord and only Savior.
Ve^se. 13, before the ^ay was made, I am. Verse 14* God is Lord Re^eemer and
holy one of Israel. Verse. 25. I b^^t out transgression, and will not remember
(...) for my own sake. Chap. 44* verse 6* I am the Lord, the (...) of Israel,
the Re^e^mer, (...) Lord of Hosts, I am (...) and I am the last, and besides me
there is no God. Chap. 45, verse 15, God of Is^ael, the Sav^^ur. Chap. 48,
verse 12, (...), I am the (...), I also am the (...). Verse 17. the Lord,
Re^e^mer, holy one of Israel, the Lord God. Chap 49. this chapter entirely
requ^^es to be expl^in^d, out it is suff^cient to say, (...) the humanity and
(...), to, and of, each other. In verse 26, God concludes, saying, ^ll fleth
shall know, that I the Lord am Savior, Redeemer, and mighty one of Israel.
Chap. 50, verse 1, 2, 3* God speaks in the divinity, and in verse 4* 5* 6* 7.
etc. he speaks in the in^ended humanity* and says, I gave my back to (...)
^miters, and my che^ks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid (...) my face
from shame and spi^^ing. Chapter ^1 verse 1, he speaks in the divinity, and calls
himself the rock. Chap, 53, God calls his humanity [Ch^^^^] his arm, he has no
beauty extraordinary, but (...) in his human form be de^pis^d and ^ej^cted
among men, a man of sorrows, and acq^ainted with g^ief, shu^^ed by men and not
esteemed, he bore manking's grief and sorrow* though they believed he was
(...), and afflict^d of God, with his sufferings to the end of this chapter.
Chap 54, verse 5, God sa^s, I am Creator, Lord of ^^osts, Redeemer, holy one of
Israel, and God of the whole earth. Jeremiah, chap. 2. ver 13, God is the
fountain of hving waters. Zacariah, chap. 12, verse 10. they shall look (...)
whom they have pierced. Having made a few observations out of many, from Isaiah
the prophet, proving God to have become Christ, by taking on him human nature,
and appearing like man: it now remains necessary to prove Christ from the
doctrines of the new testament, to be that same God spoken of in the old by
references.

In the beginning of the new testament, and first chapter of Matthew, verse 21,
22, 23, it appears the Virgin Mary was to bring forth a ^on, who should save
his people from their sins, and his name shall be called Emanuel [that is God]
reference to Isaiah, c. 1. v. 18. c. 7, v 14. c 43, v. 25, c 44, v. ^. Matthew,
chap. 2, v 1, 2, his star in Heaven guided the wise m^n of the East to.
Jerus^lem, to worship Jesus and the^ called Jesus King of the Jews and
worshipped him. (...) ^^, and they fell down and worshipped him. Ma^hew, c. 3, v
3. John Bap^it^ ^^id, prepare the way of the Lord, make his path stra^gh^.
Refer to Isaiah, ch 40. v. 13, in Isaiah Jesus is called G^d. Matthew. chap. 4.
v. 4, man shall ^ve by every word that proceeds out of ^he mou^h of God. (...)
7. Jesus said to the Devil, it is written again, thou (...) not tempt the Lord
thy G^d: here Jesus calls himself God twice. V. 10, the Devil temp^e^ Jesus a
third time, and Jesus grew a^gry and bid him (...), and desired him to worship
Jesus, for he was the Lord God. Chapter 7. v, 23, Jesus pronounces (...) as God.
Chapter 9. v. 2, Jesus forgive^ sins, refer to isaiah. c 43, v. 25 Matthew, c 9, v.
18, a great man wo^ships Jesus C. 12. v. 8 Je^us is Lord of the Sab^th, C. 15.
v 22, 25, the woman said to Jesus, have mercy on me, O Lord, and worshipped him.
Luke, c 2, v. 11. Jesus Christ is Savior and Lord, refer to Isaiah, c. 43, v.
3, v. 11. c. 45. v. 15. c 49. v 2^. John, c. ^. in the beginning was the word,
and the word was God, a^l things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made, in him was life, which was light. [or spiritual knowledge] to
mankind. And the light shined in darkness [mankind] and the darkness [of
stubborn man] comprehended it not. He was the true light, he was in the world*
he created the world, and the people of it, and they did not know him; he came
to his own [the Jews] and his own would not receive him. And [God] the word was
made flesh [Jesu^] and dwelt among mankind on earth, who behe^d the glo^^ of
the father in him. full of grace and truth. Ver. 18, no man has seen God at
any time, the only begotten son (or human tabernac^e) which is in the bosom (o^
pro^ection) of the father, has d^clared him. Verse 29. St. John says, he takes
away the sins of the world. V. 33, Jesus baptizes with the Holy Ghost [rivers
of living water]. This chapter proves Christ the same God [as has been observed
from the book of Isaiah] the first verse prove^ him God [or rather the earthy
(...) th^ough] The second and third ve^^^s prove him from the beginning to be
God, the Creator of all things. The tenth verse proves Jesus she same God and
Creator. And in the 14th verse the word (God) was made flesh, and lived in the
world. In the 18th verse, the divinity [or God] was invisi^le, speaking in the
(...) Jesus, or Jesus the (...), decla^ing God In the 23d ve^se St. John says.
he is the same God spoken of by Isaiah the P^ophet. N^w, if he was not God, he
could not forgive (...) nor dispose of the Holy Ghost as he pleased* nor create
all things, nor did he commit sin himself, and if he was no^ God, he would not
suffer the people to worship him frequently. There is no nec^ssity ^o re^er to
Isaiah, to corroborate the observations made in this chapter, as most of the
quotations from Isaiah (...) it. Chapter 4. v. 10* if Jesus was not God, he c^uld
(...) offer the w^man of Samaria* living waters, which is the Holy Gh^st Refer
to J^remiah, c. 2. v. 13, in v ^4 of St. Joh^'s, 4^h chap Jesus said, whoever
drinks of the wat^r I give, it shall be a well in him sp^inging up to
everlasting life (which water is the Holy Ghost) Refer to Jeremiah, as before.
And in John. c 4 v. 23, 24. Jesus said, true worshipers shall worship ^he
^ather in spirit and in truth. Now observ^ God [out of Christ] is a co^suming
fire, therefore he is to be worshipped in Chinst, [the sat^ctuary and
propitiation for (...).] Ver. 42, Christ the Savior of the world Refer 10
Isaiah, c 43. v. 3. 1^. J^hn, c 8 v. 16, 17* 18* 19* (...) says, my judgment is
^^ue, I am not alone, but I and the father tha sent me, this prove^ God in
Jesus, the earthen vess I which God made and sent; and again he says, the test
money of two are true. God and himself; and again he says to the people, if ^e
had known me, ye would know the father also. V 29 he that sent me is with me,
the father has not left me alone, for I do alwa^s the things that please him.
V. 58. Jesus said before Abraham was, I am, and in the old testament God is
called the great I am. Chapter 10, Jesus said I am the door of the sheep. by me man
sh^^l be saved. I am the good shepherd, I giv^ my life for my sheep. I am the
good sh^pherd* I know my sheep, and they know me, I lay down my life for my
sheep, no man compels me or takes it from me* I lay it down of myself, and take
it again, because I have power, I and my father are one, the father is in me
and I in him Refer to Isaiah, c. 40, v 9 ^0. 11 In John, c. ^2, v. 45, Jesus
says, whoever sees me. sees (...) father also; c. 14. v. 7, whoever knows me
k^ows the father, and have seen him and known him. V. 9, he that knows me, sees
and knows the father. V. 10, I am in the father, and the father in me, and the
words that I speak are not sp^ken by me, but by the father that dwells in me;
he does the works. Acts, c 20, v. 28, G^d was crucified* and purchased his
people with his won blood Corinth c. 5. v ^9, God was in Christ, reconciling
the world to himself. The first epistle general of John, c 3 v. 5 God was
manifested in the fl^^h [Chri^^] to take away sins. Rev. c. 1, v 7, 8. Jesus is
God, behold I^come in the clouds, and every eye shall see, and also them that
pierced him, and the people shall weal; then he said, I am Alpha and Omega* the
beginning and the end, says the Lord, which is* and which was [on earth] and
which is to come again on earth, the Almighty. V 11, I am A^pha and Omega, the
first and the last. V. 12. like the son of man [Jesus] V. 17, 18, I am the
first and the last. I am he that lived, and was crucified, and behold I am
a^ive again for ever more (...) 2, v 8, Jesus is the first and the last, that
was crucified, and is a live. Chapter 4 v. 8. 9. 10, 11, Christ proved to be God.
Chapter 5, v 5. Jesus is called the Lion of the tri^e of Juda. Ch 20, v. 12* Jesus
is called God, opening the books and judgi^g the world. Ch 21, v 5, 6, 7, and
he tha^ sat upon the throne [Jesus judging the world] said it is done, I am
Alpha and O^ega, the beginning and the end. I will give unto the thi^sty the
fountain of living waters. But unbelievers, liars, etc* shall be cast into the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone. Chapter 22. v. 12, 13 16, behold I come
quickly, my reward is with me* to give according to people's works. I am Alpha
and Om^ga, the beginning and the end, the first and the last. I Jesus have sent
my angel to testify unto you these things in the churches [among the people]
Ver. 20* he that testifies these things* says, surely I come quickly, the Lord
Jesus (...).

A most effectual Plan, To Prevent a French Invasion.
THE people who are to execute this plan, are that class, who are possessed of
perpetuities of upwards of One Thousand Pounds yearly, after a deduction of two
thousand pounds, principal money, for each of his or her children, except the
eldest son, who should have 200l. yearly from the age of 21, and the remainder
at his father's death, except 200l. yearly to the widow, if a widow should be.
Religion, and the bare necessaries of life, are such total strangers to the
lower class of people that they are always looking for a change in the
government favorable to a total annihilation of the wealthy; and the wealthy,
on the other hand, believe keeping the poor in profound pove^ty and darkness,
the best way to keep them quiet; but it is not, and only resembles a fire to be
quenched by putting dry fuel on it, which will make it burn more violent;
oppression always terminates in human slaughter, though the fire may be a
century kindling, or centuries: it is better for the wealthy lose a liable
voluntarily, than lose all with the loss of life, i^voluntarily, like a death
bed repentance, which God does not listen to; for what man worth five, ten, or
twenty thousand pounds yearly, in the hands of a banditti of assassins, would
not give it all for his life. Here follows the preventative: take a poor man,
and settle him in a comfortable situation, making him pay (or fecure) a
reasonable valuation; then see what family he has, and for himself, wife, and
children, abate twenty shillings yearly, each, on the following terms, give him
the book called the new testament, and then say, do you and your family read
this as often as ye are at leisure, and whilst you perform its contents, I will
keep you in the comfortable place I have given, but no longer: wealthy one, you
must do more, establish a school in your parish, or neighborhood, and pay the
teacher also; and thus do ye wealthy ones, with all the poor, and idolatry goes
to destruction; the poor will all love you, and God will love you, the poor
will revolt at the idea of invasion, or revolution, or any change that should
di^comfit their comfort. Or if you will not do this, subscribe a million of
guineas, and all people you suspect for wishing your overthrow, give them a
guinea an head to each in their families, to go to America. But this last
advice will not prevent an invasion, it would be only a foolish act of charity,
that God reqnires; besides, it wonld depopulate the nation, and lessen the rent
roll, then would the wealthy cry out, O my rent roll, my rent roll is not half
what it was; but God will answer, O thy rent roll has shut thee out eternally
from me, thou did not send my messenger among the nations (that is to
distribute the new testament among the poor); thou did not propagate the
gospel. You will say your Ministers did propagate the gospel, but the Lord will
say. your Ministers are ordained with human forms, but my Ministers are
ordained with the Holy Ghost, from the foondations of the world, but ye and
your Ministers persecute them: and perhaps he will even say, ye have also
called yourselves Lords, and great ones who are but earth, which names and
titles are for me only, and how can you look in my face.

EXTRACTS, FROM DUPATY'S TRAVELS, IN ITALY.
IN my way to the capitol I met a coach, in which were two recollet Friars, the
one seated backwards, the other forwards, holding between their legs something
I could not distinguish. Every one stopped and saluted with profound respect. I
asked to whom this reverence was addressed. It is, answered one of the
standers-by, to the Bambino, which these good Fathers are carrying to a
Prelate, who is very ill and given over by his physicians.

I afterward procured an explanation what this Bambino was. The Bambino is a
little wooden Jesus, richly dressed and ornamented.

The Convent, which has the good fortune to possess this image, neither has,
nor needs any other patrimony.

As soon as any person (who can afford the expense,) is seriously ill, they
send for the Bambino, and always in a coach, for he never goes on foot. Two
Recollets conduct, and place him by the sick man, where they remain, at his
expense, until he dies or recovers.

The Bambino is constantly running about; they sometimes fight who shall have
him at the gate of the Convent, and tear him from each other; in the Summer,
especially, he has extraordinary business, though he makes them pay very dearly
for his visits, on account of the demand, and the hot weather. This is but fair.

THE progress, insolence, and intolerable tyranny of the church of Rome, is now
become of serious consideration and public complaint, the establishment of
which will infallibly be the destruction of church, state, laws, liberties,
properties, and lives. The Protestant writers, ever since the Revolution, have
frequently and effectually exposed and confuted this pernicious doctrine,
calculated to plunder and rob the ignorant and illiterate; to whom only the
Church of Rome pretends to be the mother and mistress of all churches; and
domineers the vulgar and wicked into that belief, or faith; always exerting her
tyranny to continue them in the grossest darkness, and from a knowledge of the
Gospel light from generation to generation.

The Pope always imposes a belief on the ignorant, that he is successor to
Christ, St. Peter, etc. and such blasphemy; and none can be saved but his
subjects: and eating of all the luxuries and dainties in the world, on a friday
or saturday, sends people to Heaven, except meat, which sends to Hell, but all
his, wicked doctrines being contrary to that of Christ, he takes ^are the
gospel light shall be kept from them, as long as he can; well knowing a general
knowledge of it, would destroy his craft, as St. Paul did that of Alexander the
Copper-Smith.

FINIS.

