THE French King's MEMORIAL TO THE Emperor of Germany.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh. 1688.

MEMOIRE DES RAISONS Qui ont oblige le Roy a reprendre les Arms, and qui
doivent persuader la Chretiente des sinceres intentions de Sa Majeste, pour
l'affermissement de la tranquillite public.
MEMOIRE DES RAISONS, etc.
CEUX qui examineront sans passion and sans aucun autre interest que celuy du
bien public, la conduite que Sa Majeste a tenue depuis le commencement de la
guerre de Hongrie jusq'a present, auront une just raison de s'etonner,
qu'ayant toujours ete bien avertie du dessein que l'Empereur a form depuis
long-temps d'attaquer la France, aussi-tot qu'il aura fait la Paix avec les
Turcs, Elle ait differe jusqu'a cette heure a le prevenir, and que bien loin de
se servir des pretextes que les regles d'une bonne Politic luy pouvoint
suggerer, pour empecher l'agrandissement de ce Prince, Elle ait meme voulu
sacrifier au bien de la Paix les justes sujets qu'on luy a si souvent donnez
d'employer les forces que Dieu luy a mises en main, tant pour oter a la Cour de
Vienne les moyens de luy nuire, que pour arreter le course des injustices and
des violentes usurpations de l'Electeur Palatin: fair render a Madame,
Bellesoeur de Sa Majeste, ce qui luy doit appartenir de la succession de ses
Pere and Friar, and dissiper de bonne heure toutes les ligues and les
preparatifs de guerre, qui l'ont enfin force de porter ses Arms sur les bords
du Rhin, and d'attaquer les Places qui pouvoint donner de plus de facilite a
l'Empereur de recommencer and de soutenir la guerre contre la France.

Tout le monde convient aujourd huy, que le trop sincere desir que Sa Majeste
avoit d'empecher qu'il n'arrivat rien qui fut capable de troubler le repos de
la Chretiente, and les preuves convainquantes qu'Elle a done de ses bonnes
intentions, ont beaucoup contribue a tous les sujets de mecontentements qui ont
enfin less sa patience.

On a vu que dans le temps qu'Elle pouvoit se prevaloir de l'embarras que
donnoit a l Empereur la guerre de Hongrie, pour obliger la Cour de Vienne and
l'Empire a luy ceder par un Traite definitif, tous les lieux qui avoient este
reunis a sa Couronne, en consequence des Traitez de Munster and de Nimegue, and
fair cesser par ce moyen tous sujets de mesintelligence enter Elle and
l'Empire, Elle avoit mieux aim acquiescer a un Traite de Treve ou de
Suspension, que de detourner par ses Arms les Princes and Etats de l'Empire de
donner a l'Empereur les secours don't il avoit besoin, pour repousser toutes les
forces de l'Empire Ottoman; and que Sa Majeste suivant les mouvemens de sa
piete and de sa generosite, avoit prefer l'interest general de la Chretiente,
au bien de sa Couronne, se contentant d'obtenir provisionnellement ce que la
prudence vouloit qu'Elle demandat pour toujours.

On avoit assez remarque, qu'a peine ce Traite de Treve fut ratify de part and
d'autre, que Sa Majeste voulut bien encore donner de nouvelles marquis de sa
moderation; and quoy qu'Elle eut appris, que les Ministres Imperiaux
employoient tous leurs soins and tous leurs efforts dans la pluspart des Course
d'Allemagne, pour porter les Princes and Etats de l'Empire a enter dans de
nouvelles ligues contre la France: Que par le Traite fait a Ausbourg, ils
avoient engage un nombre considerable de Princes and d'Etats a souscrire cette
association: Que dans l'Assemblee de Nuremberg on s'etoit servi de toutes
sorts d'artifices and de suppositions, pour fair entrer dans cette meme ligue
ceux qui etoient retenus par la consideration des malheurs que pourroit causer
une nouvelle guerre, and par l'avantage que tout l'Empire trouvoit dans le
maintien d'une bonne intelligence avec Sa Majeste; and qu'enfin les Ministres
de la Maison d'Austriches etoient clairement expliquez en plusieurs endroits,
que la guerre de Hongrie ne seroit pas plutost finie, que l'Empereur tourneroit
ses arms verse le Rhin, and que le Traite de Treve ne seroit pas capable
d'arrester ses desseins: Neantmoins tous ces pressans motifs, qui devoient
obliger des lors Sa Majeste de porter plutost la guerre dans les Pais and les
Etats de ce Prince, que de l'attendre dans son Royaume, avoient encore cede au
desir empress qu'Elle a toujours eu de fair tout ce qui pouvoit dependre
d'Elle pour le maintien de la Paix; and Elle n'avoit point pris d'autres
precautions pour garentir ses Etats de tout le mal qu'on se preparoit a leur
fair, que de bien fortifier les lieux de ses frontieres qui pouvoient arrester
les entreprises de ses Ennemis.

Tant de preuves de la sincerite de ses intentions avoient fait oublier a la
Cour de Vienne, que toutes les fois qu'on a contraint Sa Majeste de reprendre
les arms, il a plu a Dieu de fair voir la justice de sa cause, par les bons
succez qu'elles ont eu. On s'est imagine qu'Elle prefereroit d'oresnavant la
douceur du repos aux soins indispensables qu'Elle est obligee de prendre pour
la conservation de ses Etats; and l'esperance de trouver de grands avantages
dans un renouvellement de guerre, a port la Cour de Vienne a rejetter avec
hauteur les insinuations, meme des Ministres du Pape, qui croyoient, avec
raison, qu'il n'y avoit pas de moyen plus prompt, plus facile and plus
necessaire pour etablir une bonne union and concord enter tous les Princes and
Etats Chretiens, que de fair un Traite de Paix sur le meme pied que celuy de
Treve, sans rentrer dans des difficultes si souvent debatues, and qui ne
peuvent plus etre soutenue que pour exciter de nouvelles aigreurs and de
nouveaux troubles.

Mais quand meme toutes ces demarches n'auroient pas ete suffisantes, pour
fair voir clairement a Sa Majeste la resolution que la Cour de Vienne a prise
de recommencer la guerre contre la France, en pourroit-on douter, apres toutes
les preuves qu'Elle en a done, tant au sujet de la succession Palatine, qu'a
l'occasion de la Postulation qui aete faite du Cardinal de Furstemberg,
premierement a la Coadjutorerie, and depuis a l'Electorat de Cologne?

Person n'ignore le droit incontestable qui appartient a Madame, Belle-soeur
de Sa Majeste, sur la succession de l'Electeur Palatin Charles son friar; on
scait que tous les meubles, biens allodiaux, and fiefs hereditaires luy sont
acquis, comme a l'unique heritiere de ses Pere and Friar; and quoique Sa
Majeste fut assez portee par l'affection qu'Elle a pour cette Princess, a luy
donner toute la protection don't elle avoit besoin, pour se mettre en possession
des biens meubles and immeubles de cette succession, neantmoins les memes
considerations qui avoient empeche Sa Majeste de fair aucun mouvement qui put
retarder la prosperity des arms Imperiales en Hongrie, l'avoient encore oblige
de preferer l'arbitrage du Pape, quoique deja declare partial contre la France,
aux moyens plus seurs and plus prompts qu'Elle avoit en main de fair render a
Madame, sa Belle-soeur, la justice qui luy est due; and bien que cet arbitrage
ne dut etre suspect qu'a Monsieur, Friar unique de Sa Majeste, neantmoins il a
bien voulu y donner les mains; en sort qu'il n'a tenu qu'a l'Electeur Palatin
de terminer tous ces differens par la decision du Pape. Mais quoy qu'il y ait
une infinite d'exemples de semblables contestations enter les Princes and Etats
de l'Empire, remises au jugement des Puissances qui n'en dependent point, cet
Electeur qui a toujours travaille a fomenter la guerre enter la France and
l'Empire, ne se contentant pas de vouloir envahir pout sa Maison les Electorats
and les Dignitez Ecclesiastiques, qu'il s'efforce d'obtener en toutes occasions
par les voyes les plus violentes and les plus contraires aux regles de l'Eglise
and aux Loix and Constitutions de l'Empire, a rejette l'arbitrage du Pape sur
cette affair, and s'est non seulement empare des terres inseparablement
attachees a la dignite Electorale; mais meme il s'est encore saisi sans aucune
form de justice de tous les engagements, biens allodiaux, fiefs hereditaires,
and generalement de tout ce qui appartient legitimement a Madame, belle-soeur
de Sa Majeste, a la reserve de quelques meubles, qu'il a bien voulu abandonner,
pour colorer son injustice manifest, and flatter la bonne foy de Monsieur
Friar unique de Sa Majeste, de l'esperance d'une plus grande restitution.

Mais comme il a bien reconnu, qu'il ne pourroit pas foutenir long-temps son
injuste usurpation contre la protection que Sa Majeste se sent obligee de
donner au bon droit de Monsieur, son friar unique, and de Madame, sa
Belle-soeur, il n'a rien obmis de tout ce qu'il a cru capable d'exciter enter
la France and l'Empire, une guerre qu il a consideree comme un moyen de retenir
impunement dans la confusion and le desordre qu'elle port avec elle, des biens
qui ne luy peuvent jamais appartenir legitimement, tant que Madame, ou ses
descendans subsisteront. Cest dans cette vue, que pendant que Sa Majeste
apportoit le plus de soin a oter tous pretextes a la Cour de Vienne de finir la
guerre de Hongrie, and que la decadence de l'Empire Ottoman faisoit encore
esperer a l'Empereur de plus grandes prosperitez, cet Electeur a redouble ses
efforts pour obliger la Cour de Vienne a fair la paix avec les Turcs, and
porter la guerre verse le Rhin. Sa Majeste n'a pas ignore tous les mouvemens
qu'il s'est done pour cet effet, les ligues qu'il a formees; and enfin la
resolution qu il a fait prendre de conclure au plutot un accommodement avec
l'Ennemy de la Chretiente, pour attaquer la France, and surprendre la vigilance
de Sa Majeste.

Il est vray que l'Archeveche de Cologne demeurant au pouvoir d'un Prince aussi
bien intentionne que l'etoit le feu Electeur, pour le maintien de la
tranquillite public, il falloit oter un si grand obstacle a de nouveaux
troubles; le seu lexpedient etoit de luy donner de gre ou de force un
Coadjuteur entierement devoue aux interets de la Maison d'Austriche, and il
n'en pouvoit trouver aucun, don't il fut plus assure pour l'execution de ce
dessein and l'agrandissement de sa Maison, qu'un des Princes ses enfans. On
peut dire aussi, qu'il n'y a rien qu'il n'ait mis en pratique pour y reussir.
Mais comme ses offres and ses promesses, appuyees de la presence du Duc de
Juliers n'ont pas eu l'effet qu il en attendoit, les menaces don't il s'est
servi contre les Chanoines, and contre l'Electeur meme, ont ete si violentes
and si outrees, qu'elles luy ont attire l'indignation des uns and des autres,
and de vingt-quatre voix don't le Chapitre est compose, else en ont determine
dix neuf a postuler le Cardinal de Furstemberg a la Coadjutorerie de
l'Archeveche de Cologne, le jugeant avec raison d'autant plus capable de le
bien gouverner, qu'outre l'experience qu'il y a acquise pendant la longue
administration que le feu Electeur luy en avoit confiee, sa dignite de Doyen,
son age, and ses bonnes qualites personelles, le sont estimer and aimer de tous
ceux du Chapitre qui ne sont point obligez de sacrifier leurs inclinations a
d'autres interets qu' a celuy de leur Eglise.

Cependant cette Postulation si canonique n'a pas ete capable de renverser les
projets de l'Electeur Palatin. La partialite du Pape trop declaree pour la
Maison d'Austriche, luy a done de nouvelles esperances; and l'impossibilite de
reussir pour un de ses fills, luy a fait concevoir un dessein beaucoup plus
avantageux pour sa Maison. Il a cru qu il ne falloit pas attendre, que le
Cardinal de Furstemberg parvenu a cet Archeveche, and suivant les mouvemens de
son affection pour la Maison de Baviere, put fair agreer au Chapitre le Prince
Clement pour son Coadjuteur, lorsqu'il auroit l'age indispensablement requis
par les Canons. Rien n'etoit plus contraire aux interets de cet Electeur, and
il n'avoit guard de souffrir, que l'Electeur de Baviere fut redevable a la
recommendation de Sa Majeste and a l'inclination dudit Cardinal, du retour de
cet Electorat dans sa Maison. Mais pour rompre toutes ces mesures and asseurer
pour ses enfans, ou l'Electorat de Cologne, ou celuy de Baviere, il a estime qu
il n'y avoit pas de meilleur moyen, que de profiter de la mauvaise disposition
du Pape envers Sa Majeste, and de son attachement a la Maison d'Austriche:
premierement, pour empecher que la postulation dudit Cardinal de Furstemberg a
la Coadjutorerie, qui n'auroit pas recu la moindre difficulte sons un
Pontificat moins passionne contre la France, ne fut confirmee: and en second
lieu, luy donner pour concurrent ce meme Prince, que ledit Cardinal avoit
dessein d'obliger si sensiblement.

Il est vray qu'il n'y a aucune person raisonnable, instruite des principes
de la Religion Catholic, Apostolic and Roman, qui eut pu s'imaginer, que
malgre tout ce que les Conciles Oecumeniques, and en dernier lieu le Concile de
Trente, ont statue touchant l'age, la science, and les qualitez requises and
necessaires a un Eveque, le Pape qui avoit temoigne par le pass tant
d'eloignement pour toutes les graces, put se porter a declarer capable d'etre
elu a l'Archeveche de Cologne, un jeune Prince de dix-sept ans, and qui n'en
est pas meme Chanoine. Mais il faut avouer que ce renversement de la discipline
Ecclesiastique est bien moins avantageux a la Maison de Baviere, qu'a celle
d'Austriche, and a l'Electeur Palatin; car si ce projet reussissoit en faveur
du Prince Clement, ou il ne seroit que le depositaire de l'Electorat de
Cologne, pour le fair passer a un Prince de Neubourg, ou s'il le vouloit
retenir pour luymeme, avaunt qu'il ait plu a Dieu donner des enfans a l'Electeur
son friar, and dans le temps qu'il expose si souvent sa vie pour le service de
l'Empereur, il asseureroit a l'Electeur Palatin la succession aux Etats de
Baviere: and a la Cour de Vienne l'extinction d'une Maison qui luy a toujours
done une forte jalousie, and que le merit de l'Electeur qui regne a present
ne diminuera pas.

Voila le veritable motif de ce Bref concerte enter le Pape, les Ministres de
la Maison d'Austriche, and ceux de l Electeur Palatin: and comme ils ont bien
juge, que Sa Majeste ne souffriroit pas que le Cardinal de Furstemberg, postule
canoniquement a l'Archeveche de Cologne, en fut depouille, en haine de
l'application qu'il a toujours donnee au maintien d'une bonne intelligence
enter Sa Majeste and l'Empire, ny que la plus considerable party du Chapitre
qui luy a done ses suffrages fut privee de ses droits par la force and la
violence; ils se sont enfin determinez a fair la paix avec le Turc, pour la
rompre en meme temps avec la France.

Mais si Sa Majeste a beaucoup de sujets de se plaindre d'un proceed si
contraire a la bonne foy avec laquelle Elle a toujours agi pendant les plus
grandes prosperites des Arms Imeperiales en Hongrie, and aux soins qu'Elle a
pris d'empecher, qu'il n'arrivat rien dans toute l'Europe qui en put arreter le
course. Il n'y a person, quelque passionnee qu'elle puisse etre contre la
France, qui ne doive avouer, que tout ce qui s'est fait depuis l'obtention de
ce Bref d'Eligibilite, tant par les Ministres Imperiaux, que par ceux de
l'Electeur Palatin, a du achever de lasser la patience du Roy, and luy oter
tout sujet de douter de la ferme resolution que l'Empereur a prise de luy
declarer la guerre incessamment.

C'est dans ce dessein que la Cour de Vienne a cru netre plus obligee a garder
aucunes mesures, and qu'encore que le Concordat Germanique, les Constitutions
de l'Empire, and le Traite du Munster doivent render inviolable la liberte des
Elections dans les Chapitres d'Allemagne; and que l'Article 23. du Traite de
Nimegue ait du fair cesser les injures and les invectives des Ministres de la
Cour de Vienne contre le Cardinal de Furstemberg; neantmoins le Comte de
Kaunitz, voyant bien que ny les promesses ny les menaces n'etoient pas capables
d'ebranler une asses considerable party du Chapitre de Cologne, pour fair
quelque opposition a l'elevation du Cardinal de Furstemberg, and qu'il n'y
avoit que ceux qui par leurs charges and leurs employs etoient
indispensablement obliges a suivre les mouvemens de la Cour de Vienne, qui ne
voulussent pas concourir a sa Postulation, tous les autres etant pleinement
persuades, qu'ils ne pouvoient fair un plus digne choix, que de la person
dudit Cardinal, non seulement pour le bien and l'advantage de l'Archeveche,
mais aussi pour l'affermissement du repos de l'empire, il n'y a point eu
d'injures, d'invectives, and de calomnies, don't ce Ministre n'ait charge ledit
Cardinal, jusqu' a luy donner une exclusion formelle de la part de l Empereur,
and menacer le Chapitre de luy oter ses privileges. Enfin on peut dire, que le
mepris and l'infraction manifest des Traitez de Paix ont paru aussi clairement
dans le Discourse adresse au Chapitre de Cologne par ledit Comte de Kaunitz, que
la moderation dudit Cardinal and son zele pour le maintien de la tranquillite
public dans la reponse qu'il y a faite.

Mais comme toutes ces violences des Ministres de la Maison d'Austriche n'ont
pas ete capables d'empecher, que la plus grande and la plus considerable party
du Chapitre de Cologne ne soit demeuree inseparablement unie avec le Cardinal
de Furstemberg, pour maintenir conjointement avec luy les droits and les
libertes de leur eglise, la Cour de Vienne fait ses diligences pour assembler
les troops de la plupart des Princes Protestans aux environs de cet
Archeveche, afin de les employer a fair executer conjointement les Brefs
qu'elle se flate d'obtenir de la Cour de Rome contre la disposition des Canons,
des Traites, and des Constitutions de l'empire, and elle ne soucie pas que
l'Archeveche de Cologne soit entierement desole, and la Religion Catholic
opprimee dans tous les lieux qui en dependent, pourveu qu'elle y trouve des
moyens and des facilites d'attaquer la France, de soutenir la guerre contre Sa
Majeste aux depens des Electeurs, Princes, and Estats de l'Empire, de
contraindre les premiers a deferer au Roy de Hongrie la Couronne de Roy des
Romans, avaunt l'age indispensablement requis par ces memes loix and
constitutions, and en fin d'assujettir toute l'Allemagne a l'autorite
despotique de la Maison d' Austriche, en eloignant de l'alliance and de
l'amitie du Roy ceux qui pourroient etre les plus fermes defenseurs des droits
and des libertes de leur Patrie.

Ces veritez sont parfaitement connues de Sa Majeste, and il n'y aura person
de bon sens, and bien informee de ce qui se pass dans l'Europe, qui puisse
revoquer en doubt la moindre circonstance de ce qui est avance dans ce Memoire.
Il seroit meme assez inutile de render publiques toutes les autres preuves que
Sa Majeste a eues de la resolution prise par la Maison d'Austriche, de luy
fair incessamment la guerre. Elle est bien persuadee, qu'apres toutes celles
qu'Elle a donnees du trop grand desir qu'Elle a toujours eu d'affermir la
tranquillite public, tout le monde avouera, qu'il eut ete a souhaiter pour le
bien general de la Chretiente, que ceux qui croyent trouver leurs avantages a
exciter de nouveaux troubles, n'eussent pas eu si bonne opinion de la sincerite
des intentions de Sa Majeste, and que ce ne sera que sur eux qu'on rejettera le
blame de la necessite ou ils l'ont mise, de fair marcher ses troops, tant
pour assieger Philipsbourg, comme la place la plus capable de faciliter a ses
Ennemis, l entree dans ses Etats, que pour se mettre en possession de
Kaiserslouter, jusques a ce que l'Electeur Palatin ait restitue a Madame,
Belle-Soeur de Sa Majeste, ce qui luy doit appartenir de la succession des
Electeurs ses Pere and Friar.

Mais quelque succez qu'il plaise a Dieu de donner aux arms de Sa Majeste,
Elle a toujours le meme desir de fair de sa part tout ce qui pourra contribuer
a l'affermissement de la tranquillite public: Et pour cet effet Elle declare,
qu'il ne tiendra qu' a l'Empereur and a ses adherans, de la render d'une
perpetuelle duree; Sa Majeste voulant bien, que pour oter a l'avenir tout sujet
de mes intelligence enter Elle and l'Empire, and ne plus laisser aucune semence
de division and de renouvellement de guerre, il soit fait un Traite de Paix
definitif, aux memes conditions que celuy de Treve, conclu and sign a
Ratisbonne le 15 Aoust 1684. bien entendu que Sa Majeste ne pourra etre
troublee ny inquietee en quelque maniere que ce soit, touchant les nouvelles
fortifications qu'Elle a ete obligee de fair pour la surete de ses Etats, tant
a Huninge, qu'au Fort Louis du Rhin.

Et comme Elle n'a pas entrepris le Siege de Philipsbourg pour s'ouvrir des
moyens d'attaquer l'Empire, mais seulement pour fermer l'entree de ses Etats a
ceux qui voudroient exciter de nouveaux troubles, Elle offer pour faciliter
davantage le Traite de Paix, de fair demolir les fortifications de ladite
Ville de Philipsbourg, lors qu'Elle l'aura reduite a son obeissance, and la
fair render a l'Eveque de Spire, pour en jouir de la meme maniere que ses
Predecesseurs ont fait avaunt que la Place fut fortifiee, sans en pouvoir
retablir les fortifications.

Sa Majeste veut bien encore ajouter a ces offres une preuve plus considerable
and plus convainquante du desir qu'Elle a de retablir une bonne correspondance
avec l'Empereur and l'Empire, and de la render d'une longue duree; Et quoy que
les depenses extraordinaires qu'Elle a faites pour render la place de Fribourg
imprenable comme elle est a present, la doivent obliger a ne la detacher jamais
de sa Couronne, neantmoins pour procurer une bonne paix a toute la Chertiente,
and pour fair voir qu'Elle n'a pense qu' a fermer son Royaume, and non pas a
se conserver des moyens de l'agrandir, Elle veut bien aussi fair demolir les
fortifications de cette importante Place, and la render a l Empereur avec ses
dependances, a condition qu'elle ne pourra jamais etre fortifiee.

Quant a l'Electorat de Cologne, Sa Majeste offer d'en retirer ses troops,
aussitot que le Pape, soit de son pur mouvement, ou a la priere de l Empereur,
aura confirm la Postulation du Cardinal de Furstemberg; and Elle s'employera
volontiers, lors que ledit Cardinal sera dans la paisible possession and
jouissance dudit Electorat, a le fair entrer avec le Chapitre dans les
temperamens qui pourront etre proposes pour la satisfaction du Prince Clement
and de l Electeur de Baviere, en sort que le repos de cet Archeveche ne puisse
etre trouble ny a present ny a l'avenir.

Sa Majeste veut bien aussi, pour ne laisser aucun rest ny occasion de
troubles, terminer incessamment les differens qui regardent la succession
Palatine, and Elle offer pour Monsieur son Friar unique and pour Madame sa
Belle-soeur, un desistement de toutes les Places, Terres and Pais, meme des
meubles, des canons, and de toutes les autres chooses qui leur doivent encore
etre restituees, moyennant un dedommagement en argent, suivant l'estimation qui
en sera faite, au plus tard dans un an, par les Commissaires qui seront nommez
a cet effet: and au cas qu'ils n'en puissent convenir dans ledit temps, Sa
Majeste consent, que ce qui restera de differens soit termine par l'arbitrage
du Roy d'Angleterre and de la Republique de Venise, sans qu'on en puisse venir
de part ny d'autre a aucune voye de fait.

C'est a ces conditions, beaucoup plus avantageuses a l'Empereur and a l
Empire, qu' a Sa Majeste and a sa Couronne, que la tranquillite public peut
etre retablie and assuree pour toujours, pourvu qu'elles soient acceptees dans
le mois de Janvier prochain: a l'effet de quoy Sa Majeste est prete d'envoyer
incessamment ses Plenipotentiaires a Ratisbonne. Mais apres ce temps, Sa
Majeste etant obligee de continuer des depenses immenses, Elle ne pretend plus
etre tenue a ses offres; and en cas d'un plus long retardement, ou d'un refus
de les accepter, Elle proteste des a present de tous les malheurs que la guerre
pourra causer a la Chretiente, contre ceux qui l'ont forcee a reprendre les
arms, pour prevenir leurs mauvais desseins, and qui ne voudront pas profiter
des expediens qu'Elle propose, pour assurer incessamment une Paix durable.

Fait a Versailles, le 24 jour de Septembre 1688.
THE MEMORIAL Of the REASONS By which the KING is obliged to resume his Arms,
and which ought to persuade all Christendom of the sincere Intentions of his
Majesty for the Establishment of the Public Tranquillity.
THE MEMORIAL Of the REASONS, etc.
THose who shall examine without passion, or any other interest than that of the
Public Good, the Conduct which his Majesty has taken from the beginning of the
War of Hungary to the present time, will have great reason to wonder, that he
having always been advertised of the design which the Emperor had formed of a
long time, to attack France, as soon as he shall have made Peace with the
Turks, he should have deferred the preventing thereof even to this hour, and
being far from making use of the pretenses which the Rules of good Politics
might suggest to him for putting a stop to the greatness of this Prince, he had
rather for* the sake of Peace, even sacrifice the just occasions which have
been so often given him to employ the Forces which God has put into his hands,
as well for taking from the Court of Vienna all means of doing him any hurt, as
for putting a stop to the unjust courses and violent Usurpations of the Elector
Palatin; and to cause a restitution to Madam, the Sister in Law to his Majesty,
of what in right belongs to her by succession from her Father and Brother, and
timely to prevent all the Leagues, and preparations of War that have at length
forced him to bring his Arms to the Banks of the Rhine, and to attack those
places by which the Emperor might with most ease renew and maintain a War
against France.

All the World is now satisfied, that it was the too sincere desire his Majesty
had of putting a stop to whatsoever might disturb the repose of Christendom,
and the convincing proofs he has given of his good intentions, that have so
much contributed to all those occasions of discontents, that have at last tired
his patience.

It is very apparent that at the time when his Majesty might have taken
advantage of the disturbance which the War of Hungary gave the Emperor, so as
to have obliged the Court of Vienna, and the Empire to yield to him, by a
definitive Treaty, all the Places which had been reunited to his Crown, in
consequence of the Treaties of Munster and Nimmeguen: and by this means put a
stop to all occasions of misunderstanding between him and the Empire, his
Majesty had rather acquiesce to a Treaty of Truce or Suspension, than by his
Arms be the occasion of diverting the Princes and States of the Empire, from
affording the Emperor those Succors he stood in need off, in order to repel
the Forces of the Ottoman Empire: and that his Majesty following his pious and
generous inclinations had preferred the general Interest of Christendom, before
the good of his own Crown, contenting himself to obtain that provisionally,
which in prudence he ought to have demanded for ever.

It is sufficiently known that this Treaty of Truce was hardly ratified on both
sides, but his Majesty was willing to give fresh proofs of his moderation; and
although he understood the Imperial Ministers employed all their diligence and
endeavors in most of the Courts of Germany, to incline the Princes and States
of the Empire to enter into new Leagues against France. That by the Treaty made
at Ausbourg, they had engaged a considerable number of the Princes and States
to subscribe this Association. That in the Assembly of Nuremberg, all kinds of
artifices and suppositions were made use of, to bring all those into this
League, who were withheld by the consideration of the misfortunes which might
be occasioned by a new War, and the advantage which the whole Empire might find
in the maintaining a good correspondence with his Majesty. And lastly, That the
Ministers of the House of Austria have plainly professed on several occasions,
that the War of Hungary should no sooner be at an end, than the Emperor would
turn his Arms toward the Rhine, and that the Treaty of Truce should not be
able to hinder his designs. Nevertheless all these pressing motives, which
might immediately have obliged his Majesty rather to carry the War into the
Countries and Estates of this Prince, than to expect it in his own Kingdom, had
yet given place to the earnest desire he has always had of doing what lay in
his power for the maintaining of the Peace; and he had taken no other
precautions for maintaining his Dominions from all the mischiefs preparing
against them, than to fortify his Frontier places, so as to put a stop to the
designs of his Enemies.

So many proofs of the sincerity of his intentions had made the Court of Vienna
forget, that as often as they compelled his Majesty to resume his Arms, it had
pleased God to show the justice of his Cause, by the great successes they have
had, They have imagined to themselves that he would hereafter prefer the
sweetness of repose before the indispensable cares he is obliged to take for
the preservation of his States; and the hopes of finding great advantages by
renewing a War, have caused the Court of Vienna, disdainfully to reject even
the insinuations of the Popes Ministers, who with reason were of opinion, that
there was no way more ready, more easy, and more necessary for the
establishing a good union, and understanding between all the Princes and States
of Christendom, than to make a Treaty of Peace on the same foot with the Truce,
without entering again into the difficulties so often debated, and which cannot
be any longer maintained without stiring up new Heats and Commotions.

But although all these Advances had not been sufficient to discover clearly to
his Majesty the resolution which the Court of Vienna has taken to renew the War
against France, can we any ways doubt thereof, after all the proofs it has
given; as well on the subject of the Succession to the Palatinate, as upon
occasion of the Postulation made of the Cardinal of Furstemberg, first to the
Coadjutorship, and afterward to the Electorate of Cologn.

No body can be ignorant of the undoubted Right of Madam his Majesty's Sister
in Law, to the Succession of the Elector Palatine, Charles her Brother: and it
is well known that all the Movables, Allodial Estates, and Hereditary Fiefs, of
right belong to her, as the only Heir of her Father and Brother: and although
his Majesty was sufficiently inclined by the Affection he has for this
Princess, to give her all the Protection she might stand in need of, for the
putting her in Possession both of the movable and immovable Goods of this
Succession: Nevertheless the same Considerations that hindered his Majesty from
making any Motions that might retard the Prosperity of the Imperial Forces in
Hungary, have hitherto obliged him to prefer the Arbitration of the Pope,
although already declared partial against France, before the more certain and
speedy means that were in his power toward the rendering to Madam, his Sister
in Law, the Justice due to her: and although this Arbitration ought solely to
be suspected by his Majesty's only Brother; nevertheless he was willing to
consent to it, so that it only lay upon the Elector Palatine to put an end to
all these Differences, by the decision of the Pope. But although there are a
world of examples of the like Contests between Princes and States of the
Empire, that have been referred to the judgment of Potentates, who have no
dependence thereon: This Elector who has always endeavored to foment a War
between France and the Empire, not being contented to have usurped to his House
the Electorates, and Ecclesiastical Dignities, which he endeavors to obtain on
all occasions, by ways the most violent, and most contrary to the Rules of the
Church, and the Laws and Constitutions of the Empire, has rejected the
Arbitration of the Pope upon this Affair, and has not only seized on the
Territories inseparably fixed to the Electoral Dignity; but he has likewise
without any form of Justice, taken possession of all the Engagements, Allodial
Estates, Hereditary Fiefs, and in general of whatsoever belonged lawfully to
Madam, his majesty's Sister in Law, excepting only some movables, which he was
willing to quit, for the better coloring his Manifest Injustice, and
flattering the good Nature of his Majesty's only Brother, with hopes of a more
ample Restitution*

But as he is very sensible that he cannot long maintain his unjust usurpation
against the Protection which his Majesty holds himself obliged to afford to the
lawful Right of Monsieur his only Brother, and Madam his Sister-in-law, he has
omitted nothing that he thought capable to stir up between France and the
Empire, a War which he looks upon as the only means to retain without control,
during the confusion and disorder which that brings with it, the Estates which
can never by Law belong to him, so long as Madam, or her posterity shall
remain. And upon this account it was, that while his Majesty took the greatest
care to take away all pretenses from the Court of Vienna for concluding the War
of Hungary, and that when the declining of the Ottoman Empire might in reason
give the Emperor hopes of greater Advantages, this Elector endeavored with
greater earnestness to oblige the Court of Vienna to conclude a Peace with the
Turks, and to carry the War toward the Rhine. His Majesty has not been
ignorant of all the Steps that have been taken for the effecting hereof, the
Leagues he has formed: and lastly the resolution which he has caused to be
taken for the speedy concluding an Accommodation with the Enemy of Christendom,
that so they might be able to attack France, and surprise the Vigilance of his
Majesty.

It Is true, that the Archbishopric of Cologne, remaining in the power of a
Prince, whose intentions were so sincere as those of the late Elector, for the
maintaining the public tranquillity, there needed only to take away so great
an obstacle to any new Troubles; the only Expedient was by fair means, or by
foul, to set up a Coadjutor entirely devoted to the interest of the House of
Austria, and there could not be found any one that could be so certainly relied
on for the execution of this Design, and the aggrandizing that House, as one of
the Princes of the same. And it may also be affirmed, that there is nothing
which he has not put in practice for the effecting hereof. But as his Offers
and Promises supported by the Presence of the Duke of Juliers, have not had the
desired effect, the Threatenings which he made use of against the Canons, and
against the Elector himself, have been so violent and outrageous, that they
have drawn upon him the indignation of both one and the other, and of four and
twenty Votes of which the Chapter is composed, they have determined nineteen to
postulate the Cardinal of Furstemberg to the Coadjutorship of the
Archbishopric of Cologne, as judging him with good reason so much the more
capable to govern well, that besides the experience he has acquired during the
long Administration the late Elector entrusted him with, his Dignity of Dean,
his Age, his excellent personal Qualities have procured him the esteem and love
of all those of the Chapter, who are not obliged to sacrifice their
inclinations to other Interests than that of their Church.

In the mean time this so Canonical Postulation has not been capable to alter
the Projects of the Elector Palatine. The too manifest partiality of the Pope
for the House of Austria, has given him fresh hopes; and the impossibility of
obtaining success for one of his Sons, has made him contrive a Design of much
greater advantage for his House. He thought it not fit to expect, till the
Cardinal of Furstemberg being come to the Archbishopric, and following the
motions of his inclination for the House of Bavaria, could make the Chapter
accept of Prince Clement for his Coadjutor, when he should be at the Age
indispensably required by the Canons. Nothing was more contrary to the
Interests of this Elector, and he could not endure that the Elector of Bavaria
should be beholding to the recommendation of his Majesty, and the kindness of
the Cardinal for the Return of this Electorate to his House. But to break all
these Measures, and secure for his Children, either the Electorate of Cologne,
or that of Bavaria, he judged there was no better means, than to make use of
the ill inclination of the Pope toward his Majesty, and his strong affection
to the House of Austria. In the first place to hinder his Confirmation of the
Postulation of the said Cardinal of Furstemberg to the Coadjutorship, which
would not have received the least difficulty under any Pontificate less
prejudiced against France. And in the second place to set up as Competitor,
this same Prince whom the said Cardinal had designed so sensibly to oblige.

It Is true, that there is no reasonable person, instructed in the Principles of
the Roman Catholic and Apostolic Religion, who could have imagined, that
maugre all that the Ecumenical Councils, and in the last place the Council of
Trent, have determined concerning the Age, Learning, and the other requisite
and necessary Qualifications for a Bishop, the Pope who has shown heretofore so
much aversion to all particular favors, could be brought to declare a young
Prince, but seventeen years old, and who is not yet a Canon, to be capable of
being elected to the Archbishopric of Cologne. But it must be confessed, that
this overturning of the Ecclesiastical Discipline is not near so advantageous
to the H. of Bavaria, as to that of Austria, and the Elector Palatine; for if
this Project should succeed in favor of Prince Clement, he would either be but
the Depository of the Electorate of Cologne, that so it might be derived to a
Prince of Newbourg, or if he should keep it for himself, before it pleased God
to bestow any Children on his Brother the Elector, and in a time that he so
often exposes his life for the Service of the Emperor, he would secure to the
Elector Palatine the Succession to the States of Bavaria; and to the Court of
Vienna the extinction of a House which has given it always a great jealousy,
and which the Merit of the Elector now reigning will not all diminish.

This then is the true Motive of this Breve concerted between the Pope, the
Ministers of the House of Austria, and those of the Elector Palatine: And
whereas they have well concluded, that his Majesty would not endure, that the
Cardinal of Furstemberg, being Canonically postulated to the Archbishopric of
Cologne, should be deprived thereof, out of hatred of the earnest application
he has always made for the maintaining a good intelligence between his Majesty
and the Empire, nor that the most considerable part of the Chapter that has
given him their Suffrages should be deprived of their Rights by force and
violence; they have at last determined to make peace with the Turk, and to
break at the same time with France.

But if his Majesty have many Subjects of Complaint against a procedure so
contrary to the fair dealing which he has always used, during the great
Successes of the Imperial Arms in Hungary, and to the care he has taken, that
nothing in all Europe should oppose it self to the hinderance of the same.
There can be no Man, let him be as prejudiced as he can against France, but he
must acknowledge, that what has been done as well by the Imperial Ministers, as
by those of the Elector Palatine, since the obtaining of the Breve of
Eligibility, has been enough to tire the patience of his Majesty, and to leave
him no reason to doubt of the firm resolution the Emperor has taken to declare
immediate War against him.

In order hereunto the Court of Vienna look not upon themselves to be obliged
by any measures, and though by the German Concordat, the Imperial
Constitutions, and the Treaty of Munster, the Liberty of Elections in the
several Chapters of Germany ought to be preserved inviolable; and that by the
three and twentieth Article of the Treaty of Nimeguen, a cessation ought to
have been put to all Injuries and Invectives of the Ministers of the Court at
Vienna against the Cardinal of Furstemberg. Nevertheless the Count De Kaunitz,
seeing that neither Promises nor Threats could move the most considerable party
of the Chapter of Cologne, to make any opposition to the Promotion of the
Cardinal of Furstemberg, and that he had none that would concur with his
Postulation, but such as by their Offices and Employments were indispensably
obliged to follow the Motions of the Court at Vienna; all the rest being fully
persuaded, that they could not make a more worthy Choice, than of the Person of
the aforesaid Cardinal, not only for the Good and Advantage of the
Archbishopric, but also for the Establishment of the Repose of the Empire;
there have been no Wrongs, nor Invectives, nor Calumnies which have not been
put upon the said Cardinal by the said Minister, till he had given him a formal
Exclusion on the part of the Emperor, and threatened the Chapter with the loss
of their Privileges. In fine, it may be said, that a manifest disregard to, and
infraction of the Treaties of Peace have appeared as clearly in the Discourse
addressed to the Chapter of Cologne by the Count De Kaunitz, as did the
Moderation of the said Cardinal, and his zeal for the maintenance of the
public Tranquillity in the Answer which he made.

But all these Violences of the Ministers of the House of Austria, not having
been able to hinder the greatest and most considerable part of the Chapter of
Cologne, but that they continued inseparably united to the Cardinal of
Furstemberg, jointly with him to maintain the Rights and Liberties of their
Church; the Court at Vienna made great haste to assemble the Forces of the most
part of the Protestant Princes, who bordered upon this Archbishopric, in
order to execute in conjunction with them those Breves they persuaded
themselves they should procure from the Court of Rome, contrary to the purport
of the Canons, the Treaties and the Constitutions of the Empire; herein not
having any regard, though the Archbishopric of Cologne were rendered wholly
desolate, and the Catholic Religion oppressed in all the places depending
thereupon, provided they might find means and opportunities to attack France,
to carry on a War against his Majesty at the Charge of the Electors, Princes
and Estates of the Empire, to constrain the great Men to choose the King of
Hungary to be King of the Romans before the Age indispensably required by the
Laws and Constitutions thereto relating; and in short, to subject all Germany
to the despotick Authority of the House of Austria, by leaving those persons
destitute of the Alliance and Friendship of the King, who were most like to be
the firmest Defenders of the Rights and Liberties of their Country.

These were Truths well known to his Majesty, and there could not be a Man of
good understanding, and who was well informed of what passed in Europe, who can
bring in doubt the least circumstance of what is advanced in this Memorial. It
would also be to no purpose, to make public all those other Proofs which his
Majesty has had of the Resolution taken by the House of Austria, to declare War
immediately against him. He is thoroughly persuaded, that after all these
Instances he has given of the very great desire he has always had to secure the
public Tranquillity, all the World will allow, that it were to be wished, for
the common good of Christendom, that those who hope to find advantage by
stirring up new Troubles had not had so good an opinion of the Sincerity of his
Majesty's Intentions, and that it is upon them alone that the blame is to be
laid, that he is set under a necessity of marching his Troops, as well to
besiege Philipsbourg (being a place fit to render to his Enemies an easy
entrance into his Estates) as to possess himself of Keisserslouter* till the
Elector Palatine has restored to Madam, his Sister-in-law, that which belongs
to her by Succession to the Electors, her Father and Brother.

But whatsoever Success it shall please God to give to the Arms of his Majesty,
he has always the same desire to contribute what on his part he can to the
Establishment of the public Peace. And to this end, he declares, that he will
not hold himself bound to make this perpetual, but only to the Emperor and his
Confederates; his Majesty being very willing (that so for the future all
occasions of misunderstanding between him and the Empire be taken away, and
that no cause may be left for a Breach and renewing of the War) that a
definitive Treaty of Peace be made upon the same Articles with that of the
Truce concluded and signed at Ratisbonne, August 15, 1684. It being provided
that his Majesty shall not be troubled, nor in any manner disturbed on occasion
of the new Fortifications he has been obliged to make for the security of his
Estates, as well at Hunningen, as at Fort-Lewis upon the Rhine.

And as he has not undertaken the Siege of Philipsburg, to open to himself a
way to attack the Empire, but only to make secure the Entry into his Estates,
from those who would raise new Troubles, so he offers moreover, in order to
facilitate a Treaty of Peace, to demolish the Fortifications of the said City
of Phelipsburg, as soon as shall have reduced it to his Obedience, and that he
will cause it to be surrendered to the Bishop of Spire, for him to enjoy it
after the same manner as his Predecessors have done, before the place was
fortified, without authority to rebuild the Fortifications.

Furthermore His Majesty is willing to add to these Overtures, a more
considerable and more convincing Proof of the desire which he has to
reestablish a good correspondence with the Emperor and the Empire, and to
render the same of a long duration; That whereas the extraordinary expense he
has been at to make the Town of Fribourg a place impregnable, as it is at
present, might reasonably oblige him never to part with it from the Crown;
Nevertheless in order to procure a happy Peace to all Christendom, and to make
appear, that he designs nothing but to secure his Kingdom, and not to preserve
to himself means of enlarging the same, He is also willing to cause the
Fortifications of this important place to be demolished, and to surrender it to
the Emperor with all its dependences, upon condition that he shall never
fortify it hereafter.

As for the Electorate of Cologne, his Majesty offers to withdraw his Troops
from thence, as soon as the Pope, either by his own free will, or at the
request of the Emperor, shall have confirmed the Postulation of the Cardinal of
Furstemberg; and he will freely interpose his interest, as soon as the said
Cardinal shall be in the peaceable possession and enjoyment of the said
Electorate, to cause him to join with the Chapter in such temperaments as may
be proposed for the satisfaction of Prince Clement and the Elector of Bavaria,
in such sort as that the repose of that Archbishopric may not be disturbed,
neither at the present, nor in time to come.

His Majesty is also very willing, that nothing may remain of what is past nor
any occasion for future troubles, immediately to put an end to those
differences which concern the Succession in the Palatinate; and he offers on
the behalf of Monsieur* his only Brother, and of Madam, his Sister-in-Law, a
disclaim of all the Places, Territories and Countries, as well as the
Movables, Ordnance and every other thing which ought yet to be restored,
satisfaction for the damages being made in money, according to such estimation
as shall be made, at the least within a years time, by Commissioners which
shall be named to this purpose; and in case they shall not agree within the
aforesaid time, his Majesty gives his consent, that whatsoever shall remain in
difference, shall be determined by the Arbitrage of the King of England, and
the Republique of Venice, without leaving either one or the other Party at
liberty any ways to render it ineffectual.

It is upon these conditions which are much more advantageous to the Emperor
and the Empire, than to his Majesty and to his Crown, that the public
Tranquillity may be re-established and made sure for ever; provided that they
are accepted before the end of January next, to which effect his Majesty is
ready to send his Plenipotentiaries immediately to Ratisbonne. But after that
time, his Majesty being obliged to continue at vast expenses, he pretends not
to be holden to these his Offers; and in case of a too long delay, or of a
refusal to accept hereof, He charges from this present, all those mischiefs
which the War may bring upon Christendom, upon those who have forced him to
resume his Arms to prevent their evil designs, and who would not take the
advantage of the Expedients which he proposes for the immediate assurance of a
lasting Peace.

Given at Versailles, Sept. 24. 1688. With Allowance.

