The Last Resolution of the Most Christian King, IN Relation to a General
PEACE; and the present Misserable Estate of HVNGARIA and the EMPIRE: Contained
in a Memorial Given in, unto the ESTATES of the EMPIRE Assembled at RATISBONNE
The 26th of July 1683. By the Count of CRECY Plenipotentiary there from his
said Christain Majesty.
Translated from the French Printed Copy by a sure Hand, and Reprinted at
London by G. C. Anno Dom. 1683.
THE Count of Crecy Plenipotentiary for the most Christian King at the Diet of
Ratisbonne, answering by his Majesty's Order to the Proposition that was made
him the 11th of July, in the Name of the Imperial Commission and in the behalf
of the Emperor, by Monsieur his Commissioner, finds himself Obliged to avouch
that his Majesty having received almost at the same time, the Proposal and
Writing, which had been communicated to this Diet by the Dictatorship, the
Fourth of this Month, under the Name of the Commission Imperial, has extremely
admired at the variance, and almost incompatible Contradiction of the two
Writings, which he has been very much trubl'd to apprehend, that being so near
so great misfortuns wherewith the Emperor's Estates have been threatened for
this long while since, and with which they are already at the point of being
overwhelmed as the Proposal of Monsieur the Commissary alleges, the Emperors
Ministers should by a Writing so far distant from all Accommodation as is the
Decree of the Imperial Commission, bring into dispute all that has been for so
long time transacted in the Conferences at Nimmengen, resume the same
Difficulties which they have been Obliged to abandon, and which have been
determined after a method the most uncontrollable, that could be observed among
Sovereign Princes; think to make it appear, that they did his Majesty a favor
in not demanding Damages while they despoyl him of all that he possesses by
virtue of the Treaties of Munster and Nimmengen, and openly demonstrate a
Design to kindle a new War in the Empire, instead of managing their Affairs to
the best advantage, and Re-uniting their Forces against the Infidels.

In a word, ought it not to seem very strange, that in one of these two
Writings that appeared almost at one and the same time, there should be an
acknowledgement of standing in a Pressing and most indispensable necessity of
the speedy Assistance of the Princes and Estates of the Empire against the
Inundation of the Ottoman Arms, and that in the other there should be nothing
of argument left-forgotten to retain and Employ in the very Heart of the
Empire, all the Forces of the same Princes and the same Estates, and to set
them by the Ears one against the other?

It is an Easy thing to make a judgment of this so surprising Variety; For
that we cannot attribute the Confession which Monsieur the Commissary makes in
his Proposal, of the Extremity to which the Emperors Affairs are reduced, but
to the always too Faithful and too sincere Providence of a pressing necessity;
and the haughty menaces of the Decree of the Imperial Commission, but to the
Humor of the Spanish Ministers, who inspire them, and the Entire Devotion which
the Emperors Minister's are Obliged to have for a Foreign and distant Nation,
which never lays to Heart the loss of Hungary nor the Calamities of Germany,
and which would have the continual Sacrifice which they make of the Interests
of Germany to be looked upon as a mark of its Grandeur and Puissance. But tho
upon consideration only in its self of the Proposal which Monsieur the
Commissioner had in charge to make, there is no Person who may not see how
little of reason it contains, and how little it is to be regarded. Nevertheless
as his Majesty is resolved not to let any opportunity pass of giving the
Estates of the Empire the marks of his good Intentions, he would have the^ also
call to mind, that it is now some Eight Months ago, when forseeing well, that
the Court of Vienna's abandoning themselves to the Counsels of Spain would draw
upon it all those misfortunes, wherewith Hungary is at present afflicted, he
applied for remedy all those condescensions which in reason might be expected
from him to reconcile his Differences with the Empire. It Is well known, that he
was at the beginning willing to have reduced all his pretensions to the only
Possession of what he enjoyed the First of August, 1681. And that of Strasburgh
and its dependencies on this side the Rhine. And that he Offered to renounce
expressly all his other pretensions, what ever Titles he had or might recover
for the time to come.

It is also to be observed, that since the expiration of the time which he had
given for the acceptance of his Offers, he would not take any advantage of the
ill Condition of the Affairs of the Empire, and the Easy Opportunity which he
had to enter Germany (had it been no more than the suffrages of the Electors,
and other well affected Princes) and to remove those Oppositions which others
made to the Establishment of Peace.

His Majesty had reason to promise to himself, that after the Electoral
College had concluded, that there could be nothing determined upon more
advantageous for the welfare and Security of the Empire, than a speedy
accommodation with his Majesty, even upon the Terms which he had proposed,
therefore that the Court of Vienna would so much the sooner conform to the
judgment of so many Electors and Princes, so providently prudent and Zealous
for their Country, that while he acted nothing contrary to the good will and
liking of the most Interested, he should thereby Reunite the whole Empire in
the defense of the Territories and Estates which belong to it. Nevertheless
that Court wholly Governed by the Counsels of the Spaniards, and preferring
them before the Electors and Princes of the Empire, has rather chosen to leave
part of his Forces in the Empire, to satisfy the Fantastical humors of Spain,
then receive the Offers which several Electors and Princes made him of their
Forces for his own Defense; and to neglect the care of his Frontiers next to
the Turks, than desist from that design which he had of declaring War against
his Majesty Upon this prospect it is, that that Court has always labored, by
the Credit which it has with several Princes, and by certain Intrigues, which
are but too well known, to prevent the Concurrence of those Princes to the
Establishment of the Peace, and has also been at greater expenses in
Negotiations to all the Princes of Europe, to engage them in Leagues with that
Court against France, then in Warlike Ammunitions and Preparations to put his
Armies and Fortresses in a condition to make a just and vigorous Resistance,
when they should be Assailed.

In regard therefore that his Majesty has so many proofs of the Evil Intentions
of the Imperial Ministers, and that he is well assured, that that Court shall
no sooner have patched up a Dishonorable Peace with the Turks, which it has
been a long time laboring to accomplish, and which perhaps, it might more
easily have obtained, if the meanness of the Offers had not caused the
Infidells to conceive greater hopes of winning far more considerable advantages
by Force, but that they will pursue their Enmity against France; His Majesty
should be wanting, according to all the rules of prudence in what he owes to
his Allies, as also to the welfare of his Crown, If he should enter into any
Engagement with the Emperor, as he proposes; rather he Declares the contrary,
and that he will reserve to himself the same Liberty which he has hitherto
adhered to, to take such measures as shall be most agreeable to the Justice of
his Rights, and his Obligations to his Allies.

But yet to let all Europe see how highly his Generosity is sensible of the
Deplorable Condition, into which the vast Projects of the Court of Vienna, have
reduced the Affairs of Christendom, and to the end he may contribute as much as
lies in him, as well toward an Establishment of a good correspondence with the
Empire, as also to Reunite all the Dominions that compose it, for the Public
Defense, his Majesty Declares, that he will not only upon this consideration
forgo all his damages which of right he may lay claim to, for all his
Extraordinary Expenses which the Leagues framed against him by the Intrigues of
the House of Austria, have Obliged him to disburse, and to content himself with
the same Conditions formerly offered; But also, because he will not give the
Princes and Estates of the Empire any cause to disquiet themselves, he is
contented to agree to a Truce of Thirty years upon the same Conditions which
have been proposed on his part for a definitive accommodation, during which
time there may be Opportunity sufficient, peaceably to find out the means of
bringing it to pass.

But in regard his Majesty is resolved not to be long delayed in uncertainty, he
has given Order to the Count of Crecy to Declare in his behalf, that he revokes
from henceforth all the Offers which he made for the welfare and Advantage of
Christendom, if they are not accepted by the Estates of the Empire, and the
Treaty be not concluded and Signed by the End of August next: And to Declare
that all the Miseries that shall afflict Christendom for the future shall be
imputed only to those that refuse Offers so advantageous to the Empire.

Given at Ratisbonne, July the 26th 1683. The Count of CRECY.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by George Croom, in Thames Street, over against
Baynards-Castle. 1683.


