A DECLARATION OF THE Most Christian King, SHOWING THE REASONS For Recalling
his PLENIPOTENTIARIES FROM THE Treaty at Cologne.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho: Newcombe, 1674.

The most Christian Kings Reasons, for Recalling his Ambassadors from Cologne.
ALthough the late Attempt Committed on the Person of William Prince of
Furstemberg, Plenipotentiary for the Elector of Cologne, in the very City of
Cologne it self, the Place appointed for the Treaty of Peace, has been done by
some of the Officers and Soldiers belonging to the Regiment of Grana, one of
the Regiments of the Imperial Army; yet the King of France would not at first
look upon the Emperor, as being the Author of so Odious an Action, his Majesty
ever reflecting on himself, and knowing, that nothing in the World ought to be
held so Sacred and Inviolable among Kings and Sovereigns, as the true and exact
observation of their Word. He thought he should do too great an Injury to his
Imperial Majesty, by believing him capable of violating, by so horrid an Act, a
Faith he had so solemnly given, not only to the whole Empire at the Diet of
Ratisbonne, but even to all Europe, for the secure Neutrality of a Town, from
whence all Christendom did expect a happy Calm.

It was in that Prospect, and for no other consideration, that his Most
Christian Majesty did suspend his just Resentment of such an Attempt* being
still willing to give the Emperor time to Declare, that it was done without his
Order, gladly expecting to see the Chastisement he should inflict on the
Offenders, to wash away the Blur they had made on his Reputation, by doing
which, the Emperor would have made it appear to the World, that his Intention
was not to infract the Public Faith, nor hinder the present Negotiation for
Peace. For these Reasons, his Majesty forbore commanding his Ambassadors away
from Cologne, though the Neutrality of that Town, so lately violated, afforded
him ground lawful enough, to fear they could not remain there any longer with
Safety. And indeed, that which his Majesty so justly feared, has since proved
but too true in the sequel, the same Security which was violated before on the
Person of a Public Minister belonging to a Prince Allied to his Majesty, was
soon broken afresh on that of his own Ambassadors, in the same Place, their
Liveries and other Equippages having been publicly Arrested, and a great and
considerable Sum of Moneys belonging to his Majesty, seaz'd on, and detained
forcibly, by Order from the Chief Commander of the said Regiment of Grana, the
said Moneys being Loaded on one of their own Wagons. And all this done in a
City, in which Freedom and Liberty is allowed, common to all the World: having
besides, caused an Express, sent by the Count de Chamilly to the said
Ambassadors, to be both Arrested and Searched. In a word, Cologne which till
then, had been Consecrated for the Public Security of all Europe, is by a
monstrous Change, become on a sudden, a most Bloody Theater, where on those
very Troops designed for the preservation of the Neutrality of the Place, being
by the Magistrates of the same, Sworn to keep and maintain it, have since
exercised with Impunity, all the Outrages and Violences that both Avarice and
Revenge can inspire. Notwithstanding all which, his most Christian Majesty has
hitherto forborne imputing the least of those Exorbitancies to the Emperors
Orders, as being still willing to persuade himself, out of the Concern he has
for his Glory, that they were attempted without any Intent of his Imperial
Majesty. But now since the Answer given at Vienna, to the Ministers of Sweden,
makes it appear evidently, that the Forcible Stealing away of the said Prince
William, was really an Effect of the Emperors Order and express Command, his
Majesty of France can no longer doubt, but what has been done since to his
Ministers at Cologne, has been a following Consequence, of the self same
Orders and Directions. His Majesty therefore, both in consideration of that he
owes to himself, and what the security of his Ambassadors requires of him in
this Conjuncture, has thought it not fit to leave them any longer exposed to
these Violences, which will doubtless raise the just Indignation, as well as
the Wonder of all Europe. Thereupon, his Majesty has at the same time
Commanded them to inform the Swedish Ministers, (who during the whole Treaty,
have exercised the Mediation of the King their Master, by whose Great and
Prudent Care, the said Assembly was convok'd together) of the Resolution he
has taken to Re-call them home. The said Ambassadors of Sweden, having
hitherto been Eyewitnesses, of those facil Means and Expedients his most
Christian Majesty has from time to time Propounded, for the making the said
Negotiation to take Effect: as on the contrary, they have seen what violent
Courses have been used by the Emperor all along, to hinder and stop the
Progress of the same; It Is but Reason they should likewise see, what just and
lawful Grounds do now oblige him to draw a proportionate Revenge upon his
Enemies by force of Arms, for the slight account made by them of what ought to
be most Sacred, not among Princes only, but even among all Men; and by the
same Force to compel them to Seek a Peace, they now strive to Hinder, by Means
so Unjust and Unwarrantable. Would the whole Empire but seriously reflect on
the Emperors Conduct in this Conjuncture, it would evidently appear, that it
includes in itself, many Sinister Designs, which must needs prove fatal to her
Liberty, if not timely prevented; there being nothing that discovers more the
Injustice of a Design, than the odiousness of the means practiced for the
effecting of it. Had the Emperor therefore been less concerned than he was, in
his hindering the Assembly at Cologne, from producing a Peace, he would never
have had recourse to such Practices, as must of necessity Dissolve the
strictest Ties and Bounds of all Humane Society: he would not have Violated the
Neutrality of a Place appointed for the Treaty, by his Insults on the Persons
of Ambassadors of France: he would not, I say, have suffered his Officers and
Commanders to seize forcibly and violently on Moneys appertaining to his most
Christian Majesty, within the Walls of a Free City; but in a word, would have
Acted in this Conjuncture, with more Candor and more Generosity, and in a War
he has rashly Declared against him; at least, if he had feared less than he
seems to do, the end and consequences of it.

All the while the Conferences lasted at Cologne, and the Mediators indeavored
to bring together the most Refractory Parties concerned; the Emperor alone, who
fearing to see himself Disarmed by a Peace, and consequently made to lose that
Power, he had usurped since the year last past, of Quartering his Troops
indifferently, and Conqueror like, in the Territories of all the Princes of the
Empire, thereby strengthening his Armies at their Costs and Charges, by all
which proceedings he did openly Contervene and Infringe, under vain and
specious Pretenses, the Treaties of Westphalia, and raising again a Power,
heretofore so formidable to the German Liberty, and which Power could never be
reduced to any lawful Limits, but after so many long and Bloody-wars. To add no
more, the said Emperor dreaded nothing more, than to see by the Conclusion of a
Peace at Cologne, the end of a Quarrel merely a Stranger to the Concern of the
Empire, prove the End and Stop of those Designs he has framed against the very
Empire it self.

All these things duly Weighed, his most Christian Majesty doubts not, but
that not only the King of Sweden himself, whose Honor is found so highly
concerned in this Breach of a Faith, of which he was made Depository as Chief
Mediator, but even all other Princes concerned, and sensibly touched with a
Desire of Peace, will not fail to impute to the Emperor, and him only, the
unhappy Dissolution of an Assembly that was both capable and likely, to have
procured it to all Christendom.

The whole Empire may one day Remember, that her Tranquillity might easily have
been restored, had the Emperor brought to the Treaty, the same Candid and
Sincere Dispositions, that his most Christian Majesty has showed all along, in
and since the late Treaties of Westphalia; and that had his Imperial Majesty
consented to Engage his Word, not to Assist at all the Enemies of France, his
most Christian Majesty would freely have Obliged himself, to have caused his
Armies to quit Germany at the same time, as soon as he should have received the
said Promise from him. However, his Majesty notwithstanding what has past
hitherto, does still retain the same Sentiments for Peace he had before: The
just Reasons that made him undertake a War, have not, nor do not lessen or
diminish any thing of his first Inclination, toward the Quiet and Calm of the
Empire: And what ever Happy Success he justly hopes, God may please to Crown
his Arms with, he shall never think them more happy, than when they shall
reduce his Enemies to desire a Durable Peace.

Given at Versailles, the 24 of March, 1674.
FINIS.

