THE French King's Letter TO THE POPE, Concerning the present Affairs in
ENGLAND.
With Allowance.



Most Holy Father,
WE heartily rejoice to see by the Brief which your Holiness writ unto us the
First of this Month, that you are sufficiently convinced of the great Prejudice
the Catholic Religion may suffer, by reason the King of Great Britain is
reduced to so distressed a condition, and what share your Interest may have in
his Re-establishment. We may also say, that our natural Inclination is so far
toward the Assisting and Comforting this afflicted Prince, that we would
willingly quit the most politic Reasons that might oblige us to deny him that
Assistance he now wants, for attaining the Glory of supporting the Catholic
Religion in that Kingdom, and of Seating the said King upon his Throne. We are
likewise very sensible that your Holiness as well as our self, does take to
heart these two so just Subjects of your Care and Resentment: And we do not
only partake with you in the merit of the Cause, but we also with joy behold,
that all Christendom is principally obliged to your Zeal, that the Enemies of
our Religion who are confederated to oppress it, will at length loose that hope
which the Conduct of your Holiness toward us has for a long time given them,
that you would be no Obstacle to their Designs, and that they ought not to
apprehend any thing but the Power which God has put into our hands; to which,
as we have just cause to believe that God will continue his Blessings, seeing
we have omitted nothing that might conduce to the re-establishing a perfect
Understanding with your Holiness, and to the concurring with you in the
Propagation of our Religion, and testifying to you on all occasions our filial
Respect; praying, Most Holy Father, that God will preserve your Holiness many
Years in the Government of his Church.

Your Devoted Son, LOWIS, King of France and Navarr.

Tres Saint Pere,
NOus avons este bien aise de voir par le Bref que vostre Beatitude nous
ecrivit le premier de ce mois, qu'elle est bien persuadee du grand prejudice
que la Religion Catholic peut souffrir de l'Etat ou se trouve le Roy de la
Grande Bretagne, and de l'interet qe'elle doit prendre a son retablissement:
Nous pouvons dire aussi que quand meme notre penchant naturel ne nous auroit
pas port a donner a ce Prince afflige, tout le soulagement and la consolation
qu'il pouvoit attendre de notre amity, nous aurions sacrifie au desir de
conserver les restes de notre Religion en Angleterre and a la gloire de
remettre le dit Roi sur son trone, toutes les raisons politiques qui nous
auroient pu obliger de lui refuser le secours don't il a besom. Nous apprenons
aussi avec bien de la joye que votre Saintete ne prend pas moins a coeur que
nous, ces deux si justes Sujets de ses soins, and de son attention: and nous
voulons bien aussi non seulement partager avec elle le merit du succes; mais
meme nous verrons avec plaisir que toute la Chretiente en soit principalement
redevable a vostre zele, and que les Ennemis de nostre Religion qui se sont
liguez pour l'opprimer, perdent enfin l'esperance que la conduite que vostre
Saintete a tenue a nostre egard, leur done depuis longtems, qu'ils ne
trouveront de vostre part aucun obstacle a leurs desseins, and qu'ils ne
doivent rien apprehender que de la puissance que Dieu nous a mise en main; a
laquelle nous avons d'autant plus sujet de croire qu'il continuera de donner
ses benedictions, qu'il scait bien que nous n'avons rien omis pour retablir une
parfaite intelligence avec vostre Saintete and concourir avec elle a
l'augmentation de nostre Religion, and luy temoigner en toutes occasions nostre
respect filial, priant Dieu, tres Saint Pere, qu'il conserve longues annees
vostre Saintete au regime de son Eglise.

Votre devot fills, Le Roy de France and de Navarre.

Sold by Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1689.


