AN ALARM To Slumbring CHRISTIANS, Or the PARABLE Of the Wise and Foolish
VIRGINS, And of the TALENTS, SHEEP and GOATS; BEING A plain and practical
exposition of the whole XXV Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel, calling upon all
Professors to a strict and constant Watchfulness, lest their Lord at his
certain and second Coming, find them not ready, but with their Lamps gone out.

Blessed are those Servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching.

Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of man comes at an hour when ye think
not,

Luke 12.37.40. By Samuel Loveday.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Eleph^nt and Castle near the
Royal Exchange in Cor^^^^. 1675.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
FRiend, whoever thou art, into whose hands this ensuing piece may come; I must
say, the rudeness of speech and unpolished style of the ensuing Book, does
necessarily (not complementally) call for a Prologue or Preface of Apology for
it self; and this I say in its behalf, that it was never intended for so
public a view in the first study of it, but only to be communicated to that
small Congregation over which I am concerned by the providence and grace of
God, as a Pastor or Feeder; to whom or in whose hearing these things were more
largely handled, for the space of one whole Year by the Author, who intended so
to have left it, had not strong and following importunities from several who
had been hearers of the matter more largely, changed my mind and prevailed with
me to publish it; and if any by the publication receive any profit, they are
debtors to the forenamed under God for it.

For my own part, I am (I can say truly) deeply sensible of much imperfection
in the management, and that I shall need thy candid and favorable indulgence
overlooking manner and heeding matter, as it agrees with the current of
Scripture.

The brokenness and imperfections hereof were partly occasioned by the length
of time, since they were delivered; and partly that those notes remaining in my
hands were very concise and brief, being but the very heads of the matter
insisted on: this I only leave as a modest plea for my self, knowing that truth
is of age to speak for it self.

And so I proceed to an Introduction to the matter it self, contained in the
following discourse. The matter before us is excellent matter, though wrapped up
in Parables, not with a design to lock it from us, but that in condescending to
set forth heavenly things by earthly, we might the easier come at the meaning.
Now this we must know, that all terms and circumstances in a Parable are not
for probation but illustration: a Parable will not always (as we say,) run upon
all four, but we must eye and observe the scope and design of a Parable; and it
is the work of a Gospel Minister not only to Preach, but to expound and open
the Scriptures, and divide (or cut asunder) the Scriptures, giving each their
Portion. It was the work of our Lord Christ when he was on earth, not only to
preach, as we find him doing, Math. 5. Luke 4. but expounding the Scriptures.
See that remarkable place, Luke 24.27. beginning at Moses and all the Prophets,
he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself;
though the Scriptures do in good measure expound themselves if well observed,
yet the Lord in all ages appointed instruments for that work, God foresaw there
would be need of Interpreters. When the Eunuch read the Prophet, he wanted some
body to guide him, and God guides Philip to do this office. God usually conveys
light by instruments whom he first inlightens.

The Subject which we have before us is a heartsearching Subject if seriously
heeded; and as heartwork is the principal and only work which Professors are to
be conversant about in this latter day, so it is to be feared there is no work
more superficially carried on by most; some not knowing what it means, others
forgetful of their hearts, not observing Solomon's Counsel, Prove. 4.23. to keep
the heart with all diligence.

The Apostle St. Paul in his days did foresee in the last days many Professors
would be loose as to this main duty, which makes him to predict it unto his Son
Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. Now (as I said before) the great design of our Lord here,
is, that his Disciples waiting for him should have grace in their hearts, a
good inside as well as a Profession, as you may perceive Christ does loudly
call for a good heart, and he knew then the outside would be good also; for
says Christ, A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth
that which is good.

But mistake me not, I do not in the least by what I say design to slight or
undervalue Profession; but my design and aim is to arm you against degenerating
into mere form, and a Carcass of Religion without the Spirit and power of it.

That state is very nauseous and offensive to Gods all-seeing Eye, who would
have the Churches to know, that he is the searcher of the heart and the tryer
of the reins, Rev. 2.23. The Church in Sardis was then in her Wane, when she
had a name to live and was dead, Rev. 3.2, 3. her fault was not that she had a
name to live, but that she had the name without the nature: and what was it
that gave her this name to live? was it not the form, Church Membership,
Ordinances? and what was it that denominated her to be dead, but want of faith,
love, zeal, yea Oil in the heart? had not these Virgins a name to live? are
they not called Virgins, a living name, but wanted life in the Root? Had not
these Servants of Christ a name to live, whilst called Christ's own Servants?
but they wanted love, faith, and zeal, to Christ their Lord in his business:
had not these Goats a name to live? were they not clean Creatures and allowed
for sacrifice? and was not a Kid of the Goat equally acceptable as a Lamb of
the flock? but all these are rejected by Christ for want of life in the root.

This consideration makes me in the Subject following, spend so much time and
pains in demonstrating sincerity from hypocrisy, as you will find as you go
along; Oh! sincerity is the life of all, a perfect heart is that which renders
a weak Person although defective in many things, yet acceptable with God. Take
notice of those two remarkable passages between Asa and Amaziah, 2 Chro. 15.17.
though the high places were not taken away, yet the heart of Asa was perfect
all his days, see the contrary ^ Chro. 25.2. concerning Amaziah, he did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. God
measures men by their hearts, whether in good or evil actions; no man can keep
acquaintance and fellowship with God without a perfect heart; though he may
possibly keep fellowship with the Church, yet Christ knows not such, but so as
to reject them with a Depart, I know you not.

My dear and Christian Friends, who are entered into the race and are aiming at
the Crown; so run that ye may obtain; it is not every running will serve,
neither is it the best of running will serve, if not persevered in to the end;
the Galatians did run well, yet ceast too soon the very best of Professors had
need to set these awakening considerations before their Eyes, in this back
sliding, sleeping, slumbring day, wherein the best of Virgins if not fallen
into a dead sleep, yet they slumber; they all slumbred and slept: and let the
consideration of the miscarrying of the former Churches awaken us in time. What
became of the seven Churches of Asia, and the former Apostolical Churches, is
not their Glory laid in the dust long ago?

Now as formality without life and power, was the very thing that prepared the
Church of the Jews, Gods circumcised Church, for casting out of his presence as
a dead Carcass, so the same formality was the ruin of these first Churches, as
we may perceive.

For this is a certain truth, that by how much the nearer any sort of Persons
come to God in his worship, and yet live not up to it, it does provoke God to
the most severe proceedings against such; as for example, Nadab and Abihu,
Levit. 10. Ananias and Saphira. Act. 5. and many more; there is enough in this
Chapter so awaken us to consider, Persons so near to Christ, having such
boldness and confidence, yet not known by him.

To consider what a close mixture here is between these persons, all as it were
of one Society, of one Family, Christ's own Sevants, of one Flock, till Christ
severs them.

Now our Lords great design in these Parables, is (upon pain of eternal
miscarriage and disappointment,) to provoke industry and faithfulness in all
Christ's Talents and intrustments; and that from a right root, that we may
plainly gather if we observe: Therefore have a special care of sloth, and
negligence in Christ's service, that is greatly distasteful to him; and consider
my Friends, that there is no one grace more acceptable to Christ and conducing
more to future profit than Charity, and Alms to the Poor: those whom Christ
has entrusted with the Talent of this Worlds goods, as Stewards, he expects
should as need require dispense them in his house; see how Christ takes it in
this Chapter, ver. 35. For I was an hungry and ye gave me meat, thirsty and ye
gave me drink, naked and ye clothed me: Christ takes it as done to his own
person, and is pleased to found their blessedness upon that foundation; if any
omission in these near to Christ renders them Goats it is that they had not fed
nor clothed Christ in his Brethren, or members.

If what I have said in my following labor may be a means but to awaken one
Person to look to his or her standing, and examine their State for eternity, I
shall be bound to bless God for his assistance in the work. I cannot but say I
did experience some quickening in my study of it, the same I desire for you in
the reading of it.

But I would not hold you too long in this Porch or Preface; I shall refer you
to the Book it self, which I desire you to read with care and consideration; I
shall only leave Five or Six general rules as to the work of self-examination
and provision.

First, Have a special care you mistake not in the two great fundamental points
of Repentance and Faith; for there may be a counterfeit Repentance and Faith;
see they be true of the right kind. Many miscarry upon this mistake, thinking
they have them, when indeed they have them not.

Secondly, Know this for a truth, that where one miscarries through despair,
hundreds perish through presumption; which is the State of those pointed at by
Christ in these Parables.

Thirdly, Improve present means and opportunity to get Oil* you see there is a
time when it is too late; Seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, is Christ's Counsel,
and to such seeking is a certain promise made, see Prove. 2.8.17.

Fourthly, Have a special care of too much love to present things, that is very
dangerous; if any man love the World, the love of God cannot be in him: this
hinders Charity, no sin so contrary to true Saintship; a Saint is much in
Heaven, Philippians. 3.20.

Fifthly, ^est not content with the measure of grace received, but add to and
labor to grow in grace, Trade for Heaven; it is Gods mind that besides getting
into Christ we should grow in him; to whom much is given, of him much is
required, as we see in this Chapter; and he that has least must make it more,
one Talent must increase to another; grace if true is communicative also to
others.

Sixthly, Study much the near approach of the day of reckoning; it is not long
at the longest before Christ will come to reckon with you; set your accounts
ready against that day; that you may give your account so as that Christ may
say, Well done, good and faithful Servant, thou have been faithful in a few
things, I will make thee Ruler over many things; or as Luke, Ruler over Ten
Cities.

Now Reader if thou meetest with any thing strange in this exposition; know
this, that my design is not to impose upon the Scriptures a sense not consonant
to the current of Scriptures, or impose upon the judgment of any man: I only
humbly tender my Judgment in these things, to the trial of the unbyassed Reader.

Sam. Loveday.

To the READER.
THE Prophets have foretold, that in the last days, the earth shall be full of
the knowledge of the Lord, and knowledge shall be increased. And blessed be God
we see these prophesies in great measure fulfilled, though not to that degree
and universal extent they shall be, but the light is growing on more and more
unto the perfect day. Now among other ways and means whereby this knowledge
has been spread, the writings of the Servants of God in all ages have greatly
advanced and propagated the knowledge of the truth. And they especially are to
be commended who by their diligent and faithful labors have opened the Holy
Scriptures unto us, that by the light thereof we may see light. Among the rest
of the number of Gods faithful Servants that have employed their Talents this
way, the Author of this Treatise is one, according to the Subject he has
handled. And though every word of God is pure, and highly to be prized, yet it
must be confessed, that some protions of Holy Scripture are more useful and
profitable than others. Such is the wisdom that God has given to this Author,
in directing his heart to pitch upon one of the most seasonable Subjects for
the day and age we live in, The Parable of the Virgins. What can be more
necessary! For the discovery of Hypocrisy, in the foolish Virgins; For the
awakening of sleepy, drowsy Christians in the wise Virgins. So for the Parable
of the Talents; To provoke all to a faithful improving of all the gifts and
graces committed to their trust by their great Lord and Master, that when he
comes again to call all his Servants to account, we may receive the reward, and
enter into the joy of our Lord.

For the third and last part, concerning the eternal judgment, a Subject of all
other most necessary; When there shall be a final determination of all men's
estates for ever, according to the Scriptures.

But not to prevent what is more copiously discoursed of by the Author himself
in all these particulars in this Treatise.

For the manner of handling these Subjects, I dare promise thee (if thou be
one that has any relish of the most important truths contained in the Holy
Scriptures) that thou will find a Savor running through the whole discourse,
as one that felt what he first spoke, and afterward committed unto writing,
for thy souls good and profit, and indeed they are the fittest persons to treat
of such Subjects as these are. To conclude; The Author has no other design
and end of writing this but thy spiritual edification and advantage; That thou
may prove a wise Virgin, and so improve thy Talents, that thou may stand in
the judgment. Which is also the sincere and hearty desire of

John Gosnold.

A Table of the Principal matters contained in this Book.
PRedictions of Christ's certain and second coming, calling upon Christians to
be strict and constant in self-examination after their inward and Spiritual
estate before it be too late, from the consideration of their Lords near
approach, page 1. The explication of the ten Virgins, and of the Kingdom of
Heaven page 2, 3, 4. Signs of Christ's near approach, with distinguishing Marks
of the right Virgins. Showing also how the Church on earth resembles the state
of glory, in four particulars page 5, 6, 7. That none goes to meet Christ
without the Lamp of profession, nor Oil without Lamps, and yet there may be
Lamps without Oil page 8, 9, 10, 11. Vast numbers of professors may wait for
Christ's coming, in six particulars, and yet deceive themselves page 12, 13. How
to know you are not of this number, by six Marks page 13, 14. A description
betwixt wise and unwise Virgins, in many particulars page 15, 16, 17. Use of
Trial in four particulars, as evidences of the truth of Christianity page 24.
In the marriage of a true Virgin to Christ, are six blessed privileges page
27, 28, 29, 30. Who may comfortably hope for this day, resolved in six
particulars page 31, 32, 33. That a little before Christ's second coming, the
sin of slumbering and sleeping will be very prevalent among professors, with
several signs of this dreadful state page 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47.
Ten awakening considerations to prevent or rowse from this slumbring estate
page 48. Christ's second coming remarkable under five circumstances page 49, 50,
51. Seven remarkable passages relating to the two sorts of Virgins with the
blessed advantage of the wise and dreadful disappointment of the foolish page
59, 60, 61, 62, etc. What it is to buy oil, and that a Market price is to be
given for it page 80, 81. Christ Jesus requires, all that look for glory
hereafter from him, shall now make ready for him; showing also what it is to be
ready page 85, 86, etc. The earnest petition of the foolish Virgins under five
heads, that Jesus would open the door for them, yet fruitless because too late
page 90, 91. etc. Reasons of Christ's rejection of persons from glory at the
last day page 97. Six marks to know when we savingly know Jesus Christ page 98.
The great duty of watchfulness enjoined from the certainty and suddenness of
Christ's approaching, under five head^ page 99, 100. etc. The Parable of the
Talents explained page 109. etc. Rules for a right improvement of our Talents
to Gods glory and our own, and others good page 128. 129. Great advantage
attends the well improving Talents page 162, 163, etc. The plea of the slothful
in hiding his Talent and the Lord ill resentment of it, and proceeding
thereupon page 170, 171, 172. etc. A description of usury what it is when
biting page 184, 185, 186, 187. Five marks to know a slothful person, with
eight arguments against the sin of slothfulness, with account of Christ's severe
punishment inflcted upon such, being attended with a double punishment page
191, 192. etc. What taking aw^y the Talent means, and that the consequence is
utter and a revokable darkness, where shall be nothing but wailing and gnashing
of teeth; and that this taking away of the slothful Servants Talent takes place
at Christ's personal coming page 191, 194, 195. That Industry in spirituals
shall produce abundance of increase page 204, 205. That there will not be the
least dram of favor in Christ's face to slothful persons at the day of account
page 206. Christ Jesus compared to a Shepherd, his people to Sheep, but the
wicked to Wolves, Lions, Dogs page 208. The dreadful Sentence denounced against
those on Christ's left hand into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels page 229, 230. etc. Hell fire differs from all other fire, in six
circumstances page 241, 242. Not only the profane, but very many among
professors will be cast into this torment for four reasons. page 246. Torment
certain and terrible, easy to fall into it, difficult to escape it, and
impossible without cutting off and plucking out a right hand, or eye, or foot
page 246, 247. That the pains and punishments of unbelievers is endless, a worm
that never dies, a fire that never goes out page 249, 250. etc. Christ's Kingdom
will be upon earth, four rules to help Christians to walk worthy of it page
241, 242, 243. Christ's high estimation of such acts of Charity as are in
singleness of heart showed to his suffering members, he takes them as done to
himself page 246, 247. God will reward men more or less proportionable to their
work in the great day, and yet the reward of grace not of debt page 253, 254.
Mercy, Charity, and Alms extended to Christ's true Brethren here on earth is
above all services acceptable to God, and brings in great profit to persons at
Christ's appearance, works of Charity above all other works, being called good
works, proved by six Arguments page 255, 256, 257. Rules for the right
distribution of our Charity in ten particulars page 258, 259. As a spur to good
works have an eye to Gods reward page 251, 252. We must not measure Gods love
to us by his outward dealings with us, want may be good for them that fear God
page 253, 254. The truly gracious have a low esteem of their best performances
to Christ in point of acceptance to salvation page 255, 256, 257. Two Emminent
reasons why righteous persons have so low an esteem of their best duties of
obedience page 258, 259. Jesus Christ is near a hundred times in Scripture
styled the Son of man, which is not an empty Epithete, he shall come so and
judge so, and dyed as such, and shall be glorified as Son of man page 209, 210,
etc. At Christ's coming all nations shall be gathered as sheep and Goats, and
set on his right and left hand, all explained page 219. etc. Christ's final
sentence denounced to them on his right and left hand with the reason of it,
first to glory, under five heads explained page 228, 229. etc. That God the
Father is the great agent in man's salvation, under eight circumstances page
234, 235. Objection, how can it agree with the justice and equity of. God
almighty to punish a moments sin with an endless Torment, resolved page 254.
255. Men's plea for an unavoidable decree to damnation made void page 257. That
our Lord Jesus though upon his Throne of glory will not proceed in judgment
according to his royal prerogative, but according to undeniable grounds of
reason from the Creature page 260, 261. That sins of Omission as well as sins
of Commission are of a damning nature page 262.
BY Reason the Book was done at two Printing Houses together, with the
uncertainty of the written Copy, the pages of three sheets from 225, etc. are
twice repeated, which the Reader is desired to take notice of, for his
understanding the Table which truly represents the matter but not the pages. In
page 232, etc. for part read point.

THE PARABLE Of the Ten VIRGINS, etc.
THat which first engaged my heart, and meditations to enter upon this Portion
of Scripture, was these two considerations.

1. The excellent matter of instruction, that was coucht under these three
Parables laid down in this Chapter; the tendancy whereof, is to provoke
Christians to strict and cordial self-examination, after their inward and
spiritual Estate, before it be too late.

2. The serious consideration of that Period of time which they point at; being
the time a little before Christ's second coming, which we may perceive by a
short view of the precedent Chapter; most of which Chapter is spent (in answer
to the Disciples threefold demand) in laying down the more remote, and more
immediate forerunners of Christ's second coming. Now in this 25 Chapter we
must either understand our Lord, still prosecuting the same design; in giving
yet more and other predictions relating to his coming; or else we must
understand him speaking of some remarkable passages, that shall fall-in
contemporary with those forenamed signs: And I take this latter sense to be
most coherent with the scope of the whole Context; that is to say, that when
the former remarkable signs and passages shall appear, and the Son of Man is
near to his second coming, ver. 30. Then shall the State of the Church, and
Professors be fitly resembled to what is set forth by these Parables. And to
this agrees the vulgar Latin, who thus read (in that point of time,) their
rendering this first word in Capitals as a remarkable period.

The Parable of the Ten Virgins, etc.
Then shall the kingdom of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins, that took their
Lamps and went out to meet the Bridegroom.

The method that I shall take in managing this Subject, shall be first to open
and explain those words and phrases which may seem to want explication.
Secondly, I shall lay down those doctrinal conclusions, that does naturally
arise from the words so opened, and then apply the whole; and all this with
brevity.

Then in that point of time, when! (according to the precedent signs,) Christ's
coming draws near; (the kingdom of Heaven.) What may we in this Text understand
by the kingdom of Heaven? (I answ.) According to the generality of
Interpreters, kingdom of Heaven in this place is to be understood the Church,
State; and so it must be understood from Corists mouth elsewhere, as Math.
16.19. the words of Christ to Peter; I gave unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, which according to the context must be understood; as also Math.
23.13. in Christ's words to the Scribes and Pharisees, that shut up the kingdom
of Heaven, kept persons out of the faith and Church of Christ: so must Paul be
understood, Colos. 1.13. where he calls the Church, the kingdom of Gods dear
Son, into which himself and the Colossions were brought or translated, (be
likened) or resembled the State of the Church in that juncture of time; and
consider, who made this comparison? It is Jesus Christ, who was wisdom it self,
who did not use to make improper comparisons, but if Christ say they are like,
it is so; and in this resemblance, our Lord has respect to the manner of their
solemnizing the Marriages in those Countries and times, which according to
History was in the Nights, and so Lamps were needful; in which weddings, there
were a choice company of young men called Sons of the Bride-chamber, and a
choice and picked company of Virgins, of the Bride kindred and acquaintance, to
attend the Bridegroom at his coming; to which it is thought David does alude,
Psa. 45. Now says Christ, the Church State shall be a meet resemblance
hereunto in that day, (unto ten.) The question is, what kind of number this
must be? Is this to be understood in a proper and strict fence? (I answ.) We
are not bound to understand this in a strict sense, precisely ten; because we
have by this certain number ten, an indefinent large and uncertain number: As
for instance, 1 Samuel 1.8. the words of Elkanah to Hannah: Am not I better to
thee than ten Sons. So in the 2 Samuel 19.43. We have ten parts in David, Eccle.
7.19. Wisdom strengthens more than ten mighty men. Zac. 8.23. Ten men shall
take hold of the skirt of a Jew. Ten women shall bake in one Oven: all which
numbers are significantly to be understood of a large indefinite number, and
not precisely ten. So here, when Christ says ten, he must be understood as
from seeing large numbers coming in at that juncture of time. But why Virgins?
(answ.) by Virgins must be understood such at least who profess holiness: In
worship and conversation, holy Persons are set out by this appellation,
Virgins, such were the Church of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11. I have espoused
you to one Husband, that I may present you a Chaste Virgin to Christ, this is
the proper epithet to Christ's Spouse, Cant. 1.2. the Virgins love thee, by
Virgins sometimes is to be understood, such as have escaped the false worship
of the World, as it is understood Revel. 14.4. These are they which are not
defiled with Women, for they are Virgins; and in this sense, the worst of these
might be Virgins, these Persons in our Text are set forth by a fourfold
Character. 1. They are called Virgins. 2. They are said to have Lamps or
visible profession commonly understood. 3. They are said to be gone out, they
are not like the Sluggard, who only with and desire, and lie still; but these
are gone out, up and doing; these are gone to seek, gone to meet. 4. They are
gone to meet Christ as a Bridegroom, with some hope, joy, and expectation, as
they that have an interest in him.

Having thus opened the words, I shall take notice of those observable
Doctrines, that flows from the words.

1. That near to the second coming of Jesus Christ, the Gospel of the kingdom
is preached; many shall take upon them professed friendship to him; then shall
there be ten Virgins, even multitudes take up profession.

2. The Church here on Earth, does or ought to bear a resemblance to the
kingdom of Heaven to come.

3. All that are waiting for Christ aright, are or ought to be Virgins.

4. Those only are wrightly waiting for Christ; who are gone forth.

5. They that go forth to meet Jesus Christ as they ought, have Lamps with them.

6. All those that are gone to meet and wait for Christ, do go to meet him as a
Bridegroom.

I shall give a brief hint to each of these.

1. As to the great number of Professors, that shall come in the latter days, I
have in the explication of this number ten, showed you that it is taken for a
large indefinent number. This was prophesied, Esa. 60.5. The abundance of the
Sea shall be converted unto thee, and the forces of the Gentiles shall come
unto thee; ver. 8. They shall flock like Doves to the windows; Christ's house
will be furnished with Guests, Math. 22.10. Many are called, Jesus Christ did
foresee that the harvest would be very great, Math. 9.37. But some may object,
was not this fulfilled in the beginning of the Gospel, when there were 3000
converted at one Sermon of Peter's, Acts 2. (I answ.) No, First, because those
then converted were Jews, but these prophesied of, are Gentiles; and Secondly,
this plentiful flowing in, is contemporary with those signs and immediate
forerunners of Christ's coming. Chapter 24.

Now that which shall occasion this large flowing in, in that juncture of time;
may be these circumstances:

First, From that great increase of light, that shall break out in that Day,
which was prophesied of by the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 12.4. Many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased; which does refer to that time, a^ we
may perceive by the Context. We read also of an Angel coming down from Heaven,
by whose means the Earth is enlightened, Rev. 18.1. the first fruit whereof we
see in our days.

Secondly, These may arise from the great noise of Christ's second coming, which
shall be made more than formerly, which shall awaken many and cause them to run
forth: The Doctrine of the latter days near Christ's second coming will run much
upon this Subject; this was foreseen by Malachy, Chap. 3 as we may also gather
out of the Book of the Revelations.

Thirdly, those dreadful and amazing dispensations of God, that shall take
place in the latter days, when those signs spoken of Math. 24. Luke 21. shall
begin to come to pass, this shall make all the Tribes of the Earth to mourn,
Math. 24.30. Luke 21.25, 26. Men's hearts failing at the sight hereof.

From hence we may be informed, that we are upon the borders of the latter
days, we have not only seen some forerunners of Christ's coming in other
respects, but we have in some part seen this also; great numbers of persons
have flowed in, in these 20 years past much more than formerly. So much for the
first Doctrine.

The second is drawn from this appellation kingdom of Heaven, Christ does not
inconsiderately, but with good consideration so call it. From whence I draw the
second part, That the Church of Christ here on Earth, ought to bear a lively
resemblance of the State of glory, and that in four Circumstances.

1. From their compactness, the Church of Christ are imbodied together and
compact, we have this very word used. Ephesians. 4.16. Speaking there of the Church,
says it is compact; as the Natural Body is, so is this therefore called a
City, Ephe. 2. Fellow Citizens of the Saints, so the glory to come called a
City, Heb. 11.1. ver. 16. He has prepared for them a City, 1 Pet. 2.5. Bu^^ up
a spiritual house.

2. The Church resembles the State of glory in that purity and holiness (...)
ought to be in it, or members of it, Plas. 93.5. Holiness becomes thy house
for ever; the Church is as to holiness, styled Golden Candlesticks, which
answers to the State of Glory, in which no unclean thing shall enter.

3. The Church on Earth bears a meet resemblance to the State of Glory, and may
be called here by Christ the kingdom of Heaven, because as Christ is King and
Lawgiver in that kindom of Glory; so Christ is King and Lawgiver to his Church,
James 4.12 One Lawgiver.

4. As Christ will be resident in his kingdom with his Saints, he shall then
dwell amongst them. Rev. 22.3. he ^abernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell amongst them; so in the Church the Lord has promised to walk and dwell
amongst them, 2. Cor. 6.16. He walks amongst the Churches under the name of
Golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1. Thus the Church bears a resemblance with the
Kingdom of Glory, and the Church is the Porch or entrance into Glory; according
to Acts 2. last, The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.
This consideration well weighed, may serve to provoke holiness in the Church of
Christ, both in Ministers and members it is prophesied, as to the State of the
Church to come. Esa. 63.21. the people shall be all righteous; that we are sure
will be a holy time, a holy State; and without holiness no man shall see God,
Heb. 12.14. You that are Church members, labor after holiness; if you arrive
not at holiness here, you shall never have it hereafter; the truth of this
Doctrine is confirmed by the third Doctrine which I shall only name.

3. Doct. That all that truly wait for Christ, are or ought to be- Virgins: I
have already showed you in the explication, what is intended by Christ in this
appellation; they that the Scripture gives this appellation to or name of
Virgins, unto such as are holy Persons. First as to a blameless holy
conversation. Secondly, Such as are separate from false worship, as I showed
you from Rev. 14.4. but I proceed to the fourth doctrine which is this.

4. Doct. That all that truly wait for Christ are gone forth, they are raised
from their Bed of carnal security: The Apostle writing to the Hebrew Church,
Chap. 13.13. does emphatically call their sufferings for Christ, going forth;
Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. The
Spouse of Christ, Cant. 3.1.2. While she seeks Christ upon her Bed, found him
not; she must arise and go forth to seek her beloved, whom her Soul loves; this
going forth supposes a sequestration in a great measure, from earthly
enjoyments, and this the Prophet Joel calls for, Joel, 2 16. Let the Bridegroom
go out of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet in order to seeking God:
that is, from their lawful enjoyments; this going forth supposes love to, and
desire after what we go forth after, Cant. 3.11. Go ye forth (O) ye Daughters
of Sion and behold King Solomon. Sometimes to go forth supposes strength and
vigor, Job. 24.^. Psa. 104.24. Man goes forth to ^is labor and to work till
evening, and (eminent is that Prophecy of) Mal. Chap. 4.2. Ye shall go forth
and grow up as a^ves of the stall. Now when it is said here in this Parable,
they went forth, it supposes a going forth with self-denial, with leaving in a
measure their lawful enjoyments, their false worship, and this with some love
and desire, strength and vigor to meet Christ.

Use, From all which learn this instruction; see how far the foolish Virgins
accompany the wise Virgins, whilst it is in definently said they went out,
these did not only come in but go forth to meet the Bridegroom.

5 Doct. Was this, That those truly gone forth to meet Jesus Christ have or
ought to have Lamps; they took their Lamps, else they had no ways benefit to go
forth upon this design; Lamps were absolutely necessary for this expedition, a
vessel to contain the Oil: And these are no blamed that they took their Lamps,
for although there are some that have Lamps and no supply of Oil, yet we find
not any that have Oil and no Lamp: we have a generation in our days, that would
pretend to have Oil and no Lamp, the power of godliness without a form; this
cannot be, although a Person may have a form and not the power, yet none we
read of that have the power without the form, it is commendable to have Lamps:
The Apostle to the Hebrews exhorts them to hold fast their profession, which
lay in a visible maintenance of the institutions of Christ, together with a
good conversation; the foolish Virgins were right so far, they took their Lamps.

I shall only commend this advice to you from this Doctrine; Do not suppose
grace in your hearts, love to Christ in your hearts, so long as it does not
appear in your lives and professions David would not hide his righteousness in
his heart, Psalm. 49.7. but he makes it to shine forth to the benefit of
others: You that pretend you are gone forth to meet Christ, where are your
Lamps? Remember those 2 Timothy 3. are not blamed that they have a form of
godliness, but they were blamed for not having the power so much for the fifth
Doctrine.

6. Doct. The sixth Doctrine respects their end and interest to meet him as a
Bridegroom with joy and encouragement, as being related to Christ, as Christ
being their friend, this going to meet Christ, supposes love and respect to
Christ: When Lot went forth to meet the Angels, it was for that respect Lot had
to them, Genesis 19.1. When Joseph went to meet his Father, it was from that love
and respect he had to his Father, Genesis 46.29. And thus the Lord is said to meet
him that rejoice and works, this is manifest love, affection, Esa. 64.5. From
the same ground the Disciples went to meet Paul, Act. 28.15. So that the
Virgins going forth to meet Christ, supposes their love and respect to Christ.
Secondly, to meet a Person, implies the forwardness and desire of the meeter to
enjoy the company of the Person met, his desire of fruition is such, that he
cannot sit still till he comes to him; thus the Harlot discovered the desire of
the fruition of her prey, Prove 7.15. She went to meet him, she was not content
to fit still till he came to find her out. Now from these considerations, we
cannot imagine these to be gross wicked Persons, who are thus gone out to meet
Christ in this sense; neither can they be thought to be such as were to be
condemned in themselves, or of those who would be hidden from the face of
Christ, according to Revelations the sixth, these that thus go forth to meet
Christ, must needs have some confidence and hopes of acceptance with him, and
therefore could come boldly as we see afterward, with Lord, Lord open to us,
as in ver. 11.

There are a generation of men that shall have great confidence, Living, Dying,
and Rising, and yet at the last suffer disappointment; and yet their considence
is so great, that Christ can hardly beat them off from it, at the Judgment day,
I tell you I know you not, I profess I know you not, It seems as if they were
hardly prevailed with, to let lose their hold; but of that more hereafter.

We see in our Text the foolish go along with the wise, have the same outward
profession, and declare the same affection, so far as man could see, so they
go forth to meet Christ and that as a Bridegroom. Nay if we take in that
parallel place, Mat. 22. They are come into the marriage Chamber, and yet
without the wedding Garment; and these foolish could not be discerned, by their
fellows and companions, so neither could these in the wedding Chamber, the
Porter could not discern this want of a Wedding Garment, till the King came to
see the guests and then a discovery is made, and not before.

May not these considerations put Professors upon a serious and deep
examination of themselves, how it stands with them as to their souls estate,
for it may easily be imagined, that the whole difference lay within, and not
without; this Wedding Garment must be understood to be Inward sincerity, that
which God only can see and Judge of; I shall handle this more fully afterward
in its place, yet I shall so far anticipate the matter, as to speak a few words
here by way of application. We have in this Parable vast numbers thus
accommodated with Lamps and set forwards, is not the case ours in this day? are
there not vast numbers of Professors now? and according to this Parable, may
not half of them be Foolish, and yet no defect appearing outwardly? methinks
this should awaken us, to look about us.

Give me leave to lay down some cautions, which I pray you take notice of on
the Negative: First, do not trust to hearing, though Christ's words many deceive
themselves, whilst they are hearers and not doers, see the 1 James 22. Many
think they are safe because they are hearers, this you shall see afterward, is
one of the false grounds of the Foolish Virgins, hearing will not do, for there
we hear of people Zek. 33.31, 32. who were hearers, And they come to thee as
the people comes, and they sit b^fre thee as my people, and they hear thy
words, but they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much love but
their heart goes after their covetousness. And lo, thou art unto them as a
very lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
Instrument; for they hear thy words, but they do them not. They came and sat
as Gods people used to do, and this is pleaded Math. 7. we have them preach in
our Streets. Secondly, do not trust to bare faith in the Son of God, that is,
to believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, such a faith those must needs
have, who cast out Devils in Christ's name if a faith that Jesus Christ is the
Son of God will do, the whole nation have it, nay the Devils confess Christ to
be the Son of God. Thirdly, do not trust to thy confidence of acceptance with
God, for this they had. Fourthly, do not trust to obedience to Christ's
Instructions, these Virgins could not want this. Fifthly, do not trust to your
keeping clear from false worship, this they had, or else they could not have
bourn the name of Virgins. Sixthly, do not trust to thy waiting and desiring
for Christ's coming, this they had; and we read of a people that desired the day
of the Lord, as in Amos 5.18. which should be to them a day of darkness and not
of light; these Virgins were gone out to meet the Bridegroom, therefore trust
to none of those.

But then may some say object, what shall we then trust unto, if not in these
six evidences of a sure and safe estate? Answer. First, when this consideration
increases, so does thy holiness increase, these in our Text were workers of
iniquity, for all their confidence, true faith, and hope of salvation, is
attended with a gradual purifying life, as you may see in 1 John 3 Chap. 3.
Every man that has this hope, purifieth himself even as he is pure. Secondly,
when thou art strict in thy thoughts and affections, as well as in thy words
and actions, so was St. Paul, 2 Cor. 10.5. casting down imaginations, and every
high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity, every thought to the obedience of Christ, So also Acts 24.16. he
exercised himself, to have always a concience void of offense toward God and
Man. Thirdly, when secret communion with God, is thy desire and delight in all
duties performed, and at all times, John 1 1.3. that which we have seen and
heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly
our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son jesus Christ. Fourthly,
when the visits of the Spirit makes thee more humble; thus it was with the
Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 6.5 Then said I, woe unto me, for I am undone, for I am a
man of unclean Lips, and dwell among a people of unclean ^^ps; for mine eyes
have seen the King, the Lords of Hosts, The sight of God humbles him. Fifthly,
when thou have a dear love to and a delight in the Brethren; such as excel in
virtue, such a one was David, Psalm. 16.3. But to the Saints that are in the
Earth, and to the excellent in whom is my delight. Though poor and indigent,
Sixthly, when though have a Spirit of secret prayer, upon all occasions thou
can pour out thy soul to God, when no Eye sees thee, and no Ear hears thee;
thus much for the first verse.

We now proceed to the second, and third, and fourth verses, and five of them
were wise, and five of them Foolish,

3d ver. they that were foolish took their Lamps, and took no Oil with them.

3d ver. but the wise took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps, in which
three Verses we have a particular and distinct description of those Persons
spoken of Verse 1 As to the number, and as to the nature of the qualifications
those Ten Virgins, ver. 1. are divided into two parts, five Wise and five
Foolish. Secondly, we have the difference of these Ten, in verse the second,
the Foolish had some Oil for their present use, the Wise had a Vessel or Bottle
containing a stock for future supply to their Lamps, in case of delay in the
Bridegrooms coming, that the Lamp might be kept burning: The whole is a Parable
bears a double acceptance in the Scripture. First, sometimes a Parable is
understood a great wise sentence, that has power in it to rule and sway the
understanding. It signifies to govern as a Prince. Secondly, Sometimes it is
taken to make like; and so a Parable in this place must be understood a
similitude. Christ in his wisdom sees these two to resemble each ather, these
engage in the circumstances thereof, bear a near parity, and likeness to the
State of Professors in the latter days, near to Christ's second coming: But why
five Foolish, when Christ on the like occation finds a Man Math. 22.11.
without a Wedding Garment: by five we are not to understand two or three
precisely, but as to signify a very large indifferent number; so five is to be
understood many together in the external part of Religion, yet many of them are
bad, unwise, and shall be shut out. But why here half, and in Math. 22.11. a
Man only, intimating a small part? I answ. It is spoken of a Man to set forth
the omnipotency of God, that can find out one Man in such a Throng, and can
draw him out; but in our Text, it is spoken as it is in it self considered to
us-wards. But now for application. First, What is the Oil? Secondly, What is
the Vessel? The learned tell us, that the word translated Oil, is the same word
that signifies Light and Noonday, sometimes by Oil is comprehended all good
things, or the best of things, as Prove. 21.20. There is Treasure to be desired,
and Oil in the House of the wise: but a foolish Man he spends it up.

There is desirable Treasure and Oil in the House of the wise; and Job means
when he says the Rocks poured him out Oil is all good things comprehensively
understood; as in Hosea 2. God names Flax an Oil as the two only things.

Secondly, sometimes under Oil is set forth, as in Deuteronomy 7.13. also Joel 3 1.
compared with Prove. 21.17. He that loves pleasure shall be a poor man: He that
loves Wine and Oil shall not be Rich. Thridly. By Oil sometimes is understood
the Spirit of God, as that which is spoken of Aaron and Christ, Psalm. 44.7.
thou love righteousness and hate wickedness, therefore God, thy God has
anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows. He is so to be
anointed with the Oil of gladness above his Fellows, which must intend the
Spirit of God; the foolish had some of this Oil, not a stock in the heart.
Secondly, What is here understood by the Vessel? I answ. Sometimes by Vessel is
understood the whole man, as in 2 Cor. 4.7. but we have this treasure in
Earthen Vessels; that is, weak Man, in this fence the Woman is said to be the
weaker Vessel, that is Person; but by Vessel in this place must be understood
the heart, because it is supposed to the visibility of profession: And in that
sense it is to be understood 1 These. 4.4. that every one of you shall know how
to possess his Vessel in sanctification and honor, that is, the Vessel that is
applied is life, Prove. 4.23. keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it
are the issues of life. We have in these words five Doctrinal conclusions which
are as follows. First, That hypocrisy and sincerity rightly understood, is
wisdom and folly, five wise, and five foolish. Secondly, That among the
multitude of Professors that shall be in the last days, there are many bad
formal Hyppocrites and unwise, who shall never possess what they seem to be
pursuing. Thirdly, Bad and good men meet, Assemble and go along together in the
outward external part of Religion; these all have Lamps alike, and went
together as David Prophesied of Judas in Psalm. 55.13. my Familiar that went
with me to the House of God in Company, that eat Bread with me, has lift up
his Heel against me. Four h^^ That the grea distinguishing of one truly and
spiritually wise, lies in the heart, one wants it, the other has it in his
heart. Fifthly, that true Spiritual Profession is then in his right order when
it is the product of the heart; or thus, Spiritually Wise Persons are such
whose Lips and lives are supplied from the heart. Of these in order, not truly,
thoroughly, to provide for time to come is folly in this sense, all sin is folly,
and all righteousness is wisdom in Solomon's Language; Fools makes a mock of
sin, Fools they lay not up for afterward, those Solomon sends to the
Sluggard to the Ant, Prove. 6.6. Go to the Ant thou Sluggard, consider her ways
and be Wise, Solomon tells us that wisdom excels folly, as much as light
excels darkness, and how does he decipher this wisdom, the wise man can see,
his Eyes are in his head.

The Use of Instruction from hence, First that all sinful people are unwise
people, though Gods own people see Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise, is not he thy Father that has bought thee, has he
not made thee and established thee, Oh foolish and unwise: a Person not rich in
Spirituals is a Fool in Christ's Language. Luke 12.21. So is he that lays up
treasure for himself and is not rich toward God: A Fool is set out under three
Characters.

First, He knows not what is good in it self, a Swine trampleth upon Pearls.

Secondly, If he does at any time see or know, yet he has no heart to lay hold
of that which is good, he has a prize but no heart to it, Prove. 17.16.

Thirdly, He knows not what is good for himself, he refuses that which is
best and chooses that which is worst for him, though he think he is wise, yet
he is a Fool, Psalm. 49.13. This their way i^ their folly, yet their posterity
approve their sayings: he is like the Beast; there is some men carry it as if
they had engrost all the wisdom in the world to themselves, yet when it is too
late, shall see they are Fools, Wisd. 5.4. we Fools count their lives madness,
and their ends without honor. A word hence, First to those without, Secondly
to those within:

First to those without: Learn to have another and higher esteem of Wisdom,
remember the truly wise Person is he that provideth for the longest time to
come, this is wisdom in Christ's account, Math. 7.24. Therefore whosoever
hears these sayings of mine and does them, I will liken him unto a wise Man
which built his house upon a Rock.

Secondly know this, that true wisdom is to depart from sin, for he is the only
wise Man that departs from evil, that flies from sin as from a Serpent, Job
28.28. And unto Man he said, behold the fear of the Lord that is Wisdom, and to
depart from evil is understanding.

Secondly as to those within, to poor weak Persons, that think themselves
unwise and thereupon are under discouragements; art thou one of those that have
laid up the word of God in thy heart? be of good comfort this is true wisdom,
if thou art also found doing of his Commandments from the heart: And know that
the wise shall inherit Glory, when shame shall be the promotion of Fools, as in
Prove. 3.35.

Secondly, Have a special care of placing your wisdom in your obedience to the
external parts of Religion, this was the evil of the foolish Virgins.

Now to the second Doctrine, That there will be many bad Professors and
Church Members in the latter days, sive foolish Virgins. I might in this Point
have an Eye to Gods ancient people in their declined State, but I need not,
Jerem. 5.26. For among my People are found wicked Men. But the truth of this
Doctrine will appear by what Christ teaches in the Parable of the Drag-net
cast into the Sea, which intends, the Gospel Ministry it gathers bad and
good, so all the Churches, Romans, Ephesians, Colossians, and the seven
Churches of Asia, five in seven, blameworthy, so in the 2 Timothy 3.5. Persons
very bad, yet holding a form of godliness, but what need I look so far back,
our days confirm this truth too fully, and whence it arises.

First, From that light that breaks forth.

Secondly, From the hardness of the work, as sins Crucifying throughout
Godliness.

Thirdly, It arises from Satan's more than ordinary industry in the latter days
to deceive.

Take an Use of Caution from this head, first have a special care of condemning
profession it self, because there are so many bad under it, and in it. Christ's
little Church consisting of but twelve, had one bad, even a Son of perdition:
consider the Church of the Corinthians 1 Epistl. 5.6. had very bad Members in
it. Many men are apt to take advantage from this consideration to keep off from
Profession, but know that the Profession is true and good, though bad men may
take it up that will not excuse disobedience to the form of Doctrine.

But I shall hasten to the third Doctrine, That Hypocrites, formal Professors
and bad Members may meet, and match, go along with the wisest and best in the
external part of Religion, this Point I shall not insist upon because it
seems to border upon the former, the truth of this Doctrine, is abundantly
true, if we look into the Old Testament sacrifices, fastings, solemn meetings,
the worst was as forward as the best and the Lord had no cause to blame them as
to that, as you may read Psalm. 50.8. I will not reprove thee for try sacrifices
or burnt offerings to have been continually before me, and further in Isaiah 58
2. compared with Isaiah 1.11. they sat before him as his people, as in Ezekiel
33.31. the Hypocrites in Christ's time were found in three choice duties at
least in the outward part, as Prayer, Fasting, Alm, as in Math. 6. and the
first six ver. thus I pass this third Doctrine.

And now we come to the fourth Doctin, which was this, That the great
distinguishing Character that discovers the wise from the foolish Professor,
it lies in the heart, the wise had Oil in their Vessels, besides what was in
their Lamps; which Vessel must be understood the heart as I have showed before,
if we look under the Law ever since God had a People or Church upon the earth
in the time of the Circumcision, here lay the difference, some were Circumcised
in the flesh, and others in heart, some only Circumcised in the flesh, but none
of them were acceptable to God, but those Circumcised in heart; he only had
praise of God, as you may read in Rom 2.28, 29. For he is not a Jew which is
one outwardly, neither is that Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but
he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in
the Spirit and not in the better, whose praise is of God, and not of Men. Here
lay the difference between Asa and Amasiah, as you may see comparing 2 Chronicles.
15.17. with the 25 of the same Book and the 2 ver. of Asa we thus read, But the
high places were not taken away out of Israel; nevertheless the heart of Asa
was perfect all his d^ys, and of Amaziah we thus read, And he did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. In Asa's time
the high places were not pulled down, yet Asa's heart was perfect with God all
his days; Amaziah did many good things, and things right in the sight of the
Lord, but not with a perfect heart; David thought he had some swervings from
God in outward matters, yet he had a clean heart, Psalm. 73 1. Truly God is good
to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart, and God bears him testimony
that his heart was perfect with him: but some may object.

Object. Does not this take us from judging men by their actions?

I answ. This Text does not so much respect persons profane in life, as
Hypocrites in Profession, for those loose in their lives, cannot be said to
have Lamps as these, and consequently some light which according to Christ
Math. 5.13. the fruit of good works, a constant corrupt life is inconsistent
with a good or clean heart, David might be overtaken with a strong temptation
and yet his heart clean, but if he had fallen into a course and series of sins,
he could not.

Use the first, The Use of this Doctrine, if this be so that the great
distinguishing Character lies in the heart, then this does inform us how we
are to estimate all our actions of obedience doing and sufferings, take notice
how far the heart is in it, and that for this reason, because that Gods eye and
estimate is there, his eye is upon the heart, as in 1 Samuel 16.7. For the Lord
sees not as man sect, for man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord
looks on the heart, a truly godly man had rather have a defect in his life
than in his heart, therefore David pra^eth God to search his heart and try it,
and to see if there were any way of wickedness that he would purge it out, and
prays hard that God would create in him a clean hear, an renew a right Spirit
in him, Psalm 51.10.

Second Use. Have a care of passing sentence upon the outward appearance, for
if we do so, we may sometimes pass unrighteous Judgment; therefore it is
Prophesied of Christ as his prerogative, that he shall not Judge according to
the sight of his Eye, but he shall Judge righteous Judgment, as in Isaiah 11.4.

Third Use. Thirdly, let this serve for Caution to us not to trust to our own
hearts: Solomon says he that trusts to his own heart is a Fool, and Jerens.
17.9. The heart of man is deceitful and desperately bent to wickedness, who can
know it. Hezekiah did not know his own heart, as you may read 2 Chronicles. 32, 31.
God left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart, but I
shall now proceed to the fifth Doctrine.

Fifth Doctrine, That a truly Spiritual wise Professor is one who possesses a
stock of grace within, that he may supply his Lamp without; he does not only
profess but possess, or this Professor is then in his right frame or order,
when it is the fruit and product of the heart. It may be said of a truly wise
Professor, as Bildad speaks to Job, in Job 8.10. where he counsels him to
inquire of the aged and experienced Person, they (says he) shall speak words
out of their hearts, that is their own experience, which they have laid up
there; as one says, the difference between a wise man and a foolish man is,
the Fools heart is in his Mouth, but the wise man's Mouth is in his heart; he
speaks from his heart, he keeps something in whereas the other utters all
at once, the wise are like David Psalm. 45.1. My heart is enditing a good
matter, I speak of the things which I have made, touching the King, my tongue
shall be as the Pen of a ready writer, to this Solomon speaks much, see Prove.
11.33. Wisdom rests in the heart of him that has understanding, but that
which is in the midst of Fools is made known: also the 15.2. and the 16.23. The
heart of the wise teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his steps, and
after the same Language Christ speaks in Math. 12.35. A good man out of the
good treasure of his heart brings forth good things, and an evil man out of
the evil treasure brings forth evil things, so in Luke 6.42. you have the
same matter, it may be said of a truly wise Professor in all his obedience, as
i^ is said of those Romans in Chapter 6. v. 17. They obeyed from the heart the form
of Doctrine delivered unto them. In all he does, in sufferings he does it from
the heart, his prayers, alms, fastings, and then God takes it exceeding well
when it proceeds from the heart; see Exodus 35.21. compared with the 25. and
the 29. it is here expressed five times for their commendations, that they did
what they did with a willing heart, all the rest God takes little notice of
again, read Judge. 5.9. My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that
offered themselves willingly among the people, Abraham's heart was accepted in
offering up. Isaac, herein the wise Virgins had something that the foolish had
not, whereby they could bear a delay; and notwithstanding their drowsiness
could recruit again out of this treasury, such a wise stockt Person is as David
was, as soon as he is awake he is with God, as in Psalm. 139.18. which well
minded must relate to this as also Psalm. 73. I am still with thee; as soon as he
is awake out of his temptation, the wise Virgins are like the good ground that
had depth of earth, the stony ground like the foolish.

Now we come to the Use of the Doctrine, and first the consideration hereof may
put Christians very much upon the work of inquiry how the case stands with
them, and it is a Christians duty to examine, it was Paul's exhortation to the
Church of the Corinthians 2 Epist. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in
the faith, prove your own selves, ^now ye not that Jesus Christ is in you
except you be Reprobates? try whether the root of the matter be in you, try by
these Rules.

First, Have thou a true love to Christ in all duties of obedience unto him, as
1 John 5.4. his Commandments are not grievous.

Secondly, Art thou afflicted, at thy coolings and straglings of heart, as well
as sins of life, so that thou can not rest in that condition.

Thirdly, Thou may know it by the bowing of thy heart to God in every
dispensation, whether affliction or prosperity, both draws to God it did so
with David.

Fourthly, Thou have a clean heart, no sin lodges there, the pure in heart
shall see God.

We come now to the fifth verse, While the Bridegroom tarried they all
slumbered and stepped, in this Verse we have contained a Prophetical relation of
the state and condition of the many Prefessors or Virgins, in the interval of
time between the general going forth to meet the Bridegroom and his real and
absolute Coming, called here the Bridegroomes tarrying, that is, tarried longer
then they expected, they all slumbered and slept; there had been a great noise
of Christ's second coming, a little before, whereupon many went out to meet him,
and they waited a while and he came not, whereupon they laid down again,
neglected their watch and fell asleep. It has been much the case of the
Christians in England; but according to my promise I shall be brief in the
prosecution of this Chapter, I shall open the words and so proceed to those
Doctrines observable.

Here are four words to be opened,

First, Who is his Bridegroom.

Secondly, What or when is the time of their tarrying.

Thirdly, Who are the all here.

Fourthly, What is this slumbring and sleeping.

First, By Bridegroom here, must needs be understood to be Jesus Christ, it is
so understood in the scope of this Parable and other Scriptures.

Secondly, This tarrying must be understood tarrying according to our
apprehension; and not only does the slothful Servant, and those Virgins, and
those Mockers spoken of in 2 Pet. 3.8. Judge Christ to tarry or delay: but we
may see that the true Spouse of Christ apprehends no less as we may perceive by
the scope of Solomon's Song.

Thirdly. By all.

I answ. By all must be understood both wise and foolish, those that had Oil as
well as those that had none, as well those that had it in their Vessels as the
rest, only there is a difference between a poor and a rich man sleeping, a rich
man as we may say can better bear it, though the wise sleep yet they have a
stock, though they sleep, yet their heart is awake, as in Cant. 5.2.

Fourthly, What is this slumbring and sleeping?

Answ. It cannot be intended a natural sleep, but this sleeping bears a clear
resemblance with natural sleep, a Spiritual sleeping is a general ceasing from
all action, and motion; while the Bridegroom tarried they all slumbered and
slept, we have three Doctrines in these words.

First, That Jesus Christ in his second coming, comes under the consideration
and relation of a Bridegroom, to his Church and people.

Secondly, That Jesus Christ the Churches Bridegroom, seems in her
apprehension to be slow in his motion in his second coming.

Thirdly, That the great prevailing evil in the latter days amongst the highest
Professors is slumbring and sleeping, a drowsy frame attends Professors in the
latter days.

The first Doctrine, That Jesus Christ in his second coming comes to his Church
and people as ^ Bridegroom; in the management of which Doctrine I shall
endeavor these four things.

First, Prove this Doctrine from other Scriptures.

Secondly, Show you what is wrapped up under this consideration and relation to
the Spouse of Christ.

Thirdly, Lay down some discovering Characters of those Persons who may
comfortably expect Christ as their Bridegroom.

Fourthly, apply the whole.

First, That Christ shall come as a Bridegroom to his Church and people, is
prophesied of and held out in Scriptures elsewhere, see Isaiah 62.5. For as a
young man marryeth a Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry thee; and as the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee: that
is, (say some) thy Ministers or thy Magistrates shall marry thee to God, our
old reading is this, so shall God marry himself to thy Sons; and if we mind the
scope it cannot intend no less, see the next words, as the Bridegroom rejoices
over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee; the State of the Church is
a State of Marriage; this (may some say) was as to the State of the Jews in
their return.

I answ. It is more general: See what the Apostle St. Paul says in 2 Cor.
11.2. For I am jealous over you with Godly jealousy, for I have espoused you
to one Husband, that I might present you a chaste Virgin to Christ: so also in
the 5.30. we have the same relation owned to them, and this is plain. Revel.
10.7. Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to him, for the Marriage of
the Lamb is come and his wife has made her self ready, so also see the Verses
after the Text.

Secondly, But what does this relation carry in it to the Saints who are
concerned in it? first in general it must needs be a very blessed day; suppose
it a day when a poor Drudge or Slave were to be Married to a Gentleman of a
vast Estate, with dear love and affections on his side, nay to a Prince, does
not the thoughts of such a change with such advancement raise and satisfy her
concerned, nay ravish her heart with unspeakable joy, it breaks her sleep, what
more particularly is contained in this consideration; there are in this
Marriage six privileges which must needs render it a most blessed state to the
true Spouse of Christ.

First, It is a day of clearing all doubts, dissolving all fears of breaking
off, or miscarriages, or disappointments, we know according to the metaphor in
wooing time, there remains abundance of uncertainty in the state.

If a Virgin have a good proffer, or one comes to gain her love, yet how
often does breaches happen in that state? nay some after they are made sure, as
we (call it) leave each other, and if they are worth having, what fears and
doubts possesses the heart thereupon? Oh! how fearful is the woman that he
should take distaste and leave her, insomuch as those who look on (or
themselves) cannot tell whether it, will be a Match or no; now therefore there
is no way to secure all, but by Marriage: that puts all out of doubt, so in
this Case this day of Christ's second coming, to such as are sincere: it
dissolveth all their doubts and fears, and according to the worthiness of the
Match, so are these fears desires and satisfactions augmented; this Marriage
day must needs be a day of blessed consequence, therefore St. Paul's care for
the Corinthians was that he might present them to Christ, he is not at rest in
his though^s concerning them, though they were Espoused, yet afraid least Satan
should occasion a breach, so as not to enjoy the Marriage as in 2 Cor. 11.2.
The same care he had for the Colossians 1.28. Whom we preach, warning every
man, and teaching every man in all wisdom that we may present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, This Marriage day is the day of manifestation of love, wooing time
is a time of secret love, few can take notice of that, few knows that there
is such love between them; it does not appear what love God bears to his
Spouse: before, nay they themselves do not many times know it, therefore that
day is called the day of the manifestation of the Sons of God, as in Rom 8.19.
For the earnest expectation of the creature, waits for the manifestation of
the Sons of God, and this manifestation is promised to them that overcome, as
in Rev. 3.9. Shall know that I have loved thee.

Thirdly, A day of very great honor. The Apostle says Heb. 13.4. That
Marriage is honorable, and if any Marriage be honorable this must be so, very
honorable in respect to the Spouse, here is riches and honor and rule
wherewith she is endowed, Jesus Christ does instate her into that glory and
rule that himself has, see Revel. 3.21. To him that overcomes, will I grant
to sit down with me in my Throne; even as I overcame and am set down with my
Father in his Throne.

Fourthly, It is a day of great splendour and glory as to Ornaments, she that
has lain among the Pots shall now be covered over with yellow Gold, Psalm.
68.13. Though ye have lain among the Pots, yet shall ye be as the Wings of a
Dove, covered with Silver, and her feathers with yellow Gold, she shall be
glorious and splended in her apparel as Christ shall be, see Isaiah 63.1. Who
is this that comes from Edom with died Garments from Bozrah? this that is
glorious in his apparel; travailing in the greatness of ^is strength, I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save, so shall she be as in Psalm. 45.13, 14.
The Kings Daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought Gold, she
shall be brought unto the King in raiment of Needle-works; the Virgins her
companions shall be brought unto thee, and so likewise in Rev. 19.8. compare
that with the 21.2. And I John saw the holy City, New Jerusalem, coming down
from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband; we know
wedding Clothes are Ornamental in public Weddings.

Fifthly, It will be a day of public and unspeakable joy, not only within but
without; we know great joy with Instruments of music attends Weddings, the
Prophet Jerem. 7.34. sets out a time of joy by the voice of the Bridegroom,
and the Bride; it is usuel in those Feasts to have great joy outward and
inward, as you may see in Isaia^ 62.5. compared with Zephaniah 3.17. The Lord
thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save* he will rejoice over thee
with joy, he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing; that
this day of Christ's second personal coming, will be a day of great joy, we may
gather from our Lords words in Matthew 9.15. compared with Mark 2.19. Can the
Children of the Bride-chamber mourn, as long as the Bridegroom is with them?
No, it is improper, see John 16.22. And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I
will see you again and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take
from you. So in Revel. 19.7. Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give honor to
him for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready.

Sixthly, It shall put a complete universal and perpetual end to all sorrow
this day occasions, a complete deliverance from sorrow, all tears shall be
wiped away from all faces, see Isaiah 35.10. And the ransomed of the Lord shall
return, and come to to Sion with Songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads,
they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away,
compare that with Isaiah 51.11. also 65.19. And I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her,
nor the voice of crying, all sorrow shall flee away: These are the Privileges
attending this Bridegrooms coming.

Quest. But who may wait comfortably for this day with good hope?

I answer in six particulars.

First, Those that know and are acquainted with Jesus Christ, it is altogether
necessary that those that expect Marriage one from another, are acquainted and
intimately acquainted with each other; if thou do not know Christ, it is in
vain to expect Marriage to him, for his coming will be to thee as before; to
know Christ is a matter of great concernment, See John 17.3. And this is life
eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent:
It is life eternal to know him, to know his Name, his Nature, his Estate, his
Glory and Dignity, that he is the Son of God.

Secondly, Such as are satisfied in the love of Christ may thus expect him with
comfort, it is necessary that thou know that he loves thee, in order to this
Marriage: and not only that he loves thee, but that thou love him, and indeed
it is a sure way to know that Christ loves us, if we love him, as in Pro.
8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me.
This was also eminent in the Church, Cant. 2.4. He brought me to the
Banqueting house, and his banner over me was love; she sees his Bed or
Chariot paved with love, as in Can. 3.10. He made the Pillars thereof of
Silver, the bottom thereof of Gold, the covering of it of Purple; the midst
thereof being paved with love for the Daughters of Jerusalem, and in Cant.
7.10. She concludes that she is her beloved's, and that his desire is toward
her, this she is sensible of, this she feeds upon, that her beloved I veth her,
this St. John is sensible of, 1 John 4.19. We love him because he loved us
first.

Thirdly, Those who may expect Christ with comfort, must be such as are sure to
him, such as are Espoused to Christ, as in 2 Cor. 11 2. For I have Espoused you
to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ, thou can
remember a time when Christ and thou were made sure, (as I may so call it) a
Match concluded I am my beloved and he is mine, and each member can say the
same; Marriage is but a public Solemnizing, what before was more privately
agreed: It is said of Joseph the supposed Father of Christ, that they were
Espoused before Marriage, as in Math. 1.8. They were Espoused before they came
together, and we know it is usual so to do; now is Christ and thou contracted,
thou art in a hopeful way then to Marriage, thou art the person that Christ
comes to as a Bridegroom, his coming is thy Marriage-day.

Fourthly, Such as have experience here of a constant intercourse between
Christ and them, at a distance; Letters use to pass between lovers between
Espousals and Marriage, there use to pass Letters of intimate love and
affections, heart loves out goings, there is a communion in Spirit, in Prayer,
Reading, Hearing, in Ordinances, that was St. John's state 1 John 1.4. That
which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship
with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Those that are sure to each other do not use to cease writing to each
other, or visiting till Marriage day; and thy thoughts have been running out
after him, as his after thee.

Fifthly, Such as may expect Christ as a Bridegroom, are such as look and long
for his coming, for this Marriage day, as in Heb. 9.28. So Christ was once
offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he
appear the second time without sin to salvation: So also the Spouse of Christ,
Cant. 8.14. Make have my beloved; and be thou like to a young Heart upon the
Mountains of Spices; so says John, Revel. 22.20. Surely I come quickly, Amen,
Even so come Lord Jesus.

Sixthly, Such as are preparing and making ready for such a marriage, g^tting
Garments suitable; is it like that a poor Maid can be married to a Prince in her
old and own clothes? no, Christ will have those that he is married to, to have
all new, as in Rev. 19.8. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in
fine Linen, clean and white; for the clean Linen is the righteousness of
Saints.

The Use. I have two words from hence,

First, To those who are yet in their sins and not engaged in their affections,
our work is to woo for Christ, as in 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Embassaedors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you, we pray you in Christ's stead, be you
reconciled to God. Oh, Christ is willing to treat with you about this matter;
be not discouraged by reason of your meanness, for Christ is willing to be at
all the Charge to fit you for this Marriage. Oh come poor sinner, treat with
Christ and close in with him that you may not perish.

The second Use. Art thou espoused? Oh admire at this great condescension to
accept of thee in such an estate.

Secondly, Have a care of doing any thing to disoblige him or displease him who
is so worthy of thee.

Thirdly, Be filled with joy in believing and hope of this day.

Fourthly, Make all ready, Garments, Oil, Vessels; we now proceed to the second
Doctrine.

Second Doctrine, which is this, That the second coming of Christ is attended
with seeming delays, or long tarryings, this is supposed or taken for granted
in the Text; some are of opinion that this tarrying is the time between the
first and second Coming, or his Ascension and second Coming, others the time of
espousal and marriage, or rather after conversion to Christ's second coming; but
if we well weigh and consider the Context, the Verses going before, it
appears otherwise, and that it relates to that time immediately before
Christ's second coming, when those signs shall appear, that are to precede his
second coming, according to the 24 Chap. of Matthew; Then shall, this Emblem be
and it must be supposed that before this eminent and remarkable passage shall
appear, there will be many alarms, and a great noise of it, as have been some
years since in England; now this tarrying must intend the time beyond this
general expectation of him; now the slowness of motion in this his coming,
occcasions this Language of tarrying: it is said Math. 25.19 after a long time
the Lord of those Servants comes and rec^oneth with them, and so i^ Luke 20.9.
it is said of Christ in the Parable, that he went into a far Country for along
time; hereupon the sl^thful Servant says, my Lord delayeth his second coming,
Luk 12.45. and from this ground arises those Mockers in 2 Pet. 3.4 where is
the promise of his coming? for since the Father fell asleep, all things
continue as they were from the creation. It seemed so long that it had been
talked of, and yet not come, that they were ready to think it would never be;
(Objection) but some may say how can this tarring, or slowness in Christ's
coming answer to those many Scriptures and Similitudes that we used to set
forth the suddenness and speediness of Christ coming; we have it three or four
times said, behold I come quickly, and in Heb. 10.37. For yet a little while
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. And the second coming of
Christ is compared to things that come suddenly, as Noah's Flood, Travail upon a
woman with Child, to Lightning, to a Theif in the night. I Answer, in these
Scriptures and Similitudes is intended Christ's speedy coming, when he is upon
his march: as for instance; Noah's Flood did not come suddenly, considered from
the first threarning, for they had a 120 years warning, yet it come suddenly at
the present upon the World when they were secure, not expecting of it, so
Travail upon a woman with Child, she has eight or nine months time to know it,
yet it comes suddenly when it does come, the Surprise is suddenly, so when
Christ comes it is as a sudden surprizal, see 1 Thessal. 5.3. When they shall
say peace and safety, then comes sudden destruction; Lightning is sudden in
its act, so is a Theif, there is a tarrying, and not tarrying, as in Hab. 2, 3.
For the Vision is yet for an appointed tim^, but at the end it shall speak and
not lie, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry, from which place we may note these things.

First, That Visions are apt to tarry.

Secondly, That by the Vision, tarrying Persons are apt to be weary of waiting.

Thirdly, That when they come they come speedily. It further app^ars that
Christ in his second coming comes not so soon as looked for, by ^he
expectations and disappointments that attended the Primitive Saints, 1 Cor.
1.7. So that ye came behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, so in 1 These. 1.10. They were set to wait for Gods Son from
Heaven, and St. Paul Prayed for them that they might patiently wait for Christ,
as in the 2 These. 3.5. Yet these Saints are dead before Christ came. But
suppose this question be asked, why Christ seems so slack in his second coming,
that it has been spoken of in all ^^ges, not only before he went away, but
before he was Born: St. Peter answers the question fully with changing the
term, slack into long-suffering, as in 2 Peter. 3.9. The Lord is not slack
concer^ing his promise as some men count slackness, but is long suffering to
usward, not walling that any should per^h, but tha^ (...) should come to
Repentance, it is for soul^ sake that they might not perish.

The first Use. This in (...) us what great need the Sp^ule of Christ has of
patience; ye have nee^ (...) parie^^e^ as in Heb. 10.36. Yea absolu^ need of
pa^^ence, those who are wai^ing for Christ have need of long patience. Take
Habakkuks co^^sel, though he tarry wait for him. This was St. Paul's Prayer that
God would direct their hears to the love of God and patien^ waiting for (...).

Secondly, If Christ come not so soon as he is (...) for, then it may instruct
those that are going fort^ to meet him, to make provision for ^delay, or long
tarrying; the fault of the Foolish Virgin^ lay here, they did not make
provision for a delay, they had just Oil enough for the present. There are some
Professors who if Christ (...) come upon them ^n the beginning of their (...)
an Profession, he would sind them in a pretry good state, their Lamps are
burning, their Oil not spent. Oh! How full of Love, Zeal, ^aith, Joy, are they,
insomuch that they could follow Christ in a Land not sown, their love to Christ
is so strong ^s srael's was of Old, of whom God complains, erem. 2.2. they
had such love (which God remembered) in the day of their first espousals, but
they lost their first love, as Ephesus did in Rev. 2.4. so these have in some
years spent all, and are gone to sleep, with Lamps gone out; their stock is
spent, no Oil left; therefore it is the wisdom of a Christian going forth to
meet the Bridegroom, to prepare for and expect a delay; therefore our Lord
Christ exhorts him that begins to build in his ways, to sit down and count the
cost, lest he expose himself to be mocked at as a Fool, who began to build and
had not wherewith to finish, see Luke 14.30. these foolish Virgins did (as it
were) begin to build, and had not wherewith to finish, so did the stony ground
in the Parable, Mark 4.5. But what stock must we lay in, or what provision must
we make, that we may hold out to the end?

First, Be sure thou have a true and sincere love to Christ in the root, else
thou can not wait long for him in differing dispensations.

Secondly, Be sure thou have true love to the Brethren, this is part of that
O^l that will hold out, Charity never saileth, this is a durable grace, 1 Cor.
13.8

Thirdly, Have faith in the certainty of Christ's second coming; though he do
tarry, yet believe he will come; this grace is of necessity, for the just shall
live by faith as in Heb. 10.38.

Fourthly, Keep a good conscience, that will be a special Companion whilst
thou art waiting, this had Paul as in Act. 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self
to have a conscience void of offense toward God and Man, so likewise in 2 Cor.
1.12.

Fithly, Maintain a Universal good spotless and holy conversation.

Thirdly, Does Christ stay longer than is expected, then this will render those
unprovided, the more inexcusable if thy work be not done, having so long a time
it is an agravation to blame, this is an argument against Jezebel, Revel. 2.21.
I gave her space to repent, and she repented not, one reason why Christ delays
his coming is, that we might be ready; and Christ expects an increase o^ grace,
not diminishing in our graces by his tarrying.

The fourth Use. This may be a Use of Caution to the word, though Christ seems
to stay long, yet he will most certainly come at last; though the Flood upon
the old World stayed long, yet it came at last; though travail upon a Woman
wit^ Child is talked on long, yet it cometl^ at last, this St. Peter asserts in
answer to those Mockers spoken of 2 Pet. 3.^0. But the day of the lord will
come as a Thief in the Night, though the season be long, the saying is true;
and will be fulfilled.

Fifthly, Though Christ tarry long, have a special care of security in lying
down, for that may be the time of his coming; have a special care of neglect^ng
thy Watch least Christ comes and takes thee napping or sleeping; if he do,
that will be sad, this seems to be much supposed in those words, Mark 13.36,
lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping, so much for the first Doctrine.

We now proceed to the third Doctrine which was this, That the great prevailing
evil amongst Professors in the latter days a little before the second coming of
Christ; is a slumbring and sleeping State, or frame of Spirit: They all
slumbred and slept: A slumbring and sleeping temper, does prevail upon
Professors in the latter days.

Now in the prosecution of this Doctrine.

First, I shall explain what this sleep is, and how it is understood in
Scripture.

Secondly, Prove the Doctrine, that this is the overspreading evil of the last
days.

Thirdly, I shall give you the reasons why it is so.

Fourthly, Give some symptoms of a Person declining toward this sleeping State.

Fifthly, Make the use of the whole.

First, I shall open the nature of this evil, (called) slumbring and sleeping;
Indeed this Language our Lord speaks, to our capacities and in our Language;
he does not in this mean or intend natural sleep; that is no evil, Christ
himself is found in that, as you may see in Math. 8.24. And behold there arose
a great tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the Ship was covered with the waves;
but he was a sleep: it is no more evil to be found so sleeping, then to be
found eating and drinking; but by slumbring and sleeping in Christ's fence here,
must be understood of the in ^ard man; now what this is must be considered.

There are two words used in the Text, slumbring and sleeping, which may be
fitly applied to the two sorts of Persons in our Text, the wise and foolish;
the wise slumbred, the foolish slept they all slept more or less. The Learned
tell u^ that there are three words made use of to set ou^ sleep in the Hebrew
tongue.

First, A word that sets forth sleep in general.

Secondly, A word that signifies deep sleep, o^ dead sleep, (as we call it)

Thirdly, A word which signifies weak and shallow sleep, or a slumber, to
forget our selves (as we call it.) David seems to ma^e a double distinction,
as you may see in Psalm. 132.4. I will not give sleep to mine Eyes, nor slumber
to mine Eyelids: sleeping is more than slumbring, and a dead sleep more than
an ordinary sleep, a Person may slumber at his work or business, but not sleep;
there is a fourfold difference between slumbring and sleeping.

First, Slumbring is more external than internal, slumbring is contrary to deep
sleep; in slumbring the thoughts may be awake and at work, but in deep sleep
the thoughts are asleep also; of this slumbring state must the Church be
understood, when she speaks as you may read in Cant. 5. or Solomon's Song,
ver. 2. in these words, I sleep, but my heart waketh; it is the voice of my
be^o^ed that knocks, saying, Open to me, my Sister, my love, my Dove, my
undefiled, for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
Night: this may give us to understand that although the eyes may be shut, yet
the thoughts may be awake and at work; and thus it may be understood of the
wise Virgins, they slambred, not sl^pt.

The second difference between slumbring and sleeping is in the length of (...)
a slumber supposes a short time, whereas a deep s^^^p is long, and proper to
young and healthy, weary and drunken persons; whereas slumbring is proper to
aged weak sickly Persons.

Thirdly, A person in slumbring is (as to himself) sensible of the length of
time, and thinks the time longer than it is; whereas in a deep sleep he is
not sensible, but thinks the time shorter than it is; it is certainly true,
that a Person in a spiritual sleep, a deep sleep, is not sensible of the length
of time he lies in that secure quiet estate, till some eminent dispensation of
affliction awaketh him.

Fourthly, One in a slumber, a small ^oise does awaken him, he can here lightly
and distinctly as the Church could, Cant. 5.2. it is the voice of my beloved;
though she was in this shallow sleep, she is soon awaked; but a Person in a
deep sleep is not easily awaked; to this the Prophet Isaiah alludeth, in Isaiah
28.10. they are in a deep sleep, therefore there must be Line upon Line,
Precept upon Precept to awaken them, these Persons are said to be under a
Spirit of deep sleep.

Now that this evil of slumbring and sleeping will prevail in the latter days,
a little before the second coming of Jesus Christ, will appear,

First, From that Provision that Christ has made with particular respect to
that day; for it is plain and clear from Math. 24.25. our Lord Jesus Christ is
here upon the predictions of his second coming, and when he speaks of
wakefulness or watchfulness it is as to that day also, you may see Mark 13. and
the two last ver. lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping, and further adds
in these words, what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch; this implies the
danger that ^^ll be in that day: Christ seems to intimate that then Persons
will be very prone, and ap^ to sall into those evils in tha^ day; even then
when Christ is near his second coming, what less then this can be supposed to
b^ the meaning of all those cautions, warnings, coun^cels, exhortations
directed to this day from Christ own mouth.

Secondly, The truth of this position appears from those beginnings of this
defection, even i^ the Apostles days, see what St. Paul says to the Church of
the Romans, Romans 13.11. And tha^ knowing the time, that now it is high time to
awak^ out of sleep, for now is our Salvation nearer the^ when we believed. By
this we are informed that such an evil as this of Sleeping did begin to appear
i^ the Apostles days, also see what the Apostle says to the Church of the
Ephesians, Ephe. 5.14. These words, wherefore he says, wake thou that sleep
and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give the^ light, and further read
what the Apostle says to this matter in his first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, These. 5.6. In these words, Therefore let us not sleep as do
others, but let us watch and be sober, by this it does appear that there was
Sleeping in that day according to the fence of the Text before us; but what may
be the reason of the prevailing of this evil in the latter day?

First it may arise from the abounding of formal external Professors in those
days, (I may say) many are asleep because never truly awaked, only rowsed, not
raised from death, or to stand up from the dead: there are many that are
startled, and seared, afflicted, and convinced, but not thorougly converted and
awakned and raised up from the dead, (as the Apostle calls it.) We read that
while St. Paul reasoned of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come;
Felix trembled, but we hear no more of him, he was not thoroughly awakened nor
raised up, to this agrees what the Apostle speaks of Professors amongst the
prevailing evils of the latter days, in 2 Timothy 3.5. These words having a form
of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away.

Secondly, It arises sometimes from former wakefulness and industry, it is
observed that Persons of a more than ordinary zeal and industry, weary
themselves and soon fall a sleep, of this sort were the Church of Ephesus
spoken of, in Rev. 2.2, 3, 4. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy
patience, and how thou can not bear them which are evil, and thou have tried
them which say they are Apostles, and are not; and have found them liars. And
have born, and have patience, and for my names sake have labored and have not
fainted. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love: this people had labored much, it is twice expressed, we find four
qualifications which did precede the drowsy and sleepy state of this Church,
which is expressed by the Spirit of God in that place.

First, They were choicely induced with the grace of patience in affliction,
it is twice expressed in the Context.

Secondly, They were not only patient but active, they labored, as is twice
expressed.

Thirdly, They could not bear with evil in their members or teachers, which was
a choice qualification in them.

Fourthly, They held a long time in this State; therefore it is added, and have
not fainted, yet after this industry she fell a sleep, she left her first love,
and ceased this vigorous motion, whereupon the are called upon to do their
first works. So the Church of Sardis had likewise persevered well, the are only
desired to hold fast what they had. The Hebrew Church was eminent for zeal and
industry if we compare them with Acts 4.4. Howbe^ many of them which ^eard the
word believed, and the number of the men were about five thousand. Al^ Heb.
10.32. But call to mind the former days, in w^i^ after ye were illuminated, ye
endured a great figh^ of afflictions, but now they were asleep.

Thirdly, This is occasioned from Satan's subt^ endeavors, to work persons out
of love with the Holy Scriptures: from hence it is that St. Pa^ takes such
pains to persuade Timothy to have a du^ esteem and respect to the Holy
Scriptures, to the end he might be preserved in the power of God^ ness, as in 2 Timothy 3. chap. 14. ver. to the en^ But continue thou in the things which thou
have lear^ ed, and have been assured of, knowing of whom tho^ have learned
them, and that from a child thou ha^ known the Holy Scriptures, which are able
to mak^ thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is (...) Christ fesus:
All Scripture is given by Inspiratir^ of God, and is profitable for Doctrine,
for reproo^ for correction, for instruction in righteousness; the the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnish^ to all good works, compare this with
Rev. 3.^ Concerning the Church in Philadelphia, I know t^^ works, behold I have
set before thee an open door, an^ no man can shut it, for thou have a little
strength, an^ have kept my word, and h^st not demed my name.

Fourthly, This evil is prevalent in the latte^ days greatly for want of
prayer. C^^ist foresecing that, puts forth a Parable; as in Luke 18 1. Ar^
he spoke a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray and not
to faint, therefore Jesus Christ joyneth watching and prayer together, or
waking and prayer together, as the great duty of the latter days: that person
that is a diligent praying person, is a wakeful person. Prayer is the first
alive, and the last dead in a person; if thou art negligent here, thou art
declining to drowsiness.

The fifth occasion of this sleep, is occasioned from that sensuality and
excess in the Creature, this was one of those evils that Jesus Christ foresaw
would be prevalent, as antecedent to this slumbring, see St. Mat. 24.37, 38,
39. ^ut as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be; for as in the days that were before the Flood, they were eating and
drin^ing, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noan entered into
the Ark, and knew not until the flood came and took them all away, so shall
also the coming of the Son of man be; So likewise St. Luke 17.26, -- 30. you
have the same words. This was the sin which did preceed the flood, and the
overthrow of Sodom, so it also shall go before the coming of the Son of man;
and consequently before this sleeping state; they then were sensually excessive
in the Creature: so also when the Apostle speaks unto the Romans, chapter 13. v.
14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not ^rovision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof, this he speaks to be awakening and rousing them
from this spiritual sleep.

Sixthly, This is occasioned by that slothfulness and negligence in those
Christian Duties required of us. There are many Christian duties required of
us, as Christians, the neglect whereof does occasion this sleep. What Solomon
says upon an outward account is true in this, in Prove. 19.15. Slothfulness
casts into a deep sleep, and the Idle Soul sha^^ suffer hunger, the same does
the Apostle St. Pete^ hint, 2 St. Pet. 1, 9, 5. And besides this, give all d^
ligence to add to your faith, virtue, and to vireu^ knowledge, or this he
speaks to be a provoking o^ them to watchfulness.

The fourth thing that I am to speak to, is to la^ down some discovering
Characters, where a per^ son may know whether he be declined, or declin^ ing
into, or toward this spiritual sleep.

First, He that is declining, or declined, is on^ that has upon him a general
indisposition to spiritual duties and Exercises, he has a loathfulness, and
dullness, and heartlesness to hearing, reading, praying and such like, if this
body be in the duty, hi^ heart is else where; of this God complains, as in
Ezekiel. 33.9.3^. And they come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit
before thee as my people, an^ they hear thy words but will not do them, with
their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after Covetousness.

Secondly, He has a disposition to separate himself from lively, spiritual,
wakeful Societies, no heart to assemble with the people of God, but loves to
be alone.

Thirdly, Such persons do not prize or preserve Communion with God in Holy
duties.

Fourthly, Such a persons Lamp or light burns dimm for want of trimming,
their conversation is dark and dimm.

Fifthly, Such a person is notable to make Judgment of the light of Gods
countenance, or the hideing of Gods face; two signs of one asleep.

First he cease his spiritual motion, or action, he cease the very duty it
self, as to prayer, reading hearing conversing of what is good.

Secondly, All his spiritual senses are asleep, as ^earing, seeing, smelling,
tasting, feeling.

Thirdly, He is not affected nor awakened, under ^he differing dispensation of
God, whether affliction, or prosperity; God bestows great mercies upon him,
yet he is not affected with them, God sends some afflictions, but he takes
no notice of them, he is not awakened.

Fourthly, All instructions and reproofs move him not at all, he remains
still the same.

Fifthly, He makes it his great business to fulfill the desires of the flesh
and mind.

Use. If this be the prevailing sin of the last days preceding our Lords
second coming, then certainly if we look in us and about us, we cannot but
judge this day of Christ draws near; does not this evil prevail in our day
more then ever, are not the Virgins for the generality of them, Slumbring and
Sleeping, as may be easily gathered by the former Characters, too visibly seen
and experienced in us and amongst us?

Secondly, This may serve for instruction, and that to two sorts of people;

First, to those awake.

Secondly, To those asleep, if they may be supposed to hear it.

First to those awake in these days; some I hope are, and be affected with thy
happy state, and know who it is that has opened thine eyes, the time was thou
wast a sleep as well as others, but God has quickened and awakened thee.

Secondly, Art thou a ^ake, then keep in spiritual exercises, that is, the
means to keep thee awake; use thy self to reading, hearing, praying, breaking
bread, Church Fellowship with the people of God, I will only n^me some
awakening considerations.

First, Consider though you are asleep, your adversary Satan is always awake.

Secondly, Consider, that God whom you profess never slumbers nor sleeps.

Thirdly, Consider natural death is very uncertain, as to his surprizal.

Fourthly, Consider that to be surprised by natural death in a spiritual sleep,
is very dreadful.

Fifthly, Consider that a spiritual sleeping state i^ a weakening, loosening,
impoverishing state.

Sixthly, Consider that a sleeping frame of spirit is an inexpressible
distasteful state to God.

Seventhly, Consider that this sleeping state is that which gratifieth our
adversary, it is his time to do his mischief.

Eighthly, Consider our salvation is very near, Romans 13.11. the Apostles great
argument.

Ninthly, This spiritual sleeep and death is the same, and both the state
before conversion.

Tenthly, A wakeful spiritual state, is the most sweet and pleasantest state in
the world. Oh (...) see how sweet it was with thee then, when it was so with
thee. Thus I have done with the fifth Verse.

We now proceed to the sixth Verse: And at Midnight there was a Cry made,
Behold the Bridegroom comes, go you out to meet him: We have contained in this
Verse a particular relation of the coming of Christ, for it is taken for
granted that Christ is the subject of our ^ext; and in this second coming of
Christ we have five circumstances considerable, and are worthy to be spoken
unto.

First, The remarkableness of it: it is ushered with a Behold as it is
elsewhere.

Four times we have it added to or ushering in his coming, as those things that
are of great concernment, which call for more than our ordinary observation,
are brought in with a Behold, as I may show you thorowout the whole Scriptures;
and it is no wonder, though this appearance of Christ be ushered with a Behold,
for it is a remarkable passage upon a fivefold consideration.

First, As to the transcendent incomparable glory of his Person in that day;
this is that which Persons are called to behold: One glorious in apparel is an
object of observation, this occasioneth the Church to cry, as in Isaiah 63.1
Who is this, that comes from Edom, with died Garments from Bozrah, this that
is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save; Christ in his first coming, came in the
form of a Servant, mean in his apparel; but now in his second coming, shall
come clothed with visible Glory; he shall then be girt with Glory, as you may
read in Psalm. 45.3. Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty, with thy
Glory and thy Majesty.

Secondly, This second coming of Christ deserves a Behold, from that glorious
and numerous attendance which he shall have in that his appearing; this is that
which Jude had in his eye, in his fourteenth Verse of his Epistle, and Enoch
the seventh from Adam Prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes with
ten thousands of his Saints: also in Psalm. 68.17. The Chariots of God are
twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels, the Lord is among them as in Sinat
in the holy place; this is that also that the Prophet Zachariah speaks in his
fourteenth Chapter and first Verse compared with the fifth Verse, Behold the
day of the Lord comes, and ye shall stee to the Valley of the Mountains, for
the Valle^ of the Mountains shall reach unto Az^^; yea, ye shall flee, like a^
ye fled from before the Earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of Judah, and the
Lord m^ God shall come, and all the Saints with thee: this is an object tha^
calls for observation, his glorious attendance.

Thirdly, This second appearance deserves a Behold to be annexed unto it, in
consideration of tha^ great power he shall be clothed with in that day^
therefore the Evangelist St. Matthew in Math. 24.30. speaking of the coming of
Christ, says, An^ then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven, and
then shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man
coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with power and great glory: so says St. Mark
also, as you may read in Mark 13.26. And the^ shall they see the Son of Man
coming in the Clouds (...) with great power and glory; and so likewise St. Luke
writes in the very same words, Luke 21.17. in these places power and glory are
coupled together, Christ in this day shall come as a King; then it is no wonder
that Persons are invited to behold a King; Muth. 22.11. And when the King came
in to see the Guests, he saw there a Man which had not on a wedding Garment,
and he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither not having a Wedding
Garment? and he was speechless if this King do but ask a Question, it strikes
them speechless, such power is in it.

Fourthly, It calls for a Behold from the consideration of that wrath and
anger he appears in, in that day; this day is called the day of wrath, yea of
his wrath, this makes the Prophet Isaiah put a Behold to it, Isaiah 13.9.
Behold the day of the Lord comes, cruel with wrath and fierce anger, to lay
the Land desolate, and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it: also you
may read further in Rev. 6.17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand.

Fifthly, It is remarkable as to the effects of this day, both as to the
righteous and the wicked, see for this as to the wicked it will be a day of
wrath, botheruel, and with fierce anger, as in Isaiah 13.9. and further as to
the wicked consider Isaiah 34.4. And all the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved,
and the Heavens shall be rolled together as a Scrole; and all their Host shall
fall down as the Leaf falls off from the Vine, and as a falling Fig from the
Fig Tree: and then shall the indignation of the Lord be upon all Nations, and
his fury upon all their Armies: he will utterly destroy them, and deliver them
to the slaughter; as in the second ver. but as to the righteous, what will be
the effect of this day unto them, consider and read Isaiah 35.4. Say to them
that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come
with ^ingeance, even God with a recompense, he will come and save you. And the
righteous also shall enter into life etirnal, even when the wicked shall go
into everdasting punishment, as in Math. 25.46.

The second thing to be considered and spoken to is the juncture of time that
he shall come in, called here Midnight: Night or Midnight is not always to be
taken in a literal and proper sense, but sometimes mystically and
allegorically, as in that place, Micah 3.6. Therefore Night shall be unto you,
that he shall not have a Vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that you shall
not divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be
da^ unto them: so Amos 8.9. And it shall come to pa^ says the Lord God, that I
will cause the Sun to g^ down at Noon, and I will darken the earth in the cle^
day: trouble also is called darkness, see Job 5.14 They meet with darkness in
the day time, and grop^ at Noon day as in the Night.

And according to that understanding, the deepest sorrows and afflictions and
states of darkness m^ be called Midnight: to have a noise, trouble, an hurry at
Midnight is very sad and amazing, therefore as a very sad state and condition
it is said J^ 34.20. In a moment shall they die, and the peop^ shall be
tr^ub^ed at Midnight, and pass away; a^^ the Mighty shall be taken away without
hand: an^ when God will make his Judgments remarkable i^ deed, he chooses to
execute them in the Nigh: (...) at the Midnight, as Exodus 12.29. And it came
(...) pass that at Midnight the Lord smote all the first-bor^ in the land of
Egypt, from the firstborn of Phara^^ that sat on the Throne, unto the
firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon, and all the first-bor^ of
Cattle: Christ is said to come as a Thief in the Night, as in 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. For
your seives knn^ perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as (...) T^ief
in the Night: so in 2 Pet. 3.10. But the d^^ of the Lord will come as a Thief
in the Night, (...) the which the Heavens shall pass away with a gre^^ noise,
and the clements shall melt with forvent hea^ the earth also, and the works
that are therein shall (...) burnt up: the middle of the Night is a sad time
(...) be d^sturbed, it was an argument sufficient to hinder the man's rising to
supply his Friend with Loaves Luke 11.7. it was Midnight, so that Christ's
coming at Midnight, implies three things.

First, He comes when Persons least look for him, the Virgins did not look for
Christ at that season, and yet Christ chooses that time to come in, as is plain
from Math. 24.43. But know this, that if the good man of the House had known in
what watch the Thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have
suffered his House to be broken up. Therefore be you ready, for in such an hour
as you think not, the Son of man comes: so likewise in Luke 12.4. you have the
same words. Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of Man comes in an hour
that ye think not: also in Mark 13.33. Take ye heed; Watch, and pray, for ye
know not when the time is: it is foretold to be in such a juncture of time, as
you may further read in 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. For when they shall say peace and safety,
then sudden destruction comes upon them, as Travail upon a Woman with Child,
and they shall not escape.

Secondly, When Christ is said to come at Midnight, it implies a very dark time
as to a Vision, Micah 3.6. Therefore Night shall be upon you, that ye shall not
have a Vision, and it shall be dark unto you that ye shall not divine, and the
Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

Thirdly, A troublesome time, a time of great distress and dark dispensations,
as in Amos 8.9. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord God, that
I will cause the Sun to go down at Noonday, and I will darken the earth in the
clear da^: and further in Luke 21.25, 26, 27. And there shall be signs in the
Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth destress of Nations
with perplexity, the Sea and the ^av^s roaring, Men's hearts failing them for
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth, for the
powers of Heaven shall be shaken* And then shall they s^e the Son of Man*
coming in a Cloud with power and great glory. Is i^ true then that Christ thus
comes, what may be the Use of this Doctrine?

Use. Then give not way to spiritual sleep, though in the Night, nay though
Midnight; forasmuch as Christ may come in that hour; we know not, whether he
may come at Midnight, cock-crowing, or dawning of the day: it is natural for
Persons to sleep in the Night one would think, but in this sense we must have a
care of giving way to this sleep though in the Night; Christ was offended at
his Disciples that they were asleep, though in the Night, at that time when he
was to be betrayed, see Math. 26.42. And he came and found them asleep again,
for their eyes were heavy.

The Second Use, Oh what a dreadful time will that be to wicked men, Enemies to
Christ considered with this circumstance of time; Condemned persons amongst us
have a Bell rung at midnight, the night before Execution, and how sad and
amazing is this to those concerned alarms of War, or fire is dreadful in the
night especially at midnight, remember Christ's coming is at midnight.

The Third thing to be spoken unto, is the relation that Christ appropriates to
himself, and that is a Bridegroom: the Bridegroom comes not, now the Lord
comes though that is true. I shall but touch this head because I have spoken
to it before; yet I will speak a few words with respect to himself.

First he comes transcendently glorious in his apparel, Bridegrooms used to be
adorned, as in Isaiah, 62.10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my Soul shall
be joyful in my God: for he has clothed me with the Garments of Salvation, he
has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself
with ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with Jewels.

Secondly, Even as a Bridegroom he comes with his heart and face filled with
tender affections, and conjugal love, with arms open to receive his dearest
spouse.

Thirdly, He comes with his heart and face filled with wrath and revenge to
those that have been her Enemi^^, who have wronged her in his absence, see that
Eminent place Isaiah 34.8. For it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the
year of recomp^nce for the controversy of Sion. Also Zech. 2.8. For thus says
the ^^^d of Hosts, After the Glory has he sent me unto the Nations which
spo^le^ you, for he that tou^heth you, touches the apple of his eye, this he
will do, because those that touch his spouse, touch the appl^ of his eye.

Use. What may we gather from hence, that Christ in his second coming, thus
comes as a Bridegroom to his Saints and people?

First, Then the spouse of Christ has no cause to be afraid of Christ's second
coming, the true spouse of Christ may say of him in his appearance, as the
Isaiah 25.9. And it shall be said in that day, lo, this is our God, we have
waited for him and he will save us, this is the Lord we have waited for him, we
will be glad and rejoice in his Salvation. From this ground it arises, that
the Primitive Saints are so desirously waiting for Christ, as in 1 Cor. 1.7. So
that ye came behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Also 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. And to wait for his Son from Heaven, whom he raised
from the dead, even Jesus who delivers us from the wrath (...) come. So Rev.
22.20. He which testifies the^ things, says, Surely I come quickly, Amen,
even (...) come Lord Jesus. And farther the Spouse in the Canticles prays
earnestly for it, as you may see i^ Solomon's Song, 8.14. Make have my beloved
a^^ be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices.

The Second Use. To those who are intereste^ in Christ upon certain grounds
thus as a Bridegroom let them be found praying for his coming though a^
midnight; good news is welcome at midnight, (...) dear Friend is welcome at
midnight, when an Enemy is unwelcome at midday. A woman that has a good and
loving Husband, who has been gone a long Voyage for her good to make provision
for her, she will be glad to arise at midnight to let him in: a^ this is true
in Christ, his death, his going away as well as his return, is for his Churches
good, he laid down his life for her, as you may read in Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands
love your wives even as Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it: he
goes away for her good, as you may read in John 14.2, 3. In my Fathers house
are many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you. I go to prepare a
place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive^ you to my self, that where I am, ye may be also: Christ comes again
to her from the love he bears to her to receive her unto himself, and does
not a constant, much more a tender and a loyal wife desire the return of her
Husband who has been long absent? the spouse of Christ will, when in her right
frame of spirit, doubtless say with St. John, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Lastly, If Christ so come, then let none desire his coming under this
consideration, but answer it in preparation, for the Bride must be answerable
in her adorning to the Bridegroom, as in Psalm. 45.13, 14. The Kings daughter is
all glorious within, her Clothing is of wrought Gold, she shall be brought
unto the King in raiment of Needle work, the Virgins her companions that follow
her shall be brought unto thee. Also Rev. 19.7, 8. Let us be glad and rejoice,
and give honor to him, for the Marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has
made her self ready, and to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine
Linen clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints.

We come now to the fourth thing considerable in the explication of this Text,
and that is the acclamation and Proclamation that shall be made at midnight,
and the great question will be, who makes this cry, the Virgins being all
asleep? Some are of opinion that the Ministers who are yet notwithstanding
awake, standing upon their Watch tower make this Cry.

But it is most probable that this voice is from Heaven, for so we find it all
along in the Book of the Revelations which relates unto this day, all these
alarms are from Heaven, see Rev. 18.1, 2. And after these things I saw another
Angel come down from Heaven, having great power, and the earth was lightened
with his glory, and he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the
great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the
hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. The
Prognostics against Babylon calling out Gods people is from Heaven; and so
Rev. 9. where we have a relation of this very Coming of Christ as a Bridegroom
it is from Heaven, read the words Rev. 19.5. And a voice came out of the Throne
saying, praise our God all ye his Servants, and ye that fear him both small and
great.

The use of this Doctrine. See the care that our Lord has, that he would not
surprise his Disciples; the Lord does afford awakening means to the very day of
his coming, even in those dark midnight dispensations there shall be a very
great clamor or Cry, for it must needs be very loud that such effects follow,
as to awake those that are so secure and dead asleep.

The fifth thing to be spoken unto is the invitation, go ye forth to meet the
Bridegroom: but some may say, did not they go forth before, they took their
Lamps and went forth to meet him, I answer yea, they did go forth before but by
their spiritual slothfulness and sleep, they were reduced to their former
estate, and wanted now an Invitation again to go forth, this was the estate of
the Ephesians, though they were once quickened by the grace of God, as in the
Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins: yet
this people afterward was called upon to awake out of sleep, as in Ephesians. 5.14.
you may thus read, Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from
the dead and Christ shall give thee light. Also Rev. 2.5. Remember therefore
from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works, or else I will
come unto thee quickly and will remove thy Candlestick except thou repent.

Secondly, They are not only to go forth but to this end to meet the
Bridegroom, Christ does expect his spouse should come to meet him in his
coming, and not to sit still till he come; we know Kings and Ambassadors are
usually met and brought in by the people; the Saints are said to be caught up
to meet the Lord in the Air, as in 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Then we which are live and
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord
in the Air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord: there is a twofold meeting
the Lord.

First, By reformation, as we must understand it in Amos 4.12. Prepare to meet
thy God O Israel, that is, by reformation and amendment of life.

Secondly, There is a personal meeting understood in a proper sense, see Numb.
23.16. And the Lord m^t Balaam, and put a word in his Mouth: in the same proper
sense the Brethren met St. Paul, Act. 28.15. To meet implies these four things.

First, To rise up from security in which a Person lies.

Secondly, To go from our enjoyments.

Thirdly, To go to meet a Person of high estate, there is required ^utable
apparel and garb.

Fourthly, To meet in this sense, is to fall in and come along with him; see 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. and also Zach. 14.5. Behold the Lord comes, and all the Saints
with thee: thus much as to the sixth Verse.

We now come to the seventh Verse. Then all those Virgins aros^ and trimmed
their Lamps: Forasmuch as I design brevity in the remaining part of this
Parable, I shall at once cast my eye upon these seven last Verses; in which
seven Verses, we have the actions and transactions of the awakened Virgins; we
have seven remarkable passages relating to these two sorts of Virgins.

First, We have the joint and particular proceedings concerning their Lamps,
they are no sooner awake, but their Lamps are the subjects of their inquisition
and inspection, they inquire forthwith what condition their Lamps are in, as is
supposed in that they are said without exceptions to trim, in which we have
contained the living sense that falls upon the foolish in that day when it is
too late, in knowledge of their want of Oil.

Secondly, We have the Cordial solici^ation of the foolish unto the wise for
Oil, and that not b^ way of command or purchase, but free gift, Give us of your
Oil.

Thirdly, We have the seeming affectedness upon the foolish appearing in their
sorrowful reason, for our Lamps or Lights are extinguished, or as we read it
gone out; we are sensible we are in a sad dark condition if you do not supply
us.

Fourthly, We have the reply of the wise, and indeed it seems to savor of
harshness and uncharitableness in three circumstances.

First, Their positive denial, not so, or we cannot do it, or it is not in our
power so to do.

Secondly, Their selfish reason given, we must supply or serve our selves
first: Nabal's answer to David's Servants will serve in this case, shall I take
the Oil that I have provided for my self, and give it to you? No.

Thirdly, It is harsh as to the ironical advice given, considering the time it
was given in, there was none then to be had; they served those as Elijah served
Baals worshippers, 1 King. 18.27.

The Sixth thing considerable, is the advantage of the wise, they are said to
be ready, having a stock by them, they went in with the Bridegroom.

Seventhly, We have the full relation of the disappointment of the foolish
Virgins, in three circumstances.

First, The door is shut against them.

Secondly, We have the successless allegation of their profession and
acquaintance with Christ, which was with great confidence, if we compare Math.
7.23. with Luke 13.27. But he shall say unto them, I tell you I know you not
whence you are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity.

Thirdly, We have Christ's positive denial to open the door, with the reason of
it.

Eighthly, We have in these Verses our Lords application of the whole Parable,
in a general use of exhortation to the duty of watchfulness; as if in effect
our Lord should say, You my Disciples take notice, all these evils have (or
shall) happen for want of this great duty of watchfulness, for the best of
these and the wisest had enough to do to be ready to go in with Christ, now of
each of these eight particulars I shall briefly speak a few words.

First, The actions and transactions of these both wise and foolish in order to
their Lamps, in which circumstance we have four Emphatical words.

First, then.

Secondly, all.

Thirdly, arose.

Fourthly, trimmed.

This then has reference to the time of the cry in Verse the seventh; it
implies the speediness of this address, there is no delay when this alarm is
given, neither will it admit of a delay, for Christ is swift in his motion, in
his second coming.

Secondly, We have the universality of this attempt, (all,) the foolish as well
as the wise are concerned herein, as all ten fell asleep, so all ten are
awakened by this Midnight cry.

Thirdly, They arose, not only awaked but arose, stood up: the word here is
often and generally in Scripture used to set forth a resurrection from the dead.

Fourthly, The business they set upon when thus raised, the Text says they
trimmed their Lamps or Candles; for Lamps and Candles are taken one for
another, as you may see in the margent, where Candle is read. We read in
Scripture of two sorts of Lamps, burning bright and shining Lamps, as in Isaiah
62.1. For Sions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I will
not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a Lamp that Burns. Compare this with St. John 5.35. He
was a burning, and a shining light, and ye were willing for a season to rejoice
in his light, such was St. John in his conversation, and Doctrine.

Secondly, We read of a despised Lamp, as in Job 12.5. He that is ready to slip
with his feet is as a Lamp despised in the thought of him that is at case, that
is, an old rusty Lamp without light or Oil, what is that good for? it is of no
esteem, the foolish Virgins Lamps are despised Lamps, according to what Job
speaks, in Job 12.5. of no worth nor use, for what use is a Lamp of, if not to
hold forth light? The great incumbent work of the Virgins awake is to (trim)
their Lamps: the word trim in Scripture has a four fold acceptance.

First, To adorn or beautify, see 1 Pet. 3.3. Whose adorning.

Secondly, It is taken for to garnish, so understood, Mat. 12.44.

Thirdly to prepare or trim is all one; thus understood in Amos 4.12.

Fourthly, Sometimes it is called dressing, we read in Scripture of dressing
the Lamps, as in Exodus 30.7. Also we read of dressing feet in 2 Samuel 19.24. Now
to dress or trim a Lamp implies two things.

First to draw up the wiek to make it burn clear.

Secondly, To pour in Oil to supply the root; from whence it is said they had
Vessels besides their Lamps, I shall note from the words thus opened, these
four things or Doctrines observable.

First Doctrine that spiritual drowsiness, slumbring, and sleeping does damage
and ruin our profession, weakeneth our Lamps or lights, the Lamps run to ruin
while they were asleep, insomuch that they now want trimming.

The second Doctrine, That the Lamps of the best and wisest professors want
trimming.

The Third Doctrine, a Christian is in no fit case to meet Christ but with a
trimmed Lamp.

The Fourth Doctrine, That it is the property of a truly awakened Christian to
concern himself about his Lamp, so as to have it adorned, garnished, prepared,
and dressed: or thus, A Christian is no Christian without good light, good light
is essential to a true Christian. I shall wind up this seventh verse with a few
words to each of these, I hope you carry along in your minds, that by the Lamp
in the context is intended the conversation; and profession for this light must
be divided into two parts, the inward and the outward; the inward light is
faith and love, the sense of Gods love, these all do decay whilst the Spirit of
sleep is upon them*

Secondly, As to the light of conversation, thi^ also is liable to dimness,
contrary to what our Lord calls for, in St. Mat. 5.15. Let your lights so
shine that men seeing your good works may glorify your Father which is in
Heaven: if this be the effect of this sleep, have a special care to watch
against it.

The Second Doctrine. The Lamps of the best of Saints want trimming, Psalm.
73.17. compared with Psalm. 51.12. The Church of the Hebrews, and also the
Ephesians. St. Paul stirs up Timothy, to trim his Lamps, while he bids him s^ir
up the g^ft given him, 2 Timothy 1.7.

The Use from bence, by way of instruction: It does not therefore follow that a
Christian has no light, because it does not burn clear; it is possible it
wants trimming.

The Third Doctrine. None are fit to meet Christ but such as have trimmed
Lamps: therefore no sooner do these Virgins hear the noise of the Bridegrooms
Coming, but they fall to trimming. We have a remarkable place for this, Luke
12.35. Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye your
selves as those that wait for the Lord. But that little time I shall spend,
shall be upon the Fourth Doctrine.

Fourth Doctrine That a truly awakened Christian is to inquire into, and
inspect the State of his Lamp, or Light. In handling of which Doctrine, I must
have an eye to Light within, conversation without, grace in the heart, holiness
in the conversation. An awakened soul must see how it is within, what light is
there; and that there is, or ought to be light within is hinted in Isaiah
50.10. the Prophet there speaks of one that sits in darkness and has no light;
this light must respect his faith and full assurance, the Face of God is called
light, as in Psalm. 4.6, 7. Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us;
this David who was truly awakened seeks after, as in Psalm. 51. Renew a right
Spirit within me, says he, restore thy free Spirit unto me: this is that light
which David went into the Sanctuary to obtain, as in Psalm. 73.17. see what the
Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians unto, in 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. in opposition to
sleeping, But let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the Breastplate of
faith, and love, and for an helmet the hope of Salvation: a wakeful Christian
must have all right within; and if this be not our great care, it is a sad sign
we are not truly awakened.

Secondly, This light respects the Conversation, and so our Lord expounds it in
the aforesaid place, Math. 5.16. Let your light so shine; Christ has set his
Disciples as lights in the world, Christians therefore are to shine forth; see
the Apostles exhortation to the Romans, Romans 13.13. Let us walk honestly as in
the day; also see Ephesians. 5.15. as the fruits of Persons awakened and standing up
from the dead, he exhorts them, to walk Circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise; Redeeming the time, because the days are evil: all which respect
Conversation, answerable to our Text, as wise Virgins.

The Use. First, This may serve to discover to us, that the life and work of a
Christian is not as many take it to be; a work done at once for all.

Some are ready to think that if their Lamp was well lighted at first, there
needs no more care about it, but we see it is not so; there still wants
trimming, daily adorning, preparing, garnishing, and feeding this Lamp, and
supplying it; Lamps must have attendance, care and pains taken with them; have
a special care of trusting to your first trimming, and replenishment.

The second Use. Considering the diverse acceptations of this word in Scripture
of trimming, le^ each of us labor to adorn and beautify our Lamp^ or
Profession. Doubtless what Titus exhorts Servant in his second Chapter and
tenth Verse, may be applied to all Sexes and relations; he exhorts them to obey
and please their Master well in all things, as in the ninth Verse, to this end
that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things God requires
that we should garnish our Lamps or Professions, as some do Candlesticks.

The third Use. Consider the near approach of our Bridegrooms coming, and from
the consideration thereof, let us be exhorted to arise and trimm, and make
ready to meet him; which that you may do, observe four or five rules of
direction.

First, Seriously consider and study your formet experiences, in the days of
your first acquaintance with Christ; how sweet his love was then to your Souls,
how readily and comfortably you could follow Christ then.

First, In a Land not sown, this God calls to remembrance, Jerem. 2.2. I
remember thy love in the thine Espousals, this is that which the Apopostles
would have the Hebrew Church to do, Heb. 10.32. But call to remembrance the
former days in which you were illuminated, how you then suffered a great fight
of affliction.

Secondly, Labor to strengthen your love to Christ, a Person rightly trimmed
to meet him as a Bridegroom, has his heart strong in love: those that trul,
wait for Christ, are those that love him, as we may easily perceive and gather
by comparing Isaiah 64.4. with 1 Cor. 2.9. that which Isaiah calls waiting, the
Apostle calls loving Christ; the same promises that are to those that wait
for Christ, are to those that love Christ also; see Jam. 1.12. compared with 2
Chap. and 5 ver. But how may I know whether I love Christ?

First, By Christ's own rule, If thou keep his Commandments, as in John 14.21.

Secondly, If thou love the Saints and Brethren, that shows that thou
love Christ; as in 1 John 4.20, 21.

Secondly, Labor to strengthen and refresh thy faith in Christ's second
coming, and thy interest in him; by faith we stand, as in 2 Cor. 1.24. By faith
we live; as in the 10 Chap. and 38 ver.

Thirdly, Labor to get loose from present things, without which we cannot
stand ready; this is the girding up of our minds, as Luke 12.35.

Fourthly, To effect this, be much in secret prayer and supplication, which of
all means is the most effectual in order to the fitting us for Christ's second
coming, Luke 21.36. Watch, and pray always; that ye may be accounted worthy to
escape all these things, and to stand before the Son of Man: thus I have done
with the seventh Verse.

We come now to the eighth Verse. And the foolish said unto the wise, give us
of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out: Before I come to speak to this Verse,
which is a Diologue between the wise and foolish Virgins; I shall by the way
take notice of the appellation upon these Virgins, (foolish) which word has an
affinity with the Hebrew Nabal, signifying sapless or unsavory, (as the Rabbis
tell us,) we have this word emphatically used in the Old Testament, once
relating to the Husband of Abigail, the second concerning Jobs Wife. First of
Nabal, as in 1 Samuel 25.25. Nabal is his name and folly was with him: he
answered to his name in these four Circumstances.

First, As he was a profane, wicked, covetous drunken, sottish man.

Secondly, As he was a morose, railing, abusive man, he railed on David's
Servants, as you may see in that Chapter.

Thirdly, He was an ungrateful Person, he rendered evil for good to David, as
you may see is 21 Verse.

Fourthly and Chiefly was he Nabal or foolish, from that he wanted a foresight,
he could not see forward, and herein according to Solomon's words, A wise Man's
eyes are in his head: a fool can see but what is present, Nabal could neither
see David's present power to hurt him, or his future Kingly glory as David
should enjoy, which his Wife wise Abigail could see; she is said to be of a
good understanding; and indeed this is wisdom, to see forward and provide for
time to come; see what Solomon says, Prove. 30.24. there are four things that
are little, but exceeding wise; and wherein did their wisdom consist, but in
forecasting for time to come; the Ant, the Cony, the Locusts, the Spider, all
these are exceeding wise, Solomon tells us.

Our second instance, is of Jobs Wife, who is called a Nabalish Woman, as in
Job 2.10. Thou speak like one of the foolish women, and wherein did this
appear?

First, In one thing it appeared, in her dullness in I arning the Doctrine of
godliness in Job's family.

Secondly, Her profaneness and ignorance in her speech to her Husband, Curse
God, and die; not fearing or reverencing God, which is true wisdom.

But thirdly, Her want of foresight to see to the end of Gods dispensations,
she looked only at present things, and things seen, which David himself calls
foolishness in himself, as in Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I, even as a Beast
before him: so that it appears, that the principal evil in these two, which
rendered them by name (foolish,) was want of foresight, (having eyes in their
heads,) and this is by our Lord Christ given out as the distinguishing
Character between the wise and the foolish Builders, as in Math. 7.24. The wise
built on a Rock; looking forward to duration, the foolish on the sand; and
wherein do the Virgins in our Text come short, was not this that wherein their
folly did appear, they did not lay in a stock for duration.

Now we return to the words again, Verse the eighth, And the foolish said;
these unstockt Persons upon a spiritual account are the foolish in our Text;
from whence I note this Doctrine, That it is a Doctrine of the highest folly in
Christ's account to be without a stock and provision by us, in order for time to
come, for eternity; a wise foresighted Professor, is a stockt Professor for
time to come; upon an earthly account, a poor man may be a wise man, although
he has not a Penny nor a bit of bread before hand; but it cannot be so in
spirituals, poor and foolish go together, as Solomon says, Prove. 2.20. there
is Oil in the dwelling of the wise, and treasure desirable; but a fool in
Christ's sense is a poor soul, or that has no stock, or that is not rich
toward God, as Luke 12.19. is a very clear place to this purpose, so is every
one, that is he is a fool, the wise woman Prove. 31. it one that is richly
furnished with a stock, but how does it further appear that such a person is a
fool or foolish?

First, He is a fool as he is ignorant of the nature of God, Psalm. 94.8, 9.
understand ye foolish, these unstockt persons would suppose God to be like man,
who cannot see the Heart what is within.

Secondly, He is foolish as he has slipped his opportunity to get a stock, this
is a piece of folly indeed; so Solomon renders them Prove. 17.16. Wherefore is
there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart? or
rather it is to be understood, by way of discovery that he is a fool, who has
a price in his hand to get wisdom, and does not improve it.

Thirdly, He is a fool as he is a hypocrite, who is outwardly something, but
nothing within; the whole course of a hypocrite, is nothing but a course of
folly; of all fools the hypocrite is the greatest fool, and the reason is
because he takes a great deal of pains, and reaps no profit by it, he does in
all his profession but play the fool; like Children that make shows, he
ventures himself many times, his credit estate and life to no profit; there are
none sin at so dear a rate as the hypocrite does, nor any sinner so distastful
to God as he, nor none so highly wicked as he. Now of hypocrites there are two
sorts.

First a gross sort, who uphold a form of Godliness on purpose to deceive, as
those we read of in Mat. 23.14. who make long prayers to devour Widows Houses.

But there is a Second sort, who in comparison of those are simple and sincere,
but yet such as are deceived themselves, and desire to deceive others, such are
these in our Text; but let us know that all degrees of hypocrites is bad and
punishable. Now we come to the words themselves, which contains a dialogue
between the wise and foolish Virgins.

First, we have the petitionary request of the foolish to the wise.

Secondly, This request is backed with a reason of the petition, give us of
your Oil, their best shift is now begging; for they neither ask to buy nor
borrow, but to give, but Solomon foreseeing their disappointment, says Prove.
20.4. The Sluggard will not Plow by reason of the cold, therefore shall he beg
in Harvest and have nothing: this is the case of the foolish Virgins in our
Text; they gat nothing (give us of your Oil,) they knew the wise had Oil;
formal outside professors can Judge of sincerity in others, though they
themselves have none; (give us of your Oil.) Oh! the great necessity that
sluggish lazy professors brings upon themselves for want of improving time and
means.

Secondly, We have the asserted reason rendered by the foolish to the wise, for
our Lamps are gone out, and that in a time of most need; their light intended
here by the Lamps is gone out, extinguished; the light of profession not fed
goes out, an hypocrites Lamp or light is not lasting, it fails him when he
has most need, at death, or at Christ's coming to Judgment, nay in time of
Trial and temptation, such was the stony ground, Mat. 13.5. Job 27.8. that the
hope of the hypocrite fails him at the giving up of the Ghost; or when God
takes away his Soul, an hypocrite at last is not only discovered to others but
to himself, he sees and says now th^^ his light is gone out, though it is
possible some may die with hope, and rise with hope as these seem to do; yet
now in this time of need their hopes fail them. Job speaks of the nature of
this hope of the hypocrite, as in Job 8.13, 14, 15. So are the paths of all
them that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish, whose hope shall be
cut off, and whose trust shall be a Spiders Web or house, in five Circumstances.

First, It is a compact of curiosity; but no strength.

Secondly, Her house is formed out of her own Bowels, not fetched out of the
Forest or stone querry, not like the Be that fetches it abroad; but his hope
is grounded upon his own righteousness; see the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. and the
duties he performs.

Thirdly, She uses her house for a double use, to dwell in her self, and to
ensnare others, so does the hypocrite.

Fourthly, She dwells in it with Confidence, so does the hypocrite.

Fifthly, A Spiders house is down with little ado, the whisk or broom lays
it flat at once, as in Isaiah 33.14, 15. an hypocrite shall lean upon his
house, but it shall not stand, Job. 8.15. We now proceed to the application of
this Doctrine.

First, By way of Information, it does inform us that the eternal perdition and
exclusion from glory is the fruit of their folly: these were foolish Virgins,
it seems to be Emphatically urged, in this Context, they were not wise, so
Solomon speaks in chapter 3. ver. last. The wise shall inherit glory, but shame
shall be the promotion of fools, so Psalm. 107.17. fools because of their
transgressions are afflicted: this will greatly aggravate the condemnation of
sinners. But the question will be, is this folly necessitated? Answer. No it
appears to the contrary in Scripture; because that God both immediately from
himself, and mediately by his Servants desires the contrary, see the Lords
ardent and passionate desire, as in Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh, that my people were wise,
so also in Psalm. 9.8. Understand, O ye brutish among the people, and ye fools
when will ye be wise? and this is Solomon's wishes throughout the whole book of
Proverbs, all along.

The Second Vs^. From hence we may learn that the Wisdom, Faith, Love,
Sincerity, and Holiness of one will not serve another, or do good to another
though of the same Society: these were of one Company; yet the Oil of the wise
must not be imparted to the foolish. Although as to outward deliverance as from
outward Judgments, those related (as the family) have received mercy upon their
account, (as Noah's Family did) yet not eternal good things received upon their
account.

The Third Use. Have a special care of hypocrisy, it is a very dangerous evil,
it is a sin of the highest magnitude, it is a sin that is very distasteful to
God, a sin that Christ pronounces more woes against than against any sin, see
Mat. 23. (as one calls them) they are the first born of the Devil, and there
is cause for it; for an hypocrite is most dishonorable to God of all, for he
renders God as the Idol Gods, that have eyes and see not, ears and hear not,
they think he sees not their hearts. Christ seems to intimate that
hypocrites are the first in Hell, as in Mat. 24. last. They shall have their
portion with hypocrites.

The Fourth Use. To the end thou may be supplied with Oil as the wise, then
make Christ thy storehouse, that is the way to have life and all spiritual
supplies, as in Gal. 2.20. The life that I live is by Faith in the Son of God;
without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing, as in John 15.4. that Soul whose
life is hid with Christ in God shall have supplies; when those that lay it up
in themselves may be drawn away to go to the Creature for Oil.

We see this Parable, this invites such an answer as have (Ne forte,) not so,
or not able.

We now proceed to the ninth Verse. But the wise answered, saying, not so, lest
there be not enough for us and you: But go ye rather to them that sell and buy
for your selves.

We now come to the reply of the wise Virgins to the foolish Virgins request,
which reply of theirs seems to savor of harshness and uncharitableness in
these three circumstances.

First, Their positive denial of their request, in this time of their need;
((...),) not so, which word must be understood to arise from an impossibility,
or else from a negative resolution it cannot, or we have no power, or it shall
not be, or we have no will.

Secondly, The reasons given seem to savor of the same Spirit in effect, we
must see our selves served first, and we fear it will not serve to supply our
selves and you too.

Thirdly, Their uncharitableness seems to appear, in their ironical sending
them to buy at such a juncture of time, when the Bridegroom was so near his
approach; it is the judgment of the Assembly, that this is but an ironical or
mocking direction, like to Elijah's bidding Baal's Prophets cry aloud, for
their God was in a journey; there are some that are of opinion, that this was
simple honest counsel, but such an understanding cannot suit with the scope and
season it was spoken in; but I would not stand too exactly upon every word in a
Parable, but mind the scope: I now proceed to the observations from this Verse.

First, That frugality and seeming covetousness in spiritual things, is a
demonstration of true wisdom, the wise answered not so, not a dram.

Second Doctrine. The best, wisest, holiest of Saints, have none of their stock
of sincerity to spare, they may well question whether there be enough for both.

Third Doctrine. From the manner of their speaking by way of Irony and mocking,
from whence this Doctrine arises, That one part of the punishm^nt of negligent
and foolish Persons in spiritual things, they shall be the Subjects of di^ision
another day; and as some would have it simple Counsel: I note that true
spiritual grace and wisdom is then rightly come at, when it is bought, not
borrowed or begged, go and buy for your selves; as if they should say ours cost
us dear, it is not to be given away, buy as we did.

A few words to each of these, and so I proceed.

First, That frugality and covetousness in spirituals is not only consistent
with, but a demonstration of true wisdom; these are the words of the wise, not
so, covetousness which is such a sin that God abhors that Person in whom it is,
as in Psalm. 10.3. yet in this case it is allowable. 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet
earnestly the best gifts: though Jacob's dealing with his Brother Esau in an
ordinary case would have been condemned as a piece of uncharitableness, yet it
is not blamed in that case, as the blessing and birthright pointed at
spirituals; therein Esau only is blamed as a fornicatour and profane Person, in
Hebrews 1.2.16. We have liberty to buy the truth whatever it cost us, but not
to sell it whatever we may have for it, Prove. 23.23. Though usury and taking
increase in Scripture is greatly forbid, yet usury upon a spiritual account is
lawful and allowed, as Math. 25.27 Thou ought to have put it out to the bank,
that I might have received mine own with usury: the Church is exhorted Revel.
3.11. To hold fast what she had, that no man take her Crown: the wise have held
fast what they had, they would not part with a drop, Christ loves such covetous
closefistedness, such Usurers as will hold fast their integrity; Job was of
this sort, I will not let it go, as Job 13.13. and this must needs be a
demonstration of true wisdom, for it does arise from a right understanding the
worth of grace and sincerity; Jacob understood the worth of a blessing and
birthright, but of Esau it is said, he in parting with his birthright despised
and slighted it, see Genesis 25.34. he is counted a wise man in earthly things,
that holds fast his own. But some may object.

Object. But is it not said by David, Psalm. 40.10. I have not had or concealed
my righteousness in my heart, I have declared and spread it abroad?

I answ. This is to be understood as to the exercise of grace, this is a duty
which may be termed a trading with, not a parting with the stock; a well stockt
Person is the only Person to do good to others, he is the man that teaches by
experience. I can tell you by experience how I came by what I have, says
David, I will tell you what God has done for my Soul. The declarations of
experience of grace and sincerity is common to all, it is communicable as
light, you cannot use it your selves, but others must have a benefit, and David
means no more than this, not to part with the principal.

The First Use. My counsel from this Doctrine is in two branches.

First, The same that St. Paul gives, 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet earnestly spiritual
indowments.

The Second use. When you have it, hold it fast, let none go to friend none,
for take the counsel to Philadelphia ( Rev. 3.11.) Hold fast that thou have,
let no man take thy Crown.

We now come to the Second Doctrine, which was this, that the best, and wisest,
and Holiest of Saints have none of their stock to spare, they have ground to
question whether they themselves have enough, if they should part with any.

We have in this Doctrine contained the reason of the former denial, we will
give you none, because we have none to spare, lest we expose our selves to
want, we have little enough for our selves, and Charity begins at home, we must
see our selves served first, that which Ezekiel. speaks upon another account is
certainly true here, Ezekiel. 14.24. He shall only deliver himself by his own
Righteousness, though it were Noah, Daniel, and Job, Ezekiel. 18.20. the
Righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and it is plain that when
Christ comes, the nearest acquaintance and relations can afford no relief,
therefore it is said Luke 17.34. In that night there shall be two in one Bed,
one taken, the other left. Consider this you that think you can speed the
better for your wife or Husbands sake, because they are righteous; the wife of
the righteous Lot, is not saved for Lots sake, she is made an example, she is
turned into a pillar of Salt, and if nearest acquaintance and relations would
have done any good, these might, these were of one Society, went out together
to meet our Lord upon the most worthy design, yet such of the company are
received, the other rej^cted b^ Christ.

The First use from hence. Oh then get Oil of your own, take the Counsel of the
wise Virgins, now buy for your selves whilst it is to be had, take the Counsel
of the Prophet, Esa. 55. from verse the I to the 7. See^ the Lord while he may
be found, cal^ upon him while he is near, in that proper season, Buy Wine and
Milk without money and without price.

The Second use of Ex^ortation, make what use you can of the wise and truly
righteous at present: for when Christ comes, then they even the wisest of them
can do you no good, their righteousness now may be beneficial to you, the lips
of the righteous now feeds many, but not ^hen.

I now come to the Third Circumstance in this Text, the reply, which I told you
before is taken two ways.

First, Ironically, as most understand: and the assembly of Divines (so called)
so understand it, some understand it is a simple proper Counsel, but I shall
speak unto it as it is ironically taken, and from thence I laid down this
proposition or Doctrine, That one part of the punishment of negligent and
foolish persons in spirituals is this, They shall be the Subjects of derision,
as well as rejection: God himself is said to mock when their fear comes upon
them; Proverbs 1.25. which must refer to this day,

Object. But some may say, it seems not to be ironical, because they took the
counsel and went.

To which I answer, So did Baal's Prophets take Elijah's Counsel when he mocked
them and said, Cry aloud, your God is in a journey, or talking: they did as he
bid them, 2 King. 18.28. This manner of speaking is usual in Scripture, so
Solomon speaks to the young man, Eccl. 11.9. walk after the sight of thine eyes
and desire of thine heart; which cannot be taken for proper and simple Council,
after this manner St. Paul speaks to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.11. Now ye are
full, now ye are rich, ye reign as Kings without us: when in good earnest it
was nothing less: from hence may arise a case of conscience, whether ironical
speeches may be used among Saints.

Answ. First, They may not be used merely to please the flesh.

Secondly, Such speaking must not be the fruit of hatred, but pity.

Thirdly, The design must be to reduce foolish Persons out of their folly, this
kind of speaking the Lord himself seems to use to Adam. Genesis 3.22. The Man is
become as one of us: it could not properly be understood: But far be it from us
to allow of a vain kind of mocking and scoffing to please the flesh as many
use; the wise here seems to upbraid the folly and negligence of the foolish;
you would not buy when you might have had it, go now and see if you can get it,
the wise answer them according to their folly, as Micaiah did Ahab, Go up to
Ramoth Gi^lead and prosper, when nothing less is meant to him than that. Now we
proceed to the use of this Doctrine.

First Use. Study the sadness of this punishment* Can there be a greater
aggravation to a poor afflicted disappointed Person, than to be an object o^
mocking and derision? This is the state of the foolish Virgins in the last day,
this is prophesied o^ in Psalm. 2.4. He that sits in heaven will laugh the
Lord will have them in derision: the same is threatened Prove. 1.26.

But suppose we should take this for simple honest counsel, Go and buy for your
selves: Then it affords us this observation; That true saving grace and wisdom
is then rightly come at, when it is bought and purchased, not begged or
borrowed: therefore Christ counsels the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.18. I
counsel thee to buy of me gold, raiment and Eye Salve: this is Solomon's manner
of speaking, Prove. 23.23. Buy the the truth, and wisdom, and understanding: and
this is the Language of the Evangelical Prophet Esa. 55.1. Come buy wine and
milk: we have this language twice used in that Parable, Math. 13. the treasure
and the pearl must be bought.

Reason. But why is this language of Scripture so frequent?

First, To set forth that sensible need that a soul rightly receiving Christ
has upon him. Persons buy when they are sensible of their needs, Persons will
not usually purchase that which they see no need of: if Laodicea in the
forecited place, could be brought off from her self conceitedness of being
rich, and could see her self poor, blind and naked, she might readily be
brought to take Christ's counsel, now this language of buying is made use of ^o
accomodate that state.

Second Reason. Because that such a Person that is a buyer, is one that knows
the worth of that which he goes to buy: so did the Merchant in the Parable
that sold all to buy the Pearl, he saw the excellency makes him buy.

Third Reason. He is at a very great price for it, it is said he sold all to
buy the Pearl, see Math. 13.44, 46. Luke 14.33. He that forsakes not all that
he has, cannot be my Disciple: Paul judged all dung, Phil. 3.9. in comparison
of Christ. These things considered it is not strange that the Scripture speaks
of buying.

Second Use. Have thou gotten Oil in thy Vessel, grace in thy heart? have thou
found and do thou enjoy Jesus Christ, pardon of sin, assurance of glory to
come? then let me ask this Question of thee, what did it cost thee? did thou
give a Market price, (as we use to say?) where things are not bought at a
Market price, it renders the matter doubtful whether they be rightly come by:
have thou forsaken thine own way, thy unrighteousness, and thine own
righteousness? has it cost thee pains, violence? art thou a new creature? I am
afraid it may be said of many that pretend they have found Christ and assurance
of Glory, as it was said to Jacob, Genesis 27.20. how came thou by it so soon or
so hastily?

Third Use. To those that have not yet bought, be persuaded to go through for
Jesus Christ, it is an excellent bargain whatever it cost thee; the wise
Merchant man that knows the worth of it, will have it what ever it cost him,
though he sell all for it; do not be like a Swine that tramples upon Pearls,
that chooses a handful of Oats before (...) handful of Pearls; strike a
bargain before it be to^ late, do not only bid but buy whatever it cost;
Solomon does not pitch a price, what we must give for the truth.

Fourth Use. This may serve to reprove those who tread backward, who instead of
buying Christ^ truth and sincerity will sell them, rather choosing present
enjoyments than future glory: consider the unexpressible disadvantage and loss,
if you should gain the whole world and lose your own soul, Math. 16.26. Thus I
have done with the ninth Verse.

We now proceed to the tenth Verse. And while they went to buy, the Bridegroom
came; then they that were ready went in with him to the marriage.

We have contained in this Verse two remarkable circumstances.

First, The beginning of the disappointment of the foolish Virgins, in which we
have two parts.

First, They are out of the way when Christ came.

Secondly, The door was shut against them, which is a dreadful aggravation, for
though they had been out of the way when Christ came, yet if the door had been
left open for them, there had been some hope, but the door is shut, which
bespeaks their state to be very bad.

Second Circumstance in the Text and that respects the wise, setting forth the
great advantage of the wise above the foolish, and that is expressed in two
Circumstances.

First it is here said, they were ready.

Secondly, It is said they went in with Christ to the marriage, a singular and
unspeakable privilege.

The words are plain and want but little explication, only the word Ready: by
which we must understand two things.

First, To be ready is understood sometimes to be accoutred, clothed, and
apparelled; thus it is used, Rev. 19.7. The Bride, the Lambs wife has made her
self ready: and this readiness is in her being arrayed in that fine linen
spoken of v. 8.

Secondly, Sometimes readiness in Scripture, does import a waiting posture:
thus it must be understood, Luke 12.37. that word watch is termed by the word
ready, v. the 40. Be ye therefore ready, is the same with, watch, in the former
verse.

I shall now lay down two Doctrines, as the product of this verse, considered
as in conjunction with the former verse.

The First Doctrine, That there is a day and time when all endeavors of
obtaining grace and wisdom will be in vain, and altogether succesless; these
beg of their fellows, they go to buy, and all in vain, yet they are shut out.

The Second Doctrine, That Jesus Christ does expect and require that all those
who look for glory from him should be ready for him at his coming.

I shall begin with the first of these. We see here persons punished, whilst in
the use of means, whilst buying in order to readiness. And if the reason should
be asked how this comes to pass, the answer must be here, they seek when it is
too late, there is a time when grace cannot be had by all means that can then
be used, this is Prophesied, Psalm. 32.6. For this shall all that are Godly call
upon him in a day of hearing: it supposes a proper se^son of finding The t^tuh
of this Doctrine is emphaticall ass^^te Prove. 1.28. Then shall they call and I
will not he^ them, they shall seek me early and shall not find m^ Therefore the
Prophet Isa. 55.6. invites to see the Lord while he may be found, and to call
upon (...) while he is near: and to this our Lord speaks fully Luke 13.24. For
I s^y unto you, many shall see to enter and strive, and not be able. It is a
sad instan^ which the Apostle, Heb. 12.15, 16. lays before them of Esau, who
could not obtain the Blessing though he sought it car^fully with tears. But
some m^^ say, when is this day proper for seeking? I answer in our life whilst
it is called to day, and while means last; therefore the Apostle says 2 Cor.
6. ^ Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation.

Secondly, On the negative, this time when the use of all means will be
ineffectual, is at Christ's appearance, according to the forenamed place, Luke
13.25. When once the Master of the house is ris^ up, and has shut to the door,
according to our Text.

Use. Be exhorted to lay hold upon the present time, fall in with the motions
of the Spirit, be not like the Sluggard, Prove. 20.4. Who will not plo^ because
of the Cold, his complaint will be yours when it is too late, ^rov. 5.11, 12,
13.

Secondly, Content not your selves with Lamps only, these had Lamps, they did
not go to buy Lamps but Oil.

Thus much for the First Doctrine, Concerning the foolish Vi^gins, the
beginning of their disappointment.

We now preceed to the Second Doctrine, which was this* Jesus Christ expects
and requires that all those who are looking for glory and happiness from him
should be making ready for him: no unready persons shall enter in with him.

Now in the ha^oling of this Doctrine, I shall first more particularly explain
this word Ready, or show you what it is to be ready.

Secondly, Prove the Doctrine, that this God and Christ do indispensably call
for.

Thirdly, Lay down some reason why this is required.

Fourthly, Make use of the whole.

First, What is it to be ready in Christ's fence?

I answer, it is made up of these two ingredients comprehensive, both which we
have laid down, Luke 12.35. To have the loins girt about, to have the lig is
burning, which allusion of Christ's does elegan^ly answer to our Parable of the
Virgins; had the foolish Virgins been accompli^^^ed with these two, we may be
assured they had gone in as well as the w^se.

Now the opening of these two terms will instruct us, wh^^ (...) is to be ready.

First, For girding up the loins is expounded by the Apostle St. Peter, 1 Pet.
1.13. where he interprets the loins to be the mind, the thoughts, gird up the
otns of ^our mind, and that it is with design of readiness, as here is plain by
the Contexe, that to have the mind, the thoughts well fixed is intended here.

And the Apostle in this kind of speaking, does allude to those loose Garments,
used in those times and places, which garments when they were to travel they
girded up close to them, ot^erwise they would have much ^indered them in their
march.

The Second Circumstance in order to readine^ is their lights burning, alluding
still to travelers it the night, who when they were reckoned to be ready, had
not only the loins girt, but stood with ^ light burning in their hand, which
the foolish Virgins were short in.

Now these two Circumstances of loins girt, and lights burning, take in the
whole of the readiness for Christ. The loins girt take in the whole of the
inward man, the mind and heart answering to the vessel in our Context.

The Second, relating to the whole of conversation outward, and this latter
answers to the Lamp it our Context.

Of each of these a few words.

First, Of our thoughts, what is it to have ou^ thoughts chus girded up?

First, When our thoughts are fixed upon Christ for acceptance, in that day of
his appearance, that though Christ came as a Bridegroom yet it is of his
admirable grace that he accepts of us to be his spouse. This was the Faith of
holy St. Paul, Phil. 3.20. Though his conversation was in Heaven, yet he looks
for Christ his Savior, not his own righteousness which he undervalueth in that
Chapter greatly. Thus he exhorts Saints to be looking for Christ, Titus 2.13.
our Savior Jesus Christ.

Secondly, A mind girded up is sixed in contemplation of that glory that shall
be brought to them at this day of Christ's appearing: see 1 Pet. 1.13.

Thirdly, if thy m^nd be girt up, it is drawn forth in praising God, and
rejoicing in the hope of this day of Christ's appearing, 2 Pet. 3.14.

Fourthly, Thoughts girded up, are humble low thoughts, not high or listed up
thoughts, of our own selves, Romans 12.16. Not thinking high

The Second Part of Christ's directions relates to the conversation to manwards,
to hold forth light in our places.

There are five or six Circumstances in a Christians conversation that give
light.

First, In good works, Charity and alms, liberality to the poor, which the
Church of Rome takes to be the Oil in our Text, and which the wise Virgins had,
and the foolish wanted. I must acknowledge according to the sequel of this
Chapter, in the third parable there seems to be some ground for them so to
judge; see ver. 35, 36. for I was an hungry and ye gave me meat, gives them
admission to this glory. But I shall not insist upon these Scriptures that seem
to favor that opinion, I shall only desire you to read three or four
Scriptures to the purpose, see Luke 16.9. And I sa^ unto you, make you friends
of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when you fail they may receive you into
everlasting habitations, Luke 12.33 Sell that you have, give alms, provide your
selves bags that wax not old, a treasure in heaven, that fails not, read Tim.
6.17, 18. read the words and counsel of Christ, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so
shine before men, that they seeing your good works may glorify your Father
which is in Heaven From all which places we may gather that Charity and good
works is a way wherein Christians have their lights burning.

Secondly, Our lights burn or shine, in holding forth the truths of Jesus
Christ and the Gospel as opportunity affords it self to us. This is that the
Apostle calls for from the Philippians, Phil. 2.15, 16. this is called for to
this and, that they might shine as lights in the world.

Thirdly, That wherein our lights shine is in a circumspect observation of our
duties in our particular relations; every one has his particular work,
Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants, Parents, Children, and each in their places
do either guid^ or stumble others by their walking: this carefu^ walking herein
will not only keep the name of God from being dishonored and blasphemed, 1
^im. 6.1. but will be a great means to adorn and beautify the Profession, 2
Tit. 10.

Fourthly, Our lights do shine fourth in ou^ just, righteous and faithful
dealings with men, to be blameless, harmless, to keep promises, and do to
others as we would have them do to us, the wan^ hereof has in all ages rendered
Christians dark no^ light.

Fifthly, Our lights should shine forth in out words, there is much light held
forth this way as we may gather from Ephesians. 4.5.

Sixthly, Moderation in all our enjoyments, eating, drinking, clothing, as to
joy and sorrow toward Relations, this does demonstrate a Person rightly
waiting for Christ; those who are waiting for Christ, must not ex^^ed in these
things as the old World and Sodom ^id, spoken of Math. 24 Luke 14. see also 1
Cor. 7.29 this is required as the time is short, and they wairing for Christ.
As to the proof of this Doctrine I shall name but two Scriptures, Math. 24.44.
Be ye therefore ready: so Luke 12.40. Be ye also ready, for the Son of Man
comes in a day when ye loo^ not for him.

But why does our Lord require this readiness? I answer in general for our
good, and the equity of it.

First, We must be ready from consideration of the sudden and swift coming of
our Lord, Mala. 3.2. The Lord shall suddenly come to his Temple: Mark 13.36.
^est coming suddenly he find you sleeping: 1 Cor. 15.46. He comes in the
twinkling of an eye.

Second Reason. Because none but those ready can stand before him in that day,
see Mala. 3.2. Esa. 33.15. We read of a certain Creature who if he sees a man,
before the man sees him, it is deadly; it is true in this case, for if we are
not waiting for Christ and ready for him at his coming, it is deadly; for
Christ to come at unawares, or when you look not for him, is very dangerous.

Third Reason. Christ may well expect from the time he gives to make ready, and
he expects an improvement of time, according to time given, as he did of
^ezebel, Rev. 2.21.

Fourth Reason. Jesus Christ may rationally expect his should be ready, because
he has at his own charge allowed her where with to be ready, as Rev. 19.8. To
her was granted (or given) that she should be arrayed.

Fifth Reason. Jesus Christ himself is ready with all his provision, as appears
from his declaration, Math. 22.17. All things are ready.

Sixth Reason. There is no one thing, wherein we show our love to Christ more
than in being ready; and rather waiting for him than Christ for thee. I shall
close this with a word of Use.

First Use. Be exhorted to make ready for him, have nothing to do when Christ
comes, whether by death to thee, or in Person. Consider it is not enough that
there is a match agreed on between Jesus Christ and thee, that thou art sure,
but prepare for the Marriage. A few motives to set home this Use.

First, Consider the dreadful state of those Persons not ready, not only in our
Text, but in Math. 22.23. Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter
darkness, for want of having the Wedding Garment on.

Secondly, Consider that though many are called, yet but few are chosen, Math.
22.14. None chosen but such as are ready.

Thirdly, Consider how well our Lord takes it to be ready, as appears by his
Carriage to such, Luke 12.17.

Fourthly, Consider how reasonable a request it is to be ready, when he is at
all the cost, Ephesians. 5.25. Rev. 19.7. Thus I have done with the tenth Verse.

The eleventh and twelfth Verses. Afterward came also the other Virgins,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us:

12. ver. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you I know you not.

In these two Verses we have wrapped up the perfect and total disappointment of
the foolish Virgins. We had the beginning of their misery in the former Verse,
which lay in this that the door was shut upon them, that was a tacit or
implicit rejection; but here we have their positive and declared rejection,
and therein their irrecoverable disappointment, they are wholly denied and
rejected in their vehement solicitations for entrance.

In these two Verses we have contained two general parts.

First, The foolish Virgins earnest petition and desire.

Secondly, The Lords reply unto them.

But in our handling these two Verses, I shall glance at these two parallel
places, Mat. 7. Luke 13. because they seem to relate to the same time, and are
spoken to the same Persons, or such like, see Math. 7.22. They will say to me
in that day, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, cast out Devils,
and done many wonderful works? we have Christ's reply, ver. 23. And then will I
profess I never knew them, depart from me ye that work iniiniquity: so Luke
13.25, 26, 27. I tell you I know you not, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity: so in our Text, Verily or Amen, I know you not: so that in taking in
those Scriptures, we have not only a petition to the Lord to open, but many
arguments urged to move the Lord for entrance, but all in vain. In the petition
we have considerable,

First, The matter of the request.

Secondly, We have in this petition the manner of it considerable, we have the
ingemination or doubling of the word, Lord, Lord, which ingemination has these
four Circumstances in it.

First, Confidence.

Secondly, Earnestness.

Thirdly, Intimacy.

Fourthly, Acknowledgment.

First, Considence in opposition to bashfulness, shame, or silence, it is a
commanding authoritative speech.

Secondly, It savours of earnestness and vehemence of speaking, quickness of
spirit in speaking, willing to be quickly heard and taken notice of; as when
Christ so speaks to Martha, Luke 10.41. Martha, Martha: and so it is to be
understood in that voice from heaven to Saul, Act. 9. Saul, Saul: the Lord is
earnest and would be heard.

Thirdly, This kind of speaking implies intimacy and acquaintance, it is that
kind of speaking which intimate friends use to each other, Christ and Martha
was familiar, and to this purpose the rebuke given by Christ, ^uk. 6.46. And
why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things I speak? as if he should say,
you express intimacy and acquaintance, but do not express obedience.

Fouthly, It implies acknowledgment, as if he should say, thou art my Lord,
Math. 7. so understood, shall say Lord, Lord, we own thee as our Lord; thus it
must be understood Romans 8.16. we say Abba or Father by way of acknowledgment,
see John 20. My Lord, my God: so that we see the petition has much in it.

Secondly, if we take in the forenamed two Scriptures, we find a material Plea
with strong arguments. We have five arguments used here with desire of opening
and entrance.

First (say they) we have eaten and drunk in thy presence: this eating and
drinking in Christ's presence is taken two ways.

First, For eating personally with Christ, when he was on earth, as Judas and
many more bad persons did.

Secondly, By some it is taken for eating and drinking at his Table in the
Church, and this latter is most likely, because Christ was ascended before this
flocking in of the Virgins; besides there are but few can plead the first.

Secondly, Thou have taught in our Streets, that is, we have been
Sermon-hearers; by hearing Christ may be, under stood hearing his Ministers, so
St. Paul speass, Ephesians. 4.20. If you have heard Christ, and have been taught b^
him: which there can not be understood Christ in Person, but his Ministers.

Thirdly, They had not only heard but taught themselves, if prophesying be
preaching as many understand it to be, from 1 Cor. 14.

Fourthly, They had cast out Devils possibly by fasting and prayer: casting out
Devils is not enough; therefore Christ caurions his Disciples not to rejoice in
that, Luke 10.20. Nevertheless rejoice not in this that the Devils are subject
to you, but rejoice your names are written in heaven.

The Fifth argument these Virgins urge is, that they had done many other mighty
works. Now all these allegations and Pleas we may suppose are true, for our
Lord never contradicts them as not being true, and these are considerable
arguments, what not let in such, so qualified, and so related to Jesus Christ?
this seems strange to them, they made no question but these arguments would
have opened the door; but instead thereof, see our Lords sharp angry reply in
two circumstances.

First, His absolute positive rejection of them, depart, depart, no admission,
notwithstanding all this. And this rejection is built upon a double foundation.

First, He knows them not, which seems strange.

Secondly, They were workers of iniquity, and that is strange also considering
what they pleaded here.

Now those Doctrines that I shall observe from the words thus explained, shall
respect not only this Text, but those parallel places forenamed.

First Doctrine, That Persons are naturally and strongly apt to lean, bear, and
lay weight upon the external duties of obedience. These several pleas are all
outward, not a word of any thing inward, all ou^ward; this was the Plea of the
Jewish Church with God all along, they leaned upon the Lord from that ground,
this was natural with the Pharisee, Luke 18. I fast twice a week.

The Second Doctrine. The best of duties rested in are nauseous and abominable
to God, ye are workers of iniquity, yet we read of no gross evils recorded of
them. This truth is very much confirmed in Scripture, see Esa. 1.13, 14. My
soul hates your solemn meetings, incense is abominable to me, Esa. 66.3. Their
Sacrifices are like offering Swines blood, cutting off a Dogs neck, and such
kind of Language.

The Third Doctrine, That persons may be in the highest duties of obedience and
yet workers of iniquity.

The Fourth Doctrine, That workers of iniquity may have a strong confidence,
Faith and knowledge in Christ.

The Fifth Doctrine, Boldness and confidence is not always a sign of a good
estate.

The Sixth Doctrine, A wicked or a reprobate person may be enabled by the
Spirit of God, to do great things in his name.

The Seventh Doctrine, It is a very hard matter to persuade persons that Christ
does not know them. See what pains Christ takes to beat them off, I tell you, I
profess, I know you not.

Now all these observations are worth our consideration and improvement as they
are drawn from these Scriptures jointly considered: but those which I purpose
to insist upon are such as do naturally arise from these verses alone, which
are as follows.

The First Doctrine from the words, That some unprepared and unwise persons,
shall be vehemently desirous and passionately solicitous for life and
Salvation, when too late. See the pains these persons take after their
awakening.

First, They apply themselves to the wise for Oil.

Secondly, They go to buy Oil.

Thirdly, They come to Christ though the door is shut, yet this does not
discourage them, they come with confidence as if they could command entrance,
need makes them to seek with pains, like some condemned person, begging
Cordially for a pardon.

The Use of the Doctrine, May not this serve for a Landmark for us to warn us
to seek in earnest, and make sure in a proper time and season? Oh! come improve
your little time and season, consider how sad it will be to fall into this
state, as these in our Text, seek early and earnestly in time before it be too
late, take Solomon's counsel, Eccl. 9.10. What thy hand finds to do, do it
with thy might, for the same reason he gives there, thou can not do it in the
grave nor after the grave.

The Second Doctrine, That many high professors shall suffer a great and total
irrevocable disappointment, contrary to strong expectation, at Christ's
appearance; persons may live, die, rise in strong hope, and yet their hope
deceive them. But what may be the ground and reason of this disappointment?

First, Mistaking those Scriptures that speak of the qualifications upon which
Salvation is built, taking those Scriptures too narrow that speak of Faith, as
if bare believing were enough without the powerful effects of Faith in
purifying the heart and life, not taking in such Scriptures, as Acts 15.9.
Purifying of the heart by Faith, 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this hope in
him, purifieth himself (...) he is pure.

Second Reas. of this dreadful disappointment lyet in a conceit of our own
doing, not disclaiming (...) acceptance from any thing in our selves, to expec^
life and Salvation, and acceptance from God b^ Christ alone.

Third Reas. is for want of looking as narrowly t^ our hearts as lives, judging
our selves for thought as well as actions, for we may gather that what these
foolish Virgins plead relates to externals, not heart work. They could not
plead, thou know I have l^boured with my own heart in secret, and mourne^
over my heart vvandrings, that it had been their So^ request God would cleanse
them from secret sins, (...) create in them a clean heart and renew in them a
righ^ Spirit, they do not commune with their own heart Psalm. 4.4.

Fourth Reas. is living in some known sin, notwithstanding all their external
duties of Faith and obedience, yet says our Lord ye are workers of iniquity.
Balaam had much of the Spirit of God to assist him in excellent Prophecy, yet
had corruptness in his heart, unto whom St. Peter compares some professors in
his day, 2 Pet. 2.

Fifth Reas. is living in disobedience to some known law of Christ, and this
iniquity is (exlex) ((...)) against the Law, 2 These. 2.8. Then shall that
iniquity be revealed. And that our Lord lays much upon this we may perceive if
we will weigh Christ's application, Mat. 7.20. what we had spoken before,
whosoever therefore shall hear these sayings of mine, and do them, ^e is the
wise builder, his house shall stand.

We now proceed to the third Doctrine, That the great ground of Christ's
rejecting persons from glory with him in the last day, lies in his not knowing
them; I know you not, I profess I never knew you; it will be a sad and dreadful
state at that day not to be known of Christ.

In handling this Doctrine I shall speak to these two things.

First, What it is for Christ to know a person in that day.

Secondly, Show you how a person may now know in himself that Christ will know
him then.

First, For Christ to know a person, cannot be understood a bare knowledge, for
so^ he knows all both good and bad, even their hearts are known to him; he
knows what is in man, John 2.25. but to know here must be understood, to
approve, esteem a person with respect, and so it must be understood, Exodus 1.8.
There arose another King that knew not Joseph, that is, had no favor for him;
and thus the World is said not to know the Saints, 1 John 3.2. In this sense it
is that St. Paul would have the Thessalonians know their Preachers, 1 These.
5.12. know them: and thus God is said to know the Godly, Psalm. 1.6. thus God is
said to know Abraham, Genesis 18.19. For I know him.

Secondly, For God to know, is for him to take care and make provision: thus
Christ is said to know his sheep, John 10.14.

But how may a poor Soul know in himself now, that Christ will know him in that
day?

First, Ask thy soul this question; do thou know Christ? they that know him,
shall be known of him; it is a matter of great concernment to know Christ
rightly, John 17.3. This is life eternal to know Christ, as we ought to know
him.

But how shall I then know that I do know him?

Ans. First, if thou know him as thy Savior.

Secondly, If we know him rightly, we know him as our King, we obey his
Laws, that is more than saying, Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.21. 1 John 2.4. He that
says he knows him and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar.

Thirdly, To know Christ, is to own him in sufferings; the contrary, is to be
ashamed of him, and will incur Christ's being ashamed of such at this day, Mark
8.38.

Fourthly, Those that know Christ, know him in his members: for a person to
say he knovvs Christ and not to know his Saints, is inconsistent; they that
know not the Children of God, are emphatically called the World. Christ takes
what is done to his members, as done to himself, as appears Mat. 25.40. And
these are of those that Christ knovvs. There is more in love to the Brethren,
than in casting out Devils, to oblige Christ to know thee.

Fifthly, Such know Christ who keep Communion with him, 1 John 1.6. and this
Communion is greatly maintained by cordial and secret prayer.

Sixthly, If thou know Jesus Christ, that knowledge tends to holiness, in
all manner of conversation, without holiness none can see, much less know God,
Heb. 12.14. such as work iniquity cannot be said to know him.

Use. See of what absolute necessity knowing Christ is here in order to a
hopeful expectation of Christ's knowing thee at the day of his coming in Glory:
labor therefore to know and be acquainted with Christ here, study the name
and nature of Christ, know him in all his offices and excellencies.

I shall close this Doctrine with the words of Jesus Christ, John 17.3. And
this is life eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent.

Thus I have finished the twelfth verse and proceed to the thirtenth verse.
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of
man comes.

We are now come to the conclusion of this first parable which contains Christ's
application of the whole upon his Disciples. In this verse, we have contained
two general parts.

First, A duty enjoined, watch ye.

Secondly, We have the Argument to enforce the duty, for ye know not the day
nor the hour when Christ shall come. (Watch therefore) because you have heard
and understood how sudden and unexpected a disappointment these Virgins have
(or rather shall have) met with, for it is to be understood to be but a
parable: our Lord propounds this duty as the only way and means to prevent
miscarrying, Watch therefore. In my prosecution of this verse I shall endeavor
these five things.

First, I shall explain this so great and useful duty of watchfulness, I shall
show you what our Lord means by this duty.

Secondly, I shall show you how want of watchfulness was the foundation of the
destruction of the foolish Virgins.

Thirdly, Show you some reasons why Christ and his Apostles do so much call for
this duty in Gospel days, and the more as the time draws near.

Fourthly, Lay down some Characters of a watchful person.

Fifthly, I shall endeavor to press our Lords us^ of exhortation upon
Christians in this day.

To the first, what watchfulness is in it self; the word here translated watch
is (excito) to stir up or a waken; the lowest acceptance of watchfulness is
wakefulness, in opposition to sleeping, to keep the eyes open is a sort of
watchfulness. This is plain from Christ's words to his Disciples, Mat. 26. when
he found them thus sleeping, watch says he, that is, keep your natural eyes
open. This watching I dare not exclude in our Text, for if there may be excess
in eating and drinking, so also there may be in sleeping, in giving way to
drowsiness and sottishness. This Solomon inveighs much against in his Proverbs,
love not sleep lest thou come to poverty, Prove. 20.13. and this watching I dare
not exclude, Acts 20.31. to the elders of the Church of Ephesus, therefore
watch, and remember that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn you
every one night and day with tears. St. Paul had broke his sleep to perform his
duty to the Churches, and this he offers as an example for them to imitate. And
this we know is the course of the world in earthly concerns; they rise betimes,
and go to bed late, sometimes their Candle goes not out by night, as we read
Prove. 31.18. of the industrious and prudent woman; now we are to seek for
wisdom, as for silver, Prove. 2.3, 4. break our sleep for it; silver seekers do
so. We have the example of our Lord upon this account, who rose up a great
while before day, upon a spiri^^^l account to preach and pray, Mark 1.35. and
we read also of David, Psalm. 119. he rose at midnight to pray and praise the
Lord. St. Paul and Silas did so, Act. 16.25. From hence the false Church of
Rome have their Vigils, their Night Watchers; and of this watchfulness some
have experienced much spiritual profit, when the heart has been in it; and I
am sure if Persons are resolvedly set for grace and glory, they would find need
of this watching. But I shall bend my self to speak to the watchfulness of the
inward man, as being the principal end, that without which the other cannot
profit. There is a spiritual and inward sleep taken notice of in the
Scriptures, some of which Scriptures I shall cite, Romans 13.11. It is high time
to awake out of sleep. Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the
dead. 1 These. 5.6. Let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be
sober: all which Scriptures must needs relate to the inward watchfulness I
speak of; this sleep is when our spiritual senses are asleep: for as the
natural body has its senses, so the inward man has his senses according to ^.
b. 5. have their senses exercised. There are five senses relating to the inward
Man, Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Feeling, Tasting; but I shall but name this,
because I touched upon it before. This watchfulness consists in three
Circumstances.

First, Observation. Secondly, Exercise. Thirdly, Expectation.
First, Observation; where the mind and understanding, eye and affection are
looking out, this is wat^hing, Hab. 2.1. I will set me upon my watchtower, to
see: there his observation is called watching: see Jerem. 20.10. They watch for
my ^alting; that is, observe: thus it is said the Jews watched to kill St.
Paul, that is, sought opportunity, Act. 9.24.

Secondly, A watch implies industry, exercise, use of means; thus it must be
understood of the Master of the house, Math. 24.43. He would have watched, and
not suffered his house to be broken: he would have been awake; both exercising
his weapon to defend and offend: barely keeping his eyes open, would not have
hindered his breaking in; watching is an industrious work; see how St. Paul
speaks to the Church of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch, yea stand fast,
quit your selves like men, be strong: so also to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.5. Watch
thou, and endure affliction; these go together.

Thirdly, Watching supposes expectation, earnest looking out with longing,
thus to be understood, Luke 12. which I have touched before, so Psalm. 130.5, 6.
I wait for the Lord; watching and waiting are the same many times in Scripture.
Thus I have briefly opened the nature of this duty of watchfulness, it is a
wakeful, observing, industrious, expecting frame of Spirit.

The second thing that I am to speak unto is this, How this want of
watchfulness was the foundation of the miscarrying of the foolish Virgins.

I answ. That the foundation of their miscarriage did not consist in not
opening their eyes, but in the want of a painful use of means, herein they were
short; they were slothful in a time of harvest, when they might have furnished
themselves; they fought when it was to late: and that this was the ground of
their miscarriage, will appear plainly from the next Parable; the whole scope
whereof is to encourage industry before Christ come; the Oil, the Wedding
Garment is the fruit of industry; these foolish Virgins had not been in good
earnest for heaven, with violence and with their might, they did not seek
wisdom as for silver, if they had, they should have found, Prove. 8.17. They
that seek me early shall find me.

Though Persons seeking the world and earthly things may miss, though they seek
early and earnestly; yet those that seek the kingdom of heaven so, shall not
miss of it; we have many promises to that.

Thirdly, Why is this duty of watchfulness so much called for, and pressed in
Gospel days?

First, Because Jesus Christ foresaw, this would be wanted when there should be
most need; and that slumbring and sleeping should prevail greatly in such a day.

Secondly, Because then the coming of Christ draws near, that was the argument
the Apostle uses to awake the Romans, Romans 13.12. the near approach of their
salvation.

Thirdly, Because our great adversary is more than ordinary vvatchful in those
days, see 1 Pet. 5.7. Rev. 12. Because he has but a short time.

Fourthly, The latter days are full of snares, gins, traps, and temptations to
catch souls; now this duty rightly performed in conjunction with prayer, is
the only means to antidote a soul from those snares, Luke 21.35, 36. For as a
snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the earth.

Watch therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man.

The fourth thing I am to speak to in the prosecution of this Doctrine, is to
lay down some Characters of a vvakeful Person.

First, A vvakeful Person tastes much sweetness in the promises of God, as a
healthful man can taste his food. As an unregenerate man, so a declined sleepy
Professor is a stranger to the covenants and promises, Ephesians. 2.12. they are to
him as food to one whose heart is asleep. When David was in a lively state and
frame of Spirit, see how sweet was the contemplation of future promises to him,
see 2 Samuel 7. ver. 18. to 22. so also Chap. 25.5. He has made with me a sure
Covenant ordered in al^ things: David feeds on the promises as a hungry man
does upon his food; and indeed God has given out many precious promises to the
end they might be strong consolation.

Secondly, A watchful wakeful Person is sensible of the least sin, though but
in thought; his conscience is tender, can feel the least prick of sin; whereas
one asleep can bear great sins insensibly: sin to a lively heart is like poison
in a Venus glass, it cannot entertain it, he hates the Garment spotted with the
flesh, he hates the very appearance of evil.

Thirdly, A vvakeful Person is constant in duties, he keeps true stroke, his
works are perfect; one in a drowsy and watchless state is not constant in
duty, an Hypocrite or drowsy Professor does not pray always nor keep to duty
always. The Church in Sardis when her works were not perfect, she had need to
be exhorted to watchfulness, Rev. 2.2. Be watchful and strengthen the things
which be ready to die, for I have not found thy works perfect before God: a
Person asleep strikes imperfect strokes.

Fourthly, A watchful Person holds fast his Profession in the outward
ordinances of Christ as his Garment; a ^erson drowsy or asleep lets fall his
Garment, the Spirit of God makes watching and keeping the Garment cotemporary,
Rev. 16.15. Be watchful and keep thy Garment: when Noah was asleep he had dropped
his Garment and lay naked in his Tent.

Fifthly, A watchful Person experienceth increase of strength against his own
iniquity, so did David Psalm. 18. he is seldom overcome by them, this is the
means that Christ directs unto Math. 26. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation.

Sixthly, A wakeful Person delights in lively spiritual Company and Society, it
is his great delight to be in their Company; whereas a drowsy Person is
burdened with them: But I would but touch these things because I spoke
something to this particular before.

I now proceed to the fifth particular which is to press this Use of
exhortation upon Christians. Would you not be repulsed at the last day, as
these were? then here lies your duty, which is to watch, be in good earnest,
do your work sure. Which if you would be found effectually in it, you must
watch and observe narrowly three enemies.

First, Your selves.

Secondly, The Devil.

Thirdly, The World.

First, Watch your selves, and that in three respects.

First, What we do.

Secondly, What we say.

Thirdly, What we think.

First, Let us weigh our actions by the balance of the sanctuary; the deeds of
the body must be taken notice of, for there is great danger, if not good deeds,
Romans 8.13. we live or die according to them, If we through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live; if we live after the flesh, we
shall die.

Secondly, We must narrowly watch our words, remember what Christ says, Math.
12.36, 37. Of every idle word men must give an account: by their words they
shall be justified or condemned. David prays for Gods help herein, Psalm. 141.3.
Set thou a watch before my Mouth, keep the door of my Lips.

Thirdly, We must observe our thoughts, they are not free as some say; no,
herein lies part of our fitness for Christ in girding up our minds or
thoughts, as you have heard from Luke 12.35. 1 Pet. 1.13. the heart is to be
kept with all diligence, Proverb. 3.24.

Secondly, We must observe Satan; it was the commendation of the Churches that
they were not ignorant of the depths and devices of Satan, and it is our duty
to be strong in Gods might against him; this is that we are exhorted to, 1 Pet.
5.8, 9.

Thirdly, We must be circumspect in our observation of this present evil world,
which also is a great and prevailing enemy to the Saints if not narrowly
vvatched; she has a double influence upon us.

First, By threatenings and frowns.

Secondly, By her smiles and allurements; both very dangerous, which made Agar
pray, That he might have neither poverty nor riches, knowing they were both
snares, Prove. 30.6. and many strong ones have fallen by this enemy; and that
Satan might tempt our Lord himself prevailingly, (this is his great
temptation,) Math. 4. he shows him the Kingdoms of this World and the glory of
them, with promise to give them if he would worship him: doubtless Satan
thought he could not choose a likelier means to destroy the Lord of life;
though the Lord Christ was well able to deliver himself from the power of it,
yet many are conquered and subdued by this allurement: We read of Demas an
eminent Preacher of the Gospel, and Companion with St. Paul, is taken hereby, 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present World.

But Secondly, I would press this Use of exhortation given by Christ, from his
own argument, For ye know not the day nor hour when the Son of Man shall come:
certainly this is a consideration that Christ would fain fasten upon his
Disciples minds in order to the duty of watchfulness, and therefore we have it
repeated over again and again, you may see Math. 24. three times in that
Chapter, ver. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man, ver. 42. Ye know not
what hour your Lord does come, ver. 44. In such an hour as ye think not, the
Son of man comes. Mark 13.32, 33. This is a secret locked up in the breast of
the Father alone, this is not known to Angels, no not to Christ himself, but
the Father only, ver. 36. therefore when Christ's Disciples would have known the
time, Christ only gives them predictions and forerunners, not a precise time;
and when the Disciples asked Christ again, Act. 1.7. it is not (says he,) for
you to know the times and seasons which the Father has kept in his own hands.

Quest. But why may not Christ's Disciples know the day and hour, and why is it
so inculcated upon them as aforesaid?

First, Because he would not have persons pry into it, God would not have man
to pry into this secre^ of Christ's Second coming, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Secre^ things
belong to God, this is one of them. There has been a double evil amongst men
in the Apostles times concerning his coming, some put the day too far from
them, as those 2 Pet 3. others brought it too near, as those 2 These. 2. now to
prevent both, our Lord would not have us busy our selves too nicely about it,
telling of us, the knowledge is not attainable.

Secondly, It is thus reiterated and inculcated, the uncertainty of Christ
coming, that we might always be ready for it; this is the scope of our Text,
therefore persons in general have their deaths concealed, that they may with
Job, all their appointed time wait till their change come. The Thief does not
use to tell when he will come, which calls upon the house-holder to be always
ready, and provided for him, which is Christ's Argument to his Disciples.

Object. But does not Christ seem to intimate, Luke 21.30, 31, 32. that his
disciples may as easily know his coming and day, as the Husbandman may know
when Summer is near?

I Answer, he may know the season in general, not the day or hour; so a man
that grows gray may judge death is near, but he knows not the day nor hour, nor
you neither, in which he shall dye: so we in like manner may judge our Lords
coming is not far off this day, by those forerunners which are as the gray
hairs preceding a man's death.

Use. We have two things employed in this verse.

First, That Christ comes, when he comes, suddenly.

Secondly, When he comes, he comes as the Son of man: the consideration of both
which may be profitable to us that we may so look for him.

First, As coming suddenly.

Secondly, As coming as the Son of man. So I have done with the thirteenth
verse and with the first Parable.

The Parable of the Talents, etc.
We now proceed to verse. 14, 15. For the Kingdom of Heaven is as a man
traveling into a far Country, who called unto him his own Servants, and
delivered unto them his goods.

15. verse. And unto one he gave five Talents, to another two, and to another
one; to every one according to his several ability, and straightway took his
Journey.

Our Lord Jesus was much affected with this parabolical speaking when he was on
earth: we find him laying down eight Parables in one Sermon of his, Mat. 13. if
we take in one omitted by Mat. taken in by Mark. 4.26. and indeed he was so
frequent in this kind of speaking that it is said, without a parable spoke he
not, Mat. 13.34. and he knevv this was a profitable speaking, no way like
this to insinuate and command the Judgment and affections. There are two
original words to signify a parable; the first word, as the learned tells
us, signifies to rule or to govern as a Prince, others derive the original
word which we render parable from a Root which signifies to be li^e, or
make like ((...)) which agrees with the Greek ((...)) parable: therefore
this was the very way that Nathan took with David, when he had sinned, by
the Parable of the Evve Lamb, 2 Samuel 12. this ruled him and overcame him. Every
Parable is made up of three Circumstances.

First, The Rind or bark, the word in which it is spoken.

Secondly, The root and occasion of it.

Thirdly, The moral and application of it, which is the chief thing that we
are to inquire after in (...) Parable, what it teaches us.

We are now come to our Lords second Parable, contained in this Chapter,
which is the Parable of the Talents, repeated also by Luke chap. 19. And this
Parable seems to rise from a double root; if we take in Luke which is a
Parallel place to this: in Luke 19. Christ seems to answer to a secret thought
arising in their hearts from somevvhat forespoken by our Lord, from whence
they gathered that his Kingdom should immediately appear; see Luke 19.11.
which to take off he tells them he must first take a great Jouney to receive
it.

Secondly, Taking this Parable according to our Context Mat. 25. the great
scope and design of it is, to provoke to industry in his absence. If any should
question or be at a loss in themselves, for what cause the foolish Virgins were
excluded, Christ does in this following Parable powerfully assert, that the
ground of their loss and disappointment lay here, that they did not improve the
stock committed to them to trade with, for idleness, not for spending but
hiding what thy were entrusted with. ( The Kingdom of Heaven) These words are
not in the original in most Copies extant, yet it may be judged a rational and
necessary supplement because it agrees with the first verse of this Chapter,
and is the preface of most other Parables, see Mat. 13. Kingdom of Heaven, it
is that unto which those things may answer.

But I shall omit speaking unto this preface, part^y because I have spoken to
it before, upon ver. 1. and partly because it is not in the original Text.

We now proceed to the words which are a Parable, and in this Parable we have
eight circumstances considerable.

First, The Journey taken.

Secondly, The end for which, according to Luke 19.

Thirdly, We have the house set in order, for his absence.

Fourthly, We have the behavior of his Servants in his absence.

Fifthly, We have the return of the Master.

Sixthly, The reckoning called for by the Master.

Seventhly, The reward of the industrious and faithful.

Eighthly, The severe punishment of the slothful Servant.

These are the considerable parts of this Parable which I shall speak unto as I
proceed.

But before I come closely to this Parable, give me leave to inquire into these
four things relating to this Parable.

First, Who is this man.

Secondly, What is this Journey.

Thirdly, Who be these Servants.

Fourthly, What are the Talents or goods.

Ans. It is agreed on all hands, that this man is Jesus Christ who is called
the Son of man in the verse before, and frequently in Scripture is so called.
Christ in his judging the World is a man, Act. 17.31. the man Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.5.

Secondly, That this Journey is his Ascension from earth to Heaven, is also
agreed on all hand which Journey he has not accomplished till (...) comes
again.

Thirdly, His Servants are his Disciples, not (...) extraordinary Disciples,
but his ordinary Disciple his Servants in ordinary, his Manual Servants, call^
here his own Servants, in opposition to the Servants of Satan, and the World,
alluding to the Parable; not the Servants of another Master, his own proper
Servants who had given up themselves (...) him, and indefinitely considered,
not only Preache^

Fourthly, What these talents are; men are exceeding extravagant, some think
the Ten Commandments; some the Five Books of Mose^ some the Five Senses; I
shall not spend time o^ trouble you at all with the Judgments of men abo^^
them: a Talent as to weight considered is very gre^^ bears 187 pound.

I shall offer my own opinion about the^ which is this; The Talents or Pounds
are those several abilities, indowments, and intrustments each member of the
Church and Body of Christ has committed unto them, for the good of the whole^
some have riches, some have wisdom, some rule, some more, some less; and for
the confirmation of my opinion, I would have the Reader consider these
Scriptures following, see Mark. 13.34. (...) parallel place to this, The Son of
Man is as a Man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to
his Servants, and to every one his work, and commanded the Porters to watch: in
which words we have the Talents or goods under other terms; every man his
work, stand thou here stand thou there, and to the Porter stand thou at the
door; the Second Scripture is Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Having then gifts differing
according to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophecy
according to the proportion of faith, or Ministry, let us wait on our
Ministering, or him that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on
exhortation, he that gives let him do it in simplicity, he that rules with
diligence, he that shows mercy with cheerfulness. See also Ephesians. 4.8. When
Christ ascended up on high, which is this Journey in our Text, he gave gifts
unto them, some one gift, some another, the improvement of which is required.
The Church is resembled unto man's body, having many members, and each member
his office in the body, so God has tempered the Church, 1 Cor. 12. See also 1
Pet. 4.10. as every man has received the gift, even so let him Minister,
whether in Doctrine or Charity. Christ has set some in his house as rulers,
others to be ruled, see Mat. 24.45. Who then is a faithful and wise Servant,
whom his Master has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due
season, blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so
doing: herein is the improvement of his Talent, and renders him one of the
blessed: we have the same words repeated by Luke 12.42, 43.

Object. But some may say, does not St. Luke chapter 19. seem to represent the
Talents to be of the same species or kind while he speaks of pounds? they had
ten pounds as they were ten Servants, each Talent there is a like species and
number.

I Answ. First, We must not be too strict as to the shell, and external words
of a Parable. A Parable is considerable only as to the scope, and drift, and
moral of it, not every Circumstance.

Secondly, This one single Scripture must not be set in opposition to seven or
eight Scriptures, whi^ speak otherwise, as those which I have laid before you,
where we find Christ's gifts to differ and n^ all to be of one species or
number; also Mat. ^ Romans 12. Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12. 1 Pet. 4. and many more of like
import, that Christians have differi^ gifts, which our experience teaches to
be true.

Thirdly, As to this word, Luke 19. Gre^^ ((...)) (Latin Mina) pound signifies
a poise or weig^^ indefinitely, as it refers to weight sometimes, large sum of
money, sometimes ((...)) it refers (...) measure as well as weight, a parcel of
Land co^taining 122 foot square, now whether this weigh be the same to each
person, because set out by the same, ((...)) is a question. But the main thing
(...) a Parable as I told you before is the scope, now (...) the scope of the
Parable, Mat. and Luke agree.

First, They all agree that Christ is ascended (...) gone this Journey, before
he reign or receive the Kingdom.

Secondly, The three Evangelists do agree that Christ at his going this his
Journey, does not breat up Housekeeping (as we call it,) but leaves his
business going in his absence in the hands of his Servants.

Thirdly, They all agree, that each of Christ's Servants have intrustments from
their Master at his going away.

Fourthly, They agree that the Servants in their improvements differ greatly.

Fifthly, They agree as to the large rewards of the faithful and profitable
Servants, and also of the slothful.

Sixthly, Some are of opinion that the reason why Matthew and Luke differ in
the manner of their relation, is because that Luke speaks of the ordinary and
lower sort of Servants, and Matthew of the A^ostles, of the highest order; but
I think there is little in this opinion because we have him with one Talent in
our Text. I now proceed to the Observations in our Text.

We have ten remarkable Doctrines in these two verses.

1 Doct. That Christ's Ascension from earth to Heaven, (even in his own
apprehension) does fitly resemble a great man's going a long Journey: It is not
compared to a poor man's, a mean man's going, a man of small concernments in the
World, but a great man, having a great family, many Servants, and great
concerns to take order about; this man is a great man, called a Lord, called a
noble man, Luke 19. and going a great Journey, to be a long time absent, which
calls for some considerable preparation; therefore it is said he abode forty
days after his resurrection, Act. 1. settling his affairs, he had several
meetings with his Disciples about those things.

2 Doct. That Jesus Christ in taking this great and long Journey, does not
dissolve his Servants, and break up housekeeping, but settles his business in
the hands of his Servants successively in his absence, he appoints each Servant
his place, and work in his House: this house is to be understood his Church,
Christ's house is as firmly settled, and has his Authority with it as bindingly
as if he were himself present.

3 Doct. That those Servants that Christ does entrust, are not his
extraordinary, but his ordinary, and Manual or hand Servants, called here his
own or proper Servants, to them he commits his goods.

4 Doct. That Christ's intrustments with such hi^ Servants, are very great and
weighty, set out b^ Talents; five times 187 to one Servant, twice 18 to a
Second, once 187 to the lowest; called according to the Greek, his substance or
goods.

5 Doct. That there are left by Christ in his hou^ sufficient gifts and
abilities for the effectual carrying on, and management of his affairs in his
house in his absence. Though Christ be in Heaven, ye^ he is greatly concerned
as to his house on Earth that his trade and business be well managed: the^ is
no want of means in order to the completing his work.

6 Doct. That every Persons gifts and abiliti^ from Christ are not the same,
though Christ own Servants, some are entrusted more, some less, some twice as
much as others, this may not be a ground of discouragement to Persons so
entrusted.

7 Doct. In giving gifts Christ has an eye to Persons abilities; it is said,
to every man according to their abilities, some cannot use or manage what
others can; the Porter had not the same abilities as the Steward or Ruler of
the Family.

8 Doct. The whole concerns of Christ in the World are committed into the hand^
of Christ's own Servants resident in his house or Church; would you trade for
Christ or Glory? apply your selves to his house, there are his Correspondents:
If any have Ears to hear, let them hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

9 Doct. The very highest Christians stock in heavenly affairs is not their
own, it is but lent by Christ, therefore they have no cause to boast as if they
had not received it: therefore Christ is but said ^o receive his Own with
Usury, ver. 27. it is his own, and the product of his own.

10 Doct. That Jesus Christ upon this Journey reposeth great trust in his
Servants; no sooner had Christ committed his substance to his Servants, but
straightway took his Journey, he is so satisfied in what he has done.

Now I might speak distinctly to each of these Doctrines, and indeed they are
all very well worth our consideration, but I study brevity: therefore I shall
speak two words.

First, One to Christ's House.

Secondly, One word to those who are not yet of Christ's house.

But before I come to speak particularly to these, let me Answer one Question.

Who or what people are Christ's house here on earth?

Answ. Baptized Believers are Christ's house: they were those with whom he left
his orders with, when he went away, and must needs be so so still; and it is
strange any should question this truth, were not all Christ's Servants brought
into his house this way? Is not this Christ's Law to all his Servants? Read but
seriously the proceedings of Christ's own Servants immediately after the Master
was gone, Act. 2.47 by Baptism, The Lord added to his Church daily such as
should be saved: and who has had power from Christ since to alter this his
way? But I design brevity. As an exposition, I shall only speak a few words by
way of Use to the whole of the former Doctrines.

Use. First, To Christ's house; consider that though your Master be in Heaven,
yet his Eye is over you continually; he searches the heart and tries the
reins of his Churches; therefore d^ all things in his house, in his fear.

Secondly, Do all in his name, by his power and authority in his house: Do not
all the Mi^^sters or Servants in the furthest part of this King Dominions, act
in his name in what they do^ and it is as powerful and binding as if he did
(...) himself in Person: even so whatever Christ's Se^vants do according to
their Commission he ow^eth it, and it is as if he had done it himself: se^
Math. 18. about Excommunication, it is boun^ in Heaven.

Thirdly, Receive all your rules, orders, and directions, in the management of
the affairs in hi^ house, from his orders left with you; for though he is at a
great distance, the house is his, he is you Master and Lord, and head of his
Church.

Fourthly, Let every one in Christ's house observe their work, stand where
Christ has set them be subject to those whom Christ has given authority; for
he has given authority to his Servant Mark 13. Some are made rulers to give
the re^ their Meat in due season; and in disobeying the^ in lawful Commands,
you disobey Christ, Math. 10.40. He that receives you, receives m^ and he
that rejects Christ's Servants in place, rejects him.

2 Use. To those not yet of Christ's house.

First, Have a special care of slighting Christ^ house or Servants, because the
Master is not with them; all slights and injuries to them is taken as i^ to
their Master, and highly provoking to him.

Secondly, If you would know any thing concerning the mind of Christ, repair to
his house, he has left his mind there, and thither he sends a^ that want
instructions and help heavenward: see in the business of Saul, though Christ
spoke from heaven to him, Act. 9. he does not direct him from thence in
particular, but sends him to the City to receive directions from Ananias, and
sends Ananias to Saul: so it was in the case of Cornelius, Act. 10. Christ
sends him to St. Peter that he might receive directions from him; not now from
the Master, but the Servants belonging to the house.

3 Use. Know this, that what rules and orders Christ gave to and left with his
Church, is for the whole time of his absence; and he looks to find his house in
the same order he left it in, when he went away: therefore in the two great
Ordinances of the Gospel, Baptism and the Lords Supper, we find their Period at
Christ's return at the end of the World. Math. 28.20. I am with you in Baptizing
to the end of the World. 1 Cor. 11.26. Ye remember the Lords death till he
come: the Church and house of Christ has its being in all Ages, Ephesians. 3.21.
therefore if you have an Ear to hear, you are to hear what the Spirit says to
the Church in this day, as well as formerly in that day immediately after his
Ascension to Heaven: know this, that all the visible power that Christ has in
the World at this day, is only that power he has in his Church; and know also
(whatever you may think,) that the Church is the only receptacle of Persons in
order to happiness and glory hereafter: Christ gathers from thence those that
shall be eternally rewarded, and enter into their Masters Joy: well, Christ is
yet upon his Journey, but his return draws near. So I have briefly done with
the 14 and 15 Verses.

We now come to verse 16. Then he that ha^^ received the five Talents went and
traded with the same, and made them other five Talents.

17. verse. And likewise he that received two, gained also other tu^

18. verse. But he that received one, went and digge^ in the earth, and hid his
Lords money.

In these three verses, we have contained the behavior of Christ's own
Servants, who were entrusted with his goods in his absence, which was the
fourth head propounded, as to this Parable, into eight particular heads.

First, The Journey taken.

Secondly, The end, to receive a Kingdom.

Thirdly, The settling his house in order for hi^ Journey.

Fourthly, The carriage and behavior of his Servants in his absence.

Fifthly, The Lords return.

Sixthly, The account required.

Seventhly, The reward given to the industrious.

Eighthly, The certain reward given to the slothful, Cast him into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, ver. 30. I have already
shown from the former heads, that our Lord Christ did at once at his going
away, settle his house in such order as he would have it abide in, in his
absence, and requires to find it when he comes again. Now in this fourth head,
we have a relation (Parabolicall) from Christ's Infallible foresight and
knowledge of the proceedings and carriages of his Servants (his own peculiar
Servants) when he is gone, as to the improvement of their Masters estate in
their hands; that they kept house is taken for granted, they did not throw the
doors off the hooks and dissolve house keeping, this is not by Christ supposed
they will do in his absence, but they kept his house, and their evil was that
they were not universally faithful and industrious, some were eye Servants, and
were lazy in their masters absence. As in the former Parable we find in one
Society wise and foolish Virgins, so here in his house shall be found faithful
and wise, slothful and foolish Servants, as afterward we find Goats amongst
the Sheep, and must be severed when Christ himself the great Shepherd shall
come. Our Lord himself who knew what was in man, entrusted some who afterward
proved very bad, idle and slothful, fearful and unbelieving.

We know that amongst Christ's Servants, in his absence, amongst his twelve
there was one entrusted who was unfaithful, Judas by name, Have not I chosen
you twelve, and one of you, says Christ, is a Devil, a wicked covetous person,
a Son of perdition? This preface may teach two sorts of persons, two lessons.

First, Those who are observers of Church members do not condemn the Church or
house of Christ, because there are bad persons in it; a very good Master may
have very bad Servants, especially in his absence; it is no certain rule to
judge the way by the persons that own it, no though Preachers there may be such,
it is not sufficient to judge by: you read Mat. 13. in the Parable of the
Drag-net, there are brought in bad and good, and the time to sever, is when the
Lord comes, who shall reveal the hidden things of darkness.

Secondly, To Church members, Christ's Servants, this consideration may serve to
awaken and rouse them to inquire into their estate, and not to trust to their
Church membership, as if that would secure them. Some especially Preachers are
apt to think they are owned and approved by God to be faithful, because
entrusted with the work of Preaching; we see that some that prophesied in
Christ's name, cast out Devils, are condemned by him to the lowest place and
severest punishments. Before I come to speak to these three verses, I shall
explain two words in our Text, First, what is here to be understood by trading.

Secondly, What by money.

I Ans. First in general, the whole is a Parable, the design of which is to set
out Heavenly things by earthly, therefore it is no wonder, though Christ speaks
like men in earthly affairs, of money and trading.

Sometimes it is taken for bodily labor, the word ((...)) translated, traded,
is drawn from a Root that signifies business, buying, selling, negotiating in
merchandising, and commonly taken for merchandising, for it is not so properly
labor of body, though sometimes so taken, as labor, of body and mind: but as
I said before it is most properly taken for buying, and selling; so taken in
Joseph's instructions to his Brethren, see Genesis 46.32, 33. their trade has been
in Cattle, or as the Heb. men of Cattle; such as bought, sold, and bred up
Cattle; such as we call Grasiers: so Eze. 27. it is plain that buying and
selling in Fairs, is called trading: So it must be understood, Rev. 18. All
that trade by Sea. So that when Christ says here, they went and traded, he
alludeth to Traffic, to profit, not only labor as a Horse, or fool, but
continuance in it with design of mind, to gain. Our Lords great design in these
three verses is to provoke and stir up his Servants to industry: the word money
is derived from ((...)) pecunia has affinity with the Hebrew ((...)) Coin that
passes among men, of Gold, Silver, brass, or Leather, if it pass in buying;
sometimes it is applied to goods, Household-stuff and the like: it is another
word, Genesis 17.12.31.15.42.25. Exodus 21.21. Where the Servants is said to be his
money, ((...)) argentum called goods or substance, before (...), That which may
stand by it self, a single Lot or part. But what is this money that he hid?

I Ans. That which his Master entrusted him with to trade with, his Talent,
whatever his gift was: for it is spoken in a borrowed speech, money, because
that men trade with.

But for our more orderly proceeding, I shall sum up the whole in these three
verses, into these five Doctrines.

1 Doct. That our Lord Jesus Christ has a trade going, and managed in his
absence, he went and traded.

2 Doct. All Christ's good and faithful and acceptable Servants are traders, or
Merchant men, men of business.

3 Doct. That Christ's trade, the Heavenly trade well managed, turns to great
profit, to Master and Servant.

4 Doct. All Christ's gifts or Talents, are given for use, as well the least as
the greatest.

5 Doct. There are some of Christ's own entrusted Servants, who do not improve
what they receive.

The first of these Doctrines I shall pass by, because I have spoken to it
before; only remember I then spoke of it, as Christ's appointment, but now as
their answer; they went and traded: these are faithful, and are found following
their Masters directions, as we have it, Luke 19.13. (...) negotiamini,
occupate, till come as before to Traffic in Merchandising.

2 Doct. That all Christ's faithful acceptable Servants are traders. This
appears because they are all liable to account. Christ when be comes calls
all to account, what they had gained by trading, Luke 19.15. and he that had
received one ^alent, as well as he that had received five. St. Paul reckons
himself and those with him, Phil. 3.20. traders this way driving a Heavenly
trade, Our Conversation is in Heaven, the word (...), business, freedom of
trade imports Commerce with a correspondent at a distance, we have liberty of
trade as Freemen. That which I shall first do in prosecution of this Doctrine,
shall be to show how a true and faithful Servant of Christ, when he is as
Christ would have him to be, does sitly resemble the highest sort of traders,
Merchants in ten particulars.

A true Servant of Christ bears resemblance to the highest sort of traders in
ten circumstances.

First, He knows the worth of the commodity he trades in; what ever others do
that are out of the way of that trade, he well knows the worth of the Pearl,
Math. 13.46.

Secondly, He is venturesome, not timorous and fearful in laying out his money
in that Commodity: the skilful Merchant is as free and willing to lade his Ship
as he is to unliver it*

Thirdly, He is endued with patience, to wait the return of a long Voyage; he
does not repine because his Ship to the Indies does not return in Five or Six
Months; he has patience to wait for a good, and bear a bad return; he does not
knock off trading because he has had a loss, though great; but goes on still
in his trade: from hence it is that the trading Woman, Prove. 31.17. is said to
have her loins girt w^^^ strength, she is not afraid of the Snow or Cold, she
is armed for it, ver. 21.

Fourthly, The highest sort of traders many times straiten themselves to
enlarge their trade, straiten their home occasions, to venture largely afar; he
takes up goods, borrows money to cast upon the waters, to send out of sight for
the present: Of these Merchant we read in the Parable, Math. 13.44. sells all
he has, to purchase the hidden Pearl, and ver. 45, 46. the Merchant, that has
found one Pearl, sells all he has to buy it. The Pearl is at a distancee; yet
a true Merchant, a trader ventures for it: a true Christian Servant of Christ,
may bear the name of the highest sort of Traders Merchants, so called in the
former Parable.

Fifthly, Great Traders are accustomed to and acquainted with trusting, they
trade for time, three Months, six Months, nine Months, they trade upon Credit
or Faith; and such great Traders have a way of insuring what they venture: this
is their refuge, I will (say they) insure; and let me say this to Christians,
no trade like Christ's trade for trusting, no trade so sure as to its returns:
here Men have need sometimes to insure their insurers; they need not do so who
trade heavenwards, their insurer is able and faithful.

Sixthly, As the highest Traders deal in large quantities of the Commodity,
fill Warehouses, and whole Ships: So the Trader under Christ deals large,
large in his endeavors, large in his Prayers, aims, and expectations. When
Solomon speaks of that Merchant Woman, Prove. 31. he speaks of her as compassing
great things; she considers and buys a Field, She plants a Vineyard: she is not
content only in her lower domestic affairs, but lanches out abroad.

Seventhly, As the highest of Traders, so a Trader under Christ trades at a
great distance; he finds that it is most profitable in its return, though
long: an India Voyage says the Merchant, is better than three or four nearer
Voyages; a Christian drives his trade at a great distance in Heaven. St. Paul
was one of those Traders, Phil. 3.20. his Conversation, his Trade, (as the word
will bear) is in Heaven: It is said of the former Merchant Woman, Pro. 31. she
fetches her food from far.

Eighthly, As the highest sort of trades on earth to foreign parts at a great
distance, have their Correspondent there, who trades there in their behalf, who
negotiates for them in their absence, and sends them their effects and
products: even so a Christian that trades in Heaven, has his Correspondent
there who is acting there for him, even Jesus Christ who is entered into Heaven
for that purpose.

Ninthly, All this trade is driven with mature consideration, and deliberate
counsel, they must be wise men that drive this great trade, such as through
experience are encouraged, such (as Solomon says) Who have their eyes in their
head, a fool will not be a Merchant adventurer, he loves to see what he has
before him.

Tenthly, This trade thus driven brings in great profit. Are not those
Merchants most rich who trade largest and furthest? this trade for Christ
brings thirty, sixty, or a hundred fold in return. Merchants sometimes makes
cent. per cent.

There are three choice commodities that Christ's entrusted Servants trade in,
vent and venture.

First, Making known the truths of Christ in the Gospel in order to Salvation.

Secondly, Charity and Alms.

Thirdly, Sufferings for Christ, and the Gospel. These are stable commodities,
which being rightly managed, never fail of a profitable return.

A word or two to each of these.

First, A word or two to the Talent of knowledge in the Scriptures; and indeed
I might be large upon this head, were I not designed to be brief in the whole.

Now though all Christ's Servants are not entrusted alike herein; yet I am
persuaded that there is not one living member of Christ's house that is not
entrusted with some measure of this kind, namely a word that might be
profitable, though women: Priscilla as well as Aquila, capable to instruct an
Apollos, Acts 18.26. St. Paul writing to the Church of Philippi, chapter 2.
indefinitely exhorts them to shine as lights, and to hold forth the word of
life, and St. Peter, 1 Pet. 4. exhorts as many as had received the gift, he
should minister therein. The Apostle supposes all had not received alike, yet
each had some gift of this kind which ought to be brought forth as occasion is
offered.

Now this Talent is of great use to the world rightly managed. It is true that
some are by the providence of God called to larger opportunities, yet each at
one time or other have an opportunity, if they have a heart to speak, something
in order to the inlightning the World, and there is a duty incumbent on them to
express their Charity to their neighbor, and not to hide this Talent in a
Napkin.

There is an opportunity at one time or other for more weak Christians, if I
may speak in the words of Elihu ( Job 32.) to show their opinion but we must be
careful to observe our time as he did; the Text faith, he waited till his
elders ha^ Ipoken first what they had to say. And see how acceptable this
modest forbearance was to God, Eli^^ is not in the least blamed, he was no
forwarder.

There are two extremes amongst persons in this respect, some will not declare
what they know, no not at any time, either out of too much modesty, or else
from fear of displeasure from those they speak unto.

Others there are that are too forward and pragmatical to thrust forward
themselves, when they are not justly called to it, but possibly the matter
might be better managed by others;

If we would therefore manage and improve our Talent rightly to Gods glory, and
the good of others;

We must observe these rules in our speaking.

First, Be sure thou speak, when if thou do not speak for God and truth, none
else will. It was a proverbal speech amongst the Hebrews, Where there is not a
man, there be thou a man: which may be applied to this case, when truth will
suffer if they be silent, be sure thou speak.

Secondly, When thou openest thy mouth to speak, speak from the honesty and
sincerity of thy heart, not from the height of thy Spirit, not out of pride,
and vain glory, but from these ends.

First, To instruct the ignorant.

Secondly, To reduce those that are out of the way.

Thirdly, To feed those that are hungry.

Fourthly, To strengthen those that are weak.

Fifthly, To confirm those that are feeble and doubting.

Sixthly, To comfort those that are sorrowful.

Seventhly, To encourage those that are fearful.

Eighthly, To provoke those that are slothful.

Ninthly, In all to gods Glory.

When these are thy ends in speaking, or any one of these; it is a sign of an
honest heart.

There are grounds that commonly hinder Persons improving this Talent.

First, Slothfulness and idleness, not willing to trouble themselves

Secondly, Bashfulness, shamefacedness, want of heart and courage, this is as
bad as being too forward.

Thirdly, Some out of fear lest they should bring themselves into trouble or
procure ill will to themselves from others: David was of another mind, Psalm.
34.11. also Psalm. 66.16. He will teach and tell what God has done for his
soul: St. Paul was one that declared the whole Counsel of God, not fearing what
might follow: so did St. Peter and St. John, Act. 4. We cannot but speak what
we have seen and heard: for we were not born for our selves, or entrusted with
life for our selves, Romans 14.7. no man lives to himself: If any of us be
instructed with knowledge in the truths of Christ, we are entrusted with a
Talent, and the Master expects the improvement, that he may receive his own
with usury.

A second Talent to be improved is Riches; with them we are to trade for
Heaven: a Servant of Christ trades in charity, and alms; Charity to the Poor is
fraighting your Ship to Sea a long Voyage for great advantage: Solomen calls
this, casting thy Bread upon the Waters, Eccl. 11.1, 2. Cast thy bread upon the
face of the waters, and after many days thou shall find it: and that to great
advantage, which he expounds ver. 2. to be giving a Portion to seven and eight.
The Merchant casts his estate upon the face of the Waters; this is the trade
that our Lord advises to, under the Parable of the unjust Steward, Luke 16. So
does the Apostle St. Paul 1 Timothy 6.17. it is a trade that brings certain and
large profit.

Thirdly, Suffering for Christ and his truth, is a Talent that some are called
to trade in: and Christ's chiefest Servants have a Talent given them in this
kind, Phil. 1.29. To you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe, but to suffer for his sake: (it is given to you,) and he that gives
expects improvement of this gift, and not to hide it for fear. These three are
the stable Commodities that Christ's Servants venture in; and they all turn to a
rich account, which brings me to the second Doctrine which was this.

2 Doct. That this Trade for Christ well managed, turns to great profit and
advantage to Master and Servant.

This Doctrine I only make use of as a Motive to the former: in handling this
Doctrine I shall First, Prove the Doctrine. Secondly, Instance in particulars.
Thirdly, Answer a Question as to the time of this return. Fourthly, Apply the
whole.

First, For proof, we have it set forth in this Parable, Five Talents make Ten,
according to Luke 19. One Pound makes Ten. What Solomon says, Prove. 3. is
true, The Merchandise hereof is better than the Merchandise of Silver or Gold;
that is so say, in the increase of it. What St. Paul says to Timethy, Tim.
4.8. is true here, Godliness is great gain.

Secondly, To instance in particulars. First, Improving the Talent of
knowledge, in Ministering light in order to Conversion, Dan. 12.2. Such shall
shine as Stars for ever and ever, Pro. 11.30. He that wins Souls is wise,
and the wise shall inherit Glory, Prove. 3.35. Those that St. Paul converted are
his Joy and Crown at Christ's appearing, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19.

Secondly, As to Charity, a Cup of cold Water, where no better is to be ^ad,
shall have a large reward; any thing forsaken for Christ shall bring in a
hundred fold. I have spoken to this before.

Thirdly, As to sufferings for Christ, those that suffer with him shall reign,
Rev. 7. therefore are they before the Throne, because they came out of great
tribulations. These three ventures makes great returns if rightly managed, to a
right end, with a good design.

Thirdly, But when is this return and increase? I answer, When the Voyage is
made, when Christ the Master comes at the Resurrection of the Just; those that
trade this way, must trust till then; and all Christ's Servants have good
Insurance on Gods side, the reward is very sure; some are apt to look for their
returns too soon, and to have lost all; have a care of that, He that believes
makes not haste. I shall speak a few words briefly, by way of Application to
both parties. Are all Christ's faithful Servants Traders, and is it a
distinguishing Character between the faithful and slothful, that the good
Servant traded, he went and traded?

1 Use. Then these considerations should put Christians upon examination and
inquity into their estate: Ask thy soul seriously this Question, What trade
do thou drive, and to what port do thou trade, to the Port of Heaven or
Hell? the Apostle in other words speaks the same thing, Gal. 6.7. Whatever a
Man sow, that shall he also reap: he that sow^ to the flesh, and he that sows
to the Spirit, reaps accordingly: whither do thou trade, do thou trade for
Heaven?

Then First, Thou have thy heart concerned in the trade, and not only thy hands
and body, it takes up thy heart: Where thy treasure is, says Christ, thy heart
will be also: those that trade this way are men of judgment and understanding
in what they do; it is the fruit of wildom to consider our latter end, Deuteronomy.
32.29. Psalm. 90. and to provide for it.

Secondly, Do thou trade this way, thou do not think what thou venturest in
this trade is lost, because it is out of sight; but he goes on comfortably,
and believingly, though the greatest part of his estate is beyond the grave.
The Apostle St. Paul was a worthy Merchant for Heaven, do but read his frame of
Spirit, 2 Cor. 4 5. he speaks like a man of great estate, though most of it
ventured out; but in Chap. 5. v. 7^ We walk by faith, and not by sight; so
Phil. 3. last. These Me^chants are high in their Spirits, though low in their
Purse^ they are Persons of great hope, Romans 12.12. Rejoice in hope; it is the
true nature of a Trader Heaven ward to look, wait and expect returns, 1 Cor.
1.7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Titus 2.11 and such as look shall not be ashamed, Heb. 9.28.

2 Use. Of exhortation, Be per^waded each of you to understand your particular
Talent that you are entrusted with. First, Know it. Secondly, Stir it up.
Labor to know what it is God has principally entrusted thee with, either in
quality or quantity; some have one, some another, see 1 Cor. 12.4. diversities
of gift; some have inward intrustments, some outward entrust ments, and God
expects the improvement of all.

Secondly, When thou know thy gift, stir it up; it was St. Paul's Counsel to
Timothy, To stir up the gift that was in him 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Pet. 4. As every one
has received the gist, so let him Minister; whether in spirituals, or in
temporal^; therefore labor to know that herein lies thy great wisdom as a
Christian trader to vent and venture; do not keep thy goods in thy Warehouse,
but send them abroad; cast thy Bread upon the Waters: and to encourage thee,
know that whatever thou venturest in this trade to this Port, is certainly and
fully insured; and this St. Paul knew what he had committed this way was safe,
2 Timothy 1.12 Pro. 11.18. He that sows to righteousness, shall have a sure
reward. Secondly, (...) venturing and venting what you are entrusted with, do
it upon the most acceptable terms; act as a wise Steward in each intrustment.

Lastly, Admire the great love and respect Christ bears to his Servants, in
this one consideration; that what Taient soever Christ intrusts his Servants
with, is for their own good and profit, not his; he puts a stock into your
hands to manage, the stock and product shall be thy own, himself is not
profited, but thou have the product of all thy ventures. So I have done with
the second Doctrine. We now proceed to the third Doctrine which was this.

3 Doct. That all Christ's gifts and intrustments are for use, as well small as
great, two and one as well as five; Christ expects improvement of the least
Tale^ if but one; those that have but little are not excused from service.
Those under the Law that could not serve God with a Lamb, must bring two Turtle
Doves or two young Pigeons; and if not so much, then a tenth part of an Ephah
of Flower, Levit. 5.7, 11. out of his little, he must sacrifice a little, none
must appear empty; but as God had entrusted each of them with abilities, so
they were to offer according to what he had received; the poor Widow was
accepted with her farthing, and it appears that it was not only accepted, but
expected, Luke 21. from hence a Cup of cold Water given to a Disciple is
rewarded; but where much is given, there much is required; and that Servant
that had so little knowledge as it is called, not knowing his Masters will, yet
he is beaten with few stripes for not improving that little, Luk 12.42. he
expects improvement of little gifts and intrustments.

Use of this Doctrine, This may serve to take off those excuses that many are
apt to make, that they are very weak and poor, their gifts are small, therefore
they will do nothing; consider that if thou have but one Talent, it is Christ's
Talent and gift as well as five.

Secondly, Be encouraged to improve, for by improvement thy little may be made
more; for to him that has (to improve) shall be given, and he shall have
abundance, Luke 19.26.

Thirdly, For incouragemen^, Consider that thou with thy little, art as truly a
Servant of Christ, as if thou had a great deal; that Servant was Christ's own
Servant unto whom he gave one Talent, as much as he to whom he gave five; and
he that improved two, is admitted into his Masters joy as well as the other.

Fourthly, Consider for thy encouragement the equity of thy Master, he requires
but according to what he gives, if he gives more he requires more, if less he
requires less.

Fifthly, Have a special care of hiding or concealing thy intrustments, that is
a great evil, and upon what pretense soever done is greatly punishable, which
leads me to the last Doctrine from these words which was this.

That amongst Christ's Servants there are some that obscure, hide, or conceal
those Talents which they have received from Christ; this Christ foresaw, that
in his absence near his coming he should have some such Servants. We have a bad
Servant of Christ in this Chap, described under three similitudes.

First, A foolish Virgin. Secondly, Under the similitude of (...) idle Servant.
Thirdly, By a Goat; these are all un^^^ofitable to Christ. The Virgins afford
him no ^ight, when he has most need; the Goat affords him ^o raiment, as the
Sheep; the slothful Servant brings him in no increase in his stock or money;
these Servants are all doomed alike to punishment, the foolish Virgins shut out
with, I know you not; the slothful Servant into utter darkness, the Goats into
Hell fire. From whence we may gather, that there is an indispensable duty upon
all Christ's Servants, to be industrious and faithful in improving what they
have received from Christ, more or less; Oh! have a special care of a fearful
frame of Spirit, the fearful are excluded as well as the abounuable; this frame
of Spirit has hindered many from improving their Talents, as I shall show you
afterward from Verse 25. I was asraid, and hid thy Yalent; our Lord had a taste
of this before he went from some we read of John 12.42. the Text says, Many
believed on him but durst not confess him, lest thgy should be cast out of the
Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men, more than of God: and consequently
feared the frowns of men.

Object. But some may Object, Is hiding and concealing what we have received
such a sin? Do we not read of some that hid Christ's sayings? and does not David
hide Gods word in his heart? and does not Solcmon call to his Sons, Prove.
12.23. to conceal knowledge in their heart? To which I answer, We read of a
twofold hiding in Scripture: First, A hiding from a choice respect we have to a
thing, in order to a safe keeping. Secondly, A hiding from use and improvement.
This latter hiding is sinful in spirituals; to hide what Talent Christ does
entrust us with, is next door to the sin of rejecting a Talent and refusing to
receive it.

Now in handling this Doctrine, I shall briefly speak a few words to each of
these four heads. First, I shall open what this one Talent is that he hides.
Secondly, When a Person may be said to hide his Talent. Thirdly, Show some
causes hereof. Fourthly, Speak a word of use to the whole. By this one Talent
cannot be understood some one distinct gift or indowment, but rather a weaker
or smaller measure, of what others are more largely entrusted with.

Secondly, By hiding, is not to expose it to public view, it is opposed to
trading with it, to hide is this, when a Person has received from God gifts,
but none can see it, nor perceive thou have it; to hide is opposed to standing
forth with light, see Deuteronomy. 22.1. so Isa. 58.7. Not to hide himself from his
own flesh, is to put forward to help. So to hide thy Talent, is when thou do
not put it forth to service.

Secondly, There is a comparative hiding, when a Person can put forth his light
in smaller and less dangerous opportunities, and keep it in, in more large
opportunities Timothy professed a good profession before many witnesses. But some
may object and say, Am not I forbid to cast Pearl before Swine? I answer, We
ought to be so wise as to know out times and seasons, and to see when a door is
opened to Gods Glory, and the good of others.

Thirdly, There is a hiding our Talents by a corrupt conversation; let a Man
say what he will if he do not live to it, it gives no light; we read of some
Romans 1. Who withhold the truth in unrighteousness, or imprison or conceal; to
the end the Philippians might shine, they must be harmless or blameless, Phil.
2.16. walking honestly among the Gentiles, is a great duty, to the end our
Talen^ might be improved. As to the third head I shall be very brief, because I
have spoken something to it before. I shall only in this place offer to
consideration two occasional grounds of this hiding thei^alent and not trading
and improving, and we have them both in the Text. First, F^ar. Secondly, An
hard opinion of God; these two may be reduced into one, they depend one upon
another, a hard opinion of God makes him afraid, a hard opinion of God does
sweetly comply and comport with a slothful Person; is feeds this humor of
sloth; but I shall meet with this more properly in his place when we come at it
only a few words by way of use from the whole. And First,

Be exhorted from hence, not to hide or conceal what God has entrusted thee
with; stand forth as occasion is offered, and thy help called for, whether in
knowledge, estate, sufferings for Christ. It is reported of St. Peter and St.
John, Act. 5.41. That they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for Christ's name. They accounted this a worthy intrustment. It is a
dangerous evil to hide our Talent, and of a bad consequence, from these six
considerations.

First, By hiding thy Talent God loses his Glory, which was one end of his
intrusting thee, it is all one at if he had entrusted thee with none, if it be
concealed; therefore our Lord exhorts his Disciples, Math. 5.16. that they
should Let there lights so shine, that men seeing their good works, might
glorify their Father which is in Heaven.

Secondly, If thou hidest thy Talent, the Church loses her profit thereby;
every gift is given for the good of the Body, the comfort and edification of
the Body; therefore if thy Talent be hidden, the body has loss, if thou halt
light it must be set upon a Cardlestick, that it may give light to all that are
in the House, it must not be put under a Bushel.

Thirdly, If thou hidest thy Talent, the World are great losers, thou do not
discharge that duty that is incumbent on thee, as to them. Ye are to be in
Christ's absence, the light of the World, holding forth the word of truth.

Fourthly, Trading and improving thy Talents in a day when opportunity
presents, will be a great comfort to thee in an evil day, when thou have not
that opportunity; doubtless Solomon's argument to enforce charity has strength
in it, Eccl. 11 2. For thou know not when evil may be on the earth. Job
draws much comfort from this in the evil day, see Chap. 6.10. I have not
concealed the words of the Holy One; and so does David draw comfort from the
same root, Psalm. 40. when innumerable evils compassed him about. Verse the
(...) That he had not hid Goderighteousness in his heart, but had declared and
preached it in the great congregation.

Fifthly, Hiding our Talent, when called to put it forth, tends to our own
eternal ruin; you may remember sufferings for Christ, I told you, is one of
those intrustments we a^^ to trade with; if this be hid, see what follows, Mark
8.38. If any are ashamed of Christ. (which is the same thing) he will be
ashamed, or hide himself from them, when he comes in his Glory attended with
his Angels; he that hides his Talent is cast into utter dackness.

Sixthly, Consider that in all the Talents thou art entrusted with, thou art
but a Steward for thy Master; and thou art not only to receive and lay up, but
receive and lay out; if thou have more than another, it is put into thy hands
for others as well as thy self. So I have done with the fourth head.

We now proceed to the Fifth head contained Verse Nineteenth propounded to be
handled in our speaking to this Parable, which was the return of the Master
from his long Journey from Earth to Heaven. Now he returns from Heaven to Earth
again, this is the return spoken of in this Parable, this return of Christ was
foretold by Christ before his going away.

We have in this nineteenth Verse four circumstantial considerations.

First, The certainty of Christ's return. It has been already sufficiently
proved, that Jesus Christ is the subject of our Text.

Secondly, We have clearly supposed in this Text, and taken for granted, the
capacity that Christ in that his return shall come in; he comes clothed and
invested with power and dominion, he has received the kingdom that he went to
receive, according to Luke 19.15. and to return having received it. It is plain
that when Christ comes to reckon with his Servants, he is entrusted with the
kingdom; if you should ask me what kingdom? I answer, that kingdom prophesied
of Dan. 7.13, 14. and 17. under the whole Heaven, which our last Prophet John
also, Rev. 11.15. foresaw, the kingdoms of this World, shall become the
kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ; when all tongues, nations, and languages
shall serve him. That Christ has received this Kingdom when he comes is plain,
from Math. 22. the King comes in to see the guests, the Lord of those Servants
comes.

The Third circumstance considerable in this Verse, is considerable as to the
period that Christ supposes, expressed here after a long time; a long time
between his going away and coming: it is the opinion of most that it will be
near 2000 years, therefore he is said to go a far and long Journey.

The Fourth circumstance considerable, is the work he propounds chiefly to do
when he comes, and that is to reckon with them; After a long time the Lord of
those Servants comes, and reckons with them.

Before I lay down those conclusions that do naturally arise from these words,
I shall explicate and explain some words and passages in them. As First, What
kind of coming is this spoken of here. Secondly, What is this long time.
Thirdly, Who are intended by those Servants. Fourthly, What here is to be
understood by reckoning.

First, This coming of Christ must be understood of his real personal coming,
therefore it is said 1 Thessalonians. 4. the Lord himself shall descend. As the kingdom
that Christ receives is a real kingdom properly understood, so is Christ a real
proper and personal King: this kingdom was given him before his Ascension, as
we have it Math. 28. and last, All power in Heaven and Earth is given to me:
But we must make a difference between a kingdom given, and a kingdom received;
a Person may have a Legacy given him by Will, several years before he do
actually possess it, and so it is here: It is a certain truth, that when Christ
has received this kingdom, he is submitted unto by all Nations and People,
they shall serve and obey him.

Christ in this his return, must needs be in as real a state as when he went
away, Act. 1.11. As ye see me go, So I come again, in a Visible appearance,
Rev. 1.7. every Eye shall see him, not a spiritual invisible appearance or
coming as some would have it in the Spirit, but a real coming such as shall
amaze his enemies; those that are his enemies shall call for the Rocks to hide
them from the sight of him, Rev. 6.

But what is this long time? I answer, First, It may properly be called a long
time in its self, from his Ascension to his second Coming, as I said before
near 2000 years. Secondly. A long time as considered to Man, considered many
generations pass in this time. Thirdly, A long time as with respect to his
faithful Servants longing desires; they think it long, they think the
Bridegroom tarrys: but how shall we reconcile this long time with a little
while, commonly set out by Heb. 10.38. Yet a little while and he shall come, so
John 16.17. A little while and I will see you again

I answ, Sometimes a little and a long time is understood as to Godward; a
little time with God, is a long time with Man; this St. Peter seems to argue, 2
Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack as some men countslackness. Men count it a long
time; but a 1000 years with God, is but as one day; so here according as men
count, it is a long time, but all things with God are present. Secondly, It is
a long time comparatively understood, long in comparison of the time; after
such and such things shall appear, then it is but a little time. After this
manner Christ speaks, Ioh. 16. When the Churches sorrows are at the highest and
sharpest, then it is but a little before Christ comes, see Hab. 2.4. compared
with Heb. 10.37. when such thangs appear; then yet a little time, and he that
shall come will come: so must it be understood, Luke 21.31. Then it is near,
even at the door. The third thing to be inquired after, who are those Servants
intended, called here those Servants? I answer, By those are to be understood
the Servants indefinitely considered, for this is a relation to Verse
fourteenth, called there his own Servants indefinitely considered, such as he
had entrusted with his substance, those Servants. Fourthly, What is this
reckoning with them? this word (...) is drawn from a word that signifies to
speak or reason; and some render it speaking with them, some to reason with
them: And indeed Christ's reckoning with them, is only a fair reasoning with
them, as we see by the following Verses; for our Lord admits of a reply, the
Servant speaks in his own defense as long as he has a word to speak, and then
out of his own mouth Christ condemns him, for every mouth must be stopped, and
all the World shall become guilty before God, as we may see in the Parable of
the Laborers. Math. 20.18. see there how Christ reasons with them, Friend I do
thee no wreng, did not thou agree with me for a penny? So here did I not find
thee slack, thou were only required to put it forth; thou did herein but
venture mine, not thy own: thus Christ reckons with them or reasons rather.
Before I proceed I shall sum up the matter of this Text into ^ Doctrines.

1 Doct. That although it may seem long first, yet Jesus Christ shall come
again; though his journey be far and long, yet his return is sure and certain:
After a long time the Lord of those Servants comes.

2 Doct. That Jesus Christ in his next and second coming, comes clothed with
dominion; he comes as the Lord of those Servants.

3 Doct. One of the great and first businesses propounded by Christ to be
entered upon at and in his next coming, is to reckon, reason, and deal with his
own Servants. Though he will judge the World, yet he does begin at his own
House first: As the Servants of Christ are raised first, 1 Cor. 15. Rev. 20 so
they shall be judged first, this is a certain truth. But for brevity sake I
shall in the handling of the first Doctrine, endeavor to draw in these two
latter Doctrines if I can.

This great truth of Christ's second coming, has been richly placed upon the
hearts of Gods people from the beginning of the World. This return of Christ
was seen of Enoch who lived in the beginning of the World, he prophesied of his
second coming. See the Testimony of the Apostle Jude, Behold the Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints. This the Prophet Zachary prophesies of Zac.
14.5. The Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee This St. Paul to
the Thessalonians speaks of, see 1 Thessalonians. 3. c. 4. c. 5. And it is observable
that more than twenty times our Lord hints and foretells his second coming
again before he went away.

As we may find in Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, it was frequent with Christ
before he went to foretell his coming. And that from these reasons.

First, Because this was a rich truth, therefore it dwelt richly upon Christ's
heart, he did not go away as not to come again ^he knew well, for his
exaltation, that where he suffered he should come again and be glorified, out
Lord was willing to leave this truth upon record, as from himself as well as
from his Prophets before.

Secondly, This truth our Lord is very careful to assert and strengthen, as
well knowing that this would be a truth much questioned and doubted by his
Disciples, and opposed and mocked at by enemies. The Disciples and Servants of
Christ intend little less. Luke 12.45. when they say their Lord delays his
coming, and thereupon fall to beating their fellow Servants, and eating and
drinking with the drunken, and what does it import less, when it is so often
said that Christ shall come in a day when they are not aware, nor look not for
him? and the World in general are destitute of faith in this second coming of
Christ; this St. Peter foresaw, 2 Pet. 3.9. they mock and scoff at such a
principle, therefore our Lord does often hint and assert his second coming,
that he might strengthen that part that was weak.

Thirdly. This our Lord is frequent in to assert his second coming before his
going away, to strengthen and encourage their hearts as to a truth that would
much contribute to their joy, for what could more contribute to their comfort
and joy, than the thoughts and belief of Christ's coming? This is their
encouragement in all their tribulations, and to that end it is applied by
Christ, John 16. I will come and see you again. To the same end does the
Apostle James apply it, Iam. 5. Be patient Brethren, the coming of the Lord
draws nigh. Christ well knew that it would be the joy and life of his Disciples
to hear of his coming again, who were so sorrowful at his going away. And there
are four chioce privileges in Christ's second coming, that make it very
desirable to his Disciples.

First, At this his coming, there is an end put to all temptations Satan can
tempt no more nor can they sin any more, the righteousness of Saints, that is
now liable to blemishes, and corruptions, but shall then be pure and permanent,
then he that is righteous shall be righteous still.

Secondly, At the Masters coming, the Servants are discharged from all their
work, and from all their intrustments, their commission then expires, it is but
occupy till I come, then they are to enter into their Masters joy, no longer
Servants but rulers over Cities, what thou have (says Christ) hold fast till I
come, Rev. 2.27. then will I discharge thee, nay says our Lord if thou servest
me faithfully till then, I will gird my self and serve thee.

Thirdly, At Christ's coming thou shall not only be taken off from all thy work,
but largely rewarded for thy work done, now as the hireling longs for the
evening, because he might receive his wages. Job 7.2. so a Servant of Christ
has reason and allowance to look for his reward, and long for it also.

Fourthly, He shall not only then receive his wages and reward for his work,
but great praise also for hi^ work; see 1 Cor. 4.5. Thon shall every man have
praise of God: so Romans 2. last. Whose praise is not of men, but of God, 1 Pet.
17. found unto praise then; and it is no small privilege to have praise of
God, for Christ to praise a poor soul at that day is a great privilege, this
was the case with the faithful Servant, Well done good and faithful Servant.
For a King in such state and glory, to praise and commend a poor creature, how
ravishing a privilege is it! Quest. A faithful Servant of Christ for these
reasons desires his second coming, but why is it said after a long time the
Lord of these Servants comes? I Ans.

1. Because our Lord foresaw that some would be apt to look for him too soon:
there are two extremes that persons are apt to be attended with, in the latter
days, as to Christ's second coming, as we may perceive by the Apostles
application to each of them in Scriptures: there are some that are apt to look
for him too soon, to such the Apostle St. Paul addresseth himself, 2 These. 2.
with much ardency and affection to divert their expectations, seeing it to be a
dangerous opinion.

Secondly, We may perceive there are some also who are apt to put this day far
away from them: to these St. Peter applies himself, 2 Pet. 3. because all
things continue as they were from the beginning, therefore they conclude it
would not come at all; to such he asserts his coming: but the day of the Lord
will come notwithstanding his seeming long tarrying.

Now as to the 2 Doct. I shall take it in prosecution of this Doctrine, and
from thence speak unto the nature of Christ's second coming, which (according to
the second Doctrine) is as clothed with dominion. The Lord of those Servants
he comes clothed with such power that when he is but demanding a question of
him that had not on the wedding garment, he is struck speechless, see Math.
22.11 When the King came in to see the guests. And the very sight of Christ in
his coming, causes the greatest men on earth to call to the Rocks and
Mountains to fall on them, and hide them from his face, Rev. 6.

The use that we may make of these three Doctrines put together is, first by
way of examination.

First, How does thy heart breath after thy Masters coming, do thou fear it,
or do thou desire it, how is it with thee, if thou art a wicked Servant, thou
may justly fear thy Masters coming from a five fold Consideration.

First, He comes to thee as a person who have abused his tender mercy, and
favors, which will greatly aggravate thy sorrows, and fears, and justly
provoke God against thee.

Secondly, That great power that Christ in this his coming is clothed with, is
all against thee, to crush thee, and destroy thee.

Thirdly, Christ to such is clothed with as much wrath as power, and all his
power is subservient to his wrath, which shall make all sinners (though in
Zion) afraid with great fear, see Esa. 33.14. The sinners in Zion are afraid,
and fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrite. Then in that day he that has
been for a long time a Lamb, meek, gentle, and patient, shall then be a Lion,
which shall tear and rend, and none shall deliver out of his hands.

Fourthly, This day is sad, because they shall lose all that they have wrought,
though thou have prophesied or Preached, cast out Devils, done many mighty
works, all is in vain.

Fifthly, Then no more opportunity or intrustment, no Trial more! then the
Summer is past, the Harvest is ended, and such are not saved, it is a sad word,
Ier. 8.20.

Secondly, By way of Trial, art thou a faithful Servant? then,

First, Thou believe Christ's coming, thou believe the Principle that he
shall come, this was the Faith of all Christ's faithful Servants, they could
say, he that shall come, will come.

Secondly, If thou be a faithful Servant, thou are preparing for his coming,
so as to endeavor to have all the work done against he come.

Thirdly, Thou prayest for his coming, it is one petition in thy prayer with
St. John, Rev. 22. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Fourthly, If thou be one of Christ's Disciples, thou rejoycest in the faith
and thoughts of Christ's coming. As it was proper for Christ's Servants to sorrow
at Christ's going away from earth to Heaven, John 1.4^ chapter 16. So they rejoice
in his coming from Heaven, to Earth: what the Prophet Esaiah. Chapter 25.9
Prophesies is true in this, they shall say, Lo this is our God, we have waited
for him, and he will save us, this is the Lord, we have waited for him, and he
will save us. We will rejoice and be glad in his Salvation. Examine thy self by
these rules whether thou art a faithful Servant or no, if thou be a faithful
Servant, thou have no cause to be troubled or afraid at Christ's coming: he
comes to them (as you have heard before) as a Bridegroom, which bespeaks i^ to
be a day of great joy and Glory.

The Third thing to be inquired into, (and which takes in the third Doctrine)
is what Christ at this his coming shall enter upon first, the answer lies in
the text, to Judge his own house, called here reasoning, or reckoning with them.

Christ's own Servants must be judged first, the first piece of justice
dispensed by Christ, is to his own Servants, they must be judged, see 1 Cor.
4.5. compared with 2 Cor 5.10. for we must all appear before the Judgment seat
of Christ (says St. Paul) he comprehends himself, and that he may first
judge them, he first raises then out of their graves, as we have it, 1 Cor.
15.23. they that are Christ's (that is to say his own) shall be raised at his
coming, which is plain 1 These. 4. Those that sleep in Jesus will God bring with
him, which agrees with Rev. 20. And there is much and good reason why Christ
shall judge his house first, and set that in order, and acquit the guiltless
and faithful.

First, Because the Saints must join with him in judging World according to the
1 Corinthians, 6.2. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World. Therefore
they cannot be tried at the same Bar, but must be cleared before, and then they
enter into their Masters joy, Glory, and Dominion.

Use. By way of Use, First, from hence we may learn this plain and wholesome
truth, that even Christ's Disciples must be tried and judged. Some have been
ready to think that Saints should not be judged any otherwise than what they
meet with in themselves, 1 Cor. 11. because St. Paul says if they would judge
themselves, they should not be judged of the

For answer to which, I say, that Paul there speaks of Temporal not Eternal
Judgment, present Chastisement, as we may perceive by the Context.

I shall only leave two words with Christ's servants, and close this, viz.
First, a word of Information. Secondly, a word of Exhortation.

First then, from what has been said, be informed that this long time of
Christ's tarrying is almost at an end, his time draws very near. Therefore in
the Second place, seeing his coming is to take account of his own Servants;
endeavor to calculate all thy actions and doings for this day. Take Paul's
Counsel to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5.9. labor so to discharge your duties as
you may be accepted of him. So we have done with verse 19.

We now proceed to the matter and manner of Christ's reasoning or reckoning. We
had before from ver. 19. That Christ comes to reckon with his servants; we have
here the matter of fact, the reckoning it self. And this reckoning I shall
divide into two parts. First, a reckoning with the industrious; Secondly, with
the slothful Servants.

I shall begin with the Industrious and Faithful in Christ's house first,
because that lies first here in order; and because the reckoning is so
interwoven and mixed with the reward, I shall at once glance at these four
verses, 20, 21, 22, 23.

20. And so he that had received five Talents, came and brought other five
Talents, saying; Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five Talents; behold, I have
gained besides them five Talents more.

21. His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful Servant, thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things:
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

22. He also that had received two Talents, came and said, Lord thou
deliveredst unto me two Talents behold I gave gained other two Talents besides
them.

23. His Lord said unto him, Well done good and Faithful Servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler over many things: enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord.

In handling this latter part of the Parable I shall be very brief, because I
have anticipated much of the matter before in what I have spoken as to this
parable.

We have contained in this reckoning these two Subjects, Reckoning and
Recompense.

1. It must be supposed that this Reckoning or Account is called for by Christ,
not that they came voluntarily and offered themselves to trial, because it is
here said, he came: For according to Luke 19.15. the parallel place says, he
commanded them to be called, or brought, who had been entrusted with his Coin
or Substance. However the Servants are willing to come to account, and the best
first. Our Lord in this his Reckoning begins with two Questons, as must be
employed: First, what have thou received? Secondly what have thou gained? To
both which Christ's servants are ready to return an answer.

In our glance upon this Reckoning, we have something remarkable first, as to
Christ's servants; Secondly, something remarkable as from the Lord. We have two
things considerable as to the servants.

First, We have the willingness and freeness to make an acknowledgment of what
they are charged with. We find Christ charge one with five, one with two, and
another with one; and herein there is no difference, their Accounts, though of
so long standing, agree; no difference in their Account, here is right
reckoning on both hands.

Secondly, as considerable in Christ's Servants, they are ready to produce
their Effects more or less, as to acknowledge the Stock, and to expose it to
their Master and to his use, it is ready for him; behold, I have gained besides
them five Talents more; I have doubled. I pray take notice (behold) he has a
desire to have his Account past, he is forward therein.

Secondly; we have something worthy observation in their Lord. First, we have
their Lord's good resentment, and choice acceptance of their Account and
Returns, their good service wins much upon their Lord's heart. But secondly, it
appears in his assigned Reward hereupon; which consists in two parts. First,
Rule. Secondly, Joy. The nature of which Joy we have explained and called their
Master's Joy. The next thing I shall do in prosecution of this Subject, is, to
explain some words and phrases in these words; as first, When may a servant be
said to double his Taent. Secondly, When may a servant of Christ be by Christ
called good. Thirdly, What are those few things spoken of in which he had been
faithful? Fourthly, What is this Rule that shall be an eminent part of the
servants reward? Fifthly, What kind of Joy may this be understood to be, called
the Master's Joy. A word to each of these.

First, When does he double, or make such a satisfactory increase?

Answ. Thy Gain does lie in three heads. First, Gain in Grace. Secondly, Gain
souls to Christ. Thirdly, Gain in glory to God and Christ.

First. Thou art an acceptable Servant, or Gainer, when thou have gained
increase in the Gifts and Graces that God has bestowed on thee. It is a
Christian's duty to multiply and add to what he has received of this kind. To
grow in grace is a positive duty, 2 Pet. 3.18. And that this is wonderfully
acceptable to God where there is an addition, we may perceive, if we seriously
read 2 Pet. 1. to the tenth verse, this is called Fruit, Phil. 4.17. Not that I
desire a Gift (says- Paul) but I desire fruit that may abound to your account.

Secondly, Then are you gainers with acceptance, when your Talent by improving
has gained souls to Christ, more Servants into the Master's family. This is
Christ's glory, Heb. 2. Here am I, and my Children: how many Servants have thou
Gained and begotten to Christ? This shall be thy Glory and Crown in the day of
Christ; this is Paul's glory, 1 These. 2. last.

Thirdly; That which is thy acceptable Gain, is, when thou have walked so, as
to gain glory to God and Christ by thy walkings: Matthew. 5.16. That they may
glorify thy Father which is in heaven. It was that which Jesus Christ pleaded
to his Father, Joh. 17. I have glorified thee on earth; and these will God
glorify in heaven. This is to walk worthy of God, 1 These. 2.12. and worthy of
Glory.

2. How may a Servant of Christ deserve the name good? None is good but God.

I Answer. None is good in the abstract but God; good so as to have no mixtures
of evil: but some are called good, as Barnabas, Acts 11.24. is said to be a
good man: but good in the fence of the text must be taken for one profitable
and beneficial; so we understand a good Servant to us is a profitable Servant,
one that is faithful in our business to our profit; the good Servant here is as
much as if he had said, profitable Servant.

3. What are these few things?

By few things we must refer to the Talents as before; the few things are the
five Talents; the Master undervalues his intrustments to magnify the profit of
the Servant. Christ speaks with the least, byway of diminution from what he had
entrusted him with; I trusted thee with but a few things; Christ takes notice
of all disadvantages in quality and quantity, that he might advance the
Faithfulness of his Servants to him, Thou have been faithful in a few things.

4. What Rule shall this be as part of the Servants reward?

I Answer. The same that Christ's shall be; as the Joy, so the Rule. It is
material Command, and Government, Rev. 2.27. Rule over the nations with Christ,
as here over ten Cities.

5. When As here it is called the Masters Joy, it implys a very large and
unspeakable Joy: Joy in this fence is not only Goodness but Glory. Christ is
said to be anointed with the oil of Gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. but
his fellows shall have some of the same anointings; though not so much in
quantity, yet the same in quality and kind, it is the Joy of the Lord. There
are ten Parts observable in these words.

1. That the best and highest entrusted Servants of Christ must be accountable
for their stock received: such as have received five Talents.

2. A True and Faithful Servant of Christ is very free and apt to acknowledge
all his Enjoyments and Intrustments to be of God; Thou deliveredst unto me five
Talents.

3. Where Christ has given Stock, he does indispensibly require Improvements.

4. Winning and gaining, is the required and acceptable life of a Christian.

5. That Jesus Christ is exceedingly pleased, even to satisfaction with
delight, with an industrious Servant, one that doubles his Stock.

6. Faithfulness and industry, sloathfulness and wickedness are taken on for
another by Christ.

7. Christ's way of trying his Servants is by trusting them with a little
first, called here few things.

8. The well improvement of a little in Spirituals, does infallibly introduce
and bring in increase.

9. Future Rule is one great part of Christ's future Reward to his Faithful
Servants for their industry.

10. That the state and Condition of Christ's Servants at his Coming, is a
state of great Joy. Of these a few words.

I shall pass these Observations very briefly, because I have spoken something
in the opening of the words to some of them.

First; That the best and highest of Christ's Servants must be accountable to
Christ at his Coming. This is often hinted in the Scriptures; those two
Scriptures, Romans 14. 2 Cor. 5.10. Paul takes in himself, We must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ: to receive the things done in the body,
whether they be good, or bad: the good must be brought there as well as the
bad. This Truth (is at least) implicitly held forth, in the message of Christ
to Pergamos. Those that are praiseworthy must receive a white-stone, a token
of their Acquitting and Justification, which is spoken in a borrowed speech,
from the manner of the proceedings of the Courts of Judicature in those days;
when persons were acquitted they had a white-stone given into their hands.
Which does teach us that the innocent as well as the guilty, the faithful as
well as the wicked Servant, must be reckoned with; this is the day of blotting
out the sins of true converted persons. See Acts 3.19. this is the proper time
when those praise worthy shall receive praise of God, 1 Cor. 4.5. The
Consideration of this truth serves to teach humility and holiness; thy actions
must be examined by Jesus Christ before thou art commended; whatsoever men say
of thee or account of thee, that is the day of manifestation of thy
Faithfulness. This well considered, will much promote Holiness and Carefulness.
2 Cor. 5.9. Wherefore we labor that we may be accepted of him. So much for the
First Part.

2. Part. The true and Faithful Servants of God are free and ready to
acknowledge all their enjoyments and intrustments are of God. This I might
largely prove from the Current of Scriptures; but I forbear to be large; only
see what Paul says, 2 Cor. 3.5. but our sufficiency is of God. And as they are
ready to acknowledge whilst they are here, so they are as ready to acknowledge it
to Christ at his appearance, as in our Text. And all this arises from that
principle of humility dwelling in them, which makes them little in their own
eyes both now and then. Read the frame of Spirit that dwelt upon Holy and
Humble Paul, 2 Cor. 4. I shall only leave this one word of instruction from
hence; Study how acceptable this frame of Spirit is to Christ when he finds
it, either now or then.

Part. 3. When Stock is given, there is improvement indispensibly required; the
Contrary will not be born by God or Christ. This I have spoken unto before.

Part. 4. That the right state of Christ is a Winning Gaining state. If thy
State be right, as it ought to be, thou art gaining, increasing, and adding in
the inward man. This is a true and a proper Character of a righteous and holy
person, Job 17.9. he grows stronger and stronger. The Father, who is the
husbandman, purges his vine, John. 15. that it may bring forth more Fruit.
This I have touched upon before.

Part. 5. Jesus Christ is pleased even to delight in an industrious improving
Soul. Jesus Christ is herein like a frugal man in the world, he loves to see
his tenants and Servants thrive under him. The Spirit of Paul was the same that
dwelt in Christ, when he was glad and rejoiced in the Thessalonians increase in
Spirituals, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3. That their faith grows, and their charity
abounds. This is that which the Spirit of God takes notice of in the Church
of Thiatira, Rev. 2, Thy last works are more than thy first. And from whence
does this arise in God and Christ? not because our profiting is to his own
profit, no, we can add nothing to his glory: but the love of God to his
creature is such, that he would have us bring forth fruit that might abound to
our own account: admire the goodness and dear love of Christ to his Servants.

Part. 6. Faithfulness and industry are in Christ's account the same thing, and
sloathfulness and wickedness are the same. He that improves his Talents, does
bear the appellation of Good and Faithful Servant.

We are now upon the industrious Servant, he had traded to advantage, and he is
Faithful. Faithfulness is a proper qualification in a Servant; that he be found
faithful is required in a Steward, 1 Cor. 4.2. that is, that he makes a
distribution to each according to their several needs. Luke 12.42. He is a
Faithful Steward that gives them meat in due season.

Use. A sloathful Servant of Christ can never be reckoned faithful.
Sloathfulness is no such small sin as some take it to be; there is a curse
pronounced by God against a sloathful person, Jer. 48. that does the work or
business of the Lord negligently. A faithful Servant has these three
properties: First. He is diligent in his business in which he is entrusted.
Secondly, he aims and designs his Masters profit in all he does. Thirdly he
stands up for his Masters Name and Credit in what he does. A good and faithful
Servant answers to all these.

Part. 7. Christ's usual way is to try his Servants with a little first. All
that he intrusts his Servants in this world, though never so large
intrustments, are but small and few things in comparison of what they shall be
trusted with hereafter: there are true riches to commit to his faithful
Servants, Luke 16.10, 11, 12. The intrustments here are called the least
things, and he that is unfaithful in these least, shall not be entrusted with
much. O then Consider, that thy future intrustment depends upon thy present
improvement of what thou have committed to thee, whether it be Wisdom, Riches,
or any other Gift; thou have those Gifts only for a trial, and thou art now
only in the Trial; thou must be tried before thou be trusted more.

Part. 8. Is the Use of this; Be assured that the well-improvement of a little
shall certainly bring in abundance: To him that has, shall be given and he
shall have abundance, as we have it, Mat. 25.29. we have a double shall to
confirm the truth of this.

Part. 9. Jesus Christ rewards his faithful Servants with Rule and Government.
Be thou over ten Cities. And that this is properly and really to be taken is
plentifully proved from other Scriptures: Dan. 7.27. The Kingdom under the
whole Heavens shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most high. And
in several other Scriptures; But I shall meet with this more fully afterward.

This reward is a very great reward in Christ's esteem, sufficient to requite
his Servants for all their saithfulness and industry.

Part. 10. The state will be a state of very great Joy, called here the
Master's Joy; a state of unspeakable joy. Sometimes this state of Joy
comprehends all good, as sorrow comprehends all evil. See an eminent place to
this purpose, Isa. 35.10. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come
to Zion with songs and everlasting Joy upon their heads; they shall obtain in
and gladness; and sorrow and sighings shall flee away. This I have according to
my promise, only touched these ten Parts, and so I have done with the 20, 21,
22, 23. verses.

We now proceed to the 24th verse; and it is altogether necessary that we do at
once cast our eye upon these seven verses, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, at once:
because they all together make up the whole proceeding of Christ with the
sloathful Servant.

24. Then he which had received the one Talent, came and said, Lord, I knew
thee that thou art a^ hard man reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering
where thou have not strawed.

25. And I was afraid, and went and ^id thy Talent in the Earth; lo, there thou
have that is thine.

26. His Lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and sloathful Servant,
thou know that I reap where I sowed not, and gathered where I strawed not.

27. Thou ought therefore to have put thy money to the exchangers, and then
at my coming I should have received mine own with usury.

28. Take therefore the Talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten
Talents.

29. For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance:
but from him that has not, shall be taken away even that which he has.

30. And cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

That which remains to be handled as to the winding up of this second Parable,
is that remarkable passage relating to the sloathful and unprofitable Servant,
which was him who had received the one Talent; a relation of whom we have
contained in these ^ verses: the whole whereof divides it self into three Parts.

First, the Servant's Answer, Plea and Defense.

Secondly, the Lord's ill-resentment and dissatisfaction thereat.

Thirdly, his proceeding thereupon.

Now for order's Sake, I shall speak to these heads distinctly; and

First, the Servant's Answer, Plea and Defense. An Answer I call it, because it
must be employed that his Lord in his reckoning with him propounds a double
Question. First. What have thou received? Secondly; What improvement have thou
made? This first Part contains verse. 24.25. in which verses we have his
Confession and Concision with his Lord that he had received one Talent.

Secondly, We have him, as formerly, acknowledging that he had made no
improvement; and he seems to six the foot and foundation of his non-improvement
upon his Lord, namely his Lord's austerity and severity; the fence and knowledge
whereof begat fear in him, which fear disinabled him, bound up his hands, took
away his heart, hindered his industry; and in short, all the whole fault of his
miscarrying in this affair is wholly laid upon his Lord, even as our father
Adam at first did, Genesis 3. And all this evil, is founded upon a mistake of the
nature and Justice of his Lord: as first he charge his Lord with hardness or
austerity, according to the parallel place, Luke 19.20. For I feared thee
because thou were an austere Man: Secondly, he charge his Lord with
unreasonableness and exaction; like Pharaoh, who required bricks, and gave no
straw: So ver. 21. Thou take up that thou layest not down, and reapest that
thou did not Sow, or gatheredst where thou have not strawed; and this charge
he does not exhibit as by report or hearsay, but upon sure and certain
knowledge, I knew thee that thou were a hard man.

3. We find him not only charging his Lord, but Justifying himself, and that by
a threefold Circumstance: First, I do not slight or cast away thy Talent, but I
had an esteem for thy Talent, and I laid it up accordingly, I wrapped it up safe
in a napkin. Secondly, I had a care o^ it, that it should not be lost or stolen,
I dug a hole in the earth and laid it up safe, I did not cast it carelessly
away. And Thirdly, This I did not for my own profit or advantage, but for
thine, that I might keep it and render it whole to thee as the owner: See the
words lo, or behold there is thine own; (acce) behold, or take notice; he
makes proclamation: As if he should say, I care not who sees my proceedings,
they are so righteous; I give thee that which is thine own, what can thou
desire more? I have not lost or imbezelled it away, there it is.

Before I proceed to the Observations, I shall speak a few words by way of
explication of some words and passages in the Text; as,

First, how comes this Servant to assume this considence and freedom of Speech?

Secondly, How comes this Servant to understand this austerity and severity, or
what does he intend by it?

Thirdly, I shall speak a few words as to the falsity and untruth of this
charge.

Fourthly, What is this fear that surprised this Servant?

Fifthly, What is to be understood by his hiding his Talent in the earth?

Sixthly, How came he by this knowledge that he can say here, he knew? A few
words to each of these, and that briefly, and so I shall proceed to the
Observations.

How comes it to pass that this Wicked and sloathful Servant does assume such
boldness and Confidence in the presence of his Lord, clothed with such
dominion and majesty? does it not seem to cross many other Scriptures, which
speak of fear and shame to be upon such, Isa. 33.14. The sinners in Zion shall
be afraid, fearfulness shall surprise the hypocrite. Mat. 22. who at one
question demanded by Christ is struck speechless. And does not Paul, Romans 3.
tell us, with respect to this day, that every mouth shall be stopped? here seems
to be the contrary; this Hypocrite is bold, and his mouth open. Yet
notwithstanding these Scriptures, other Scriptures are plain, that bad persons
and hypocrites shall plead with Christ in that day; and not only plead, but
plead hard and stiffly, so that Christ cakes some pains to shake them off; as
Mat. 7. Luke 13. Therefore to reconcile these Scriptures, I understand there
are 2 sorts of Hypocrites: one sort who are gross Hypocrites, that are so by a
design; a profane person in Saints apparel, that knows he is so, only he is
designed to be thought otherwise. Secondly, There is another sort of Hypocrites
who (as Caryl on Job. 34.30. calls them) are simple or sincere hypocrites, who
do not design to deceive, but are deceived themselves and think their state
good. And such a sort must be understood in this Chapter, and also Luke 13.
Mat. 7. who did not distrust their own state, but thought their state to be
good enough. Of such a sort of persons Paul speaks, Gal. 6.3. If any man think
himself to be something, when he is nothing, he supposeh such there are who in
their own thoughts be right: There are self-deceivers, which James speaks of
Chap. 1.22. and they are such who trust to their being hearers of the Word
only. Now such as these thinking well of themselves, no wonder if they be bold:
there are some persons that in the day of Christ shall suffer great
disappointment, contrary to their expectations: so that not all Hypocrites
shall be afraid, though the generality shall. And those we read of in Mat.
22.42, 43, etc. that were speechless at Christ's asking a question, does not
take off, but that some may answer as in our Text.

Secondly, I Answer. At last those Scriptures also will be fulfilled, there
will be cause of Fear and Consternation also, when they are cast at the bar of
Christ, and then all such shall be speechless, and every mouth stopped: and
this will be the state of this Servant in our Text, when he sees his pleas
prove ineffectual.

But from what here has been spoken, may some demand, Is it possible for a
person to be a hypocrite, and himself not know it? how shall I then know what
my state is?

I Answer. It is true, that you may be deceived in your selves, must be taken
for granted, from the many Cautions and Counsels given against self-deceit; and
Counsel to examine our selves, our own selves, 2 Cor. 13. But, to know thy
state to be good and free from hypocrisy, inquire after these qualifications,
which are infallible marks of Sincerity.

1. Do thou make Conscience of the most secret Sins and Evils to avoid them,
even vain thoughts?

2. Do thou make Conscience of the most Secret Duties to do them, Secret
Prayer, Secret Alms, and suchlike? I only leave this brief touch here, because
it is handled before.

But Secondly, What does this Servant intend by his Lords being austere or
hard, according to Luke 19. and nowhere else used in the Scriptures throughout?

Answer. It signifies a severe, cruel, sour, as we call it, cruel, miserable
man; in opposition to tenderness, mildness, gentleness, freeness, mercifulness,
Justice and equity.

But is this charge true or false?

I Answer. It is utterly false, from a fourfold testimony. 1. The Testimony of
God himself. 2ly. From the Testimony and Experience of the People of God in all
ages. 3dly. From the works and ways of God and Christ in all ages the contrary
appears. 4thly. This very Servant implicitly sets forth the contrary.

First. This Charge is false from the Lord's own Testimony, who cannot lie, nor
needs not Care for any man. See the publication of his Name, which agrees with
his Nature; Mercifulness, and Graciousness and Goodness is a great part of his
Name and Nature, and Jesus Christ in whom the Godhead dwelt bodily was not the
Contrary, harsh and cruel. The tenderness of God exceeds the tenderness of a
Mother to her sucking child, Isa. 49. Math. 18. from 11 to 33. what a quite
contrary nature is in Christ? I forgave thee all thy debt as soon as desired.

Secondly. See what God's Servants in all ages say in Testimony to the contrary
Nature of God in Christ Nehemiah 9.17. God is a God ready to pardon, gr^
el^^es, merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness. Se^ the same Psalm. 103.
from ver. 3. to 14. See what J^nah says contrary to this Servant, Jonah 4.2.
h^ speaks quite in another language, I knew thee that th^^ art a gracious God,
slow to anger, of great kindness good to all; his tender mercy is over all his
works. And as to Christ it is said of him, Grace is pourt^ into his lips, Psalm.
45. and John 1.14. full of gra^^ and truth. See Paul, 1 Timothy 1.14. Ephesians. 2.4.

Thirdly; The falsness of this Position appears i^ the Works of God and Christ
in general, and particularly in an eminent passage of Gods tenderness to his
former people, if we read Judges 3.4, 6, 10. (...) or seven times it is
recorded upon their crying His so^ was grieved for their misery: See the nature
of God, Ezekiel. 16.3, to 14. see Gods condescension to Abraham's pleading for
Sodom, Genesis 28. if God had been cruel and harsh, he had not given Christ.
Secondly, if Christ had been cruel and harsh, he had not freely offered
himself, and admirable is this sweet nature in Christ! Oh the frequent manifest
sympathy with poor Creatures in distress, he had compassion on them, healed
them, showed mercy to them. We read of Christ but twice weeping in his time on
earth, and both times arising from the sweetness and goodness of his nature;
once he wept over Lazarus, John 11. once over Jerusalem, Luke 19. Let Christ's
works speak for him, that the suggestion of the Sloathful Servant is utterly
untrue, when he says, I knew thee that thou were a^ austere man; a hard and a
cruel man.

Fourthly, This imputation put upon Christ, is false from the servants own
mouth: as First, he cannot but confess that his Lord had trusted him with a
part of his estate; he therefore falsely charge his Lord with reaping where he
had not sown: for he confesses, that he had received one Talent, which was
seed sown. Thus I have briefly endeavored to discharge our good Lord from this
false imputation.

The Fourth thing I am to speak to is the nature of this fear that surprised
this sloathful servant, What kind of fear is this? [I was afraid]

I Answer. There are two sorts of Fear with respect to God.

First, a reverential Godly Gospel-Fear, that kep^s us in awe that we sin not;
this Fear is a good and a profitable Fear.

Secondly, there is a legal slavish Fear, the tendency whereof is o^ drive men
to despair of God and his goodness. This Fear was of this Second sort which
begot in him a disrespect to his Lord, as appears; and this Fear led him to
great negligence in duty.

Fifthly. What may we understand, or rather what would he have his Lord
understand by his hiding his Talent; or, as some read, concealing; for he seems
^o be satisfied in himself in what he had herein done, and he urges this his
so doing for his Justification? Circumstances considered, this hiding must be
understood in direct opposition to the former trading required by Christ, and
acted by some of the Servants; which Christ declares his well-liking of before
they had vented and ventured their Talents, as you have heard; like David Psalm.
40. who would not conceal but declare his righteousness; but this Servant hides
or conceals his Talent: and this hiding is to be understood the worst of
hidings; it seems to be a voluntary hiding. Some concealings we are (as we may
say) necessitated to by persecution and opposition; but this man went and
dug (took pains) to hide his Talent his Lords money.

Sixthly; What may we understand this Knowledge to be [I know thee.] The word
here signifies a certain Knowledge, not a Conjectural Knowledge; although this
Knowledge in it self is a false persuasion, yet to him it seemed certain, it was
rooted and sealed in his heart, and so grew up to a full persuasion; I did
firmly and without doubt believe.

But having briefly opened these words, I shall sum up what is teaching to us
from them into two parts of Doctrine.

Part 1. That very wicked persons, such as Christ is altogether unacquainted
with, and shall eternally reject at his Coming, yet these persons shall assume
knowledge of, and great confidence in him: such shall seem at first to have that
choice privilidg proper to his most faithful Servants abiding in him, 1 John
2.28. Who shall have boldness and confidence, and not be ashamed before him at
his Coming. This is plain, Mat. 7. compared with Luke 13.

Part 2. It is a very dangerous and destructive thing for persons to entertain
a false and hard opinion of the Lord, that he is Austere and Cruel; now many
have been destroyed temporally and eternally from this ground, distrusting that
God would not have mercy on them? but give me leave to tell thee, who-ever thou
art, that thou have to do with a very tender and merciful God, that is willing
to save to the utmost such as comes to him. My warrant to bear me out so saying
is, 2 Cor. 5.

Part 3. It is the nature of slothful negligent persons, as to their own
Spiritual Concerns, to quarrel with God and Christ, and impute their
miscarriages unto them.

Part 4. That the dear Son of God, who is goodness and righteousness it self in
the very abstract; yet he has been always liable to the most false and
unreasonable imputations: what a plentiful measure of this did Christ meet with
when he was one earth? examine his life, and since his ascension the same.

Part 5. That Jesus Christ never meets with more base and unworthy dealing from
any, than from those who have received most kindness from him. This was
prophesied of Psalm. 41. and fulfilled in Judas, and of his own the Jews; and
here one of Christ's own Servants, in whom Christ had reposed Confidence, and
trusted him with a part of his estate.

Part 6. Christ expects increase, where he has been scattering and strawing,
as here he had.

Part 7. Distracting slavish fear is the natural fruit of an ill opinion of God.

Part 8. Distracting slavish fear is an effectual stop to industry and labor;
when persons are brought to say there is no hope, the effects are very sad:
This was David's fear, 2 Samuel 6.9. And David was afraid of the Lord that day,
and said, how shall the Ark of the Lord come to me? 1 Cron. 21.30. it stopped
industry; But David could not go before it to inquire of God; for he was afraid
because of the sword of the Angel of the Lord. True Fear drives to duty; See
Jehosaphat, See Noah, Heb. 11. Phil. 2.12. Work with fear and trembling.

Part 9. That very bad and wicked reprobates may retain what they have
received, and that with some esteem, in a napkin; Oh then, how weak an argument
is it of some who plead they are as true to their principles as ever they were!

Part 10. The vulgar Latin reads Lo, behold; persons are apt to bear hard with
strong confidence upon negative holiness and righteousness; behold, take
notice, I am just, I have saved it whole, for there is thine own. All these
Parts are worth our handling and Consideration; only for brevity's sake I shall
pass them, and proceed to the close of this Parable.

We have but one remarkable passage more to handle and apply with respect to
the slothful servant, and that is, our Lord's reply to the slothful Servants
Plea and Defense, which you have laid down in the 24, 25. verses: Now in these
26 and 27 verses, we have our Lords reply, which divides it self into two
general Parts.

First his ill resentment, appearing in his severe Rebuke and Reproof.

Secondly; his Judgment and Sentence ordained and pronounced against him.

First; We have his severe rebuke and reproof, v. 26, 27. and then his Judgment
and sentence, v. 28, 29, 30. I shall first endeavor to handle this First part,
which contains our Lords reply to what the slothful servant pleads for himself
in the two former veries: and it is plain and clear that what he here aledged
and pleaded, is so far from satisfieing and pleasing his Lord that he resents
it exceeding ill, as appears from these several Circumstances following.

As First, from the placing his rebuke, which he makes the prom or preface of
what he had to say; his Lord breaks out in the first place with this his
discovery of high dissatisfaction in these words (thou wicked and slothful
servant) being in the frontispeice.

Secondly; from the nature of this rebuke, which consists in two emphatical
epithetes, thou wicked and slothful.

Thirdly; In the particular application in that particle Thou.

Fourthly; It appears in our Lords ironical upbraiding speech to him, verse. 26.
where our Lord in these words seems to be angry with the Servant.

Fifthly; it appears in his angry expostulation with him v. 27. showing what he
ought to have done.

Sixthly; in that he charge him with incompatibleness, and inconsistency with
his own knowledge and principle. In these several circumstances we hear our Lord
breathing forth his displeasure against this ^ale Servant.

(...) I (...) to raise these proper observations con(...) in the words, let us
consider and inquire into s^^^ words and Circumstances in them; as first, let
^^inquire into these two Epithetes, Wicked, Slothful.

Secondly; Whether our Lord be in good earnest in these his words, Thou
knew? or, whether Christ does only upbraid?

Thirdly; What does Christ intend, when he says he should have put his money
to the exchangers?

Fifthly; in what sense does Christ palliate or encourage Usury between man and
man?

First; As to the two Epitheres the original word ((...) male) translated
wicked, is a very Comprehensive word; it has many acceptations in Scripture,
as evil, naught, lewd, dishonest, false, despiteful, rude, unskilful: but in
this place it is to be understood in the worst sense: it is used to set out the
worst kind of wickedness, malice, and guile; it is to be understood in the
Superlative degree. See Acts 18.14. wicked lewdness, the highest kind of evil
that can be exceeding naught. In short, the word is used to set out the
wickedness of the Devil himself. See Mat. 13.38. Children of the wicked one. So
1 John 5. that wicked one touch him not; (Malignus) as if Christ should say,
thou most wicked, or thou malignant ill-affected person. Our Lord does not use
this word but upon special occasions: he uses it ( Mat. 18.32.) concerning the
servant that had 10000 Talents forgiven him who was so cruel to his
Fellow Servants, Oh thou wicked Servant; So here thou wicked.

But what was the principal evil in this Servant that Christ refers unto,
which makes him speak so sharply to him as in this word? it will easily be
granted he might be called slothful, but why wicked?

I Answer; There are four Capital evils in him; as first his ungratefulness and
unanswerableness to his Masters Love. Secondly; his slighting carriage and
terms. Thirdly; his safe and untrue charging his Lord. Fourthly; his impudent
hardening his Face against his Lord.

In all this, first; his ungratefulness and unanswerableness to his Masters
love, and his high intrustment of him: it was no small favor that his Master
should entrust him with a part of his estate to improve: Christ expected this
servant should have answered his love, and rendered suitable returns. The
wickedness of that servant we read of Mat. 18. lay in this particular, not
answering Love received. O ungratfulness is a high sin, and greatly offends God
and Christ. How ill did God take it at Hezekiah's hands, not rendering according
to the benefit he had received 2 Cron, 32, 25. Therefore wrath broke out
against him. It is wickedness to trample upon the mercies of God.

Secondly; wickedness consists in slighting undervaluing terms of God and
Christ. See the character of a wicked man, Psalm. 10. he contemns God. See Job
22.27. They say, what can the Almighty do for us? Nah. 1.11. There is one come
out of thee that imagines evil against the Lord, a wicked counselor: this was
the sin of the wicked Jews, unto whom Christ speaks, Mat. 12. This was the sin
of Simon, Acts 8.22. he imagined meanly of the gift of God.

Thirdly; his wickedness lay in his verbal false accusation of his Lord; this
is one chief part of the Devils wickedness, from whence he is branded with
false accusing the brethren; it is one of his names, the part of a wicked man,
Psa. 10. That God can neither see nor hear. This was the wickedness of the
Jews, Mat. 12. that accused Christ that he cast out Devils by the Devil; this
was the wickedness that Job's friends thought him guilty of in charging God
falsely: and for this Christ comes to judge the World, ( Jude 15.) for hard
speeches: This was some part of the slothful Servants evil, he gave hard
speeches of his Lord.

Fourthly; his wickedness is further aggravated by his pertinacy, stubbornness,
frowardness, and wilfulness: as we may perceive in the two former verses, he
hardens his face against his Lord; which is a character of a wicked person. See
Prove. 6.12. A wicked person walks with a froward mouth, Chapter 21.29. A wicked
man hardens his face that is against God. So that we may easily perceive this
Servant did deserve this epithete, thou wicked Servant.

The next word we are to inquire into is the word slothful, which is an
emphatical word, it has near 20 acceptations in Scripture, thou slothful,
sluggish, idle, dull, stopped, hard to be removed, loath to labor; it signifies
to delay, stand still, and many more. By such a comprehensive word our Lord
sets out his dissatisfaction to the highest against this person, he ^

The fourth ^as^^ge to be (...) m^^^ing in ^^ese words, (...) Christ consent
and agree with him or upbraid him?

I Answer. That this speech of Christ must be understood to be non^^al and
^^^^ding; like that spoken to Adam, Genesis 3.22. The man is become at one of us:
and after this manner the Lord often speaks in Scripture. See Job 40.12 Deck
thy self with strength and majesty: behold him that is high and abase him. It
is not likely that Christ did consent with the flothful Servant that he was
austere, that he gathered where he had not strawed, reaped where he had not
sown* because this is not true of the Lord.

The fifth thing to be spoken unto is, the word that our Lord makes use of to
set out his return or advantage, he calls Usury: from whence some gather
encouragement to be Usureres. The Lord in this word follows the former borrowed
metaphors of money, and bank, and trading; so here Usury. Great men's Stewards
dispose of their Lord's moneys to bankers in order to bring in increase. But
this borrowing the word, does not at all palliate or encourage the abominable
sin of Usury; no more than Christ making use of the unjust Steward for an
example to provoke his Disciples to make sure their future estate, does allow
of his fraudulent dealings with his Master; all that Christ instanceth in as to
the ways of man, does not amount to a toleration of their ways; only from their
manner, not matter does Christ make teaching to us: that Usury is lawful or
unlawful cannot be urged from this Text; only this is true from hence, that
Usury, yea the largest increase, is not only ^awful, but required in Spiritual
things. But because it is a case of Conscience, whether or how far Usury is
lawful or unlawful; I shall offer my opinion according to what I have received
in this matter as to the practice it self; and for orders sake I shall first
speak to the etymology of the word which is here translated Usury: the Hebrew
word (Neshek) that Usary is drawn from, fignifies Teeth, and so rendered to
bite, because (says Wilson, the gain which is taken for Moneys or Wares in
respect of lending, does bite and gnaw; especially if he be poor: Ainsworth
calls it biting Usury, to bite like a Serpent, Numb. 21.9. spoken with respect
to this biting with Serpents. See Pr^^. 23.32. In the end it bites like a
Serpent. So Amos 5.19. a Serpent bit him. The Greek word seems to be more plain
(Tokoo) to be born or brought forth, as Children are born and brought forth,
and so called the increase of a Man. So the word is used, Mat. 2.2. Luke 1.31,
57. it holds forth an effect^al substantial increase, to double it self as he
or she that have a Child does. Thus did the five and two Talents, they doubled
themselves; which is by Christ implicitly called Usury, in that he would have
had this with his one Talent done the same. Now this bringing forth in the
New Testament is that which is called biting in the Old Testament.

But to come close to the matter, I shall speak to it under three
Circumstances, and therein show when it is sinful, or when it is biting Usury.

1. When it is exacted of the Poor.

2. When of a Brother.

3. When of any body.

1. When of the Poor, then it is apparently sinful. See what care the Lord had
in this respect, Exodus 22.25. Thou shall not lend upon Usury to any of my
Porple that is poor. So Lev. 25.35, 36. If thy Brother be poor, and fall to
decay, thou shall relieve him, th^^ shall not be an Usurer unto him, thou must
not take increase. We have Usury three times expressed, Ezekiel. 18.8, 13, 17. and
all in respect to the Poor, as in the former places named. This is that Usury
Nehemi^^ that holy man inveighs against, chap. 5.

2. It is sinful to a Brother of the Church of Israel, poor or rich: Deuteronomy.
23.19. Not to thy Brother; to a stranger thou may: Then God allowed that
cruelty which he does not allow now. See Deuteronomy. 7.2. and 20.17. They were not
only allowed to oppr^^ strangers, but destroy them: therefore it is not
indefinitely to be understood. Strangers in our days, and enemies also, are to
be fed, if they hunger: Usury is not lawful to a Brother, especially when he
borrows for his need; not to augment his Estate, b^^ to supply him with
necessaries, and is not in a thriving way. If a Brother will expect part of the
gain, he must bear (if need be) also part of the loss: therefore there ought to
be no Covenant or Contract made for use, but leave it to liberty to turn
according to his gain.

3. Biting Usury is sinful to any body because it is oppressive, which is a Sin
of a high provoking nature to God, let it be to whom it will, Usury is yoked
and linked with Oppression; see Ezekiel. 18. And see how David without exception
makes this a discriminating character of one that shall dwell in God's holy
Hill, Psalm. 15. He puts not his Money out t^^ Usury. The Prophet Jeremy under
all his abuses and wrongs purges himself in this respect, Jer. 15.10. he had
neither borrowed nor lent on Usury, and yet they curse him as if he should have
said, Had (...) done so, I might have looked for curses.

But some may say, Why does he purge himself from giving? a man may be
necessitated, if he cannot have it without.

Ans. This is sinful upon a twofold account: 1st, Thou art accessory to his
sin; 2dly, accessory to thine own ruin. Usury is ranked with unjust gain,
Prove. 28.8. and all unjust gain is of the same nature.

But some may say, What is Biting Usury?

This Question is hard to determine, because the Borrower must be well
considered. But I will boldly affirm, that the practice of several in our days,
and in this City, is sinful, who let out Money or Clothes by the week at
unreasonable rates and advantage, as sour-pence or sixpence in the pound by
the month, or thirty in the hundred, as many do. This is cruel Ertortion and
sore Oppression, and those who use it may upon good grounds question their
share in God's holy Hill, Psalm. 15. Such Oppression does not only ^ite and
pinch, but eat up persons insensibly. Oh! the sin of your weekly Letters-out of
Clothes to pay so much a week, and Pawn-Broakers who take forty in the hundred,
ruins the Poor insensibly, as a man bleeds to death with use. The Magistracy of
this Nation are to be highly commended in this respect, who brought Use from
ten and eight to six in the hundred, in which they have to a good degree
blunted the teeth of this Serpent, that it does not bite so sharp nor deep.

But some will object, If it were not for these Week^un and Pawn-broakers the
Poor might starve.

Answ. 1. Thirty in the hundred cannot long preserve their lives, if they
follow that way.

2. If the Poor who want to borrow would be as ^reful to return the Principal
to Friends they borrow of, as they are and must be to those, both Princip^ and
exorbitant Interest, they need not be so put (...) it as they are But this is
the mischief, that want of ca^ and punctuality in returning, when they bor^^^
freely without Use, has forced persons to this w^^ of biting borrowing. But I
have made too long digression. Remember I have not yet in what I have said,
asserted, that all Increase is Usury; but that a^ Usury is Increase to biting
and hurting.

I now return to the words, and from thence lay down ten Parts observable.

1. That all Christ's Servants are by him ranked i^ to two sorts, Good and
Faithful, Wicked and Slothf^^ Wise and Foolish, Sheep and Goats, no medium
(...) middle-state.

2. There is no wickedness like the wickedness Christ's own Servants; Christ
seems to be at a (...) to set them forth so bad as they deserve, he gives
S^tan's name to them.

3. Slighting words to God and Christ is a char^cter of a wicked person.

4. Slothfulness and negligence in the Lord's Service and Business is very
nauseous and distastful (...) him, Jer. 48.10. there is a Curse pronounced
(...) on it.

5. It is not nearness of relation to God and Christ will exempt us from being
called to account; her^^ Christ's own Servant, entrusted by him, lyable^
account.

6. Ironical Rebukes are a manifestation of sore displeasure from God or Christ.

7. Christ takes it exceeding ill to be misunder stood and misrepresented. I
have showed you how the Servant misrepresented his Lord.

8. Wicked men are not true to their own Pr^ciples; this Servant does not walk
up to his own Reason. If Men would walk up to their own I^e^son, it would carry
them far.

9. Christ's Servants ought to calculate all their Actions with an eye to their
Lord's coming: Thou should have put it out, that at my coming I might have
received mine own with Usury.

10. All Christ's Servants, acting as they ought to do, bear a resemblance of
Usurers. Christ does certainly expect Use, as well as Principal, of his
Servants.

Now all these Parts are worth our handling, only I must study brevity,
according to an Exposition; therefore I shall pass most of them, and only speak
to the 4th Part briefly.

I shall speak a few words to this one Part; That Slothfulness is inexpressibly
distastful to God and Christ. This was the sin of Laodicea, Revel. 3. latter
end; Christ is ready to spew her out of his mouth. Christ could not abide an
Idle Servant: see Mat. 20. Why stand ye all the day idle? The place forenamed,
Jer. 48.10. is a dreadful word; God pronounces a severe Curse against those
that do the work of the Lord negligently, that stood still in oppofition to
zeal and motion; that stand still, as the word will bea^. This evil the Spirit
of God forbids, Romans 12. (...) not slothful in business, this must not be. --
And there is good reason that slothfulness should be so distastful to God and
Christ, because it is not the manner of God and Christ acting to us; God acts
with zeal in our behalf: and when the Spirit does his office in the heart, it
brings forth zeal in us.

2. Slothsulness is a great hinderance to the Propagation of the Gospel in the
World. Zeal provokes many. See 2 Cor. 9.2.

3. It is not like Christ; it is prophesied of him, Psalm. 69. The Zeal of thine
House has eaten me (...)

Q. But how may we know in our selves whether we are of this slothful temper?

A. 1. When thou have not thy heart in God's Service, but only the external
part: This is to have (...) Male in the Flock, according to Mal. 1. and offe^
unto the Lord a corrupt thing, v. 14. which is (...) accursed service.

2. A slothful Servant is one who is hindered from the Service of God upon small
discouragement, imaginary discouragements, apprehensions of danger, etc. See
Prove. 22.13. The slothful man says, There is (...) Lion in the way, I shall be
slain in the streets; (and we have the same Prove. 26.13.) a very unlikely
thing, yet the slothful man takes hold of this as a ground of discouragement.

3. A slothful person has no pleasure nor deligh^ nor joy in Christ's Service.
It is said of the Sun, that he rejoices to run his race, Psalm. 19. An
industrious Servant takes great delight in Christ's Service, it is his meat and
drink to do his will. This was the Spirit of Christ himself when he was on
Earth.

4. A slothful Servant is very confident of his own good estate. See Prove.
26.16. The sluggard is wis^^ in his own conceit, than seven men that can render
a reason. So was Laodicea. Whereas an industrious person in Spirituals is
always humble.

5. A slothful person acts not up to his strength and light received, he will
not put forth his strength.

I shall speak a few words to provoke persons against this sin of Slothfulness;
labor against this so distaste. full an evil. Take St. Paul's counsel ( Romans
12.11.) against sloth, by way of prevention, in nine Particulars.

1. Study the weightiness of Christ's Work, it is turious Work, it is of
eternal concernment; they relate to thy Master as well as to thy self, Joh. 15.
God is glorified in thy fruit.

2. This Work can never be done profitably not acceptably without industry. The
violent take the Kingdom by force, Mat. 11.12.

3. Consider, that pains and labor in good earnest never failed in this Work,
Prove. 2.8. there is a sure Promise in this matter, 1 Cor. 15. last.

4. Consider the shortness and uncertainty of the time we have to do the Lord's
Work in; do it whilst it is day.

5. Consider, the stock and strength by which we do all is from above,
therefore we need not be discouraged, Phil. 2.12, 13.

6. No excuse in Christ's Service will serve, all these excuses in this Servant
will do nothing.

7. Study the near approach of Christ; this is the Argument, Luke 12.

8. Study the great pleasure of a zealous and industrious life; Labor is
pleasure; in Christ's ways are all Pleasures and Peace.

Lastly, Slothfulness is not only impoverishing, but undoing: The Stone-wall is
broken down, the House falls down by it. A slothful man is brother to him that
is a great waster. We need go no further than our Text to prove this.

We now proceed to the close of this Parable. That remarkable passage yet to be
handled is the severe sentence and judgment past by Christ upon the slothful
Servant, of whom we have already heard in several Circumstances. 1. You have
been minded of Christ's favor and respect, showed to him in trusting of him
with a part of his estate. 2. We have heard of his proceeding thereupon in his
Master's absence, his hiding and concealing his Talent from use and in
provement. 3. We have spoken to, and you h^^ heard of his Master or Lord's
proceedings with hi^ as to the first Part of it, His Account called for 4.
(...) Plea and Defense for himself to his Lord ^t his co^ing. 5. We have heard
of the ill resentment and d^ like his Lord takes at his Plea, which I have
show you under several Considerations; amongst which his sharp and severe
Rebuke, whereby this Serva^ is silenc't, his mouth is stopped; and now his L^^
proceeds to sentence, which Sentence we have in the words, vor. 28, 29, 30.
Take therefore the T^lent from him, and give it unto him that has (...)
Talents. For unto every one that has shall be give^ and he shall have
abundance: but from him that ha^ not, shall be taken away even that which he
has. A^ cast ye the unprofitable Servant into utter darknes^ there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. But (...) lies principally in the 28th and
30th; for the 29th is only a recital of a Law, Rule or Maxim, establ^^^ed
either then at that present, or else before, which by Christ is found properly
applicable to this Servant; for, from him that has not, shall be taken aw^^
even that which he has. Which Rule is so proper is such cases to be applied,
as that we have it five time hinted by the Evangelists.

This Sentence contains two Parts: First, a puni^^ment of privation, or loss.
Secondly, a punishment of infliction or sense.

First, the punishment of, privation, ver. 28. Take the Talent away from him,
there is his loss.

Secondly, In v. 30. we have his positive punishment of infliction and sense;
Cast ye the unprofitab^^ Servant into utter darkness.

In handling this Sentence in these verses, I shall first open some words which
want explication. Secondly, Raise those parts properly slowing from them so
opened. Thirdly, Apply the whole.

I. For EXPLICATION.
1. What may we understand by taking away his Talent. 2. As to Time, when this
is done, when does this Judgment take place. 3. Who are the Executioners that
must take it away; because Christ is said to speak to those that stood by, or
the Servants, Luke 19.22. 4. Why given to him that had ten Talents rather than
to him that had less. 5. How can we understand this taking away that which he
has not. 6. What by this Unprofitableness. 7. What kind of Punishment is this
utter or exterior Darkness. 8. What is this weeping or gnashing of teeth.


First, What is this taking away. The Greek word signifies to snatch, or take
by violence. But this we must carry along with us in our minds, that this
passage is spoken to accommodate the Parable we read of, delivered to him ver.
15. or giving, which we cannot understand properly that he had so much money
told out to him in a literal sense; neither can we so understand the taking or
snatching away. But if we diligently observe the Parable, we shall find it all
one to take his Talent from him, or him from his Talent. The taking away the
Talent is the same with a severe stripping him of his Trust and Profession; As
it is with the foolish Virgins and Goats, separate him from the place wherein
before he stood, and the capacity he had been in before h^s Talent was taken
away, when he was discovered and disowned by Christ. This was the taking, away
of Judas his Talent when Christ discovered him, when Christ speaks these words,
Luke 22.48. Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? his Talent before
was, that he was numbered amongst Christ's Servants; he had something of Heaven
upon that account. This taking the Talent away is the same in effect with
Christ's gathering out of his Kingdom every thing that offends, Mat. 13.41, 48,
49. The first Part of Christ's Sentence is, Depart, Excommunication from the
presence of Christ. This is that ((...)) which we read of 1 Cor. 16. last, let
him be accursed when the Lord shall come. This is to shame and degrade him, and
is the first part of his Sentence; as when one is degraded from his dignity his
Robes are stripped off: contrary to the Faithful and Godly, who shall stand in
that day; set 1 John 2.28. Psalm. 1. his Talent is then taken away, when he is
discovered to be an Hypocrite, 1 Cor. 4.5. Secondly, To take away his Talent,
supposes his utter, total and eternal disabling, from ever having opportunity
of improving it again. This is the night coming when no man can work any more,
his stock b^ing taken away, now he must cease.

Secondly, When does this Judgment take place of taking away?

Ans. At the personal return of his Lord. This is plain in our contex, ver. 19.
when Christ has received the Kingdom, and is returned; when the Bridegroom
comes, as before, the same is effected; when death comes, it does cease.
Indeed it happens with some, that their Talent is taken away; either sometimes
it is lost as to exercise, or else they are discovered: but if the slothful
escape with the Talent here, it will effectually be taken away when Christ
comes, then shall every man have praise of God; this is the Time resolved upon,
ver. 31. when the Son of man comes in his Glory, and the holy Angels with him;
-- persons may hold their Talents, or Intrustments, or a show of them till then.

Thirdly, As to the Executioners of this Law; Is it their fellow servants that
must take the Talent away? No, it is plain that the Angels are the Servants,
those that stand by Christ in that his coming: therefore when he comes he is
attended with all his Angels, Mat. 13.39. and 41.49. The Angels are the
Reapers, they gather out of Christ's Kingdom that wh^^h offends, they sever the
Wicked from amongst the Just.

Fourthly, Why given to him that has ten? this is so strange a Circumstance
that the Servants the Angels are not able to understand; Luke 19.25. Lord (say
they) he has ten. This seems strange. Whereupon Christ recites the Law in that
case; for, To him that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance; he
that was able to improve much, shall have much more. This Circumstance cannot
be understood properly, that the faithful Servants of Christ shall receive
addition from those that are wicked: but the Moral to usward is, to set forth
the great esteem Christ has to Industry, and his palpable severe dislike of
the contrary. The scope of this passage is to teach us that the evils and
imquities of some Professors shall much and greatly redound to those that are
eminently righteous. This is God's way to set the righteousness of the
Righteous against the wickedness of the Wicked, that so their Righteousness may
shine. So he did by N^ah in his day, he magnifies Noah's righteousness from the
wickedness o^ others, Genesis 6.7. We have four expressions in Noah's case in
opposition: 1. It is said, but Noah found Grace; 2. Build thee an Ark; 3. I
establish my Covenant with thee; 4. Thee have I seen righteous. These are
singularly spoken to Noah, and of him, in opposition to the rest. So Ezekiel. 44.
those that went astray with the Idolaters advanced the praise of those who were
faithful So does Christ take from Israel to give unto the Centurion, I have not
found so great faith no not in Israel. This is usual with Men too as with
respect to Chrildren and Servants, to make the faults of one to contribute to
the others praise. So here, let him that is so worthy be made more worthy. So
it is plain, that some who have had large Intrustments from Christ, and have
improved them, shall shine as the Sun, shall have very large Returns; though
those that have least shall have enough, yet this is a truth, That some shall
abound in Glory beyond others, one Star shall differ from another.

Fifthly; How may we reconcile this seeming Contradiction, to take from him
that he has not?

I answer; It is true in both senses: he has, he has not; he has in Stock,
he has nothing in Increase. He that has Grace or Gifts, and does not improve
them, is so like him that has none, that he may fitly bear the name of not
having. To have, is to improve and put forth. We have an Argument in common,
That which appears not, is not. So here, he that manifests no Grace, is equal
with him that has none: therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 12.28. Let us have
Grace, that we may serve God acceptably.

Sixthly; How is this Servant unprofitable? this is the Epithet put upon him
here: Why unprofitable, may some say? was it possible, let him have done what
he would or could, to be profitable? are we not taught to say, When we have
done all, we are unprofitable Servants?

I answer, If he that had done all he could, was an unprofitable Servant, then
much more him that comes short of what was commanded must needs be
unprofitable: Though we cannot profit God by what we do, yet we may profit men
like our selves; here is unprofitable. But I rather think this term is made use
of to accommodate the Parable, as before he is said to require his own with
Usury or advantage; so this term profit, answers to such a dialect of speaking.
It is false and wicked to say, we can profit God; this is that which Eliphaz
insinuates against Job, Job 22. Can a man be profitable to God? the answer is
in the Negative, No. And as it is wickedness to say, we can profit God by what
we do; so it is also to say, Obedience and Industry in Spirituals do not profit
our selves. E^^hu thought it a wicked and bad charge, Job 34.

But some may say, Is not man profitable unto God? why then are God's People
called God's Treasure, and his Portion?

I answ. 1. They may be so called from that high esteem he bears to his People.
2dly, It is true, that God is exceedingly pleased, though not profited: that he
is mightily pleased appears from Luke 12.37. He will gird himself, and come
forth and serve them.

Seventhly, What may we understand in this part of the punishment, referring to
the positive punishment of sense, 1. Cast him, 2 dly, into darkness, 3dly,
utter darkness?

I answ. 1. To cast, implies a violent casting with detestation; as it is used
by Christ elsewhere: If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from
thee; Thus the Lord is said to cast out the Nations.

But 2dly, Why into Darkness?

Answ. We read of Darkness in Scripture under a twofold Consideration; 1.
Proper and natural; 2. Improper and metaphorical Darkness.

1. Natural Darkness, occasioned by withdrawing the Sun, or by its Eclipse.
Such a Darkness was upon Abraham, Genesis 15. called an hour of Darkness. It is
one of the plagues of Egypt, Exodus 11.1. This is a sore Judgment, this is the
Darkness that Job wishes upon the day he was born in, Job 3. This Darkness we
read of at the time of Christ's Crucifixion; and it is a sad and dreadful
Judgment.

But 2dly, we have Darkness metaphorically understood, and that under a
fourfold Consideration: 1. The natural unregenerate state of sin; see Ephesians.
5.8. ye were Darkness. 2. A state of Darkness in the understanding; this was
the state of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.18. 3. Death is a state of Darkness, Job
17.13. Death is the dark bed. 4. Darkness is put for the most deep and dismal
state of Sorrow; as Joy is a state of Light, so is Sorrow a state of Darkness.
A state of Joy is a lightsom state, opposed to Darkness: see Esth. 8.16. Psalm.
97.11. Col. 1.12. So, 2dly, the depth of Sorrow is styled Darkness; see Job
19.8. He has set Darkness in my paths, says Job, that is, Sorrow of the
deepest sort. And Job 30.26. I looked for Light, and behold Darkness. See
Eccles. 5.17. all his days he eats in Darkness. Now all these metaph^r^cal
exquisit Darknesses of Sorrow do but weakly epitomize that Darkness of our
Text, which is the eternal punishment of the Reprobate. Therefore this Darkness
is comprehensive of unspeakable Sorrow and Affliction, when the Lord by his
Prophet Isaiah sets forth the eternal punishment on the worst of sinners, this
is it, Isa. 8. last, he says, He shall be driven to Darkness. This is the
punishment appointed for the unbelieving, ( Mat. 8.12.) of him without the
wedding garment, Mat. 22.13. Of those lapsed Professors, 2 Pet. 2.17. It is the
Darkness of the lapsed Angels, 2 Pet. 2.4. All their punishment is said to be
Darkness. So this unprofitable Servant's is Darkness.

Q. But why Darkness?

A. 1. Because it was their choice here, 1 John 3.14. they loved Darkness
rather than Light. 2. Because his state shall be quite contrary to the sta^e of
the Saints, which is a state of Light, Col. 1.12. the Saints are, whilst here,
Children of the Light.

Qu. But why utter Darkness?

Ans. We have this word three times made use of; see Mat. 8.22. and here in our
Text; it is to set forth the perfection of this Darkness, chap. 5. No Light at
all. 2. Ueter Darkness respects the place; exterior signifies out, or beyond
the bounds of that Light where Christ shall dwell, without the verge thereof.
This is the portion of the unprofitable Servant, and all other suchlike; as
they loved Darkness here, so it shall be their miserable portion hereafter.

Obj. But why is it added, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth?

Ans. This term does further explain the nature of the punishment of this
Servant, that it is not barely a privation of Light, but a Prison of fore and
gr^nding intolerable pain: so that it is plain that the future punishment is
not only a punishment of loss, but of fence. From hence we read of some who did
foolishly fancy two sorts of Hells, one hot, another cold, in which cold place
the teeth chatter'd: But we are no^ necessitated to believe any such thing from
this Text. It is well called a fancy. For,

1. Weeping is the effect of deep sorrow and loud complaints See Numb. 11.10.
Ezra 3.13. Isa. 65.19. it implies a dreadful crying out; it is translated
Calamity, Job 30.13.

2. Gnashing of teeth is a discovery of Envy, Rage, and the effects of exquisit
Sorrow and Misery, Psalm. 35.37. of Rage, Act. 7.54. sometimes Sorrow and
gr^nding-pain is the cause of grinding the teeth, a^ persons do in extreme
misery, filled with envy at the prosperity of their fellow servants, vexation
at their own loss, out of folly; as we may gather from the Parable of Dives in
Hell, Luke 16. I am, says he, grievously tormented in this flame.

Having thus opened the words, I shall now according to my promise, lay down
those Doctrinal Conclusions contained in the words thus opened, with an eye to
the Context: there are ten Parts or Doctrinal Conclusions that I shall lay
down, and speak a brief word to each, and so wind up these verses. Part 1. That
Jesus Christ shall be victorious, and shall overcome in Judgment; every mouth
shall be stopped before him; Jesus Christ has stopped the mouth of this
pertinacious Pleader. Part 2. That the second Coming of Jesus Christ is a
stripping, discovering day, a day of pulling off of vizards. Part 3. The Angels
are Christ's subordinate Ministers and Executioners at tha^ day. Part 4. That
Christ's way of proceeding in Judgment is to exalt the Faithfulness of such as
are so, by the Wickedness of others; the dispraise and shame of the one, is the
glory of the other. Part 5. It is Christ's never-failing Rule and Maxim, That
Industry in Spirituals shall produce abundance. We have it five times exp^est
from Christ's mouth. Part 6. It is a certain truth, That stripping,
bereavement, and poverty, is the never-failing portion of the slothful Servant.
Part 7. That Christ's proceeding in Judgment with his unfaithful Servants, is
with violence and detestation; Cast ye. Part 8. It is highly displeasing to
Christ, when we are not profitable to our selves. Part 9. Darkness, utter
Darkness, is the portion of Satan and wicked men, as well such within as
without the Church. Part 10. That the greatness and exquisitness of the Wrath
and Misery of Condemned Sinners, will occasion Envy, Rage, Vexation, vented in
lamentable Clamor, with gnashing of teeth.


I shall speak a very brief word to each of these.

1. That Christ shall overcome in Judgment. This Part I gather from his
silencing this Pleader. That word shall be fulfilled, that every mouth shall be
stopped, when he comes to plead with men. This Servant is now dumb, like the Man
we read of, Mat. 22. Christ does but ask him a question, and he is speechless:
This David prophesied of, Psalm. 51.4. That thou might be justified when thou
speak, and overcom^ when thou judge, or pleadest: Christ will carr^ the
day in Judgment against the most arrogant Ple^der. What bold presumptuous
Pleaders does Chri^meet with, Mat. 7. with Luke 13. yet what Davi^ says Psalm.
1. is true, they cannot stand in Judgment. This man in our Text had liberty to
plead and reason with his Lord as long as he had any thing to say and now he
can say nothing why Sentence may no^ be pronounced against him. If this shall
be the Power of Christ in that day, then take David's Counsel. Ps. 2. Kiss the
Son before that day come: He is now willing to be reconciled to thee; Make
peac^ with Him before that day, as the Prophet Isaiah directs chap. 27. and,
Now acquaint thy self with Him, Job 22. So much for the first Part.

2. That the Day of Christ's second Coming shall be a stripping, unmasking,
discovering day. I showed yo^ in the Explication, that the taking away did
principally consist in his discovery and shame, cutting asunder, or cutting
off, (as you have heard) as to that Servant, Luke 12.46. which is the same kind
of punishment. This Servant went for current before h^ Master and Christ found
him in his House, as he did him without the Wedding Garment, Mat. 22. This day
will be a sad day for Hypocrites when Christ comes, they may well be afraid of
that day. Isa. 13.14. In this day every secret thing shall be discovered; that
which was done in secret in Closets, shall be published upon the House tops;
that is the very proper time of discovery, 1 Cor. 4.5. yea, every secret thing
shall be revealed, Eccl. 12.14. This may teach us to be through and cordial for
God in what we do, or in what we profess. Sincerity is that which will stand
thee in stead, and nothing else. The varnish and painting of the Hypocrite
shall then be washed off, and he must lie open in his colors. This should put
each of us upon the Test before that Day come. Examine and judge thy self
before, that so thou may not be condemned in that Day: for every man's work
must be tried by fire; the Day shall try it. So much for the second Part.

3. The Angels are Christ's subordinate Officers, in that day they are to
degrade and take away. That Jesus Christ in his next coming is attended with
multitudes of Angels, yea all his holy Angels, is plain in Scripture, both in
the old and new Testament; see Psalm. 68. But I shall have occasion to say more
to this afterward. I have, in opening the words, showed you that the Reapers
are the Angels, and those that gather out of the Kingdom that which offends,
are the Angels. This sets forth the high and excellent Nature of Christ who
comes so gloriously attended: when Christ was born they worshipped Him, Heb. 1.
by appointment, and in this day they shall serve Him. See how far Christ is
above Angels, they waited on Him in His Temptations, Matthew. 4. The Angels came
and ministered unto Him. They also waited on Him in His last Passion, they then
ministering unto Him. What a dreadful and glorious Appearance will this be then,
when they shall all attend on him! the Angels are then his great Host and
Attendants in that day, He comes then in Power and great Glory.

4. That the slothfulness and wickedness of some of Christ's Servants shall
redound to th'augmentation of the glory and reward of the other who are
faithful: Give it to him that has ten. He had a large portion before, having
doubled; he had ten before, yet he must have this augmentation. Christ will
heap Honor upon the Faithful (...) that day. Give it to him that he^ ten. How
does this set forth the unexpressible respe^^ that Christ bears to Faithfulness
and Industry; (...) knows not how to gratify him enough; rather tha^ such a
one shall not be served answerably, He wi^^ come forth and serve him himself,
Luke 12. B^^ because I shall meet with something like those in the next Part.

5. That what Christ does in this case is the answe^ to a standing Rule and
Maxim laid down by himself That Industry in Spirituals shall produce abundan^^
We have this Rule five times minted by the Evangelists, Mat. 13.12. For
whosoever has, to him shall (...) given. This Christ gives in Answer to the
Questions propounded by his Disciples why he spoke to the multitude in
Parables: He answers, because they should not understand, as is evident in the
two verses following, in regard they had not improved their Understandings,
they should be taken away: But verse. 16. Blessed are your eyes, for they see;
that is, you have been improving what you have, you shall have more Knowledge.
None shall set forward in Christ's Ways in good earnest but shall find great
encouragement; see Mark 4.24, 25. To him that has, shall more be given; i. e.
that is willing to be found putting forward; for, he that has, to him shall be
given, Luke 8.18. To him that has, shall be given, Luke 19.26. Unto every one
that has, shall be given. This is God's standing Rule, both here and
hereafter. Whatsoever the Evangelists leave out, they will not leave out this
passage which is so considerable* Therefore our Lord says, Joh. 7. He that
does my Will, shall know of my Doctrine, according to this Rule. But the Jews
were short here, they would not improve, but bauk'd their own Knowledge and
Reason, and so deserved to be blinded.

Use. What a door is here opened in this for Industry, To him that has shall
be given; that as, that puts forward by way of unprovement what he has; by
this means, a little knowledge shall be made a great deal, and rewarded as a
great deal. If we do but endeavor to improve that little knowledge we have, it
will be made more. Apollo, who knew but in part ( Act. 18. concerning Christ
Jesus, being willing to be instructed, came to know more perfectly. How have we
seen the truth of this in our days! How have some from small gifts come to
great increase here! and th^s shall be but a weak glympse of what shall be
hereafter to those whom Christ shall find faithful in that day. We have a
Proverb amongst men, that he that has enough, shall have more. It is certainly
true in this case, when Christ speaks of rewarding he Faithful, He speaks under
a fourfold gradation, Luke 6.38. He shall have good measure, pressed down,
shaken regether, and running ever, to set out the abundant reward upon the duty
of Charity and Alms.

6. The sixth Part is the certainty of the contrary, That non-improvement of
what we have ushereth in poverty and indigency. Seem all the forenamed places,
and you never find the promise to Industry, but you find in the same place a
threatening to the Nonimprover; Take from him is Christ's determination. This
shall be the great aggravation of all unbelievers and unworthy walkers, that
they have, and have not improved, Take from him that he has.

But some will object, he had it not really, because Luke 8.18. says, he
seemed (...) so; that it was but a supposed, not a real Talent.

Ans. This is but one place of the five that reads so; and the vulgar Latin
reads thinks he has, which must respect his improvement, not his stock: he
think^ he has that he has not, and so finds disappointment. This
Consideration tends to the same end with the former, to provoke Industry and
Improvement of what we have.

7. That Christ's proceeding with his own in Judg^ment will be with violence
and detestation; Cast him out. Christ's day of Grace, Favor, and Lamb-like
Meekness then is over, according to the Prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 42.13. See
how severe the Sentence i^ upon him that had not the Wedding Garment; it is the
day of Christ's Wrath, and it will appear; there shall not be the least dram of
Favor then in Christ's Face, no not to those nearly related to Him in
Profession if they have not been faithful. Consider this all that are
Professors.

8. It is highly displeasing to Christ when we are not profitable to our
selves. The great love God bears to his creature makes Him afford him great
means to deliver him from wrath to come. Now when they slight this means, it
highly provokes God. Take notice of that severe word of Christ, Joh. 3.36. He
that believes not on the Son, the wrath of God abides on him: whereas if he
had not believed, that eternal profit had been his own. See the tender love of
God to his creature, that is angry at the unbelief and disobedience of man, not
because he wrongs Him, but his own Soul.

9. Utter Darkness is the state of the Devil and wicked men. See Jude v. 6.
compared with ver. 13. the same punishment the Devil is reserved unto, is that
which the slothful and wicked Servant shall have. But I shall speak more fully
to this afterward.

10. The exquisitness and extremity of the torments of wicked men, shall not
only occasion inward sorrow, but ^utward dolor; it shall be expressed by Envy,
Rage, gnashing of teeth, weeping, crying, howling, with great noise: as those
in Glory shall sing for joy, Isa. 65.14. so they shall how^ for sorrow and
vexation of spirit. But, according to my promise, I have but touched these,
because I shall afterward meet with some of them again. Now I have done with
the 30th verse.

The Parable of the Sheep and Goats.
We now proceed to ver. 31. When the Son of man shall come in his Glory, and
all his holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory.

There is very little variation in the reading of these words; only the Vulgar
Latin reads And when, but generally they are read as here, without that
particle: and some do make the whole from ver. 13. to this 31, an entire
Paragraph, and a Parenthesis, a digression from the business in hand. But I see
no cause why it should be taken so. I understand the whole of this Chapter to
contain three Parables, all tending to set forth the just, righteous, and
severe proceedings with good and bad Professors or Church Members; -- and that,
at His second Coming, the Church shall contain good and bad in it, has been
largely proved.

It was Christ's manner of proceeding, to bring several Parables to illustrate
one and the same thing, as you may see, Luke 15: we have there (as here) three
Parables to set forth the same thing, the lost Groat, and the lost Sheep and
Prodigal and all to set out the lost estate of a sinner; and the desire after,
and rejoicing of God in his return. So we have here Christians set forth by
wise and foolish Virgins, by faithful and idle and slothful Servants, by Sheep
a^ Goats.

We have in this latter part of this Chapter, fre^ ver. 31 to the end, our Lord
set forth under the (...) militude of a Shepherd and a Flock; a Shepherd (...)
his strict observation and inspection that he w^^ make into good and bad
Church Members, whos^ Erasmus says) are mixed together in the Church (...)
then. And it is no new thing for God's People (...) be compared to Sheep, both
in the Old as well as N^^ Testament we find it. See Ezekiel. 34. God's ancu^^
People set forth by Sheep and Goats in one Fold, ver. 17, 18. God sets out his
People in Scripture b^ clean beasts, not unclean. The Goat was a clea^
creature, and allowed for Sacrifice; a Kid of the Goats was as acceptable as a
Lamb of the flock: b^ when God will set forth wicked men, He speaks o^ them
under the similitude of Lions, Wolves, Dog^ and suchlike unclean Beasts. But I
come to the words.

We may sum up the whole of these verses into these four Parts, or Heads.

1. We have a description of the great Glory, Splendour, Throne, Royalty and
Attendance of JESUS CHRIST in his second Appearance and Coming.

2. We have the great Congression or gathering that will be unto Him, and
before His Throne, a this His second Coming, expressed by a figure, All Nations.

3. We have the curious and exact Segregation and strict Division that CHRIST
will make of this vast number into two Parts, Sheep and Goats.

4. We have the Examination, Trial, and final Sentence upon both Numbers
according to their Works.

That which lies first in order before us is the first of these Heads, which
is a third Relation of Christ's second Coming. We had two before in this
Chapter, first, His Coming under the capacity of a Bridegroom; Secondly, as a
Lord or Nobleman; and here, as a glorious King on his Throne.

Now we have in this Relation of Christ's second Coming four Circumstances
considerable.

1. The Capacity that He then comes in, which is as Son of man.

2. The Glory He shall come in, here called emphatically His Glory.

3. The great Attendants He shall have in this day; all the Holy Angels.

4. That in this Appearance of His, He shall place Himself upon a Glorious
Throne. Of these briefly in order.

1. He comes as Son of man, which is not an empty Epithet. Jesus Christ is near
an hundred times in Scripture styled Son of man; not half so many Son of God:
and as often is this title applied to him upon his second Coming, as upon any
other account. See Mat. 16.27, 28. Luke 18. chap. 19. chap. 22. and 21.27, 36,
and many times more. So it is plain, that when Christ comes again, He comes as
Son of Man. That Jesus Christ shall assume this N^me, with respect to this day
of His Coming, is so plain, that it is needless to multiply Scriptures to prove
it. But that which will be more needful to insist upon, is to enquire, Why it
may be thought he does so often render himself under this capacity.

First, He is styled Son of man, to show the property and reality of his
Person; Son of Man, and Man is the same. That He shall come as a Man in this
day, see Act. 17.31. He shall judge the World by that Man whom he has
appointed. Here he is called a Man, who in our Text is called Son of Man.
Christ would have us know, that in all His O^^ices to us. ward, He is, and acts
in them as the Son of Man, as a Man in his Preaching and Conversing on Earth;
In His Death a Man; In His Resurrection a real Man, Act. 24. Feel me, says
Christ, a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, Joh. 20. Act.
7.56. Stephen saw Him so, I see the Son of Man standing on the right hand of
God in His Mediatorship. 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one Mediator, the man Christ
Jesus. In His coming again He is a real Man; therefore it is recorded as to His
Coming. Rev. 1.7. Every Eye shall see Him. So that He may well by himself be
styled Man, or Son of Man. So Daniel fore^aw Him in a Vision of His second
Coming, Dan. 7.13. He shall appear as the Son of Man; that is, real substantial
Man.

2dly, He is called Son of Man, to set out the foundation of his Exaltation,
which was founded in his great Humility. For Son of Man is a title of dim^^t
on, a lessening title, an ^p^het to set ou^ Meanness, Lowness. That it is often
used, see Number. 23.19. God is not a Man, that he should lie; where it is used by
way of dimmution. So it is used Job 26.6. Son of man, which is a worm. So Psalm.
8. Wh^ is Man, or the Son of Man? Ezekiel is near an hundred times called the
Son of Man; and, as the judgment of the Learned is, it was to humble him.
Ezekiel was a Man wrapped up in the Visions of God, and he might be apt to think
of himself above a Man; he lived so much in Heaven as that he might be ready to
think he was above the Earth, and not of the Earth: therefore God in this style
minds him often of his original, Son of Man. It is recorded of some proud men,
who would derive their pedigree from the Gods, or from the Stars, as Alexander
the Great would be called the Son of Jupiter, the Son of the Sun; he did think
it below him to be called Son of Man. In our Lord's stiling himself Son of Man,
He bears in his mind his former low estate, which gave Him a right to this his
Glory; as the Apostle in Phil. 2.5 lays the foundation of Christ's Glory in his
Humiliation: and we have an eminent place to this purpose, Joh 5.27* And ^ath
given him Authority to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of Man. This
gives Him right to this his Glory.

3dly, Son of Man, to set out the suitableness of Christ to have converse and
followship with Men, which makes society with Him very desirous, and the
contrary very burdensome: Therefore Israel begged of God not to speak Himself in
his Glory, but to speak unto them by a Man like themselves; and it was reckoned
a mercy to them when God did so condescend to them in it, Deuteronomy. 11. We are Sons
of Men, therefore cannot be capable of communion with the Son of God.

4thly, Son of Man, to show that he shall be glorisied in the same body that he
suffered in: as his visage was more marred than any, Isa. 52. so his visage
shall be more glorious. Christ shall have a glorious Body, Phil. 3. this was
figured out in the Transfiguration, Mat. 16.

5thly, Son of Man, as he is the second Adam, so called 1 Cor. 15. By Man came
Death, by Man came the Resurrection of the Dead; Christ triumphs and is
victorious, conquers and recovers all that the first man lost. These
Circumstances considered, it is not an empty title when Christ calls himself
in his second Coming, Son of Man. The use of this Consideration:

Use.

Does Christ appear as Son of Man, or real Man^ Then this may serve for
instruction against those va^^ and airy imaginary Conceits as to Christ's
Coming Many that conceit his coming only in the Spirit, an^ invisible, do not
take notice that he is Son of Man i^ this his glorious Coming. This Doctrine,
however understood in our days, is a feeding, nourishing Doctrine. Christ
teaches his Disciples to eat ha^ Flesh, and drink his Blood, Joh. 6.51 to 58.
which in effect is to have our Faith conversant upon the reality of Christ,
that he had Flesh and Blood as we.

Qu. But how does this nourish?

I ans. It informs us and satisfies us that Christ took and carries our nature
on him, Heb. 2.16, 17. See how the Apostle applies this Consideration as
nourishment to the Hebrew-Church.

2. Christ by this assuming our Nature, puts himself into a capacity to be a
Sacrifice for us, as St. Peter speaks 1 Pet. 2.24. He bare our sins in his own
Body on the Tree. Heb. 10. A Body have thou prepared me. Christ overcame as Son
of Man, both the World and the Devil. This may be a ground of encouragement to
the common sort of men that they may do so, and it is laid down for that end
Joh. 16. I have overcome the World; and herein Christ is but as the
first fruits.

The second Particular we are to speak unto is, the Glory that Christ shall
come in in that day; Christ shall then have a ^^stinct Glory of his own beside^
the Father's Glory. So Mat. 16.27. Mark 8.38. Christ is said to come in His,
and in his Father's Glory. Now Jesus Christ must either be understood, 1. of
internal and essential, Exodus 33. or 2dly, external and visible shining Glory
and Splend or, brightly as the shining of the Sun, glorious and visible. This
is called Glory, 1 Cor. 15. One glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moon.
This outward Splendidness in appearance Job calls his Glory, Job 19. They have
(says he) stripped me of my Glory. This must be understood in God's words to Job
chap. 40. Deck thy self with Glory and Beauty. Visible Glory is sometimes
attributed to Apparel, as Isa. 63. Who is this glorious in Apparel. Now that
Christ shall have such a visible splendour as to his garb, is plain in
Scripture, see Dan. 10. Rev. 1. This Peter, James and John saw in the Mount.
And this Glory of Christ is rendered distinct from his Power; therefore he is
said to come in Power and great Glory, Mat. Mark, Luke. This Glory, as his
Robes, is such a Glory as every one shall not be able to behold; nay, it will
be a special favor to be admitted to behold this King in his Glory, Isa. 33.

This may serve to inform us of the vast difference as to the Glory between
Christ's first and second Coming. In his first Coming he had no glory upon him:
it was prophesied Isa. 53. that he should come without Beauty, or form, or
comeliness; then there was no outward glory or desirableness in him; He came
mean and poor every way, as to the outward; in his second Coming he shall be
clothed with Glory.

2dly, Consider that all this unexpressible Glory that Christ shall then be
clothed with, is but the same that all Christ's true and faithful Servants
shall be clothed with also: for Christ and they shall be glorified together,
Romans 8.17. -- if we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified together.
Col. 3.4. We shall appear with him in Glory. Phil. 3. Our vile bodies shall be
made like unto his glorious Body. O what can be greater comfort and
encouragement to Christians in bearing the image of Christ in his Sufferings
and low estate, than to think that you shall be glo^sied with him. That though
you have been amongst the Pots Ps. 68. you shall be covered with yellow Gold.
See what St. John says, 1 John 3.2. We shall be like him, we shall see him as
he is. And consider th^^ Christ's great design in his abasement, was, that he
might bring many Sons unto Glory, Heb. 2. Therefore Christians have cause
sufficient to slight present meanness and sufferings. Christians may say, as
St. Paul, Romans 8.18. I r^ckon the sufferings of this present time, etc. Thus
much for the second circumstance, The Glory Christ shall come in.

The third Circumstance in this his Coming is, His Attendance the Angels. I had
occasion to touch upon this before in the former verse, when I showed you that
the Angels should be Christ's subord^^ate Servants to execute his Will as to
the slothful Servant. Now have we the same more fully attested in this
Consideration; for from that and the other ends we here find Christ attended
with Angels. We have three Circumstances considerable as to them: 1. The
Certainty of their coming with him. 2. Their Number. 3. Their Nature.


1. It is here fore-spoke by Christ, as a certain truth, that the Angels shall
then come with him.

2. That all the whole body and host of them.

3. These Angels are expressed by their Nature, Holy, we have three Predications
in Scripture, of the Nature of Angels. 1. They are said to be mighty, 2 Thessalonians.
1.7. Mighty Angels. 2dly, said to be Elect, 1 Timothy 5.21. 3dly, They are said to
be holy Angels. And it is an eminent qualification in Angels that they are
Holy, so called Mark 8.38. Luke 9.26. they are very holy: and it must ^eeds be
that Christ's attend^nts be holy, these so near to Christ must be holy.

But some may object from Job 4.18. He charge his Angels with folly, which in
Scripture Language is as much as to say with sin.

I answer; Some here understand this to be spoken of the bad Angels which fell;
they he might well charge with sin: But this cannot be the meaning of it. 2.
Some understand the good Angels. 3. But others think neither good nor bad, as
understood personally, but with respect to the nature of Angels; he charge
the Angelical nature with sin, because a Regiment of them fell. But I think it
may be understood comparatively compared with God who is holy in the abstract,
They are chargeable with fully, because there is none holy as the Lord; As
there is none immortal as Him, 1 Timothy 6.16. He only has immortality; so He
only is holy. So that it may be true that the Angels of themselves may be holy
according to our Text, and yet in comparison with God chargeable with folly.

Oh what a glorious and large Attendance shall Christ have when he comes! What!
all his Angels* what a vast number then must he have come with him! Ainsworth
reads Psalm. 68. Twice ten thousand thousands of Angels, v. 17. or double
myriads, or innumerable, they cannot be numbered, Heb. 12.22. innumerable
company. As Abraham's seed could not be numbered; so neither can Christ's
attendants, those Angels, be numbered. Oh what an amazing sight will this be to
Christ's enemies, and what a rejoy^ing sight to Christ's true Spouse! O who
would not be interessed in Christ at that day! and how unspeakably dreadful
will it be at that day for Christ not to know you, or be ashamed of you, Mark
8.38.

We now proceed to the fourth Circumstance considerable in the first Head,
relating to the Glory and splendour of Christ's second Coming, which lies is
the glorious Throne thus expressed, Then shall he (...) upon the Throne of his
Glory; it shall be a most Glorious Throne. God's Throne is called a Glorio^
Throne, Jer. 14.21. So also is Christ's Throne called a Glorious Throne, Mat.
19.28. -- when the S^^ of man shall sit on the Throne of his Glory: where we
read that Christ as Son of Man, according to our Text, shall have a Glorious
Throne; Throne of Glory supposes very high Glory; as we may gather by
considering it in opposition to the Throne of Inquity, spoken of, Psalm. 94.20.
High ruling Iniquity is styled a Throne of Iniquity. So at this Sessions of
Christ he shall be clothed with Ruling Glory.

The Scripture speaks of three Thrones; first that Throne which is in the
highest Heavens, or, as we read Ephesians. 4.10. far above all Heavens. This is
called the Throne of God's Holiness and Glory, Isa. 63.15. And we read of
several Heavens: 1. The Cloudy-Heavens, the Air up to the Moon. 2. The
Planetary-Heavens, where the Stars are. And we read of a third, call^^ the
Heaven of Heavens, 1 King. 8.27. or, the third Heaven, which is that Heaven St.
Paul speaks of 2 (...) ^.2. there called the third Heaven.

Secondly, We read of another Throne pitched in Heaven, of a lower or middle
Heaven or Region: this we understand is spoken of, Dan. 7.8. where it is said
one sat like the Son of Man. This Throne was showed to John, Rev. 4. about
which Throne the twenty four Elders and four living ones are, and the Lamb in
the midst of it. This Throne shall appear when the lower Heavens shall depart
as a Scrowl, Rev. 6. On this Throne Christ sits, called the Lamb; and this
answers to what the Prophet Isaiah foresaw chap. 26. unto which the Lord
descends out of his Place, that is, from his former and proper Place; for the
Father attends Christ to this his Throne, therefore it is said of the Faithful,
Him will I confess before my Father and his Angels. In this day when Christ is
on his Throne the Prophecy of Zachary shall be fulfilled, Zech. 9.14. In that
day the Lord shall be seen above, or over them. The first of these Thrones is
invisible; 1 Timothy 6.16. -- dwelling in the Light which no man can approach
unto, whom no man has seen, or can see. The second is the Throne unto which
the Man-child is caught, Rev. 12. We read of a third Throne pitched in
Jerusalem answering to the Throne of David in Zion, as is plain 2 Samuel 5.7.
with 1 Chronicles. 11.5. and Psalm. 2. a Prophecy of Christ; Yet have I set my King
upon my Holy-Hill of Zion, literally understood, and must make good God's
Promise unto him, repeated Luke 1.32. The Lord God shall give unto Him the
Throne of his Father David, which was prophesied Isa. 24.23. He shall reign in
Jerusalem in Mount-Zion. This removing-place by Christ to the second of these
Thrones, will be a heart-amazing sight; see Mat. 24.30. it shall make all the
Kindreds of the Earth mourn, Rev. 1.7. The first of these Thrones is JEHOVAH's
alone; the second is the Father's and Christ's together; the third shall be
Christ's alone, when all Judgment is committed to the Son; and on this third
Throne the Saints shall also sit judging the World, 1 Cor. 6.

Now the great Question will be which of these three Thrones is intended in our
Text? Herein I do only humbly offer my thoughts with submission, not to impos^
upon any; I am ind^ned to believe that the second Throne in the lower Heavens
must be intended here, and I offer my Reasons that do induce me so to think:

1. Because this is the Throne about which the innumerable multitudes of Angels
do attend, according to our Text, as is plain, Rev. 5.11. as also chap. 7.11.
all the Angels stand about this Throne.

2. Because this Throne (...) our Text is the Throne before which the Saints
and Faithful must be, judged and therefore not that Throne on which they shall
sit with Christ to judge the World; for that Christ must reside some
considerable time on this Throne, is plain from the work done whilst he is
there; namely, first, the Battle sought there between Michael and his Angels,
and the Dragon and his, which we read of, Rev. 12.7. 2dly, Whilst there raising
the dead Saints. 3dly, Converting the Jews, which will not be done till Christ
is seen there; at Christ's sitting there on this Throne Satan is cast down,
being dispossessed then of his Principalities, who before was Prince of the Air.
4thly, Christ's Appearance and Christ's Throne are contemporary, they are at
the same time, the Scripture makes no difference in them, as St. Paul takes for
granted 2 Timothy 4.1. Now this we know that his Appearance is in the Clouds
first; no sooner does Christ appear, but he is on his Throne; so it is in our
Text, Then shall he sit on the Throne of his Glory.

But I shall wind up all with one word of Use and Comfort to the Righteous: Oh
admire the unspeakable blessed state of those who shall stand blameless before
this Throne of his Glory; there will be some preserved without fault before
this Throne, Jude 24, Rev. 14.5. of which sort are all the wise Virgins, v. 4.
they are Virgins; v. 5. and in their mouth was found no guile, for they are
without fault before the Throne of God.

We now proceed to ver. 32, 33. And before Him shall be gathered all Nations,
and He shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his Sheep
from the Goats: and He shall set the Sheep on his right hand, but the Goats on
the left.

In these two verses we have two of those four heads propounded to be spoken
unto in order to the close of this Parable;

First, The great Convention or gathering together that shall be at this his
Appearance, and the one set out by a Figure, All Nations.

Secondly, The strict and exact Segregation or Division that Christ will make
between them; He will divide the Sheep from the Goats.

Now in handling these two Uses my principal work will lie in Explication and
Application. In my Explication I shall enquire into these six Particulars.

1. Who is the Judge on this Throne; because it is said here, before Him.

2. Who are here to be understood by all Nations.

3. Whereunto shall this Gathering be?

4. What is to be understood by this Separation, or Division?

5. Why Sheep and Goats?

6. What may here be understood by right and left hand?

1. The Judge here will readily be granted to b^ the Son of Man and Son of God,
Jesus Christ alone we read of none but Him in this Judgment; o^e Context does
clearly grant it, and the Apostle seems so to understand it Romans 14.10. We must
all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. 2 Timothy 4. He shall judge the
quick and the dead at his Appearing. Christ is the alone Judge on this Throne
unto whom Judgment is committed, of whom John speaks Rev. 4.8. who was, is, and
is to come, which does relate to Jesus Christ.

But the chief circumstance to be enquired into, is, Who are these All Nations?
From these words most have gathered, that the latter end of this Chapter speaks
of the General Judgment, and they so take it, because till of late few
understood the order of the Resurrection, but thought that all, good and bad,
Saints (so professing) and Sinners shall rise at one and the same time, not
minding what St. Paul speaks 1 Cor. 15.23. or what Sr. John says Rev. 20. But
to the words, the Worlds ((...), Omnes Gentes) here translated All Nations,
bear a threefold acceptance; 1. Sometimes Gentiles, or Greeks, in opposition
to Jews. 2. Sometimes the same word, or the word which has affinity with it in
the Hebrew, is People, as Psalm. 47. last, Isa. 43.21. This People have I formed
for my self, or Nation, as here. 3. Sometimes this word is translated Family,
Luke 7.5. he loved our Family: so that it may be read, All Nations, All People,
All Families, all compact People, such united under Christ.

All Nations cannot be understood in many places of all the World in a strict
sense; as for instance, Deuteronomy. 29.24. it is there said, All Nations shall say,
what means the heat of this anger? whereas it cannot mean universally, 1 Chronicles. 14. last, God brought the fear of David upon all Nations. Psalm. 118. All
Nations assembled against David. Hag. 2. Christ is called the Desire of all
Nations; yet when he comes the Nations are angry, Rev. 11. and his coming does
not answer their desires: Therefore the Assembly does read this Hag. 2. The
Desire of all Nations, the Faithful in all Nations; though there, as here, it
is read all Nations. So it is said, Dan. 7. All Nations shall serve him, yet
God provides punishment for those that will not serve Christ, see Isa. 60. So
Christ tells his Disciples, they shall be hated of all Nations for his Name
sake, Mat. 24. These cannot be taken in a strict sense: but Rev. 21.24. of the
Nations of them that are saved: this bears the name of Nations distinct. From
all these instances I argue, That because we have read all Nations, it does not
necessitate us to believe that all the World must be meant by it in a strict
sense: for in all the forenamed places it cannot mean all the World, every one
will easily grant and acknowledge, and that all the World and every individual
person cannot be intended in our Text.

I urge in the third place this; That at no one time shall there be such a
gathering to Christ to Judgment; for we read in Scripture of two general
Judgments:

First, Those that are Christ's at his coming, 1 Cor. 15.23. And all that sleep
in Jesus shall God bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. And the rest of the dead lived
not until the thousand years were finished, Rev. 20. Neither does this in our
Text agree with the last general Judgment, for these Reasons: 1. There shall be
no Sheep judged in that Judgment; The Saints sit with him in Judgment, 1 Cor.
6. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World? 2. No^ the last and
general Judgment, because here the Angels are Christ's attendants at this
Throne and Judgment; whereas in the last they shall not be concerned: for the
World to come is not put into subjection to Angels. Therefore whereas it is
said in our Text, that Christ comes with all his Angels; to the last Judgment
He shall come with all his Saints, Zec. 14. Jude 14, 15. when he comes to
execute Judgment on the Wicked, Jude says, he comes with ^ee thousands of his
Saints; neither can they be Saints in a strict sense taken till themselves have
past the trial before his Bar, they meet him in the Air in his first Judgment,
they come along with him in the second. 3. Not the last Judgment in our Text,
because in the last Judgment Men shall be cast for not believing in the Son of
God Jesus Christ; but in this Judgment they shall be cast and condemned for
being unfruitful in works of obedience under Christ.

Besides all these Reasons, this in the latter end of this 25th of Matthew is
not meant of the general Judgment of the whole World, I will superadd the
Judgment of Men both Ancient and Modern; Gregory Nazienzen says to this place,
These spoken of here are wicked Believers, not Rebels; not Foreigners, but
offending Citizens. By Goats (the College of Rhemes on this place) separated
(say they) because till then they lived together in the Church; Heretics (say
they) went out before and so not to be separated here. The Assembly of Divines
(so called) on these Verses, 32, 33. Separated as Chaff from Wheat, at those
Mat. 3. as those in the Net, Mat. 13. the Flock of Christ, his Church in this
life, are like the Flock at Pa^an-aram speckled and spotted (Genesis 30.35.) in
one Flock; so says the Assembly on this place, which seems to illustrate the
matter before us. Erasmus says, here, By all Nations must be understood all
ranks and sorts of Men in all Nations: consequently not all Nations in a strict
sense. Ainsworth upon Caut. 1.8. feed thy K^^^^ or young Goat^ says The Plock
in Scripture (...) is comprehensive of Sheep and Gouts; Christ himself was
typed out by Goats and Kids, Lev. 16. H^^. 9. the blood of Goats typed out the
blood of Christ.

Now these Opinions of Men may help to clear me from Novelt, or Singularity in
my Notion on this Text. That those that shall be gathered before this Throne
are such as have professed Christ eparated from the World, as is plain in the
former two Parables, the foolish Virgins and Servants who are Christ's own
Servants: So here by Sheep and Goats are intended the Flock of Christ gathered
out of all Nations, among which are bad as well as good, caught in the Not,
M^^. 13.

I now proceed to the third Question propounded to be spoke unto by way of
Explication which was this Whither shall this gathering be?

Answ. first in general, to Christ; Where the Carcass is, thither will the
Eagles be gathered together, Luke 17.37.

2dly, in particular; Their gathering shall be into the lower Heavens, when his
Throne shall there be set, called Clouds and Air, 1 Thessalonians. 4. caught up to meet
the Lord in the Air, whither we read the Manchild is caught, Rev. 12. The
general Rendezvous is in Heaven, there this Throne is set, Rev. 4. Dan. 7.
therefore we read of numberless numbers before that Throne, Rev. 7. We read of
those that dwell in Heaven, chap. 13. We read of some cleared before this
Throne, chapter 19. and upon white Horses coming with Christ when he comes; which
they could n^ be, had they not been acquitted at this first Thron^ of Judgment.

The fourth Question by way of Explication, i^ What is to be understood by this
segregating or dividing?

Ans. The word segrego signifies to disjoyn, to take out of a Flock, to
disfranchise out of a Freedom or Corporation, to excommunicate; so Pasor read^
it: To segregate must be to disjoyn those that before were aggregated or
closely incorporated; therefore Sheep and Goats here cannot be understood
Church and World. The Church and World were segregated before, according to the
Apostle's directions 2 Cor. 6. Be ye separated or disjoined. These here spoken
of are in a Net together, in a Kingdom together; therefore he says, He will
gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, Mat. 13.41, 49. The Angels
(who then come with Christ) shall sever the Wicked from among the Just. These
are both together in the Wedding-chamber, Mat. 22. till Christ comes to sever
them. The Sheep and Goats of old in a literal sense were together in one Flock
under Jacob, Genesis 30. So also Ezekiel. 34. So in Job's Flock, Job 1. in his seven
thousand Sh^ep the Goats are comprehended. All which Instances do serve to
strengthen the Conjecture, that this Judgment in our Text is not to be
understood of the last and general Judgment, but such as have been drawn in to
profess Christ.

5th Quest. Why does Christ style them Sheep and Goats, seeing they are all
Christians in profession?

I answ. first, Because Goats were always reckoned clean beasts, fit for
Sacrifice under the Law as well as Sheep; therefore these bad Professors may be
called Goats, comparatively clean. Christ does not set them forth by Dogs,
Bears, or Lions, but Goats.

2dly, Sheep and Goats, to set out the difference in nature that was between
them though both in the Flock or Church. A Sheep is of one nature, and a Goat
of another. These Professors differ much in their natures, as a Goat from a
Sheep.

3dly, Goats are taken in here as well as Sheep, to show the particular charge
that Christ has of them both, the Goats as well as the Sheep, as plainly
appears Ezekiel. 34.

4thly, Goats and Sheep, because though they were both in one Flock, yet the
Goats were the worst in nature. There is much difference as to the worthiness
of Sheep and Goats in nature; the Goats are not so profitable as the Sheep:
therefore although the Goats are clean creatures, yet the Sheep were esteemed
as the best, and commonly in Scripture named first. So much for the fifth
Question by way of Explication.

The sixth Circumstance to be explained is, What may be here understood by
right and left hand?

Ans. 1. Right and lest hand is sometimes taken properly, sometimes improperly
and figuratively, in Scriptures: when it is taken improperly and significantly,
it implies great Power, or a powerful hand; So Exodus 15. The Right hand of the
Lord. So Psalm. 108. and Psa. 138. Let thy Right hand save me; that is, thy
strong hand.

2dly; Sometimes significantly, a place of pleasure and delight is understood
God's right hand, Psalm. 16. Sometimes the right and left hand of Christ are
properly to be understood; as in that request of the Mother of Zebedee's Sons,
Mat. 20.20, 21. Grant that these my two Sons may sit one on the right hand, and
the other on the left in thy Kingdom. Where we may understand both places ^o be
places of Honor, but most commonly the right hand is understood the place of
highest Honor; So Jacob understood it in his blessing Joseph's Sons. But by
right and lefthand in our Text, it may be understood properly; as Christ is
personally considered as Son of Man in this his day, so He has right and left
hand: And as we do properly give the right or upper hand to those whom we bear
esteem unto, so here it is to be understood, a place of high esteem; and under
that consideration Christ is said to be set at God's right hand, that is, he
place of high esteem: but I need not dwell upon this, I shall only add a few
words of Application to the whole, and so proceed.

Use 1. This does inform us where Christ when he is in his Glory on his Throne,
attended with his Angels, will begin, namely at his own House, his own
Servants, his own Flock; and thereto the words of S. Peter may properly be
applied (though there is more in i^) 1 Pet. 4.17. Judgment begins at the House
of God.

2. We have in this Relation a view of Christ's Glory in his second Coming by
his great and glorious Attendance, by the vast gathering that shall be unto Him
in that day; for I judge they are therefore called by a Figure, All Nations,
though properly (...) you have hoard) because of the vast numbers that shall be
of them; there shall be innumerable Multitudes of all Nations, Tongues and
Kings, eminently see forth, Rev. ^. All Nations, to show the Universal Power
that Christ shall have in that day over all Nations, no Nation but what must be
accountable unto Him. See what Glory is ascribed unto this Lamb, Jesus Christ,
all Crowns are cast down before Him, Rev. 4.10. and 5.8.

3. This informs us of that perfect knowledge that Christ shall have of all
Persons in that day, that He can divide before He try; He knows who are worthy
of the right hand, and who deserve the left at first (...).

4. We are by this Relation (if so to be understood, as I think it is plain,
that this is Christ's Flock not the general Judgment) informed, what little
cause Professors and bad Church Members have to bear upon and rest in their
mere Profession, if some may be Go^ts, (...) consequently condemned to eternal
torment. Consider, it will be an unspeakable favor and privilege for
Church Members to stand in that day; as Christ hines when he speaks to his
Disciples, Luke 21.36. when the greatest Men on Earth shall call to the Rocks
to hide them from His Face, Rev. 6.16.

5. In the last place, I would speak one word more by way of Counsel to
Church Members; Enquire into the sincerity of your Hearts, as well as the truth
of your Principles: Here is no fault found in their general Faith nor
Principles, the fault lay in the Root, it lay in the Nature of them they had
not a changed Nature, though in the Flock: What a weak Argument is it then for
Church Members to plead [I thank God I am as true to my Principles as ever, and
do believe whatever I did] whilst they want love to Christ in his Members, zeal
in his Service, and fruitful^^ss in their Places; do but always remember there
are Goats as well as Sheep in Christ's Flock when he comes to inspect them.

The Parable of the Kingdom.
We now proceed to Verse. 34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right
hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the World.

We now proceed to handle the last Head of the four propounded to be handled,
in order to the taking up the matter contained in the latter part of this
Chapter, which is the final and irrevocable Sentence past by Christ upon these
two Parties so segregated, or divided to the right and left hand; which
proceeding of our Lord with both Parties he seems to follow, in the same
method: As,

First, To denounce His Definitive Sentence;

2dly, Render the Ground and Reason why he does so;

3dly, Receive their Reply thereunto.

4thly, Take it off, by showing them their mistake.

1. I take notice of Christ's Order; with whom he begins, namely with them on
the right hand, with his Sheep or the Righteous, so styled in this Context: now
the whole passage and paragraph relating to the Righteous we have from ver. 34,
to the end of v. 40. which whole passage or paragraph issues in these four
Heads: 1. Christ's final Sentence to Glory, v. 34. 2. We have the ground and
reason rendered, v. 35, 36. 3. We have the Reply of the Righteous, v. 37, 38,
39. 4. We have our Lord taking off this Reply, showing them the truth of what
he had said. Of these in order.


1. We have considerable Christ's gracious Sentence and Invitation to Glory, in
these words, Come ye; In which passage we have these five Circumstances
considerable. 1. The present capacity that then our Lord shall be in; A King,
or the King, twice expressed in the Context. We have our Lord Christ under a
fourfold capacity set forth in this Chapter: 1. A Bridegroom; 2. A Nobleman
traveling; 3. A Lord coming, v. 19. 4. A King judging and ruling. The fourth
of which we are now upon.

2. We have in this verse the sweet amicable Epithet or Salutation used by
Christ to them (ye blessed of my Father) commonly in Scriptures a manifestation
of gracious respect, as I shall show you.

3. We have Christ's Gift or Bequeathment from this dear love and respect, and
that is the Kingdom; Which Kingdom we have,

4. Set out, 1. By the right and propriety of it, it is implicitly an
Inheritance, 2. Prepared for them; 3. As to the Antiquity and Eternity of it,
before the foundation of the World. These are the particular Circumstances in
our Text, of which I shall very briefly speak, 1. By way of Explication, 2.
Observation, 3. Application.

1st. By way of Explicacion.

1. What is this Kingdom?

2. What may we understand by this appellation, blessed of my Father?

3. How may it be said to be prepared?

4. How from the foundation of the World?

5. What said here inherit?

1. By this Kingdom, I understand the Kingdom under the whole Heavens,
prophesied clearly by Daniel chap. 7. and it is on the Earth, Rev. 5 10. over
the Nations, Rev. 2.27. three times expressed, Dan. 7.18, 22, 27. and it plainly
appears to be the same that Nebuchadnezzer had before, by the context there.

2. Why called blessed of my Father? This is a Salutation showing very high
esteem to them, and so it is used in Scripture from men; see Genesis 24.31. from
Laban to Abraham's Servant, Come in thou blessed of Jehovah; an honorable
title; as Ainsworth faith on the place. To that end is it used by Abimelech to
Isaac, Genesis 26.29 Thou art now the blessed of Jehovah. It is used also by Naomi
to her Daughter, Ruth 3.10. Blessed art thou of the Lord that has showed thee
kindness. From Saul to Samuel, 1 Samuel 15 13. thou blessed of the Lord. It was
used to express very great respect: And it is understood that there is three
circumstances contained in this Salutation;

1. A very amicable loving sweet Countenance; so Erasmus, paraphrasing on this
verse and saluting, says, He to the sort on the right hand, with a mild and
merry cheer, shall say, Come my Friends, whom the World counted vile and
execrable, but my Father counts honorable and praiseworthy. So he.

2. This Salutation was spoken with much reverence and honor to them unto whom
it was spoken, it was with bowing and worship to those unto whom they spoke.

3. This respect was given as they having received it first from God; as if
Christ should say, I esteem and honor you because my Father honors you; you
are not only blessed by me in this capacity, but my Father has determined this
Blessing to rest upon you.

But 3dly, Why is this Kingdom said to be prepared?

I answ. To prepare supposes these three things. 1st, To work or make a thing
is to prepare. 2dly, To establish, confirm or appoint: So God's Throne is said
to be prepared of old, Psalm. 9 7. so understood. R^m 9.23. there he speaks or
persons prepared unto G^^^^, or pre-appointed. 3dly, To prepare, is to make
every way fit and ready for the end.

But 4thly, Why are they invited to inherit?

Answ. To inherit supposes an Inheritance purchased by their Ancestors, as
Children inherit after their Fathers what was theirs, and that of right. The
Estate which a Father le^ves to be divided to his Children does properly bear
the name of an Inheritance, Prove. 13.22. A good man leaves an Inheritance to
his Children. Prove. 19.14. Houses and Riches are the Inheritance of Fathers:
Therefore, Luke 12. the man speaks to Christ to divide the Inheri^ance.

2dly, It is called an Inheritance, because it is long and worthy; it is not a
small inconsiderable Legacy that is styled an Inheritance, but a considerable
Estate. Therefore David styles God's Word by this name, his Inheritance, Psalm.
119.

3dly, Ca^^ed an Inheritance, because it was yours before you were born.

But fifthly, Why added here, before the foundation of the World?

I answ. 1. To set out the Antiquity of God's design of good to your souls that
shall be found in Christ. This was one of the most early Contrivances of God;
the Salvation and Glorification of Sinners was one of the great Concernments
upon God's heave in the very beginning: 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and
called us with an holy Calling, not according to our Works, but according to
his own Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the World
began. Ep^ 1 4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of
^he World, tha^ we should be holy and without blame before him.

2. To show the certainty of this Inberitance, therefore is Antiquity affixed
unto the Promise o^ Christ to come, His Death, the Kingdom of Christ, to set
out the certainty of this Inheritance.

Having thus explicated the words, I now proceed to observe ten Parts from
them. Part 1. That Jesus Christ the Son of God and Son of man, i^ his
distributions of Favors and Severities in his second Coming unto his own
Servants, is a King. Part 2. God the Father is the principal Agent in
Glorification of the Righteous. Part 3. That Jesus Christ in handing out Glory
to the Righteous, does it with apparent manifestation of dear affection, and
choice esteem, whilst he calls them, Blessed of his Father. Part 4. From this
word of invitation (Come) Jesus Christ loves and desires close communion with
the Righteous in that day of his Royal Glory; when he bids others Depart with
detestation, he says unto the Righteous, Come ye. Part 5. That the future
reward of the Righteous is not their own purchase, but their Fathers, it
descends to them as an Inheritance. Part 6. The proper reward of the Righteous
when Christ comes, is a Crown and Kingdom. Part 7. The Righteous receive their
Commission for taking and possessing the Kingdom from the immediate Mouth and
Throne of Christ at his second Coming. Part 8. The reward of the Saints is a
prepared and made-ready Glory; they shall not stay for it. Part 9. This
Kingdom, Rule and Glory was prepared properly, directly, and particularly for
the Righteous, and none else. Part 10. Preparation of Glory for Saints was one
of the first, great and chief Concerns of Almighty God before the World was
made.


Now all these Parts are very worthy to be largely treated on, but it will not
suit with the title of the Book so to proceed: therefore I shall touch them
very briefly.

1.

That Christ in this his Day is a King, will be easily granted, the Prophecies
are full to that purpose, Psalm. 2. My King, Psalm. 21. Psalm. 24. Isa. 32.12.
Zech. 9. chap. 14.9. Matthew. 22. the King came in to see the guests. And this is
considerable, that Christ is not then an ordinary King, but a Monarchical King
over all the Earth; Zech. 14.5. He shall reign from Sea to Sea, from the River
to the end of the Earth; Prophecy and Promise, Isa. 53.12. Greatest strength,
Rev. 17. chap. 19. King of Kings and Lord of Lords; not only King of Saints,
but King of Nations. There are two things considerable in this Royalty of
Christ; 1. His Imme^ Power; 2. His transcendent Glory. 1. His b^ mense Power,
as you have it before; He is a M^ narchical King, having (...) Power in Heav^^
a^^ Earth given him by his Father at his Resurrect^^ and now actually received
into Po^ession in this h^ season, Power over D^vils, over Men; all must (...)
to him in Heaven and in Earth. 2dly, (...) this (...) Christ shall have
transcendent Glory: Solomon (...) his Glory was but a weak Type o^ Christ's
^^^ry therefore it is prophesied, Isa. 33. the Righteous she see the King in
his Glory, Psalm. 24.

I shall speak a word or two by way of Application to this Part, and first to
them on the right hand, the Flock of Christ, by way of Admiration. Will n^^
this be a choice and unspeakable Privilege to a p^^ soul to enjoy a smile, an
amicable loving Countenan^ and Respect, full Satisfaction from Him, when He^ in
this Immense Power and transcendent Glory what think you of it?

But, 2dly; a word to those on the left hand. O^ the D^ead, the Terror that
will be in a frown, in a sharp rebuke, with^ire and wrath in the face from
Christ in that day! it struck the man dumb the first word, Mat. 22. Consider of
that also.

3dly; These things being so; is it not all our concerns to make peace with him
in time whilst he is a Lamb, before this day come? Kiss the Son. I must but
touch them.

Part 2.

That God the Father is the great Agent in Mant Salvation. These are the
blessed of the Father unto whom Christ ^ere speaks; Christ does but confirm
what was done before by the Father, unto whom he here speaks. That the Father
is the great Agent, and first mover in man's eternal Salvation, is plain; if we
observe these (...) in circumstances,

1. He promos^th Christ to come, and that freely, Genesis 3. as we find in the
Prep^ers all along.

2. He gives and sends Christ, John 3.17. He so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son. Gal. 4. God sent his Son.

3. The Father invites and draws to Christ, John 6.44. None come to him, except
the Father draw him.

4. The Father sends the Spirit, Act. 1. it is the promise of the Father; as
also Joh. 14.26. the Comforter whom the Father will send.

5. The Father converts and begets, Ephesians. 1.

6. The Father makes fit and prepares for Glory, makes meet for the
Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.12, 13.

7. He is said to save us; man's Salvation is attributed to him, Tit. 3.4. 2 Timothy 1, 9. who has saved us.

8. The Father gives the Kingdom, even this reward in the Text, according to
Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give
you the Kingdom. And all this God does from the root of render love dwelling in
him: therefore, says Christ, John 16.27. For the Father himself loves you.

Use 1. O then, what an unspeakable, unimaginable Love does appear from God to
man to these Considerations and the time of it does much aggravate it,
according to Romans 5. When we were enemies. It might well be said o^ John, that
God is Love.

2. If this he so, then men are taught unto whom to attribute their Salvation,
not to themselves. We say with Paul Ephesians. 2.8, 9. We are saved by Grace, by the
gift of God, not of Works. The Scriptures are full to this purpose; see unto
whom the Apostle a tributes his Salvation, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the G^ and
Father who has blessed us. So Col. 1.3. We gi^^ thanks to the God and Father
of Jesus Christ for (...) hope of Glory. 2 These. 2.13. We are bound to ble^ God
who has from the beginning chosen you 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our L^^ Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant Mercy ha^
begotten us.

Part 3.

That Christ in his Appellations and Congratulations to the Righteous does
manifest much sweetxess a^^ fullness of affection; Christ crowns his Saints wid
alacrity and cheerfulness, as we have heard in the explication. The Ancients
are of opinion that when the Salutation was given by Laban to Isaac's Servant,
and from Abimelech to Isaac and in such cases it was expressed with much
alacrity, and smiling, loving appearance; And that our Lord does manifest in
these words much affection we need not question, who went so readily and freely
to die for them, and whose love conveyed him forth with such strong desires to
sup with them before he went, John 13.1. Having loved his own; he loved them
unto death, Luke 22.15. with desire. The consideration of this his love
manifested in his going away may easily satisfy us, that in this his coming
again there will be an amicable joyful meeting: therefore this coming of his is
set out by a Marriage in this Chapter, which is a loving and joyful meeting. We
have a precious Prophecy relating to this day, Heb. 3.17. The Lord thy God in
the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy;
he will vest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing. The like
Prophecy we have, Esa. 53.11. He shall see the gravel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied; or, as the words may be read, Joyfully refresht. So the word is
used, Job. 38.27 as rain refresh the Earth, making it look merrily. And this
appearance of Christ does well suit with what Christ promises, Luke 12.37. He
will come forth and serve them, as Bridegrooms used to do in some Countries.
Christ is the Patron of the Saints Crown, and does it Joyfully. The reason why
Christ does so j^yfully crown his righteous Servants, is,

1st. The sweetness and goodness of his Nature, who though they receive all
from him, yet loves them for his own Graces.

2dly; From that sympathy that is between Christ and those that are righteous,
Psalm. 11. the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness. This consideration may
inform us of that unspeakable difference which shall be in this day between the
face of Christ toward the wicked and the righteous: he speaks to the one in
his wrath, Psalm. 2. and to the other in his loving kindness. Oh the face of
Christ will be set against the wicked, he will in that day despise their image,
Psalm. 73.20.

3dly; This should provoke the Righteous to do what they do in obedience to
Christ with joy and gladness, in consideration how gladly he shall reward them.
This Paul exhorts the Corinthians unto, as to Alms, 2 Cor. 9.7. not
grudgingly, for God loves a cheerful giver, because he is so himself; it is but
our reasonable service, Romans 12.12.

Part 4.

That Christ loves and desires close Communion with his Righteous in that day;
as appears by this invitation, Come: he is not content to let them remain at a
^stance: for we must understand this is oposed (...) what he says to the
other, Depart: here it is Come or draw near. This Come is se^ as a loving
invitaton; so it was used by Jehu to Jehonadab, 2 Kings 10.15, 16. Come along:
often so used in the Book (...) Canticles, chapter 4.8. Come with me. So chapter 5.1,
2. (...) Prove. 9.5. Come, eat. And according to this invit^tion it shall be, 1
These. 4. they shall be ever with the Lord.

See again the unspeakable difference in God's preceedings with these two sorts
of Persons; Come Depart. The Spouse of Christ can say, as it is Came. 7.10. I am
my Beloved's, and his desire is toward me, or his face. The Saints is comely,
the others is despised.

But a poor s^ul may say, How may I now know that I shall then be invited into
this Communion?

I answ. Thou may in a great measure know^ at present. How stands thy
desires as to Communion with Christ at present? the true Spouse of Christ
desires the kisses of his mouth at present, besides (...) Letters at a
distance. Can thou say, My Beloved i^ mine, and my desire is toward him?

Part 5.

That the reward of the Saints is an Inheritance, not their own purchase. This
is implied in that they are b^d to inherit. In opening the words I showed you,
that by an Inheritance is commonly underst^od a Patrimony, or a (...)
descending from Fathers to Children. The L^arned cell us, that there is a
critical difference between a Portion and an Inheritance, a Portion consisting
of Goods and Chattels, but an Inheritance is properly of Lands. Now a man may
come to possess an Inheritance two ways: 1st, as it does descend to him
line^lly as the rightful Heir: 2dly, by tree-gift, as having it freely given,
or being adopted unto it, made an Heir, as many are in a proper sense. In this
latter sense it does very well agree to, and set forth the state of the Saints:
for they are freely made Sons and Heirs, John 1.12. He gave privilege to be
called the Sons of God. And so Romans 8.17. And it is considerable that there was
a time when we had no right to this Inheritance, according to that, 1 Cor. 6.9.
The unrighteous shall not inherit: and in such a caparity were you, Ephesians. 2.12.
strangers from the Covenants and Promises. And that this Reward of the Saints
is called an Inheritance, (...) from these Scriptures, Ephesians. 1. 1 Cor. 3.24.
Heb. 9.15. 1 Pet. 1.4. These Considera^ions may inform us, if the Reward is by
Inheritance, there is then th^se four Circumstance^ considerable in it;

1. It is l^rge; every small Legacy or Gift is not an Inheritance.

2. It comes freely; an Inheritance is free: not the product of thy labor and
pains, it was the purchase of thy Ancestors; therefore it is called the
purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.

3. If an Inheritance, then not subject to imbeziement, it lies sure; not like
Goods and Chattels; a man will strain hard before he will sell the Inheritance
of his Fathers.

4. If it be an Inheritance, it is an honorable Portion; a person that has an
Inheritance is esteemed above one that has no Inheritance. If thou art an^
Heir to this Inheritance, live like an Heir. All God's Children are Heirs. Live
like an Heir to such an Inheritance, and have a special care of those sins the
will disinherit thee. There are ten sins laid dow^ 1 Cor. 6.9. that every one
of them will disinhe^ thee, as these: Fornication, Idolatry, Adultery,
Ess^minate. Abusers of themselves with Mankind, I he^^ Covetousness
Drunkenness, Revelling, Extortion, (...) of these lived in, will disinherit
thee or any person.

Part 6.

The particular Reward of the Righteous from Christ is a Crown and Kingdom;
Inherit the Kingdom, (...) the Kingdom, possess the Kingdom. In handling the
part I shall speak a very brief word to these fi^^ Heads.

1. Prove the Part. 2. Explain more particularly what this Kingdom is. 3. Where
it is. 4. When it takes place. 5. A brief word of Use.
1. For proof hereof; this was prophesied of from the beginning of the World.
Numb. 23.24. Balaan prophesied of it; so does David, and the Prophe Daniel: But
I have touched this in the Explication, only I will mind some places in the
New Testament, Jam. 1.12. Those that endure Temptations, shall have a Crown of
Life. So chap 2.5. The Kingdom that God has prepared for them that love him.
This is the Reward that is promised to the Elders that are faithful, 1 Pet. 5.2
Tim. 4.8. called a Kingdom, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. that you may be accounted worthy of
the Kingdom. Luke 12.32. Heb. 12. We, says the Apostle, receive a Kingdom that
cannot be moved, Luke 22.30. This is a Truth that the Scriptures do abundantly
make manifest.

2. What a Kingdom is this?

I Answer; When Kingdom in Scripture is spoken as it is taken for Rule and
D^^^^ion or S^veraignry. Thus it must be understood of Saul. 1 Samuel 14.47. of
whom it is said He took the Kingdom, that is, ^e entered into the Rule. So
understood also, 1 Samuel 18. and what can he have more but the Kingdom? This was
prophesied, Psa. 49. The Just shall have dominion. So Psalm. 22. And this is
plain in that Parallel-place, with this, Luke 19. from Christ's mouth, Be thou
Ruler over five (or ten) Cities. So that here when Christ says, inherit the
Kingdom, he means, take the Rule or Dominion.

3. Where is this Kingdom? (This I have spoken unto before, only a few words.)

I answ. This Kingdom shall be on Earth. See one Text more, Psalm. 45.16.
Christ's Sons or Children shall be construted and appointed Princes in all the
Earth, as Ainsworth reads it. Remember I have before given you two Scriptures,
which alone are sufficient, Dan. 7.27. Rev. 5.10. o^e says, under the whole
Heavens; the other, on the Earth.

4. When does this take place, or its beginning?

I answ. At, and not before Christ's second Appearing. And in managing this, I
shall comprehend the seventh Part, which was this, That they shall receive
their Commission from Christ's immediate mouth. This Part is exceeding clear,
if we will mind our Context, comparing ver. 31. with these verses; When the Son
of Man shall come, and all his Angels with Him, then this Kingdom commences and
not before; neither can it rationally be expected that they shall receive it
before. St. James says, they are tried when they are tried. And th^s
confirmed, Dan. 7.21, 28. They have made war with the Saints, and prevailed,
until the Ancient of Days come; and then it is that Judgment is given to the
Saints; then from that time the Saints possess the Kingdom. So Psalm. 49. The
Just shall have dominion in the morning. And this is plain from what St. Paul
speaks, Col. 3.4. When Christ who is our life shall appear. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. The
Saints were to have Rest when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with
his mighty Angels. As also our Text is plain. And it cannot be rationally
thought that the Saints shall have Kingdom before Christ, they are not to
expect it before Him, the Reign of the Saints is contemporary with Christ's;
neither can it be supposed that they shall have it before they have past
Christ's Bar, and are acquitted by Him. Therefore St. Paul exhorts the Church
to judge nothing before the time, and that is, when Christ shall appear, when
every man shall have praise of God.

This Part does instruct us in the greatness and compleatness of the Saints
Reward. What can be compleater and greater than a Crown and Kingdom? Is it not
the ultimate of all aims and endeavors of this World the highest of all
Seize on Earth^ is a Kingdom: Therefore this was the saying of Saul
concerning David, when the people sung of him in the dances, Saul has slain
his thousands, and David his ten thousands, and says Saul, what can he have
more but the Kingdom? Be therefore affected with the greatness of this Reward.
This Consideration might serve to satisfy a righteous Person in the lowest
condition they can be brought into in this world, the contemplation of this
Glory; this is the root of the twenty four Elders Song* Rev. 5. Thou have made
us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the Earth; and you
that are interessed in it, upon good grounds long for it; it is not
unwarrantable, it is but like Christ, who sits at God's right hand, expecting,
looking, waiting, till he make his foes his footstool. And labor to walk
worthy of this Kingdom and Glory, which that ye may do, observe these rules.

1. Labor to be loose from this present World. This is the proper use that
Christ makes of the same premises, Luke. 12.32, 33. Sell what you have, give al
^s.

2. Rej^ice in hope of this glory, Romans 5. Romans 12.

3. Do not make haste unwarrantably toward this Kingdom.

4. Do not envy at the prosperity of the wicked; thou have no cause to envy at
their state. See how pertinently David does urge this, Psalm. 37. throughout.

Part. 8.

That the Reward of the Saints is a prepared, made ready Glory; the Kingdom is
prepared. In handling this Part I shall, 1. show how the Scriptures elsewhere
speak in this language; 2. what is intended in this kind of speaking, and so
make the application. Briefly, That the glory of the Saints is prepared; see
Esa. 64.4. Men have not seen, nor heard what God has prepared for them that
wait for him: which St. Paul recites, 1 Cor. 2.9. only differs the word wait
into love him. We have David speaking in this language, Psalm. 31.19, That this
Kingdom is prepared for some out Lord seems to grant in his reply to the mother
of Zebedees Sons, Math. 20.11. It shall be given, says he, to them for whom it
is prepared.

But what is Comprehended in this saying prepared?

I Answer first, it sets forth the certainty of it. Because to be prepared,
ordained, and established, is the same in Scriptures Isa. 30. where we have
these two made convertible te^rms, ordained prepared, spoken of ^ophet. And so
may that place be understood, as I showed before Romans 9.23. this was ordained,
established for you.

2. To make ready, or prepare, supposes a proportioning or making fit or
suitable.

3. To make a thing by Skill and Art, as Noah's Ark is said to be prepared,
that is, by pains and art Heb. 11. he prepared an Ark, or framed an Ark. So God
framed this Kingdom.

4. To prepare is to beautify and adorn: and thus the new Jerusalem is said to
be prepared as a bride adorned for her husband, Rev. 21. Take only this word by
the way; Consider your inheritance is ready for you, do you labor to be ready
for that, it is made ready for thee in particular, and none else, the Righteous
only with Christ, exclusive of all others, it was prepared for them that are
righteous only. And this was shadowed out in the choice qualifications of those
first to be Rulers, Exodus 18. the counsel of Je^hr^ to Moses. They must be men
fearing God and hating Covetousness. 2 Samuel 23.3. They that rule over men, must
be Just, must be Righteous: and it was more eminently, held forth in chose
Judges set up by God in the second age of the world, when God himself is said
to be their King, 1 Samuel 12.12. but as a Just punishment (...) their Sin God
suffered them to go out of this path. But all the while that the unrighteous
Rule, David tells us that the Foundation of the earth are out of course, Psalm.
75. Psalm. 82. which are plain to this. But how will it be when it is in course?
Daniel tells us, chap. 7.18, 22, 27. four times expressed, the Rule and Dominion
shall be in the Saints; not Saints in their own or other men's thoughts, but
Saints and righteous, so reckoned and allowed, possess the Kingdom prepared for
you, says Christ with an emphasis, whom I acquit at my bar for Saints.

By way of Use I only leave this one word of Information, We may from hence be
satisfied of the infallible certainty of the righteous inheriting, it is
prepared, ordained, and appointed for thee; and all the Devils in hell cannot
turn it aside. This the prophet Isaiah foresaw, Chap. 24, he heard songs from
the utmost parts of the earth, glory to the righteous, the House of the
righteous shall be exalted, Psalm. 75. last.

Part. 10.

The 10th and last Part respects the antiquity of this Provision, it was
provided for the Righteous before the Foundations of the World: the Part was
this. That the reward of the righteous was one of those first and most weighty
concerns that was upon the heart of God before the world was made. There are no
things said to take their beginnings from hence but great and weighty things;
things ordained, appointed, effected before the Foundation of the world are
things of weight. God the Father loved Christ before the Foundation of the
World, Joh. 17. the Saints are chosen in Christ before the Foundation of the
World. Christ was appointed a Sacrifice for sin, a Lamb slain before the
Foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1.20. the Rest and eternal Reward before o^ the
Saints was prepared and finished amongst these weighty Concerns, before, or
from the foundation of the world, Heb. 4.3.

One word of Use and so I shall close this verse. From hence we may see and
perceive a glimps of the unspeakable happy state of righteous persons; they
were the Subjects for whom Jehovah was at work before the world was: not only
were thou upon Christ's heart before thou wast made, but before the World was
made. Oh admire the Love to and provision made for thee! so much for verse 34,

We now proceed to Verse 35. to the end of the 40. for I was an hungry, and ye
gave me mean I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger and ye took
me in: Naked and ye Clothed me. I was sick, and ye visited me. I was in
prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord,
when saw we thee an hungry, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? when
saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? or when
saw we thee Sick or in Prison and came unto thee? And the King shall answer,
and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

In these six verses we have contained the whole proceeding of our Lord with
these sheep. So divided, which for brevity sake I have comprised under Four
heads.

1. The Lords gracious Sentence to those separated on the right hand.

Secondly the Reasons (by the King on his Throne) alleged as the ground of
this his singular and signal favor toward them, which we have here, verse.
35.36.

3, We have the humble reply made by the Righteous by way of disclamation, not
sensible of their worthiness in the least. 37, 38, 39.

4. We have our Lord graciously taking off the Objections urged against
themselves; by way of explanation, verse. 40. inasmuch as ye have done it to
these it was done to me. The first of these I have largely spoke unto already
and finished. We now proceed to the Second which is the ground that our Lord is
pleased to insist upon, verse. 35.36. which in general is the kindness showed to
Christ in his brethren: which he branches out into Six circumstances of
distress: First, he being in them hungry; Secondly, thirsty; Thirdly,
harbourless; Fourthly, naked; Fifthly, sick; Sixthly, in p^^son. In all which
several states and conditions he had found these now on his right hand
ministering unto him in his brethren.

But because, according to promise, I would proceed with all possible brevity
in this latter part of the Chapter, and in the remaining three heads, I shall
handle them together which I judge most proper, because they are intermixed one
with another (that is) what we have contained from verse. 35. to 40. and there
being nothing difficult, or wanting explication, I shall reduce the whole in
these Six verses into Six heads.

First; we have a recitation of the former good actions performed by the
Righteous, urged here by the King as the grounds (next and immediately to his
own Grace) of that signal acceptance and unspeakable favor.

Secondly; We have contained a particular en^meration of those particular
actions, so acceptable to and taken notice of by Christ in them; which lies
here in Six circumstances: all which are very well taken by him.

Thirdly, We have Christ taking notice of all these actions of charity done t^
the least and lowest of his brethren as done to himself*

Fourthly, we have the modest and humble reply of the Righteous by way of
disclamation to this imputation.

Fifthly; We have implicitly supposed the relation believers stand in to
Christ, though, hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, imprisoned, yet Christ's brethren.

Sixthly; We have Christ's acknowledgment of the poor and least as well as of the
greatest and richest of his disciple^ in this day of his great Immense Power
and transcendent Glory, the King, attended with all his Angels, owns these to
be his brethren.

From the whole of this Context I shall lay down these Nine observable Parts
from the Connection of the verses:

Part 1. That the true demonstration of our eternal Election to glory is
through our obedience and Friendship to Christ, prepared for you so qualified:
chosen in him before the foundation of the World, Ephesians. 1.4. through
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. God has from the beginning chosen
you to Salvation of the Spirt, and belief of the truth, 1 Pet. 1.2. elect
through Sanctification.

Part. 2. It is our Lords way in his dealings and proceedings with men, to
render a reason of his so proceeding with them.

Part. 3. Jesus Christ in his distributious to men in Judgment, has a special
eye to their works respectively.

Part. 4. That works of mercy, charity, and alms, b^^r a superintendency over
all works and duties whatsoever, as to acceptance with God, and profit to our
selves in time to come.

Part. 5. That it is incident to Christ's dear friends and brethren, to suffer
hunger, thirst, nakedness, and all manner of distresses whilst on earth.

Part. 6. Jesus Christ in his Celestial glory at the right hand of his Father
does espouse the state of his Disciples and Saints here on earth.

Part. 7. It is the nature of one truly acceptable to Christ to disclaim all
worthiness in themselves, they see no such worth as Christ sees in them.

Part. 8. Jesus Christ does record and register each particular action of
charity proceeding from one Saint to another, if but a draught of drink.

Part. 9. The poorest Saint, or true believer, in his lowest state and
Condition is by Christ owned as his brother.

Of each of these parts I shall speak a few words briefly, and hasten to finish
this paragraph.

Part. 1. The first Part does arise from the Connection of these verses with the
former, which was, First, that the true and infallible demonstration of our
eternal Election to glory hereafter, is by and through our Cordial Obedience
and friendship to Christ. See how this part is raised, the Kingdom was prepared
for you before the Foundation of the world (who are these) those who feed,
cloth, and own Christ here in his lowest state in his members; Those three
Scriptures before named are very pertinent and pregnant to our purpose to bear
a testimony to this Part; weigh what St. Paul says, 1 Ephesians. 4. According as he
has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World; as verse. 5.
predestined us to the adoption of Sons by, in, (or through) Jesus Christ.
None are elected but as they are in Christ, 2 These. 2.13. He has from the
beginning chosen you through Sanctification, Those Thessalonians foreseen by St
Paul to adhere to the last Antichrist, excepted, who received not the tru^ in
the love of it, and so demonstrated themselves n^ to be elected; but these,
verse 13. are elected, as the are found abiding in Christ and his doctrines:
yo^ says the apostle, are of these who are Sanctified, chos^ before the
Foundation of the World; as here in (...) text. So that herein it does appear
that you trul^ and certainly are chosen by him, in as much as yo^ are found in
the way that lead thereunto. To the does that place in St. Peter agree, elect
according (...) the foreknowledg of God, through Sanctification of the Spirit
unto Obedience, not without* This application of Election is never applied to
any but as they appear called, and the application of Election is by the
Scripture suspended where these due qualification are wanting; as for example,
The person without the Wedding Garment is supposed by Christ one (...) those
not chosen or elected, Math. 22. he was only come in upon the invitation, not
elected.

But against this it it objected from Romans 9.11.12. in these verses (in a
parenthesis) before the Children had done good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to Election may stand, not of works, but of him the Calls:

To this I answer that this Text does not at all relate unto this part before
us, and so it will easily appear if we consult the original place Genesis 25.
First, because this Text does not refer to particular persons, but nations:
Secondly, neither does this Text re^er to eternal, but temporal good and evil:
Thirdly; neither are either of the persons actually loved or hated till good or
evil appears from them: it was only said before the elder shall serve the
younger. Fourthly; neither can the works here spoken of intend
Gospel-Obedience, but works of the Law, as is plain verse. 30, 31, 32. The Use
that we may make from this Part to our selves, is,

1. From hence be instructed to measure your Election by your effectual Calling
and Conversion. Many are at a great loss in themselves about their Election,
and many have been upon the point of Desperation, whilst they have been upon
the question, whether they were Elected or no. Are ye of those that the Kingdom
is prepared for before the foundation of the World? you may know it by this:
you are prepared also, see Romans 9.23, 24. You are Vessels prepared unto Glory
by Sanctification and Friendship to Christ.

2. Would you be making your Calling and Election sure and certain? then the
way to effect it, is to grow in grace, according to what St. Peter calls for, 2
Pet. 1.10. Add to your Faith Virtue, etc. Those that experience increases of
Grace, and answer to every Duty called for by Christ in them, and from them, as
here in our Context, may read their state to be sure and certain, and such are
those for whom the Kingdom is prepared before the foundation of the World. So
much for the first Part.

Part 2. That the Lord Jesus in his dealings and distribution^ to all sorts of
Men, does not proceed according to his Royal Prerogative, though in his highest
Royalty and Glory; but according to undeniable reason, Jesus Christ renders a
reason of his proceedings on both sides. And this way of proceeding is God's
way from the beginning of the World. When God will save Noah, and drown all the
World, he gives his reason on both sides, Genesis 7.1. For thee have I seen
righteous before me in this generation, and for the rest he gives this reason,
for the imaginations of their heart were only evil, and that continually. So in
that eminent differing dispensation to the Rigteous and wicked, Isa. 3.10. God
gives the reason For they shall eat the fruit of their doings; for there ward
of their hand shall be given unto them. A^ so in all Cases God is very ready to
render a realo^ of his Dispensations to Men: therefore he invi^^ them to reason
with him. God is not Arbitrary i^^ his proceedings with Men, but upon equal and
^^tional grounds. And were not this the manner (...) Gods proceedings, how
should every mouth be stopped, as they shall be in the great day.

1. I know many will plead the Sovereign Power of God in this place, from Romans
9.21. Ha^^ not the Potter power over the Clay?

For answer to which, I say, The great design o^ the Apostle, is to set forth
the sole power that God has (being the free Donor of Salvation) here (...)
make choice of what terms or conditions he pleases, in order to the way of
saving men, whether by the deeds of the Law, or Faith in Christ; and he has
absolutely rejected that way of the Law, and made choice of Faith in Christ as
the terms of Salvation; as is plain, Romans 3.4. By the same lump the posterity
of Adam. Yet however the making these Vessels different, is not only the bare
Will of God, but upon terms. See the original place, Jer. 18.10, 11. 2 Timothy
2.21. The consideration of this part may administer great satisfaction to poor
souls, they have a very righteous God to de^l with; who will judge righteous
judgment, not according to his Prerogative, but according to the works of each
Person: which leads us to the Part, which was this, That God in his
distributions to men in Judgment, has a special eye to man's work respectively,
Come ye blessed of my Father, for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. I
shall be very brief as to this Part, because it does border upon ^he former.
And besides, this Truth is so apparent, that the very current of Scriptures
contribute to the proof of i^. We have a cloud of witnesses as to this Part,
the recompense from God to Men is proportioned to their works, whether good or
evil. This Rule was stated by God at the first in the days of Cain and Abel,
when we read of but two men in the World, Genesis 4.7. If thou do well, thou
shall be accepted, if evil, sin, or punishment, lies at the door. This Rule
God proceeds by to Abraham, Genesis 22. For because thou have done this thing,
therefore will I bless thee. If any one question the truth of this Part, let
them read these Scriptures, Psalm. 62.12. Isa. 3.10. Rev. 17.10. Prove. 24.12.
Ezekiel. 18.33. Matthew. 16.27. Romans 2.6. 2 Cor. 5.10. 1 Pet. 1.17. Rev 2.23. Chap.
20.13. Chap. 22.12. and by the taking in these Scriptures, I hope you will
easily be satisfied of the truth of this Part.

Yet some will be ready to Object, That if God rewards men according to their
works, and men have only what they work for, where then is Grace? St. Paul
says, We are saved by Grace, not by Works.

I Answer, We must distinguish between Legal and Evangelical works: therefore
St. Paul tells us, it is through Faith, the work of Faith is not excluded in
part of salvation.

2ly, The way propounded in which we are saved is of Grace, we thought not of
it.

3ly, We are saved by Grace, if we consider the vast disproportion between the
wages and work: all our Obedience is nothing compared with the Reward. Though
God rewards every man according to his works, that is, in kind, good for
good, yet not quantity; all we do is not to be compared with recompense of
reward; the Saints are by Christ (...) counted worthy of the Kingdom for which
they (...) suffer. 2 These. 1.5.

4thly; Salvation is free, and of Grace, because (...) the strength by which we
act is from himself: (...) may say of all we do in order to salvation, as Da^^
says of the people, 1 Cor. 29.14. All things (...) of thee, and of thine own
have we given thee.

And whereas many are apt to Judge that this Pa^ does encourage man to trust to
his own righteouness.

I Answer That our own righteousness must su^pose a righteousness without
faith, or distinct (...) faith, and that trusted in without an eye to Christ
and his righteousness: but know this that there in righteousness called the
Righteousness of Saints, and this Righteousness of Saints upon true and right
beses has an honorable esteem with Christ. Rev. 19.8. the white linen is the
righteousness of Saints: and John says, he that does righteousness is
righteous, ^ he is righteous. Now because this part seems to border upon the
former, I shall leave but a brief word of application unto it and that is this;
That God (...) no respecter of persons, according to Acts 19.35. that is a
certain truth which we ought to receive. Now herein does God clear himself from
respect of persons, in that he does dispense to each person according to his
works.

Part. 2. From hence we may take great encouragement to righteousness and
holiness; Study what St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 15.58, Your labor is not is vain
in the Lord.

Part. 3. The Consideration of this part may be (...) means to caution persons
against sin: because thou shall be certain to receive according to thy works.

Part. 4. And the main is drawn from the reason ^here given by Christ, which
does center in Charity; the Part was this, That Mercy, Charity and Alms
extended to Christ's true brethren whilst here on earth, is above all services
acceptable to God, and brings in greatest profit to a person at Christ's
appearance, these services of Charity are superintendent above all other
services whatsoever in Christians. This part is sounded upon 3 Circumstances in
this Text, First, we have the grace of Charity only made mention of by Christ
at this day; therefore it must needs be mighty acceptable to him. Secondly, we
have Christ's favorable aspect and amicable Countenance on these thereupon.
Thirdly, The Kingdom is received upon this very ground, Alms and Charity
Distribution to the poor is compared to Sowing, 2 Cor. 9. which does naturally
produce increase, it is a casting seed into the earth, or, as Solomon; upon the
waters. In handling this part, I shall speak to these five heads a few words.

First; prove the Point in both parts, the acceptance to God, and profit to our
selves.

Secondly; show the nature and root of our Alms and Charity, in order to this
end.

Thirdly; offer some Scripture-Reasons why it is so.

Fourthly; speak something to the Subjects of our Charity.

Fifthly; make some use of the whole.

1. That Charity is so acceptable to God, when rightly performed; See James.
28. this is Called pure religion and undefiled before God, or in his right;
this is pure Religion, or the highest Re^^gion.

2. This is Called good Works. Works of Cha^^ above all works are Called good
Works; they most (...) all resemble God, who is good to all: That they a^^
called good works see Acts 9.16. spoken of Dorc^ who the text says was full of
good works. 1 Tim^ But (which becomes women professing Godliness) (...) good
works. Heb. 13. But to do good, and to distribute forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is (...) pleased.

3. The person found in the services is in Scripture called a good person.
Psalm. 112. a good man he (...) called that is found in it.

4. This service is very acceptable from those imp^tations put upon it; see
Luke 11.41. But rather give alms of such things as you have, and behold, all
thing are clean unto you. It appears to be of a cleaning nature. Moreover it
bespeaks God to be his friend; it is a pregnant place which we have, Luke.
16.9. Maks to your selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness it makes God
thy friend after death if it be performed from a right root.

5 It appears to be acceptable, in that the Lord bears those works in mind,
Heb. 6. God is not forgetful of your work and labor of Love showed to his
name, is that you have ministered to the Saints, and do Minister.

6. These services appear to be an acceptable service to God, because he does
declare that he loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. It is said of Cornelius that
his prayers and his alms were come up in remembrance before God, Acts 10. We
have an eminent place Phil. 4.18. but I have all, abound, and I am full having
received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an Odor of a
sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable well pleasing to God.

2ly, Charity is not only pleasing to God, but it is profitable to our selves:
1. Here; 2. Hereafter, at Christ's coming.

1. It is profitable here, many Mercies are promised here: See the singular
favor showed from God to Abimelech, Jer. 39.17, 18. foreshewing favor to
Jeremiah when he was in the Dungeon, he shall be delivered in the day of God's
judgments for that reason: So we have it, Psalm. 41. He that remembers the
poor, shall have many Mercies in this life, preservation in sickness and
deliverance from death, strengthening upon the bed of languishing; God will make
all his bed in his sickness. If these be the Qualifications, God will not
deliver him to the will of his enemies. Oh the many merciful Promises, a
charitable person is under at present: therefore, says Solomon, Eccl. 11.2.
Give a portion to seven, and to eight; for thou know not what evil shall be
in the Earth; that is to say, that so thou may have mercy in an evil day.
See what a special present privilege belongs to such. Psalm. 112. Such a one
shall not be afraid of evil tidings; these Mercies he shall receive from God as
tokens of his acceptance, he shall procure the love and esteem of Men at
present: Oh how is a charitable person in the affections of persons; the
Apostle says, Romans 5. That for a good man some would even dare to dye; that
is, a charitable man, he is so in the affections of men. These are Privileges
here.

But 2ly, Hereafter it is profitable according to our Text there is a profit,
Eccles. 11.1. After many days thou shall find it, that is, afte^ this life,
these in the Text and Parable after many days shall find, Psalm. 112. Such a
one as has dispersed to the poor, his righteousness endures for ever, Matthew.
6. God shall reward him openly. Luke 12.33. Sell the you have, and give Alms;
provide your selves Bagg^ which wax not old, Treasures in Heaven that (...)
not; where no thief approaches, nor moth corrupts. 2. Cor. 9.6. But this I
say, he which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly: and he that sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. charge them that are
rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy: that
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing is
communicate, laying up in store a good Foundation for themselves against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal Life.

But may some say, May not I give all my goods to the poor, and yet have no
profit, 1 Cor. 13.

I shall therefore lay down ten Qualifications or Conditions in our Charity, or
Alms necessary as to God's acceptance, and our own profit, which are these:

1. If thou would find this Remembrance, Acceptance, and Profit, do thy Alms
secretly. Doubtless this was the manner of those in the Text, for they could
not remember they had done any such thing; therefore they had not designed
observation or praise of men. This is one of those Rules given by Christ,
Matthew. 6. design secretly, not to be seen of Men; provided God sees, it is
enough.

2ly, In thy Alms, to the end it may be acceptably taken, do it cheerfully, not
grudgingly, 2 Cor. ^. God loves a cheerful giver, that does it as to the Lord
himself.

3ly, If thou be able, be rich in good works: 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that
are rich in this world, that they be rich in good works. It does not please
God, for one richly blessed in this world, to be poor and scanty in good Works.
When Christ makes a promise to reward a cup of cold water, it must be
understood that this is answerable to his poor ability: for where much is
given, there much is required. The poor widow is by Christ commended for her
two mites, because it was what she had, Luke 18.

4ly, In Charity and Alms we must give our own, not rob others, oppress or
abuse others to give: we are not obliged to borrow to give; we are, as we have
received, to give: Job clothed the poor with the fleece of his sheep. Solomon
counsels thee to honor the Lord with thy substance, Prove. 3.

5ly, If we would have our Charity acceptable, we must be speedy in it, not
delay to do our alms. Pro. 3.28. say not to thy neighbor go and Come again,
when thou have it by thee.

6ly, Thou must do thy alms with discretion so as it may be most answering to
his needs and his profit. Thus it is said of the charitable man, Psalm. 1 12.5.
he guides his affairs with discretion.

7ly; In our alms and Charity we must do them with simplicity, not with
partiality: though an enemy, one that has done thee wrong, yet relieve him.
Romans 12.13.20. if thine enemy hunger, feed him; distribute to the necessity of
Saints: eye their wants, not their friendship to thee, if in need let them be
who they will. See what Job says to thi^ Job. 29. such as were ready to perish
were the objects of his charity; he was eyes to the blind, legs (...) the lame,
he made the widows heart to sing.

8ly; Our Charity should be done in hope (...) faith; as the plowman sows in
hope, so ought we (...) do.

9thly; In love to God and Christ. This must b^ understood 1 Cor. 13. by
Charity: if I give (...) my goods to the poor, and have not Charity, it
profit^^^ me nothing. We ought to give in love to God.

10ly; They must be universally and constantly. We are Commanded to be ready to
every good word at all times: not like the stony ground, Math. 13. for a
season, and not continue. Charity with these qualifications has its
superintendency of all duties of obedience whatsoever; for Mercy is more
acceptable then Sacrifice.

But some may say, why is alms so acceptable, and so exhorted unto above all
duties?

First; Because a man in no works does so resemble God and Christ, as in
Charity; therefore it is called for, Math. 5.16. that we might be like our
heavenly Father. Luke. 6.35. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is
merciful. This makes Paul say to the elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20.
that it is a more blessed thing to give than to receive; because most like God,
who gives all, but receives nothing; a charitable person bears the image of God
most perfectly.

Secondly; Alms and Charity to Christ's disciples is so acceptable to God, from
that tender love that God bears to his poor members. Parents love those who
show love to their Children; and from the Love that Parents have to their
Children, they Love to see them show Love to each other. Gods Children are as
near and dear to him as the apple of his eye, Zech. 2.

Thirdly; Because if Alms be done as they ought to be done, they be a true
demonstration of our Love to Christ; and he loves them that love him, Pro. 8.17.

Fourthly; Works of Charity do choicely demonstrate a person to sit loose from
present things; the Contrary whereof is Covetousness, which the Lord abhors,
Psalm. 10.

The next thing that I am to speak unto, is, to set forth who are the proper
objects of our Charity in order to acceptance with God and Christ. Which I
shall show.

1. Negatively: not idle or slothful persons. See what St. Paul says as to
that, 2 These. 3. the Apostle discourses his through dislike to such, and
declares his Apostolical In junction in that Case, which was, that those which
would not work, neither should they eat. We are not to feed such, though they
should be hungry.

Secondly; affirmatively.

First; we must chiefly and principally relieve those who do most lively bear
the image of God, in point of holiness; they must be so like Christ, as he may
say another day, I was an hungry, and ye gave me meat. That was the rule that
David observed, Psalm. 16. he extended his Charity to those who excelled in
virtue. So Math. 10. Mark 9. the ground is because they belong to Christ.

Secondly; your Charity must in the first place, and most strongly run out to
those whose hunger, thirst, ^akedness and imprisonment is for Christ's sake; in
so doing, you do most properly relieve Christ: relie^ to such so suffering,
brings acceptance.

Thirdly, To those who succeed Christ in the work of the ministry on earth; in
order to such does Christ speak in special manner, Math. 10.40. he that
receives you, receives me, such (says Christ) are worthy of their meat: to
such especially does John direct Gaius to show Charity 3 John 7.8. because that
for his names sake they went out, taking nothing of the Gentiles. We therefore
ought to receive such, that we might be fellow-helpers of the truth; such are,
or ought above all, to carry the most lively image of Christ, and may bear the
name of Christ's brethren. Take an example how acceptable this sort of Charity
was to God from the old Testament, 2 King. 4.8. from the Shunamitish woman to
the prophet of the Lord who built a chamber, provided him a bed, stool, table,
Candlestick: ^e the favor of God to her. 1. She has a Child past age, and
hope; 2. When this Child died it is raised to life again as a requital of this
Charity (as is plain in the Context.) The Use of this part may be first for
Exhortation; Labor to be in a capacity to discharge this duty so acceptable to
God; take pains in honest ways, that thou may have wherewith to do good. See
the Exhortation of St. Paul to Titus, Maintain honest Trades, as it may be
read, to this end. So Ephesians. 4.28. Labor, working with your hands, that you may
have to give to him that needs. And this counsel is not only to Members, but
Preachers and Elders: for it is a more blessed thing to give than to receive,
in them. If this be so acceptable a service then let us labor to be found in
it: who would not do that which will please God? this is a Sacrifice wherewith
God is well pleased, Phil. 4.18. Heb. 13.16.

Fourthly; Study the great profit, the certain and infallible profit of this
duty: the return is sure and great, and it is not forgot: Christ remembers
every part and action from this root. As you have opportunity do good to all,
but especially to the household of faith: make you friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness. Works of Charity are of exceeding esteem with Christ, as
appears by his bringing them forth at this day of his glory: for, I was an
hungered, and a thirst, and naked, and so forth.

The Fifth Part was this, That our Lord keeps a particular record of the good
deeds performed by his Servants. Our Lord seems here to take pleasure to
particularize in every action one and other; it does not only please him to
say, because you were charitable, and so take it by the great, but he does
enumerate and show wherein. He does not stop at this, that they are sheep, that
they are righteous, but each particular action shall be brought out. When God
of old would set out Job to the best advantage* he does not only in the general
say, he was a Godly man, but three times over he does delineate him in several
particulars: 1. he is perfect: 2. upright: 3. one that fears God: 4. one that
escheweth evil: 5. he maintains this integrity, being tried: 6. this he does
beyond all other men in that day, and in those parts. So for works; see how
Christ commends the Churches in particulars, Rev. 2.2. of Ephesus he says, I
know thy works, labor, patience, thou can not bear with those that are evil;
thou have tried these that say they are Apostles, and are not; and have not
fainted. So of Thyatira, verse. 9. I know thy works, charity, Service, Faith,
and the last more than thy first.

1. The Lord does this with a design to magnify the virtues and services of
his Children, that their graces might look to the best advantage and largest
magnitude.

2. This the Lord does to set forth his distinct knowledge of what we do; not
only does he know in general, but in particular.

3. His goodness that he will not let slip the least service.

4. To set forth his exact Righteousness, he records, that he may reward.

Use 1. This may serve for a spur to industry in all good duties, they shall
not any of them be forgotten. If we cannot do the great if we do the less, it
shall be rewarded. The farthing is not forgotten, given by the widow Luke 18.

2ly. This may serve for a Check to hypocrisy; we need not Covet to be seen of
men, we see the least act or service done to Christ shall be brought before his
bar. 1. Cor. 4.5. God will then make man confess the hidden things of darkness.

3ly. From hence we may read the tender love that Christ bears to his disciples
that he takes such pleasure to bring over each of their actions as parents do
of their children: they are not content to say he is a good Child, but set it
out in particulars.

Use 2. From hence we may be informed that Christ will proceed by the same rule
against his enemies, Psalm. 50. God will set their sins in order before them:
and so, Jude 14.15. not only shall their ungodly deeds, but their hard speeches
shall be mentioned. So in the following verses we find, that Christ does as
well and as particularly enumerate the neglects of the Goats as of the
performance of the sheep. We now proceed to the 6th Point employed in the text
which was this, That the lowest poorest most indigent wanting state in outward
is incident to the dearest choicest and most acceptable Saints, Christ's
brethren; not only to be without possessions, lands, and livings, but without
meat and drink, and dewlling place: persons are sometimes accounted poor in
comparison to Rich when they have but from hand to mouth, nor to spare. But our
Text speaks of the extremity of poverty, thirsty, naked, the lowest state
herein is incident to the best of Saints, such as Christ may own, and be
content they should personate him. I was a hungry, I was a thirst, I was a
stranger. The truth of this Part appears from what Christ spoke by way of
preparation before hand to his disciples to arm them from such a state:
therefore Christ foretells the poor to be the subjects of the Gosple-Church,
Math. 11.5. the poor receive the Gospel: ye shall have the poor always with
you. Mat. 26.11. and Christ was sent to preach the gospel to the poor, Luke. 4.
God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom, Jam. 2.5. Does not this preparative saying of Christ and his Servants,
suppose such a state to be the state of choice Christians, and the best of them
such as are rich in faith? But Secondly, to prove this Part we have matter of
Fact; this has been the state of the best; David himself at some turns
sustained hunger believing, but we have a lively instance of this state in the
holy Apostle St. Paul, the great Apostle of the Gentiles, yet liable to the
great extremity of poverty. See 1 Cor. 4.11. We both hunger, thirst, and are
naked, having no certain dewlling place. Here we have this holy precious Saint
exercised with four of these distresses in our text. See again 2 Cor. 11.27. in
weariness and painfulness, watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings,
(we most not here understand religious fastings, but fastings for want of food)
in cold and nakedness. And this was so common a Condition, as that it grew
Customary unto him, Phi. 4.12. I have learned to be full and to be hungry. We
read of a Lazarus yet worthy of Abraham's Bosom, though a beggar at Dives gate.
Yet I would not be mistaken in this, as if I encouraged a trade of begging; I
fear there are but few of our common beggars of this stamp; I dare not allow
it. It is true, David begged once or twice in some particular necessity, but
not constantly. I think the generation that make a trade of begging, are the
worst of people and such as God allows not; they are under such a curse as the
posterity of Judas, which was pronounced as a severe Judgment, Psalm. 10 9, 10.
let his Children be vagabonds and beg, let them seek their bread. There are
some poor whom God is specially concerned to take care of, these are the poor
we have in our text, Psalm: 34. this poor man cried. There is a Congregation of
poor who may be styled Gods poor, Psalm. 74. I might urge the state of our Lord
Christ who was poor for our sakes, 2 Cor. 8. he had no habitation many times,
he was hungry, and thirsty.

Obj. but why does God expose his dear servants to such a state,

Answer, from a threefold ground. First, with respect to themselves; Secondly,
with respect to himself; Thirdly, with respect to his brethren.

1st, As to themselves, 1. God does it to humble them, who many times are not
able to bear the contrary. This is the reason that God renders, Deuteronomy. 8, he
suffered them to hunger and thirst in the wilderness, to humble them to prove
them. 2. To teach Israel to live by Faith; therefore they must have but from
hand to mouth, their daily bread; to make them know that man shall not live by
bread alone, bu^ by every word that comes out of the mouth of God. 3. To make
them relish future mercy, the land flowing with Milk and Honey, that he might
do them good in their latter end, verse. 16. Heavenly things are sweet to a poor
hungry Soul rightly qualified.

2ly. God does this to try those that are rich, whether they will do their
duty; they were born for such a day, Psalm. 17.17. a brother is born for
adversity: by this way God tryes their love and sincerity to Christ* see these
texts, 2 Cor 8.9. chap. 9.13. Phil. 4. Not (says St. Paul) that I desire a
gift, but fruit that might abound upon your account. Thus we, from good reasons
known to God, know Gods people are such as may be very acceptable to him, and
yet may be very poor as to outward.

Object. But it is not said, Psalm. 34. The Lions shall suffer hunger, but they
that fear the Lord shall want no good thing? From hence we may gather, that
hunger shall not be the state of those that fear God.

Ans. 1. All that is promised in that place, is, that they shall want no good
thing; but sometimes hunger is good for them that fear God, as you have seen
from Deuteronomy 8. this Part may teach us not to measure Gods special love by his
dealing to thee in outward; one that God is angry with may flourish in this
World, whilst one whom he dearly loves may want bread. Does not Solomon, say
Eccles. 9.2. that all things come a like to all? yet how often are persons apt
to measure the favor of God by these his dealings?

Secondly, This may help to bear up the hearts of righteous persons: be not
discouraged under poverty and a low estate, study that word, James 2.5. God
has chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith and heirs of the Kingdom.
Study the state of Jesus Christ himself, he was often hungry, though the Son of
God.

Thirdly, If thy estate in the world be low, Consider there is a special duty
lies upon thee in th^^ Condition to live by Faith, and to be content. God took
it very ill of Israel when he brought them into a low estate in the wilderness,
and they did not believe, but murmured against him. Learn that lesson that St.
Paul learnt, Phil. 4. in all estates to be content.

To the end I might dispatch this paragraph according to promise with brevity,
I shall only touch two Parts more, and so conclude; the one respects the
disclaiming of the righteous to Christ's reasons rendered, the other respects the
reply of our Lord to take it off by way of explanation: wherein we have a
worthy Part, though but employed, supposing the relation that these stand in to
Christ his brethren. The 2 parts are these. First, That it is the nature of a
truly righteous person in Christ's account, to have a mean and low esteem of
their best performances for acceptance with Christ and Salvation.

The Second part is this, That true believers in Christ Jesus, though poor and
despicable in the World, yet stand related to Christ and his brethren.

1. A righteous person is ready to disclaim his own righteousness for
Salvation. In handling this Part I shall, 1. Endeavor to Confirm the truth of
this part from Scripture: 2. answer an objection founded on some seeming
Contrary Scriptures: 3. give two considerable reasons: 4. make some Improvement
as to the truth of it. There is a vast difference between a righteous and a
wicked man in this respect, a Saul will justify his disobedience, 1 Samuel
15.20. but a righteous Job will not justify his righteousness, it must be
forced upon him: as here, our Lord draws the emblem of a righteous and naked
person to the life, Luke 18. under the name of a Pharisee, and a Publican: the
Pharisee thinks himself righteous, and does pertinaciously plead it; I fast
twice in the week, I pay tithes of all that I possess: he boasts of his
righteousness; but the Publican sees nothing in himself worthy taking notice
of. See what frame of Spirit David is in, 2 Samuel 7. What am I, or my Fathers
house? 2 Chronicles. 29.14. he sees nothing in himself. So Job is full to this
purpose, who is a man Justified by God to be one perfect or upright; one that
feared God, and escheweth evil; yet he can see no such thing: Job. 9.15. whom
if I were righteous I would not answer. Job 40.4. behold I am vile, yet a
perfect man in Gods esteem, a very charitable man, chap. 29. in his own
understanding when he was to deal with man. So Daniel, a man greatly beloved of
God, Chap. 9. We present not our suplications in our own name. And this lesson
Christ teaches, Luke 17. say, when ye have done all, we are unprofitable
Servants.

But it is objected, Do we not find three eminent Servants of God pleading
their own righteousness, Nehemiah, David, Hezekiah, Nehem. 13.14. Remember my
good deeds: Psalm. God rewarded me according to my righteousness, and the
cleanness of my hands: Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. Remember how I have walked before
thee with a perfect heart, done that which is right in thy sight; does not
these speeches savor of another Spirit? thus Job 9.20. If I should justify my
self, my own mouth would condemn me, then if I should say I were perfect, it
would prove me perverse. See what David says, Psalm. 130.3. If thou should
mark iniquity, who can stand? Psalm. 143.2. In thy sight shall no flesh be
justified. Now how shall we reconcile these two sorts of Scriptures?

Answ. To reconcile which, we must diligently consider the different
acceptance of righteousness in Scripture:

1. A Righteousness as to Actions.

2. A Righteousness as to Persons; and this considered under a twofold
opposition:

1. There is Righteousness in opposition to Wickedness.

2ly, Righteousness in opposition to imperfection; and in that abstracted
sense, there is none righteous, no not one, Romans 3.10. no man righteous in the
abstract; nor no man righteous in God's sight, but by interpretation and
imputation, as God pleases to accept in Christ. But let us examine those three
instances, of Nehemiah, David, and Hezekiah.

1. As to Nehemiah, Chap. 13. the Righteousness and good deeds done by him,
which he pleads, were comparatively to be considered as he was a Magistrate, as
he pleads, Chap. 5.15. The other Governors were chargeable, so was not I,
because of the fear of the Lord. So that Comparatively he could plead
Righeousness, that he was more righteous than his Predecessors: yet this plea
of his is with an eye to God's Righteousness in the multitude of his mercies,
as Ver. 22. which does not contradict our part.

2. See that of David, Psalm. 18. He has respect to his Righteousness, as to
Saul, and in that case he had been righteous as to him, and that Saul is forced
to confess that he was more righteous than himself; and according to this
Righteousness of his, God had now rewarded him, in giving him the Kingdom, he
had patiently waited, and not been unrighteously hasty.

3. As to Hezekiah, Isa. 38. He being suddenly surprised with a dreadful
threatening and following sickness, so suddenly upon a choice manifestation of
Love and Zeal for God's Name in the business of Rabshekah, was amazed to think
what might be the cause (that is to say, the extraordinary cause) and he could
upon search find no immediate Cause, but rather the contrary; therefore upon
this he weeps, and pleads with God as to his walkings and perfection of heart,
not for Heaven and Glory: but he pleads what he pleads in order to an addition
to his days in the Land of the living. The like we see Jer. 39. As to
Abimelech for his mercy showed to Jeremiah. And these very men upon a general
view of their best actions, were very humble: and it is one thing to put God in
mind Historically of what they have done, and another thing to claim acceptance
meritoriously for them done.

But we have two Reasons, why truly righteous persons look so meanly on their
own best Duties of Obedience.

1. Because such persons have always before their eyes the pure Majesty of God
and his Glory, this humbles. Job 9. This makes him say, Though I were
righteous, yet would not I lift up my head, but make supplication to my Judge,
says Job, thou art my Judge. This sight of God did make Job abhor himself in
dust and ashes, Chap. 42. Because his eyes had seen God. So Isaiah is humbled
at the sight of the Majesty of God, Isa. 6. I am undone, I am a man of unclean
lips. This sight strikes an awe upon the Righteous as it does here on these in
our Text: These see Christ upon his Throne of Glory. We have an eminent place,
Tit. 3.5. Not of Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to
his Grace he saved us.

The second Reason that Righteous Persons are so ready to disclaim their own
Righteousness, is from a true sight of their imperfections in their best
services: A truly righteous person sees sin in his best performances;
therefore not worth the pleading with God: he sees his own righteousness but as
filthy rags; he can say of his Faith, as the Man, Mar. 9.24. Lord, I believe,
help thou my unbelief. They see their prayers want the Incense of the Angel to
be offered up with them, Rev. 8.4. St. Paul was conscious hereof: for, says
he, though I know nothing by my self, yet I am not thereby justified, 1 Cor.
4.4. He forgets what is behind, and presses toward the mark, Phil. 3.

Use. If these be the Characters of a righteous person: Then a Christian may to
a good degree know how it is with him, what his state and condition is. Now do
you look upon your selves, in and for what you do; are you humble, or are you
lifted up? a truly righteous person is full of good works, but he is regardless
of it. Cornelius was a man full of prayer and alms, but he makes no noise of
them, till we hear of them, from another hand (or from heaven); so was Dorcas,
but we have no noise of them, till she was dead, till it arose from others. It
is the Spirit of an hypocrite to cry up what he does. See Mat. 6. labor to be
humble in all thy duties of obedience for they are mixed with imperfections.

Secondly, Labor to be rich in good works, it is our duties to remember to do
good and not to forget, but leave God to remember the good we do. Not that a
Christian should do good ignorantly, that is to a degree to do evil, but leave
God to remember it, who is not forgetful of your work and labor of love, in
that ye have ministered and do minister, Heb. 6.10. I now proceed to the last
Doctrine in order to the close of this Paragraph, which is this.

Doctrine, That the poorest meanest indigent wanting righteous persons are
Christ's Brethren, who is the Son of God and Lord of Glory: Jesus Christ
acknowledges the receivers as well as the givers to be his Brethren; In as
much as ye have done it to the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto
me. (minimorum) the smallest; Christ ranketh his Brethren into three ranks.

First, Rich.

Secondly, Poor.

Thirdly, Poorest.

Now Christ in his highest glory is not ashamed to acknowledge the smallest in
this relation, Heb. 2. he is not ashamed to call them Brethren: Jesus Christ
only owns himself to be the first born, the eldest Brother, Romans 8.29. That he
might be the first born among many Brethren, this relation Christ is freely
ready to own before men. See Mat. 12.50. He that does the will of my Father, is
my Brother, Sister, Mother. A poor creature that wants a bit of Bread and a cup
of Water, yet if he be Sanctified he is Christ's Brother.

But how comes Christ to be a Christians Brother?

I Ans. Because Christ and they have one Father, God. This is Plentifully
acknowledged in Scripture, 1 Pet. 1.3. God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
has b^gotten these Saints St ^eter writes unto; St. Paul does freely
appropriate this relation, Gal. 1.4. God our Father; and this our Lord teaches
us to own in our Prayers, Mat. 6. So Ephesians. 1.2. P^il. 1.1. Col. 1. 2 These. 1.
God our Father: when ye pray, say, Our Father: and so that eminent and pregnant
place from Christ's own mouth, Joh. 20.17 Say to my Brethren, I ascend to my
Father and your Father. So that the truth of this Doctrine does undeniably
appear, that Christ does freely own believers indefinently considered, the very
meanest to be his Brethren. Let me from this Doctrine urge a few instances and
conclude.

First, What a Treasury is herein opened of comfort and encouragement to
poorest Saints? art thou indeed Sanctified in Christ Jesus, he is thy Brother;
this consideration speaks great comfort to Saints in every condition, and in
every duty.

Secondly, As to thy Trial and Judgment, consider thou art to be tried and
judged by thy elder Brother; he that is in that immense power, and transcendent
glory, may a true believer say, is my Brother, my Fathers Son. It was a great
encouragement to Jacobs Sons (when once they came to know it) that Joseph who
was in such honor in Egypt was their Brother, I am your Brother, says he.

Thirdly, Then if you can but upon sure grounds prove this relation, that you
are Christ's Brethren, that your extract is from the same Father, then you are
great He^^es. So says the Apostle, Romans 8. If Sons then eires, heirs of God,
joynt-heires with Christ. There is a large in heritance to be divided among the
Sons of God who are Christ's Brethren, if thou find thy self thus near
related to God and Christ.

Fourthly, Labor to walk worthy of such a relation, that you stain not the
reputation of your kindred. It is storied of a Heathen that was invited to a
great Banquet, and he heard there was to be there present a noted Harlot, the
Heathen asks Counsel how he should behave himself there; it was answered, Only
remember thou art such a Kings Son. So only at all times remember thou art
Christ's Brother, this remembered will guide thee how to walk.

Fifthly, If Christ owns the poorest for his Brethren, do so also in the
Church, own the poorest member if Sanctified, be not ashamed to call them
Brethren though thou art rich.

So much for that Paragraph ending with the fortieth verse.

We now proceed to ver. 41. Then shall he say also unto them on the Lest hand,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Deviland his
Angels.

We now proceed to the second part of Christ's Judicial proceeding on his Throne
relating to those now on the left hand. And the manner of Christ's proceeding is
after the same manner as before with the righteous.

First, To pronounce sentence.

Secondly, Give the reasons.

Thirdly, Suffer a reply.

Fourthly, To take it off.

That which we have first to take notice of is the dreadful severe sentence
which is here pronounced against a considerable part of the flock divided out
of the vast number convened before Christ, called these ^n the left hand,

In order to which dreadful sentence we have two Circumstances by the way as an
Introduction unto it.

First, The time when this sentence is pronounced or takes place, set forth by
this Adverb of time [Then] at the same time, immediately after his clearing the
Sheep, and then when Christ is in his glory with all his holy Angels. [Then]
The Spirit of God is careful to note the circumstance of time, as I might show
you all along, and not as an empty circumstance, but it has weight in it, Mat.
4. Then was Christ led into the w^ derness to be tempted, in order after such
preceding occurrences.

So here, after Christ in his imperial glory has congratulated his deaily
beloved Brethren with an amicable face of love and delight, he now changes his
face and turns to these on the other hand; his smiles are turned to frowns, his
love to wrath.

The Second Circumstonce by way of Introduction is the Character of the persons
who are here decyphered by those on the left hand, who before might have easily
understood their state by their separation to that side from the rest. From
this Preface I only note by the way.

First, That the order of Christ's proceeding in judgment is to begin with the
best first. First to dispatch the righteous into their intended glory, and then
proceed with the worst.

Secondly, That the dreadful and amazing sentence upon reprobates may be by
them perceived and understood beforehand, there was enough done in their first
discountenance to amaze them. The dread of the wicked begins before the time,
as the joy of the Saints: when the judge on the Bench cries, Tie him up, it is
a dreadful beginning of his horror. The dread of reprobates may be read
beforehand even in the conscience, 1 John 2.20. If our hearts condemn us, God
is greater. Against this supposal may be objected the bold Plea, Mat. 7. Luk
13. To which I briefly answer, that none can so plead but such as have made a
considerable profession as those had done.

Secondly, Though these might have known that their no acquaintance and
Communion with Christ in their lives, might have been a sad presage of this
sentence; yet their eye was so fixed upon their relation they stood in to
Christ with the high Services in his name, that they could not admit of
thoughts of condemnation. See how they plead with Christ notwithstanding this
separation, as if they were wronged by him: from whence we may gather, that
these were not the profane or ignorant world on the left hand, but bad
professors as you have heard, and the circumstance of time also does confirm
the truth. It is then, the same time when Christ is upon his Throne and all the
Angels about him.

But I proceed to the sentence it self, which breaths out nothing but dread,
horror and amazement to those concerned in it. We have in this Sentence two
considerable variations from the former Sentence: Those before are said to be
blossed of the Father: here only ye cursed, not said ye accursed of the Father.

Secondly, As to the former it is said, the Kingdom and Glory was prepared for
you, on purpose for you.

But here it is said prepared for the Devil and his Angels, not said prepared
for you (that is to say originally;) (...) was prepared for him and his Angels.

We have in this Sentence several pathetical and Emphatical words and
expressions; as,

First, Depart.

Secondly, From me.

Thirdly, Ye accursed.

Fourthly, Into fire.

Fifthly, Everlasting.

Sixthly, Prepared or made ready for the Devil and his Angels.

This Sentence divides it self into two parts.

First, The punishment of loss.

Secondly, The Punishment of sense.

First, Privation.

Secondly, Infliction.

1. Those concerned in this Sentence suffer the loss of Christ's face and
favor, which is a great loss considered as to Christ in this his glory at that
time, as I showed you before in the former Sentence, these are excluded from
that amiable face of his whom to see in his glory is a great privilege, Esa.
33. The righteous shall see the King in his glory. This Sentence is supposed to
be with much wrath in the face; therefore Erasmus reads our Text thus; Then
with an horrible look turning to those that shall be on the left hand, he shall
give a terrible Sentence; get you away from me, you whom the world flattreed
but by me accursed; go into fire that never shall be quenched, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. So he. The vulgar Latin also reads, Get you away.

Secondly, This punishment in the particular abdication from the face and
presence of Christ in all his glory, Depart from me.

Secondly, Not only depart, but depart as cursed as execrable filthy things or
persons; they suffer an eternal Excommunication from the presence of Christ in
all his glory. This part of the punishment of evil believers some account the
worst part of their punishment.

Secondly, The positive punishment, and that contains three Circumstances

First, The Soul and bod^es misery unutterable.

Secondly, The everlastingness and eternity of it.

Thirdly, The Society in this misery, the Devil and his Angels.

But for brevitys sa^e I shall sum up all that is employed and expressed in this
Sentence; into six Doctrinal points.

1 Doct. That Jesus Christ in his second coming will appear with ireful
Countenance, with wrath in his face, whilst he is judging wicked uncharitable
persons at his Bar.

2 Doct. Wicked and uncharitable persons are not only rejected from Christ's
presence, but they are rejected as accursed with loathing and detestation.

3 Doct. That the punishment of Reprobates does not only consist in loss of the
^ace and favor of God, but in a most exquisite infliction of Soul and body
misery.

4 Doct. That the punishment of Reprobates and such who are accursed from
Christ's Bar, is endless and everlasting.

5 Doct. That the punishment of Reprobates was originally prepared for the
Devil and his associates.

6 Doct. That one part of the punishment of these accursed by Christ at his
Barlyeth in this their eternal society with Devils.

A few words to these in order, and first to the first.

The ire and anger of Christ appearing in his face at this day so contrary to
what appears from him to the righteous, this is prophesied of in Scripture,
Psalm. 2. Then shall he speak to them in his wrath. Psalm. 90.11. who knows the
power of thine anger? Psalm. 7.6. who can stand in thy sight when thou ar^
angry? Therefore David desires that he would not rebuke him in his wrath,
Psalm. 6. And that Christ (as well as God so considered) can be angry, Mar. 3.5.
it is said that Christ looked on them with anger. And Christ's anger considered
in that day is very terrible; he is then a Lion. The wrath of a King, Solomom
says, is as the roaring of a Lion, as messengers of Death. Wrath in man is his
rage; but wrath in God is his reason. There is great power in God and Christ's
anger, or look of God. With anger is Pharaohs Host spoiled. Christ but looking
upon his enemies that sought him, with an [I am he] they fall backward, Joh. 18.

The consideration of this Doctrine may serve to a waken Professors.

What Professors and Subjects of Christ's wrathful face? this may be, if you be
not careful in duties of obedi^nce and Charity.

Secondly, This sad and dreadful state of the wicked and unworthy walkers, does
serve to set forth the inexpressible happy state of the righteous who are
friends to Christ, that shall have his smiles and embraces at this day, unto
whom Christ shall say, Well done, enter into thy Masters joy with him.

Thirdly, Walk so as to keep in love and favor with Christ here; keep
communion here, for it will be sad to fall into this day of his wrath. But
because this Doctrine is but employed, I shall say no more to it.

2 Doct. Wicked and uncharitable persons are not only rejected from Christ's
presence, but rejected as accursed with loathing and detestation.

This Doctrine contains two parts.

First, They are rejected.

Secondly, As accursed.

They are bid to depart, Mat. 7.23. Where we have the same word, Depart from
me. See also, Luke 13.27. Depart ye that work iniquity. Now this rejection must
needs be very sad and a great punishment.

First, Because it is the pure and proper effects of Christ's wrath and sore
displeasure; it is a token of high displeasure to say to a man or woman, Get
you hence; I had rather have your room than your company.

Secondly, A great and heavy punishment because it is the fruit of our own
doings, rejecting the tendered love of Christ in time, Prove. 1.27. Prove. 3.
Surely he scorneth the scorner. These rejected him first from their hearts;
though they professed him yet did not possess him by his Spirit and love in their
hearts. Many do in effect say to him Depart, Job 21.22. they care not for his
pure presence.

Thirdly, This banishment from Christ's presence is a great punishment, from
consideration of that great joy that persons shall enjoy for evermore. Psalm.
16.10. Psalm. 3.6.

Fourthly, A great punishment, because there is no midium between exclusion
from Christ's presence and depth of misery. If once a Soul be excluded, misery
seizes upon him as a Jailer; and what God says to Israel, Hosea 9.12. may be
inverted here, And woe be unto thee when thou departest from me.

Fifthly, Great punishment, because for ever is this exclusion; it is eternal,
as you will hear more hereafter.

If this be so that one part of the punishment of Reprobates is in their
abdication and rejection; then see the vast difference between the state of the
righteous and wicked: the righteous are invited to close Communion, Come; these
rejected, Depart. The difference is, embraces, rejections. But how comes this
to be such a punishment seeing they do not desire Communion, but say to God,
Depart.

I Ans. In this day they shall have a glimpse of the good of Communion with God
and Christ which they had not before; these shall know now with Cain what it is
to be driven from the presence of God, and shall then say with him, My
punishment is greater t^en^ can bear, Genesis 4 13

Secondly, See how the Lord in this day proceeds by way of retaliation, whereas
the righteous desired nothing more than Communion with God, they shall have it;
and whereas wicked men bid God depart, they shall have it so.

Thirdly, See (according to our understanding of this Context) the vast
difference between members and members of the same Society; as here some have
Communion with Christ, others none, so in this day.

We now come to the second Doctrine, That they are not only abdicated and
rejected, but as accursed persons. They were accursed before, but now they are
by Christ pronounced accursed, and they are accursed with an effectual curse. In
speaking to this second part of the Doctrine;

First, I shall show what kind of rejection this is, to be cast off as accursed.

Secondly, Show the certain effects that do infallibly follow.

Thirdly, Give you some reasons why Christ rejects them as abominable.

Fourthly, Make some application. 1. What this is.

And First, The Curse of God is as an Arrow shot out from his provoked wrath
and sore displeasure. Therefore the Learned tell us, that the word to curse and
strike through with a Dart is the same; to curse is as much in God as to strike
through with a Dagger or dart. Some understand this word to intend a loathing
detestation, and so they understand that in Job 5.3. I cursed his habitation,
or abhorred or abominated his habitation, I loathed his habitation. We have the
Word used Hab. 3.14. Thou did strike through their Villages, or curse their
Villages. So that to curse, to loath, to abhor and strike through are the same.
Others read that Job 5. I wished ill to his habitation: these were the words of
Eliphaz.

But (by the way) was it lawful for him to curse, strike through, or wish ill?

I answ. That men are sometimes said to do that which they Prophecy shall be
done; so Jeremiah and Micah are said to pluck up and destroy, when they only
prophesied what would be done. A curse from God is the highest token of
displeasure. Herein was his high displeasure against the Serpent, Genesis 3. God
cursed him, Thou art cursed above all the heasts of the Field. So it was to
Cain, Genesis 4. when he had killed his Brother Abel. To be accursed is the
highest Sentence of Excommunication or Anathema. And as it is reported of the
Preachers of some Churches, that in this Execration or Excommunication they
used to thrust them out of the presence of the Brethren by force; so it seems
here in this case, Depart ye cursed, ye are Anathema. To curse is the effect of
the bitterness of the Soul; and from that root it sprang in Noah to his Son
Canaan, Genesis 9.25. Cursed be Canaan, who had behaved himself so unworthily to
his Father in uncovering his nakedness. The like we read of Michal David's wife,
of whom we read, 2 Samuel 6.16. who when David danced before the Ark in his
linen Ephod, it is said, she despised him in her heart; It might as well have
been said, she cursed him in her heart; for these words are used promiscuously
one for another as the Hebrew Rabbys tell us. 1 Samuel 2. Concerning Elyes house,
They that despise me shall be lightly steemed (or cursed.) So it is commonly
understood by Jobs words, it may be they have cursed God in their hearts, that
is, had light and undervaluing thoughts of God. And Lev. 20.9 we find that
cursing and honoring Father and Mother are opposed one to another. I might
multiply instances of this kind. Man abhors, despises persons or things upon a
threefold consideration.

First, As they are infectious with the Plague.

Secondly, As unlucky, (as men call) as the sight of such a Person or thing
presages some evil to him that sees it.

Thirdly, As they are monstrous, deformed or misshapen.

Now in this latter our Text seems to be understood; Christ abhors wicked men
as deformed, degenerate Persons, Psalm. 73.20. When he awakes, he shall despise
their Image; or as some use the word, curse their Picture. No Toad can be more
loathed by man, than such Persons by Christ. At that day a Curse from God is an
introduction to all evil, as a Blessing is an introduction to all good. Prove.
3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked. It is an
inexpressible Judgment to be cursed by Christ at that day, because the effects
will follow. If man curse, the effects will follow sometimes; but if God curse,
it follows always. If Eliphaz curse, Job 5. the effects follow, his Children
are far from safety. If the old Prophet curse the Children that called him
Bald-pate, they are destroyed by the Bears, 2 King. 2.24. but if God and Christ
curse, it never fails, Psalm. 37.22. They that are accursed of him, shall be cut
off. If Christ curses the Fig Tree it forth with withers away. Therefore it
must needs be none of the least part of the curse of the wicked in this day, to
be under Christ's curse, [depart ye cursed.] I have dwelt the longer upon this
word, because I might set out the dreadful bad estate of bad Professors,
Hypocrites and uncharitable; they are the objects of Christ's soul abhorrency at
this day, they are cast off as execrable things. As if he should say, Get you
hence, I cannot abide to see your faces.

But why does Christ so abhor such bad Professors?

First, Because of all Persons none so ungrateful, as ^^ch who have tasted of
his love and grace and tender mercies. This was that which aggravated Judas's
sin, he had received love from Christ from time to time, and he had returned
hatred for love, therefore he is cursed, he and his generation, all like him;
see Psalm. 41. Psalm. 10.9. They rendered evil for good; he that eat bread with
him, lift up his heel against him. Psalm. 55. It was not an enemy that did it,
but thou my Friend; had it been an enemy I could have born it.

Secondly, It is abominable to Christ from the nature of this sin.

First, The sin of these persons is a sin of treachery; these are treacherous
as they stand so related (...) Christ. The sin of Gods own people of old w^ by
him reckoned treachery; as the unfaithfulness o^ a Wife, of a Child, or Servant
is treachery: these were his Manual Servants, these were Citizens, an^
therefore must expect more severe dealings with than strangers and foreigners.

Secondly, As to the nature of their sins they are reckoned upon the account of
Hypocrisy, which is the first born of all sin in the sight of God, most of all
hateful to Christ. The punishment seems to be originally prepared for
Hypocrites. If you would read the hatefulness of this sin in Christ's heart,
read Mat. 23. We have eight foul woes by him pronounced against Hypocrites, no
people so absolutely the people of his curse as Hypocrites, the Hypocrite above
all shall be surprised, Esa. 33.14. Esa. 10.6. When Christ would pronounce the
most severe punishments to men, he tells them they shall have their portion
with Hypocrites, Mat. 24.31. See how St. Peter speaks to such, 2 Pet. 2. It had
been beeter for them they had never known the way of truth.

Thirdly, They are so abhorred and detested and accursed by Christ, because
these have not only their own sins but the sins of others upon them. Oh the
evil that bad professors do to others by seduceing and leading others out of
the way, causing others to stumble at the ways of God, leading the blind out
of the way.

We know God pronounced a severe curse of old upon those who should cause the
natural blind to walk out of the way in a civil fence considered, Deuteronomy. 27.18.
much more will they deserve a curse who cause the blind to wander in a moral
fence considered.

Some think this may be understood to be the reason why Dives was unwilling his
five Brethren should come into that place of torment in the Parable, Luke 16.
because by that means his own torment would have been augmented. I shall only
close with a word or two of inference or application.

First, We see by this what a discriminating day this day of Christ will be.
Here are those abhorred and cast off as accursed who little expected it; they
rather expected to have been entertained with embraces, as we may perceive by
their bold plea, Mat. 7. Luke 13.

Secondly, From hence we may learn that negative holiness will not serve in
this day. These were clean creatures in a common fence considered, as you have
heard, fit and allowed for Sacrifices.

These are not cursed nor abdicated for acts of injustice as we can find, but
want of Charity, acts of goodness and love to Christ; they had been wanting in
relieving Christ in his poor members: not a word of swearing, Whoring,
Murdering and debauchery.

Thirdly, This should put all persons upon a serious and cordial examination of
their state; how it will be at this day with them. You may find now how it will
be then.

Fourthly, Labor to bless, own and love Christ in his poor members; be
beneficent to them: you see the contrary is that which provokes Christ to this
detestation of these. Christ loves a cheerful giver, and abhors a closefisted
professor. So much for the third Doctrine: we now proceed to the fourth
Doctrine which was this.

4 Doct. That the second and positive part of the punishment of reprobates
consists in real, materi^ and most exquisite misery and torment, extensive to
Soul and body, by fire.

This Doctrine is the very product of our Text. In handling this Doctrine I
shall prove the truth of it from other Scriptures, that fire is the punishment
of barren professors. See Mat. 3.12. He shall thoroughly purge his flowr and
burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire^ From which Scripture I note these
things.

First, That Jesus Christ in his proceedings with his own people acts as a
Husbandman, who is gathering in his wheat, with which he must needs bring in
chaff also.

Secondly, There is a necessity of threshing, fanning or winnowing this his
wheat in order to segregating the chaff, which is here called the purging his
flowr.

Thirdly, We have a choice discovery of singular esteem for the wheat, by
gathering it into his garner, a place for clean grain.

Fourthly, We have contained his total and absolute rejection of the chaff.

They are executed under the name of chaff, and that by sire. That by the chaff
are intended ungodly and reprobates, is plain from Psalm. 1.

Fire is the threatened punishment of the rash angry Brother, spoken of Mat.
5.22. He shall be in danger of Hell fire, (gehenna) torment. This is the
punishment of the Tares, Mat. 13.42. They are bound in bundles and cast into a
Furnace of fire: This is the punishment of the bad fish gathered in the net;
see ver. 58. They are cast into a Furnace of fire; this is the punishment of
him that does not cut off his offending hand and foot, Mat 18. Hell fire; this
is the punishment of them that worship the beast, Rev. 14. Cast into a lake of
fire; this is the punishment of all those whose names are not in the book of
life, Rev. 20.15.

It is true it is a question amongst some of our modern Writers, whether by
fire in these places is to be understood material sire: but the generality are
of opinion that it is to be understood material; and should we depart from the
literal fence and grant it to be immaterial fire, it will be dangerous; for it
is a rule in Divinity, That we are not to depart from the letter unless we be
forced to it to preserve other Scriptures from violence: Now I know no
Scripture can be wronged by taking these Scriptures in the literal fence.

Secondly, If we should give way to question the materiality and reality of the
torments of Reprobates, it will make way to question the reality of the reward
of the righteous which we would believe to be real.

Thirdly, That it is material fire we have the earnest of it in the punishment
of Sodom, which fire proceeded from God and was a punishment representing this
we are speaking of.

Fourthly, If this fire was immaterial or allegorical, the Scripture in some
place or other would have told us so; as in some other cases, Gal. 3.

Yet we grant that this fire does considerably differ from our ordinary fires
in six circumstances.

First, As to the unexpressible and vehement extreme heat of it: as one well
observes; If all the fire in the World were contracted in one, and all the
combustible matter in the World brought to it to feed it; yet all this fire is
but as a fire painted upon the Wall in comparison of Hell fire. Therefore it is
called a Fire of Brimstone, a River of Brimstone, Esa. 30.33. Rev. 14.20. Now
we know that that sort of fire made of Brimstone is of all fires most scorching
and tormenting: if two or three drops fall upon our flesh, how will it torture
it?

Secondly, It differs from our fires, as this Hell fire is made by God himself,
prepared, compounded and ordained by God, Esa. 30.33. God has been much
exercised in his wisdom and counsel in contriving this fire that it might
torment, and his wrath blows it up and continues it.

Thirdly, In our fires there is light as well as heat: but this though it be
fire, yet here is no light at all; but utter darkness, whilst consuming fire.
We have it often called utter darkness; Jude calls it chains of darkness, and
blackness of darkness: Egyptian darkness, that may be felt: their portion is
darkness, whereas the Saints portion is light.

Fourthly, Our fires only consume or torment the bodies not touch the Soul;
whereas this fire takes hold of both body and Soul, as our Lord teaches, Mat.
10.28. Fear not them that kill only the body; but I warn you whom you shall
fear; fear him that can kill Soul and Body in Hell; that is, after the
resurrection can torment the body and mind also. The reprobate in Hell has his
mind as full of torment as his body; and there is reason it should be so, and
that they should suffer together, because they sinned together, for a wicked
and ungenerate person sins with delight of mind as well as body.

We read a pretty parable of an Hebrew Doctor to this purpose.

There was a certain man planted an Orchard, and being to take a Journey,
appointed certain watchmen to look unto it, and preserve it from robbing by
others or wronging from themselves; and accordingly he appointed one man strong
limbed but blind, and another man that could see but was a Cripple: And in his
absence the blind man and the Cripple agree together, the blind to carry the
lame; and so they robbed the Orchard. When the Master understood the agreed
deceit, he severely punished them both together. The whole is but a Parable;
the moral is this: The body cannot act without the mind, nor the mind without
the body; therefore they are joint in sin and joint in punishment.

Fifthly, Our fires consume or annihilate all that come into them, they reduce
all into its own nature, turn flesh into ashes; but this does not so: here is
not an annihilation. But I shall have occasion to speak to that afterward.

Sixthly, This is called unquenchable fire, Mat. 3. It is noted by the Learned
that a river of Brimstone cannot be quenched.

That there is such certain punishment for the reprobate we have the general
consent of the most approved Authors both ancient and modern. Zanchy, Austin,
Lambert, Aquinas, Gregory and many others.

Secondly, The name of Hell or Tophet in it self carries in the name of it
torment; it was drawn from the torture that the Idolatrous Jews put their
Children upon. They made a hollow Idol of Brass with his arms open, in whose
arms they put their Children when their Idol was red hot from the fire within:
hereupon there was great scrieching with the Children, and they used to beat
Drums and found Trumpets to drown the noise with.

This place partly from the Image and the torment is called Tophet, and the
punishment of the damned is in the forenamed place called Tophet, Esa. 30.33.
That there is real torment to come for the wicked we have the testimony of the
Devil who believes and fears it, Mat. 8.29. Art thou come to torment us before
the time? the Devils believe and tremble at the thoughts of these torments. So
do the consciences of wicked men who have felt the earnest of it. Before they
went hence they have witnessed with a witness this torment. We have a threefold
testimony to this truth in the Parable of Dives and Lazarus; the scope of which
is to set forth the dreadful inexpressible torment of wicked uncharitable
persons hereafter. We have the testimony of Abraham, we have the testimony of
Dives himself, we have the testimony of Christ in this case who makes this
Parable.

Heathens have been convinced of the truth of this by the improvement of
Nature. We read of one who coming to visit Olympas, finding him closed up in a
dark Cell, which by reason of heat and swarms of Gnats and stinging Flies was
uninhabitable, he being asked why he confined himself to such an afflictive
place, he makes answer, This is a small matter of punishment if he could avoid
the torment of Hell fire, the stinging of Gnats is nothing to the stinging of
conscience. Many Heathens have been satisfied that there is bliss and torment
after death.

But it might have seemed strange some Ages since to have spent any time to
assert the truth of this real torment for wicked men after Judgment; yet the
unhappiness of our Age is such that there are many whose endeavors have been
either to overthrow the Scriptures altogether, or else to corrupt them from
their simplicity in all things, and in this also, That the Judgment and
torments of men is in their consciences here, that there is no resurrection, no
future state, all is here. But I may say of such as St. Paul says of those who
did in his time deny the resurrection or say it was past, (as these do) let
them deny as much as they can, yet it will not turn it aside, the foundation of
God stands sure; there will be a resurrection and eternal Judgment to their
cost who so say.

First, From this Doctrine we may perceive the cursed nature of sin. Oh what an
antipathy is in the nature of God against sin! See his severity against the
first sin that ever was committed, Genesis 3. In Paradise, God curses the Serpent,
the woman and the man. And in the end see in our Text the severity of Christ in
this unspeakable torment. And one thing I would beseech all our Allegorizers
upon Hell torments seriously to weigh, and that is, the reality of Gods first
punishment; was it not literally as God speaks? ask the Woman and she will tell
you it is true in the letter of it, that she brings forth in pain; and do not
all men really go to the dust in a literal sense for it? why then should it be
strange as to the time to come, that Gods threatenings to the reprobate should
be as really and literally performed as those in the beginning? That God means
as he speaks in promises, precepts, and threatenings may be seen in several
cases, the threatening of the old World, the making the Ark, the Bow in the
Clouds, which last may fully satisfy us, we see with our eyes that what God
said is so fulfilled, there is a Bow in the Clouds. Therefore have a special
care of corrupting the word of God as to the precepts, promises or threatenings.
There is no ground but Gods present silence and deferred execution that
occasions this thought. This is prophesied of by God, Psalm. 50. Because I kept
silence; but I will set thy sins in order. God reckons all sinners to be his
adversaries and he will have a time to avenge himself of his adversaries, Psalm.
7.11.

Secondly, Consider what ground of lamentation with great admiration, that the
greatest number of persons are posting to this place of torment, yet not
sensible of it nor considering whither they are going; there is but a thread
between most men and this eternal torment. And this is not only the state of
the ignorant and profane debauched world, that never professed acquaintance with
Christ, but the greatest part of Professors also; but few of them walk as a
people traveling toward the right hand. It is a certain truth if I understand
any thing of the mind of God in Scripture, that there are but a few of strict
Professors in outward appearance will escape this torment. And how comes this
to pass?

First, Few believe the reality of what is here said.

Secondly, Though they do believe it, yet they put the evil day far away from
them; they think they may yet live long and have time to prepare to prevent it,
though we have not one hour of time that we can call our own.

Thirdly, Others trust to the grace, mercy and tenderness of God, as if they
could have mercy and pardon from him when they will, with a word speaking, upon
a dying Bed; not considering that Syllable in his name, Exodus 34.6. By no means
clearing the guilty. No, know that as Gods thoughts of mercy exceed our
thoughts of mercy, so his thoughts of severity also.

Fourthly, Many trust to their standing profession and relation, they are
Church members. So were these that Christ has to do with in this Chapter, if I
understand the scope of this Chapter, and what do they gain at Christ's hands by
it?

Oh then consider, the great and most weighty work that lies upon each of us,
is to labor to escape and avoid this wrath to come: And if the living and
powerful belief hereof did rest upon us, it would make us labor not only to
deliver our selves but others. See what St. Paul says, We knowing the terror
of the Lord persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11. Do not be worse than Dives, who
according to the Parable takes pains to prevent his Brethren from coming into
that place of torment, Luke 16.

Fourthly, Examine how the case stands with thee, art thou liable to this
torment if thou dye as thou art, consider, or art thou upon good grounds in a
way of escape?

First, If you are in a ready way to escape, you are united to Jesus Christ in
a work of true regeneration by Faith, Love and Obedience; are you now gotten
out of the Kingdom of Satan?

Secondly, Are your names written in the Book of life? for all whose names are
not there shall fall into this Lake, Rev. 20. last. But how shall I know that,
may some say.

First, Are your names recorded in the Church of God, as those Phil. 4. of whom
St. Paul speaks?

Secondly, Are you assistant in the Gospel as they were?

Thirdly, Do you make it your business to mortify every lust, even your own
iniquity, according to Mark. 9. from 43. to 48. those that escape are of these.

There are five Circumstances considerable in these verses.

First, That there is a certain torment, else Christ would not have made it an
argument of it.

Secondly, The torment must be great the deliverance from which is profitably
purchased with such loss and torments, as cutting off and plucking out.

Thirdly, There is a connaturality between persons and their own iniquity,
eyes, hand, foot.

Fourthly, It is very difficult and hard Service to escape Hell, to cut off and
pluck out, especially to do it himself to himself.

Fifthly, Notwithstanding so hard, yet it must be done else we cannot escape
Hell torment. So much we have in this, Mark. 9.43. to 49. It is a matter of
great concernment to know how the case stands with us in this matter. Now if
upon examination we find upon true and solid grounds that we have some good
hope (through grace) to avoid this place and state of torment, oh what ground
of unspeakable joy is here to a poor Soul? there is more cause of joy in this
than can be from casting out of Devils and doing mighty works.

That is not a sufficient ground of joy, this is. See Luke 10.20. But if upon
examination you want this hope, remember what is in the Parable said to Dives,
Luke 16. They have Moses and the Prophets; make use of the word of God, that is
the only means to come to avoid this place of torment.

I now proceed to the fifth Doctrine observed, viz. That the pains and
punishment of Hypocrites and unbelievers are endless and eternal. As they are
not tolerable so not terminable. The truth of this Doctrine is plain from the
constant language of old and new Testament. The fire is everlasting, eternal,
unquenchable. This is the Scripture language. I need have said nothing to this
Doctrine, were it not that we are fallen into such a day wherein persons do
study to avoid the force of those Scriptures which are of most concernment to
consider of.

Therefore that which I shall chiefly endeavor as to this Doctrine is,

First, To strengthen this Doctrine from Scripture arguments.

Secondly, Answer some objections made against it.

Thirdly, Give a Second sort of Testimony to this truth.

Fourthly, Make some Use of the whole.

1. Consider the Testimony of Scripture, Mat. 3.12. He shall burn up the chaff
with unquenchable fire. This fire is called everlasting fire, Mat. 18. Hell
fire and eternal fire are taken one for another in Scripture; it is not Hell
fire except it be eternal; no fire is eternal but Hell fire. It is called
eternal damnation, Mar. 3.29. But I will give you one place in the Room of many
that sets it forth to be endless, Mar. 9.43. to 48. where we have this fire
five times called unquenchable, and three times the worm that never dies.
Certainly there is more than ordinary in this that our Lord, who is never
guilty of Tautologies or making vain repetitions, should so often reiterate
this word not quenched, not quenched, five times over. There is a just cause of
repetition; and by this reiteration,

First, We may learn the certainty of this truth. As in other cases in
Scripture, when things are doubled in Scripture, it is to show the certainty.

Secondly, This truth so reiterated was not only a truth but a truth that lay
much upon Christ's heart; this eternity of torment lay much upon Christ's heart,
he was much affected with it. And

Thirdly, Christ would fain affect his Disciples also with it.

Fourthly, Whereas our Lord adds this three times, the worm that never dies,
we are instructed in these two things.

First, That the severity of the punishment it self is endless.

Secondly, That the creature in this fire is eternal and endless, that he shall
not be annihilated in it or consumed to nothing and so an end of his torment as
to himself. By the fire is understood the punishment it self, by the worm must
be understood the person himself.

The truth of this Doctrine is yet further confirmed from what the Apostle
speaks to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 8.9. Who shall be punished with
everlasting perdition from the presence of God and the glory of his power. The
same is farther confirmed, Rev. 14.19, 20. The smoke of their torments ascended
up for ever and ever.

Now our Lord is greatly desirous that persons might take warning and be
awakened before they come into this gulf with Dives.

It is said he lift up his eyes being in torment, he was not awake till he came
there irrecoverably. Therefore our Lord beats so long upon this string, the
danger is very great and persons greatly secure.

Object. But it is objected against this truth by our Critical Age; that ever
and everlasting have an end, yea ever and ever, and they urge Jer. 7.7. when
God tells Israel that they shall dwell in the Land for ever; see chapter 25.5. yet
say they this is endless.

I Answ. As Canaan was a type of that rest which remains to the people of God,
Heb. 4. so it is for ever and ever; putting their present and future estate
together makes it ever and ever.

Secondly, I Answ. That although ever and ever have an end in some cases, yet
it cannot be always so understood. As for instance, when it relates to the
eternity of God, when God is called the eternal and everlasting God, and where
it is said he raigns for ever and ever, I hope the objector will not say that
God and his government is to terminate.

So that ever and ever in that case cannot have an end; neither will it (I
hope) be thought that the joy and happiness of the righteous shall have an end,
which yet, if ever and everlasting have an end, lies in danger to have an end
also.

So that in our understandings of these speakings of the Spirit of God we must
diligently observe the scope of the place and thing spoken of, that must guide
us in our understandings. And then it will not appear that what is spoken as to
the punishment of the Reprobate, is temporal but eternal.

Some will urge what the Apostle Jude speaks of the punishment of Sodom, to
weaken our position, who it is said suffered the vengeance of eternal fire. To
which I answer, That punishment might be called eternal from these
considerations.

First, From the perfection of it.

Secondly, From the continuance of the burning (as it is reported) throughout
all Ages unto this day.

Thirdly, From the nature of it, or rather the matter of it, it was fire and
Brimstone, and that from Heaven, and so of the same nature as Hell fire shall
be.

Fourthly, Because that overthrow and punishment is never recovered, they have
as it were an entrance into eternal punishment as the Devils are said to be
reserved in chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the great day.

To further strengthen this position, that the punishment of reprobates is
endless, I urge these Arguments following as reasons of the Doctrine.

First, From the Judgment it self pronounced at that day, it is eternal, so
called Heb. 6.2. Eternal Judgment without exception; and it is a principle to
be believed that the Judgment indefinitely considered is eternal, not eternal
to the righteous, and temporal to the wicked.

Secondly, The bodies of each are at that day raised in an immortal estate,
redeemed by Christ from mortality where Adam left them. To this Daniel speaks,
chapter 12.2. Many of them that slept in the dust awaked, some to everlasting life,
and some to everlasting shom and contempt.

Thirdly, It is endless with respect to the circumstance of time when it is
pronounced, when the day of grace is past and the day of wrath takes place, the
sentence at that day is irrevocable, no appeal from this Bar; as Abraham tells
Dives in the Parable, there is a great gulf fixed so as that they that are in
Hell cannot come where Abraham is.

Fourthly, The sentence then pronounced is to endless pain, because there can
be no means to expiate sin, no Christ to dye again. If a person dye in his
sins, he rises in them and is condemned for them, and there can be no after
means to expiate them, but the wrath of God remains on them, Jo^. 3.36.

Fifthly, From this second death there is no redemption; none but the Son of
God could redeem man from the first death, but who shall redeem him from the
second? We read of no redemption from the second death; not man by all he can
do or suffer, Psalm. 49. No man can redeem his Brother nor give a ransom to God.
There remains no more sacrifice for sin.

But some will frame an Objection from Christ's words, Mat. 5. that we may
suppose a payment of our debt by punishment hereafter because Christ says he
shall not come out (till) thou have paid the utmost farthing. From whence some
(in my hearing) have pleaded a possibilily of escaping by paying.

To which I answer by explaining the Period until; which bears a twofold
acceptance in Scripture: sometimes it is understood for a limited time and
sometimes for an endless. As when it is spoken of Michal the daughter of Saul,
wife of David, who despised David dancing before the Ark, it is said, She had
no Child until or till the day of her death, It might as well have been said,
she never had a Child more at all. And it is sometimes understood in a limited
time, as Psalm. 123. Our eyes wait upon the Lord till he have mercy on us. We
read of another place, Luke 12. where Christ speaks of few and many stripes,
some shall be beaten with many stripes, others with few stripes: from whence it
is argued that some shall have less and some shall have more; from whence some
urge difference of periods.

To which I answer; That Christ in that place has not respect to length of
time but weight of misery, though in his speaking he alludeth to the custom of
the Jews paying by stripes, who gave many or few according to the fact. And
this is more clear if it be considered with the future state of the Saints; for
though it be concluded on all hands, that the happiness and glory of the Saints
is endless, yet the glory of the Saints differs in the degrees of it, as one
Star differs from another, not in truth of continuance.

But it is further objected that it cannot agree with the Justice and equity of
God Almighty to punish a moments sin with an endless torment.

To which I answer in three words thus.

First, As to the design of the sinner, he deserves it; he would have sinned
longer if he had lived longer; he sinned out his own eternity, and as the
Hebrew phrases it, he must be punished God's eternity. As for instance, a
Company of Gamesters are set down to play at Cards or Dice all night, but one
comes and blows out the Candle and so they can proceed no further: The question
is whose fault it was they did not play all night? Not the Gamesters. So if the
sinner were not prevented by a short life, he would still sin. When men lived
nine hundred or near a thousand years they were as bad at last as at first.

Secondly, Consider that the God he sins against is an infinite eternal God,
which does greatly aggravate the sin. As for instance; for a person to speak
against an ordinary person is easily past by, but to speak against a King is
death. The Majesty of God whom the sin is committed against, does greatly
magnify the sin.

Thirdly, Such a person who is so punished is but punished according to his own
choice. He had eternal life and eternal death set before him, to take his
choice, Deuteronomy. 11.26, 27. chapter 30. Life or death was Gods offer to him and he
chose this part, Joh. 3.14. He chose darkness rather than light. And Christ
complains they will not come to me that they may have life; therefore they must
needs have death. These things considered do instruct us that to Preach Hell
and damnation is to Preach Gospel Doctrine, it is the Doctrine of our Lord
Jesus the only Gospel Minister. This was the Doctrine of St. John, Mat. 3. Mat.
5.25. Christ persuades his enemies to make peace with him for fear of this
Prison.

This is Christ's Doctrine to the bad in the Church, Mat. 13. and to others,
Mat. 23.14, 15, 33. Christ Preached damnation, Joh. 3.36. Such Doctrine does St.
Paul Preach, Romans 2. Tribulation and wrath upon every Soul of man that does
evil. And see that thundering execration threatened by him, 1 Cor. 16.22.
Anathema, Maranatha. So 2 These. 1.8, 9. Heb. 10. chapter 12. Rev. 14. The Gospel is
not only glad tidings but threatening upon refusal.

Secondly, If the punishment of reprobates is endless, then how does this serve
to set out the folly and madness of those that for a moments pleasure expose
themselves to this eternal endless pain? Of which sort are most men
notwithstanding. Well might Solomon call them Fools, who make a mock of sin.

Thirdly, Study and confer much with eternity; seeing such a state will be,
consult it daily, and in particular study this torment so as to avoid it; let
this terror of the Lord persuade men.

Fourthly, Information to those on this side the grave and this eternal
torment; know this for thy encouragement that God has not necessitated thee to
this state of torment, but on the contrary he is taking pains with thee that
thou might escape it. We have one Circumstance more considerable in order to
the Close of our Lords Sentence to them on the left hand which is in these
words (prepared for the Devil and his Angels) and doubtless it is not in vain
that our Lord adds these words unto this Sentence. Before I lay down those
Observations that may be properly deducible from these words added unto this
Sentence, I shall briefly explain them.

First, Why is it said here to be prepared? To prepare in Scripture is
sometimes curiously to work by contrivance.

Secondly, To prepare is to establish, ordain or fix. Thus it is taken Esa.
30.33. But I have spoke more fully to this before.

Who is to be understood by the Devil? Under that name in the singular he has
many appellations or names by which he is called.

I Answ. The chief of the Devils is here understood in this singular number.
This is the most proper and common name to him in the old Testament, as in the
New Testament his most proper name is Satan. This name Diabolus signifies to
deceive, to tempt, to accuse. It is so properly his work to accuse that he is
called by that name, Rev. 12. But why is it added here (and his Angels?) It is
intended here his whole Regiment under his Authority; they are his Angels in
subordination: as we read of Michael and his Angels, so we read of the Devil
and his Angels. We may note by the way that there is an order amongst Devils
and evil Angels, Monarchical not Anarchical is their order, called his as in
subordination to him. Therefore we read of a Prince, a God, a King. Of this
sort we have a Prince of Devils, the God of the World, Beelzebub the chief of
Devils. Those are the Subjects for whom originally this preparation is made,
namely for this Prince or chief and all his whole Regiment. That Doctrine which
I shall note from the words in order to the closing this Sentence is this.

Doctrine, That the second death or punishment eternal by fire is curiously
wrought, ordained and prepared originally for the Devil and his Angels. Or
thus: That the punishment of reprobates is the same punishment that is prepared
for the Devil and his Angels; but one place of torment, one Tophet for them
all. For the proof of this consider Rev. 19.20. those who worship the beast are
cast into the same Lake, and all whose names are not written in the book of
life; As all the faithful followers of the Lamb shall be with him where he is,
so all wicked men and Apostates shall be where the Devil is, that first
Apostate; they shall have their part with the Devil and his Angels.

But why is this added, That it was prepared for the Devil and his Angels?

I Answ. This explanatory circumstance is added to anticipate a threefold plea
that might have been made.

First, That men might not think to plead an unavoidable decree of damnation to
men before the foundation of the World.

But he does with counsel alter the phrase to them, or the list, and tells
them, it was prepared for the Devils. So what Mr. Mayor says upon this place,
God has not made man for perdition, but as by sinning they join with the Devil.

Therefore Jude is careful to decypher those that are of this misery by their
qualifications, ungodly men who are ordained to this condemnation. Some may be
ready to think that Hell was so provided or prepared for them that there is no
possibility to avoid it; no, Hell will have fuel enough if all men and women
should be saved; therefore it is said for the Devil and his Angels. And again
Mayor on this place says, Thus he says, not as to the merciful, prepared for
you, but for the Devil and his Angels, to show (says he) that wicked men do
voluntarily cast themselves into Hell (for whom it is not prepared.) And Origin
on this place says, Hell was not prepared for men as men, but as men through
sinning prepared it for themselves. And further he says, Men not God are
Authors to themselves of their own woe; and God not men is the Author of
Salvation. To which these sayings of our Lord do well agree. And Doctor Hammond
on the place says, Eternal Hell fire was not prepared originally for you or
any of you or mankind, but for the Prince of Devils and his Angels that follow
him, but now by your wilful defect is become your portion also.

Secondly, It is supposed that we have this addition, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, to anticipate any thought of impunity from consideration of
greatness; for here the chief Subject tormented in this fire is the Prince and
God of this World, the Devil; this Tophet was prepared for this King, Esa. 39.
last. Rev. 9. called Abaddon.

Thirdly, To prevent thoughts of impunity from highness of profession; for who
was higher than the Angels in profession? yet if they kept not their station,
they are reserved in chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the great day,
according to 2 Pet. 2. and Jude. If this eternal fire were prepared for the
Apostate Angels, then those of a lower extract as Professors being Apostates
cannot think to escape. After this rate does St. Peter argue, 2 Pet. and Jude
and also Romans 9. chapter 11. If God spared not the natural branches, much less
thee. It is the received opinion, that once the Devils were good and Holy
Angels, but now the principal fuel of Hell fire.

Fourthly, It is added that it was prepared for the Devil and his Angels, to
set out the greatness of the punishment of those persons; this was thought a
condign punishment for the Devils, therefore it must be very great. After this
manner does our Lord when he tells the Servant that he shall have his portion
with Hypocrites, Mat. 24. last. that is, that he shall have a great punishment.

I shall only urge a few words from this consideration, that the punishment is
the same with the Devils.

Then it should from thence appear that the sins of these in our Text was much
of the nature of the sins of the fallen Angels, for it is usual with God to
proportion his punishments to the sins of persons. If the question be asked what
was their sins? I answer, That Apostasy from a higher state; they kept not
their former state, (Jud.) The sin of the Devils was pride, the sin of the
Devils is Calumniation or false accusing the brethren. But I shall say no more
to this verse which contains the Sentence.

There remains yet four Circumstances to be spoken unto in order to a close of
the whole Chapter, and to them I shall speak but a brief word. The four
Circumstances are contained, ver. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.

First, We have our Lord Jesus Christ indicateing his Sentence to be most
justly past upon them for these reasons, ver. 42, 43. For I was an hungry and
ye gave me no meat, I was a thirsty and ye gave me no drink, I was a stranger
and ye took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in Prison and ye
visited me not.

Secondly, We have the bold and pertinacious reply of these Goats to this
charge, wherein they do implicitly charge our Lord with unrighteous Judgment,
contaned in ver. 44. Then shall they answer him saying, Lord, when saw we thee
an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in Prison, and
did not minister unto thee?

Thirdly, We have our Lords silencing reply to this their plea, ver. 45. Then
shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, In as much as ye did it
not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

Fourthly, We have a ratification of both sentences by the certain execution of
both, ver. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal.

First, We have our Lord freely rendering a reason of this severe and ireful
sentence, ver. 42, 43. We have nothing difficult in the words, therefore I
shall sum them up in five Doctrines as follows.

1 Doct. That our Lord Jesus Christ though upon the Throne of his Celestial
glory, in his Judicial proceedings does not proceed according to his Royal
Prerogative, but according to demonstrative undeniable grounds of reason from
the Creature.

Secondly, That the relief of the Saints in their pure and absolute
necessities, is an absolute indispensable duty; if it be neglected, it is
damnable.

Thirdly, Sins of omission are of a dangerous and damning nature, as well as
sins of Commission. These are not charged for grinding the face of the poor, or
oppressing the poor, but for withholding good from them.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ takes the unkindness shown to his Sts, as done to him,
ye gave me no meat

Fifthly, Uncharitableness to Christ in his members is a very high provoking
sin. Christ here takes up nothing else to judge these by; yet here is enough to
cast, condemn and execute Judgment upon them. First that Christ proceeds by
demonstrative and undeniable argument and reason, see Prove 1. Because I called
and ye refused, because ye hated knowledge and would not choose the fear of the
Lord, I will laugh at your destruction and calamity, read but Ezekiel. 18.33. See
there how God proceeds by reason. Ioh. 3.17, 18. Because they believed not in
the only begotten Son of God this is the condemnation. Here is the rational
ground of it, because they love darkness more than light. So 2 These. 2. Because
they received not the truth in the love of it that they might be saved,
(Therefore) Ephesians. 5.6. For these things sake comes the wrath of God upon the
Children of disobedience. Tribulation and wrath upon every Soul of man that
does evil, Romans 2. Oh how does this speak forth the righteousness and goodness
of God to admiration when he is upon the Throne in that eminence, power and
transcendent glory with all his holy Angels, yet then by undeniable reason to
stop mouths! Christ does not say as Monarchs on earth many times, I will do so
because I will; No, Come let us reason together. The consideration of this
Doctrine may serve to take off all hard thoughts of Christ with respect to this
day. But I will be very brief I therefore proceed to the second, which was this.

2 Doct. That the relief of the Saints in their pure necessities in hunger,
thirst, nakedness, is an indispensable duty. I put in pure necessities, because
out Text has it in matters of pure necessity, and th^s condemnation is upon
this ground. The want of this duty in Gods people of old made their fasts
abominable to God, Esa. 58. We have one Scripture may serve in the room of many
James 2.13. He shall have Judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy. This
duty must be performed for these reasons.

First, Because therein we make a discovery of our love to God, and without
this we cannot demonstrate our love to God, 1 Ioh. 3.17. He that has this
worlds goods, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion, how dwells the love of God in him? He might as well have said,
the love of God cannot dwell in him.

Secondly, It is such a duty as carries in it a true Character of the sheep of
Christ. See the former Context. This is the Character, here lies the
difference between the Sheep and the Goats.

Thirdly, The want of this duty is a discovery of the want of faith. See Iam.
2.15. In this Doctrine we have a double rule for our Charity so indispensabley
required.

First, They are Saints, Christ's brethren. Secondly, Such of them as are in
necessity; both these are comprehended Romans 12.13. distributing to the
necessities of the Saints. Saintship and necessity are the rule of our Charity
in the first place. Though we are to do good to all as opportunity and ability
serve, yet the Text and Doctrine is grounded upon Saintship. These are not here
condemned because they did not level or make all common, but for not giving to
necessity. The community we read of Acts 2. was voluntary and not compelled by
a rule; we are required no more than according to our abilities to dispense.
See 1 Timothy 6 17, 18, 19. 1 Pet. 4. As every one has received so let him
minister. So much for the second Doctrine.

Now I proceed to the third Doctrine which was this, That sins of Omission as
well as sins of Commission are highly provoking, they are dangerous and
damning. These are not charged with violence and rape or spoil upon the poor,
nor charged for taking away their food.

The Amalekites and Moabites are excluded the congregation for ever for not
meeting Israel with bread and water when they came out of Egypt, see Deuteronomy.
23.2. not for robbing them or meeting them in a hostile way. Take it in point
of worship it is dangerous, God has a controversy with the Nations, Ier. 9.
for not being circumcised in flesh, as Israel for not being circumcised in
heart. Eminent is that place to this purpose, Luke 7.29. they are charged with
rejecting the counsel of God against themselves, for not being baptized with
the baptism of John

This informs us of the bad estate of many formal Professors in this day, that
content themselves only with negative holiness though wanting in positive
duties. So much for the third Doctrine. I shall speak a sew words to the fourth
Doctrine which was this.

4 Doct. That Christ takes the unkindness offered to his poor members as done
to himself. I need say but little to this, because I had occasion to ^peak unto
it in the precedent matter. This sets out the great affection that Christ bears
to his least and poorest Saints It is from the dear and choice love that
Parents bear to their Children that makes them respect those (if but a Servant)
who sh^ws kindness to their Children, and take the il carriages of them to
their Children as done to themselves. But I pass this, and I shall speak a very
few word to the fifth Doctrine which was this.

5 Doct. That uncharitableness to Christ is a very high provoking sin* Here is
no one thing mentioned in this sentence and condemnation but this one omission,
the omission of Charity. Though doubtless this sin does not go alone, yet this
is that which is with weight upon Christ's heart in this day; and the reason is,
because there is no evil more contrary to Christ's nature than this: for he is
made up of goodness, and that appears by that pleasure and delight that he
takes in the contrary, Heb. 13. With Sacrifices of charity God is well pleased.
But us to Covetousness which is the contrary, see what he speaks of that, Psalm.
10. The Covetous man the Lord abhors.

See how Nabals unkindness to David (when in distress) was relished, God sent
death upon him for that very cause, see Sam. 25.38. The Lord struck Nabal that
he died, for that evil. Thus I have done with verse. 42, 43. I now hasten to the
close of the whole. There remain but three Circumstances more to be spoke unto;
and that which I am next to do in order to prosecute them is the answer and
reply of these left hand, uncharitable Goats. They seem to stand in their own
justification, as if this ground upon which ou^ Lord proceeds were not true;
they had not been wanting in this duty of Charity, they plead an universal
justification to the whole charge in all the several Circumstances of it. We
may put a double construction upon these words.

First, They may be taken in the last sense, of this grounding their plea upon
their ignorance of Christ in his members, laying the whole of the Word there to
intend Christ's person; When saw we thee in thy person so want? we never saw
thee in thy person hungry, or thirs^y, or naked, and we did not dream in the
least that thou wast so immmediately concerned in these pitiful poor
inconsiderate indigent Souls; had we but imagined that they had belonged to
thee, they should have been fed and clothed. And this opinion seems to be
favored in Christ's reply by way of explanation, showing them for certain that
these did belong to him whatever they thought, though so poor. But,

Secondly, It may be taken in the worst sense that they had no love to Christ
nor any that did bear his Image, and so were wholly negligent herein; and this
latter sense seems most clearly to agree to Christ's severe proceedings in this
Context. Taking of it as a bold pertinacious plea and defense, we may note this
Doctrine; It is the property of a corrupt heart to plead his justification even
to God himself and Christ himself. This was seen in Adam in the first
transgression, Genesis 3. and followed in Saul, 1 Samuel 15. This is that Spirit we
read of, Mat. 7. We have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out
Devils. See the vast difference herein between those on the right hand, they
are wholly upon a disclamour of their own righteousness which Christ imputes to
them; Christ can hardly fasten any belief upon them that they had ever done
such good as Christ charge upon them. These are the quite contrary.
Self-justification is the property of one most guilty in Christ's sight. But all
these pleas are in vain, our Lord proceeds to take them off; which is our third
Circumstance, ver. 45. it is a silencing reply, not one word more after this.
This reply has two par^s considerable.

First, The manner of it.

Secondly, The matter.

First, The manner, Verily or Amen. This word was much used by Christ when he
was on earth, and it seems shall be used by him on his Throne, Verily, that is
as much as to say, it is an infallible truth.

Secondly It is considerable as to the matter that Christ does so certainly
assert; that neglect of charity to the poorest member of Christ was a neglect
to Christ himself. This was so hard a truth to be received that Christ had need
to confirm it wi^h a Verily or Amen. From this verse with an eye to the former
I no^e this Doctrine.

1 Doct. That all pleas, arguments and strivings with Christ in the last day
will be unavoidable and successless. Christ will have the casting voice, the
last word, every mouth must be stopped.

2 Doct. That it is certain and u^deniable that neglect of Charity to Christ's
poo^ needing indigent members is a neglect offered to Christ himself. That all
pleas are in vain at that day I think I need not say much unto; it will be
easily granted, and the truth appears, Mat. 7. Luke 13. and in all this
Chapter: all calls to Christ at that day are ineffectual, because his have been
so before, and Christ does but retaliate, Prove. 1. I called, ye refused. Oh
consider this in time, for this day will most certainly come.

The 2. Doctrine I shall speak a very brief word to, That neglect of charity is
as to Christ whilst as to hi^ poor members. As he that shows pity to the poor
lends to the Lord, so be that is wanting in it is wanting to the Lord.

The fourth Circumstance is the confirmation of both Sentences, verse last.
From which last sentence of Christ there is no appeal, it stands unalterable to
all eternity. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into lise eternal.

FINIS.

