TREATY Made Between LEWIS xiv. of France, AND THE STATES GENERAL* About the
EXCHANGE and RANSOM OF THE Prisoners of WAR.

Together, with the RATES, or PRICES of RANSOM, FROM A General, to a Private
Soldier.

The same Treaty is likewise in Agitation, being Proposed by the French King to
the Emperor, King William, and the rest of the Confederate Princes.

Licensed,

April the 3d. 1691. James Fraiser.



LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationer (...) 1691.

We Helie William de Rochon, de la Peyrouse, Lord de la Motte and de
Chateau^^ux, the King's Lieutenant of Maubeuge, and Commander in the Town of
Thuin, and its Dependencies, in the Name, and by Order of his Majesty: And
James, Baron de Wassenaer, Lord d' Obdam, Hensbrock, etc. Nobleman of Holland,
Major General of the Horse of the United Provinces, Governor of William-Stadt,
etc. in the Name and by Order of the States General of the United Provinces:
Have agreed upon the Exchange and Ransom of the Prisoners of War, that have
been or shall be made by the Troops of the Armies and Garrisons of France, and
Those of the States General, One upon the Other only; and have Concluded the
present Treaty, by Virtue of a Power given to us, in the following Manner.
FIRST.
THAT all Prisoners, that shall be made of both sides, either in Battles,
taking Towns, Skirmishes, or other occasions, that may happen between the two
Nations, shall be rendered faithfully in a Fortnight at the furthest, by an
exchange of other Prisoners of the same Post, or others, in making Compensation
of more or less of the Ransom, or shall pay the Ransom, that shall be named
hereafter, and shall be paid in French Money. --

And to prevent all Disputes and Difficulties, as well in regard of the Post
and Quality of the Officers of both sides, as the Ransoms that shall be paid by
each of them; We have found necessary to specify hereafter the Employments and
Posts of each Party, and the price of the said Ransoms.

The Generals of the Kings Army, Commanders in Chief, and the Mareschals of
France, shall be Exchanged for the Captain General of the States General*
Commanding in chief their Armies, or shall pay -- Livers. 50000 The Captain
General of the Kings Armies. -- 40000 Livers. The Lieutenant Generals of the
King's Armies shall be Exchanged for those, that Command the Armies of the
States General immediately after the General, or shall pay -- 20000 Livers. The
Great Master of the Ordnance of France for the General of the Ordnance of the
States General, or shall pay -- 4000 Livers. The Mareschals de Camp of the King
Army shall be Exchanged, or pay -- Livers. 4000 The Colonel General of the
Horse shall be Exchanged for the General of the General of the Horse, or the
Foot of the States, or pay -- 4000 Livers. The Colonel General of the Dragoons
shall be Exchanged, if there be one, or shall pay -- 3500 Livers. The Maistre
de Camp, General of the Horse of France, shall be Exchanged, or pay -- 3500
Livers. The Maistre de Camp, General of the Dragoons, shall be Exchanged or pay
-- 3000 Livers. The Commissary General of the French Horse shall be Exchanged,
or pay -- 3000 Livers. An Intendant of the Armies or Provinces, for a Deputy of
the States in the Field, or shall pay -- 5000 Livers. The Commissioners under
them -- 1500 Livers. A Lieutenant General of the Ordnance of France, shall be
Exchanged for a Lieutenant General of the Ordnance of the States General, or
shall pay -- 1000 Livers. A Lieutenant General of the Horse or Foot shall be
Exchanged, or pay -- 1500 Livers. The Major Generals of Horse or the Foot,
shall be Exchanged for Major Generals or Commissary Generals of the Horse or
the Foot, or shall pay -- 800 Livers. The Brigadiers of Horse or Foot, shall be
Exchanged, or pay -- 600 Livers. A Major of a Brigade, for a Major of a
Brigade, or shall pay -- 300 Livers. A Marshal General of the Qurters the Army;
for a Quarter Master General, or shall pay -- 500 Livers. An Adjutant of the
Marshal General of the Quarters, and half a Quarter Master shall be exchanged,
or pay -- 100 Livers. Adjutant General's of the King, or he Dauphin -- 500
Livers. Adjutant Generals of the Generals in Chief, Lieutenant Generals and
Marshals de Camp shall be exchanged or pay -- 300 Livers. Quarter Master
Generals of the Horse shall be exchanged or pay -- 200 Livers. Their Adjutants
shall be exchanged or pay -- 100 Livers. The Treasurer General of the
extraordinary Expenses of War -- 1500 Livers. The first Commissary of every
Army -- 500 Livers. The other lesser ones of the Army and Places -- 50 Livers.
The General of the Provisions shall be exchanged for the Proveditor or pay --
1000 Livers. The first Commissaries of the Provisions of every Army shall pay
-- 500 Livers. The other Commissaries and Controllers of the Provisions -- 50
Livers. The Commissaries of War -- 100 Livers. The General Provost shall be
exchanged for the General Provost, or shall pay 300 Livers. The King's Attorney
for the Fiscal of the Council of War, or shall pay -- 250 Livers. The Provost's
Lieutenant for that of the States, or shall pay -- 100 Livers. The Clerks of
the Council of War, shall be exchanged, or pay -- 80 Livers. The other Officers
and Soldiers attending the Council of War, each -- 18 Livers.
Out of this number we have agreed to accept those Soldiers there shall be
employed to look for, and to seize* Thieves, Malefactors, and others that have
disobeyed their Orders, which are allowed to go with all Security from the
number of four to fifteen, commanded by a Brigadier, Exempt, Lieutenant, or the
Provost himself; neither shall it be lawful to seize their Horses and Arms,
being provided with good and sufficient Orders of the Generals, Governors,
Commanders, or Intendants of the Armies or Provinces, and they may take along
with them the King's Attorney, the Fiscal, Assessor, and Clerk, to proceed
against the Criminals, in case it be required, upon condition, that they shall
not approach nearer than two Leagues to the Enemies Army, or Places belonging to
them.

And in case that they are met with* either above or under the said number,
they may lawfully be made Prisoners with their Arms and Horses, and obliged to
pay the Ransom specified in the present Treaty.

The Wagen Maistre General shall be exchanged, or pay -- Livers. 150 His
Lieutenant. -- 80 Livers. The Commissary General of the Banks -- 150 Livers.
His Lieutenants, each -- 50 Livers. The Conductors of one and the other, shall
pay each -- 10 Livers. An Auditor, or Judge -- 2^ Livers. The Weght Maistre
General, or Captain of the Guides, shall be exchanged, or pay -- 80 Livers. His
Lieutenant -- 50 Livers. His Cornet -- 35 Livers. The Guides on Horseback, as
Troopers -- 10 Livers. The Chief Ingeniers -- 500 Livers.
And the others a Month of their Pay, which shall be faithfully declared of
both sides.

The Ordnance.
A Particular Lieutenant or Colonel of the Ordnance shall be exchanged or pay
-- Livers. 400 Livers. The Provincial Commissary or Lieutenant Colonel of the
Ordnance shall be exchanged or pay -- 250 Livers. An ordinary Commissary or
Major of the Ordnance shall be exchanged or pay -- 150 Livers. A Commissary
extraordinary, Gentleman of the Ordnance, Cadets or Guards shall be exchanged
or pay 30 Livers. The Captains of the Bombardiers, Miners, Pioniers, Watermen,
Cartmen, Pontoons, and others depending from the Ordnance shall be exchanged or
pay -- 50 Livers. Gunners, Bombardiers, Fire-Workers, Carpenters, Farriers,
Pioneers, Watermen, Bridg-Masters, and others shall pay as Soldiers -- Livers.
7. 10 s.
Gensd'-Arms.
THe Brigadier of the Gendarms -- Livers. 1100 The Captains of the Guards du
Corpse of the King -- 2000 Livers. The Captains Lieutenant of the Gendarms of
the King -- 2000 Livers. The Captain Lieutenant of the Light Horse -- 2000
Livers. The Captain Lieutenant of the Scotch Guards -- 2000 Livers. The Captain
Lieutenants of the two Companies of the Musketeers on Horseback -- 2000
Livers. The Captain Lieutenant of the English Gendarms -- 2000 Livers. The
Captain Lieutenants of the Companies of Gendarms, and the Light Horse of the
Queen, the Dauphin, the Dukes of Burgundy, Anjou, and Berry -- 2000 Livers. The
Captain of the Guards of the Duke of Orleans -- 2000 Livers. The Captain
Lieutenant of his Gendarms and Light Horse -- 2000 Livers. The Lieutenants of
the King's Guard du Corpse -- 2000 Livers. The under Lieutenant of the Gendarms
-- 2000 Livers. The under Lieutenant of the Light Horse -- 2000 Livers. The
under Lieutenant of the two Companies of the King's Musketeers -- 2000 Livers.
The under Lieutenant of the Scotch Guards -- 1000 Livers. The under Lieutenant
of the English Gendarms -- 1000 Livers. The under Lieutenant of the Gendarms of
the Queen, the Dauphin, the Dukes of Burgundy, Anjou, and Berry -- 1000 Livers.
The under Lieutenant of the Gendars of the Duke of Orleans -- 1000 Livers. The
Major of the Gendarms -- 1000 Livers. The Ensigns of the King's Guards du Corpse
-- 1000 Livers. The Ensigns and Guidoon of the Gendarms -- 1000 Livers. The
Ensign of the Scotch Troop -- 1000 Livers. The Ensign and Cornet of the
Musketeers -- 1000 Livers. The Ensign of the English Gendarms -- 1000 Livers.
The Ensign of the Gendarms of the Queen -- 1000 Livers. The Cornet of the
Light Horse of the Guards -- 1000 Livers. The Cornet of the Light Horse of the
Queen -- 1000 Livers. The Ensign of the Gendarms of the Dauphin, the Dukes of
Burgundy, Anjou and Berry -- 1000 Livers. The Lieutenants of the Guards of the
Duke of Orleans -- 600 Livers. The Ensign of the Gendarms -- 600 Livers. The
Cornet of the Light Horse -- 600 Livers. The Guidoon of the Scotch Gendarms --
600 Livers. The Guidoon of the English Gendarms600 Livers. The Guidoon of the
Gendarms of the Queen -- 600 Livers. The Guidoon of the Gendarms of the
Dauphin, the Dukes of Burgundy, Anjou, and Berry and of the Duke of Orleans --
600 Livers. The Major of the Guard du Corpse -- 600 Livers.
And concerning the Exempts, Quartermaster Brigadeers, Sou-Brigadeers, Guards
du Corpse, Gendarms, Musketeers, and others of the above mentioned Troops, they
are to give a Month of their Pay, or shall be Exchanged for Persons of the same
Quality and Caracter.

And concerning also the Company of Granadeers on Horseback, of the King's
Guards, the Officers and Granadeers of the said Company shall be Exchanged or
give a Month of their Pay.

French and Suiss Gaurds.
THe Colonel of the French Guards Livers. 3000 The Lieutenant Colonel -- 1500
Livers. The Major -- 600 Livers. The Captains -- 300 Livers. The Lieutenants,
Aid-Majors, under Lieutenants and Ensigns and others to a Soldier inclusive, a
Month of their Pay. The Provost, Quartermaster, Archers, and others belonging
to the Provostship of the French Guards, a Month of their Pay. The Colonel
General of the Suissers 4000 Livers. The Colonel of the Suiss Guards -- 3000
Livers. The Captains, Lieutenants and other Officers Soldiers of the Suiss
Guards shall pay at the same rate as the French Guards.
Guards of the Captain General of the States.
THE Officers, Troopers, and Soldiers of the Regiments, Troops, and Companies
of the Guards, shall be exchanged, or pay a Month of their Pay.

Horse.
A Colonel -- Livers. 400 A Lieutenant Colonel -- 250 Livers. A Major -- 220
Livers. A Captain -- 200 Livers. A Lieutenant -- 100 Livers. An Adjutant -- 75
Livers. A Cornet -- 75 Livers. A Quartermaster of the Regiment -- 75 Livers. A
Quartermaster -- 25 Livers. Brigadiers, or Corporals -- 22 l. 10 s Clerks and
Troopers -- 20 Livers. The Regiment of the Cravattes. The Royal English
Regiment. The Royal Regiment of Piedmont. The Germen Regiment of Count Nassau.
The said Regiments shall be treated as the rest of the Cavalry.
Dragoons.
A Colonel of Dragoons -- Livers 350 A Lieutenant Colonel -- 250 Livers. A
Major -- 200 Livers. A Captain -- 150 Livers. A Lieutenant -- 70 Livers. An
Adjutant -- 60 Livers. A Cornet -- 55 Livers. A Quartermaster -- 25 Livers. A
Quartermaster of a Regiment shall be exchanged, or pay -- 50 Livers. A
Brigadier, or Corporal -- ^0 Livers. Dragoons -- 18 Livers.
Foot.
A Colonel -- Livers. 400 A Lieutenant Colonel -- 250 Livers. A Major -- 150
Livers. A Captain -- 100 Livers. A Lieutenant -- 40 Livers. Adjutant -- 40
Livers. Quartermaster of the Regiment -- 35 Livers. Under Lieutenant, or
Ensign -- 25 Livers. The Sergeants -- 15 Livers. Soldiers -- 7 l. 10 s. The
Provost of the Regiments of Horse, Dragoons, and Foot shall be exchanged, or
pay -- 40 Livers. Their Lieutenants, Clerks, and Auditors shall be exchanged,
or pay -- 20 Livers.
Gentlemen Cadets.
THE Captains of the nine Companies of Cadets, shall be exchanged, if some are
to be found of the same Post and Character, or pay -- Livers. 150 The
Lieutenants -- 80 Livers. The Sou-Lieutenants, or Ensigns -- 60 Livers. The
Sejreants -- 20 Livers. Corporals -- 12 Livers. The Cadets -- 10 Livers.
The Governors, Commanders, the King's Lieutenants, the Majors and Adjutants,
and the Captains of the Gates, shall give a Month of their Pay, and if they
have another place of a greater Revenue, then they are to pay accordingly

All French Volunteers that shall be in the King's Army, of what Quality and
Dignity soever, in case they are of the number of those, that live constantly
at Court, and that have no Military Employments, they shall be exchanged, or
pay 2000 Livers.

And such Volunteers as shall have some Employ, either in, or out of the Army,
either in his Majesty's* or States General, or some other Foreign Princes
whatsoever, shall be exchanged, or pay according to what is specified in this
present Treaty.

The Contents of these two Articles shall be observed also in regard of the
Volunteers, that shall be in the (...)the States General.

The Almoners, Ministers, Physicians, Directors General, as well as Particular,
Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons and other Officers belonging to the Hospitals of the
Armies and Places of War, as also Women of what condition soever, Children of
twelve years of Age, and under it, Post-Boys, Messengers, Footmen, and
Servants shall be sent back without Ransom.

Those that have the benefit of several Employments, shall only pay the Ransom
according to the greatest place they are in possession of, and shall be
exchanged accordingly, or pay their Ransom.

All Officers of the Ordonance, that are not comprehended in this Treaty,
beariug the same Names with the Officers of Foot, shall without any difference,
be exchanged for the same Ransom.

All Reformed Officers shall only pay the fourth part of the Ransom of the
Place, they have the Title of.

Trumpets and Drummers that shall reclaim the said Prisoners, shall be sent
back in three days, and if for some reason of War, they are kept longer, they
shall be defrayed by those that do detain them.

All Officers and others, receiving Pay, not included in this present Treaty,
and obliged to follow the Armies, shall be Ransomed by paying one Month of their
Pay, besides that it shall be lawful to the Parties, to give one another notice
of the Officers, that have been omitted in this Treaty, and to agree amongst
them about it, after which it shall be faithfully observed in the same manner,
as if it was actually included in this Treaty.

If a difficult should arise, concerning the Quality or the pay of some of the
Prisoners, it shall be removed by a Certificate, which shall be faithfully
given by the General of the Army or the Governor of the place, which the said
Prisoners shall belong to, without any other proof.

It shall be prohibited of both sides to strip the Prisoners.

All Soldiers, Troopers, Dragoons, and others, whose Ransom is the same, shall
have for their subsistence, during the time of their Imprisonment three pence
of French Money, besides the Bread of Munition, and the Sergeants are to have
the double of it*

It is agreed on both sides, not to force any Prisoners of War to be Listed,
and to prevent all Disputes about it, those that shall be willing to serve him,
whose Prisoners they are, shall be obliged to give under their Hand, that they
have done it Voluntary, without being forced thereunto.

All Officers may be Treated in such a manner as they think fit, and shall find
themselves in a condition to pay.

All Officers of both sides, that have been sent back upon their Parole of
Honor, shall be obliged to return and Surrender themselve Prisoners, a
Fortnight after the Ratification of this Treaty, in case they have not before
paid the Ransom specified therein, as also the Debts they have Contratracted
for their Subsistence in Prison, which they may do without being obliged to
return, and shall be at liberty to serve as soon as they are acquitted of their
Creditors.

As to the Months of Pay, mentioned in several Articles, they shall be
regulated of both sides according to what the King allows them, except the
Governors, Commanders, the King's Lieutenants, Majors and Adjutants, Captains
of the Gates, Officers Troopers and Soldiers of the Guards, of the Captain
General of the States Army, who shall pay according to the Pay they receive
from the States General.

Upon the Conditions above mentioned, it is agreed to send back all Prisoners
from both sides, a Fortnight after the Ratification of the present Treaty, by
praying Reciprocally, what they have spent for their Subsistence during their
Imprisonment, and hereafter it shall be very exactly observed to Render the
Prisoners as soon as they shall be Reclaimed by paying the Ransom of rendering
some Prisoners in an Equivolent number, to the Place, they possess.

And to render all things easy, equally to both Parties, an Account shall be
given of them every six Months, if it be necessary.

Each Party shall make a Computation of the Prisoners that he sends back, and
shall take a receipt from the Commander of the place, where they are sent to, in
order that after a full delivery of the Prisoners, those of the two Parties,
that shall be in Debt for it to the other, he may take care to satisfy them
according to the Ransom here above mentioned.

All Prisoners, Horse as well as Foot, that are or have been made so, since the
Declaration of the present War, by Sea as well as by Land, shall be returned
from one side and the other, by satisfying he above mentioned Articles, to the
nearest place under his Majesty's or the States General's Obedience.

It shall be expressly Prohibited of both sides, to make use of Bullets of Tin,
or any other Metal besides that of Lead, as also all Ramed Bullets for Flying
Parties.

No Passport shall be delivered by the Generals, Governor, or Commanders of
Places to Soldiers, to go out in Parties under the number of Nine Men a Foot,
and Fifteen of Horse; it being agreed, that those who shall be Caught in Arms
under the said number, shall be punished with a hard Prison of two Months, and
in case, they shall be convinced of Murder or Robbery, they shall be delivered
into the Hands of the Justice, to be punished according to Law, of which Notice
shall be given Reciprocally, as also the Reasons for so doing.

Yet this punishment shall find no place, in case a Party after having lost
some Men in a Skirmish with the Enemy, shall be Rencountred in a less number,
then they went out from the Army, or their Garrison, which shall be Justified by
the Passport and Certificate of the Generals, Governors, or Commanders, from
whom they got their Leave, as also when a little Troop has served to Convoy an
Officer, which will be justified by the same Attestation.

That in case some Troopers, Dragoons, or Soldiers that are made Prisoners, and
that are, either Wounded or Sick to the danger of their Life, shall be put into
the Hospitals, or other Convenient places, in Order to be Cured; it is agreed,
that which the King or the States General give to the Governors of the
Hospitals for the entertainment of the Sick, shall be repaid besides their
Ransom, upon an Ingenious Declaration of both sides:

That in case of one side or the other, under pretense of Well Treating the
Prisoners, they are put into Inns or Public Houses upon their own, or their
Captains Charges, there shall be paid nothing, besides the Ransom, except the
three pence Allowed 'em for their Subsistence, and the Bread of Muniton, which
of both sides shall be given daily to the Troopers, Cravattes, Dragoons and
Soldiers, and the double to the Sergeants.

That the Pass-Ports of Spain shall have place, and shall be respected by the
Troops of Holland, of what Nation soever, in the whole extent of the (...) from
the Sea till to the Mosel French Men being the Bearers of them, and
particularly Intandants their Deputies, Receivers of Contributions and
Confiscations, undertakers of Forage, Expresses and Post-Boys, and the same
shall be granted by France, to the Receivers of Contributions, of Convoys,
Customs, and others of the same Employments and Functions, as those here above
mentioned from the side of France, in case it be required, that shall be
Estabish'd upon the Frontiers of the Spanish Netherlands, by the States
General, which shall have leave to go without any Molestation to the Towns and
Places of the said Frontiers, provided they do not approach nearer than than
two Leagues of the places of the Enemy, of one side and the other.

It shall also be granted to Prisoners, to give notice to their Superiors of
the place of their detention, and the Governors and Commanders shall assist
them in it.

That Trumpets and Drummers shall be sent back without Ransom, except they have
been taken with Arms in their Hands, in which case, Trumpeters shall pay as
Troopers, and Drummers as Soldiers.

This present Treaty shall have place, and shall reciprocally be good for all
the Troops, as well of the King's, as those of the States General, being
actually in their Pay, or not, of what Nation soever, without exception, or
exclusion, that shall stand under the orders of the Princes and Generals, that
have, or shall have directly and naturally a Command and Authority over the
Armies and Troops of His Majesty, and their High and Mighty Lordships, acting by
their Orders* and in their Name, either jointly, or separately, in what Places,
or Conntrys soever, all the said Troops shall have the benefit of this present
Treaty on both sides, and shall be exchanged, or pay a Ransom, according to the
Agreement made therein, which His Majesty promises to approve, and to see it
punctually observed and executed as the States General promise to approve the
Contents of the present Article, and to see it punctually observed and executed
by the Princes and Generals, as it is here above mentioned:

The present Treaty shall also have place, and shall be executed by His Majesty
during this present War, not only for the Troops that are either in the King's
or States Pay, of what Nation soever but also in regard of all Kings and
Princes, that are now Actually in War against France, that within the time of
two Months, shall Declare by an Act of a good form, that they willing to
conform themselves to His Treaty, and promise the Execution of it concerning
Prisoners, either of this side, or the other side of the Sea, and his Majesty
does Promise to see the said Treaty Executed, in regard of above mentioned
Kings and Princes, that are in Alliance with the States General, provided that
within the Limited time, the said Allies of the States General that are now in
War against France; do promise by an Act in a good form, to conform themselves
to the said Treaty, during the Present War, and as soon as the said Act shall
be delivered to the Sieur de la Motte, in Order to send them to his Majesty, he
will permit to the Prisoners of the said Alley's that have promised to Execute
also the present Treaty, to return either to their respective Countries, or
Armies, by paying the Ransom specified in the said Treaty, according to the
places, which they were in possession of, when they were made Prisoners, and in
case some difficulty should arise, concerning the differency of the Places in
the King's and the Confederate Princes Armies; Notice shall be given to the
Sieur de la Motte in Order to compose it in such a manner as shall be most
agreeable to both Parties.

The Contents of the foregoing Article shall be of no prejudice to, nor cause
any alteration in this Treaty concerning the Troops of the States General.

That the present Treaty about the Exchange and the Ransom of the Prisoners of
War on both sides, shall have place, and be thought good from the Day of the
Date of the Ratification, and shall be inviolably continued during the present
War without the least interruption.

And for the better assurance of the said Treaty, we have promised reciprocally
by virtue of the power, given unto us to get it Ratified by His Majesty, as
well as the States General of the United Provinces, within a Fortnight, at the
farthest from the Date hereof:

Made at Buillon, December the 29th. 1690. Signed, La Motte de la Peyrouse. J.
B. de Wassenaer.

The KING's WARRANT, Translated out of the FRENCH.
THE King being informed that the States General of the Unined Provinces were
inclinable to Agree upon a Treaty for the Exchange and Ransom of the Prisoners
of War, that have been or shall be made, either by his Majesty's Armies or by
those that are in his Pay, in Case his Majesty was willing to harken to it; and
being ready to Contribute on his side to the easiness and Liberty of the said
Prisoners, his Majesty being Entirely satisfied with the Conduct of the Sieur
de la Motte de la Peyrouse, his Lieutenant in the Government of Maubeuge,
concerning the soid Treaty, which he has made and past in his Name the 20th. of
October last, with the Commissaries, nominated by the Catholic King, in a
Treaty of the same Nature, in which he has given Proves of his Capacity and
Experience; His Majesty has Ordered and Deputed him to Transport himself to
Bouillon, and to render himself there toward the second of December next, in
Order to Negotiate, Conclude, and Sign in his Name with the Sieur Baron de
Wassenaer, d' Obdam, Deputed to the same purpose by the said States General, by
Virtue of a sufficient Power, and that shall be in good form, a general Treaty
about the Exchange of the Prisoners of War, thas have been or shall be made,
since the beginning of this War, and the time of its Continuation, by the
Troops of his Majesty, and by those of the said States General, in what place
soever, where the Armies of his Majesty and those of the States General have
Acted, or shall Act hereafter, without Exception, and Man for Man of the same
Post, and Quality, and thot in Case there should be a greater Number of
Prisoners of War of one side and the other* the Surplus shall be set at
Liberty, by paying the Ransoms, which shall be agreed upon, and all Conformably
as much as shall be possible, to the last Treaty of Exchange and Ransom,
Concluded and Signed May the 20th. 1675. for the Prisoners of War made by the
Armies of his Majesty and those of the said States General, Adding thereunto,
or taking off from it what shall be thought, fit, and to be done by the said
Sieur de la Peyrouse, for the said Exchange and Ransoms, all that he shall find
necessary, and to the Purpose, His Majesty having given him, as he gives him by
the present full Power of it, Promising upon the Faith and Parole of a King, to
Consent, and Faithfully to keep all that shall be Negotiated, Premist, and
Signed in his Name, by the said Sieur de la Peyrouse, by Virtue of this present
Power, and to see it Punctually Exacted and Observed on his side, without
difficulty; for such is his Majesty's Will.

Given at Versailles, November, the 19th. 1690 Signed, LEWIS
And lower Le Tellier.

The WARRANT of the States General, Translated out of the DVTCH.
THE States General of the United Provinces, to all those whom it may concern;
give to understand, that We have thought fit to Depute and Authorize, as We do
Depute and Authorize by these presents, the Here Baron of Wassenaer, Here of
Obdam, Major General in the Service of Our State, from Us and in Our Name, with
those who by his Majesty the King of France, are, or shall also be sufficiently
Authorized, to negociate, and to conclude a Treaty about the Excbange and
Ransom of the Prisoners of War, that are, or shall be made hereafter, with all
that depends from it, promising faithfully to Approve, to Ratify, and to
Execute all that by the said Baron of Wassanaer, Here of Obdam, shall be
concluded and agreed upon in our Name.

Given under the Seal of the State at the Hague, December the 11th. 1690.
Signed, G. SLOOT,
By Order from the High mentioned States General, F. FAGEL.

The King's Ratification, Translated out of the French.
THE King, having seen, and attentively read the Treaty here before mentioned,
made, and concluded by the Sieur de la Motte, De la Peyrouse, and in the Name
of the States General of the United Provinces, by the Sieur de Wassenaer, de
Obdam, about the Exchange and Ransom of the Prisoners of War that have been
made, since it was declared, or shall be made hereafter, during this War, by
the Troops of France, and those of the States General, one upon the other; and
His Majesty being pleased with the said Treaty* has Approved, Confirmed, and
Ratified, and does Approve, Confirm, and Ratify it; and he has promised, and
does promise upon the Faith and Parole of a King to keep it, to see it kept,
and inviolately observed on his side, without the least Infraction* nor permit
that it should be Infracted in any manner whatsoever; having for a Mark of his
good Will, Signed these present, with his own Hand, and ordered his Privy Seal
to be set to it.

Versailles, January the 4th. 1691. Signed, LEWIS.

Ratification of the States General, Translated out of the DUTCH.
THE States General of the United Provinces, to all those whom it may concern,
Greeting, Give to understand, that having seen and examined the Treaty
concluded at Buillon, December the 29th. 1690. between the Sieur De la Motte,
De la Peyrouse, Authorized thereunto by his Majesty the King of France, and the
Here Baron of Wassenaer, Here of Obdam, A^ed also thereunto by Us, concernin^
^he Ransom and Exchange of both (...) Prisoners, as it is here above at ^^^ge
mentioned.

And having o^^erved, that it is promised by the last Article of it, That the
said Treaty should ^e Ratified on both sides, within a Fortnight after the
24th. of December past, it being the Day of the beginning of the Treaty, We have
accordingly Approved and Ratified the said Treaty, as we do Approve and Ratify
it by these presents, promising faithfully to observe the present Treaty and
all the Points and Articles of it, to execute it, and to see it executed by all
those whom it may concern.

Given under the Seal of the State at the Hague, January the 11th, 1691. W. de
Nassaw.
By Order from the High mentioned States General. F. Fagel.

FINIS.

