A LETTER WRITTEN By the FRENCH KING, to the Cardinal Richieleu, occasioned
upon a Letter, dated Ian. the 28. being sent him from Pope Urban the 8.
intimating the miserable condition the Catholics (both in England and Ireland)
are like to come into, and upon some late proceedings of the Parliament in
England.

Commanding the said Cardinal to hold, and observe the like strict hand
toward the Hugonets, or Protestants, in France.

Whereunto is added the Cardinals answer to his Majesty, and expression of his
Zeal in the observation of His commands therein.

Faithfully translated out of the French Copy.

London, Printed for Nath: Butter, March, 18. 1642.

A Copy of a Letter, written by the King of France, unto Cardinal Richellieu,
Feb. 19 new style, wherein he requires him to consider the contents of the
Letter sent him unto St. Vincent, by Pope Urban, Ian. 28. 1642. And to give
order therein, according unto the concernment.
Right trusty, and well beloved Couzin, and Counselor, We greet you well:
We having received, Feb. 19. from our holy Father, and Uncle Pope Urban the
eight, by the hand of Jacob, by Gods providence, Bishop of Salerno: his
holiness's Nuncio Letters, fatherly advising us in matters at this time, highly
concerning us, and the flourishing prosperity of this our Monarchy: deeply
weighing how nearly it concerns us, who have wars abroad to provide for; and
maintain peace, and unity at home: and that the greatest turmoile, and
discords that ever arose in our Realm, was occasioned, stirred up, and
maintained by those of the Religion, pretended reformed, usually called
Hugonets: not content to mutiny themselves, (notwithstanding al our gracious
messages and replies unto them: granting them more then any of our Royal
Predecessors ever yielded unto: (but called and obtained the actual aid of our
dearest brother of great Britain against us: thereby as much as in them lay,
laboring the utter dissolution of our long ratified league, and amity: and in
liew thereof to bring in, and cherish an irreconciliable hate and discord,
between us and our dominions: not yet forgetting the both cost and labor,
lives and limbs, the reducing of that strong Town, and Cittadell of Rochell
stood us in, before we could have our dues from them; and their duties to us,
and our Crown acknowledged: and that which is not the least of the rest, being
certified by our Chamber accounts of Paris, as they, from the several
Out-lookers, and Surveyors of Parishes, throughout our whole Realm; how that
sect not only increases, but swarms, so that it is greatly to be suspected,
that (if not their Forts and Castles) yet their number will shortly become
formidable: in no wise over slipping the mis-deameanour, and outrages there
have lately been committed in England; to the great discontent, and damage of
our dearest brother, as we have been not long since to our great grief
informed: albeit his Royal self, a Professor, and maintainer of the same
Religion with them.

We justly fearing (as his holiness providently foreseeth, that had they the
same power in our Kingdom, we should undoubtedly be sensible of the same
inconveniencie: by reason, that that sect in its very principal, is a Shaker
off, and Despiser of all Monarchical government) do charge and require you
with all diligence possible, as to your wonted approved wisdom, you shall
think fitting, (we leaving the ordering, remedying, and redressing of this so
weighty affair, wholly unto your tried, and experienced ableness therein, as
you will answer the contrary unto his holiness, as touching obedience, and us
in duty: to put your best endeavors in hand, for the full and plenary
satisfaction of his Holiness and Us, as touching all, and every particulars in
the said Letter contained: we have likewise given in charge unto Sir de Boys,
the Bearer hereof, most special command, farther to acquaint you with our
pleasure in this kind.

Given at our Palace of the Castle, Saint Vincent, of this present Feb. 23.
anno Dom. 1641. And King of France, and Navarre, 40. Signed LEWIS,
And under De LANTON.

Cardinal Rechillieu's Letter unto the King of France, Feb. 22. wherein he
intimates unto his Majesty, the great care he has taken in fulfilling the
charge, by the same Kings Letter, laid upon him, Feb. 19. about the Popes
Letter, written unto the French King, from Rome, Ian. 28. 1641.
Most Christian Sir,
We have most seriously weighed, the contents of the Letter brought to us
from your Majesty, by Lord du Bois, Master of your Majesty's Ceremonies,
bearing date the nineteenth of this present month of Feb. having thought
deeply there upon, with the rest of your Majesty's Counsel, Presidents of
Estate and Parliament, as the importance of the matter, our bounden duty toward
your Majesty, right humble and feliall obedience on his Holiness his behalf,
duty and conscience toward the Roman Catholic Religion, do all severally and
respectively command and require: And first your Majesty has good reason, and
therein obliged: to give thanks and acknowledgement unto his Holiness; for the
care he has of the durancy, and perpetuity of the now flourishing State of
your Majesty's Crown, giving unto your Majesty very seasonable warning of
foreseeing, and preventing the evils that may any way endanger it: amongst
which (we all here residing for the service of your Majesty, in all things
whatsoever, and principally about this now in hand: do advertise your Majesty,
that it is a mischief, the remedy of which is not to be any while deferred:
for the Hugonets in number increase, and swell mightily in France, through all
quarters and territories; yea, we are given to understand, that in some places
they are become so impudent, that they oppose, and mock you Catholic
subjects, as they come from our God unto the holy Mass: which is more, Boyaux
our Secretary has avowed unto us, that a Gentleman of Deep an Hugonet, stuck
not to say (in reproaching him) that he should see shortly, that the
Protestants (as he termed them) would make proof of force enough, not only to
defend themselves, but (may be) to offend their adversaries: which he spoke
openly in a Tavern, and (we pray God) without ground: we are all assured,
that the conjunction of your Majesty's most Royal sister in marriage, with the
King of great Britain, being a Prince professing the same Religion, (although
il rewarded of it) and the promise your Majesty made unto his Ambassador, of
gentle use of them, during their loyal deportment: and his Majesty's like
usage of those of yours in England, has been the cause that your Majesty has
showed such clemency, that we may not say licentious liberty unto them, against
your Majesty's own interest and profit, that we may not say, conscience, and
otherwise obligements: but seeing that this obligation is frustrate, and broken
on their part: and that your Majesty is so assuredly certified by messengers,
the verity of whose report we no ways doubt, how great miseries the Catholics
there abiding, since the holding there of their Parliament, are put unto; not
only in respect of estates and honors, but of freedom and life: how
unworthily your own most Royal sisters Subjects, (knowing that her reproach
does some way glance upon your Majesty) we assure your Majesty, and declare
unto all the world, that your Majesty is acquitted, and discharged of all
obligation, or promise whatsoever made in that kind, seeing that his Majesty
of great Britain, either cannot, or will not keep and observe his: All which
considered, that which your Majesty is speedily to resolve upon, is this: Your
Majesty must forthwith publish an absolute, and peremptory Edict, declaring
what course your Majesty is pleased, and resolved to take with these Hugonets:
straightly charging therein, all your officers, of what quality, degree,
condition, place, or authority soever, where these Hugonets inhabit, upon pain
of loss of office, fine, and imprisonment, and farther sharper proceeding, if
your Majesty shall see just cause to accomplish, and put in strictest
execution, without any respect, or favor whatsoever, all and every the
particular clauses, as touching the said Hugonets, that in the fore-rehearsed
Edict shall be contained; the Copy whereof we have here sent unto your
Majesty, by Mounsieur du Plaisir: one of the Presidents of Parliament, to
lead, revised, amended, enlarged, altered, or presently signed, as it shall
please your Majesty to write your Royal disposednesse, we remit our selves.

From St. Germia Paris, the 22. of this present. Your Majesty's most loyal
subject and servant, Sir Richieleu.

FINIS.

