ARTICLES OF PEACE BETWEEN The Two CROWNS OF France and Spain, Concluded at
Aix-la-Chapelle, the second of May, 1668.

Translated out of French.

Licensed June 25. 1668. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by E. O. for William Crook, near Essex-House without
Temple Bar. 1668.

ARTCLES OF PEACE BETWEEN The two Crowns of FRANCE and SPAIN, Concluded at
Aix-la-Chapelle, the second of May, 1668.
I.
FIrst, It is Covenanted, and Agreed, that for the Future, there shall be a
true, firm, and inviolable Peace, Confederacy, and perpetual Alliance and
Amity, between the most Christian and Catholic Kings, their Children born, or
to be born hereafter, their Heirs, Successors, and Inheritors, their Kingdoms,
States, Countries and Subjects; and that they shall mutually love one another,
as kind Brethren, that the one shall promote with all his ability the Good,
Honor, and Reputation of the other, really avoiding according to their Power,
the prejudice of one another.

II.
In pursuance of this good Reunion, as soon as the ratification of the present
Treaty shall be exchanged, the Peace between the said Kings shall be published,
and from the time of the said publication, there shall be a Cessation of Arms,
and all acts of Hostility, as well by Land as by Sea and fresh Waters, and
generally in all places, where their Majesty's Forces wage War, as well among
their Companies and Armies in the Field, as in the Garrisons: and if the said
Cessation be opposed by the taking of any place, or places, be it by assault
surprise, or private Intelligence; and in like manner, if there be any
prisoners taken, or other acts of Hostility committed by any accident not
foreseen, or of those that cannot prevent it contrary to the said Cessation of
Arms, the departing from the Agreement shall be really repaired on either side,
without delay or difficulty, restoring without the least diminution, that which
they possessed, and setting the Prisoners at Liberty without any Ransom or
Charge.

III.
In consideration of this Peace, the most Christian King shall keep, remain
seized with, and effectually enjoy all Places, Forts, and Posts that he has
gained, obtained, or fortified by Arms during the last years Campaign: That is
to say, the Fortress of Charleroy, the Towns of Binch and Atthe, the Places of
Doway, the Fort of Scarpe being comprised, Turney, Oudenard, Lille,
Armentieres, Courtray, Bergues and Furnes, and all their Bailiwicks,
Castlewicks, Territories, Governments, Provostships, Appurtenancies,
Dependancies and Annexations, by what name soever they be called, as far as
ever they extend.

IV.
The said Places, Towns, and Places of Charleroy, Binch, Atthe, Doway, Fort of
Scarpe, Turney, Oudenard, Lille, Armentieres, Courtray, Bergues and Furnes,
their Balliwicks, Castlewicks, Governments, Provostships, Territories, Domains,
Seignories, Appurtenancies, Dependancies and Annexations, by what name soever
they may be called, shall appertain by Virtue of this present Treaty of Peace,
to the said Lord the Most Christian King and his successors, having right
thereunto, irrevocably and for ever, with the same rights of Soverainty,
Propriety, Royalty, Patronage, Gardianship, Jurisdiction, Nomination,
Prerogatives and Preheminencies, over the Bishoprics, Cathedrals and other
Churches, Abbeys, Priories, Dignities, Cures, and all other Beneficies
whatsoever, being within the extent of the said Country, Places, and Bailiwicks
granted, of what Abbey soever the said Priories hold Land, and have dependence
upon, and all other Rights that have heretofore appertained to the Catholic
King, though they be not here particularly recited, without any future trouble
to his most Christian Majesty, by what pretense soever, of right, nor disturbed
indeed by the said Catholic King his Successors, or any Prince of his House,
or by any Person whatsoever, or upon any pretense or occasion that may happen
in the said Soverainty, Propriety Jurisdiction, Authority, Possession and
Enjoyment of all the said Countries, Towns, Places, Castles, Lands, Seignories,
Provostships, Domains, Castlewicks, and Bailiwicks, together with all the
Places and other things thereunto appertaining. And to this purpose the said
Catholic King, as well for himself, his Heirs and Successors, having right
thereunto, renounceth, quitteth, grants, and conveyeth, as his
Plenipotentiary in his name by the present irrevocable Treaty of Peace, has
renounced, quitted, granted, and conveyed, perpetually, and for ever in favor,
and for the advantage of the said most Christian King, his Heirs, Successors,
and such as are concerned, all the Rights, Actions, Pretenses, Royalty,
Patronage, Gardianship, Jurisdiction, Nomination, Prerogatives and
Preheminencies over the Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, and other Abbeys,
Priories, Dignities, Cures, and other Beneficies whatsoever, being within the
limits of the said Countries, Places, and Bailiwicks granted, of what Abbeys
soever the said Priories hold Lands, and have dependence upon, and in General,
without retaining or reserving any thing to himself, all other Rights, that the
said Catholic King, or his Heirs, and Successors, have, pretend, or can have,
and pretend unto, upon what ground or reason sover, over the said Countries,
Places, Castles, Forts, Lands, Seignories, Domains, Castlewicks and Bailiwicks,
and over all Places depending thereupon, as is before mentioned, all the Laws,
Customs, Statutes and Constitutions to the contrary notwithstanding, on those
confirmed by oath, in which, and in the abrogatory Clauses of Abrogation, it to
expressly abolished by this present Treaty for the confirmation of the said
Renunciations, and Concessions, which shall stand in Force, and take place,
insomuch that the particular expression or specification shall not Disanul the
General, nor the General, the Particular; Perpetually excluding all exceptions,
upon what Right, Title, Cause, or Pretense soever they can be grounded: The
said Catholic King Declares, Consents, Wills, and Intends, that all Men,
Vascals, and Subjects of the said Countries, Towns, and Lands, granted to the
Crown of France, as before mentioned, be, and remain quit, and discharged for
the present, and for ever, of their Faith, Homage, Service, and Oath of
Fidelity, which all and every of them might have made to him, and the Catholic
Kings his Predecessors; together with all Obedience, Subjection, and Vassalage,
that by reason thereof might be due unto him, from them; the said Catholic
King requiring, that the said Faith, Homage, and Oath of Fidelity, be made Null
and Void, as if they had never been made or given.

V.
The said most Christian King immediately after the Publication of the Peace,
shall withdraw his Forces from the Garrisons of all Places, Towns, Castles, and
Forts of the County of Burgundy, commonly called la-Franche-Comte, and shall
really, effectually, and bona fide restore to his Catholic Majesty, all the
said County of Burgundy, without any retention, or reservation.

VI.
The said most Christian King shall make restitution of all the Places, Forts,
Castles, and Posts, that his Forces have, or might have enjoyed, unto the day
of the Publication of the Peace, in what place soever Situated to the
Catholic King, those Places, and Forts which ought to remain by this present
Treaty, with his most Christian Majesty, as has been above specified, excepted.

And in like manner His Catholic Majesty shall make restitution of all the
Places, Forts, Castles, and Posts, which his Forces could have been possessed
of, to the day of the publication of this Peace, in what Place soever they be,
to his Most Christian Majesty.

VII.
Their Majesty's agree, that all Kings, Potentates and Princes, that will
freely enter into the like Obligation, would give their Majesty's their
Promises and Engagements of Warranty, as to all the contents of this present
Treaty.

VIII.
It has been consented to, agreed, and declared, that hereby there is to be no
revocation of the Treaty of the Pyreneans (with a reservation as to the
Portugal, with whom the said Catholic King has since made a Peace,) only so
far as it has been otherwise disposed of in this Treaty, by the concession of
the above said Places; so that the parties can acquire no new right, nor
receive any prejudice upon their respective pretenses in any thing, whereof
there is no express mention made in this present Treaty.

IX.
And for the further Confirmation of this Treaty of Peace, and of all the
Clauses and Articles herein contained, the said present Treaty shall be
published, ratified and registered in the Court of the Parliament of Paris, and
in all other Parliaments of the Kingdom of France, and Court of Accounts of the
said City of Paris; so in like manner the said Treaty shall be ratified,
published and registered, as well in the Great Council and other Councils and
Court of Accounts of the said most Catholic King in the Low-Countryes, as in
the other Councils of the Crowns of Arragon and Castile: The whole affair being
managed according to the form of the Treaty of the Pyreneans in the year 1659.
the expedition whereof shall be mutually given by each other, within three
Months after the Publication of this present Treaty.

Which Clauses and Articles above named, together with the contents of every
one of them, have been Treated of, agreed upon, passed and Covenanted between
the above said Plenipotentiaries of the said most Christian and Catholic
Kings, in the name of their Majesty's, which said Plenipotentiaries by Virtue
of their Power, (the Copies whereof shall be annexed unto this present Treaty)
have promised, and do promise upon the Obligation of all and every the Goods,
and Estates, present, and for the future, of the Kings their Masters; that they
shall be inviolably kept and performed by their Majesty's, and to cause them to
be ratified, firmly and simply without any addition, and to complete the
ratifications by authentic Letters, Sealed, where all the present Articles
shall be inserted Verbatim, on the last day of May next ensuing inclusively.
First, his most Christian Majesty at Brussels, in the hands of the Governor of
Flanders, and his Catholic Majesty at Saint Germains en Lay, in the hands of
the said most Christian King, and sooner, if possibly. Furthermore the said
Plenipotentiaries have promised, and do promise, in the said names, that the
said Letters of ratification being perfected, the said most Christian King, as
soon as can be, and in the presence of such person or persons, as the said
Catholic King will please to Delegate, shall solemnly Swear upon the Cross,
the Holy Evangelists, the Canons of the Mass, and upon his Honor, fully,
really, and bona fide to observe and accomplish all the Contents of the
Articles in this present Treaty, and the same shall be also performed, as soon
as it can possibly, by the said Catholic King and the Queen Regent his Mother,
in the presence of such person or persons, as it shall please the said most
Christian King to depute. In witness whereof, the said Plenipotentiaries have
subscribed the present Treaty with their names, and caused the Seal of their
Arms to be set thereunto. Dated in the Imperial City of Aix-la-Chappelle, the
28 day of May, 1668.

And in the name of his Holiness, and the said Electors and Princes of the
Sacred Empire, they have also subscribed these present Articles with their
names, and caused the Seal of their Arms to be affixed thereunto, Signed
Augustine Franciotti, Archbishop of Trebisond, Plenipotentiary to his
Holiness. The Baron of Scheneborn in the name of his Electoral Highness of
Mayenee. Francis Egon of Furstenberg, in the name of his Electoral Highness of
Colen; and the Chevalier Semising in the name of his Highness of Munster.

We therefore allowing of the forementioned Treaty, in all and every the
Particulars and Articles therein contained, and Declared, have accepted,
approved, ratified and confirmed, do accept, approve, ratify and confirm the
same, as well for our selves, as for our Heirs, Successors, Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands, Seignories, and Subjects, promising the performance of the
contents hereof, upon the Faith and Word of a King, and upon the Obligation and
Engagement of all and every our Estates for the present and the future, to keep
and observe them inviolably, without doing any thing Directly or Indirectly, in
any manner or kind whatsoever to the contrary. In Witness whereof, We have
Signed these Presents with our Hands, and have caused our Seal to be set
thereunto.

Given at St. Germain's en Lay the 26th. day of May, in the year of our Lord
1668. and of our Reign the 26th. Signed Lewis, and underneath De Lionne.

FINIS.

