ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Treaty having for a considerable time been the Subject of the
Gazettes beyond Sea, and of common Discourse here, and an Abstract thereof
having been published very Imperfect, if not Erroneous; for the Information of
Mankind it is here translated from the best Copy that could be gotten, to let
the Nation see the care his Majesty takes to prevent new Wars, and by
consequence the further Effusion of our Blood and Treasure.

THE TREATY BETWIXT The Most Christian King, The King of Great Britain, and The
States General of the United Provinces, For settling the Succession of the
Crown of Spain, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, in case his Catholic
Majesty die without Issue.

In English and French.

LONDON; Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwick Lane. M. DCC.

Traite enter le Roy tres Chretien, le Roy de la Grande Bretagne, and les
Seigneurs Estats Generaux des Provinces Unies des Pais bas.
SOIT notoire a tous qui ces presents verront, que le serenissime and tres
puissant prince Louis 14me par la grace de Dieu Roy tres Chrestien de France
and de Navarre, etc. and le serenissime and tres puissant prince Guillaume 3me
ausi par la grace de Dieu Roy de la grande Bretagne, and les seigneurs Estats
generaux des Provinces Vnies des pais bas, n' ayant rien de plus a coeur que de
fortifier par des nouvelles liaisons la bonne intelligence restablie enter sa
Majeste tres Chret. sa Majeste de la grande Bret. and lesd. seigneurs Estats
generaux par la dernier traite conclu a Riswick, and de prevenir par mesures
prises a temps les evenements qui pourroient exciter de nouvelles guerres dans
l' Europe; ont done pour cet effet leurs pleins pouvoirs pour convenir d' un
nouveau traite scavoir sa dite Majeste tres Chret. au Sieur Camille d' Hortung,
Comte de Tallard, Lieut. general des armees du Roy and de la province de
Dauphine, Ambassadeur extraordinaire de France en Angleterre; and au Sieur
Gabriel Comte de Briord, Marquis de Senezan, Cons. du Roy en ses conseils, and
son Ambassadeur extraord. aupres desd. seigneurs Estats Generaux des Provinces
v. des p. b. Sad. Ma. Brit. au Sieur Guillaume* Comte de Portlant, Vicomte de
Cirencester, Baron de Woodstock, Chevalier de l' order de la jarretiere, and
Consr. du Roy en son conseil prive; and au Sieur Edward Comte de Jersey,
Vicomte de Villiers, Baron de How, Chevalier Marechal d' Angleterre, premier
Secret* d' estat, and Consr. du Roy en son conseil prive; and lesd. seignieurs
Estats Graux aux seignieurs Jean van Ersen bourguemaitre and senateur de la
ville de Zutphen, Curateur de Vniversite a Harderwick; Frederick Baron de
Rheede seigneur de Lier; St. Antoine Berlee de l' order de la Noblesse a'
Hollande and West Frize; Antoine Heinsius consr. pensionare, guard du grand
sceau, and surjntendant des fiefs de la meme province; Guillaume de Nassau
seigneur de Odyeck Cortigene, and premier noble and representant la noblesse
dans l' assemblee des Estats and de Deputes, Consr. de Zelande; Everhard de
Veede, seigneur de Weed, Dickvelt, Rateles, and seigneur foncier de la ville
d' Oudewater, doyen and escolastre du chapitre Imperiale de St. Marie a
Vtrecht, Diekgrave de la Riviere du Rhin dans la Province d' Vtrecht, and
president des estats de la meme province; Guillaume van Harein; Grietman du
Bild depute de la Noblesse aux Estats de Frize, and Curateur de l' universite
de Franecker; Arnold Lemcker, Bourgomatre de Deventer; and Jean van Heeck,
senateur de la ville de Gronningue, tous Deputes dans l' assemblee desdt.
seigneurs Estats generaux, de la part des Estats de Gueldre, de Hollande and
West Frize, de Zeelande, d'Vtrecht, de Frize, d'Overissel, and de Groningue and
Omelandes; lesquels en virtue desds. pouvoirs sont convenus des articles suivans.

Article I.
La Paix restablie par le traite de Riswick enter sa Majeste tres Chretienne,
sa Majeste Britanique, and les seigneurs Estats Generaux des Provinces Vnies
des Pais Bas, leur heritiers and successeurs, leurs Royaumes, Estats, and
Sujets, sera ferme and constante; and leurs Majestes, and lesdits seigneurs
Estats Graux des P. V. des P. B. feront reciproquement tout ce qui pourra
contribuer a l' avantage and a l' utilite de l' un and de l' autre.

II.
Comme le principal objet que sad. Majeste tres Chres. sa dite Majeste de la G.
B. and lesd seigneurs E. G. se proposent, est celuy de maintenir la tranquilite
generale de l' Europe, ils n' ont pu voir sans douleur que l' estat de la sante
du Roy d' Espagne soit depuis quelque tems devenu si languissant, qu' il y a
tout a craindre pour la vie de ce prince; quoy qu' ils ne puissent tourner
leurs pensees du cost de cet evenement sans affliction par l' amity sincere
and veritable qu' ils ont pour luy, ils ont cependant estime qu' il estoit d'
autant plus necessaire de le prevoir que sa Majeste Cathol. n' ayant point d'
enfans, l' ouverture de la succession exciteroit infailliblement une nouvelle
guerre sile Roy tres Chret. soutenoit ses pretensions, celles de Mons. le
Dauphin ou de ses descendans sur toute la succession d' Espagne, and que l'
Empereur voulut aussy fair valoir ses pretensions, celles du Roy des Romans
de l' Archi-Duc son second fills ou de ses autres enfans masles ou femelles sur
lad. succession.

III.
Et Comme les deux seigneurs Roys and les seigneurs Estats Generaux veulent sur
toutes chooses la conservation, du repos public and d' eviter une nouvelle
guerre dans l' Europe pour un accommodement des disputes and des differents qui
pourroient resulter au sujet de lad. succession ou par l' ombrage de trois
Estats reunis sous un mesme Prince, ils ont trouve bon de prendre par avance
des mesures necessaires pour prevenir les malheurs que le triste evenement de
la mort du Roy Cathol. sans Enfans pourroit produire.

IV.
Ainsy a ete accord and convenu que si le dit cas arrivoit le Roy tres Chret.
tant en son propee nom qu en celuy de Mons. le Dauph. ses Enfans Masles ou
Heritiers and Successeurs, nez and a naitre; comme aussy Mons. le Dauph. pour
soy meme, ses Enfans Masles ou etc. se tiendront satisfaits, comme ils se
tiennent satisfaits par la present, que Mons. le Dauphin ait pour son partage
en toute propriete possession pleniere and extinction de toutes ses pretensions
sur la succession de Espagne, pour en jouir, luy, ses Heritiers, Successeurs
descendans Masles ou etc. a perpetuite sans pouvoir etre jamais trouble sous
quelque pretexte que ce soit de droits ou de pretensions directement on
indirectement, meme par cessions, appel, revolte, ou autre voye de la part de
l' Empereur, du Roy des Romans du serereniss, M. Archiduc Charles Son second
fills, des Archiduchesses, de ses autres Enfans Masles ou etc. les Roiaumes de
Naples, and de Sicilie en la mannere que les Espagnols les possedent
presentement, les places dependantes de la Monarchy d' Espagne, situees sur la
cote de Toscane ou jsles adjacentes comprises, sous le nom de Sancto Stephano,
Porto Hercole, Orbitello, Palamone, Portolongo, Piombin, en la maniere aussy
que les Espagnols les tiennent presentement, la ville and le Marquisat de Final
en la maniere pareillement que les tiennent, la Province de Guipuscoa nommement
les villes de Fontarabie, and de St. Sebastien situees dans cette Province and
specialement le port du Passage qui est compris avec cette restriction
seulement ques* il y a quelques lieux dependans de lad. province qui se
trouuent situez au de la de Pirennees ou autres Montagnes de Navarre d' Alava
ou de Biscaye du cost de l' Espagne, ils resteront a l' Espagne, and s'il y a
quelques lieux pareillement dependans des provinces soumises a l' Espagne qui
soient en deca de Pirennees ou autres Montagnes qui se trouveront enter lad*
province de Guipuscoa Navarre Alava and de Biscaye a qui qu' else
appartiennent seront partagees enter la France and l' l' Espagne, en sort qu'
il restera autant desd. Montagnes and trajests a la France de son Cost qu' il
en restera a l'Espagne du sien, le tout avec les fortifications, munitions de
guerre, poudres, boulets, canons, galleres, chiourmes, qui se trouveront
appartenir au Roy d' Espagne lors de son decez sans Enfans and etre attachez
aux Royaumes, Places, Isles and Provinces qui doivent composer le partage de
Mons. le Dauphin bien entendu que les galleres, Chiourme and autres effects
appartenant au Roy d' Espagne par le Royaume d' Espagne and autres Estats qui
tombent dans le partage du serenis. Archd. luy resteront, celles qui
appartiennent aux Royaumes de Naples and de Sicilie devant revenir a Mons. le
Dauphin ainsy qu' ily a ete dit cy dessus.

De plus les Estats de Mons. le Duc de Lorraine a scavoir les Duches de
Lorraine and de Bar ainsy que le Duc Charles W. du nom les possedoit et tells
qu' ils ont ete rendus par le Traite de Riswick seront cedez and transportez a
Mons. le Dauphin ses Enfans Heritiers and Successeurs Masles ou etc. en toute
propriete and possession pleniere a la place du Duche de Milan qui sera cede
and transporte en eschange and. Duc de Lorraine ses Enfans Masles ou etc. en
toute propriete and possession pleniere, lequel ne refusera point un parti si
avantageux, bien entendu que le Comte de Bitch appartient a Mons. le Prince de
Vaudemont, lequel rentrera dans la possession de terre don't ill a joui cy
devant qui luy ont ete ou doivent etre rendues en execution du Traite de
Riswick, moy ennant lesquels Royaumes, Isles, Provinces and Places lesd. Roi
tres Chret. tant en son propre nom qu' en celuy de Monseig. le Dauphin, ses
Enfans Masles ou etc. lequel a aussy done son pleinpouvoir au Sieur Comte de
Tallard, and au Sieur Comte de Briord promettent and l' engagent de renoncer
lors de l' ouverture de lad. Succession d' Espagne comme en ce cas la ils
renoncent des a present par celle cy a tous ses droits and pretensions sur lad.
couronne d' Espagne and sur tous les autres Royaumes, Isles, Estats, pais and
places qui en dependent presentement a l' exception de ce qui est enonce cy
dessus pour son partage, and de tout cela ils feront expedier des acts
solemnels dans la plus forte, and la meilleure form qu'il se pourra qui seront
delivrez au temps de l' eschange des ratiffications de ce present Traite au Roy
de la Grande Bretagne, and aux Seigneurs Estats Generaux.

V.
Toutes les villes places and ports situez dans les Royaumes and provinces qui
doivent composer le partage dud. Seig. Dauphin seront conservez sans etre
demolis.

VI.
La dite couronne d' Espagne and les autres Royaumes Isles, Estats, pais and
places que le Roy Cathol. possede presentement tant dehors que dedans l' Europe
seront donnez and assignez au seren. Archid. Charles 2d fills de l' Empereur a
l' exception de ce qui a ete done dans l' Art. 4. qui doit composer le partage
de Monseigneur le Dauphin, and du Duche de Milan en conformite uddit. Art. 4.
en toute propriete and possession pleniere en partage and extinction de toutes
ses pretensions sur ladit. Succession d' Espagne pour en jouir, luy ses
Heritiers, and Successeurs nez and a naitre a perpetuite sans pouvoir etre
jamais trouble sous quelque pretexte que ce soit de droits ou des pretensions
directement ny indirectement, meme par cession, appel, revolte ou autre voye de
la part du Roy tres Chret. de Monsegnieur le Dauphin ou de ses Enfans Masles ou
etc. moyennant laquelle la Couronne de'Espagne and les autres Royaumes, Isles,
Estats, pais and places qui en dependent, l' Empeeur tant en son propre nom qu'
en celuy du Roy des Romans, du seren. Archd. Charl. son. 2d fills, des
Archiduchesses ses filles, ses Enfans leurs Enfans Masles ou etc. comme aussy
le Roy des Romans pour luy and le seren. Archd. Char. des qu' il sera majeur pour
luy meme leurs Enfans etc. se tiendront satisfaits que led. seren. Archd. Char.
ait en extinction de toutes leurs pretensions sur la succession de Espagne, la
dit Cession faite cy dessus, and led. Empereur tanen son propre nom qu' en
celuy du Roy des Romans du seren. Archd. Char. son. 2d Fills, des Archiduchesses
ses filles, ses Enfans Masles ou etc. ou les leurs, comme aussy led. Roy des
Romans en son propre nom renonceront lors qu'ils entreront en ce present Traite
and qu' ils le ratiffieront and le seren. Archd. Char. des qu' il sera majeur,
a tous autres droits and pretensions sur les Royaumes, Isles, Estats, pais and
places qui composent les partages, and les portions assignez cy dessus a
Monseigneur le Dauphin de celuy qui aura le Duche de Milan par eschange de ce
qui sera done a Monseigneur le Dauphin and que de tout cela ils feront
expedier des acts solemnels dans la plus forte and la meilleure form qu' il
se pourra, scavoir l' Empereur and le Roy des Romans quand. ils ratifieront ce
present traite, and le serenissime Archi-Duc des qu'il sera Majeur, les quels
seront delivrez a sa Majeste Brit. and aux seigneurs Estats Generaux.

VII.
Immediatement apres l' eschange des ratifications de ce present traite il sera
communique a l' Empereur lequel sera invite d' y entrer; mais si trois mois
apres a compter du jour de la dite communication, and de lad. invitation, ou le
jour que sa majeste Cathol. viendroit a mourir, si ce toit avaunt led. term de
trois mois sa Majeste Imp. and le Roy du Rom refusoient d' y entrer and de
convenir du partage assign au serenissime Arch-d. les deux seigneurs Roys ou
leurs successeurs, and les seigneurs Estats Generaux conviendront d' un prince
auquel led. partage sera done, and en cas que non obstant la present
convention led serenissime Archi-Duc voulut prendre possession ou de la portion
qui luy sera echeue avaunt qu' il eut accept le present traite, ou de celle qui
seroit assign a Monseigneur le Dauph. ou a celuy qui aura le Duche de Milan
par exchange comme il est dit cy dessus, lesd. Deux seigneurs Roys and les
seignieurs Estats Generaux en virtue de cette convention l' empecheront de
toutes leurs forces.

VIII.
Le serenissime l' Archi-Duc ne pourra passer en Espagne ny dans le Duche de
Milan du vivant de sa Majeste Cathol. que d' un commun consentement, and point
autrement.

IX.
Si le Serenissime Archi-Duc vient a mourir sans Enfans, soit avaunt on aprez la
mort du Roy Cath. le partage qui luy est assign cy dessus par l' art. de ce
traite passera a tell enfant de l' Empereur masle ou, etc. horse le Roy des Romans
ou tell enfans masles ou, etc. du Roy des Romans que sa Majeste Imple trouvera bon
de designer, and en cas que sad. Majeste Imple vient a deceder sans avoir fait
la supd. designation elle pourra etre faite par le Roy des Romans mais le tout a
condition que led. partage ne pourra jamais etre reuni ny demeurer en la
person de celuy qui sera Empereur ou Roy de Romans ou qu' qui sera devenu l' un
ou l' autre soit par succession, testament, contrait de marriage, donation,
eschange, cession, appel, revolte, ou autre voye* and de meme led. partage du
serenissime Arch-Duc, ne pourra jamais revenir ny demeurer en la person d' un
prince qui sera Roy de France ou Dauphin, ou qui sera devenu l' un ou l' autre,
soit par succession, testament, contract de marriage, donation, etc.

X.
Le Roy d' Espagne venant a mourir sans enfans and ainsy le susd. cas arrivant,
les deux seigneurs Rois and les seigneurs Estats Generaux s' obligent de
laisser toute la succession dans l' etat comme alors elle se trouvera sans s'
en saisir en tout ou en party directement ou indirectement, mais chaque prince
pourra d' alors se mettre en possession de ce qui luy est assign pour son
partage, des qu' il aura satisfait de sa part aux art. 4 and 6 precedens celuy
cy; and s' il y trouve de la difficulte, les deux seigneurs Rois and les
seigneurs Estats generaux feront tous leurs devoirs possibles afin que chacun
soit mis en possession de sa portion selon cette convention, and qu' elle
puisse avoir son entier effet, s' engageant a donner par mer and par terre les
secours and assistances d' hommes and de vaisseaux necessaires pour contraindre
par la force ceux qui s' opposeront a ladit* execution.

XI.
Si lesd. seigneurs Roys and les seigneurs Estats Generaux on quelq un d' eux
sont attaquez de qui que ce soit a cause de cette convention, ou de l'
execution qu' on en fera, on s' assistera mutuellement l' un l' autre avec
toutes ses forces, and on se rendra garand de la ponctuelle execution de lesd.
convention, and des renonciations faites en consequence.

XII.
Seront admis dans le present traite tous Rois, Princes, Estats qui voudront y
entrer, and il sera permis aux deux seigneurs Rois and aux seigneurs Estats
Generaux and a chachun d' eux en particulier de requerir et inviter tous ceux
qu' ils trouveront bon de requerir and inviter d' entrer dans ce present traite
and d' etre semblablement garands de l' execution de ce traite and de la
validite des renontiations qui y sont contenues.

XIII.
Et pour assurer encore d' avantage le repos de l' Europe, lesd. Rois, Princes
and Estats seront non seulment invitez d' etre garands de lad. execution du
present traite and de la validite desd. renonciations comme cy dessus: mais si
quelqu' un' des princes en faveur desquels les partages sont faits, vouloit
dans la suite troubler l' order etabli par ce traite, fair des nouvelles
entreprises y contraires and ainsy s' aggrandir aux depens les uns des autres
sous quelque pretexte que ce soit, la meme garantie du traite sera censee
devoir s' estender aussy en ce cas, en sort que les Rois, Princes and Estats
qui promettent seront tenus d' employer leurs forces pour s' opposer auxd.
entreprises and pour maintenir toutes chooses dans l' etat convenu par lesd*
articles.

XIV.
Que si quelque Prince qui ce soit s' oppose a la prise de possession des
partages convenus lesd. deux seigneurs Rois and les seigneurs Estats Generaux
seront obliges de s' entr' aider l' un l' autre contre cette opposition and de
l' empecher avec toutes leurs forces, and l' on conveniendra d' abord apres la
signature du present traite de la proportion que chacun doit contribuer tant
par mer que par terre.

XV.
Le present traite and tous les acts faits en consequence ou qui y ont rapport
and nommement les acts solemnels que sa Majeste tres Chret. and Monseigneur le
Dauphin sont obliges de donner en virtue de l' art 4. cy dessus seront
enregistrez au parliament de Paris suivant le form and teneur and l' usage
ordinaire pour avoir lieu aux conditions qui y sont portees des que l' Empereur
sera enter dans le present traite ou au bout de trois mois qui luy sont donnez
pour cet effet s' il ny enter pas plus tot, and pareillement sa Majeste
Imperiale sera tenue quand elle entrera dans le present traite de le fair
approuver and enregistrer avec tous les acts faits en consequence, ou qui y
ont rapport, nommement les acts solemnels que s. Majeste Imperiale le Roy des
Romans and le serenissime Archi-Duc seront obligez de donner en virtue de l' art.
6 cy dessus en conseil d' Etat ou ailleurs suivant les forms les plus
authentiques du pais.

XVI.
Les ratifications des deux seigneurs Rois and des seigneurs Estats Generaux
seront toutes trois eschangees en meme tems a Londres dans l' espace de trois
semaines, a compter du jour que lesd. seigneurs Estat. Generaux auront sign ou
plutot si fair se peut. Fait and sign a Londres le 3 Mars N. S. 1700. 21 Feb.
V. S. 1699. par nous plenipotentiares de France and Angleterre, and a la Hay
le 25. ded. mois de Mars 1700. and par nous plenipotentiares de France and des
seigneurs Estats Generaux les deux seigneurs Rois and lesd. seigneurs Estats
Generaux etant convenus que la signature de le present traite se feroit de la
sort, en foy de quoy nous avons sign led. present traite de notre main and
fait apposer le cachet de nos arms.

Sign Tallard, Briord, Portland, Jersey, J. van Ersen, F. B. de Reed, and
Heinsius, W. de Nassau, E. de Weed, W. van Haren, Ar. Lemker, van Heek, avec
leurs cachetes.

A TREATY between the most Christian King, the King of Great Britain, and the
Lords States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries.
BE it known to all who shall see these presents, That the most serene and most
potent Prince Lewis XIV. by the Grace of God most Christian King of France and
Navarre, etc. and the most serene and most potent Prince William III. also by
the Grace of God King of Great Britain, etc. and the Lords States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries, having nothing more in design than
to confirm by new Obligations that good Intelligence reestablish'd between his
most Christian Majesty, his Majesty of Great Britain, and the said Lords States
General of the United Provinces by the last Treaty concluded at Reswick; and to
prevent, by taking timely Measures, those Events which may raise new Wars in
Europe; Have to this end given their full Powers to conclude a new Treaty: that
is to say, his most Christian Majesty to the Sieur Camille d' Hortung, Count de
Tallard Lieutenant* General of the King's Armies, and of his Province of
Dauphiny, Ambassador Extraordinary of France in England; and to the Sieur
Gabriel Count de Briord, Marquess de Senezan, one of his Majesty's Privy
Council, and his Ambassador Extraordinary to the States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries: his said Britannick Majesty to the Sieur
William Earl of Portland, Viscount of Cirencester, Baron of Woodstock, Knight
of the Garter, and Privy Counselor to the King; and to the Sieur Edward Earl
of Jersy, Viscount Villars, Baron of How, Knight Marshal of England, first
Secretary of State, and Privy Counselor to the King: and the said States
General to the Lords John van Ersen, Burgomaster and Senator of the Town of
Zutphen, Curator of the University of Harderwye^k; Frederick Baron Rheede, Lord
de Lier; St. Anthony Berlee, of the Order of the Nobility of Holland and West
Frizeland; Anthony Hensius, Counselor, Pensionary, Keeper of the Great Seal,
and Superintendant of the Fiefs of the same Province; William of Nassau, Lord
d'Odyke Cortigene, first Noble and Representative of the Nobility in the
Assembly of the States and of the Deputies, Counselor of Zealand; Everhard de
Veede, Ld of Weed, Dickvelt, Ratteles, Ld of the Manor of the Town of
Oudewater, Dean and Member of the Imperial Chapter of St. Mary of Vtrecht,
Dickgrave of the River Rhine in the Province of Vtrecht and President of the
States of the same Province; William van Harein; Grietman du Bild, Deputy of
the Nobility of the States of Friezland, Procurator of the University of
Franeker; Arnold Lemsker, Burgomaster of Deventer; and John van Heek, Senator
of the Town of Groningen; all Deputies of the said Lords States General, on
behalf of Guelderland, Holland, and West Friezland, of Zealand, of Vtrecht, of
Friezland, of Overysel, and of Groningen and Omelandt: who by virtue of the
said Powers have agreed to the following Articles.

Article I.
The Peace reestablisht by the Treaty of Reswick between his most Christian
Majesty, his Britannick Majesty, and Lords States General of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, their Heirs and Successors, their Kingdoms,
States and Subjects, shall be firm and constant; and their Majesty's, and the
said Lords States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, shall
reciprocally do what they can to contribute to the advantage and profit of one
another.

II.
As the principal object which his said most Christian Majesty, his said
Majesty of Great Britain, and the said States General propose to themselves,
is, that of maintaining the general Tranquillity of Europe, they could not
without sorrow understand that the state of the King of Spain's Health has for
some time been so languishing, that the Life of the said Prince is much feared:
tho they cannot think upon this Event without trouble, because of the sincere
and true Love they have for him, they have nevertheless thought it the more
necessary to consider it, because his Catholic Majesty having no Children, the
business of the Succession will infallibly raise a new War, if the most
Christian King should maintain his own Pretensions, those of Monseigneur the
Dauphin, or of his Successors, to the whole Succession of Spain; and if the
Emperor should also make good his Pretensions, those of the King of the Romans,
of the Archduke his second Son, or of his other Children, Males or Females,
unto the said Succession.

III.
And as the two Kings, and the Lords the States General, desire above all
things the Conservation of the public Peace, and to prevent a new War in
Europe, by accommodating the Disputes and Differences, which might arise upon
the Subject of the said Succession, or by the Umbrage of three Estates reunited
under one and the same Prince, they have thought good to take beforehand
necessary measures to prevent the Evils which the sorrowful Event of the
Catholic King's Death without Children might produce.

IV.
Therefore it is agreed, that if it should so happen, the Most Christian King,
as well in his own Name, as in that of Monseigneur the Dauphin, his Male
Children, Heirs and Successors, born or to be born; as also Mons. the Dauphin
for himself, his Male Children, etc. shall hold himself satisfied, and do hold
themselves satisfied by these Presents, That Monseig. the Dauphin shall have
for his Share in full Property and Possession, and in lieu of all his
Pretensions to the Succession of Spain, to be enjoyed by him, his Heirs,
Successors, Descendants, Males, or, etc. for ever, without ever being molested
under any pretense whatsoever in his Rights or Pretensions, directly or
indirectly, either by Cession, Appeal, Revolt, or otherways, by the Emperor,
the King of the Romans, the most Serene Archduke Charles his Second Son, the
Arch-Dutchess, his other Issue Male, or, etc. the Kingdoms of Naples and of
Sicily in the same manner the Spaniards possess them at present, the Places
depending upon the Monarchy of Spain, situated on the Coast of Tuscany, or the
Isles adjacent, being therein comprehended, under the name of Sancto Stephano,
Porto Hercole, Orbitello, Palamone, Portolongo, Piombin. In that same manner
also as the Spaniards possess them at present, the City and Marquisate of
Final; in that same manner also as they possess them, the Province of
Guipuscoa, and particularly the Cities of Fontarabia and St. Sebastian situated
in that Province, and especially the Port of Passage which is therein
comprehended, with this Restriction only, that if there be any places
depending* upon the said Province, which shall be found situated beyond the
Pyrenees, or the other Mountains of Navarr, Alava, or Biscay, on the side of
Spain, they shall remain to Spain; and if there be any places in like manner
depending upon the Provinces subjected to Spain, which are on this side the
Pyrenees, or other Mountains betwixt the said Province of Guipuscoa, Navarr,
Alava and Biscay, let them belong to whom they will, they shall be divided
between France and Spain, in such sort as there shall remain as much of the
said Mountains and Passes to France on her side, as shall remain to Spain on
hers; the whole with the Fortifications, Ammunition of War, Powder, Ball,
Cannon, Galleys, Gallyslaves, which shall be found belonging to the K. of Spain
at the time of his Decease without Issue, and to be annexed to the Kingdoms,
Places, Islands and Provinces which are to compose the share of Monseigneur the
Dauphin, provided that the Galleys, the Gallyslaves, and the Effects, belonging
to the K. of Spain for the Kingdom of Spain, and other Dominions, which fall to
the share of the most Serene Archduke, shall remain to him; those which belong
to the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily being to return to Monseigneur the Dauphin
so as abovesaid.

Further, the Dominions of the Duke of Lorrain, that is to say the Dutchies of
Lorrain and Bar, so as Charles IV. of that name possessed them, and as they
were restored by the Treaty of Reswyk, shall be yielded and transferred to
Monseigneur the Dauphin, his Heirs and Successors Males, or, etc. in Property
and full Possession in lieu of the Duchy of Milan, which shall be quitted and
exchanged to the said D. of Lorrain, his Male Children, or, etc. in all
Property, and full Possession, who will not refuse so advantageous a Bargain,
it being understood that the County of Bitch belongs to Monsieur the Prince of
Vaudemont, who shall enter into Possession of the Lands which he heretofore
enjoyed, which have been, or ought to have been restored according to the
Treaty of Reswyck; on the account of which said Kingdoms, Islands, Provinces,
and Places, the said Most Christian King as well in his own as in the name of
Monseigneur the Dauphin, his Male Children, or, etc. who has also given his
full Power to the Count de Tallard, and to the Count de Briord, promising and
engaging themselves to renounce at the opening of the said Succession of Spain,
as in this case, they have at this time renounced by these Presents all their
Rights and Pretensions to the said Crown of Spain, and to all the other
Kingdoms, Islands, States, Lands, and Places, which at this time depend
thereupon, except what is abovesaid excepted for his part; all which they shall
confirm by solemn Acts in the most authentic and best form as may be; which
shall be delivered at the time of the Exchange of the Ratification of this
present Treaty to the King of Great Britain, and the States General.

V.
All the Towns, Places, and Ports situate in the Kingdoms and Provinces which
are to compose the share of Monseigneur the Dauphin, shall be preserved without
being demolished.

VI.
The said Crown of Spain and the other Kingdoms, Islands, States, Lands and
Places, which the Catholic King at this time possesses, as well within as
without Europe, shall be given to the most Serene Archduke Charles, Second Son
to the Emperor, except what has been given in the 4th Art. for the share of the
Dauphin and of the Duchy of Milan, according to the said 4th Art. in full
Propriety and Possession as his part; excluding all his other Pretensions to
the said Succession of Spain, to enjoy the same for himself and Successors born
or to be born for ever, without being ever molested under any Pretext
whatsoever of Rights or Pretensions directly or indirectly, by Cession, Appeal,
Revolt, or otherwise, on the part of the Most Christian King, or Monseigneur
the Dauphin, or his Children Male, or, etc. for which said Crown of Spain, and
other Kingdoms, Islands, and Places thereupon depending, the Emperor as well in
his own Name, as in that of the King of the Romans, and the Archduke Charles
his Second Son, the Archdutchesses his Daughters, his Children Males, or, etc.
as also the King of the Romans for himself, and the most Serene Archduke
Charles, as soon as he shall be of Age, for himself, their Children, etc. shall
be satisfied that the most Serene Archduke Charles shall have in lieu of all
their Pretensions upon the Crown of Spain, the said Cession abovesaid; and the
said Emperor as well in his own Name, as in that of the King of the Romans,
the most Serene Archduke Charles his Second Son, the Arch-Dutchesses his
Daughters, his Children Males, or, etc. or their Issue. As also the said King
of the Romans in his own Name shall renounce, when they shall enter into, and
ratify this present Treaty, and the most Serene Archduke Charles as soon as he
shall be of Age, all other Rights and Pretensions to the said Kingdoms,
Islands, States, Lands and Places which compose the Share or Portion assigned
to Mons. Dauphin, and of him who shall have the Duchy of Milan by exchange of
what shall be given to Mons. the Dauphin, of all which they shall cause the
most solemn and authentic Acts to be made that may be; that is to say, the
Emperor and the King of the Romans when they shall ratify this present Treaty,
and the most serene Archduke as soon as he shall come of age; which shall be
delivered to his Brittanick Majesty and the said States General.

VII.
Immediately after the Exchange and Ratification of this present Treaty, it
shall be communicated to the Emperor, who shall be invited to enter thereinto;
but if, after three months time from the day of the said Communication and the
said Invitation, or the day that his Catholic Majesty shall die, if it happen
before the expiration of the said three months, his Imperial Majesty and the
King of the Romans should refuse to enter thereinto, and to agree to the share
assigned to the most serene Arch Duke Charles; the two Kings, or their
Successors, and the States General shall agree upon a Prince to whom that part
shall be given: and in case, notwithstanding the present Convention, the most
serene Arch Duke shall take possession either of the part which might fall to
him, before he has accepted the present Treaty, or of that part which might be
assigned to Mons. Dauphin, or to him, who shall have the Duchy of Milan in
exchange, as abovesaid, the said two Kings and the States General, by virtue of
this Convention, shall hinder him with all their Forces.

VIII.
The most serene Arch Duke shall not pass into Spain, nor into the Duchy of
Milan, during the Life of his Catholic Majesty, but with common consent, and
not otherwise.

IX.
If the most serene Archduke should die without Children, either before or
after the Death of the Catholic King, the share which is hereby assigned to
him by the Articles of this Treaty, shall come to such Male Child of the
Emperor, or, etc. except the K. of the Romans, or such Children, Males or, etc.
of the K. of the Romans, which his Imperial Majesty shall think fit to assign
it to: And in case his said Imperial Majesty should die without having made the
abovesaid Assignment, it may be done by the K. of the Romans; but on condition
that the said part shall never be united nor belong to the person of him who
shall be Emperor or King of the Romans, or is become one or the other, be it by
Succession, Will, Contract of Marriage, Donation, Exchange, Cession, Appeal,
Revolt, or otherways: And in like manner the said share of the serene
Archduke, shall never come or belong to the person of a Prince that shall be
King or Dauphin of France, or that is become one or the other, be it by
Succession, Will, Contract of Marriage, Donation, or otherwise.

X.
The King of Spain dying without Children, etc. the abovesaid Case happening,
the two Kings, and the States General, do oblige themselves to leave the whole
Succession in the same state as it shall then be, without seizing the whole or
any part directly or indirectly; but each Prince immediately may put himself in
possession of what is assigned him as his share, as soon as he has fulfilled on
his part the 4th and 6th preceding Articles; and in case of difficulty, the two
Kings, and the States General shall do their utmost endeavors, to the end that
each one shall be put in possesssion of his part according to this Agreement;
and that it may have its entire effect, engage themselves to give by Sea and
Land such help and assistance of Men and Ships as shall be necessary to
constrain by force such who shall oppose the said Execution.

XI.
If the abovesaid Kings and States General, or either of them be attacked
because of this Convention, or of the execution that shall be thereof made,
they shall mutually assist one another with all their Forces, and render
themselves Guarantees of the abovesaid Convention, and of the Renunciations
made thereupon.

XII.
All Kings, Princes, and States, that will enter into the same, shall be
admitted into the present Treaty: and it shall be lawful to the two Kings, and
States General, and to each of them in particular, to require and invite all
that they shall think fit, to enter into this present Treaty, and to be jointly
Guarantees for the execution thereof, and of the validity of the Renunciations
herein contained.

XIII.
And for the further securing the Peace of Europe, the said Kings, Princes and
States shall not only be invited to be Guarantees of the execution of the
present Treaty, and of the validity of the Renounciations, as above, but if any
one of the Princes, in favor of whom the shares are assigned, do in time to
come break the Order established by this Treaty, and begin new Enterprises
contrary to the same, and so aggrandize himself at the expense of one or other,
under any pretense whatsoever; the Guarranty of this Treaty shall be understood
to extend so far also in this case, that all the Kings, Princes and States who
promise the same, shall be obliged to employ their Forces against such
Enterprises, for the maintaining all things in the same condition as agreed to
by the said Articles.

XIV.
In case any Prince whosoever oppose the taking possession of the Shares agreed
on, the said two Kings, and the States, shall be obliged to assist one another
against such opposition, and to hinder it with all their Forces, and shall
agree after the signing of this present Treaty, on the proportion that each
shall contribute both by Sea and Land.

XV.
The present Treaty, and all Acts made, or that have dependence thereupon, and
especially the solemn Acts that his most Christian Majesty and Monseigneur the
Dauphin, are obliged to give by virtue of the 4th Article abovesaid, shall be
registered in the Parliament of Paris, according to the Form and Tenure and
usual Custom, to have place amongst the Conditions therein contained, as soon
as the Emperor has entered into the present Treaty, or at the end of 3 Months
that are allowed him for that purpose, in case he does not enter into it
sooner: and likewise his Imperial Majesty, when he enters into the same, shall
be obliged to get it approved and registered, with all the Acts made in
consequence thereof, or which have relation thereunto; especially the solemn
Acts which his Imperial Majesty, the King of the Romans, and the most serene
Archduke shall be obliged to give, by virtue of the 6th Article abovesaid, in
the Council of State or otherwise, according to the most authentic Form of the
Country.

XVI.
The Ratifications of the two Kings and the States General shall be all three
exchanged at London at the same time, within the space of three Weeks,
reckoning from the day that the States General shall have signed, or sooner, if
possible. Done and signed at London, 3 March N. S. 1700. 21 Feb. V. S. 1699. by
us Plenipotentiaries of France and England; and at the Hague, the 25th of the
said Month of March, 1700. by us Plenipotentiaries of France, and of the States
General, the two Kings and the said States General having agreed that the
signing of this present Treaty should be performed in this manner. In witness
whereof we have signed the said present Treaty with our Hands, and caused the
Seal of our Arms to be affixed.

Signed, Tallard, Briord, Portland, Jersey, J. van Ersen, F. B. de Reed, and
Heinsius, W. de Nassau, E. de Weed, W. van Haren, Ar* Lemker, van Heek, with
their Seals.

FINIS.

