Lunae 1. die Feb. 1696. Ordered,
THat the Thanks of this House be given to Doctor Lancaster, for the Sermon by
him Preached before them, upon Saturday last, at St. Margaret's Westminster.
And that he be desired to Print the same, and that Mr Robert Berty and Mr Drake
do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of Commons, AT St Margaret's
Westminster, On the 30th of January, 1696/7.

By WILLIAM LANCASTER, D.D. Vicar of S. Martin's in the Fields.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons.
LAMENT. V. 16. The Crown is fallen from our Head; Woe to us, for we have sinned.


THE Words are part of Jeremy's Lamentation; and if we look into 2 Chronicles.
35.25. We shall find that this Lamentation was for the Death of King Josiah:
The words of that place in Chronicles are these, And Jeremiah lamented for
Josiah, and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their
lamentations to this day; and made them an Ordinance in Israel, and behold they
are written in the Lamentations.

From these words, I conclude, That the Prophet in this place, speaking of the
downfall of the Crown, does it with relation to the Death of that great and
good King: The Chronicle witnesses, That Jeremy made Lamentation for him, and
that it was contained and written in the Lamentations: And since these Words of
the Prophet do so well express it, we must believe that Josiah's downfall was
the occasion of them. He was a Pattern for all Princes, and the Mourning which
was to be in Judah and Jerusalem for him, was to be a Pattern for all
Lamentation.

The Prophet Zechary, when he foretells the Passion and dying of our Lord Jesus
upon the Cross, says, There shall be such mourning for Him as was for Josiah;
That they shall look on him whom they have pierced: Zech. 12.10.
which S. John c. 19. explains and applies to our Savior exposed, and wounded,
and bleeding upon the Cross. And then the Prophet adds, v. 11. That in that day
there shall be great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in
the valley of Megiddon. The Lamentation for our Lord, it is here foretold,
should be as great as that for Josiah, who was slain in the Field of Battle at
Megiddo; which seems to have been the greatest Mourning that was ever known in
Israel.

The words then I have sufficiently explained by showing the occasion of them:
and the same History says, That hereupon an Ordinance was made in Israel; and
the Book which was written many years, at least some reigns after Josiah's
Death, says, the observation of that Ordinance was continued a very long time,
They speak of him in their Lamentation to this day. So that we may conclude
thus much from that History, that when Josiah was slain, there was in Israel an
Act, an Ordinance, a Law made for a solemn yearly Mourning for ever.

We see then, we are now assembled by a Law made after a Precedent of great
Antiquity, and I may add, of much greater Authority. And since Providence has
for our Sins given us the like Occasion, let us implore his merciful Acceptance
of the like Mourning and Humiliation; and of our Service and Sorrow in
Obedience to the Law in our own Nation, made after the example of Israel, and
of this Divine Ordinance, wherein the Wisdom of Heaven was most immediately
concerned.

The Civil Magistrate may, by what Rules he pleases, enquire after Persons
disaffected, and uneasy to the Government; but methinks it were very natural to
suspect all such persons as dangerous to Kings and States, who rejoice and seem
to triumph at the fall of one of the best of Kings; and at the promotion of the
worst of Men and Murderers into his place. It cannot be safe laughing, when a
Nation, upon so good reason, is commanded to be all in Tears; not only lest God
should be angry, whose Judgments are thereby despised; but also lest that Man
who can be merry upon so sad, and lamentable an occasion, should be thought
pleased with the public Sorrow, and that common Calamity which was the cause
of it.

Every Man's experience tells him thus much, that what we are glad of, we wish
may happen frequently; and that occasion and matter of Joy can never come too
often: so that should the Anniversary for one Prince's Murder be to any Man a
day of Joy, I should suspect that Man wishes more such days as these; and that
we may have many such reasons for Jeremy to lament.

On the other hand, what a Man sorrows, and grieves, and mourns for, he wishes
may never be repeated; and that he may never hear of the like again. So that
days of Humiliation (as they have sometimes been serviceable to Hypocrisy) may
serve for Politic Ends and Purposes, as well as Religious; to secure Princes
from all attempts of cruel and bloody Men, by creating an aversion to such
barbarous Practices upon them, in the minds of all Men.

It is very natural for Sorrow and Shame to fill the Mind with horror and
dislike of all Events or Actions which caused sorrow; to possess the Mind with
a principle and habitual desire to prevent such Actions for the time to come;
and all the Efforts and Endeavors which are made toward them.

The Jews had therefore very good reason to make an Ordinance for a yearly
Mourning for Josiah, as all other States and Governments have upon the like
occasion; because sorrow and affliction for the untimely Death of one King,
disposes the Mind to Care and Vigilance over the Life and Welfare of another.
And I think common Charity will teach us to believe, That he who now does his
dury to God, and is just to the Blessed Memory of this day's Martyr, can do no
injury to the State or Person of his present Successor; nor give way to so much
as a Thought which may prejudice the Interest of that Brave Man, who through so
many Perils, has asserted the Religion and Honor of the English Nation.

We may reckon upon Two sorts of Men who are avowed Enemies to our present
Constitution: The First are those little Wretches, who yet dare meditate great
and Bloody Villainies; and endeavor the Confusion of their own Native Country,
by Assassines, and bringing in upon us a Foreign Power. These are not to be
neglected, because little; since it has often been in the power of Wretches,
and small things, to do great mischiefs. But,

Secondly, There are other Enemies who are far more powerful, and who have hit
upon the only stratagem in the World which can undo us: Such are they who
endeavor to make God our Enemy; and to rob us of his Care and Favor, to whom
alone we owe our Protection and Peace. When the Almighty thunders, and when his
Judgments are abroad, he expects we should tremble and be afraid; and not live
as if we either defid Heaven, and God, and Providence; or did not believe them:
Now the taking away the most Pious and best of Kings, by the most impious and
inhumane Practices, and by a Civil War; where Subject was against Sovereign,
Father against Son, the Bonds of Affection, Friendship, Blood and Nature, all
dissolved, and Hell broke loose, was certainly a very dreadful Judgment of God
upon a People, though it were no worse; and if we be not sensible of it, God can
make us know and understand it to our sorrow, (which Heaven forbid!) by
bringing upon us again the like Calamity. I say, the Desolations which attended
the downfall of God's Anointed, will bear Witness, that God was very Angry; and
it is but modesty in dust and ashes to humble our selves under the sense of his
displeasure.

I do not now consider the Death of King Charles, as a Sin, much less as a
Murder, and a National Murder, the most crying of all Sins. Suppose he had only
fallen as Josiah did by a chance Arrow from a Bow; or by a Ball or Dart, which
respects no Persons, nor has sense to distinguish betwixt right and wrong; yet
were it for no other reason, but because his Death was one of God's Judgments,
which are all terrible; and abstracting from the Sin and Crime that lie heavy
upon this Nation; we have still reason, as Judah and Jerusalem had, to lament;
and to continue our Mourning, as well as the Memory of God's Anger and
Indignation.

Think then who are they that feast and rejoice; that make this a Day of
Pastime and Recreation, which the Almighty made a day of Vengeance; which the
Church has set a part for a day of Mourning; which the Law has appointed for a
solemn Fast: think again, who are they that provoke God to anger, by despising
these his Judgments, and ridiculing the Signs and Tokens of his heavy
Displeasure; and then see if these be not the Enemies we are most in danger of.
These are the Men who are to make God our Enemy; and when they have done that,
it is in vain they boast of their Fidelity, and of their other Services to this
or any Establishment. They are better men, and better friends to this their
Country, who arm Ruffians; then they who arm God and Heaven and Providence
against us; and who put the Sword into the Hand of the destroying Angel to undo
us. Other Foes may have as much Malice; but cannot do half the Mischief, as
they who defy God and his Ordinances, are able to do. We fear the secret
Contrivances and Conspiracies of ill Men at home; we are providing against the
Assaults of a crazy Mortal from abroad, and of Forces which could not till this
Day have stood before us, but as our Sins and our Follies had given them
advantage over us, and kept them up: but there is no fencing nor fighting
against Heaven; if our open defiance of God's Judgments provoke Him to punish,
or to forsake us.

And thus I have shown that the taking away a good King, though considered only
as God's Judgment upon a People, and not their Crime, yet ought to be
remembered with the last dedegree of Humiliation; and looked upon as a Sign
that God was displeased with that Land, which he made the Theater whereon was
shed so much Innocent Blood. No man sinned when Josiah was slain in Battle; yet
the Wisdom of God and the Nation (only because he was killed in the Field) made
a Law for a yearly Mourning for Him, through all future Ages.

I now come to Two particular Reasons which I find in the History of Josiah,
why the people made so great, and so universal Lamentation for Him.

First, A Prince was slain in Battle, whose Clemency, and Goodness; and whose
Zeal for Religion, had created Him a general Esteem and Veneration among all
his People.

Secondly, The Jews had reason to mourn, and to be afflicted, when he dyed;
because it was prophesied, that the Calamity of that Nation should commence and
bear date from the very day Josiah should be taken from them. 2 Chronicles. 34.24,28.


First, The First Reason why the Jews made so great Mourning for Josiah, was,
because his Clemency and Goodness, and his great Piety had got him a general
Esteem and Veneration among his People. Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and
his Goodness, or Clemency and Kindness, according to all that is written in the
Law of the Lord, behold they are in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
2 Chronicles. 35.26.


Here is then an Argument for the Peoples Mourning, and for an Ordinance to
establish a yearly Mourning; because Violence had taken from them not only a
great Prince, but also a very good Man: his Clemency became his Purple; and his
Goodness or his Graces shone brighter than all the Jewels in his Crown. He was
Religiously Good; he was Good out of Principle and Conscience, and not only out
of Policy, and in appearance; his Goodness, or, as the Hebrew reads it, his
Clemency and Kindness would endure the Touchstone; for, it was according to the
Law of the Lord.

Now this is the true Standard for all Virtue, and he who can walk according to
this Rule, is a perfect Man. This is a Law that is fit to be the Study and Care
of Princes; because by it they not only hold their Crown and Dignity on Earth,
but also hope for a more lasting Inheritance and Crown in Heaven. No wonder
then if goodness win upon the Hearts and Affections of all the World; for most
Men are in love with Virtue, though few will practice it.

And therefore a greater thing cannot be said of any Man, nor of any King or
Prince of the Sons of Men, than that he is good according to God's Law: other
Excellencies may make a Man great in Imagination, and continue his Memory so
long as Marble will bear his Name; but it is his Goodness, and this only, that
gives him Immortality, and a Name and Honor, that will endure for ever.

The History tells us, That Josiah came very young to the Throne; That he was
but Eight Years old when he began to reign. 2 Chronicles. 34.1.
He must needs at that Age want Understanding; and Wisdom, and Experience, and
Strength to wield the Scepter of that Kingdom; and Solomon denounces Woe to that
Land, whose King is a Child. Eccl. 10.16.
But Josiah made up all these Deficiencies, and Imperfections in Nature, by the
early supplies of Divine Goodness, and of Grace. 2 Chronicles. 34.2.
During our Minority we are under Tutelage and Government of others we suppose,
wiser then our selves; and Honest as well as able to direct and manage our
Affairs; who yet have many failings, at the very best; and great allowances
must be made even for their Infirmities: But this young Prince chose for the
Guide and Conduct of his Infancy, the Ancient of Days; and of him to learn
Experience, who himself knew all things by Intuition, and at the first sight.
Here we have a Guardian who can defend his Charge, and protect his Orphan,
against the Invasions and Encroachments of his greedy Neighbor: Here is a
Counselor who knows the state of Nations, and sees into all affairs of Princes
both Foreign and at Home: He knows what is done in this Cabal, in that Cabinet,
in the other Conclave; nay. He knows the Hearts, and understands our Thoughts
long before. So that a Child, and Infant of a King, under His Conduct, shall
undermine the Counsels of Achitophel himself.

It is said of Josiah, That he chose David for his Pattern, whom he would
imitate, without going aside to the right or left hand. Now David was a
glorious Precedent for any Potentate on Earth to take Example by: He was great
in Arms, and in Religion; admired for Courage, and for Devotion: and (to
satisfy all the World, that Religion does not make Cowards) He was therefore
Great in the Field, because Devout at the Altar, and in the House of God.

I shall not give any account of the many eminent Virtues either of Josiah, or
the Martyr; those of the latter which were most in View and in Exercise, were
Patience and Perseverance; and it is but Melancholy discoursing on these
Virtues, as well as practicing them. They were both of them Zealous for
Religion, and for Reforming to the True, Ancient and Primitive Way; They both
studied to adorn the Temple, and to serve God in the Beauty of Holiness: It was
their Endeavor to cleanse the House of God from Sordidness and Superstition;
and to distinguish it from a Gaol, or a Den of Thieves: And if others had but
been as Careful to have served Them, as they were Active and Industrious to
serve their God; they might have had a much more prosperous and longer Reign,
over a far better and far more happy People.

And yet it is not to be wondered at, That so much Virtue and Piety, that so
pure a Zeal for Religion and the Love of God, should sometime happen to be
utterly overrun and ruined by the grossest Atheism and Hypocrisy, that ever
passed upon Mankind. Our Josiah was bound up to the strictest Honor, Truth,
and Justice; and could do nothing which might be a blemish to any of these,
though it were to save a Kingdom: when as his Enemies were for Liberty; and (as
their practice explained it) were to be confined to no Rule or Principle; were
to be bound by no Law or Promise, but to act purely, and entirely, as their
Interest should direct.

If a Man make a Conscience of Truth and Justice, then Liberty of Conscience is
very good, and men seldom want it: but where there is no Conscience, all Men
must own, that Liberty is very dangerous; it then becomes Licentiousness, or a
Liberty, such as our Martyr's Enemies made their own, and which was allowed to
none besides, to kill, and to take Possession; and to wade through the blood of
Innocents, to every thing they imagined would enrich, honor, or advance them.

And thus I have done with my first Reason, why so great Lamentation for
Josiah. He was Religiously good; and the loss of such a Prince is hardly to be
repaired.

Secondly, The Jews had reason to mourn, when Josiah dyed; because it was
prophesied to them, That their Calamity and Misery should commence from the
very day that Josiah should be taken away from them.

It was told them by Huldah the Prophetess, That God was very angry with that
people, and that he had dreadful Judgments in Reserve. whereby to punish the
Obstinacy of the Jewish Nation: but that for Josiah's sake, that most pious and
most religious Prince, he would not execute his Vengeance so long as he should
live; but would defer his Indignation till that great, good Man should be
carried to his Grave in Peace: that then, and from that time, Israel should be
a miserable and an afflicted People; and a hissing and an astonishment to all
Nations round about them.

According to this Decree revealed to, and foretold them by the Prophetess, all
things befell them: Josiah's Sons and Successors were one of them carried away
by Necho King of Egypt; another was deposed by the King of Babylon; a third was
taken Prisoner, and judgment given against Him; his Sons all slain before his
Eyes, and then his Eyes bored out, that he might see no more of the Misery
which he was to suffer. Now since this was all foretold them, and that all
their temporal Bliss and Happiness depended upon the Thread of Josiah's life, no
wonder they made great Lamentation when he dyed.

The Ancients reported, that in Troy there was an Image, which they believed
fell from Heaven, which so long as they could preserve safe within their Walls,
would preserve them successful against all Enemies from abroad; but the loss
of it was to foretell the Ruin of their City and Civil Government. King Josiah
was this Image, and gave the same security to Judah and Jerusalem; and they
were well assured, that whilst this Palladium was among them, no Injury could
befall them either from Heaven or Earth; for he who is Lord of both, had given
his Word for it.

He therefore falling in Megiddo, caused this Lamentation among the People;
their Peace, their Plenty, their Laws, Religion and Lives were all in Danger
when he was in Peril, or in the least Distress; all their Glory was cast down
when he fell in Battle; and the Arrow that wounded him, went to the Heart of
every good Man in his Dominions.

This is therefore my second Reason for so great Mourning in Jerusalem at that
time.

Now give me leave to apply these Reasons of Judah and Jerusalem's Lamentation
for their King, who fell in Battle, and was slain in the Valley or Plain of
Megiddo. There was upon it an Ordinance, a Law made for a solemn Mourning; and
it was observed even after the Jewish Monarchy was destroyed. I hope our Law of
the same nature, made after that Divine Example, and ordained for the same end
and purpose, may long continue together with the Enghsh Monarchy; and even for
that very end, that the Monarchy may long endure. The Jews Mourning for Josiah
endured longer then their Kingdom. Their yearly Fast for Gedaliah,
notwithstanding their Dispersion, is religiously observed by them to this day;
and although they are broken and scattered abroad in all Nations, and among all
Languages; yet their Lamentation is continued with one Voice, and one Consent.

It were not hard to make it appear, That we have as great Reason to continue
our Humiliation, as the Jews had for Josiah: and, may be, it were happy for us
if we had not other, and greater Reasons for this day's Solemnity, then the
Jews had. Josiah was slain by a foreign Power: He fell in Battle, and was
killed in the heat of Blood; Himself was in a Disguise, and unknown; and an
Arrow shot at Random, wounded Him that He dyed: His own People were no way
guilty; His Death could not be charged upon any of them; nor was their Land put
under a Curse, or defiled with Innocent Blood. Let the Armies of Egypt and
Pharaoh Necho answer for it: Jerusalem and Judah had no hand in it.

Josiah was not murdered by His own Subjects, nor tried, condemned, and
executed by Men whom he had patronis'd and promoted to Wealth and Honor:
Josiah was not brought to the Bar or Scaffold, by Men who fought against his
Person by his own Commission; nor did he die by the hand of Thieves and
Robbers, who, when they had slain the Heir, divided among them the Inheritance.
Josiah's Enemies were all of them of another Country, and had never vowed
Duty, nor sworn Allegiance to him: and such Men may have, by the Laws of Nature
and Nations, a greater Liberty to invade and make War, then Men born and
educated in his own Dominions.

But then, If the King of Judah, only fallen in Battle, and slain by a foreign
Enemy, caused so general Lamentation, and such as was continued through the
Reigns of all the succeeding Kings, till the Babylonish Captivity; and which
was observed even in the time of Cyrus, and the Persian Monarchy; (as the last
Chapter of 2 Chronicles. does sufficiently evince:) How much greater, and more
lasting Humiliation should Ours be, who have the Guilt of Innocent Blood at our
own Doors? A Prince, who was Himself all Pity and Compassion, sentenced and put
to Death by cruel and bloody Men; a King who had been a kind Father to his
People, worried and devoured by his own Children! here is Guilt that may demand
Humiliation, till the Day of Judgment.

The Almighty has ever declared to the World, That the Blood of the poorest
Innocent defiles the Land; and that whole Kingdoms and Countries have a long
time lain under the Curse and Cry of it. Ancient Wise Men filled their
Tragedies, and loaded their Scenes with God's Judgments upon Murder; Theaters
groaned under the weight of public Guilt; and Towns and Cities felt the
Calamity, especially upon the Effusion of Royal Blood, (...); Lord, (says
Oedipus in Sophocles) What a storm of Vengeance falls upon our City for this
King's Blood? The very Heathen Gods seem not to have been at rest, till the
Blood of Innocents was atoned for, or revenged; and the Saints in Heaven, and
Souls of Martyrs now with God, though them selves all flaming Charity and Love
to Mankind, yet call for Vengeance upon the Earth, for the Innocent Blood that
has been shed upon it. And I saw (says S. John,) Rev. 6.9,10.
under the Altar, the Souls of them that were slain for the Word of God. -- And
they cried with a loud Voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy, and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? So that in
Case of Blood, even Mercy it self turns cruel, and calls for Justice, and
cannot rest till it be revenged.

And now, whether we believe Moses or S. John, or even Sophocles the Tragedian;
They all with one Voice conclude, That a Drop of Innocent Blood is enough to
bring a Deluge of Misery upon a Nation.

But who will deny, That Innocent Blood was shed as on This Day, and in This
Land; and not only the Blood of a Man, who had done no harm; but under whom we
might have enjoyed both Wealth and Honor; who nourished Arts, encouraged
Learning, advanced Religion, maintained the Peoples Liberties, pardoned great
Offenders; and at last was betrayed, and put to Death, by many of those who had
been forgiven by him.

All Nations have owned, That Kings are Fathers of their Country; and the
Voice of Civilized and Learned Nations, is the Voice of Nature and of God. Now
for a Man to murder his own Father, is of all sins of the worst kind, the very
worst, and most clamorous, and cries loudest to Heaven for Vengeance.

In short then, The People had no sin to answer for, when Josiah died; and yet
they had Mourning by an Ordinance, and by a Law: but in our case, the People of
This Nation slew their own Prince, and had their Hands dyed in the Blood of
their Sovereign; of Him, who by Birth, Title, Possession, Care, Kindness,
Courtesy, and every thing that could either give or purchase Right, was Father
of his Country.

It is not very difficult to discern how the Almighty has ever since chastised
and scourged This Nation; and how that horrid Murder, and Effusion of Sacred
Blood, has been the Cause of many public Calamities This Land has since
groaned under. His Death was accompanied with the Blood of Thousands, other
great Men; and He went to Heaven with a royal Army of Martyrs to attend upon
Him. Then it was, That Men's Honesty was their Crime, and Wealth and good
Estates were to others as bad as Felony. It were endless to reckon up, how many
brave Men were obliged to fly for their Lives; to pray for Sanctuary, and
Protection in a Foreign Land; to take Service in another Nation, thereby to
escape a most wretched Bondage and Captivity in their own Country.

We have been ever since (and may be not without Reason) under Fears and
Jealousies of a Foreign Religion; even the Blessings and Sweets of the
Restoration, were made bitter to us, by the Wormwood and Gall of Superstition
infused into our Cup; and by the endeavors which have been used to bring our
Souls into Bondage. Only the Wisdom and Goodness of Heaven in this mighty
Revolution, we hope, may free us from those Apprehensions of Superstition
coming in among us, the Equivocal Offspring of that otherwise happy
Restoration. But still we must remember who first drove those Kings into a
Country, where they might be taught Superstition; and that if they had not
when young, been pursued out of their own Land, they would not have been
tempted by the Gods of other Kingdoms: if they had been Educated under their
own Father, in their own Country, under their own Laws, and suffered to breath
their own Native Air, they might have been zealous Patrons of the Religion and
Interest of their own Nation; and the Miseries we have labored under, upon
that account, will, in a good measure, lie at the doors of those, who drove
them out of the Church, into the Idols Temple.

And having thus far assigned, and applied the Reasons of Judah's Lamentation;
give me leave to sum up what other things I have interwoven with this
Discourse. I have shown,

First, That the downfall of that good King, whom we now lament, taking all the
Miseries that did belong to it, from first to last, was a most visible mark of
God's Displeasure; and, may be, so severe a Judgment as this Land never felt,
since it was a Nation.

Secondly, That God's Judgments upon a People ought not to be neglected; much
less, to be made our Pastime, and entertained with Raillery and Ridicule.
Solomon says, God scorns the scorners, and that He will laugh when their Fear
comes.

Thirdly, That the Peoples shedding the Blood of their Sovereign, was a Public
Crime, as well as a Public Judgment and Calamity.

Fourthly, That although the Effusion of his Innocent Blood were no more then a
private or a personal Crime, or the Sin only of those Men who acted in it; yet
the punishment is National, and the Land polluted. The Nation is one Body
Politic, and the whole must answer for what one or a few Members have done
amiss.

Fifthly, That the Pollution of the Land with Blood, submits the Nation to the
Curse of God, which he has said he will sometimes continue to the third or
fourth Generation; and the Jews when they were so vehement for our Lord's dying
as a Malefactor, took his Blood upon themselves and their Posterity.

I come now to the last thing I am to speak to, and that is,

Secondly, That He upon whom God's Judgment falls, is not always the Person who
offended, but the Innocent are many times the Sufferers, when the Guilty
escape, and go free. Josiah lost his Crown and Life; but it is, Woe to us, for
we have sinned.

Kings have often suffered for the Sins of the People; and perhaps as often has
an Innocent Nation been scourged and plagued for the Sins of their King. For
First, David numbered the People, which was not their fault; nor was it in
their Power to prevent their being reckoned up, if the Prince of the People
would have it so: But the Plague fell upon them alone, and not upon the Person
who had done the Offense. David owns thus much in the Presence of God and the
Congregation: It is I that have sinned, Lord, what have these silly sheep done?
Secondly, the Son of Jeroboam died young, or was by God removed out of the way
by Death; not because He had offended, but because He should not see the Evil
which was to fall upon his Friends and Countrevmen who had. He only of all the
House of Jeroboam shall go to the Grave in Peace, because in him was found some
good. His goodness shortened his days; He was early ripe for Heaven and for
Eternity, as the rest of his Family were for destruction: Yet this young Prince
did not lose a Crown, which he might have come to by slow ways of Succession
and of Inheritance; but was hastened and translated to a Crown that is Immortal.

This young Son of Jeroboam, it is said, went down to the Grave in Peace. I
would here stop a little to enquire what is meant by a Man's going to the Grave
in Peace. Is it to live as long as the Course of Nature will allow? Is it to
wear well for Threescore Years and Ten, and then to dye an easy and a Natural
Death? and the Lamp of Life to go out purely for want of Oil? No, far
otherwise. It is said of Josiah, that He should go to the Grave in Peace.
Behold I will gather Thee to thy Fathers, and Thou shall be gathered to thy
Grave in Peace. 2 Chr. 34.28.
Now I have already shown, That Josiah was mortally wounded at Megiddo, and
fell in Battle: and how can such a Man who is defeated, and dies in War, be
said to go to the Grave in Peace? And yet Josiah who fell by the Hand of an
Egyptian; and Jeroboam's Son, who was cut off by Death in the most flourishing
state of life: I say they both went to the Grave in Peace.

Now to dye, or go to the Grave in Peace, does not respect the kinds of Death,
whether in Battle or on a Scaffold, or of old Age, and in a Man's Bed: but it
regards the Person who dies; and that Temper and Cheerfulness and quiet of Mind
wherein a man dies. He then dies in Peace, whom Outrages and Indignities cannot
provoke to Anger; and whose Patience reremains unshaken, when the Storms and
Waves of Sorrow beat hardest upon Him. He dies in Peace, who resigns his own
Will to the Will and Pleasure of him who made him; and welcomes the most
painful or shameful way of Dying, as the ready way to Immortality and Eternal
Life: Thus dyed Josiah, though he fell in Battle; and thus fell the Royal
Martyr, though Murdered in the face of the Sun, and his own Subjects. How he
went to the Grave, it is not known; the Graves of Moses and of King Charles
being concealed by the Will of God to this day.

I confess, there is one Reason why Martyrs should not so much be said to die in
Peace, as they who die in Battle, or in their Bed; because though they go out of
the World with a calm and quiet Mind, yet their Blood calling for Vengeance,
seems to declare War: But in all other respects, Men who die for Religion, and
patiently suffer in a good Cause, though sawn asunder, or torn with wild
Horses, and devoured by Birds or Beasts of the Field, may very well be said to
go to the Grave in Peace.

It is very true, that Sorrow, and Suffering, and Death, did all come into the
World together, and were occasioned by the sin of Man; and are all of them
continued as Scourges and Judgments of God upon Man for sin. The Almighty has
but one Arrow in his Quiver sharper than these; and that he sends among us,
when he punishes sin with sin; when he suffers ill Men to harden in
Impenitence, to increase their Guilt, and thereby consigns them over to
Damnation. This is the most dreadful, and amazing Judgment of God upon Earth,
to leave a Man to a reprobate sense, and hard heart, and on this side the Grave
and Hell, without all hopes of Redemption.

I know not but there may be Men in the World, thus left to themselves; who
instead of repenting of a most horrid Murder, and of shedding Innocent Blood,
have themselves and their Posterity, justified the doing it, and advanced from
the Blood of one King, to maintain the Lawfulness of resisting all Kings. To
sin, is not so great a fault, as to vindicate and maintain the lawfulness of
committing Sin; we are all sinners, but hope God will give us Grace to repent
and amend; and then we are again right in his sight: But to shed Innocent
Blood, and to justify the doing it, is what Highway-men, and common Thieves and
Robbers will not do.

Now Resisting is a comprehensive Word, and includes in it reviling and
standering, deposing and putting to Death; and that, what way you please,
whether by Poniard or Pistol, on an open Theater, or by Assassines in the
Highway. Any, or all of these are Lawful to as many as believe it Lawful to
Resist.

Do but then think, Who are they that have been plotting against the Lord's
Anointed? Who have been engaged in Conspiracies to murder him in secret, and by
surprise? Who have been in Consult and Intriguing with a Foreign Enemy to
invade us; and upon what bottom all this mighty process has been formed and
founded, but upon this hellish Principle, That it is Lawful to resist. Our
Prince is hereby in as much danger in his Palace, or in his Bed, as formerly in
a Battle; and his very Recreations may be as perilous, as when he storms a
Castle, or takes a Town. We have heard of these men's Crimes, and sometimes of
their Absolution, but not a word of any public Repentance for public Sins;
but all go out of the World with a quiet Mind, or are only sorry their Attempts
succeeded not. Now this can proceed from no other Cause, but from that sole
Principle and Opinion, That it is Lawful to resist; and to embrew their Hands
in that Sacred Blood, which has been too frequently, and too far exposed in our
Defense.

I wish that sort of Men would deal fairly; and instead of vending among the
People those Jesuitical Notions and Speculations, they would go directly to the
Prince's Chambers, and tell them Him, and give Him timely notice to look to
Himself; for that they will Rebel when they please, and themselves are the
proper Judges of their own time.

This is the real truth of the matter; and Men who justify Resistance, and
intend to practice it, do not intend to ask the King's leave when they go about
it; do not wait for an Order of Council, or a Patent or Instrument under the
Broad Seal; but their Convenience is their Commission, and they bear their
Authority on their Sword's point.

Thus, I say, God has given some Men over to a reprobate Sense, and from
Murdering one King, to maintain, That all others may be lawfully Murdered. This
is surely the most direful Curse, that ever happened to any People, to be given
over to Impenitence and a hard Heart; a Man in this state, is got within the
confines of Hell, even while he lives upon Earth, and has gone so far within
the Gulf, that he cannot return.

Moses was once angry, and he repented. David was guilty of Murder and
Adultery, and with Tears he washed off the guilt of Blood, and of Uncleanness.
S. Peter denied his Lord, and wept bitterly: Nay, Judas made some sort of
Confession, and seemed to be sorry, when he returned the Money which was the
Price of Blood: Judas himself never betrayed and resisted, and taught others to
resist: so that this is one degree above his Crime, and will be punished in a
place below him.

Men of no Religion, and who have written in behalf of a Liberty, I had almost
said, in behalf of an Indifferency of all Religions; yet have thought fit to
own, That Principles not consistent with the repose, and quiet, and security of
Government, ought not to be tolerated or endured. Now Men who teach and
justify the Lawfulness of resisting Kings, maintain all Principles of
Confusion, in one word.

For, First, It will be hard to distinguish between Resistance and Rebellion;
they are Twins, so very like each other, that without some nicety in
Metaphysics, a Man would mistake them for one and the same thing.

Secondly, If a Man may Lawfully resist, no man can Lawfully hinder Him, or put
a stop to his Resistance: for what has any man to do to hinder or molest me,
when I am doing a Lawful thing? I am then about my Lawful Employment.

Thirdly, If Resistance be lawful, and men doing lawful Actions, are not to
be hindered or molested; be sure upon that account they cannot lawfully be
punished: and then all Treasons may go on and prosper.

And now as we are bound to pray for Kings and all in Authority; so it is no
less our Duty to teach such Doctrines as may secure to them the Possession of
that Power and Sovereignty they have over us, and the Duty and Allegiance we
owe them as God's Ministers for our good. It is not Affection alone, nor is it
Principle alone, that renders Kings safe in the Enjoyment of their Crown and
Dignity: Principle may be too weak, when Affection is lost and gone; and
Affection for a Prince without Principle too, is but mutable and uncertain; our
Love is apt to vary and change; and Affection goes with Interest, and turns
with it; but when Affection for a Prince, and a Principle of Conscience are
joined and united, they make a Bond that will hold a Sampson, and which the
strongest Man cannot break.

But to conclude.

First, Our Law and our public Prayers complain of a Murder committed as on
This Day, and of the shedding Royal Blood: Let us mourn and sorrow for it,
though as to our selves we had no hand in it, (the Heart must grieve for what
the hand does) and thereby we shall testify to all the World, That although
there is upon our Land the Guilt of Blood; yet we are not those Savages that
delight in Blood.

Secondly, God in his Justice took away Josiah; and He frequently takes away
good Kings, when the sins of the People tempt and provoke Him to it; He has
hitherto been gracious to us, and delivered our Sovereign both from hidden
Conspiracies, and open Violence; and has been his Defense, when thousands have
fallen at his Right and Left Hand. Let us not by our Sins tempt God to take
from us that Blessing we enjoy in Him.

Thirdly, The Jews had their Temple and City Jerusalem destroyed, and
themselves carried away Captive, after the Death of Josiah: think you they were
Sinners above others? I tell you nay. The same People of God the Jews for the
Murder of our Savior, were above Forty years afterward finally ruined, they
and their Children: think ye they were Sinners above others? I tell you nay. We
know what follows.

Here is likewise the Cry of Innocent Blood at this day; and we cannot presume
that we have yet shed Tears enough to wash off the stain and pollution from our
Land; but that Posterity and Childrens Children may mourn under the Curse and
Cry of it. Woe to us, etc.

This is a proper Subject for Jeremy's Lamentation; here a man might (with Him)
wish his Head a Well of Water, and his Eyes a Fountain of Tears, to bewail the
Miseries due to so sinful, so ungodly, so ungovernable a People. Remember, O
Lord, and let not those things come upon us which our sins deserve. Let not our
Inheritance be turned to strangers, nor our Houses to Aliens who would be Lords
over us. Spare us, good Lord! Spare thy People! turn away thy Wrath from us,
and together with all our other Iniquities pardon the Sin of this day, Thou who
have shed thine own Blood to save us from Sin and from Wrath to come.

FINIS.

