THE French King's APPEAL FROM THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE POPE TO A General
Council, September 28. 1688.

Faithfully Translated from the French Copy Printed at Paris.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin. 1688.

AN Act of Appeal Made to the Future Council, BY THE KING'S Attorney General;
And Judgment given thereupon, by the Chamber of Vacation, the 27th. of
September, 1688.
An Extract from the Records of PARLIAMENT.
THIS Day the King's Attorney General, being come into the Chamber of Vacation,
declared that the Matters of Fact laid open in the Letter the King sent to the
Cardinal d'Estrees the 6th. of this Month, having obliged his Majesty to
represent to our Holy Father the Pope, that he cannot look upon him otherwise
for time to come, than as a Prince that takes part with his Enemies, or own him
for a Competent Judge in all Cases wherein his interest may be concerned: The
King's Attorney General has thought it his duty at the same time, to make use
of the Precautions provided by the Law, practiced in many Cases, and founded on
the Opinions of the Italian Cannonists themselves, to prevent his Holiness from
passing any Valid and Regular Decrees in these Matters: With this purpose he
has made an Extrajudiciary Appeal from all the Proceedings his Holiness may
already have made, or make for time to come; and Decrees he may have passed, or
pass for time to come, in prejudice to the King, the Rights of his Crown, and
of the Subjects of his Majesty: The Respect he ows to this Court, has obliged
him to come and give them an account hereof, and to tender to them the Act of
Appeal he has made thereupon: They will easily perceive from the Command he has
received from the King on this occasion, the Piety, Wisdom, and Moderation,
which seem to have quite extinguished in this Prince those passions which so
powerfully bias the rest of Mankind. He hopes the Court will approve his
Conduct herein; and is fully assured they will with abundance of zeal and
faithfulness employ all the Authority the King has been pleased to trust them
with, to maintain the respect due to his Majesty upon so many just Titles; and
to preserve the Rights of his Crown, the peace of his Subjects, and those
Liberties which are not peculiar to the Gallican Church, but which she has
preserved always with more Luster and Vigor than any other Church whatsoever.

The Kings Attorney General being withdrawn, after having read the said Act of
Appeal with his Conclusions thereupon, by him left in the Office of the said
Court, and the Matter put to debate,

The Chamber Orders, That the said Act of Appeal shall be entered in the Office
of Records, to resort unto as occasion shall be, and that most humble thanks be
returned to his Majesty; that he has thought good his Attorney General should
begin those Proceedings which have been practiced upon the like occasions: And
that the first President shall assure our said Lord the King, in the Name of
the Court, of their constant adherence to his Sacred Person and Service; and of
their Zeal ever to employ the Authority his Majesty has been pleased to entrust
them with; in maintaining the Rights of the Crown, the Liberties of the
Kingdom, and the Peace of his Subjects.

Given in Vacation, the 27th. of September, 1688. Signed DONGOIS:

Before the Apostolical Notaries underwritten, to that purpose sent for to the
Bar of the King's Council in the Palace of this City, my Lord Achilles de
Harlay made his personal appearance, and declared that the Repute of our Holy
Father the Pope Innocent the 11th. his Piety having made the King to look upon
his Exaltation to the supreme Pontificate with much joy, his Majesty has ever
since endeavored to join with his Holiness, in laboring with one accord to
promote the Concerns of the Glory and service of God.

That the King's desires herein, and the steps he has already made in this
matter having mist of the good success he might have expected from them, his
Majesty notwithstanding has continued on his part to employ the Power God has
entrusted him with, in preserving the Purity of Faith within his Dominions, and
in bringing back to the bosom of the Church a great number of the Children
that were gone astray from her; and in affording her all the protection she
could expect from the Authority of a great King: His Majesty having moreover at
the same time edified her by his own example, and instructed all his Subjects
by his singular Piety.

In the mean time, our Holy Father the Pope, to whom so many Virtues and
wonderful Acts ought particularly to have endeared the Person of the King, has
with fervency embraced the Complaints that two Bishops have made to him,
concerning the Right of the Regale, having at the same time rejected the
Attestations tendered him by all the other Bishops of that Kingdom, concerning
the favors they had received of the King in that regard, even in prejudice to
his own Right.

His Holiness has deprived the King's Ambassadors at the Court of Rome of
those very Franchises which they have enjoyed during his Papacy, in a City
where it might have been expected the gratitude of the Popes would have
reserved for our Kings those more Illustrious and peculiar marks of
Sovereignty, which they in former times divested themselves of in favor of the
Holy-See.

Our Holy Father the Pope, has judged the Declaration which the Deputies of the
Clergy assembled in the City 1682. made of their Opinions concerning the Power
of the Church, to be at least a suspicious and dangerous Doctrine, and at a
Juncture wherein many of his Predecessors would rather have gone to the
uttermost bounds of Europe, than to leave so many new Catholic Converts
destitute of Pastors: His Holiness has refused his Bulls to many
Ecclesiastics the King had nominated to fill the vacant Churches of his
Kingdom; and to whom no other Crime can be imputed, than that of having known
the Truth by their Learning, and declared the same with a sincerity joined with
a great Respect for the Holy See.

Our Holy Father the Pope's Behavior for some Months since, in the Business of
the Archbishopric of Cologne, has given occasion to Men to believe, that his
Partial Dealings might as well raise as dissipate a part of his Scruples and
Difficulties.

His Holiness persisting in his not owning, and resusing Audience to an
Ambassador, whom the King was pleased to send at this Juncture, the
Thunderbolts he has made use of against that Ministry, the Interdiction of the
Church dedicated to God under the Name of St. Lewis in the City of Rome; and
last of all, his unheard of refusing not long since to give Audience to a
Person, whom the King had sent to him on purpose, and even so much as to
receive a Letter from his Majesty, wherewith the said Person was charged, will
leave an ^^most Incredible Instance to Posterity, of the power that Religion,
and the desire of preserving the Peace of Christendom, have had over the heart
of the King, as well as of the prevalence of prejudice over the Spirit of the
Pope, so contrary to the Obligations lying upon him from the place he fills.

It would be to no purpose to enlarge here any further on this Subject, since
the King has been pleased to permit, that his Letter writ on this occasion to
the Cardinal D'Estrees the 6th of this Month, should be published.

And because we see, that his Holiness thus stops his Ears to all the
Informations the King has been pleased to give him, as well as to the most just
Complaints that were to be laid before him from his Majesty, we are at last
forced to stand up in our own Defense, to maintain the Dignity of the Crown,
and the Peace of the King's Subjects by the Rule of Justice, at the same time
that his Majesty performs the same with so much Glory by the Puissance of his
Arms.

And though we might Dispense with entering any Proceedings against those
Decrees which would be null and void, by the condition of him that pronounces
them, by the Quality of the Matters in Question, and the Persons they respect.
Notwithstanding, that his Majesty may omit nothing of what is his Duty, and,
according to the example of his Predecessors, the said Attorney General does as
such, and after having obtained Permission from his Majesty, declare that he
makes his Appeal on behalf of the King and his Subjects to the General Council,
which it shall please his Holiness to Convene according to Canonical Form, from
all the Proceedings and Acts of our Holy Father the Pope, and from any Decrees
his Holiness may have past since the notice given him by Order of his Majesty,
of the just Causes of complaint and exception he has against the Person of his
said Holiness, and in like manner from all other Proceedings and Decrees he may
make for the future, to the prejudice of his Majesty, the Rights of his Crown
and Subjects; protesting at the same time, in the Name and by express Command
from the King, that his Intentions are ever to continue inviolably devoted to
the Holy See, as to the true Center of the Unity of the Church, to preserve the
Rights, Authorities, and Preeminencies thereof, with the same zeal his Majesty
has done on so many important Occasions, to render to the same himself, (and
causing all his Subjects) the Respect, Deference, and Submission due unto it,
and that as soon as our Holy Father (being better informed) shall give
Demonstration of the Equity and Disposition of a Judge and common Father, his
Majesty will pay (as he has done always heretofore) to his very Person the
Filial Duty he owes him, which the sole Behavior of his Holiness forces him to
forbear at present.

Given and past at Paris, in the Palace, at the Bar of King's Council, in the
year 1688. the 27th. of September, before Noon. Signed. Moussinor Senior and
Batteliee.

And at the same time the foresaid Attorney General made his Appearance in
Presence of the Apostolical Notaries at Paris underwritten, before the Reverend
Nicholas Cheron, Priest Doctor in Divinity, and Official of the Archbishopric
of Paris, and after having tendered him the said Act of Appeal by him made, and
desired to grant him the accustomed Letters to Summon, and the Party concerned
to prosecute the same when occasion shall be, the said Official has as far as
in him lies, granted the said Letters out of the respect he bears to the
Universal Church, represented in a General Council, and in consideration that
the said Appeal concerns the King's Rights, the Liberties of the Gallican
Church, and Peace of the Kingdom.

Given at the Hall of the Ecclesiastical Court of Paris, in the Year 1688. the
27th of September, before Noon. Signed Moussinot Senior and Battelier.

FINIS.

