THE French King's Answer TO Mons, Tyrconnel's Letter.
Licensed August 22. 1690.
Right Trusty, Right Obeysant, and Right Couchant Champion, and Creature.

WHEN your most obsequious Letters kissed our most Potent hands at our High and
Mighty Seraglio at Versailes, we were graciously pleased to condescend to
peruse them, and to approve the Zeal, and Affection therein expressed to Our
puissant Person, and most Christian Cause: and We have vouchsafed to send you
our Mighty Greetings, and most Sultan-like Thanks for the same.

We cannot but take it well that with such profound Submission you acknowledge
Our Sovereign Councils, and Conduct, Our Arms, and Alliances; wherein, as We
have scorned to take Precedent from any other Monarch; so doubtless we have
exceeded all that Less-Cultivated Princes could, or can pretend to.

Has not the Religion of our Wise Pagan Ancestors, Commanded them to Worship
the Gods themselves had made? And if they were compelled to Deifie the Graven,
or Molten Images the work of their own hands; Is it not much more rational and
according to Ecclesiastic Rudiment, That Adoration, and Divine Rights be
performed to Us who are a Living Deity, yea of their Own forming and setting up
too? Were they not the late Kings of England that exalted Us to this Grandeur,
and does not the World see with what Veneration, and Devotion the good King
James always received Our Orders, with what Humility he lies at the Feet of Our
Shrine, and with what Reverence he pursues our Absolute Commands? And is it not
due to Us upon Account of the Almightiness to which We are exalted?

Can We not Thunder like Jupiter, Fabricate Arms like Vulcan, contrive New
Forms like Saturn, forge Stories like Mercury, be taken in a Net like Mars, if
not Outdo these and the whole Pantheon of Old-fashioned Gods? And shall We be
denied Our Priests, and Altars?

It Is true, there are not wanting some of the Sacerdotal Function, that with
great Piety have acknowledged Our Jus Divinum, and have not been wanting in
their Pulpit Declamations, and Writings too, to convince the Unbelieving Mob of
that Antecedent, and Inherent Right of Sway, and Empire which Our Infallibility
justly claims, and Our Vassals out of their Bounden Duty, so inculcated,
acknowledged to be Lineally descended with us, and that by Natural Prerogative.
But after all this, I hope we are not to have Our Sovereign Authority, and Jus
Imperii to stand, or fall at the Will and Pleasure of an Orthodox Cassock, or
Hood! Was it not the Bounty of Our Fathers and Predecessors, that endowed their
Cloisters, and Colleges? And shall these Coxcombs in Orders think to give Law
to the Sultanian, and Imperial Power? What has the Bishop of Rome to do in
Secular Affairs? Must the Ambassadors of Our Mightinesis take his Time, and
Manner of Entry from the Direction of an Old Formal Pontificat? But now the
Father thinks he has secured his Chair by entering into a Confederacy with
Lutherans, Hugenots, and Whiggs; and drawing off a Parcel of sullen Devotes
from their Unquestionable Allegiance to our Stupendous Majesty; but alas! the
Old Prelate will find himself vastly out in his Measures, when the Thunder of
the most Potent Monarch of France, England, Holland, Spain, and Almain, shall
have broken his Bulls, ^^^m^nations, and Ecclesiastical A^^ery to pieces.

Neither are We without the most Undeniable Assurances imaginable, that may
encourage Our Illustrious Confidence, and buoy up the sinking Courage of Our
drooping Troops with Undeniable Proofs of Our Rising Fortune. And that you may
raise the Confidence of your Forces, by imparting so great a Secret to them;
the Grounds are these; which We have thought meet to acquaint you withal.

1. The de facto Party, as they are called, have made such a Schism in the
Minds of the Subject, that, as long as we can keep alive that Scruple, it will
incline vast Numbers of the sober; Churchmen to Our Side: For it is most
certain, if they can be prevailed with to believe that a de jure. Shim is not
there; It must necessarily reside some where else; and their Allegiance must be
due where that is to be found, Now We defy the Papers of Our Late Trusty
Confident Nevil Pain to speak more to the Purposes than this amounts to.

2. The Cocks who were not in Condition to fight this Summer, will doubtless
have their Weapons grown out against the next; and then We need not doubt Our
Right Trusty Catholic, and Jacobite Friends will Arm, stand (...), and give
the Signal: It is almost Unaccountable to Imagine what became of their Courage
when Animated by Our Ships of War, and Galleys on their Coast; but some think
sending the latter so near dispirited them, they being a People that have a
Natural Aversion to the Oar, and Chain.

3. Those, who by too early opening the Design, have fallen under the Frowns of
the Government, will, by that time, have drawn Breath, and be in Condition to
Rally, and pursue their Purposes, unless they shall serve Us, as they did their
Abdicating Master, that is to say, fly without a pursuer, Secundum Vsum Sarum.
It Is very true, We have no great reason too much to confide in their Bravery,
since, if they deserted when they had the Sword in their hand, there is but
small hope they should have the Courage to attempt, when the Army, and
Government are against them. But though much Confidence ought not to be laid on
their Valor, We may a little rely on Verbum Sacerdotis.

4. Our Royal Armada will, by that Time, be Refitted, and in Condition to put
to Sea again, if We can but have such good Fortune as the last Bout; only I
cannot forbear to tell you as Our Right Trusty Counselor, that We escaped not
altogether so well as Our Arches and Pillars boast, but, like Achilles We were
galled in the heel: And though Our Gazettes made no mention thereof, yet the
Docks belonging to Our Arsenal will show it, as well as the Abatement of Our
Number.

5. For a Supply of the True Sinews of War, though Our Enemies stru^, and Erect
themselves upon the Melting down of Our Household, and Altar-Plate, yet has Our
Egregious Care of your Concerns took up so much of Our Thoughts, that We have
permitted you to make a Coin of Horn, and Leather, as has been the Usage in
Times past: Neither would We have the Ignorant World imagine, that it is the
Intrinsic Value of the Metal, that gives Reputation to Our Bullion, but it is
the setting the Image, and Superscription of Our High and Mightiness thereon,
that puts a real Estimate upon it; So that as We were graciously pleased to
indulge your late Master to Coin up Kettles, and Shellets to half Crowns, and
Shillings: We have given you full Power to make any thing pass that comes next
to hand, setting, as was said, Our Victorious Figure thereon.

We heartily commend your Own, and Monsieur Lazun's Conduct in making good
Limerick, and Galloway, for Places of retreat, and, if it be possible for the
Soul of a Monarch flusht with such Continual Successes to be Capable of the
mean Impressions of Sorrow; it is' only for this, That Our great Ships so
inconsiderately burnt the Fisher Boats at Tingmouth, which else might have
served to Transvert you, and your Remaining Troops home to (...), when Occasion
shall Offer.

What remains is this, That if that Active Prince King William can by no means
be prevailed with to remit of his Rigor, and put on a Temper of Calmness, and
Remission; if nothing will work him to Compassion; then that you make all
possible haste you can to Us with the Remainder of your Forces, which no doubt
we may have need enough of the next Summer; for if he bring his Traveling Tent
hither, My Victorious Self, and your Great Master, are resolved to betake our
selves to the Sanctuary of some Holy Roof, and there to end our Days in that
Undisturbed Peace, which we have always endeavored to preserve in Europe: So
We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Castle at Versailes, in the last Year of Our Puissance, LOWIS.

FINIS.
London, Printed for R. Baldwin, in the Old Bailey, 1690.


