The French King's New DECLARATION, Published at Paris, the 26th of this
Instant September, 1699.
Our last French Mail brings the following Advices.
Paris, Sept. 26.
I Have frequently given you an Account, That the Persecution rages in this
Kingdom more and more, and to confirm the same, have sent you His Majesty's
Declaration, signed Yesterday in Parliament, by which you may perceive, That
whereas some of th Judges did formerly take Occasion, from some Expressions in
former Declarations, to suspend forfeiting the Estates of those who have left
the Kingdom, it is not now in their Power to show so much Mercy, and at the
same time you will be satisfied, That I did not misinform you, when I said,
That all the Methods hitherto taken, have not been able to suppress the
Reformed Religion here, nor to hinder the Subjects of both Religions, to leave
this miserable Kingdom in great Numbers. The Declaration is to the Effect
following:

LOuis, etc.

-- By our Declarations and Edicts of August, 1699. and May and July 1682. we
forbad our Subjects to depart out of the Kingdom, in order to settle in Foreign
Countries, on pain of Confiscation of Body and Estate; which by our Declaration
of May 1685. we commuted into that of the Galleys for ever: And by our
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, in October 1685. we particularly forbad our
Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion, to go out of our Dominions, with
their Wives and Children, on pain of the Men's being sent to the Galleys, and
the Women's being confiscated in Body and Estate: And being informed, that
notwithstanding all this, many of our Subjects, who had converted themselves to
the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, returning to their former Errors,
had retired into Foreign Countries, where they might enjoy the unhappy Liberty
of the Exercise and Profession of it, we did by our Declaration of May 1686.
order, That those who attempted to leave the Kingdom, should be seized on the
Frontiers, the Men sent to the Galleys for ever, and the Women shut up during
their Lives, in such Places as our Judges shall think me^t, and their Estates
confiscated to ou^ Use, even in those Countries where Confiscation was not
practiced; and that those also who assisted them in their Escape, directly or
indirectly; should incur the same Penalties.

And, in fine, by our Declaration of February last, we ordered, That all the
Edicts, etc. beforementioned should be put in Execution, and renewed our
Prohibitions against the New Converts going out of the Kingdom, on the
Penalties before specified. And though there was much greater Reason, that same
Penalties should take place against those who had sconsummated their
disobedience by their actual going out of the Kingdom, in contempt of our so
often repeated Prohibitions.

Yet being informed, That some of our Judges and Officers doubted whether it
were our Intention, that such Persons should be condemned, according to the
Penaltes of our said Declarations, because in our Declaration of the 11th of
February last, we had not expressly ordered it; and that in our Edict of December.
School. we had ordered, that the Estates left by such of our Subjects, should
belong to those that ought to succeed them, in case of Natural Death. And
though by attending to our Declaration of the 11th of February last, they might
have been satisfied of that Matter, we have nevertheless thought fit to explain
our Meaning, for the removing all doubts concerning that Affair, and for the
cutting off at the same time all hopes from the New Converts of enjoying any
part of their Estates, by means of their Children or next Relations, who should
have succeeded them as in case of Death, after their having left the Kingdom:
We do by these Presents, signed by our own Hand, Declare, Ordain and Will, That
all the Declarations and Edicts beforementioned, be put in Execution,
according to their Form and Tenor: And that Process be completed against all
our Subjects of the pretended Reformed Religion: And New Converts, who leave or
attempt to leave the Kingdom without our Permission, viz. That the Men be sent
to the Galleys for ever, the Women shut up during Life, and their Estates
confiscated to our Use: And in case their Estates lie in those particular
Seignieuries, where Confiscation has no Place, that the Criminals be fined in
half the value of their Estates for our Use. And (...) O^d^in an^ Will, That
those who contribute, directly or Indirectly, to their escape, be punished in
the same Manne^.

Given at Fountain^leau September. 13, 1699. Signed Louis,
and Registered in Parliament, Sep. 25. 1699.

Signed, Dongois.



Yesterday also there was registered in Parliament a Declaration by his Majesty;
For Regulating the Traffic of Corn in the Kingdom. In the Preface it takes
notice, That the dearth of Corn had not so much proceeded from bad Harvests, as
from the Covetousness of some Persons, who, though they were not Corn-Merchants
by profession, had nevertheless warmed themselves into that Trade; and their
chief End being to make Profit to themselves by the Necessity of the Public,
they concurred together to lay up hidden Magazines, which occasioning a
Scarcity and Dearth, gave them an Opportunity to sell the Corn at a much higher
Rate than they bought it. That his Majesty would have remedied that disorder
sooner, but that he staid for a more convenient Season, and better Harvest than
the last; and having Advice that the Harvest had been good this Year in most of
the Provinces, he judged it time to redress that Disorder, which is so much
contrary to good Manners and prejudicial to the Public. And therefore he
commands all those who trade in Corn, to take Licenses from the Officers of
Justice, and the Oaths appointed for that End, and to register the same: And
that none other presume to Trade therein, on pain of forfeiting the Corn, and
being fined in 500 Livres, and declared incapable of following, that Traffic
any more. Half the Corn is to be given the Informer. All Laborers, Gentlemen,
Officers, and those concerned in the Revenue, are forbid meddling with this
Commerce, on pain of 2000 Livres Fine and bodily Punishment; half the Fine to
be given ^o the Informer: And the Officers who g^v^ Lic^nses to such are to
lose their Places. No Corn-Merchents are to contract any Society with other
Corn Me^chant^, on the same P^nalties. And all ^argains made this Harvest for
Corn upon the Ground are declared Null, and the like in time to come, under the
Penalty of confiscating the Corn, a Fine of 3000 Livres, losing their Advance
Money, and being rendered incapable of that Trade for the future.

Yesterday likewise an Arrest of the Council of State was Registered in the
Court of the Mint, for raising the Value of the Species, viz. The Species of
the first Reform, the Crown at 67 Sous, the Louis* Or at 12 Livers 15 Sous,
throughout the K^ngdom of France. In the new Conqu^sts, the Flanders Pieces of
4 Livres, not reformed to 4 Livres 6 Sous.

The Speices not reformed and cried down, and those of the first Reform in the
Mints, and Offices of Receipt for the King, the Crown at 69 Sous, the Louis'd
Or at 13 Live. 5 s and the Pieces of 4 Livres, at 4 Livres 10 Sous.

The Reals of Weight, except those of Peru and Chapelet, at 66 Sous, and in the
Officers of Recepts at 68 Sous.

The Spanish-Pistoles, of weight at 12 l. 5 s. and in the Officers of Receipt
at 13 l. 5 s.

In the Mint, the Mark of Reals at 30 Livres 10 Sous, and of Pistoles at 480
Livres. And that Materials of Silver and Gold may be augmented according to the
Valuation of the Spices, the Mark of fine Silver, or of 12 Deniers, is to be 33
Livres 10 Sous; and the Mark of fine Gold, or of 24 Carats, at 502 Livres 10
Sous.

Done in the Council of State at Fountainbleau, September 22. 1699.
FINIS.
Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for J. Harrison, in Cornhill, 1699.


