THE French Kings DECLARATION OF A WAR AGAINST ENGLAND.

Published in the manner expressed therein at Paris, 27 Jan. 1666.

Translated out of French, and Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, living over against Baynards Castle in
Thames Street. 1666.

By the KING.
WHereas His Majesty being informed, that some misunderstanding was like to
arise between England and Holland, did give order to His Ordinary Ambassadors
to perform in His Name, all good Offices necessary for the Stifling those
Differences in the Birth, and being troubled to see things grow worse and
worse, so as to come to open Acts of Hostility between them, did dispatch
Extraordinary Ambassadors to the King of Great Britain, to endeavor to stop the
further growth, and by some Agreement to compose those Differences; but His
Mediation not having had that effect He promised Himself in it, the States
General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, have with Earnestness
continued their Instances with His Majesty, That He would execute the Treaty of
League Defensive, which He concluded with them the 27 of April, 1662. And His
Majesty finding Himself obliged to make good His Royal Word, and the
Engagements, He entered into, by a Solemn Treaty at a time when England and
Holland were in good correspondence, without any appearance of rupture. His
Majesty has declared, and by these present^ signed with His Hand, does
declare, That Men determined and resolved to succor the States of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries, in consequence of the said Treaty of League
Defensive, and to join all His Power to that of the States General in act
against the English as well by Sea as Land. And to this end, does most
straightly charge and require all His Subjects, Vassals, and Servants, to fall
upon the English, prohibiting them for the future, to have any Communication,
Commerce, or Intelligence with them, upon pain of Deaths. And to this end, His
Majesty has revoked, and from henceforth does revoke, All Licenses, Passes,
Letters of Protection, and of Safeguard, which may have been granted by
Himself, His Lieutenant Generals, or other Officers, contrary to these
presents, declaring them void, and of no effect; and commanding that no regard
or consideration be had of them by any person or persons whatsoever. And His
Majesty's will and pleasure is, That the Duke de Beaufort, Peer of France,
Great Master, Head, and Surintendant General of the Navigation and Commerce of
this Kingdom, the Mareschals of France, the Governors, and Lieutenants General
for His Majesty, in His Provinces and Armies, Mareschals of Camp, Colonels,
Masters of Camp, Captains, Heads, and Conductors of His Soldiers, as well of
Horse as of Foot, French as Strangers, and all other His Officers whom it may
concern, do cause the Contents of these presents, to be put in execution within
each of their Powers and Jurisdictions respectively: For such is His Majesty's
pleasure, Expecting that these presents be published in all His Towns, as well
Maritime, as others, and in all the Ports, Havens, and such other places of His
Kingdom as may be necessary; to the end, none may pretend cause of Ignorance;
and that to Copies hereof, duly Collationed, Credit be given as to the Original.

Signed, LOUIS,
and below Le Tellier.
These are to Charge, and Require Canto, the Kings Sworn Crier, to publish the
above Proclamation, and it to Post up and Affix in the usual places of this
City and Suburbs of Paris.

At Paris the 6th of Jan. 1666. Signed, Daubray.


REad and Published with sound of Trumpet, and open Proclamation in all the
Carrefours of this City, and Suburbs of Paris, Posted and Affixed, where
necessary, by me underwritten, Charles Canto, the Kings Sworn Crier, of the
said City, Provoste and Visconte of Paris. In the making of which Proclamation,
I was accompanied by Five Trumpetters; to wit, Jeremy Tronsson, Stephen du Bos,
His Majesty's Sworn Trumpetters in the said places, and Three other Trumpetters.

The 27th of day January, 1666. Signed, Canto.



After the Publication of the said Declaration, in the manner above expressed,
the Lord Hollis having taken his leave of that Court, and so being divested of
his Character, thought fit to represent to Monsieur de Lionne, one of the
Secretaries of State, the exorbitancy thereof, and how offensive it would look
to all the World, to expose the Estates and Persons of His Majesty of Great
Britain's Subjects, to the last violences, if it were literally executed; and
how contrary it was to the Treaties subsisting between the two Nations, not to
allow a competent time for persons to withdraw themselves from the rigorous
execution of it; His Majesty of France was pleased to issue this following
Declaration, allowing three months time for all English to withdraw their
Persons and Estates from His Territories.

By the King.
HIs Majesty having been given to understand, that the English which are now in
the Kingdom, do apprehend they may be molested in their persons, and disturbed
in the enjoyment of their Estates, in consequence of the Ordinance of the 26 of
January last; in which, His Majesty declared He would join all His Force to
that of the Estates General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, to
act against the English, as well by Sea as by Land; charging and requiring all
His Subjects to fall upon them, and not to have from thenceforth any Commerce
or Communication with them. And although there be not any ground for such
apprehension, seeing the said Ordinance cannot be understood, but against the
English that shall hereafter be met at Sea by His Majesty's Ships, or that
shall appear on the Coasts of the Kingdom, to Land and enter there in Arms, or
otherwise; and not against private persons that are settled in the Kingdom, or
that are come hither upon the Faith of that good Correspondence which has
hitherto been between this Crown, and that of England: Yet His Majesty desirous
more particularly to explain His meaning therein, has ordered, and does order,
That such English, as being not Naturalized, have settled themselves in the
Kingdom, or are at present here, do quit it within three months, to be
accounted from the date of these presents; during which time, they may safely
sell or transport their Merchandise and other Goods. His Majesty, in the mean
time, strictly commanding all His Subjects not to molest the said private
Englishmen in their Persons or Goods, for any cause or occasion, or under any
pretext whatsoever, except by the ordinary ways of Justice; and so, as they
might have done before the publication of the said Ordinance of 26 January
last. And His Majesty's will and pleasure is, That all His Governors, and His
Lieutenant Governors of His Provinces, Intendants there, particular Governors
of His Towns and places, Bailiffs, Seneschals, Provosts, Judges, and their
Lieutenants, and all other His Officers and Subjects, whom it may concern, do
take care respectively for the exact observation of these presents, which His
Majesty commands to be published, and set up in all the Towns, Boroughs, and
other places of His Kingdom, where requisite; to the end, none may pretend
cause of ignorance.

Given at St. Germain in Lay, the first of February, 1666. Signed LOUIS,
and below Le Tellier.
These are to require Canto, the Kings swarn Crier, to publish the above
Ordinance, and to cause it to be affixed in the usual places of this City and
Suburbs of Paris.

At Paris the first of February* 1666. Signed Daubray.


REad and published with sound of Trumpet and open cry, in all the Carrefours
of this City and Suburbs of Paris, and affixed where requisite, by me
underwritten, Charles Canto, the Kings sworn Crier in the said City, Provoste
and Visconte of Paris. In making which Proclamation, I was accompanied with
three Trumpetters, viz. Jeremy Tronsson, Stephen du Bos, His Majesty's sworn
Trumpetters in the said places, and with one other Trumpetter. The third day of
February, 1666.

Signed Canto.



FINIS.

