A SUMMARY OF MATERIAL HEADS Which may be Enlarged and Improved into a Complete
ANSWER TO Dr. Burnet's Theory of the EARTH.

Digested into an ESSAY, by a PENSIONER of the CHARTER HOUSE.

Semper ego auditor tantum, nunquamne reponam?

Juv. Cum^^^n Nullius (...) jurare in verba Magistri.

Hor. LONDON, Printed by T. B. and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London
and Westminster 1696.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE The Governors of the Charter House.
My Lords,
IT may seem Inconsistent with a Character Your Honors vouchsafe to bear, That
any who live under the Influence of Your Lordships special Care, should be
apprehensive of the Want of Protection. And it would be so indeed, My Lords,
did all keep within the Bounds and Precincts of the Liberties allotted them.
But since I have been so rash, as to venture Abroad into the World; it is from
that Transcendent and more Extensive Character of Honor, the Signature of
Noble and Exalted Minds, that displays it self in supporting the Weak and
Defenseless; and not from any Claim of Right, arising from Promise or
Stipulation, That I can expect, and do most humbly crave Your Lordships
favorable Protection, in a little Ramble that now I have made to the Press.
Had the Excursion been greater, My Lords, it is probable my Confidence would
have been more Excusable, and a fuller grown, and more bulky Book would have
born a truer Proportion to the Ambition I had of having brought a more Earlier
Offering of Duty and Gratitude to Your Honors. It was what I intended, My
Lords, and should have performed, had not my Design, for want of kinder Nursing
Fathers, bin starved into this scanty and lank Essay. Nevertheless, I am
inclined to think, My Lords, That the Bulk alone will be no Hinderance to its
Acceptance, nor to the Grant of that Favor which is humbly su'd for at Your
Lordships Hands; since, if I be not very much imposed upon, little as it is, it
may do some Good in the World.

It is therefore in hopes of Your Honors Countenance and Approbation, That
with so short a Weapon, I have engaged a Mighty and well Appointed Adversary.
The Attempt I confess, seems rash, My Lords, but cannot think it will be looked
upon as Dishonorable, since my Dagger is no Stiletto, is neither poisoned nor
rusty, nor is it wrapped up and hid within a treacherous Sleeve. To such as may
think it a little too sharp and keen, I have this to say, My Lords, That it is
the more like for that to do Execution, and to prevent more trifling and
fooling of Sophisters and Theorists, with a Matter that is too serious to allow
it, or to admit of a dallying and perfunctory Dispatch. And that it was an
honest Concern for so good a Cause, as that of Truth and Religion, with a
zealous Endeavor to undeceive, if possible, a licentious and profane Age, of
a most dangerous Error, into which many, for no other Reason but that it is A
la Mode, are capriciously fond of being deluded, that has in a great Measure
given it the Edge.

Were I to allege other Personal and more particular Reasons for the Thing, My
Lords, I should be blinder than indeed I am, and that is what no Man living can
be, if I mistook the proper Judges to whom I ought to Appeal: But then again, I
should be rasher too, My Lords, than is fit for a Man in better Circumstances
than I am in to be, if by a Message from the Press, I summoned in Witnesses,
and an Audience to the Trial. It is too great a Trouble for Your Lordships at
present, That the Author with his little Naked Book, is laid at Your Honors
Feet, humbly begging from your Acceptance and Protection, a Covering for both,
against the foul Weather of Censure and Malice.

If this great Honor be to be obtained, My Lords, I shall then rest secure, in
the Confidence of being reputed to be, what really, and with all Submission, I
am

My Lords, Your Lorships most Dutiful And Obliged Servant and Votary, ARCHIBALD
LOVELL; Brother and Pensioner of the Charter House.
Charter House, June 16th, 1696.
A SUMMARY OF MATERIAL HEADS Which may be Enlarged and Improved into a Complete
ANSWER TO Dr. Burnet's Theory of the EARTH.
THE Learned Author of this Sacred Theory of the Earth, Dr. Thomas Burnet,
Master of the Charter House, who allows the World to have been drowned by
Water, is pleased to object against the manner of the Deluge, as it is related
by Moses, and his Reason for so doing, in short is, the difficulty of finding
so much Water in the Universe, as might effect so great and stupendous a Work;
for having, by the help of Messenius, calculated the proportion of the Water
necessary to drown the Earth, and raised the Flood to that pitch, which Moses
says the Waters did arise to, above the Tops of the highest Mountains: Though
he does acknowledge, that there is as much Water at least to be seen on the
surface of this our Globe, as there is dry Land; yet he concludes, that it
would require Eight Oceans as big as the present, to perform the Work in the
manner Moses says it was done. And since so great a quantity of Water cannot be
found in this World, nor, in probability, borrowed from any where else, it
could not be had without the expense of Two great Miracles; the one in creating
so much Water, as would be fit to do the business; the other in annihilating
the same after the Work was over; so that, since Deus and natura nihil frustra
faciunt; if any other way or expedient can be found, it is vain and
unreasonable to have recourse to Miracles; and this I take to be the strength
of all the Reason and Argument that he has to object against the truth of
Moses's Relation.

Now since the Author confesses, that there is as much Water as dry Land in
the World, I think one may venture to say, that Intelligendo facit ut nihil
intelligat, he cannot see the Wood for Trees; and that as much more would make
it all Water; for Two halves makes a whole: So that were I not confined to the
brevity of an Essay, I should spend a little time, to make it plainly appear,
that the Author has made an inauspicious Blunder in the beginning of his Work,
and indeed a greater Bull, than the honest Irishman was laughed at for, when
he said, They had broken his Stick into Three Halves; for here the Author has
broken a Whole into Ten Halves; the Earth and the Ocean being already Two
Halves, he adds Eight Oceans more, to make the Ocean half as big as the dry
Land half, which in all makes Ten Halves; and all this performed by mere
natural Philosophy, without the help of Magic or Mathematics. But at present,
I shall proceed, to show, how without a Miracle, Water enough may be had in the
World, to bring a Flood upon the Earth, and drown it in the manner Moses has
related it.

To this purpose, I shall lay down as a Principle sufficient to overthrow all
the Author's Hypothesis, this plain Proposition, which being in it self so
evident, as not to need demonstration, might be demanded as a Postulate, and
will be readily granted by all knowing Men, viz. That all Bodies which tend to
a Central Point, as their place of rest, must needs cast themselves into a
Circular or Orbicular Figure. And the Reason is plain and obvious; because no
natural Body in motion can stop till it comes at the place of Rest, or as near
it as possibly it can, for the interposition of other Bodies that have their
right to be before it. Now since in a Circle or Orb, all the points of the
Circumference are equally distant from the Center, Bodies which rest upon, and
are gathered about the Center, must needs cast themselves into a round, to be
as near the place of rest, as possibly they can. From this true Position, two
undeniable Corollaries do result, First, That there can be no Vacuum or Place
in the World altogether empty of some Body; for Bodies tending toward a place
of Rest, must crowd and touch one another contiguously; for if any void Space
should be betwixt them, the succeeding Body would not be so near his Place as
otherwise it might, which is contrary to the Position laid down. And then next,
that no Natural Body can shift or remove its place, but that in exchange,
another must immediately possess it; else there must needs be a Void in the
Universe, contrary to the Principle of Nature. Not but that there are small and
imperceptible Interstices, more or less in all Bodies, occasioned by the sight
and position of the variously figured Particles, of which they are constituted;
these being absolutely necessary for the motions, changes and alterations of
Nature, as Generation and Corruption, Growth, Vegetation, Rarefaction and
Condensation, Compression, Expansion, and the like, which cannot be performed
without them; but that there should be any considerable Space wholly void and
destitute of some body, is inconsistent with the order and economy of the
World, the being of Matter, and the Idea of its Creator. And thus the debate of
Philosophers about the being, or not being of a Vacuum, may be easily
reconciled, and both may be in the right, and both may be in the wrong,
according to the different Sense they spoke in.

Now since Gravity is that Principle which gives natural Bodies their tendency
toward the Center, and yet seems not essential to the pure and abstract notion
of matter of which they consist, it would be worth the while to find out what
Gravity truly is. To guide us therefore into this Enquiry, we are to conceive,
that the great Abyss of Matter, which made the Chaos, was no more but a Mass
and Crowd, or aggregate of infinite Numbers of Atoms, jumbled together in that
vast Expanse, without any property or quality, but that of shape and figure,
according to the Opinion of the Ancient and Modern Corpuscularian Philosophers.
And that there being great variety amongst those indivisible Atoms, as to their
shape and figure, some Globular, some Angular, and those of many different
kinds; whilst reeling in the dark, and encountering one another fortuitously
too (if Naturalists be in the right) according as the several Figures were
fitted for union and coalition, they combined and incorporated one with
another, some into a more close and compact, some into a more lax and fluid
concretion, and divided themselves into several distinct and homogeneous
Bodies. Some of these Bodies then that consisted of more Atoms and parts of
Matter closely compacted together, and therefore taking up a less space, since
the bounds of the Expanse were not to be enlarged nor contracted, but all
filled, did, as they must needs do, possess the middle part or center, leaving
the rest of the Expanse to be filled with the other Homogeneous Bodies,
according to the texture of the several constituent Particles, which was either
more close or loose, as their Figures did suffer them to unite; so that the
Bodies that were of the most lax and open Concretion, possessed themselves of the
Place most remote from the middle, which is the circumference, and the utmost
limit of the Sphere or Vortex; and the others in order, filled up the
intermedial Spaces betwixt the Center and that. These distinct and homogeneous
Bodies are those which are called the first perceptible Elements of Nature; and
by reason of the quantity of Matter they contain, their solidity or fluidity
challenging the Places that they possess in the Universe, by what cause soever
they are removed or displaced, they naturally tend to the same again, because
there is no other Place for them, all being full of the other Bodies, which
will not make room for them, nor incorporate with them. And this is that which
is called Gravity, and Levity, according to which the Elementary Bodies possessed
themselves of their several Places in the Universe; though indeed all affect to
be as near the Center, or Point of rest as they can, from which they stir not,
unless the danger of a Vacuum, or some other external Force or Violence compel
them so to do.

According to this Philosophy, if no other Power but that of Nature, were
concerned in framing of the Universe, those great Bodies which we call the
Elements, though indeed they be not purely so, must needs have subsisted in
this Order. First, The Earth being the most weighty, as consisting of most
solid and compact Matter, must have been, as now it is, the Basis and
Foundation of all; then the Water, as coming nearest to it in consistence, must
have succeeded in place; after it the Air; then the Either; and last of all the
Fire, if any such Element exist, separate from the rest, to limit and
circumscribe this World. And since all these, being in their proper Places,
according to the Laws of Nature and Gravity, they must have rested, and
continued in that posture; no Earth then could have been seen, being covered
and surrounded by the Orb of Water; and the Superior Orbs being invisible to
the Eye, nothing must have appeared to the sight, but a vast and spacious Globe
of Water. Now, since we find it is otherwise, and that the Earth is to be seen
as well as the Water, distinct and separate from it, and both replenished with
vast numbers of Beings, animate and inanimate, all harmoniously conspiring to
the order and beauty of the whole Universe, and to the mutual uses and
advantages of each other, which is far above the power of mere Matter to
effect; it must needs convince the most obstinate and prejudiced Materialist or
Atheist, that matter and nature are not eternal, all-sufficient, and
independent; but that they must derive their being and virtue, from a Supreme
and Omnipotent Cause, which has brought Nature out of the Chaos of Matter, and
put all things into the decent state and order that we see them in; and that
this was so done in the beginning of Time; when, as Moses the Servant of God
tells us, in a style suitable to the Grandeur of the Subject, that the Spirit
of God moved upon the Waters: And the Great Creator by an Almighty Fiat,
commanded Dry Land, and all things to be; and accordingly Dry Land, and all
things were.

It is not then, by the Principles of the simple Elements, or of mere motion
and gravity, that the works of Nature in the state they are now in, do perform
their several Offices and Operations; for we may observe, that those Powers are
in many things restrained, without altering the essential properties of natural
Bodies, or hindering the ordinary exercise of them, in any thing that is
consistent with the order and welfare of the Universe.

It is then the Constitution they received at their first Creation, the Figure,
Proportion, Site and Position of their parts in Mixion, which Philosophers
have called the Substantial Form, that is, the main Principle whereby they act
and preserve themselves in the order and state they are in; which, if
dissolved, and Nature let loose to itself, the Elements would certainly return
to their ancient state, and by their primary and natural principle of Gravity,
involve all things again into confusion. Whatever might be the immediate cause
of this, the Will of the Creator must be the chief Director. Since the
Creation, the World has but had one sad instance of this, and by virtue of a
Divine Promise, is to have no more before its final Dissolution.

And this happened in the Days of Noah, when, for the Sins of Mankind, the
World was overwhelmed by a Flood, and the Waters mounted Fifteen Cubits high,
over the tops of the highest Mountains; which how it may be done by Natural
Causes, without any Miracle, is that which now I undertake to explain.

In order to this, It will not be amiss to observe the external Face and Figure
of the World. The Terraqueous Globe then, which we inhabit, though it be round,
yet it is not of a smooth, equal and united Surface; but there are in it, many
and great Depressions and Cavities, vast and spacious Chasms, that lie betwixt
the highest swelling of the Ocean, and the tops of the Mountains, as there is
between one Mountain and another, and these vast Chasms, are the Appartment of
the lower Region of the Air, which is that strong Barrier, though but a thin
and transparent Partition Wall, that hinders the tumid Ocean from falling down,
according to its natural principle of Gravity, and overflowing the lower
Grounds, and by so doing, bringing Ruin and Desolation upon a great part of the
habitable Earth. For we are to take notice, that the Ocean in its highest
swelling, rises to as great a height as the tops of the highest Mountains. And
if this could not be demonstrated by Experience and Observation, as it can, the
following Proof is sufficient to evince the truth of it.

Parts of Water being imbibed by the Earth, as they are forced into its Pores
by succeeding Parts that descend from higher Places in the Ocean, are in the
same manner as the blood does pass through the Flesh and Bodies of Animals,
percolated through the Body and Substance of the Earth, where leaving their
saline Particles, to impregnate the ground with fertility and vegitation, the
vapid and simple Lymph is forced into small and capillary Veins, by which it is
conveyed into larger Vessels, or subterranean Pipes and Conduits, and from them
is discharged into more capacious and hidden Rills, as into some Vena Porta, or
Cava, out of which, qua data porta ruit, at the first open Passage it meets
with, it gushes out in Springs; where being in the open Air, and in the Region
of another Element, to which it must yield, it falls downward, and by way of
circulation, returns back to the Ocean, from whence it came. This, as it
plainly discovers the Origin of Fountains and Rivers, which has hitherto
puzell'd the most ingenious and industrious Enquirers; so it does, in a manner,
demonstrate, that the swelling of the Ocean rises higher, or at least as high,
as the tops of the highest Mountains, where Springs of Water are found, and
Vegetables grow.

The Use I make of what has been said, is, to show, that the Elements, those
simple Bodies of Nature, maintain their several Posts in the Universe, by the
different form and figure of the simulary Particles of which they are
constituted, as must needs appear to us, when we consider the difficulty there
is, and violence that must be used, to sink a Body of Air out of its natural
place into the Water, or to make a Body of Water mount into the Air; for by no
means can they be made to incorporate, and mix together, whilst they subsist in
entire Bodies. To effect this, they must be attenuated, and taken in pieces. It
is by this Principle then, and not that of Natural Gravity, that the lower
Region of the Air maintains its post, and becomes a Barrier to keep the Ocean
from falling down upon those Parts of the Earth, that are lower than it self;
and that it performs this with so much vigor, that when it is attacked by any
powerful Neighbor, born down and comprest beyond the natural site and
position of its parts, it will regain its ground with such a sudden and
forcible Jerk of Reciprocation, that hardly does the Explosion of Gunpowder
exceed it; as may be experimented by shooting in a Wind-Gun; or that if it be
forced by any irresistible Impulse to quit it is Place, it forces the hardest
and most solid Bodies to give way, and make room for it; sad Instances of this
may be seen, when by Hurricanes, Tempests and violent Concussions of the Air,
Trees are blown up by the Roots, Houses laid prostrate, and sometimes large
Pieces of Ground transplaced, to make Way for it.

But when, by the direction of the Supreme Being, and the Influence of
instrumental and secondary Causes, the Air does pass from its close Order of
Nature, opens rank and file, and sends off detachments of small Bodies and
Particles at the same time, when the Ocean, being in the same manner affected,
the Fountain of the great Deep is broken up, and Mother Thetis opening her
Breasts, sweats out her purer Exhalations: These small Particles of Air, enter
into the evacuated Spaces of the Water, as the Effluvia of the Water possess
themselves of the Interstices of the Air so deserted; and these two being
Strangers, new Comers, and at first no very good Neighbors, cooperating with
the other causes, mutually force more Particles to follow the same Course they
have done; so that by a successive and continued Transmigration of Colonies,
the Two Elements are blended and incorporated together, and in a manner united
into one Body, the Air becoming a thinner Water, as the Water does a thicker
Air, both improper for the nourishing and preserving the Life of the Animals,
that live in those Elements, in the state they are now in^ This Rarefaction and
Condensation is indeed a natural sort of Distillation, which may be well
illustrated by the ordinary Process of Distilling, which does exactly imitate
the same. Of this we have daily Instances, but because they are so common, but
slightly observed; as when Vapors and Exhalations attracted and raised by the
heat of the Sun in the Day time, fall again by Night in Dews: But this is far
more remarkable in the Instance of Water-Spouts. And since that does conduce so
much to the Illustration of what I am about, and that I my self have seen one
at Sea, I will describe it with as much Plainness and Exactness as possibly I
can.

Being at Sea, and sailing between the Tropics, in or about the 15 th or 16 th
Degree of Northern Latitude, one Morning, when the Weather was very fair, the
Air serene, not troubled with the least Cloud, or Shadow of Meteor, and the Sun
shone very hot, about Ten a Clock in the Morning a Seaman at work on the
outside of the Ship, alarmed us with a Cry of a Spout, a Spout; the Curiosity
of seeing this, invited me, as it did others, to come upon the Quarter Deck;
there I saw to the Larboard, within about half a League distance from the Ship,
in the middle of the Ocean, that then looked as smooth as a Looking-Glass, a
Circle of Water, which appeared not to be a quarter of a Mile in Diameter, much
differing from the rest of the Sea; for the Water therein did goggle and wamble
much faster and higher, than any Copper or Caldron full of Water could have
proportionably done over the intense Heat of an open Fire. From this boiling
Water, there arose Steams as thick as the Smoke of a Brew House or Glass-house,
but pure and white, like that of the cleanest Wood, or like thick and white
Fogs, that gather about the Tops of Trees in an Autumn Morning; this Steam
ascended impetuously, as in a natural Alembeck, consisting of two Pillars, of a
black Cloud, which terminated above in a Point like a Cone, wherein was a small
Opening, through which the Sun peeped, and darted down his Rays upon the Circle
of the Water underneath the thick sides of that Cloudy Alembeck or Cone, which
widened toward the Basis, but reached not the Surface of the Water, by some
little distance, hindering the Sunbeams from being dispersed any where else;
so that in the space of Half an Hour after this first appeared, the whole
Hemisphere was overcast with black, thick, and low hanging Clouds, which soon
bursting, the Windows of Heaven were opened, and poured down such a prodigious
quantity of Rain, in whole Cataracts, as forced us all under Decks; and this
Rain lasted, as I do remember, near a third part of the time longer than the
Clouds were a gathering in the manner aforesaid. I had the Curiosity to taste a
little of the Rain Water, that I might know whether or no, in so swift a
Distillation it could be wholly purified from its Saltness; and when I found an
odd taste, but what, I could not call, a brackishness in it; the Master of the
Ship rectified a mistake, which otherwise I might have fallen into, by telling
me, that since I had the Water out of the Ship's Bucket, that oddness of taste
proceeded from the Pitch and Far of the Ropes, from which it had dropped, but
that the Water was sweet and fresh.

Now, since subsistente causa subsistit effectus, had this Distillation
continued, or been often repeated, or had several other Spouts of the same kind
happened in different Horrisons at the same time, as what can be said to the
contrary, but that they might, I dare be bold to affirm, That in less time than
Forty Days, and Forty Nights, which is the space assigned by Moses for the
Increase of the Waters, to complete the Flood, the Waters would have prevailed,
and mounted as high above the Tops of the highest Mountains, as Moses says they
did; nay more, should the same cause be employed and continued a sufficient
Space of Time, it is more than probable, that not only the Water and Air might
be blended and mixed together, but that these two making then a Body still
thicker than that of the Orbs above them, by the same Operation, the Either and
all the rest might be involved in the same Confusion, and the whole World be
turned into one Immense Globe of Water, having the Earth as a Core remaining in
the middle. And that if a proper Menstruum were applied to dissolve it, as such
may be had in nature, (and who knows but that the Salt of the Ocean being then)
separated from it is Mixtion, with the purer Elementary Water, whose Globular
Particles muffled and blunted the Edge of it is sharp Angels, might prove such a
Solvent? Which then precipitating into the bottom, might with it is sharp and
aculiated Points exert its Corrosive Virtue, open and attenuate the Solid Body
of the Earth,) the Earth also might be reduced into its Original and
Constituent Atoms, whereby the World would again return to the old Chaos, or
Thales Melesius's First Principle of Water.

The Prophet Elijah, it seems, was not Ignorant of this Philosophy, when after
God Almighty had made him the instrument of the Miraculous Vindication of his
own Glory and Worship, from the Idolatry and False Worship of the Priests of
Baal, he had promised King Ahab Rain (the Israelites having had none for three
Years before) he sat down upon the Top of Mount Carmel, ordering his Servant to
go seven times and look toward the Sea, and to bring him word back what he
observed there, this his Servant having done, and after the seventh time
bringing his Master the News, that he saw a Cloud rising from the Sea no bigger
than a Man's Hand; the Prophet thereupon sent to the King advising him to hasten
home, least he should be stopped by the Rain, which accordingly ensued
immediately after, now this having been observed in the Mediterranean where
Spouts frequently happen, and so like in all Circumstances to that which I
observed in the Ocean, they were both of them, no doubt, the effects of the
same, natural and ordinary Causes acting by the Will of God in an extraordinary
Manner.

There have been several particular and local Floods and Inundations in the
World; as the Ogygian and other Floods of the Ancients, taken Notice of by our
Author in his Theory of the Earth, and in most Countries there are daily
Instances of Land Floods and Inundations; Now since in all such Inundations,
the Waters of the Sea are not diminished, but rather increased, the Water-Mark
being carried further up, and the Tides swelling higher upon the Shore; the
Rivers overflow their Banks, and the low Grounds ly drowned under Water, if Dr.
Burnet, since he allows no Miracle of a New Creation of Waters, nor that they
can be borrowed from any Neighboring or Superior Orb, for which I quarrel not
with him, can show any rational Way, besides what I have now alleged, how
Waters can be had to cause those Inundations which frequently happen, he shall
be more than a Philosopher, erit mihi magnus Apollo, at such Times, the Water
appears Turgid and Flatuous, as Impregnated with some Extraneous Body, and the
Air Thick, Raw and Squalid. So that Men covet a Close Room, where they may
enjoy a corrected Air, as the Fish skulk to the bottom to be refreshed by a
purer and untroubled Water, which shows, That both then are unduly mixed for
the common uses those Elements are intended for; and therefore since plus and
minus non variant Speciem, the same Causes which serve pro tanto may serve pro
toto, since no Man can deny, but that they Exist in the World, nor no Christian
doubt, but that God Almighty, if he please, may Employ and set them at Work,
and Moses no where says, That the Earth was drowned with Salt Water. So that, I
think, if the Author do but make a Serious Reflection upon the Reasons now
given, he cannot but be ashamed of his blunder, as to the quantity of the Water
necessary for the Flood, and much more of his reason and manner of making it,
and confidence in maintaining the same: When in his reply to Mr. Warren, one of
his Answerers, he says, he believes the Truth of his Hypothesis as much as any
thing of that Nature, can be believed, for since the System of Moses, which is
as agreeable to Natural Reason as any thing can be, is a Thing of the same
Nature, and as firmly believed by all who own the Scriptures to be the Word of
God, as any Article of our Creed. He must either renounce this Faith of his,
or, by keeping it, be an Infidel.

It Is time now that we consider, what Expedient our Author has taken to find
out Water enough to drown the World, without any necessity of Miracle, and
without any respect to the Relation of Moses; and this we find he has done by
making a New Genesis, new modelling the Fabric of the World, and Ordering the
State of Nature by turning one Chaos, into another, and indeed a better into a
worse: For when he stuffs his Chaos with Ponderous and Earthy Parts, Watery
Parts, Light and Unctious Parts, etc. which are complete and perfect Natural
Beings, consisting of Matter and Form in the Language of the Schools: He
represents to us a Chaotick State of Nature jumbled into Disorder and
Confusion; and not a True and Original Chaos, which was no more but what the
Poet says, rudis indigestaque moles, bare and indigested Matter, void of all
Form, but susceptible of any that it should please an Almighty Creator to stamp
upon it. And nevertheless in purging and digesting this his Chaos, such as
it is, into a Frame and State of Nature, he observes a Method that turns all
topsie turvie, and quite inverts the very Order that the Laws of Natural Motion
and Gravity, and his own Principles require. For contrary to that Principle of
Gravity, upon which he lays so much stress, in building us a World out of a
Natural Chaos, he observes a very preposterous Method, and makes that which
should be the Roof the Foundation. This he exposes to open View in the Scheme
he gives us of the World, as thus, He places the lightest of all the Elements,
instead of the heaviest, in the Foundation, and makes the Fire to be the Center
of our Globe. But for what reason he does do so, unless it be the kindness he
has for Sea-Cole, for the good Services they may have done him, I cannot
imagine. Next to that he places a Lay or Orb of Earth; over that a Lay of Water,
and over all, another Lay or Orb of Earth for a crust and covering, stratum
super stratum, as the Physicians use to prescribe. These, as he says, continued
in this State for a long while, till at length this upper crust and covering of
Earth growing old and crazy, chopped and decayed, did in the days of Noah break
to pieces, and fall into the Water underneath, where it was soak't in a Deluge,
and thereby the Face of the World was Altered and Changed from what it was
before, to what we see it at present. For the Surface of the Earth, which
before was even and smooth, was, as he would have us believe, by this
disruption, made Rough and Rugged, Mountains and Valleys, Hills and Dales;
steep Rocks and Precipices, which never were before, then appearing, and the
Waters that had formerly lain hid under Ground, became an open Sea consisting
of a Spacious Ocean and Various Bays, Creeks, Gulfs, Inlets and Lakes, as now
it shows it self.

My Answer now in short to all this, is, That there is not One Word of it True,
nor indeed Possible in Nature, that it can be True, even granting the Authors
Hypothesis could consist with the Laws of Natural Motion and Gravity, as from
what has been said before may be demonstrated it cannot; because according to
that undeniable Principle, which I laid down in the beginning, and which the
Author cannot reject; That all Bodies which rest upon a Center must of
Necessity cast themselves into an Orbicular or Circular Figure: That there is
no Vacuum, and that no Body in this Globe or Sphere can move out of its Place,
but it must succeed into the Place and Room of that Body, which did dispossess
it, the Expulsed into the Place of the Intruder. If the Crust of Earth, which
the Author will have, to have been the Circumference of this Globe, did break
and fall down, the Orb of Water underneath being then dispossessed by the Earth
so falling in, must needs mount and succeed into the Place of the Earth,
filling all the Space, which that Orb had abandoned before, so that the Earth
must for ever lie soust in it is own Pickel, impossible to be retrived again
into dry-Land, unless by a Miracle as great as any that he would avoid, that
is, God Almighty's anihilating all the Water, diminishing the Extent and
Compass of the Globe, and altering the whole Frame of Nature. How deep the
Earth would then be under Water, it is not easy to be determined; since as the
Learned Dr. Beaumont justly complains, the Author has assigned no proportion to
his several Orbs; but if the Proportion marked in his Scheme be exactly
measured with relation to the Globe of this our World, the Waters then over the
Earth must have been of a prodigious Depth.

For in measuring the Scheme he gives us of the Globe, we find that the Orb and
upper Crust of the Earth takes up one fifth Part of the Semidiameter of the
whole, so that the Semidiameter of the World being Three Thousand Five Hundred
Miles, the fifth Part of that which is Seven Hundred Miles, and makes the
Thickness of that Superior Orb falling into the Water underneath, the Water
mounting into the Place of it, must needs fill all that Space of the Globe,
which the Earth had forsaken. But being though much of the same Dimension as to
it is Depth and Thickness, an inferior Orb rising and making a larger Circle, it
would not indeed be of the same Depth, when Circumferential, as when it was
Intermedial, yet I think I may venture to say, without being too exact in
computation, it would still have been near five hundred Miles in Depth, and
that is Water enough, you will say, to bob for Griggs in. But if we take an
estimate of the same Depth from his Doctrine, we shall find a vast odds and
disproportion in the Matter. As thus, In the Sacred Theory of the Earth, the
Author Affirms the Ocean where it is deepest not to exceed two Miles in Depth,
so that it being by him confessed, that the Sea lies now in a shelving Bed,
that obliquely descends from the sides to the middle, where it makes a kind of
obtuse Angle at the bottom, were the sides Perpendicular, and the Water every
where equally deep, then this Depth of Sea must be lessened by one half, and
consequently be but one Mile in Depth. And then again, did this encompass the
whole inferior Orb of Earth, as it did when it was the Abyss before the
Disruption, according to his Hypothesis, whereas now it does but Encompass one
half of it, it must suffer the Diminution of another half of the Depth, and so
the inferior Orb of Water, or the Abyss could not be above half a Mile Deep.
Which, if Extended Round the Exterior Surface of the Earth, must needs make but
a very thin ring of Water. Now, though the Disproportion of seven hundred Miles,
(the Depth of the Abyss according to his Scheme) to one half Mile, be somewhat
odd and strange, yet it seems almost as strange, that the Author should make
the Mountains so High, and at the same Time the Waters so shallow: When,
according to his Doctrine, the Height of the one depends upon the Depth of the
other: For Explanation sake, Let us consider in what Manner he produces Hills
and Mountains. He supposes then before the Disruption, that the Unequal Surface
of the Superior Orb of the Earth being Smooth, Uniform and Equal, was as High
as the Tops of the Highest Mountains now are, and that upon the Disruption, the
Parcels and Fragments of broken Earth sinking and falling down, left some Parts
remaining, which made the Tops of Mountains, the Highest whereof, are not above
six Miles High. Now let us grant, which indeed cannot nor ought not to be
granted to a Natural Philosopher, that upon the Disruption, when all the Parts
of the Superior Orb of the Earth were Loose and at Liberty; some Peake or other
should miraculously (for naturally it could not,) hover and hang suspended in
the Air, or float upon the Water till the falling Fragments should likewise
miraculously, or by Violence (since naturally they could not) deviate from the
Straight and Perpendicular Lines, which guided them toward the Center, and Edg
and Side inobliquely to make a Pedestal, or Support for the remaining Top of
the Mountain: Yet seeing the broken Parts of the Crust of Earth could fall no
lower, than the Depth of the Water, which was to receive them, could allow of,
and that being but half a Mile Deep, they could sink no lower, and consequently
the Top of the Mountain from which they fell, could be no more than half a Mile
in Height; and so we have the Mountains six Miles High, dwindled into Mole
Hills of half a Mile Height. But should we grant what he says, That the Tops of
the Highest Mountains are six Miles High, then the Waters of the Abyss into
which the Fragments fell, to suit with that Height, must needs be six Miles
Deep, and consequently by the rule of Proportion abovementioned the Sea in the
Deepest Place four and twenty Miles Deep, and the Seashore twenty four Miles
distant from the Bottom of the Abyss. Which would make it as High again as the
Earth was before it is Disruption.

Let us now consider a little from the Dimensions he gives to his Orbs, and the
Height and Depth of Mountains, Valleys and Sea, what the Extent and Dimension
of the World must be according to his Schemes and Doctrine. If we Measure then
his Schemes of the Globe, we shall find, that the two Superior Orbs of the
Earth and Water, make together two Fifths of the Semidiameter of the whole, and
as it has been necessarily inferred from his Doctrine, these two making but
half a Mile each, that is, both together one Mile, the other three Fifths can
amount to no more than to three half Miles, and altogether but to two Miles and
one Half, which being the Semidiameter of the Globe, the whole Diameter can
extend to no more than five Miles; and consequently the whole World, to no more
than fifteen Miles in Circumference. This is such a little Button of a World,
that were it to be cut out into Commons, it would hardly suffice, either as to
Quantity or Quality, to make competent Shares, for all the Pensioners in the
Charter House, if he Thought of them when he made it. But let us again take it
in the Largest Extent, that his Doctrine can stretch it to, and that is, the
Mountains being six Miles High, and consequently the Water (without which they
could not be so) six Miles Deep, then the two Orbs of Earth and Water, which
make two Fifths of the Semidiameter of the Globe, being twelve Miles in Depth,
the other three Fifths must be Eighteen Miles more, and so the Semidiameter
being in all thirty Miles, the whole Diameter must be Sixty, which makes the
Globe Nine-score Miles in Circuit. This indeed is a Size somewhat more
befitting an Orbis terrarum universus, and looks like a World of another Man's
making; though after all, if Reason can draw necessary Consequences from the
Premises of Scheme and Doctrine, both are the Workmanship of One and the same
Hand.

I can hardly believe a non cogitaram will pass among Critics, for a
satisfactory Excuse for so many Slips, Blunders, and Bevewes in a Matter of so
great Importance, and therefore it is like, the Author himself, on some good
Friend for him, may hit on some expedient and new Way to save Bacon; and
probably, by turning the Sacred Theory into a Romance, allege, that the Author
meant not the Round World, which God made for Man and his fellow Creatures to
dwell in, but a World of his own Creation, contrived to please Children of all
Sorts, and curry Favor with some new fangled. Patron, by such an Ingenious
Trial of Skill. If so, the Author might have conceived and brought forth as
many such Worlds, as he pleased, and given them to whom he had thought fit,
without the least Trouble and Molestation from any that I know of, had he let
Moses and the Holy Scripture alone: But since he has struck so bold a Blow at
the Credit and Authority of both these, and consequently of Religion and the
Rule of Faith and Manners; I think no Honest Man will deny, but that he has
given sufficient Provocation to all, and even the Weakest and Meanest of all,
who think themselves obliged to Defend the Religion they believe and profess by
giving a Reason of the Faith that is in them, to enter the Lists and make Head
against such a daring Aggressor, especially seeing the Provocation comes
hightned by this insulting Challenge usually made by the Friends and Favorers
of the New Doctrine, to such as seem to dislike it, and which I my self, among
many others, have met with, Viz. Why is it not Answered? Why don't you Answer
it then? As if they would stop Men's Mouths by daring them to Speak. In the mean
time, it must be acknowledged the Author was pretty Fortunate in his Choice,
when he presented his New made World, to a Good Natured, Peaceful and
Unaspiring Monarch: For had he made an Offer of it to that Grand Signior, who
would have had his Pioneers take shovels and throw the Isle of Britain into the
Sea; Or to such a World-Subduing King as Alexander, who straightened within the
narrow Limits of this spacious Continent, wept there were no more Worlds to be
Conquered; such a Monarch would have looked upon it as a Bomb, or Granado-Shell
fit to be flung out of a Mortar into the Moon, or some Neighboring World he
intended to conquer or destroy, rather than a spacious Field large enough to
bear the illustrious Trophies of his Victories, or to reward the faithful
Services of those many Heroes and Worthies that must have followed him in his
glorious Expeditions. And then the Author must have thought himself bountifully
and magnificently treated by such a Prince, if he had received from him a
little House or Habitation to be Master of, in his own World, as a Reward for
his industrious Labors. And the rather, that in all likelihood, his little
House would have lasted as long as his little World; nam super hanc petram
aedificata est domus sua; yet after all, to give every thing it is due, if we
view this new made World in all the several Lights, the Author has been pleased
to place it in, we shall find it, little as it is, abounding with Rarities, and
such to, as Nature can no where parallel: As for instance, amongst many more
that I could name, if we look on it through one end of the Aspective, the
Author presents to us, we may observe the Mountains that are Six Miles high,
not to be above Half a Mile in height; again, let us but shift our Ground, and
take the other end of the Glass, as he gives it us, we may find, that the Tops
of the Highest Mountains being Twelve Miles distant from the lowermost Orb of
Earth, or the bottom of the Abyss, are Six Miles higher than the Seashore and
Valleys. And lastly, if we take a glance of it on another side, we may
perceive, without straining of Optics, or forcing a Theory, that the Seashore
being Four and Twenty Miles distant from the bottom of the same Abyss, is
Twelve Miles higher than the tops of the highest Mountains. The Mountains Six
Miles higher than the Valleys; and then to make amends for that, the Valleys
Twelve Miles higher than the Mountains, is a Rowland for an Oliver indeed; and
such a hocus pocus piece of Legerdemain in Natural Philosophy, that he who is
able to unriddle it, and make such Inconsistences stand friendly together upon
a Level, might easily have helped some Young Lads out of the Mire, by answering
a drolling Question, that I have known put to puzzle them; viz. If I were under
you, and you under me, who would be uppermost; for the poor Lads had nothing to
say to the matter; but, if you can tell me who is undermost, I can tell you wh^
is uppermost.

An uncouth Subject, handled with as strange a confidence, may surprise a
little at first I confess; but why it should obtain a Vogue and Reputation in
the World or be thought to have Charms strong enough to attract the Esteem and
good Opinion of young Philosophers, I cannot conceive; since I dare confidently
affirm, it can make no fit Pattern for their Imitation, as to a just and
consequential way of Reasoning, and much less a proper and sure Guide to lead
their unexperienced steps through the secret and difficult Paths of Natural
Philosophy, into the true knowledge of God, of themselves, and of their own
Happiness.

The Author that could rush into, and break through, such a Thicket of Thorns
and Briars, and neither be ruffled, scratched nor torn, must needs be a
dextrous and well fenced Man; for my own part, I did but just enter into the
Skirts and Purlieu of the Forest, when I found my self quickly caught, and so
closely beset and hampered with Implication and Contradiction, that I had much
ado to find Words, and proper Expression, to disintangle my self from Nonsense.

An indeed to reckon up all the Absurdities which may be plainly inferred from
this silly Hypothesis, would require a large Volume, and is too much to be
crowded into the narrow Compass of a Specimen, to which I am limited; I shall
leave it then to others, who may have better Advantages and Opportunities to
trace them, and proceed to see, how he mends the Matter with an Egg.

This Learned Author certainly must be at great variance with Moses, for rather
then not to Contradict him, and give him the Lie in Matters of the highest
Importance, He contradicts himself, his own Principles, and Concessions, and
the Principles of Nature, Reason and Religion. For having given us, in his Book
of the Theory of the Earth, a Scheme of the World entirely Round, ^^^ing
convinced by the Evident Principles of Nature, That it must be so, He
afterward in the same Book Represents it to us as Oval; making the same thing,
at the same time to be, and yet not to be, and so verifying a Contradiction in
all it is Conditions of ad idem, secundum idem and eodem tempore, I shall not
here repeat what I have said before, to prove the Orbicular Figure of the
World, nor spend much Time in Confuting the Absurdities that necessarily follow
such Erroneous Doctrine; the Ingenious Dr. Beaumont having already successfully
labored in that Province, I shall only observe, that the Advantages that he
thinks he has gained from it, in finding out Paradise, are not able to
countervail the Prejudice it may do to Mankind, by overturning all Religion,
and so consequently setting them in a fair Way to Hell.

Instead of proving his Doctrine of an Egg-World by Natural Reason, which
indeed he could not do, He endeavors to Establish it, by the Authority of the
Ancients, who have compared the World to an Egg; and he had done well to have
told us, what kind of an Egg, whether a Hen-Egg, or a Goose-Egg, since it is
not the Figure alone that makes the Egg, nor are all Eggs of the same Figure,
or in which of the two Paradise was the most likely to have been found, though,
to say the truth on it, it may be found equally in either of them, as well as
where he has placed it under the North and South Pole; for having reckoned up
the various Opinions of Authors concerning Paradise, whether it was a
delightful Garden, a local Paradise, or a Paradisaical State of the whole
Earth: He gives it for the later, and so flatly contradicts Moses, who tells
us, that God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden. He cannot Excuse this by
saying, that Moses spoke Figuratively, which some Good and Learned Men have
thought, and with Reverence and Humility endeavored to Explain the Mystery,
since he himse^^ ^peaks Literally and in the same Sense, That he owns Moses to
have spoken, because in his comparing both together, he makes the Pleasures and
Advantages of Paradise, to consist in Terrestrial Felicities. Now when Moses
says, that Paradise was a delightful Garden Eastward in the World, and Dr.
Burnet, on the contrary, Affirms, that all the World East, West, South and
North, was a delightful Garden and Paradise; there can be no Figure in the
case, unless to tell a Lie be to make a Figure, but whether Moses might have
spoke Litteraly or Figuratively, the horrid and impious Consequences, which
attend our Authors Opinion, are still the same; for if there was no other
Paradise, but a Paradisaical State of the Earth, and that this continued till
the days of Noah, when the Flood happened by the Disruption of the Earth, which
quite altered the State and Figure of it; then it necessarily follows, that it
was Noah, and not Adam, who lost Paradise.

Now if Adam did not lose Paradise, no more did not he Sin; for the Punishment,
and the Sin being relata quae mutuo se ponunt and tollunt, if the one be False,
the other is so too; so that if Adam did not lose Paradise, which was the
Punishment, neither did he commit Original Sin which was the Cause of it.
Again, if Adam did not commit Original Sin, he did not forfeit the Primitive
Innocence and Integrity of his Nature, and seeing all the Essential Properties
of the Human Nature, whereof Innocence then was One, were by ordinary
Generation transmitted from the first Man to his Posterity, the Offspring of
Adam must have continued Innocent, and no Sin have been in the World. So that
there could have been no such thing, as that all Flesh had corrupted their
ways. No such thing, as the Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men, lay with them
and begat Giants, there could be no such thing as Nimrods and Mighty Hunters,
who usurped the Rights of others, and invaded the Possessions o^ ^^ir
Neighbors; or if that was done, it must be done (...) Righteous Men, and with
a Good-Conscience, a Doctrine, that cannot be much disliked by many of the
Saints of our Age. There could be then no necessity of a Preacher of
Righteousness, since all Men were innocent; and therefore if Noah would needs
be so Officious a Phanatic as to Preach without a Call, and disturb honest Men,
he was rightly served for his Pains, and lost Paradise for his Labor. Since
then the Religion of the greatest and most Civilized Part of the World depends
upon the Belief of Adam's Committing Sin, and therefore losing Paradise, and
that of Christians more particularly, upon the Belief of the Disobedience and
Transgression of the First Adam, and the perfect Obedience, and complete
Satisfaction of the Second, and all this be no more than Fiction and Fable, as
it needs must be, if the Doctrine of our Author be true: Then was Moses a mere
Gypsy, the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles Juglers and Deceivers; and, I
tremble to say it, the Son of God, Christ Jesus the Savior of the World an
Arrant Impostor; and thus the Author has brought his Eggs to a fair Market; for
here we have all Religion, Virtue and Morality pelted out of the World with one
rotten Egg thrown by a Left Handed Philosopher in Holy Orders.

These are some material Heads, which I think may be enlarged into a complete
Answer to the Theory of the Earth; though at the same time, something more may
be said in Answer to the Author; for Seria mixta jocis does do well; and if an
Author with so much Vanity and Ostentation insult the greatest Truth, and
batter the strongest Bulwarks with no better Ammunition than full blown
Bladders, besides, a serious Confutation of Reason and Argument, he ought to
have a little of the Jocose, and a Lash or Two of Raillery and Merriment.

It is a good while since I laid this Keel, with design thereupon to have built
an Ark that might have saved the Reputation of Mos^^ ^^d Holy Scripture, from
the Deluge of Vain and Atheistica^ ^^ilosophy. Materials I had ready, and
should have finishe^ ^^e Work before Dr. Beaumont's Answer came to light; but
being unable to go on with it my self, because of want of Sight and Friends;
notwithstanding all the Importunities I could use, refusing to assist me with
an Amanuensis, as thinking that Charge too great a Venture to be committed to
the Care and Management of a blind Undertaker, from whose Labors they could
expect no great Success, I have been forced to desist, and at length, to
procure a Friend to write for me this short Specimen for their Satisfaction. So
true it is, that Contempt is the Deformed Shadow that constantly attends an
Ill-shap'd Fortune.

Magnum Paupertas Opprobrium, Iubet
Quicquid and facere and pati.
The Scriptures tell us, Of a Poor Man that by his Counsel once saved a City,
but that no Body thanked this Poor Man for it: If he had lived and done the
same in this Age, it is odds, but he had met with the same Entertainment. Holy
David in (...) ^^^tress, became the Byword of Fools, and the Song of the
Drunkard; and no wonder, since a far greater than David, our Savior found the
like Usage, and complains of it. No Man then that would follow him, and bear
his Cross, ought to murmur and repine.

If therefore any other more Skilful and Fortunate Artist than my self, as
there are a great many, shall with the Help of these Materials, rear the
Fabric, and finish the Work. I intended to have done, I shall not envy, but
applaud, his good Success; only I think it but reasonable, That the poor
Labourer, who has lugg'd in the Materials, should be thought worthy of his
Hire: And that if he have not the Praise of having done the Work, he ought, at
least, to have the Acknowledgment that it was not done without him.

FINIS.

