TO THE POPE, And All His Cardinals, Bishops, Jesuits, Monks, and Friars, with
all the rest of his People;

Who are Reprobates concerning the Faith of Christ, Gospel Order, and true
Religion: And also the Papists proved to be a Seditious Sect.

BEING Something in Answer to Aeneas Match. Gilmury, and Mauritius Bern; who
call themselves Students of Art.

J. L. J. S.

Evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived,

2 Timothy 3.13. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these resist the
Truth, Men of corrupt Minds, Reprobates concerning the Faith,

2 Timothy 3.8. God shall send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a
Lie, that they all might be damned, who believe not the Truth, but had pleasure
in Unrighteousness,

2 These. 2.11, 12. Printed in the Year, 1671.

To the POPE, and all his Cardinals, Bishops, Jesuits, Monks and Friars, with
all the rest of his People.
I Have received a Paper, subscribed by Aeneas M. Gillmury and Mauritius Bern,
who call themselves Students of Arts, and both Professors of the Apostolical,
and Roman Catholic Church; which is a pretended Answer to John Stubbs, and
James Lancaster, their Quaeries and Challenges, they sent to the Papists, and
the Pope, and his Cardinals and Jesuits, etc.

But all people may see that this is not an Answer, but instead of answering,
they beg the Question; and fall a railing, and sometimes Daub and Flatter,
thinking by their daubing and flattering to put out the Eyes of their simple
deluded people. And these two Papists seem to be much grieved, because our
Challenge is directed to the Pope, and his Cardinals, and Jesuits: They find
fault with our Long-windedness, or sounding a Trumpet as a Horn; which well we
may do, to alarm the Pope, his Jesuits, and Cardinals: For we must tell them,
that we have the Breath of the Almighty (which will reach to Rome) by which we
come to be living Souls.

And did not the Jesuits and Priests say in Ireland, that they had no License
from the Pope to answer us; and now we have alarmed the Pope, and Cardinals,
and Friars, and Jesuits; it is well that he does confess this is
Long-windedness, over their muddy breath.

And now they tell us, that they can answer at Home, and that we need not send
to the Pope; but no Answer to our Challenge, as the Reader of our Challenge and
this Paper, may see that their Mouths are stopped, and that they cannot maintain
their own corrupt Principle, nor seditious Sect.

And as for your saying, that you are both Professors of the Roman-Catholique
Church, this is false; for the Roman-Catholique Church, as it was in the
Apostles days, you are degenerated from, and are come to be a Seditious Sect,
and do spread your Heretical Opinions from your Heresies, which you have at
Rome; and are a Schism and Schismatical, rent from the Catholic Church of
Rome, as it was in the Apostles Days (for Catholic we do understand is
Universal) and are erred from that Universal Power, and Faith, and Gospel, and
Spirit, that the Apostles were in, you are erred from; as easy is to be proved.

1st, You the Church of Rome are a Seditious Sect, with all her company; and
you are found in Herod, a Persecutor; you are found in Nebuchadnezar, a Burner,
by your Fires; you are found in Judas, with your Swords and Staves against the
Just; you are found in Cain, with your Envy against the second Birth Abel; you
are found in Ishmael, Scoffing at Isaac; you are found to be the Beast and the
Whore drinking of the Blood of the Saints, that receive not your Mark; So
Killing, Burning, Hanging, Racking, Torturing, and Imprisoning; this has been
the work of the Church of Rome, who is a Seditious Sect, who are the Traitors,
Heady, High-minded, Self-willed, Lovers of Pleasures more then Lovers of God:
For look upon your proud Prelates, Cardinals, Jesuits, Pope, with all his
gorgious Robes, these are the Wicked Arts, which you have invented, and are
Masters of: So its clear, that all these Works be the Works of the flesh, and
of the Devil, that bloody wicked Persecutor, and not of the Birth born of the
Spirit.

2dly, So I say, Here it is clear you are a Seditious Sect, erred from the Faith
that works by Love; for if you were in that Catholic Faith, which belongs to
the Catholic Church, which is universal, you would not tell People of a
Purgatory when they are dead, for which you have no Scripture; we Challenge you
to bring a Scripture for it, out of your own Bibles, or Protestants either. And
so it is clear here by the second Proof, you are erred from the Faith that
works by Love, that purifies the heart, that gives Victory and Access to God,
by which Faith men please God, which is the Faith of Gods Elect; from this
Faith, which is Catholic, from which the Church of Rome, with his Company are
erred, and are found in the Enmity, Madness, Folly, and Persecution, who are
Synagogues of Satan, that Murderer, whose works ye have done, and are void of
the Faith that works by love, and purifies the heart; therefore you must have a
Purgatery as you say.

3dly, You are a Seditious Sect; for you have transgressed the Command of
Christ Jesus, who says, Love one another, Love Enemies; and if any go from
you, you will hate them, you will kill them; and if others will not join to
you, you will burn them and destroy them; this is the work of a seditious Sect,
and Hammon like, that informed against the Jews, that did not follow the
National way; and like those that informed against Daniel: And so it is clear
that you are a seditious Sect, erred from the Command of Christ Jesus, and cast
it behind your Backs.

4thly, You are a Company of Liars, and a Seditious Sect; for how can you love
God, whom you never see, and hate your Brethren, whom you see daily?

5thly, You are in the death of old Adam, and in the power of death the
Serpent, who love not your Brother; he that hates his Brother abides in Death.

6thly, You are a Seditious Sect; for you have persecuted people about Meats,
Drinks, Cloths, and outward Crosses, your Crucifixes, your Bread, and Wine, and
Holy Days, your eating of Flesh, and Fish, and Marriages, which the Kingdom of
God stands not in; not Meats, nor Drinks, nor Days; but in Righteousness, in
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and so out of the Power of God, our of this
Righteousness, are you all a sedititiou^ Sect, and are found in those things
the Kingdom of God stands not in, and Persecuting and Murdering such as will
not observe your wills: like to the Beast spoken of in the Revelation, that
with his Paw would pluck all under him; and like the Dragon, his Wrath is found
in you against the true Woman, the Church; and they that have followed your
Worship, have followed the Dragons worship, and the Beast, and have not
followed Christ Jesus, nor the true Cath lique Church.

7thly, You are a Seditious Sect, that teach the Doctrine of Devils forbidding
Meats, and to Marry, 1 Timothy 4. which the Spirit did say expressly should come in
the last times; who speak Lies in Hypocrisy, having you Consciences seared, as
with a hot-Iron, that you a^e hardened in your Wickedness, Seducing Spirits,
Doctrine of Devils: For Moses was a Priest, and Aaron was a Priest, and were
Married; and the Prophets and Apostles had Wives; and Marriage was Go^s
Ordinance; and Christ established it in the new Covenant, wherein he says,
Whom God joins together let no man put assunder: So here it is clear, Christ
the High Priest, made higher then the Heavens, confirms Gods Work, which is
Marriage, being his joining; and therefore do not you give liberty to
Brothel-Houses, and Baudy-Houses, and Uncleanness? And then you have need of a
Purgatory.

8thly; You are a Seditious Sect; for you have erred from the Cross of Christ,
which is the Power of God, and therefore have you set up Wooden Crosses, and
Stone, and Brass, and Silver, and Gold: And how many Hundred Years after Christ
were those outward Crosses invented? And where did ever Paul, or Peter, or any
of the Apostles set up a Wooden Cross? And speak if you dare: Let us see your
Antiquity: And how many Hundred Years after Christ, got up that Seditious Sect,
forbidding Priests to Marry, and setting up places to put Women in, and vowed
them, and swore them to Chastity? And how many Hundred Years after Christ was
it before they made a God, and a Christ, of Bread and Wine? Come out of your
Holes and Dens, and answer us in the Light, if you dare? And try your God and
your Christ, that you have made of Bread and Wine: See if you will be as Bold
as Baals Priests; for they tried their god before the Prophet: Come, let us see
what this seditious Sect can do with all their Arts; Can you make him Speak? Is
he a Living God, that will not be found Asleep? And will not your Gods grow
Corrupt, and Moldy? And is it not a Work of man's hands, which you call people
to Worship? Yea, your Fists of Wickedness, and Bloody Hands, which have been
embrued and washed in the Blood of the Innocent; with those hands have you not
made your God, and Christ, of your Bread and Wine? And therefore I say, come
out and try them, and we will have a Bottle of Wine, and a Loaf of Bread, and
it shall be cut in two pieces, and the Wine in two Basins; and let the Pope,
and his Cardinals, and Friars, and Munks, with all their Bloody Fists make a
God of part of the Wine, and part of the Bread, and when they have done, we
will set them in a Cellar with part of the Wine and part of the Bread, which is
not consecrated, and we shall try quickly whether their God will not Mould, and
their Christ will not Dye, that is consecrated; and their consecrated Wine grow
sower and dye: Come, shuffle us not off; for we will have them locked up in a
Cellar with six or seven Locks, and have a Watch on our side, and another on
yours, and try if your God and your Christ, that is made of Bread and Wine do
not Corrupt, and do not grow Moldy; and your Wine does not grow Sower and Dye;
then we will all turn to you, and say, that you have made a God and Christ by
your Art; and then if your God and your Christ, you have made of your Bread and
Wine* do grow Moldy, and the Wine Dye and Sower; your Bread Moldy that you
have consecrated, you shall all turn to us, and acknowledge your selves to be a
seditious Sect, that have been Deceivers of the people this thousand Years. We
do challenge you, and dare you, the Pope, and his Cardinals, and Jesuits, to
come forth, and try, and bring your God out; all you God-Makers, and
Christ-Makers of the Popes Crew and Company, the Lord calls for you to come out
of your Holts, who have been a company of Blood-thirsty men, who have mingled
your invented and idolatrous Sacrifices with the Blood of the Innocent, Pilate
like; a seditious Sect, erred from the words of God, and from Christ Jesus the
Head of the Church; and therefore you have invented a Head, a counterfeit Head
of your own making, which is not a Catholic Head, but a Seditious Head, full
of Sedition, which fills the Body to the brim; you are full of Hypocrisy to
the very brim; and full of Envy and Blood-thirstiness to the brim; and full of
Murder to the very brim; your Actions, your Doings, your Works, your Fruits
speak it, and declare it to all Nations about you. But Christ Jesus, he is the
Head, the Cathelique Head, the Universal Head; the Catholic Church is Living
Members made, and of Living Stones a spiritual Household sanctified by him, and
washed, and purged, and cleansed by the Living Head, Christ Jesus, who is the
same to day, yesterday, and forever.

9thly, You are a Seditious Sect; as erred from the Power, from the Spirit of
the Apostles, and Christ Jesus; and from the Righteousness, the fine Linen,
which is the Righteousness, of the Saints, and of Christ Jesus; and therefore
you have set up your Surplices, and your white Coats, who have lost your fine
Linen, which is the Righteousness of Christ Jesus, and are more like Actors of
Stage Plays, and M^un^ebancks, (then Preachers of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ ^n all your Fools-Coats, and the Pope and his Cardinals Foolscaps, Keys,
and Crowns: Where do you read in the Scripture, or new Testament, of Master
Paul, or Mr. Peter, or Mr. Timothy, or Mr. Titus, or Mr. Matthew, or Luke, etc.
or my Lord Timothy, or my Lord Titus, or Peter, or my Lord Bishops; we
challenge you to make this good out of your own Scripture; let us see some
proof for your Ambition, and Pride, who are puffed up with Titles, and take the
Titles that belong to God Almighty to your selves, contrary to Elihu, who said,
If I give flattering Titles to men my Maker would not regard me; and contrary
to Christ Jesus, and in despite of Christ Jesus, who says, You have one
Master, and you are his Brethren. It is very clear that you are a Seditious
Sect and Schism, and are rent from the Body and the Head both; and therefore
you are a Seditious Body: It is you which make so many heads and christ's, and
then say, Lo christ is here, and lo he is there; and your Seditious people run
to christ-Makers, and god-Makers, or your idol-Makers. Indeed the Heathen
Priests made gods, which were no Gods; and therefore in Spain, and France, and
Rome, and Ireland, and Portugal, and other places, how many gods have you. And
how many christ's have you made in all these parts, and christ-makers? And then
he is here, and there, Lo here, and Lo there, Antichrist against Christ: We
know that the Devil will rage at this: And how much Blood have you shed (number
up the Persons) because they will not eat your gods, and your christ's, that you
have made, and Worship it? And is not this worse then the Heathen? Did the
Heathen eat their gods when they had made them? So it is clear, that you are
erred from the Catholic Cross, which is the Power of God; from the Catholic
Faith, that works by Love; from the Catholic Head, Christ Jesus: from the
Catholic Church, the Body of Christ Jesus; and cannot maintain your
rudiments, nor your christ that you have made, to the Apostles days; for did
they set up any such thing? Your doctrine concerning Purgatory, Meats, Drinks,
Holy Days, Lent, nor your Cloths; nor your Bell Book and Candle; nor your
Popes Head of the Church; none of these things can you maintain; nor your
Persecuting about Religion, nor your Mass-mongrey-Stuff, nor your several
Orders, nor your Triple-Crowns, nor your Nunneries, nor your Crucifixes, nor
your forbidding to Marry, not your Schools of Arts to make Ministers; none of
all these things can you make good, that they were acted or practiced by the
Apostles, or that they did persecute any people about outward things.

10thly, You are a Seditious Sect, and have left the Commands of Christ Jesus,
who says, Freely you have received, and Freely give, therefore you who have
set up both Easter-Reckonings, and Midsummer-Dues, and Tithes, are a Sect that
serve your selves, and not Christ Jesus; that mind Earthly things, and are
Enemies to the Cross of Christ; and are gone in the way of Cain, to Envy;
Gainsaying, Carah, against the true Church, and its practice, and run after the
Error of Balaam for Gifts and Rewards, the Wages of Unrighteousness,
Unrighteous Wages; and like to Flimas the Sorcerer; who seek to turn People
from the Catholic Faith, that works by Love, whose Eyes are blind, groping up
and down in your Rudiments, and among your Idols, and Inventions of your
Forefathers, who erred from the true Church: And as for the Pelagian-Heresie,
look at home, you Papists: and as for the Arians, you may look at home; for we
are none of that spirit: Whereas thou give us a Catalogue of some that did
succeed Peter at Rome, or Paul; but thou do not tell us of Pope Jone, and
make a Catalogue of her that had a Bastard; nor thou do not tell us of the
Bishop of Rome, whom thou call Pope, that sacrificed to the Heathen gods,
and denied Christ: What will you say that these were Rebellious Actions? And
thou do not tell us of Boniface the third, set up by Phocas, that murdered
his Master Mauritius about six hundred years after Christ, then began your
first general Pope: and you may say, if you should do so, Satan would be
divided against Satan, and so could not stand. You are far from giving freely,
who have set up so many Glebe-land, and Tithes, and I aster-reckonings, and fat
Parsonages, that you might live in the Glory of the World, not like a suffering
Seed, but that you are Enemies to the suffering Seed.

11thly, You are a Seditious Sect, you have cast the Royal Law of God behind
your backs, which teaches to do unto others as you would others should do unto
you; for would you have others to Burn you, to Hang you, to Imprison you,
because that you do not conform to their Way or Religion: Would you have the
Turks, and Tartars, and Protestants, and Jews, to Rack and Torture, and make
Inquisitians for you, and Burn you, and Hang you, because that you do not
conform to their Religion, Blind the Royal Law of God, To do to others as you
would have them to do unto you: Speak plainly if you can or date; or is Ishmael
that S^^ff^r, Cain the first Persecutor of his Brother, Nebuchadnezar, and
Hammon, and the Murdering Jews and the Devil, the Dragon, become Christians?
Are not you sound in this nature to the brim? And was this divine? Cain was a
mighty man in Arts, as high as you; and so was Nimrod in his Building, but God
confounded him, and his Works, and so he will do yours; it is all under the
Chain together, with the Workmen: And are not you more like to the proud
Pharisees, with their long Robes, that love to be called of men Master, and the
Gentiles Gracious Lords, who loved the Praise of men, and Honor one of
another; a Mark of no Believer: Is not this Ti^le, and these things, forbidden
by Christ Jesus? See John 5. But I must tell you, in your Catalogue you say
that many did succeed Peter: Where do you read, that in all his time he was
called Gracious Lord, or Pope; or that Timothy, or Titus, or any other, that he
was set up above another, by the Apostles: Did not Paul reprove Peter for some
things: This makes nothing for the Pope (the Catalogue you have brought)
neither does it suit the matter; for your whole Church, as you call it,
together with your Head the Pope, is judged by Christ, and the Apostles, and
the primitive Church; and therefore because that you have lost the Key of
David, and Tongue of the Learned, the Pope must have the outward Key, and you
must have the Tongues that begin at Babel, which your Brother Pilate set on the
top of Christ when he Crucified him; and therefore must studdy Arts, and so
Tubal Cain; and this proves you a Seditious Sect, and have lost the Crown of
Life, and therefore he must set up 3. Crowns on his head, a Triple-crown; this
becomes the old Fool, that is erred from the Spirit that makes wise, and gives
understanding he is far short of them that said, An outward Crown did not
become a Preacher of the Gospel: Let him look the History, and see if he can
sind such a one in the Church History, before the Pope was: But his Head must
be beyond Nebuchadnezars Head of Gold; for he sets a Tripple-crown upon h^s
bead: But there is a Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, that will
dash his Head of Gold to pieces, with his Crown. So it is not the handy works
of men's hands, make them never so strong, that will stand before this Stone:
Glory to God in the highest forever. And this Stone will become a great
Mountain, and fill the whole Earth; it is increasing, and in vain do the
Pot-shreds of the Earth, and Briars, and Thorns, set themselves in Battel-array
against it; for his Ensign and Flag of Defiance against all Idolatry, with
their Idols, is hell forth: and his Truth spreads, and his Light shines, by
which they all see the Foundation, and Rock of Ages: And this Stone is fallen
upon your Head and Body, and will grind you to Powder; for when your Head is
dead, you make another with a great deal of quarrel and strife, and many times
Blood is shed, that some of your Members are killed about making of a head,
when the body makes him like to frantic men that have lost their Brains: But
for your Racks, and Fires, and Fagots, your rude Rabble would never be kept in
order; for that noble Spirit and noble Mind of Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man,
the second Adam, that rebuked his Disciples, that would have had Fire to come
down from Heaven to consume them, as the Prophets did, that would not receive
them; and Christ told them, that they knew not what spirit they were of, that
would have had men's lives taken away, and destroy them; and this was by way of
Prayer, Shall we Pray that Fire come down, etc. Now if they did not know what
spirit they were of the Disciples of Christ Jesus, who would have Fire to come
down to consume the People, they would not do it by Inquisitians, and outward
Burnings, by Stacks of Faggots, nor Hang, ing of them, as you have done:
Therefore have you known what spirit you are of? Have you known your own
spirits, either Pope, or Cardinal, or Friars, etc. that have burned, and
racked, and put to Death so many Thousands since the Apostles days, since you
got up with your counterfeit Church and Heads. And so you that do not know what
spirit you are of your selves, do you think that any that know God or Christ
will trust their bodies, or their souls, or spirits in your hands, that do not
know what spirit you are of your selves? Then they may say they have lost their
Reason, and Understanding, like your selves: But Christ's Prophecy is come
upon you, and John's Revelation; and the Apostles, That the Man of sin and Son
of perdition is exalted above all that is called God in you; and so there might
be a ceparting away from Truth, and then the man of sin should be revealed and
there must be a falling away; and so he is revealed now, These. 2.2, but the
Lord will consume him with the Breath of his Mouth, and destroy him with the
Brightness of his coming, that Satan, that has been working in you, all those
lying Signs and Wonders, with the deceivableness of Unrighteousness, in you
that Perish, because you receive not the Love of the Truth, that you might be
saved: For this cause God has sent strong Delusions among you, that you should
believe a Lie, that they might be damned who believe not the Truth, but have
had pleasure in all your unrighteous doings, and ^ctions and bloodthirstiness:
But we are bound to give God Thanks always through Jesus Christ who has called
us by his Gospel to obtain the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Head
of our Church: But It Is clear you are of them that have smitten your
Fellow Servants, and have eaten and drunken with the Drunkards: for what must
you look for? but to be cut assunder, and appointed your Portion with
Hypocrites, where is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 24. And you have made
salfe christ's, and showed your Signs and Wonders, if it were possible, to
deceive the very Elect; but it is not possible; the Elect was before the World
was: And so you are the unprofitable Servants, that have hid your Tallent (the
fruit of which is Love) under your earthly Traditions, your earthly Idols and
Rudiments, your own Inventions, and Works of your own hands: and the fear you
teach your people, is by your own precepts, which you never had from God,
Christ, nor his Apostles; and instead of Clothing the Naked, and Feeding the
Hungry, and Receiving Strangers, and Visiting the Sick, you have made Naked,
you have made Sick, you have made Strangers; and in as much as you have done it
to these true Christians, you have done it to Christ the Head: And why? Because
they will not own your Idolatrous Ways and Idols, your counterfeit Head, your
counterfeit Church; and instead of Visiting in Prison, you have cast into
Prison, and there let them Perish: Hear the Sentence of the Head of the Church
for all your evil doings and works, Depart from me; for you must go into
everlasting Punishment; yea, depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Then, what have you got here by all your
Merits, by all your Works, your tinckling Cymbals, your founding Brass, who
have not had love? Have you given your Goods to the Poor? Could you give your
Bodies to be Burned? Have you Tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and full of
Envy and Blood-thirstiness, and void of Love? A seditious Sect, degenerated:
Have you Faith? It Is but a dead one, one that does not work by Love; for Love
is the fulfilling of the Law: Is not the Birth of the Flesh sound amongst you,
of Hagar, that persecutes him that is born of the Spirit, the Free-womans
Children: And so are not you the dishonorable Birth, that must be cast out?
And are not the works of the Flesh manifest amongst you, as, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife Sedition, Heresy, Envy, Murder,
Drunkenness, Revilling, and such like? Look upon your church, are not all these
found? Look over Ireland on your Holy Days; what Drunkeness; I never saw so
many people drunk, as I do of your people, on that you call Peter's-day; but
the fruits of the spirit it is Love, Joy, Peace, Gentleness, Patience,
Meekness, Goodness, Long suffering, Faith, Temperance; but these are wanting
among you, and the other Fruits plentifully may be gathered of your corrupt
Trees, that cannot bring forth good Fruit; who are Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, without the Hope that purisies as he is pure; therefore you must have
a Purgatory when you are dead: and so are like a Company of Heathen Priests,
raging for your Images, and your Idols, and your godds, you have made of Bread
and Wine, and christ's; and are ignorant of them that preach the true Doctrine
of the Apostles, who preached the Word in the Heart and Mouth; and Christ was
in people, except they were Reprobates, though they have had Bread and Wine:
The Apostles tell people no where that Bread and Wine was Christ, after they
had blessed it; the Apostle tells them of an Anointing within them, that should
teach them, and as it does teach them, they should continue in the Son and in
the Father, and as he was, so were they in the present evil World: So they need
not have a Purgatory, but you are all in your Purgatories already, Head and
Tail, and Body, already separated from God, and the true Church, and Head; And
so as Christ said, False Prophets should come, Mat. 7.2., and Antichrists; and
bid the Disciples not to go after them, for they should be inwardly ravening
Wolves, having Sheeps-Clothing: And so its clear that you have the
Sheeps-clothing, that you are inwardly ravening Wolves, that have worried so
many Sheep and Lambs; but you have preyed upon them, and made War with the
Remnant of the Seed of the Woman, and have drunk the Blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus So as Christ said they should come, and John said they were
come, and it was the last time then, and they went forth into the World, and
the World went after them; and so you were the Fore-men of the World, that led
into Error, as you may read in John, and Mat. 7.21. A dread Timothy, where the
spirit speaks expressly in the latter days of forbidding Marriage, and of
(...), the doctrine of Devils: And read Jude, such as should go in Cain's way,
and Balaam's way, and Corah's way, gainsaying the Gospel, persecuting for Gifts
and Rewards; and here your Fruits are clearly seen, the Son of Righteousness
shines over your heads amongst his People; and so here you went from the
Apostles Head, Christ; if you had been of them, no doubt but you would have
continued with them; Christ saw you inwardly ravening from the Spirit of God,
from the Spirit of Truth, the Word of God in the Heart; from the true Faith,
that works by Love; from the true Doctrine, and so are up to the very brim in
false doctrine, and Idols, and Images of your own making, and Inventions; and
so you may see in the Revelation, how the Beasts got up; the first out of the
Sea, the second out of the Earth; and how the Dragon gave his Power to the
Beast, and how his Worship was set up; and how the Whore the false Church got
up, and there are the Names of the Beast, which we leave you to interpret; and
how long the Beast must be worshipped: and how long the true Church was to be
in the Wilderness, and to be fed of God, and the Man-Child taken up to God, and
he should be brought forth again, and to rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron;
and the Bride should come forth again, and the Marriage of the Lamb should be
known again, and the Lamb and the Saints should have the Victory: So read your
Antiquity, and how that all that would not receive the Beast's Mark, and drink
the Whores Cup; the false-church she drunk the Blood of the Saints: What, has
she been as a Queen, and has she seen no sorrow? But now is she losing her
Children; and the Scripture is fulfilling, Glory be to the Lord God forever.
But you shall cry, Alas, Alas, What have we had a Golden Cup, that is full of
Abomination? What have your Kings drunk it, and do some begin to hate her? Oh!
You must drink the Cup of the fierceness of the Wrath of God Almighty, before
this cup of Abomination be purged out of you: The Angels begin to sound their
Trumpets; and the Everlasting Gospel is preached a^ain, and that makes you to
roar; it sounds to Rome, and to the Turks, and to the Maguls, the Jews, and
Gentiles: the Everlasting Power of God, before the Devil was, will awaken you:
The Gospel-Bell begins to Ring, it is beyond Aaron's Bells; Christ, the
High Priest, is entering into his Temple. For, had you been of the Apostles, no
doubt but you would have continued with them; for your doctrine is forbid by
Christ and his Apostles; for Christ bid, F^ed my Lambs. And you Wolves worry
them, and have got the Sheep. Clothing in three or four Languages, you have
learned naturally; and they that had the gift of Tongues were but tinckling
Cymbals and sounding Brass, who had not love; and therefore all your Sounds, it
has been but in comparison the sound of Brass, and your tinckling but as
Cymbals, and your own Inventions: And so your head is false, not being found of
that Catholic Faith, that works by Love: And the Word of the Lord God is
kindling, that Fire that will burn the Whores Flesh, and will take her,
together with the Beast, and the Dragon, and cast her and them alive into the
Lake of Fire.

What, you to profess Christ Jesus in words, and Murder and Persecute the true
Christians to death! What is this but Ishmael, and Cain, and Sodom, and Egypt,
and the Jews, and the Heathens spirit and nature; and the Whore, and the Beast,
and the Dragon, and the Devil, and false Prophets, and false Apostles, and
Antichrist against the true Apostle and Christ Jesus, who says, Love Enemies,
Love one another.

Oh Seditious Sect! For when the second Beast rose out of the Earth, then all
your earthly Idols were established, earthly Inventions, earthly Images; and
then got your Whore on the top of the Beast, your false Church, Mystery
Babylon, arrayed in Purple and Scarlet, decked with Gold and Precious-Stones,
and Pearls; do you see how she is decked? a Golden Cup in her hand, full of
Abomination, of Filthiness, of Fornication; and upon her head written, Mystery
Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots: Yea, of all the Harlots from God,
from Christ, from the Apostles, from the Spirit, from the Faith, from the
Truth, from the Power of God, the Cross of Christ, from the Righteousness, and
from Christ the true Head, and from the true Church: And this Whore thus
decked, has drunk the Blood of the Saints, and Jesus his Martyrs: Who cannot
but wonder to see such a Monster! And from whence came he, that this Whore,
this Woman, this false Church sits upon, but from the Bottomless-pit; and
thither must they return again, with his Horns.

And now is the Cry is, Come out of her my People; signifying that God has a
People to come out there, lest they be Partakers of her Plagues, This is the
day that the Lord is calling, Come out of her my People; we have heard his
Voice, and can rejoice over her; for God will be avenged on her, and she shall
be cast down like a mighty Millstone, read Rev. 17. For mark, Here is the
Devil, the Dragon, and the Whore, and the false Prophet as Companions, that
came out of the Beast like Froges. These go altogether; to wit, the Beast, and
the Dragon, and the Whore on the top of the Beast, the Dragons Power, and his
worship has been set up, and she is riding on the Devils power, killing and
murdering the Lord Jesus his Martyrs, and Prophets.

What! Has your Church lived deliciously, and been as a Queen, and no Widow?
Does she profess to be a Married Wife, and a Queen? She has made many of her
Merchants rich, and is not she become the Habitation of Devils, and Hold of
every foul spirit, and Cage of every hateful Bird? And has not the Beast had
two Horns, like a Lamb, and exercised the power of the first Beast; and all
that will not worship, and receive h^s Image, and drink the Whores Cup, must be
made war against, and their Blood drunk? The Son of Righteousness is risen,
that shines, that shows his Horns, his Marks, his Names, and what is written
upon the Whores Forehead: and so against them that have kept the Testimony of
Jesus (the Spirit of Prophecy) by which they have seen you, you have made War
against them, and against them that have kept the Commands of God, the Remnant
of her Seed, which is the Seed of the Woman, whom the Dragon was wrath withal,
and was fled into the Wilderness, there to be fed of God one thousand two
hundred sixty days; and this Dragon gave his power to your Beast, that the
Whore sits upon; and so by the Dragons power she rules: And out of this Beasts
power have your false Prophet gone crooking up and down the Nations, and
creeping under the Mountain like Froggs, the unclean spirits; and these spirits
are Devils, that came out of the Mouth of the Beast and false Prophet that
should work Miracles, and deceive the World. But a day of Famine will come, and
Plague and Death to this Life that you live in, and flaming Fire; for strong is
the Lord God that judges her, the great Whore, and false Church, her smoke is
seen, and we know that you will begin to know your tongues for Pain; for your
Kingdom is full of Darkness: For the Angel has Power over your Thrones, and
your Rivers will be dried up, which is muddy Water. For has not your City bin
divided into three parts, and the Turk got one part, and the Protestants
another? And all your noisome Smells begin to smell, who have the Beasts Mark in
your Foreheads, and have worshipped his Image, that have been out of the Image
of Christ; and so the Lord is True and Righteous in his Judgments; for he has
judged the great Whore, which has corrupted the Earth with her Forhication and
will avenge the blood of his Servants at your hands: she has corrupted the
Earth with her Idols, and Idolatries, and Inventions, and Fables; and so we are
come through the Light of Christ Jesus, above her, by which we see the Heavenly
Jerusalem, the true Spouse, the Lambs Wise, Christ the Head, the true Church,
and the new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; and your old Earth, which the
Devil compasses, wherein dwells Unrighteousness, filled with Idolatry and
Corruption, and filthiness of flesh and spirit, that which cumbers the Ground,
fruitless Trees that have born no Fruit to God.

The Gates of our City, Heavenly Jerusalem, are not shut neither by Night nor
Day; but any that come to the Light of Christ Jesus, they may enter through the
Light into our City, which is far above your Mystery Babylon, false City, false
Church, Whore, Dragon, false Prophet, which has been the Drinker of the Blood
of the Righteous; Persecutors and Murderers by the Devils power and authority,
which Christ, who is our Head comes to destroy, who was before the Devil was,
and will be when the Devil is gone; who was First and Last; the Beginning, and
End; the Top and Cornerstone, who is our Rock, which our House is built upon;
and our Foundation, upon which we are built: Glory to God in the Highest for
evermore. And now to something further.

Whereas you tell us a long Tale of Anaxagoras, a Philosopher; you have just
hit your own Condition, for it suits your present Condition, and it is a very
fit Comparison for you, who would make People believe you can make a godd and
christ, and make a head for your Body, the POPE; and so deceive people; as he
makes people believe, That the Snow was Black, and the Sun was a broad Plate of
Nettal: And so you are so perverse in Nature, though you are confuted, and
convinced in your Consciences, you will not be brought from your Error, as
before mentioned, and out of your Seditious and Erroneous ways; and so you
have gone about to confound Truth, but it is too hard for you; for the Devil is
out of it.

And as for your profane Impiety, you say we draw people to, that is your own
Condition, and Jewish Fables, and Heathens also, you may find enough of them at
home in your own Houses and Fields; nay worse then the Jews.

It seems you cry out, That we Disturb the Tranquillity of the Christian
Religion: Nay, it is your false Religion, which you have made, who are a
Seditious Sect, who are erred from the Pure Religion that is above, that keeps
from the Spots of the World, which is to visit the Fatherless, Widows, and
Strangers; and you instead of this cast into Prison, and let your Poor go
Begging up and down your Streets, and Fatherless, and Widows; as look into
France, and other Parts: And if you were in this Religion, which you, as a
Seditious Sect, are erred from, which would keep you from the Spots of the
World, which is pure from above, and undefiled before God, you would not tell
people of a Purgatory: And so the pure Religion we stand for, against all your
false Ones; and every one among us may Minister as they have received the
Grace, as good Stewards; and they may all Prophecy one by one: And God has
poured out his Spirit upon his Sons, and Daughters, and Handmaids, and
Young Men, and Old men, that every one has somewhat to offer to God; but this
is a Strange Paradox to your false Church and seditious Sect, that are erred
from the Apostles, who limit your Preaching to such as have got the Natural
tongues; and so, Nebuchadnezar like, whom you please you set up, and whom you
please you pull down: and whom you please you open their Mouths, and whom you
please you stop them; and they that would not Bow at the sound of your PIPE and
ORGAN, you cast into the Fire, Nebuchadnezar like: But this is a Strange
Paradox; you can make Ministers, as you can make a Christ and a Godd, one like
the other, out of Truth; an^ so, in so doing deny the true Ministers, and the
true Christ, and God, who is to be worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth,
which Christ set up above 1600 years since; and since you have forsaken Christ,
that is worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth, you compel others; do not
you so? who is the same to day, yesterday, and forever. But from this
Infallible Worship, that Christ s^t up in the Spirit and in the Truth (which
the Devil is out of) are you erred from the Spirit and Truth, and become a
Seditious Sect, an Erroneous and Schismatical Sect and Persecuting the true
Worshippers of the living God in Spirit and Truth, which Truth and Spirit is
within, by which Spirit the God of Truth is known. It seems John Stubbs, and
James Lancaster, have sorely angered that Seditious Sect of Rome.

And whereas thou tellest us of Phanatick Assertions, which we are clear of;
but thou may look at home for that, and take in thy old fathers Puddles of
Errors and Blasphemies, which we deny: And as for Phanatick, is there a People
more like them in the World then you, in Rage, and Fury, and Madness against
the Righteous, for your Godd you have made, and your Images, and Idols, and
Fables? And have you not tewed your selves about them, as much as ever Tubal
did about the godds they made? For the Spirit of God is Gentle and Meek, and so
your Phanatick Humors have sufficienly spoken forth themselves to the Nations.

And whereas thou speak, That we have rightly tituled the Mother Church of
Rome the Old-Woman: Though thou have got some Glory in it, which seems to paint
thee off a little, but thou should have taken all our words, The Mother
Church of Rome, with all her Old-Womans Fables; this thou tearmest to be a
Scoff: But is it not a Scoff in thee to call us the Young Woman, for calling
that the Mother Church of Rome, the Old Woman, with her Fables, that Harlot who
has drunk the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; she has (...) honor
from God, nor her saints; and her Reward will be the Flames, and all that hold
her up, the Flames of Hell; read in the Revelation her Portion: And there is no
comparison between your Mystery Babylon, and the Old Woman of Rome, that you
cry up so; and Christ Jesus, the Savior, and the true Church; but it manifests
your Ignorance and Darkness, and as them that call Darkness Light, and Light
Darkness; Good Evil, and Evil Good: And your Mother Rome does begin to be out
of date, and is out of date with many that are come to Christ Jesus, their
Head, the true Church; and do lay her aside like an old Almanac.

Thou say, because we call her the Old Woman of Rome, this was enough to
convince us of our Arguments. Nay, nay, she is a Harlot, and not the Spouse of
Christ; you speak as men that have lost your brains: For though we do say the
Old Woman, with all her Fables; yet we deny her to be the Spouse of Christ
Jesus, for she has shed the Blood of the Martyrs and is brim full of Idolatry,
and her Cup is full of Abominations, which corrupt the Earth; and to the Brim
she must have a Cup of Indignation of the Wrath of the Lord God Almighty.

And as for the Weather-cocks, blown about with every rue and false doctrine,
look into your own Fields, and look at Rome: How many false Doctrines have
blown you about, and false Ways, and several Images, and Orders, have you set
up since the Apostles days by that persecuting murdering spirit? Do not you
call your old Mass-house, your Church? Do not you Worship there? And when you
come into them, do not you put off your Hats? And do not you worship when your
Host is carried, and fall upon your knees, and worship your Image? Is not here
your Church, founded upon Idolatry? And did not the Apostles speak of your
Antiquity, and worshipping of Angels, and that were Intruders into those things
that they did not see, that did not hold the Head, and neglect the Body; and so
you are Worshippers of Angels, and neglect the Head, and have set up a Head of
your own making. And have not the Gates of Hell prevailed against your outward
House, which you call a Church, and your People.

Now you seem to shuffle, and call the People your Chruch, and say, The Gates
of Hell has not prevailed against your Church, that is, against your People:
The Reason, you say, is. The Spirit of Truth, Christ says, shall lead his
Church into a^^ ^^th, which he would send to them: And Christ's saying to Peter,
Upon this Rock will I build my Church: And therefore because Christ said these
words to his Disciples, therefore the Gates of Hell has not prevailed against
your Church, and your Church has stood without Interruption to this present
day, neither Fails nor Corrupts.

Mark People, how impudent these Men are! What without blushing they can speak
such words: Is not all their Brothel-house, and Stew-houses, and Fornication,
and Adultery, is not this Uncleanness? And all their Idols, and Images, from
their false Church, silled to the brim with that? And all their bloody
Persecutions, is not this from an unclean spirit? But he says, Their Church
has stood without the least Interruption: And now people, you know that since
Boniface the third, the first Universal Pope, was set up by a Murderer, one
Phocas, who Murdered his Master; and since their Church has been held up by
Murder; he says, That their Church has stood without the least Interruption:
Now since the Pope got up, did not the Turk get up? And did not the Turk get
from the Pope, Jerusalem, Constantinople, Egypt, Greece, and many other Parts
of the World, that might be mentioned? How can these men be so audations, as to
say, Their Church has stood without Interruption; And if the Turk be the Gates
of Hell, he has prevailed against you: And are there not Protestants in
France? Yea, at Rome; Protestants in Switzerland, Protestants in Germany; and
many Princes, as King of Denmark, King of Sweedeland, and Low Countries, and
Ireland, Scotland, and England, and other places which have forsaken the Pope
and his Church, in words. Now have not the Gates of Hell prevailed against this
People? Have not these Papists lost their Reason and Understanding, as men?
What, has not the godd of the World blinded you, that you cannot see? Oh that
men should be so blind, and so bold, to utter such Falsehood, as to say, That it
has been without the least Interruption; the Pope and false Church! Nay, it is
their City that has been divided: what I yars are these I that love to Lie, to
Flatter, and Dissemble on this manner, and to Deceive the Simple; they are
simple indeed that will be deceived. Alas, alas, You are driven up into a
narrow scantling, over you were at first. Did not you Burn with Fire and Faggot
in England, in Bonner's time? If these be the Gates of Hell, they have
prevailed against you, and your counterfeit Church too, and your Head also: And
it has been the unclean Ghost that came from the Dragon, that has led you
into all these Images, and Idolatry, and Sedition, and Blackness, and Darkness,
which is over you. We know that Christ did pray to the Father, and he has sent
the Spirit of Truth, that leads the true Church into all Truth, of which Church
Christ is the Head.

And whereas thou speak, Of Peter's Feeding his Lambs and Sheep; you have
torn the Sheep in pieces, and Lambs also, and ruled by Force and Cruelty, and
sed the Wolves; and Peter having Power to Bind (and so did the rest of the
Apostles) and to Loose: What is this to your counterfeit Church, whom the Gates
of Hell has prevailed against? And a great stir you make to hold up the Pope,
your counterfeit Head: And you cavel at that in the Acts, of Peter's being sent
by the Disciples to Preach, Acts 8. for you would fain have Peter a Pope, that
you may hold up your Pope; and this clearly proves that Peter was not above his
Brethren: but they were all Brethren, as Christ said, they were his Brethren;
you abuse Christ's words in saying that he made him the greatest, and Head; for
Christ tells his Disciples all his True Church are Brethren: But does thy
Christ, that is made of Bread and Wine, tell thee that Peter was Head? And so
you will make a Head of the Pope, and your Pope and you will be Pead of your
christ, that you have made; and Christ said to his Disciples, when they were at
Strise who should be counted greatest, Christ tells them, The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and Authority over them, and are called
Gracious Lords; it must not be so amongst you. Here you slight Christ's words,
in making a Head, and setting up your Gracious Lords, your Popes, to exercise
Lordship over the People, in dispite against Christ's Command; and so plainly
manifest an Antichrist, a Schismatic, and a Sect degenerated from the true
Brotherhood, and true Head; and he that will be the Greatest must be as the
Least, he that is Chiefest as he that Serves, etc. and so he brings to an even
rule: And in many places it is plain that Peter never took the Headship to
himself, as your counterfeit Head has done in opposition to the True Church,
and true Christ, in dispite against him; and this makes no Contradiction; for
the Chiefest must be as he that Serves, and the Greatest as the Least; this
cuts off your Lordship; for the Scribes and Pharisees were reproved for that:
And thou bring an Argument to prove that Peter was Head of the Apostles,
though the Apostles sent him.

Thou say, Though the Father sent the Son, yet to say that the Father has
greater Power then the Son, thou say, is Blasphemy.

Christ says of Him, That his Father is Greater then He, John 14.28. and that
was no Blasphemy in Christ: And how was he Greater, was it not in Power? Yet we
tell thee again, that the Father and Son is one according to his Divinity; he
is God, and God was in Christ; and according to the Flesh he Suffered, it was
not God that Suffered, that Died, the Eternal God, but Christ Suffered
according to the Flesh, as the Scripture declares: for what God was, that
Christ prayed to, and said, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from
me; but not my Will but they Will: But these things are a Mystery to you, and
your dark spirits, who it seems are ignorant of the Scriptures, neither are the
Holy Men of Gods words fit to come into your Mouths.

And whereas thou say, Christ would have I relates to be humble People. Look
over the Popes Church, and what Humility do you see? Are not your Women full of
Spots, and the Pope with his Tripple-Crown, and their Gorgious Attire? Was this
like Mary the Mother of Jesus, who was brought to Bed in a Stable, and laid
Jesus in the Mainger? Now we shall hardly have room in your Stable, but in your
Fires and Inquisitions; for the Devil would Destroy True Christianity
throughout the Earth, who is become a false Christian in you; but Christ will
brake the ^e^d of hi^. And if Peter was at Rome yet he was not Pope over all
the Churches, nor any of his Disciples, nor none of Peter's Follower; all these
things will not cover your Seditious Head, nor this Catalogue of Bishops, that
were set up, not for the first Six Hundred Years after Christ, there was no
Universal Pope all that time, till, as I said before, Boniface the third was
set up by Phocas the Murderer; and after came in the Turk; and then came in the
Devil, that has filled your Cup to the brim with a Raging spirit, and a
Murdering spirit And thou say the truth of this Succession is gathered out
of Matthew, which proves nothing at all of this to you; for your counterfeit
Church has been prevailed against by them which worship Mahomet: Christ was
with Peter to the end of his days, and with all them that be in his Spirit,
the Spirit of Christ Jesus. But what is this to you who have erred from Peter's
Spirit, and are got into a Murderous spirit, who Persecute People to Death for
your Rudiments; Peter did not Persecute People for not owning Christ, nor for
not following Idols, or images, the Works of men's hands.

Another false Cover these Papists have, which they daub People with,
concerning Peter's being Head of the Church, where it is said in Matthew. 16.
where Christ asked his Disciples, Whom do men say that I am? And their Answer
was, That he was John Baptist, some say; and others Elias; and others,
Jeremiah, or one of the Prophets: But he said, Whom do you say that I am? Peter
said. Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God: And Jesus answered and said
unto him, Blessed art thou Simon Barjona: for Flesh and Blood has not revealed
this to thee: I s^y unto thee, thou art Peter; and upon this Rock I will build
my Church, and the Gates of H^ll shall not prevail against it. Now if this
Church had been built upon Peter, as he was a man of Flesh and Blood, as you
say; then when Peter was put to Death, the Gates of Hell had prevai'ed then;
and here the Papists would give Christ the Lie; but Christ says, That Flesh
and Blood had not revealed this to thee; and thou art Peter; and upon this Rock
will I build my Church: That his Flesh and Blood had not revealed unto him;
thou art Peter: And what signifies Peter? If Peter signifies a Rock; and if
Christ built his Church upon the signification of Peter's Sur-name, which
signifies but an outward Rock, which outward Rock may be brought as a Figure of
Christ, or a Parable, or Comparison; if it be built upon the Parable, it is not
built upon the thing it self: Must not then all your Popes names be called
Peter, if they be the Rocks of your Church; and so your Church must be built
upon their Sur-names: Now if it be built upon Peter as a man, and your Popes as
men, as you say it is, as Flesh, and Blood, etc. then it is built upon the
signification of the word Man, which is not the signification of Peter's
Sur-name; but the signification of Man, is Adam; for Son of Man is Son of Adam,
as Ben Adam, Ben Elohim and Adam signifies Red Earth, does it not? And so the
Interpretation of the Popes Rock is, That he built his Church upon Red Earth;
and Red Earth is not a Rock.

And what is that which Flesh and Blood has not revealed? Thou art Christ the
Son of the Living God, and upon this Rock is Christ's Church built, that his
Flesh and Blood had not revealed, and the Gates of Hell shall not preva^l
against this Rock, Christ Jesus; it destroys the Devil, and his works, and his
Power is over Hell and Death; and they are Living Stones that be Members of his
Body. What is all this to the Popes counterfeit Head and Church, which the
Gates of Hell have prevailed against, their fleshly Foundation, their fleshly
Church, and their carnal Head, which is devilish: And thus they have erred and
degenerated from the Foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, and Christ
Jesus, being the Top and Cornerstone; for Christ was their Rock the Apostles
confessed; and the Rock that followed the Jews was Christ: And so it is clear,
that you are the Foolish Builders, that have built your House on the Sand, the
Sea shore, and many of your Houses are walled down; for they that built upon
the Rock Christ Jesus, which Flesh and Blood has not revealed, but the Father
has revealed that Rock which his Church is built upon; by his Power and by his
Spirit they stand sure: Glory be to God forever.

And whereas you bring Matt. 26. verse. 26, 27, 28. and compare it to John 6.5.
This you do bring to prove your Sacrament of the Alter, and your christ and
godd, that is made of Bread and Wine, which is to no purpose at all; for that
of John 6. where Christ says, Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness,
but are dead: So you have eaten your godd that you have made with Bread and
Wine, and are dead: But Christ is the true Bread, which comes down from Heaven;
for Bread comes from the Corn and Wine from the Grape, and that comes from
below; but he that eats this Bread, that comes dow from Heaven, shall live
for ever, etc. he that does eat Christ's Flesh and drink his Blood, does not eat
it Figuratively, but they eat it Really, if they have life in him: And Christ's
Flesh is not Wafers, nor his Blood is not outward Wine, that comes from the
Grape; but Christ says, His words are Spirit and Life, and the Flesh
profitteth nothing; for it is the Spirit that quickens: Therefore you are
darker then the Jews, and cannot receive Christ's words, but judge them
carnally, as they did: And for your old Fathers Talk or Story, that proves
nothing to us, but is like your own Fables. And as for that 1 Cor. 11.28.
proves nothing as for you, that make a christ and a godd of Bread and Wine, for
they wrote, That they were to take it in Remembrance of Christ: and if a
Remembrance of him, then it was not he: Have you lost your Reason? If thou
do any thing in Remembrance of a man, if it be the man, what, do thou it
in Rememembrance of him? He says, As often as you do this, do it in
Remembrance of Christ; as often as you eat this Bread: And so both the Bread
and the Cup was left unto them as Often, not Always; for they were to enjoy
Christ Jesus: And he said he would come and dwell in them; and so had it been
he. Christ, it had been Nonsense and Ridiculous to say, in Remembrance of him,
when it was he: What silly reasoning is this? And you do show forth his Death
till he come; so says he, Till he come; Mark, then it is not he, it is not
Christ; for if he is to come, it is not the same Christ as was offered up upon
the Cross, if he be risen, and he is to come; So you have been all the unworthy
Eaters and Drinkers, and not discern Christ nor his Body, who have put your
Bread and Wine for the Body of Christ; and so have eaten and drunk your own
Damnation, not discerning the Lords Body; and therefore you are Sick, and Weak,
and asleep in your Sins: That which is done in a Show, is it not a Figure, or a
Shadow? And a Shadow mu^t be done away when the Substance is come: And people
must come to dye with Christ, and be buried with him, if they live with him,
and not always eating (1 Cor. 11.) and drinking in Remembrance of him Bread
and Wine; and they must Suffer with him, and Dye with him, and be Buried with
him and Rise with him; now if you be risen with Christ, you seek those things
that come from above; for Bread, Water, and Wine is from be^ow: For Christ
says, I am the Door, does not be? And he is the Way, he is the Vine, and he is
a Rock, and a Stone: And is Christ an outward Stone, an outward Vine, outward
Bread, and outward Water, an outward Door, an outward Rock? If thou
interpretest the one, interpret the other, and confute thy self, which is
enough to confute all your whole counterfeit Church. People may eat and drink
natural bread and natural wine without Damnation to themselves: But surely the
Bread and the Wine, which you say is Christ, and his Blood, and his Flesh, and
the whole christ, a Wafer, or sup of Wine, or a piece of Bread, any Drunkard or
Profane Man or Woman, that is, can see it with their outward Eyes; but to say
that to be Christ, his Flesh, and his Blood, that came down from Heaven, which
came from the Grape, and from the Corn; thou would make people believe, as
the Philosopher, That Snow is Black, and the Sun abroad Plate of Metal. And
your Confecrations makes your Wafers and Bread no more Christ, then it was
before, nor God; for it is Blasphemy in you to say, That Wafers, or a little
Bread or Wine is God: You have made many godds, and eaten them, and drunk them;
but except your simple people had been enchanted, and so you make them believe
it to be God; but we are over your Enchantments, and in that which will Grind
you to Powder; and we know that Christ has given his Flesh for the Life of the
World, that is a Mystery to you, that make Christ's of Bread and Wine.

Moreover, you say, That the Body of Christ was given for to redeem our Sins
upon the Cross, which Body he gave to his Disciples at his Last Supper, etc.

Answ. People, did you ever hear the like? What silly Logic or Rhetoric is
this? It seems the Apostles eat Christ's Body, and drunk his Blood; then what
Body had Christ to offer upon the Cross? Had he two Bodies; for he says, He
redeemed their Sins with his Body upon the Cross; and before he says, He had
given his Body to his Disciples, and they did eat it after Supper? What
Nonsense and Confusion is this! It may well be called Mystery Babylon, the
Mother of Harlots, that taught him such a Lesson: After the Disciples had eaten
his Body, and drunk his Blood, when he went to be offered up upon the Cross,
which he says, His Body was offered up upon the Cross, for the redeeming of
their sins: Did you ever hear such Doctrine? Did Christ come to redeem the Sins
of people? You read of the true Doctrine, that the Apostles came to turn people
from Darkness to Light; but you never heard of such a Doctrine; Sin is of the
Devil: Did Christ come to Redeem the Devil? Nay: He came to destroy the Works
of the Devil, and to Redeem People from Sin: See what gross Delusion and blind
Ignorance appears here from this Seditious Sect of Papists, and these that
style themselves Masters of Arts: The Papists say, The same Body that suffered
upon the Cross, the Apostles eat; and upon this their Salvation hangs: Now if
the Apostles had eaten it, and drunk his Blood, then what Body had he to offer?
Or see what Salvation these people have, which hang upon the Bread and Wine
after Consecrated, to be Christ, and have no Christ but that which they make;
And that is it which suffered upon the Cross: Then how came he to rise again,
if they had eaten him, that very Body after Supper, that very Body of Christ
Jesus? And how came he to be laid in the Grave, and yet came after to show the
Apostles his Hands and Sides, seeing they had eaten him, and his Body was
whole? And the Apostle says, As often as you do eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup; Was it an outward Cup they drunk, or was there somewhat in the Cup? Did
they swollow an outward Cup? Come, interpret this, and confute your selves.

And whereas thou bring Faustus and Augustine, and speak scoffingly of
the People of God (called Quakers) and call'st them Humming Speakers, and
show thy self to be of Ishmaels brood: And you bring St. John Damascenus,
and a many such like Fathers of the Church, which is nothing to the purpose,
but only to blind People (that are ignorant) withal, to make them believe that
your Bread and Wine is Christ after you have blessed it, to keep your poor
deceived people in ignorance: But the Lord is taking off your Covers, that your
filthy Rags may be seen, and your ugly Images and Idols, which have been set
up by the Unclean spirit, and spirit of Persecution.

And whereas thou layest down a Charge, To know who was our first grand
Speaker, after Peter, of our Religion?

I Answer, He that was of Peter's Spirit, which was of the Spirit of Christ
Jesus, which was the Seed of the Woman, whom the Beast, and your false Church,
the Whore, has drunk their Flood, and made War against them that have kept the
Testimony of ^es^^s, that have seen all your works and actions, and testify
against them, with all the whole Train of Idolatry, and Idols, and Images, that
you have made an Idol of, Bread and Wine; and now the Seed is rising, and the
Witness, that will make your earth to quake; and Christ says, Learn of Me; he
was the first Speaker to us, called Quakers; This is my beloved Son, hear ye
him, says God: So I tell thee, he was our first Speaker, and he has given us
his Spirit, that leads into all Truth, that has taught us the Way to life and
Salvation; and he is the Rock of Ages, and not Peter, and the Foundation of
many Generations; and is the same to day as he was yesterday, and so forever;
and he has been our Leader, our Prophet, our Shepherd, our Priest, our Bishop,
our Councellor, our Minister, our Preacher, whom God has anointed to Preach,
that Preaches Life, Light, and Salvation: So we come to obey his Doctrine, and
do his Will, and we shall know his Doctrine; if in doing the same, you will
know our first Preacher, you must come to the Light, to see him, which will
condemn all the Images and Idols, and condemn your christ and godd, that you
make of bread and wine; and condemn your head and church too.

And whereas thou speak Scoffingly, Of the Church of God being Smothered
under a Cloud?

We say, to these Mockers, and to this Seditious Sect, That the Church has
been in the Wilderness, there fed of God Forty and Two Months, One Thousand
Two Hundred and Threescore Days, which is a Time, and Times, and half a Time;
so count you a day for a year, and then you may reckon your selves how long
your false church the Mother of Harlots, has been on the back of the Beast,
whom the Devil the Dragon gives power to and the year when the Woman, the true
Church, is coming-out of the Wilderness, who has been fed of God: God has
been her Feeder, which indeed you with the Dragons power would have smothered
Her, as under a Cloud or a Tubb, but the Earth helped Her; and she was
preserved in the Wilderness, where you could not find her, though you went with
Judas his Swords, Staves and Lanthorns, and your band of Soulaiers from your
counterfeit Head: But I tell you, She was fed of God in the Wilderness Ferty
two Months; and reckon this, and then you may see how long the false church,
and the whore and the beast has reigned, and when she comes out of the
Wilderness again.

Then we Challenge you, To tell us how many Martyrs, Prophets, and Saints, the
beast, and whore, the false church, that sat upon the Beast, in the Dragons
power; how much of their Flood have they drunk, to wit, the Blood of the Saints
and Martyrs of Jesus? And so by this time thou will see the coming in of the
False church the where; and the going into the Wilderness of the true Church;
the Downfall of the Beast, and of the Whore; for if thou can count the
number of the true Church, that comes out of the Wilderness, thou will know the
number of your false.

The Scriptures we own; we do contend against your filthy Rags of your
Heresy, which we deny, and will not put on; for we have a better Garment,
which is the Fine Linen, which is the Righteousness of the Saints.

THe Ingenious Reader has read your Paper, and here is somewhat in Answer to
it; and finds it a confused piece of Nonsense, and Toutologies, and
Contradictions; and if all the Forefathers, and these that thou have quoted, be
as dark as you are, they are in that which is Darkness it self, and ignorant of
the Scripture, and of Christ, and the Apostles Doctrine, and Spirit and, Power,
and Faith, and are separated and degenerated from it (to wit) the Spirit of
God: You are all judged, you and your Forefathers, together with your Works,
your Images; and are in the spirit of Persecution, the first birth of the
Flesh; of Hagar, that is cast out, and and not the Bride of the Lambs Wife, nor
the true Spouse of Christ Jesus, which is coming forth of the Wilderness.
Halelujah.

Postscript.
IN Matt. 26: Christ said, Take the Cup, and said, Drink ye all of it: Now was
it an outward Cup that the Dissciples did drink, or something in the Cup? Then
you do interpret this wrong; for it was not the Cup they did drink.

And then you must interpret that Scripture [This is my Body, and Christ brake
the outward Bread] then did Christ break his own Body, and give it to his
Disciples before he suffered: and did they eat it then? What Body had Christ to
offer upon the Cross for the Sins of the People, if that the Apopostles had
eaten it? And Christ does not say, The Wine which was called the Blood of the
New Testament, was the New Testament.

And Mark 14. and Luke 22. Christ brake the Bread, and gave it to his
Disciples: And did he break his Body that suffered upon the Cross for Mankind?
No: His Body was whole then: And he took the Bread and brake it, and gave it to
the Disciples, and they did eat it: For if that outward Wine was his Blood, and
the Bread his Body, then his Blood and Body was eaten and drunk before he
suffered; and if his Disciples had eaten his Body, and drunk his Blood, then
they had eaten Christ; and then there had been no Offering on the Cross for the
Sins of Mankind, according to your Assertion.

And in M^tt. 26. Mark 14. Christ says, For I say unto you, I will not any
more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.

Lule 22. For I say unto you, I will not drink of the Fruit of the Vine, until
the Kingdom of God shall come.

Mark 14. Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the of the Fruit of
the Vine, until that day that I drink it new in the Kingdom of God.

And Matt. 26. Christ says, But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of
this Fruit of the Vine, until that day when I drink it new in the Fathers
Kingdom.

What! Will Christ drink his own Blood with his Disciples new in his Fathers
Kingdom, and eat of the Bread, his own Body, in the Kingdom of God?

And did Christ eat his own body, and drink his own Blood while he was on the
Earth with his Disciples? for he says, I will no more drink, and I will not
any more eat, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God; and I will no more
drink until that day (said he) that I drink it new in my Fathers Kingdom. And
what does NO MORE signify? Does it not signify that he had eaten and drunk it
before? And what then do you say, or affirm, that he had eaten his own Body,
and drunk his own Blood? Come, let us see what sense you will make of this,
with all your Keys?

And what did the Pascal-Lamb typifie forth, your outward Bread and Wine? And
what did one outward thing Type forth another outward thing? And what did
Christ eat himself, and drink himself? and did the Apostles eat Christ before
he suffered? Is this your Doctrine? Did not the Paschal Lamb Typifie our
Paschal Lamb, CHRIST, our Passover? And what did it type forth your Bread, and
Wine, christ, which you made, which is outward, and from the ground? And there
your Heads go downward, and the one outward thing types forth another outward
thing; and this is your Doctrine; is it not? and so that one Natural Types
forth another.

But we tell you, That Christ, our Pascal-Lamb, ends the Jews Pascal-Lamb,
and their Passover; for he is the Substance of them, which were Types of him,
who is the spiritual Man, who ends them all, that were Types and Figures of
him.

And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. For we being many are one Bread and one
Body, etc. and what was this, the outward bread? and were the Apostles and
Saints Bodies, outward bread? Or were the Saints the Body of Christ, and he
their Head; and so one Body, and one Head.

Or has Christ ever a Body, but what you do make of Bread and Wine? Answer.

And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. That the Bread, and the Cup, was the
Communion of the Body of Christ. And he does not say, That the Bread is the
Body of Christ; nor does he say, That the Cup is Christ's Blood.

And wherein does your Cup and Table differ from the Cup and Table of Devils?
Answer: And come let us see what sense you will make of this, you Corrupters
and Destroyers of Scriptures, the Masters of all Corruptions, Theft, and
Plunder; the Devils Espouse, and a Help meet; who with his Sparks sets
Princes together by the Ears; this usurped Dragon would have brought the Earth
to desolation, who with his fiery Sparks, which he has thrown amongst the
Nations, has set the Nations on fire, and would have all bow to him, and
Persecutes them that bows to God.

And are not you offering up your christ (in every Nation and Country where you
have power) which you make of your Bread and Wine? And without blushing falsely
call your selves Ministers of the True Christ, but you are the Ministers of
that christ you make of Bread and Wine: So you make your Lord, your Christ, and
your Host; and then you do offer him in every Country or Nation; and so you
make many Thousands of godds and christ's, and many thousand godd and christ
Host-makers you are, and many thousand Offerings ye offer up Yearly. But the
True Christ is offered up Once for All, and not yearly: And this was the true
Ministers of Christ's Doctrine, who denied the Yearly Sacrifices amongst the
Jews, which Offerings Christ, the True Offering ends; and so Christ put away
sin by the offering of himself; and so our High Priest was not made by man, but
he was begotten of God, who is made higher then the Heavens, and whom God did
prepare a Body. And you make your body and blood of your Antichrist, and offer
him up Yearly to deceive the People, and keep them in their sin, and then tell
them of a Purgatory when they are Dead; GREAT DECEIVERS; and so you do the will
of Devil, your godd.

But he that did the Will of the Living God (to wit, Jesus Christ) did it
through the Offering up of his Body Once for All; and so there is an end of the
Offerings, and your false ones, together with your christ's, the workmanship of
your own hands, which you have caused people to worship, both Small and Great;
a Mark of the great Whore, see Rev. and Heb. 10.

And you Papists, who say, you make the body and blood of your christ; and when
that you have made it you say, people must not have the blood, but the body of
your christ, you have made. If that this was the True Christ, as it is the
Falfe, then you keep all your Deceived People in Death, and from Life, and
Faith, and Justification; For except they eat Christ's Flesh, and drink his
Blood, they have no Life in them; and this comes down from above, and is not
from below; as your blood and flesh, which you make of Bread and Wine; and so
they must drink the Blood, as well as eat the Flesh of Christ, if they have
Life: and they that do not drink his Blood, have not Life in Christ; for all
the true Christians do drink his Blood, and have Life, and they are justified
and cleansed with his Blood, and their Faith is in the Blood of Christ; and so
all that have Life, Commune in both kinds; that is, They eat the Flesh of
Christ, and drink his Blood, which no man can make, but it comes down from
above.

But you that are dead, and in Death, who have gotten the Name of Christians,
and pretend to make a christ of flesh and blood, of bread and wine, which is
but a Lie, yet you will not give your people your blood, which you have made of
wine; and so according to your own doctrine your people are dead, if you do
profess the Scripture; for Christ does not separate the flesh from the blood,
but the one must be received as the other; and Christ does not limit it from
any one, but did shed his Blood for all men; but this is your Cheat of Pope,
Cardinals, and Priests, who love the Wine to drink it; and thus you do deceive
your people.

And also when you have made your lord, and host, and christ, you do adore him,
and worship him, and reverence him and cause the people to do the same; and
then when you have done, you do EAT up your GOD, HOST, LORD, and CHRIST, which
you have adored, reverenced, and worshipped. Oh Deceit! This is worse then the
Heathen; for never do you read in any Chronicle, that the Heathen did so Eat
any of the Godds that they had made with their hands, as you have done; and
thus you despise the true Christ, and confine him in the Creatures of Bread and
Wine; all which (of your works) are for Judgment.

G.

THE END.

