The French King's Declaration of War by Sea and Land against the Spaniards,
revoking the Pasports, Safeguards, and safe Conducts, and making prohibition
against having any Commerce, and enjoining his Subjects to fall upon the
Spaniards.
THE sincere Desire which the King has had to maintain the Truce concluded in
the Year 1684. induced His Majesty to dissemble the Conduct held by the
Ministers of Spain in all the Courts of Europe, where they have made it their
whole endeavor to stir them up to take up Arms against France; And His Majesty
is no stranger to the Sham they have had in the League of Augsbourg; He has
likewise been informed of the Part the Governor of the Spanish Low Countries
has had in the Prince of Orange's Enterprise against England; but in no wise
believing that His Conduct in that matter had been prescribed to him by the
King His Master, who for so many reasons of Religion, Blood, and Security for
all Kings, was bound to oppose such an Usurpation. His Majesty had hoped that
He might have prevailed with his Catholic Majesty to have struck up an Union
with him for the Restoration of the Lawful King in England, and the
conservation of the Catholic Religion, against the Union of the Protestant
Princes, and at least to keep an exact neutrality, if the state of the Affairs
of Spain did not permit the Catholic King to take such like Engagements: His
Majesty had to that intent made him several Proposals since the Month of
November last, which have been well received, while the Prince of Orange's
Enterprise seemed doubtful. But these favorable Disparitions vanished, as soon
as it was known at Madrid; that the King of England had departed his Kingdom,
and from that time there has been no other Discourse than of War against
France. His Majesty has at the same time understood, that the Spanish
Ambassador in England daily saw the Prince of Orange, and solicited him to
induce the English to declare War against France; that the Governor of the
Spanish Low Countries raised Forces in all haste; that he promised the States
General to join them with theirs in the beginning of the Campaign, and
solicited them, as well as the Prince of Orange, to send Troops into Flanders,
for the putting him in a posture of waging War against France: All these
intimations having let his Majesty understand, that it became his Prudence to
know what to rely upon: He gave order to the Count de Rebenac, his Ambassador
at Madrid, to demand a positive Answer of the Catholic King's Ministers,
offering him the continuation of the Truce, provided he would oblige himself,
by keeping an exact neutrality not to succor directly or indirectly his
Majesty's Enemies: But all Counsels having prevailed, his Majesty has been
informed, that the Resolution had been taken to favor the Usurper of England,
and of joining with the Protestant Princes. His Majesty has also understood at
the same time, that the Prince of Orange's Agents received considerable Sums at
Cadiz and Madrid, that the Troops of Holland and Brandenbourg are entered into
the principal Towns belonging to the Spaniards in Flanders; and that the
Catholic King's Governor of the Low Countries caused the States General to be
solicited to order their Army to advance to Bruxells. All these
Advertisements, together with the Answer received by the Count de Rebenac at
Madrid, leaving his Majesty no room to question, but that the Catholic King's
intention is to join with his Enemies; His Majesty thought it became him, not
to lose time, for the preventing his ill Designs, and has resolved to declare
War against him, as well by Sea as Land, as he does by these presents:
Therefore his Majesty orders and enjoins, to this effect, all his Subjects,
Vassals, and Servants, to fall upon the Spaniards, and has most expressly
forbid, and does forbid such his Subjects from having hereafter with the
Spaniards any Communication, Commerce, or Intelligence, upon pain of Death; and
to that purpose, His M. has revoked and does revoke all Permissions, Pasports,
Safeguards, and safe Conducts, which may have been granted by him, or by his
Lieutenant Generals, and other his Officers, contrary to these Presents, and
has and does declare them null, and of no effect; forbidding all Persons
whatsoever from having regard thereunto. His M. commands and orders the
Admiral, Mareschals of France, Governors, and L. Generals for his M. in his
Provinces and Armies, Mareschals de Camp, Colonels, Maistres de Camps,
Captains, Chieftains, and Leaders of his Soldiery, as well of Horse as Foot,
French and Foreigners, and all other his Officers to whom it shall belong, that
they cause these Presents to be executed as far forth as may concern them, and
fall within their Powers and Jurisdictions. For such is his M. Will and
Pleasure, his Will and Pleasure being, that these Presents be published and
affixed in all his Cities, as well Maritime as other, and in all his Ports,
Havens, and all other places of his Realm, and to all Territories under his
Command whom it may concern, that so none may pleaad ignorance. Given at
Versailles the 15th. of April, 1689. Signed, and lower, COLBERT.

LE desir sincere que le Roy a eu de maintenir la Treve conclue en l'annee
1684. a port Sa Majeste a dissimuler la conduite qu'ont tenue les Ministres
d'Espagne dans toutes les Course des Princes de l'Europe, ou ils ne se sont
appliquez qu'a les exciter a prendre les Arms contre la France; Et Sa Majeste
n'a pas ignore la part qu'ils ont cue dans la negotiation de la ligue
d'Ausbourg; Elle a aussi este informee de celle qu'a eu le Gouverneur des
Pais-Bas Espagnols, dans l'enterprise que le Prince d'Orange a faite contre
l'Angleterre; mais ne pouvant croire que la conduite qu'il a tenue a cet egard,
luy eut este prescrite par le Roy son Maistre, qui par tant de raisons de
Religion, de Sang, and de Seurte pour tous les Roys, estoit oblige de s'opposer
a une pareille usurpation, Sa Majeste avoit espere de pouvoir porter Sa Majeste
Catholic a s'unir avec Elle pour le retablissement du Roy legitime en
Angleterre, and la conservation de la Religion Catholic contre l'union des
Princes Protestans, and au moins, a garder une neutralite exact, si l'etat des
affairs d'Espagne ne permettoit pas au Roy Catholic de prendre de pareils
engagemens, Sa Majeste luy a fait fair pour cet effet differentes propositions
depuis le mois de Novembre dernier, lesquelles ont este bien receues, tandis
que le succez de l'enterprise du Prince d'Orange a paru douteux; mais ces
favorables dispositions se sont evanouies des quae l'on a sceu a Madrid le Roy
d'Angleterre sorty de son Royaume, and l'on n'y a plus parle que de guerre
contrel a France. Sa Majeste a appris en mesme temps que l'Ambassadeur
d'Espagne en Angleterre voyoit journellement le Prince d'Orange, and le
solicitoit de fair que les Anglois declarassent la Guerre a la France, que le
Gouverneur des Pais-Bas Espagnols levoit des troops avec empressement; qu'il
promettoit aux Estats Generaux de les joindre aux leurs au commencement de la
Campaign, and les solicitoit aussibien que le Prince d'Orange, a fair passer
des Troops en Flandres pour le mettre en estat de fair la Guerre a la France.
Tous ces avis ayant fait juger a Sa Majeste qu'il estoit de sa prudence de
scavoir a quoys'en tenir, Elle a done order au Comte de Rebenac, son
Ambassadeur a Madrid, de demander une response positive aux Ministres du Roy
Catholic, luy offrant la continuation de la Treve, pourvu qu'il volust
s'obliger en gardant une neutralite exact, de ne secourir directement, ny
indirectement les ennemis de sa Majeste; mais les mauvais Conseils ayant
prevalu, Sa Majeste a este informee que la resolution avoit este prise de
Favoriser l'usurpareur d'Angleterre, and de se joindre aux Princes Protestans.
Sa Majeste a appris aussi, presque en mesme temps que les Agents du Prince
d'Orange ont touch des sommes considerables a Cadix, and a Madrid, que les
Troops de Hollande and de Brandenbourgh sont entrees dans les principales
Places des Espagnols en Flanders, Eque le Gouverneur des Pais-Bas pour le Roy
Catholic faisoit soliciter les Estats Generaux de fair avancer leur Armee
sous Bruxelles. Tous ces avis joints a la reponse que ledit Comte de Rebenac a
receue a Madrid ne laissant a Sa Majeste aucun lieu de douter que l'intention
du Roy Catholic ne soit de se joindre a ses Ennemis; Sa Majeste a cru ne
devoir pas perdre de temps a prevenir ses mauvais desseins, and a resolu de luy
declarer la Guerre, tant par Mer que par Terre, comme Elle fait par la
Present. Ordonne and Enjoint pout cet effet, Sa Majeste, a tous ses Sujets,
Vassaux and Serviteurs de courre sus aux Espagnols, and leur a deffendu and
deffend tres-expressement, d'avoir cyapres avec eux aucune communication,
commerce, ny intelligence, a pein de la vie; Et a cette fin, Sa Majeste a
des-a-present revoque and revoque toutes Permissions, Passeports, Sauvegardes,
and Sauf-conduits, qui pourroient avoir este accordez par Elle, ou par ses
Lieutenans Generaux, and autres ses Officiers, contraires a la present, and
les a declare and declare nuls, and de null effet and valeur; deffend a qui que
ce soit d'y avoir aucun egard. Mande and Ordonne Sa Majeste a Monsieur
l'Amiral, aux Mareschaux de France, Gouverneurs and Lieutenans Generaux pour Sa
Majeste en fes Provinces and Armees, Mareschaux de Camp, Colonels, Mestres de
Camp, Capitaines, Chefs and Conducteurs de ses gens de Guerre, tant de cheval
que de pied, Francois and Estrangers, and tous autres ses Officiers qu'il
appartiendra, que le contenu en la present, ils fassent executer chacun a son
egard dans l'etendue de leurs pouvoirs and jurisdictions; Car tell est la
volonte de Sa Majeste, laquelle veut and entend, que la present soit publiee
and affichee en toutes ses Villes, tant Maritimes qu'autres, and en tous ses
Ports, Havres and autres lieux de son Royaume, and terres de son obeissance que
besoin sera, a ce qu'aucun n'en pretend cause d'ignorance. Fait a Versailles
15. Avril 1689. Sign, Louis. Et plus bas, COLBERT.

Printed in the Year. 1689.


