The New Disease; OR A Rational Account of the Great COLDS AND COUHGS Now
Raging amongst Us: SHOWING The true Causes of the said Distempers, and Approved
REMEDIES for Their speedy Cure.

TOGETHER With the Author's Solemn Invitation to all that shall escape those
Maladies, to come and Dine with Him at Christmas next.

By J. L. Student in Physic and Astrology.

London Printed for W.T. 1676.

The New Disease; OR A Rational Account of the Great Colds and Coughs now
raging amongst Us, etc.
OBserving Colds of late to be a General Affliction wherewith most Persons
(especially about this City) are troubled, and which in Many at this time are
far more Dangerous, and attended with worse Symptoms than ever were known
heretofore; I could not but think my self obliged in Pity and Christian Charity
toward the Multitudes now Laboring under Them, to give some Physical Account
thereof, with the best and most approved Remedies for the same, that People may
know how to help themselves in time, and prevent the more mischievous
Consequences; The rather, for that I do not remember any Physician that has
Professedly treated thereof, But generally they over-pass them, as scarce worth
their notice, though it is well known that they are the principal Cause to which
most Diseases have their Original; An overflowing of Rheum being as
destructive in the little World, as an Inundation of the Sea in the Great: I
confess a Cold to many, seems a very Contemptible matter, not fit to trouble a
Doctor with; People generally slight it, but often pay for their Vanity; They
find their Head stufft with crude vapors, and their Breasts clogged with
vicious unconcocted Humors, and the cry -- It Is but a Cold; They find their
Lungs afflicted and obstructed in their Functions and Offices, and themselves
scarce able to draw their Breath, and yet -- It Is but a Cold; They find a want
of Appetite, and weakness of Digestion, a general Stupefaction of the Animal
Spirits, and faint with Coughs, and languish with Catarrhs, and sink under
Lethargies, and lose their Senses in Apoplexies, yet still -- It Is but a Cold:
In short, their Brain is at last drowned by a deluge of Phlegm, and the Soul is
forced to leave the ruinous cottage of the Body, and the Man dies, and is
fairly buried, and still -- It Is but a Cold; When it may be a little Care, and a
Medicine of Three-Half-Pence, might (under God) have preserved him alive till
the Year 1700.

And therefore I hope none will think this our friendly Undertaking,
Superfluous or Impertinent, nor undervalue it because its presented in a single
Sheet; As opiniated Ladies (that have more Money than Discretion) refuse many
times wholesome Medicines merely because they are Cheap, and may be had in their
own Gardens;

In all Medicinal Inquiries, the Great Masters of the Art of Healing, advise us
to begin with the Cause, For Scire est per Causas Cognoscere; Now the Causes of
these extreme Colds that at this time so universally afflict us, are either
General, or Particular, Immediate, or Remote; The Immediate or Particular
Causes are various according to each Persons occasions and circumstances; The
Remote, primary, or general Cause; we are not to look for on this ^ide Heaven,
for let Ignorance, or narrow Learning rail at Astrology as they list, we are
satisfied it is only that Art, can give any tolerable Account of the Reasons of
Epidemical, or Endemial Distempers; and why they Rage at such particular
seasons more than at other times;

If therefore we lift up our Eyes to that glorious Glass, we shall find in the
last Month of October, a great number of very rough and threatening Positions;
first a Conjunction of Mars and Mercury, an Opposition of Mercury and Saturn, a
Conjunction of Mars and the Sun, an Opposition of Saturn against both the Sun,
Mars and Venus, and a Con^^nction of Venus and Mars all within the space of one
Month; From the Consideration whereof, it was very easy (without the least
suspicion of Witchcraft or Conjuring) to Judge and conclude that Mankind would
at or about that time, be afflicted with some kind of general Disease or
Distemper; The particular kind of which is sufficiently intimated unto us by
the Signs through which the opposing Planets make their present Transit, as
Saturn (the fountain of Cold (as the Sun is of Heat) and causer of most frigid
Diseases) in Taurus an Earthly cold Sign, and the Sun, Mars, Venus, and Mercury
all in Scorpio, a Sign Watery and Feminine, Cold and Moist, and of which J.
Gadbury has affirmed in Print, that it is the most vicious Sign of the Zodiac
Anim. Cornutum, p. 20. Now is it less evident that London more especially,
should suffer in Its Inhabitants by these extraordinary Colds, since Jupiter
the only Planet that can lend us any Assistance in this case, is posited in
Opposition to the Radical Ascendant of that City.

These are the Celestial reasons of this raging Distemper, for by these rugged
and contradicting beams, and unwholesome infrigidating Influences, the Air was
not only suddenly altered, and the we^^her changed from very warm to very cold
(as we may remember) but likewise impregnated with certain unseasonable
particles, which are no sooner drawn in by the Lungs, but they incorpora^e with
the Serum or watrish part of the Blood, and render it more impure, and thence
is generated that vast quantity of Mucus (or Snivel) which we find Nature
unloading her self of continually at the nose and other Emunctories; raised and
increased by reason that the External cold, unwarily received at some of the
Pores, gets up to the bra^n, and by compressing and overcooling the same, adds
still fresh crudities, whence proceed continual distillations of Rheum, which
falling upon the Lungs, and Aspera Arterea (or windpipe) causes a tickling by
the Acrimony and sharpness of the humor, and thence comes the Eructation (or
little Earthquake in the Microcosm) which we call a Cough.

For the Prognostics of this Distemper, we conceive it to be of longer
continuance than ordinary, and of a more stubborn and contumatious nature, not
yielding to common Remedies, besides people shall be in much danger of
Relapses, and at sometimes the Disease shall seem almost wholly vanished, of
which mitigation we shall have an instance about the 10th. of December, and
from thence continue very moderately till Christmas, but afterward shall
spread it sel^ abroad a fresh. I is a common saying, Prevention is the best
Physic; I know no better way for them to avoid this troublesome companion,
that makes a kitchin-stuff pot of your head, and a Limbeck of your nose, than
for to keep your self wa^m, but be sure arm your self against him Cap a Pe, I
mean whatever you do secure your head and your feet, for they are common
sally-por^s where the Enemy enters, keep them therefore warm and dry, a cap
will be a good bedfellow, and it is better to pay the Shomakers bill than the
Apothecaries.

But if the intruder have already by a forcible Entry got Possession of the
Tenement of your body, the best way in the world to Eject him is by a sound
Sweat, to this purpose take a Dram of Diascordium, or two drams of
Mithridate, or a small quantity, about four Drams of Matthiolus his grand
Antidote, or if you please take Aurum Diaphoreticum, or Diaphoretick Antimony,
or what other Sudori^iques (or sweat-provoking Medicines you please) and in
sweating whether for this or any other Distemper order your body thus, if you
would receive more benefit than harm by it.

Take the Medicine in your bed, and be covered warm, drink often as you lie
Posset drink, as hot as you can endure it, sweat an hour or two, if your
strength will bear it, then the chamber being kept very warm, shift your self
all but your head, about which (your cap which you sweat in being kept on) wrap
a hot napkin, which will be a means to repel the vapors back.

This sweating will turn the humors in your bodies into vapors, and setting
open the Pores will ridd you of them without any more to do, or you may make
use of the following Syrrup, by which several scores about this City have been
perfectly cured, a thing no less excellent in its virtues than cheap and easy
to be obtained.

Take a whole head of Garlic the largest you can get, peel the several Cloves,
and bind them all up together again, then put it with a quart of running water
into some earthen vessel, and stop it up very close with paste, and let it
stand in a hot Oven twelve hours, then being took out do not open it till it is
quite cold, for if you should, the spirits and virtue would evaporate, then
strain out the Garlic and press out as much as you can of the juice, and boil
up that liquor that remains with brown sugar candy to the thickness of a
Sy^rup, and eat thereof as you have occasion, but be sure you keep your self
warm after it for it as a great opner of the Pores.

To eat a raw Pippin, is a usual Remedy for a Cold, and I know a Gentleman that
commonly Cures himself by drinking of a pint of cold Water when he goes to Bed;
These may seem strange Medicines, but not to those that truly understand the
mystery of Sympathy and Antipathy, and that Diseases are cured by their Likes,
as well as by their Contraries: It often happens that Colds leave ill-favor'd
effects behind them in the Body, and settles with pain and trouble in some
particular Member, in such a case you have no more to do, but send to the
Apothecaries for a little Vnguenium Nervinum, and it will help you, having
restored several even in dead Palsies; for Wind, anoint your Belly with it; for
want of Digestion; your Stomach; for the Cholick, your Belly; For whatever
Disease in any part of the Body comes of Cold, esteem this Ointment as a Jewel,
and bless GOD who has given Man the knowledge of it.

For a Cough.
First cut the phlegm with Syrup of Vinegar, then purge and cleanse the Breast
and Lungs, which may be done by giveing wine of Antimony, and taking several
times after it Diacassia, then comfort the Lungs with Syrupus Succorum, and
give Troches Bechice to hold constantly in your mouth, which you may buy at the
Apothecaries and carry about you in a paper, and at night take Tincture of
Sugar or extract of Elecampane, or Elixar Proprietatis is very useful, the best
of which to be had in London is prepared and sold by my worthy friend Doctor
Coelson at the Royal Oak on Tower Hill, and is very necessary for all families
to keep by them, being an excellent Medicine in all kind of colds, as likewise
in the Griping of the Guts and most common diseases.

I might have entertaind the Reader with disputing whether these colds now so
rife amongst us are not contagious or catching, most Physicians hold they are,
which seems confirmed by experience, in that when they come into a house they
usually go quite round the Family, by I have not time to enlarge, only because
I would be civil at parting, I care not if I invite all persons gentle and
simple, that shall not have a cold since Michaelmas to dine with me the day
after Christmas day next where they shall be very welcome, and have an
Hermetical Banquet, dressed by a spagyrical Cook, that like (the Ambrosia of the
Heathen divinities) shall render all that taste of it immortal.

FINIS.

