Practical Christianity: Or, an Account of the HOLINESS WHICH THE Gospel
Enjoins, WITH The MOTIVES to it, AND THE REMEDIES it proposes AGAINST
TEMPTATIONS, With a Prayer concluding each distinct Head.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aedib. Lambethanis 23. December. 1676.

GEO. HOOPER

LONDON: Printed by S. and B. G. for R. Pawlet at the Sign of the Bible in
Chancery Lane. 1677.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have endeavored in this following Discourse, to endear Holiness to the Love
and Practice of Mankind; which is a design neither so trifling nor criminal as
to stand in need of an excuse:

But because a very worthy design may miscarry in the contrivance and method of
its prosecution, therefore I think my self obliged to give you some account of
that: which is thus, I have endeavored to represen^ Religion in its true and
natural Character, purified from the sensual Freedoms which some, and the
frantic and conceited Whimsies which others deform it by: I have proposed the
glorious Motives to Holiness, and the powerful Remedies against Temptation
which it contains. I have performed this as near as I could, in an easy Method
and familiar Style: I have not intermixed either Fancy or Passion, which seems
to me too light and garish a dress for Divine thoughts, but writ them in as
natural a plainness and Majesty as I could give them, hoping all from the
conquering power and influence of clear truth, and therefore it will be
necessary, to him who shall design any advantage to himself from this Treatise,
to read it deliberately, and allow each sentence a proper Consideration; for
being forced to crowd many Truths into a narrow compass, I have wove the matter
a little closser, and chose a conciser Style, than otherwise I should have
done; and therefore do not expect to be betrayed by me into a wise Love of
Religion at unawares, or to be heated into a Romantic Passion for Virtue, the
former is impossible, and the latter of little use; but if you bring an honest
and attentive mind, I hope you may find something in this Discourse which may
be of very important service to your Soul. And besides this I had one
inducement more to the Publication of this Treatise, that is, I am sufficiently
assured that no kind of Discourses contribute more to the peace and welfare of
Church and State than those practical ones, which aim at implanting a real
goodness in the minds of men, for the want of this goodness is it which has
betrayed us into Errors so numerous and so fatal to the public Peace, and
Charity, and to the very vitals of Religion; for if our minds were possessed
with that Charity, and Meekness, and true Zeal for the Divine Glory, which
becomes Christians, we should consider more calmly, and see more clearly, and
act more sincerely; we should discern a more manifest contradiction to Religion
in those unnatural Feuds, which are carried on by so much passion in such
irreligious methods, and made use of to such unchristian purposes, than in any
thing, which is the subject of our contests; and we should follow after peace
by a compliance, if not to all yet to all we could, and then I am confident we
should soon put an end, if not to our Mistakes yet to our Divisions:

If I have contributed my endeavors to this, in my degree and capacity; I hope
for pardon at least here, and am assured of a Reward hereafter. Farewell.

ERRATA.
PAge 15. l. 26. after all which, add gives us an excellent notion of God, and.
p. 48. l. 11. r. Thee or four. l. 13. r. Faith, Love, Temperance and Humility
p. 98. l. 2. r. his happiness or glory. p 102. l. 14. r. unkind. p. 123. before
the prayer add Sect. 3. As to the means of attaining Temperance I refer my
Reader to the Section of Fasting. p. 138. l. 14. for better r. lesser. p. 164.
l. 11. for word r. world, p. 223. l. 9. for are of r. use, p. 249. l. 23. r. or
universal, yet --

THE CONTENTS.
PART. I.
Chap. 1. THe great Motive to Religion. 1. The Salvation of the Soul. Chap. 2.
Of the Nature of Christianity in general in relation to Faith. page 13 Chap. 3.
Of Christianity with respect to practice in general. p. 29 Chap. 4. Of
Christianity with respect to practice in particular Of Faith. 65 Of the Love of
God. 82 Of the Love of our Neighbor. 91 Of Temperance. 112 Of Humility. 124 Of
Perfection. 133

PART. II.
OF the Motives to Holiness contained in the Gospel. Of the Reward and
punishment in another Life. 152 The Second Motive, the Consideration of Divine
Nature. 172 The Third, the Consideration of Jesus Christ. 179 The Fourth, the
Vanity of Temptations. 193 The Fifth the Nature of Virtue and Vice. 195 The
Sixth, the assistance of the Divine Spirit. 206 The Seventh, the Nature of the
Gospel Covenant. 207
PART. III.
OF Temptations to Sin. Of Pleasure. 220 Of Pain. 241 Of some particular
Methods by which we are betrayed into Sin. 265 Of the Instruments of Holiness;
the Sacraments, Prayer, and Fasting. 280 The Conclusion. 296
Practical Christianity.
CHAP. I. Showing the necessity of being Religious, because the Salvation of
our Souls depends on it.
Sect. 1.
1. WHat is a Man profited (says our Blessed Savior, Mat. 16.26.) if he shall
gain the whole world and lose his own Soul?

That I have in this state I am now in, a Soul as well as a Body, whose
interest concerns me, is a truth my own sense sufficiently discovers; for I
feel Joys and Sorrows, which do not make their abode in the Organs of the
Body, but in the inmost recesses of the Mind; pains and pleasures which Sense
is too gross and heavy to partake of, as the peace or trouble of Conscience in
the Reflection upon good or evil Actions, the delight or vexation of the mind,
in the contemplation of, or a fruitless inquiry after excellent and important
Truths.

2. And since I have such a Soul capable of Happiness or Misery, it naturally
follows, that it were sottish and unreasonable to lose this Soul for the gain
of the whole World: For my Soul is I my self, and if That be miserable I must
needs be so; outward circumstances of Fortune may give the World occasion to
think me happy, but they can never make me so; Shall I call my self happy, if
Discontent and Sorrow eat out the life and spirit of my Soul, if lusts and
passions riot and mutiny in my bosom, if my sins scatter an uneasy shame all
over me, and my guilt apales and frights me? what avails it me, that my Rooms
are stately, my tables full, my attendanrs numerous, and my attire gaudy, if
all this while my very Being pines and languishes away? These indeed are rich
and pleasant things, but I nevertheless am poor and miserable Man: Therefore I
conclude, that whatever this thing be I call a Soul, tho it were a perishing,
dying thing, and would not outlive the Body, yet it were my wisdom and
interest to prefer its content and satisfaction before all the world, unless I
could chose to be miserable, and delight to be unhappy.

3. This very Consideration, supposing the uncertainty of another World, would
yet strongly engage me to the service of Religion, for all it aims at is to
banish sin out of the world, which is the source and Original of all the
troubles that disquiet the mind; for 1. Sin in its very Essence is nothing else
but disordered, distempered passions, affections foolish and preposterous in
their choice, or wild and extravagant in their proportion, which our own
experience sufficiently convinces us, to be painful and uneasy. 2. It engages
us in desperate hazards, wearies us with daily toils, and often buries us in
the ruins we bring upon our selves: and lastly it fills our hearts with
distrust, and fear, and shame; for we shall never be able to persuade our
selves fully, that there is no difference between good and evil, that there is
no God, or none that concerns himself at the Actions of this life; and if we
cannot, we can never rid our selves of the pangs and stings of a trembling
Soul: we shall never be able to establish a peace and calm in our bosoms, and
so enjoy our Pleasure with a clear and uninterrupted freedom. But if we could
persuade ourselves into the utmost height of Atheism, yet still we shall be
under these two strange inconveniences. 1. That a life of Sin will be still
irregular and disorderly, and therefore troublesome. 2. That we shall have
dismantled our Souls of their greatest strengths, disarmed them of that Faith,
which only can support them under the afflictions of this present Life;

Not to mention, that after all; the sad Stories of another Life will not be
strait way nonsense, because we think them so, they will continue at leastwise
disputable, and who would, but a desperate-Sot, commit his Soul to such a
venture!

Sect. 2.
4. But when I consider, that the immortality of the Soul is a persuasion,
which generally obtained in the Heathen world, That the more wise and virtuous
any of 'em were, the more deeply were they possessed by the belief and hopes of
it, that the reasons Plato, Cicero, etc. founded this assertion in, derived
from the nature of the Soul, its operations, its little affinity to any visible
matter, its resemblance of the Deity, etc. have rendered it so highly probable,
that it has shed a very powerful influence upon the Lives of many.

5. But especially and above all, when I consider, that the Holy Scripture,
(whose Divine Authority is cleared by as strong evidences as any matter of that
nature is capable of) assures me that this Soul (whether in its own nature
immortal or no, I Will not now examine) shall not perish in the Dissolution of
this Earthly Tabernacle; as Eccles. 12.7. Then shall the Dust return to the
Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it: and Mat.
10.28. Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul:
(The Soul it seems is not liable to the injuries of a Disease, or the violence
committed on the Body, but does subsist when the Body is dissolved into its
dust:) When I consider all this, I can never so far renounce my Reason, and
harden my self against all the tenderness and passion I have for my self, as to
be content that this Soul should be lost in that other State, provided I be
fortunate and successeful in this; for what satisfaction can I then reap from a
patrimony or purchase wide as the world it self, in a state wherein I shall be
deprived of all means and opportunity of enjoyment? What can the Wealth, or
Power, or Beauty of the World signify to me, when the Body, which is the
proper instrument of earthly pleasure, shall lie stark dead and cold in the
Grave, shall have no passions, no appetites, nor can all the Rhetoric or
wanton charms on Earth awaken in it one languishing desire, or one imperfect
act of Life; and as to the Soul, it must dwell in the Mansions of a new world,
(far, far remote from this,) wherein every thing will be strange, wonderful,
unalterable, and eternal.

But I must pursue this thought a little further, and not stopping in the
contemplation of the uselessness of the World after the Souls departure from
it, go on to consider the Soul in its intermediate state between Death and the
Resurrection, that I may know the utmost (if I can) that the loss of a Soul
imports; and here I would suppose my self surprised in the midst of gavety and
pleasures, of Love and Honor, by a violent, inexorable disease; I resign up my
dear objects, and my dotage together; I am torn from my possessions and my
hopes; and when the storm has burst the Cable, and shattered the Hulk of this
frail Bark the Body, it casts my Soul, that is all that remains of me, upon an
unknown strand, naked, and poor, and desolate, without interests, or friends,
or hopes; it must dwell in the dismal blackness of eternal night and
Melancholy, rackt by despair and guilt, scourged by shame and rage, tortured
with envy and vexation, stabbed by regret and repentance, not a calm and soft,
but a tempestuous and painful one; then like some sick body, which rowles and
tumbles for an easy posture, rather out of an inability to suffer pain, than
any hope of finding rest, it sometimes languishes and looks back upon the world
vanished like a dream, and repeats ineffective wishes for the Body, but it shall
return to its dear wealth and beauty no more for ever: Sometimes like Dives in
the flames, it looks toward that Region, where Light and holy Souls do dwell,
but the unpassable gulf of the Almighty's Decree cuts off all hopes of that,
so that that Light only augments its envy and despair, and Heaven it self adds
misery to the wretched Souls hell.

This is the natural and unavoydable state of a wretched Soul, dislodged from
the body; despair, and rage, and shame, and guilt, and fear, and grief, and
anguish, gnaw and devour the miserable creature, and for ever must increase:
Blessed God! need there any chains to sink it lower than its own weight has
done? Needs there any other darkness cover that Soul, which such a cloud of
sorrows has benighted? Tell me no more of pleasures, these thoughts are enough
to make me tremble, and grow pale at the approach of a temptation; rather than
my Soul should dwell in such a state a thousand years, may shame and poverty be
my portion in this life, may the hatred of powerful enemies, or what is worse,
the scorn of my dearest friends pursue me, may my Body be but a Scene of
Diseases, and so incapable of the least gust of pleasure; and more than this,
may an awakened tender Conscience every moment flash Death and Hell into my
face, or if there be any thing worse, let me suffer it, so it but preserve my
Soul from Sin here and from that inexpressible state of torments afterward!

And yet all this while I have taken no notice of those additional sufferings
which Divine Vengeance will no doubt inflict upon the Soul, nor of the nature
of the Soul; the exaltedness of whose Essence heightens and sharpens the pain;
for the more delicate the Being, the more subtle its perception, and the more
exquisite the torment.

Sect. 3.
There is a third State wherein misery swells to the highest mark it can
possibly, when the Body, being raised again shall follow the Fate of the Soul,
and both shall be condemned to inextinguishable flames; O Hell, where only the
Enemies of God and Goodness dwell! where wretched men undergo all that sullying
the Divine Glory, and trampling on the blood of Christ can merit! But I have
reserved a place for a further survey of this state.

I am sufficiently convinced, that the gaining of the whole World cannot
recompense the loss of my Soul, since its loss implies all this, and more: for
what would I take to be miserable? or rather, what would I take to be eternally
so? is it a rational question? if I lose my self, what can be gain to me? the
world peradventure will continue amiable many ages after I am gone, but what is
that to me?

And if to gain the whole world at so dear a price be so ill a Bargain, how
fatal a purchase should I make, who am like to gain so little, being none of
the worlds greatest Favorites! My Soul is not so cheap yet, that I can set it
at so low a rate, as a few hundreds a year: I am as immortal as any Monarch in
Christendom; and my pretensions to the Almighties favor may grow equal to
that of any of the Sons of men, and I should be a Profligate and Reprobate, a
Brute indeed, if I should abandon my poor Soul to Misery, and renounce the
interest I have in the God of Heaven and Earth, for I know not what.

Let who will therefore sweat and toil for wealth and greatness, I have but
this one business to do, to insure this dear, dear Soul of mine in its voyage
to eternity; let who will gain the Reputation of a wise man by a clearer
foresight and thriftier management of affairs, by an unwearied Attendance, and
insinuating applications, I shall think my self wise enough, if I can but be
saved, and great enough if I enjoy but the Smiles of Heaven: Let who will
applaud themselves for the contempt of intrigue and sullen business, whilst
they thaw and dissolve in soft and delicate pleasures, or waste and spend
themselves in course and toilsome Lusts; If I may enjoy the pleasure of a manly
rational life, spent in a constant course of Religion and virtue, without
Superstition or frowardness; of a mind unharass'd by desires and fears; of a
peaceful assured conscience; of the contemplation of glorious Truths, and the
hopes of a blessed immortality, I shall envy none the happiness of the most
luscious pleasure, or kindest fortune the World affords.

A Prayer reflecting on the precedent Discourse.
BLessed God, give me grace to prefer the interest of my Soul to the World and
Flesh; the things eternal to the things temporal; that amidst the pleasures of
Prosperity and Peace, and the flatteries of Reputation, I may not forget to
think what will be the condition of my future State; and that amidst the
troubles which besiege this mortal Life, I may be supported by the blessed
hopes of a better world; that the confident belief of the Souls immortality may
render me industrious to lay up a good foundation for the time to come; so that
when I shall have put off this Tabernacle of clay, I may be clothed with a
building of God, not made with hands eternal in the Heavens: all this I beg,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Christianity.
Sect. 1.
CHristianity may be considered either in Relation to Faith, or Practice: I
will first consider the Christian Faith, and that in the most practical manner
I can.

In my Creed, I have regard to three things especially. 1. To the use and end
of Faith, which is certainly to guide and influence our lives. 2. To the peace
of my own Breast. And 3. To the preservation of Charity: My Reason for the
first, is evident of it self; for the two later, is this: Tho I may doubt
whether I believe aright all that is necessary to my eternal salvation, and yet
that doubt not prove injurious to my happiness at the last day, because I did
both believe aright and live conformably to it, and the scruple arose only from
the Disputes and Contests of men, and the weakness of my own understanding, not
from any iniquity of my will; yet this doubt will disquiet and disturb my
repose, damp my cheerfulness and vigor, and may peradventure unsettle my
faith, and end, if not in Atheism, in coldness and indifferency:

And tho 2. I may believe Another in a damnable Error, when he is not, without
prejudice to my own Soul, because I may make this judgment in the Simplicity
of my heart, by the best light and Rule I have; yet peradventure this opinion
may improve it self insensibly upon my affections, to a very ill consequence,
and invite me to an uncharitable and unfriendly deportment.

(1.) If I consider the Christian Faith with regard to the great end of it,
Holiness, I observe that the Gospel contains two great things, the Knowledge of
God, and of Jesus Christ; This is Life eternal, Joh. 17.3. To know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: This knowledge contains
in it all the Obligations imaginable to a Holy Life, and secures the hopes and
comforts of Christians upon an unmovable foundation; and this knowledge agrees
perfectly with the Nature and Ends of Religion.

1. First, With the Nature of Religion. Religion is nothing else but the true
and spiritual worship of the only true God, who is a Spirit: Now all the
worship we are capable of paying him, consists either in the Affections of the
Soul, or Actions of the Body; so that that Belief or Knowledge which tends to
render these proper and acceptable to God, is directly conformable to the
Nature of Religion; The Gospel therefore has discovered God to us 1. One,
infinite in Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Goodness, etc. And secondly, as he stands
more particularly related to us in the Work of Creation, Providence,
Redemption. All this put together proves him to be God, and to be Ours; it
evinces his Excellency and his Supremacy; it represents him infinitely Lovely
and Adorable in himself, and entitles him to all the service and affection,
which Dominion, Love, and Munificence can lay a just claim to, all which is
enforcement enough (which is the use of Faith) to our Duty, when we are
acquainted with it:

Which that we might be, and that we might have assistance to enable us to
perform it, and that there might be a Provision made for the pardon of our
errors, God in his infinite wisdom thought it necessary to send his Son into
the world, and therefore it is necessary to eternal Life to believe in Jesus
Christ, whom he has sent; and about him we are informed in the Gospel, that he
is the Son of God; that he was made Man, and lived here upon Earth, that he
might teach us our Duty, and leave us an Example of it; that he was crucified
for our sins; that he rose again from the Dead, and after forty days
sojourning here, he was received into glory, and became the Head and Prince of
his Church, etc.

The Belief of all which, illustrates the Justice and Mercy of the Most High
God: assures us of the truth of his promises, i. e. The assistance of the
Spirit of God, and eternal Rewards; and superadds most powerful Obligations to
obedience, and lays an unshaken foundation of Joy and Peace by showing us on
what account our sins are pardoned, and our services accepted. So that now
there will need but few words to prove

2. That this knowledge does directly serve the End and Aims of Religion, which
must be Gods Glory and Man's Happiness, the former is already proved, for to
Glorify and to Worship God are equivalent terms; the later easily appears
thus, in that this Belief does. 1. Rescue us from the power of sin, by powerful
motives, and endearments, to and by supernatural assistances of virtue, and 2.
From the guilt of it by the Blood of Christ; and so it frees us from the misery
of unruly passions, and from the slavish Fears of Death and Hell: 3. It
composes our minds in all the various changes of the world, by the firm
persuasion of the wisdom, power, and goodness of the God who governs it; And
lastly, it delights and satisfies our Souls by the discovery of Objects fit for
their love and enjoyment; which is no less essentially necessary to our present
happiness than any of the former, for Man being a weak and empty Creature,
cannot like God, find his happiness in the fruition of himself, but must seek
it in something else, which must be able to fill all his desires and appetites,
and satisfy all his Capacities of enjoyment.

O Happy Christian, that conquers the World and himself, that is freed from all
fears and jealousies about a future State, and enjoys the ravishing Objects of
a glorious Faith; well may the Holy Spirit make up the Description of this
State, of characters of Joy, Peace, and Hope.

2. But now Secondly, that this Happiness may be entire, it is neessary to
secure the peace of my own bosom, as to the matters of Faith: And this may be
disturbed two ways, either by doubting of the Truth, or else the Sense of
Divine Revelation: we are tempted to the former commonly by this Argument,
These things cannot be, therefore the Book, which contains the History of them,
is an imposture. To the later, by much the same Argument, These things cannot
be therefore (since we cannot deny the authority of Scripture) we must explain
them in some other sense: Both proceed upon this botome, I cannot understand or
conceive the possibility of this or that, therefore it cannot be.

To secure my self from the first of these, I consider the infinite Majesty of
the God we worship, and the trifling dwarfish Capacities of us Men, and then I
wonder not, that some Articles should rather surprise and dazzle my faculties
than enlighten them.

To expect otherwise, were to forget the nature of mysteries, and of my self;
it is true, to believe without a Reason for it, is Credulity not Faith, but
then Revelation is the highest Reason for the belief of things supernatural,
there being no other mean left us to attain to their knowledge; so that all
that Reason can have to do here, is not to discuss the probability of the
Article revealed, but the Authority of the revelation, and this being once
cleared, to surrender up our doubts and scruples: which is (weighing the
shallowness of our understandings, and the depths of mysteries) no more than in
a tedious long journey, our eyes being dim, and the way unknown and intricate,
to abandon our selves to the conduct of a kind, skillful, and faithful Guide.
The Sum of all is this, Man is born like a wild Asses Colt, and arrives into a
rational Creature by painful institution, and slow progressions, the Soul being
clouded by Passions, imprisoned and limited by scanty Organs, perverted by
unhappy prejudices; and therefore it is a very wild, and extravagant piece of
folly, to make ones own understanding the great standard and measure of all
truth, or to determine, that the utmost of our Fancy is the utmost extent of
Nature and of the Deity too; for on the other hand, God is a great and
incomprehensible Being, Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his
greatness is unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. and therefore by a clear consequence,
our Faith is not the less reasonable, because it is the more resigned, an awful
distance and a modest Faith is as essential a part of Holiness, as the
conformity of our Wills to the Divine Law. These very Considerations will serve
to secure me

2. Against all doubts, about the Sense of Revelation, for the received and
general sense appears to be the more natural and obvious, and therefore no
objection lies against it, but what is already removed, the seeming
impossibility of it: and if it be further considered that the Gospel was
addressed to persons of very ordinary endowments; and therefore to be
understood in its most obvious sense; that it is most conformable to that
humble infant Spirit Christ requires in his Disciples to qualify them for the
reception of his Doctrine, to Believe rather than Dispute: That the received
sense is the sense of the whole Catholic Church. That an Error of judgment,
which springs from Humility not Pride, will be rather pitied than punished by a
good God, this all together will easily raise my Faith above all scruple and
wavering: Especially if I add to all this, this one Observation, That the
Adversaries of any one Article of Faith, have never made up one entire Body,
but several Sects, divided by numerous and contradictory Tenants, built up upon
different Foundations, that they have never been able to propagate any thing
but wild and unaccountable fancies; that they have set Scripture at a more
irreconcilable distance from it self, and instead of clearing its mysterious
senses, have made its plainest sense a Mystery.

From all this I am obliged to resolve, not to gaze, and stare upon Majesty,
lest I be blinded by the shine of it; but worship and adore, that I may be
blessed by it. I Will look upon my Creed like the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6. It must not
be touched by a bold hand, though to support it: all its Articles are like the
Stones of the Altar, Exodus 20. to lift up a tool of a Workman upon them, tho
with design to polish and adorn, is nothing else, but to profane and unhallow
them.

If after all this I chance to Err, I do not doubt, but that the purity of my
intention, the diligence of my inquiry, the meekness and intireness of my
Resignation, will, through the mercies and goodness of a gracious God, secure
my Heaven, and render my error innocent and harmless. All that is behind now is
in the

3. Third place, to preserve my Charity for my Neighbor, least that Faith
which should be the strong engagement to union, become the unhappy Instrument
of Divisions: To this end I consider 1. That the Controversies now on foot in
Christendom are not about the Truth, but sense of Divine Revelation, none at
all calling into question the veracity, but the meaning of God; and therefore I
cannot conceive the glory of God any more lessened or injured by variety of
Opinions than by variety of Capacities; unless in their consequence.

2. As the bare assent to a Truth does not save, so I see no reason, why the
holding of an Error should damn, unless it be such as has a sinful Original or
Issue, or such as is not consistent with the Honor and Glory of the Most High
God; and indeed no Opinion which lessens the Majesty of the Most High God, can
be taken up by any one professing Christianity, but that it must begin or end
in Sin: But yet the aggravation or extenuation of the guilt of a Man thus
erring, may depend upon so many circumstances, as Capacity, Education, Means
and Opportunity of better information, the strength of prejudices, etc. That he
must be left to the judgment of God alone, and my duty, as a private Christian,
is to love and pray for him, and to endeavor his reducement by all the pious
Subtleties I can. This is the general Rule of the Apostle, Let not the Weak
judge the Strong, nor the Strong despise the Weak

I will live in the peaceful temper of these persuasions; happy in the
enjoyment of a smooth and settled Calm, resigned up to God, stanch and
consistent in my self, and possessed by charitable hopes of my Neighbor: I Will
endeavor to keep a Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Man; and
then I hope I may at last resign my Spirit into the hands of a faithful
Creator, in the Joys and Transports of this Precious Christian Faith.

The Prayer.
GLorious and incomprehensible God, suppress in me all proud thoughts, all wild
and wanton Curiosities, and keep my Soul in the humble frame of new born Babes!
Thou dwell in Light inaccessible, my Soul in a cloud of Flesh and Blood; my
Faculties are weak and tainted, and thy Light dazzling; and therefore it is not
for me, Lord, it is not for me, saucily to discuss, or pragmatically to
determine of, but humbly to receive, and heartily to embrace those Mysteries,
which thou a God of Truth, of Goodness, and of Power, have vouchsafed to reveal
to us by the Son of thy Bosom; Lord, I confess, that tho these Mysteries have
a dark, they have a bright side too, for tho I cannot see through them, yet I
see enough to oblige me to worship Thee in Humility and Love, and these, these,
I hope, will secure me in thy Love through Christ. Lord I believe, help thou
mine unbelief; enlighten my blindness! quicken and enliven my dullness! support
my frailties! disperse my Passions! free me from all the prejudices which clog
my sinful nature; and finally beget in me an earnest desire after those
blissful Mansions, where my Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision. Amen blessed
Jesus.

Thus I have considered the Christian Faith, and secured my own Peace: But
there are multitudes of People of a lower Rank and Capacity, who may not, it
may be, reach the design of this Section, who are distracted by the numerous
Controversies every where on foot, and frightened by the rash zeal of their
Abetters: For the satisfaction of such, I consider,

That it is easy to deduce from the Gospel, That the Almighty will judge men
by their several measures and opportunities. 2. That the great Fundamentals of
Religion are clear as day light, and therefore the Gospel is called Light, and
the Grace of God is said to appear unto all men, which (tho I suppose primarily
meant in opposition to the darkness of Gentilism, and in some measure of
Judaism too, and to that narrower limitation of this Grace under the Mosaical
Economy) implies with all the clearness of the Gospel, of which were there no
other proof, this one would suffice, That the Gospel was designed for the
benefit of all Mankind, and more immediately preached to the Poor, and Silly,
and Refuse of the World: The consequence of this is, that it seems at least to
me, wholly improbable, that any Body should be betrayed into a necessity of
Erring in Fundamentals, unless they be accessory to their own error, and
therefore this being once granted, I may resolve all I can think of necessary
for the Multitude in to two directions.

1. That holding fast to manifest Fundamentals, they for the rest submit
themselves to the Government they are under, which will be safe for them upon
three Accounts. 1. That the points controverted are such, which they are not of
necessity obliged to know. 2. That they themselves are not capable of making
any solid inquiry, and therefore to resign themselves to those set over them,
is the utmost of their duty. 3. That in this Case their submission to the
public Authority of the Church they are of, is an act of Obedience and
Humility, and most conformable to the command of God, and the peace and unity
of the world.

2. That they never prefer a doubtful opinion to the prejudice of a plain
Precept or Duty; a Man may go to Heaven tho he be not of this or that opinion,
but without Obedience and Charity he cannot; but to do this, is to stickle for
a Sect, in violation of Obedience and Charity, and to prefer an humor before
ones Duty, which is a certain Symptom of a mind infatuated by pride, or
perverted by interest.

CHAP. III. Of Christianity with respect to Practice, and that 1. In general,
and 2. In particular.
Sect. 1.
OF Practice in general, which contains Being and Doing Good;

We are born into a World full of Snares and Temptations; and we our selves are
Creatures blind, and yet wilful; weak and yet wanton too: and upon these
accounts we are vouchsafed the favor of Divine Revelation; to conduct us
through our Pilgrimage, to enable us to fight the good fight of Faith, and to
prevent our miscarrying through the Deceitfulness of Sin, and the frailty of
humane nature: and therefore whoever does not improve this gift of God, into
all these Advantages and Benefits, defeats the design of Heaven, and receives
the grace of God in vain.

Besides all this, the great Author of all things has declared himself a God
jealous of his honor, and delighted in the happiness of his Creatures; from
whence I naturally infer, that that only can be a design worthy of Christ's
descent into Earth, which promotes the Glory of God and the Happiness of Man,
and that is only Goodness or Holiness, concerning which I will

1. Enquire what kind of Goodness or Holiness that is, which the Gospel of
Christ requires: And

2. Prove that it tends to advance the Glory of God, and Happiness of Mankind;
which will serve not only as a proof of its being the scope and drift of
Christianity, but also for a strong enforcement, and motive to it.

Of the 1. Holiness is comprised in three things, living soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.12. That hereby is forbid all plain and
open violations of the Commandments; such as are. 1. All debasing of God in
our imaginations, and depraved Acts of worship consequent to this, and all
unthankfulness to him. 2. All sorts of Falsehood and Injustice. 3. All kind of
unnatural Lusts, and Excess, destructive to our Health or Reason, is too plain
to be proved: All this being nothing else but that ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts which we are to deny, and the very Heathens by the Light of Nature, Romans
1.32. Knowing, that they who do such things are worthy of death.

But whether Christian Holiness imports any thing more than the mere avoiding
those Sins, upon the principles and assistances of Religion; whether the
positive part of the command in the later part of the Verse, does not intend
something more, than the negative in the former part of it, is very well worth
our Consideration; because it is plain that the Scripture speaking with respect
to the Life of Gentiles which was depraved even below the Light of Nature, does
by mortification mostly intend an abstinence from those actions amongst them,
which were manifest transgressions of the Law: Mortify therefore your members
which are upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, etc. Col. 3.5. And because
most men do (by interpreting the Gospel to this sense) embrace Christianity
themselves, and recommend it to others under the Character of a Debonnair and
Complaisant Religion, so that the way to Life seems to me so exceeding broad,
and the Gate so very wide, that unless a Man be born with a most villainous
temper, and that be improved by a loose and undisciplined Education, a Man may
make a shift to enter in without much striving or struggling, which seems to me
very opposite to the meaning of our Savior. I will therefore answer to this
Quere by degrees: Having first removed the Objections by telling you. 1. That
Mortification is but one part of Christian Holiness, and that Abstinence from
gross Sin is but half of Mortification: And 2. That, I hope, they who speak
such soft things of Christianity, do intend it of a spiritual pleasure, or else
of that more perfect State, wherein they who are arrived at it know how to
abound; because having obtained a more complete conquest over the Body and the
world, they are not so easily ensnared as new Converts: And I proceed now to
the Query it self.

1. Acts of Sobriety and Justice, performed without any deliberation by the
mere inclination of Nature, (if such may be) are merely natural Actions,
neither good nor evil; neither rewardable nor punishable.

2. Acts of Sobriety and Justice, performed upon the sole instigation of
pleasure, and convenience, which attends such a Life in this present world, are
very proper and natural effects of Reason, but under the Gospel they do not
constitute any parts of the Righteousness of the Kingdom, because our Actions
are to proceed from nobler Motives; not that I deny, but that to us Christians,
Worldly Happyness may be a very lawful incentive to Holiness, but then it must
be in its place, not the sole and great, but a subordinate inducement. Thus tho
the Apostle invites us to goodness by Praise and a Good Report, yet he, who is
virtuous merely that he may be famed for it, is a vainglorious Sinner; so
though the promises of this Life annexed to Godliness, may encourage us to
embrace it, yet if any Man be godly merely for present pleasure and happiness
of this Life, he is but a Worldly Man; nor do I here only mean, that worldly
pleasure must not be the sole, but that it must not be the great, the principal
allurement to Religion; something it may contribute, but it must be in its
place and its Degree: and thus far I have treated the Quere with more favor
than I should, by making use of the words Acts of Sobriety and Justice, which
is not taken for granted in the Question; and now I must premise once for all,
that a mere abstinence from evil is not a Doing, or Being good, and then I
proceed to resolve

3. That to deny any Sin upon the account of Religion, i. e. The Fear and Love
of God, and Hopes of Salvation, is certainly an acceptable Sacrifice; but
because in all our Actions there are generally many motives twisted together,
and because Man out of fondness for himself is very apt to attribute the work,
to that motive which it is his interest should be uppermost; therefore it will
very nearly concern every one, to examine seriously the degrees and strength of
this Faith he pretends to; for peradventure, tho this Faith be strong enough to
restrain him from wild and unnatural Lusts, because it leaves him enjoyments
and pleasures enough to entertain him with more delight in their stead; and
gives him up to a Life no less sensual, tho the instances of sensuality be more
regular: Yet it may not be powerful enough to crucify all worldly and carnal
affections, and to force him to do perfect violence to his Inclinations: His
fondness for the pleasures of this Life may be too stubborn to give way to a
Faith, which is not more deeply rooted, nor armed and winged with holy passion;
and the Body may be too high fed to surrender up all its satisfactions upon the
demands of a drowsy Faith; so that the Man does not entirely deny himself
because Religion commands it; but thus far he thinks fit to comply with
Religion, because it does him no harm, it does not entrench upon his sensual
enjoyment: and if this be his Case, tho the Man may have called in Faith to the
assistance of Reason, yet he does not suffer it to reign, and by consequence
his Life is still the Life of Sense, and not of Faith. Faith comes in but
slantingly and collaterally into his Life, it is not the main and chief
inducement to his Actions.

4. And lastly, A Life lead in mere abstinence from evil, and yet an allowance
of the utmost freedoms we can with innocence enjoy (upon supposal that such a
Man could so love God and Heaven, as to be able to renounce all, when called
thereto, a supposition I can very difficultly be reconciled to) is but the
minimum morale; if Holiness, yet the lowest degree of it; and the Gospel seems
to me to have a further aim, to propose a greater height, and to expect from
its Votaries a nobler perfection; which will easily appear to any one who shall
diligently consider. 1. The great Motives to Holiness, which it contains, that
is, a declaration of the Divine Nature, Jo. 1.18. The infinite Love of God to
Mankind, manifested in the blessed Jesus, and the full Discovery of Life and
Immortality; or Secondly the mighty assistances it promises, that is the
blessed Spirit of God, and Divine Providence, employed, either in preventing us
from falling into temptations too big for this imperfect state, or else in
finding a way to our escape out of them: Or Thirdly, the immediate end of
Christian Religion, that is whilst we are here on Earth to fit us for Heaven:
He that shall seriously lay to heart these three things will be forced to
conclude, that in all reason, the Gospel must require of us something
proportionable to the extraordinary motives, the powerful assistances, and the
glorious end it assures and proposes to its Children, and this must be
something more than a mere negative righteousness; for it is unreasonable, that
this Light should beget in us no greater degrees of Love and Fear for God, than
what natural Reason might; or if it does, that the instances of our Obedience,
now under the Gospel, should be only such, as the strength of nature might have
enabled men to comply with under Gentilism, tho it must be confessed not so
easily as now.

Agreeable to this Doctrine our Holy Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, (which
is the Rule and Standard of the Christian Life) sets us as a more exalted
pattern: Not only to be True in our words, and Just in our dealings with our
Neighbor, but to be Charitable, Gentle, Patient, and to return good for evil
to our very Enemies: not only to avoid all unnatural Lusts and wild Excesses,
but also to be pure and holy, to admit of no sensual Fancy or unchaste Looks, or
idle words, to fast and afflict our selves (the Blessed are they which mourn)
he forbids us all Ambition, and Covetousness, and Vainglory, not on the account
of injustice, for that does not always unavoidably cleave to them, but as they
are the Acts of a worldly mind, which is perfectly contrary to poverty of
Spirit, and to laying up our Treasures in Heaven, and to the taking up of the
Cross of Christ, so powerfully and sweetly recommended. Our duty to God is
couched all along in the whole Discourse, but the Acts of worship more plainly
expressed, are Loving him as a Father, praying to him, endeavoring to promote
his Glory, and cheerfully to obey his will, relying upon him for assistance in
our spiritual warfare, for Provision, Protection, and Deliverance in this Life;
and add to all this, this one circumstance, that all this is to be done with
delight, constancy, and vigor, (implied in those general Precepts, Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst, etc. Lay up, etc. for where your treasure is there
will your Heart be also, seek you first, etc. and strive to enter in at the
strait Gate, etc.) and then you have our Saviors Sense of Christian Holiness;

If we consult his Disciples, the best Expositors of their Masters Text, we
shall find the whole of Religion comprised in two things. The Mortification of
the outward Man, and the Resurrection of the inward, by which they mean, as
appears from Colos. 3. a setting our affections upon things above, and not upon
things on the Earth, from whence I will infer two conclusions.

1. That our affections are an essential part of Holiness, that it is not
enough to approve of invisible things in our understanding, and then act not as
Men, who love God, and Heaven, and Goodness, but as men, who see it unavoidably
necessary to do something, and therefore go as far as is consistent with that
carnality they yet resolve to gratify; but that we must love them also; and
this to that degree may be able to extinguish our passion for the World, and
therefore.

2. The Life we are to lead, must be such a one as may most tend to enkindle in
us holy passions for the things above, a delight in the survey of our hopes,
and defires of entering into the presence of God; all which cannot be attained
but by requent Prayer, Meditation Hearing, and Reading of Gods Word, the holy
Communion, and heavenly Discourses: and on the other side to take off our
Affections from the world, and beget in us a generous contempt of it, which can
never be effected, but by repeated acts of self denial, fasting, watching,
meditating, on the example of a crucified Savior, the glories and pleasures of
another Life, the vanity and yet bewitcheries of this fadeing one; I may be
confident, that a constant caressing the senses with feasting, drinking, wanton
dalliances, the pomp and vanities of Life cannot be a proper method to the
mortification of the outward man or vivification of the inward;

So that if a very abstenious Life (as to the general course of it) be not
required, as an essential part of Holiness, yet it is necessary as the means
and instrument of it: conformable to this whole discourse is that of St. Paul,
1 Cor. 7, 29.30. But this I say Brethren, the time is short; it remains that
both they that have wives be as tho they had none, and they that weep as tho
they wept not; and they that rejoice, as tho they rejoiced not, and they that
buy as tho they possessed not; and they that use this world as not abusing it,
for the fashion of this world passes away: where we are not only interdicted
unlawful pleasures, but forbidden to give our selves up to lawful ones; and
commanded to use such moderation as may become men fully persuaded of the
shortness and vanity of this Life, and possessed by the expectations of a
better.

The Sum of all is this, The Christian State, is a State of extraordinary
Holiness and Purity; it is a new nature, wrought by principles, motives,
assistances, different from those of the natural man; it is, in one word, to be
Heavenly minded; and therefore that course of Life, which can best serve to
increase this blessed temper, is the Christians Duty; and that course which
quenches it, which softens and sensualizes us, is inconsistent with
Christianity, and inconsistent with Regeneration; for if we be risen with
Christ we shall not only Love, but seek those things, which are above; it
being impossible for any man to live, (when he can choose) quite contrary to
his own desires; so that he who loves God, need not be told, that he must Pray,
and Meditate, and Communicate, and be doing good, etc. When he knows he can
enjoy him here below no way else; he that hates Sin, and loves Holiness, needs
not be told that he must lead an abstemious Life, when he knows that feasting
and drinking, etc. do feed the Body into wantonness and lust, and quench the
holy flame of Love, and indispose it for Religious Duties.

From all this it is plain. Religion is in its essence an inward and spiritual
Holiness, outward actions can be considered but two ways, either as the means
and instruments, or else as the fruits and effects of Holiness; and both ways a
sober temperate Life (as to the general course of it) is indispensably
necessary; tho I cannot here deny, but that there must be an allowance made for
the variety of Tempers, and the different strengths of grace, etc.
proportionable to each man's different case.

Having thus given an Account of the nature of the Holiness which the Gospel
requires, I come

2. To show that it tends to promote Gods Glory and Man's Happiness. 1. Gods
Glory.

1. Though a right understanding be wholly necessary to, yet it self is no part
of Divine worship; it is not mere knowledge or belief of a truth, but Love, and
Fear, and Obedience by which we honor God, and devote our selves to him; there
is no where more light of knowledge (Heaven excepted) than in those Regions of
darkness where the most impious Spirits dwell, but no body will say that they
there worship God; it is true an understanding illuminated is certainly a
beautiful thing, but then if it be joined to an unsanctified will, the Man in
the whole is the most deformed and loathsome thing imaginable, for he is made
up of two the most disproportionable and contradictory things, as if he were
formed as the Poet fancies men, growing out of the slime of the Deluge, the
upper parts enlivened flesh and blood, the lower mud and clay; the light of the
understanding enhaunces the guilt of malice and degeneracy in the Will; for to
see God, and not love and obey him is strangely malicious, but if his beauty be
not adored by things that have no eyes to see it, it is not to be wondered at. If
you had been blind, then had you had no sin.

2. The Heavens, says the Psalmist, declare the glory of God, etc. Their
brightness and vastness, whilst they engage our wonder, invite us to the
contemplation of the Power, and Infiniteness, and Majesty of their Architect;
so Holy and Good men declare his glory too, for being renewed after his Image
in Holiness and righteousness, they represent to the World an imperfect draught
of some of the glorious attributes (...) God they worship: thus as the power of
Miracles imported to the Apostles, forced the Beholders to glorify God, who
had given such gifts unto men; so too Christ exhorts his Disciples to let their
Light shine before men, that when they see those good works, they may glorify
God, who is in Heaven; induced by the loveliness of that Goodness derived from
him, as the other were by his power.

3. It is Goodness, by which we own a God, and acknowledge him to be ours.
Divine worship is the confession of our meanness and his Majesty; and
conformity to his Laws is the fullest proof we can give of our Allegiance and
his Supremacy; and therefore they who live irreligiously let 'em pretend to
believe and think what they will, are said to be without God in the world, and
to deny him in their works.

4. Holiness or Goodness is really Divine worship, and therefore it is in
Scripture defined to be Religion, and Wisdom, and Knowledge. To know God this
is Wisdom, and to depart from evil this is understanding To do Justice, to
relieve the Poor and Needy, is not this to know God, says the Lord: pure
Religion and undefiled is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
affliction, and to keep ones self unspotted from the world; more plainly; what
is worship, but the cleaving to God with purity and earnestness of Affections
acting in conformity to his Law as those Affections shall invite and enable us?
and this is the very same thing with Holiness. So that it is plain, that
Holiness and Goodness contribute to Gods Glory, the two only ways we are only
capable of glorifying him, that is by our own particular worship, and by the
influence our example has upon others.

2. It is most serviceable to the Happiness of Man here and hereafter.

1. Here.

1. All the advantage of peacefu, Governments, friendly Neighborhood I
comfortable and closer unions, and pleasant Retirements, depend on and arise
from Goodness: But suppose the World planted with Covetousness instead of
Justice, Pride instead of Meekness, Cruelty instead of Compassion, Revenge and
Malice instead of Mildness and Charity, falsehood and lying instead of Constancy
and Truth, etc. and imagine if you can whether all Societies would not be torn
into as many Factions as there are cross interests and opposite passions,
whether any Commerce could be just and smooth, any tie lasting and delightful,
whether it were possible to find security or pleasure either in a private or a
public Life.

2. It is Holiness which best secures a man's inward peace, guards and arms him
against those impressions which outward temptations make, prescribes bounds to
our Desires, scatters our Fears, confirms our Hopes, raises our Affections to
things of true and lasting Excellency; that is, in few words, it not only
settles our peace by establishing the empire of the mind over the inferior
Appetites, but also provides for our pleasure, by filling the mind with
spiritual Joys, and Peace, and Hope.

2. Hereafter.

3. Goodness is wholly necessary: 1. To recommend us to the Love of God, whose
infinite purity, and excellency cannot approve of any thing that is sinful and
unholy. This is the Message that we have received of him, that God is Light,
etc. Where you see that the Law is founded in his Nature, has an intrinsic
resemblance to his own Holiness; and by consequence he can neither alter it nor
dispense with its Observation. 2. To qualify us for Heaven, for it is
Goodness, which weans the Soul from all fondness for the Body, and the World,
and possesses it with an intense Love of God and Holiness, which two things do
first capacitate it for that world, wherein God, and holy Spirits dwell, and
Secondly recommend it to greater degrees of Glory and Happyness in it.

Besides all this the Scripture speaks This Doctrine in express terms, the
grace of God which has appeared unto all men teaches us, etc. This was the
great business of our Saviors Life, he was still instructing men in the
doctrine of the Kingdom, that is, Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety. His
Miracles did confirm the Divinity of his Person, and this too was carefully
secured, to gain authority to his Doctrine.

I will conclude this Chapter with the absurdity of the contrary Doctrine. Of
what use would the Gospel be in relation either to God's Glory, or Man's
happiness, if it were only to be believed, and not obeyed! To what purpose is
light come into the world, if men may still love darkness? to what purpose did
the Son who lay in the bosom of the Father reveal him more gloriously to us,
if, knowing him as God, it be yet lawful for us not to glorify him, as such --

And as insignificant would this opinion render it to the happiness of Man; for
of what use will all the excellent rules of Justice, Charity, Meekness,
Temperance, etc. prove, if we continue peevish and revengeful, intemperate and
lustful, etc. to what purpose are the fuller discoveries of another World, Life
and Immortality, and the Belief of Jesus being the Son of God, if they do not
enable us to conquer the world and mortify the flesh? and if I walk according
to the Laws of the Flesh, i. e. Violate the Laws of the Spirit, can I choose
but dread a God whom I have wronged? and will not unruly Passions and a
troubled Conscience make a Christian as miserable as a Jew or Heathen?

If Goodness now be the end and drift of the holy belief of Christians, then I
infer,

1. That the best Man is the best Son of the Church, and he whose affections
are more raised and heavenly, and has least of the mixture of sensuality, is
of the highest form in the School of Christ, because he does best answer the
design of his Lord, and walks in some measure as he walked.

2. That the most infallible characters of a true Faith are to be taken from
the government of our Passions; our conquest over the world, and the increase
of our inward joy, and peace, and hope. Good Lord! how apt are we to put a a
cheat upon the World and our selves, to persuade it and our selves that we
believe, tho there be no change in our Souls and Conversations, and therefore
consequently we do nothing less. I shall hereafter never think that I believe
aright, till I have a Love for all his Commandments, till I can meditate
delightfully, pray vigorously, rely constantly, obey readily, suffer
patiently, rejoice humbly, expect reverently, and (happy is me, if I attain
that height) earnestly too, the hour of my death, or the appearance of my Lord.
I shall never hereafter think, that I have studied or known divine truth to any
purpose, till the Truth has made me free, rescued me from the bondage of Sin,
and fears of Death.

The Prayer.
THou Holy, Pure, and Eternal Spirit who can not endure iniquity! who do so
love goodness, that thou have sent thy Son into the world to promote it; his
Life and his death, his Pains and his blood were spent in this Cause. O enable
thy poor Servant, who names the name of Christ to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and to depart from iniquity;

Lord let thy truth and thy Spirit be powerful in me to the subduing all of
evil inclinations. I believe that all things are naked and bare before thee,
and therefore that thou can not be mocked or imposed upon by specious
pretenses or formalities; That I am not to expect to appear any other in thy
Eyes, than such as I am in my self; enable me therefore to confess thee in my
practice as well as words, to live like one who believed thy holy Truths. Let
my heart be fixed in Honesty and uprightness to obey all thy Commandments. Let
the Belief of things not seen have the same influence upon me, they had upon
all thy holy Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors, i. e. Persuade me to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and holily in
this present world, through Jesus Christ.

Sect. 2. Of doing Good.
There are a sort of People who endeavor all they can to withdraw from the
world, and rid their hands of business, and think it abundantly sufficient if
they can discharge their duty toward God in their Retirements.

This is Lawful, nay commendable, only upon two accounts.

1. If my Temper or Circumstances be such, that my Conversation cannot be
public and safe too, for then the Salvation of my own Soul is naturally the
most near and dear concern; or

2. If my qualifications are such, that my retirement is likely to prove more
advantageous to the public, than my filling any other Post, for then I act
according to the Rules of Charity;

There are two other Inducements to a retired Private Life, The one founded in
a vice, the other in a mistake.

1. The First is when Men withdraw from the Business as from the trouble of the
World, and their Pleasure not Religion is their first and chief motive. They
meet with many rubs and oppositions in a busy Active Life, and then they grow
soft, and weak, and lasie, and they want Courage, and Industry; and the
frequent interruptions of their private peace and enjoyment is uneasy, and
they would withdraw to enjoy themselves; and this is unchristian and unmanly,
it is Epicurism, not Contempt of the World,

2. The mistake is when we look upon a Monastical kind of life as the whole of
Christianity, and the mere Perfection of the Regenerate state, and place Piety
so wholly in acts of solitary Devotion, as to seclude the doing good and
communicating, etc. It will behove such to consider. 1. That true and apparent
Motives, Pretense, and Religion are sometimes so twisted together, that it is
hard for a man to distinguish 'em, and therefore some secret weakness or
reserve may be the real, whilst zeal is made the pretended cause of this choice.

2. That the Busy and Active Life is the more Excellent; and the more
necessary. 1. the more excellent, as being fuller of hazards, and troubles, and
temptations; there is a larger field for virtues, for Patience, Courage,
Meekness, Reliance, etc. in an active than speculative life, and such will
receive more Crowns. And when I consider the Nature of God, and necessities of
Mankind, I cannot but think acts of Charity as prevalent to the wiping off our
guilt, as the severest penances. A vigorous and active life spent in promoting
the welfare of others, is a more perfect instance of self denial, speaks a
greater contradiction to our ease and pleasure, commits more violence upon our
inclinations, than any acts of private Austerity can pretend to do; for besides
the Pains, the watching, and the fasting incident to both a like, the trouble
of Contrivance, the industry of addresses, the uneasiness of refusals, etc.
sufficiently weigh down the one side. Besides this Confinement imprisons our
light under a bushel; it is a Cover, a Napkin for our Talents to conceal them
and render them useless to others; and therefore our reward will be less in
another world, and our graces the fainter in this, For to him what has, i. e.
uses, shall be given, Grace like the Widows Oil increases by being charitably
imparted: That Flame which warms my Neighbor, reflects back with a double heat
upon my self, and that Goodness which cherishes his heart, softens and
sanctifies my own. And over and above all this, I enjoy a strange delight in
doing good, and in beholding the fruits which my own hands have planted. And my
assurance, and the confidence of my hopes increases by the conscience of that
Love, which my works convince me I have for my Brethren.

2. That a busy employment of our selves for the advantage of others, is of
more absolute necessity. The world is one entire Body, and each member must be
serviceable in its place, nor can any part withdraw it self from the whole at
its pleasure, hence it is that the greater part of the Law of our blessed
Savior are Rules of Society, of Justice, Charity, etc. and he himself, the
best example, made his Retirements by night, but by day he went about doing
good; Nature has founded a cognation amongst us, as we partake of the same
form, shape, reason. But the Christian Religion has cemented us in closer
unions, made us the Members of the same Body, tied us together by faith and
love, by the same Sacraments, the same Promises, and the same hopes: and
therefore we cannot in reason think we do one another all the good we are bound
to, by a mere abstinence from doing wrong, and by sequestring our selves from
the service and concerns of our Brethren.

2. Because the Glory of God is more concerned in the deportment of whole
Societies, than a few private persons, as much as the safety of a multitude is
more valuable than that of a very few, and goodness redounds more to his honor
when public and almost universal, than when cloystered up in the Bosoms of a
few: therefore all good men must needs be obliged to promote the interests of
Holiness and goodness in the public, because the Divine Glory is so deeply
concerned in it.

3. (Which ought well to be considered,) The nature of Goodness is such that it
cannot well be conceived how the being good is separable from doing good. God
tho his own Heaven and Happiness, did yet found a World, to which he might be
an universal Benefactor; his Goodness was certainly the most powerful motive to
his Creation, not any considerable accession that his happiness was to receive
from it. This Goodness therefore in Man ought to be a Vigorous and Active
Principle, and render 'em the Benefactors of Mankind. It is indeed hardly
conceivable, how men should be zealous Patrons of virtue and goodness, and yet
not concerned to protect and own them, to promote and encourage 'em in the
world; or how men can be inflamed with a very strong Love of God, and yet not
endeavor to establish a true sense of his Beauties and excellencies in the
minds of Men; or how, lastly, any can be possessed with a passionate kindness
for a Brother, and yet never mingle with the concerns of his Soul or Body.

Lastly, The great motives of the Gospel are, The example of our Lord and
Savior, whose Disciples we profess ourselves, whom we are bound to imitate;
and he went about doing good. The glorious rewards annexed to all those who any
ways benefit Mankind, either by instructing the mind, or relieving the body;
The Character of the Children of God at the last Judgment is composed wholly
of Acts of Charity, all which suppose an active life. Conformable to this
Doctrine is that of Heb. 13.15, 16. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice
of Praise to God continually, that is the fruit of our Lips, giving thanks to
his Name. But to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased; we must pray, but prayer without doing good is
an unpleasing sacrifice, without Charity our very Devotion is unchristian, and
our Religion unnatural.

This let those mind, who are long in their Prayers, severe in their outward
deportment, frequent hearers of the Word, and yet we can discern in them no
fruits of Meekness or Charity: let 'em consider whether they do not mistake the
nature of Religion, whether they do not choose the more easy Sacrifice,
because it costs them nothing, whether they have not a secret reserve of
Covetousness or Frowardness, etc.

Having spoke this much of the Necessity of doing good, and the Motives to it,
I Will propose three or four Rules, and submit 'em to your Consideration.

1. That we must judge of our call to do good by the capacities and fitnesses
with which God has endowed us; and here I cannot but proclaim our own glorious
privilege, That tho to do good be so great and glorious a thing, that it is a
kind of imitation of God himself, a thing our blessed Savior came down on
earth for, yet it has pleased God so to multiply the instances and
opportunities of goodness, that there is none so unfortunate, as to be
incapable of doing good. The happy by their wealth, the wise by their
knowledge, even the miserable themselves, may by their patience, and courage,
and prayer, comfort and relieve the world; and we are to judge by our Parts and
Fortunes the way that God has marked out for our Charity and be content to
obey him in his own methods.

2. Let Meditation and Prayer administer to our good actions, and like oil to a
Lamp, give our Charity fresh Spirits and Flame; for as private Religion is
deficient without public Charity; so Charity, unless often refreshed by
Retirement, Devotion, and Heavenly Reflections, will cool and languish; our
Hearts will be tough and insensible, and our doing good will be only the
effect of Custom or Prudence, or Activity of Spirit, not of Religion or
Charity; and if (which is the best can be supposed) the man consecrates the
whole Mass of his Actions by purity of intention, and continues an obstinate
observer of Prayer, as far as he thinks strict duty obliges him to, yet for
want of more leasurely Meditation, and more serious Reflections, his addresses
will lose their warmth, his Soul will abate much of its Love, and whilst his
Religion loses so much of its pleasure and sweetness, what wonder if his
Charity relish more of drudgery than delight.

3: That we may not be discouraged from doing good, by any difficulty or
misfortune which may attend us in it, in our nightly Reflections, let us judge
not the hapiness of our success, but the integrity of our endeavor; and let us
think it sufficient reward, that we have obeyed God; or if we will measure our
success let us examine how much our experience has improved our Meekness, our
Patience, our Reliance, or Charity, for scarce any action, but will exercise
some of these graces.

4. Look upon doing good as truly your Business, as Prayer or Hearing the Word
or Meditation, etc. And therefore never think your time misspent, which is laid
out in visiting the imprisoned or sick, relieving the necessitous, comforting
the afflicted, and reducing those that err into the paths of Sobriety and
Truth, tho this time be pared off from our Meditations, Prayer, and Sacrament.
He is a good man indeed, who prefers meek attendance and ministry, and
importunate addresses to the Souls of men before much knowledge, passionate
disputes and high pretenses.

O Charity, how lovely must thou needs be in the eye of Heaven, for were thou
planted in all our hearts, Earth would resemble that place above: I will be
pleased therefore with my self only in proportion to what I share of thee, for
I know this is the Standard by which God now value me, and will hereafter judge
me.

If this be the end of Religion, only to implant goodness and charity amongst
us, to make us holy and like God, and kind, and beneficial, one to another what
is it, that the World hates it for; I may say, concerning those who persecute
Christianity, as St. Peter did of those who Crucified its Author. I wot that
through ignorance ye did it, Act. 3 17. Surely it is because you do not discern
its beauty, that you do not Love it.

If any retired life promote the end I have mentioned, as well as an Active,
once I would not be thought to condemn it.

The Prayer.
O God, the Heaven and Earth are full of thy goodness; the faculties of our
souls, and the senses of our bodies are all employed in the contemplation, and
enjoyment of it; O make us who worship thee, to imitate thee too, that we may
be thy children indeed, make our souls delight to do goood, and imprint in us
such tender and compassionate Bowels, toward one another, as our dear Lord and
Master had toward us, Amen, Amen, blessed Jesus.

CHAP. IV. Of Chrictian practice in particular.
HAving considered the Nature of Christianity in respect to practice in the
general, I am now to speak of it more particularly, but not pretending to give
an account, of every single virtue, I will dwell upon Three. Which contain the
substance of the Christian duty, i.e. Faith, Love, and Humility. I will not
apologize for the unphilosophical placing of Faith amongst practical duties,
the following discourse will clear the reason of it; I place humility in the
last place not because there is not an humility which is precedent to, and
disposes men for the reception of faith, but because I look upon that humility
which is consequent to, and caused by it, and which must always accompany it to
render it acceptable, in a more peculiar and proper sense, an Evangelical grace.

1. Of Faith.
When I read the glorious Achievements, of a true Faith, Heb. 11. That it
subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained promises. etc. and in one
word, supported men under the greatest miseries, and armed them against the
most taking pleasures of this World; I cannot sufficiently wonder, that a
fuller and clearer discovery of a Heaven, confirmed to us by the strongest
evidences, i. e. the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, should have so
weak an influence upon us Christians; we take no more pains for Heaven, than if
we did not believe there were such a place, and we have the same cares and
fears in respect of the things present, which Heathens and Infidels have; so
that though we talk much of Faith we make little or no use at all of it;

Therefore, least any man delude and fool himself with a persuasion of being
endowed with that Faith which he has not, I Will give such an account of it as
agrees with the Gospel of the Kingdom, as suits with, and serves the
necessities of mankind, and the end and Aims of God.

Faith, says the blessed Apostle, is the substance of things hoped for, and
the evidence of things not seen; the substance or presence, the evidence or
Proof, it is not a slight transient glance, drowsy imperfect assent, a
staggering wavering opinion, but it is a lively representation, an affective
vision, a full persuasion of the glorious truths of the Gospel: when the
Objects are so fully and clearly evident that they not only convince, but,
take us too; it is having the mind enlightn'd, and so looking upon things with
the eyes of Angels, and judging by the light of the blessed Spirit,

It is not only to see that the things invisible are, but to see them in some
measure, such as they are. Eternity as Eternity, and Heaven as Heaven, that is,
a state of truly great, and glorious happiness; on this account, the things
present may have a different face and aspect, when regarded by the eyes of
Faith, and when of Sense; for sense stops in the things themselves, and regards
their usefulness to the pleasure or profit of this present life; but Faith
carries its sight forward, and compares the things which are seen, with those
hoped for, the things temporal, with those eternal, and then all below appears
but mere vanity.

This whole account of Faith we may find in the 13 verse of Heb. 11. These all
died in Faith, (and what it is to dye or live in Faith, the following words
explain,) not having reciev'd the promises, (i.e. the accomplishment of them)
but having seen them a far off, (i. e. by divine Revelation) were persuaded of
them, and embraced them, (and the natural consequence of this was,) and
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth: Now Faith is
unalterable as to its essence, but its objects may vary, they may be more or
fewer, clearer or darker, according to the Nature of divine revelation, Heb.
1.1. its evidence may be fuller or weaker, but still it must be such as may
suffice to convince man of the Divine authority of the Revelation;

As to the Christian Faith. 2. Its objects are the whole Gospe^^ of Christ. God
the Father, such as he is revealed by the Son, God the Son incarnate,
crucified, etc. The Rewards and punishments contained in it; and all in order
to engage us to an entire obedience to its holy and righteous Precepts.

By Faith I see that God, who is invisible, who tho he dwells in Heaven, does
yet humble himself to behold all that is done upon Earth; nor does he only
behold but govern all things too: And whilst I contemplate his Wisdom, Power,
Truth, Goodness, Holiness, Justice, etc. manifested to me in the Gospel, I
adore and worship him, I love and fear him, I call on and rely upon him, I
endeavor to walk before him and be perfect; I know nothing like him, and
therefore I desire nothing beside him, or equal to him in Heaven or in Earth.

By Faith I see the Son of God abandoning the bosom, and the Glory of his
Father, descending upon Earth, and assuming the form of a Servant, that by his
doctrine and example he might propagate Righteousness and holiness in the
world; I trace him thorough all the Stages of his sufferings, and travel till I
behold him fastened to the Cross, and bleeding out his meek and holy Soul at
those painful wounds the nails had made; and all this for my sins, and the sins
of the whole World; and then with what a strange mixture of Passions that sight
fills me! with grief and shame, and yet with love and hope too: How I am amazed
to see what indignation a holy God has discovered against Sin! and how my
heart bleeds to think that my sins have treated thus despitefully and cruelly
my dear Lord and Master! and with what a melting passion, and vigorous
resolutions of a fervent industrious service, and an everlasting zeal and
devotion, do I behold the amazing instances of my Saviors Love, whilst with so
much affection and sweetness he laid down his life for me, whilst his enemy and
his persecutor! O how I long to do something for such a Savior as this, to
execute my lusts, to bring his and mine Enemies before his face and slay them!
and now tho a survey of my sins has filled me with amazement and shame, yet
since Christ has died I look up with comfort, and an humble hope! Since he
has died, did I say, yea rather since he is risen again, for

By Faith I see him breaking forth with Power and great Glory out of his
Sepulcher; I behold him ascending in Triumph up to Heaven; I see with Stephen
the Heavens opened, and my Prince and Savior sitting at the right hand of
Power, with one hand despencing his Graces with the other holding never fadeing
wreaths to crown the patience of his Saints: And now how I am exalted above
Nature, transported above the world and flesh! how this prospect has disarmed
the Beauties and glories of this life of all their Killing charms and
Temptations! how my soul leaps for joy to see a way opened into the holy of
holies! and to consider the mighty interest I have in Heaven!

As for Earth, I am so far from admiring it, I value it not; I know I must
sojourn here a while, and therefore I must be fed and clothed, but my heavenly
Father knows I have need of these things, and his is the Earth, and the fullness
thereof, and therefore he cannot want means and ability to provide for me; and
he is a wise and a good God, and he has promised by his Son to take care of
me, and all this will invite him to design and accomplish what is best for me:
Upon these grounds I think I could hope (like Abraham) even against hope, I
could rely upon God without any flattering appearances of promises, Friends
nay or any visible probabilities; I am to seek the righteousness of the
Kingdom, and permit the Government of the World to the God of it; I am his
child and he is my Heavenly Father, to obey is my Duty, and (with Reverence be
it said) to provide for me is his.

By this time it is easy to be discerned what kind of Faith it is must save or
justify us; one that enlightens our understanding, and ravisheth our Heart;
one that prays and watches, that contends and struggles, and fights and
conquers; one that makes us too great for Earth, and fit for Heaven; one that
fears, and loves, and worships, and seeks, and relies, and hopes: And then

3. When it has done this, when I find my Faith made perfect in Love, when
through this belief I find my self a conqueror over the World and Flesh, and
have crucified those lusts I did before serve and gratify; then I am full of
Joy and peace; Then I feel that pledge of his Love, that spirit which he has
given me, assuring me of the pardon of my sins thorough the blood of Christ.
Then I have a foretaste of the powers of the world to come, and I do in some
measure anticipate my Heaven. And not till then.

For this persuasion of the pardon of my sins (call it what you please, Faith,
Peace, Hope, Assurance) is always proportionable to the success I have in my
fight of Faith; if I have either falsely betrayed, or weakly deserted a good
cause i.e. my virtue under a temptation, which is in Scripture called a Trial;
if I have turned my back in the day of battle; then my own conscience condemns
me, and because I know that God is greater than my Conscience, and knows all
things, therefore I cannot expect to stand when I am judged, unless I rally and
repair my fault: But if upon a serious reflection upon my life each evening, my
conscience acquit me as a Conqueror through Faith and Love, then I rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory: what a beautiful morning does this Faith
shed upon any soul! How I long that thy Kingdom, O God, may come! And how I
disdain all that this vain World can flatter me with! Then like Peter, tho all
men should be offended (fall through temptation) yet will not I. Give me a
temptation equal to this Faith. (till the sense of my frailty, as in Peter, do
lower my confidence and yet heighten my resolutions.)

And yet all this does not in the least imply any reliance or confidence in my
own Righteousness or works (phrases of the same sense in Scripture.) But that I
know Repentance and Faith are proposed as the sole conditions of Justification
thorough the blood of Christ. And that these fruits or effects of Righteousness
(I mean a holy life) are the only evidence of these habits; and therefore I
can never persuade my self that I believe and repent, till I live well; nor
ever flatter my self with Peace, Peace through his blood, till I thus believe
and Repent; to do otherwise is presumption not Faith; it is the fond and
groundless confidence of foolish Virgins, which shall be for ever shut out from
the Bridegrooms presence.

There is not in the book of God any one plainer Doctrine than this. Not every
one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven: which is, not every one
that professes me to be Lord, and so far relies upon me as to knock at the
gates of Heaven with presumption of admission, shall enter, etc. If we walk in
the light as he (God) is in the light, we have fellowship one with another (and
truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, v. 3.)
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Where, walking
in the light (that is Holiness) is supposed as a necessary condition to our
purification by the blood of Christ; and, tribulation works patience, and
patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, etc.
These are the steps or stages by which the Christian makes his progress into
assurance. Tribulation being conquered works patience, and Patience
experience i.e. a conviction or proof of our Love of God, and this experience
works hope, which contains in it the assurance of pardon, and the expectance
of a better world; and by the same method does he who is attacked by the
temptations of pleasures proceed to a particular assurance.

The Sum of all is this; man may be considered in Three states. 1. Of
unregeneration, and then he is to be convinced of the truth of the Gospel, (if
that be supposed) this belief will easily convince him of his unrighteousness,
and show him the wrath of God revealed from Heaven against all ungodly and
impenitent sinners, and on the other hand, the blood of Christ (who became a
propiation for the sins of the World) will encourage him to hope for
reconciliation and pardon, if he repent and rely upon Christ; And it will
highly, oblige him to both; or 2. In a state of Regeneration, and then
according to that experience and proof a man has of the truth and sincerity of
his Conversion, such is the proportion and degree of his assurance and hopes;
which does not exclude but suppose Faith in Christ; for this is no more then to
believe, that now his sins are pardoned, his prayers heard, his services
accepted, and he shall at last bear warded, (if he persevere unto the end) in
and thorough Christ. Or 3. In a state of Relapse, and even here, he has yet
hopes, (if he repent) thorough the blood of Christ. For this is frequently
asserted in Scripture. I Will urge but one place. 1. Jo 2. 1, 2. My little
Children, (regenerate certainly) These things write I unto you, that ye sin
not; and if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, etc. that by these sins are
not understood the unavoidable frailties and imperfections of the best men, but
plain and manifest transgressions of the Law, is plain. 1. From hence, that
this is the general notion of sin in this Epistle. 2. from the manner of
speaking, that ye sin not, if any man sin, which cannot be sense if applied to
the unavoidable errors and imperfections of the best of men. 3. They are here
said to be of the number of those sins for which Christ shed his blood, and are
equaled with the sins of the rest of the World.

And besides these Three uses of Faith I know none, nor what more can be
attributed to, or desired from the blood of Christ; I cannot see, unless men
will wilfully abuse their Faith into an impunity and patronage for sin; or what
disparagement it can reflect upon this sacrifice of Christ, That it obliges us
to Holiness, and rescues us from the power as well as guilt of sin, I am not
able to comprehend; as to the silly scandal of trusting in works, they that
know what these words or terms (Justified by works, and justified by
Repentance, and Faith) mean, know that the one implies a perfect contradiction
to the other, for the former denies any sin or iniquity, and the latter does
directly suppose it.

4. Without some degrees of Faith, it is impossible that a wicked man should be
awakened into any serious sense of his condition, or should be induced to set
himself in good earnest to please and obey God; without a good measure of this
Faith, the very regenerate will never be able to conquer the World, and subdue
the flesh, and enter into their rest, I mean with the Apostle a Rest from sin,
for their endeavors will be but weak and languishing; their prayers cold and
faint; the Acts and instances of Religion will be undertaken as a Duty of
necessity, not delight; the whole Progress of their Christian warfare, will,
like the driving of Pharoahs Charriots when the Wheels were off, beslow and
uneasy; they will be liable to frequent relapses: their Life will not be a
firm Peace, but an unstedy truce with conscience: and their Death will be mixed
and checkered with jealousies, Distrusts, and faint hopes, like a sky spotted
with numerous Clouds:

But if we arrive at a good degree of this precious Faith, we shall be more
than Conquerors over the World and ourselves; we shall be placed above the
Reach of Temptations, preserved thorough the power of Faith unto Salvation: we
shall be too great to be swollen with vanity in prosperity, or to be cast down in
affliction; we shall find all the ways of wisdom ways of pleasantness and
all her paths peace: in one word, we shall rejoice always with joy unspeakable
and full of Glory, and when our glass is run, and our Lives spent, we shall be
translated to the blesed Seats of Perfection and Peace.

5. For the obtaining, and improving, and confirming of this holy Faith, it is
necessary, that our Religion be not mere Credulity or Custom, but that we
seriously weigh those two great witnesses our Savior appeals to, for the proof
of his coming from God, his Works and Doctrine; the Power of the one, and
Holiness of the other, being sufficient evidences of his Commission from above:
To which we must add the Testimonies God himself gave him from Heaven, his
resurrection from the Dead and ascension into glory; and all those mighty works
performed by his followers in the virtue of Faith in his name; and to be firmly
rooted and grounded in Faith through these arguments, is that which St. Peter
exhorts Christians to, 1 Pet. 3.15. To be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you.

2. By frequent retirements and sosolemn and devout Meditation, to acquaint our
selves as intimately as we can with the glorious Truths of the Gospel of
Christ, to draw the representations of them as lovely as may be; and to dwell
and gaze on the things we believe, till the light of the understanding has
shed it self thorough the inferior Soul, warmed all our passions, and the Body
it self seem to relish and partake of the pleasure of the mind.

The most useful matter of our Meditations will be 1. The Nature of the the God
we worship, I mean the glorious Attributes Mankind is most concerned in, His
Truth and Wisdom, his Power and his Goodness: And 2. The Sufferings and the
Glory of our blessed Redeemer, as the sole ground of inexpressible comfort; as
the most indearing Obligation to Holiness; as the most perfect pattern of
Virtue, and the most lively instance of its reward.

3. We must add to both these means, incessant prayers offered up with a
fervent Spirit at the Throne of Grace, for considering the darkness and
indisposition of our Natures, we have altogether need of the assistances of the
Divine Spirit, and therefore

The Prayer.
O Eternal God, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Author of all
good gifts, enlighten my understanding, that I may believe thy Gospel; set at
liberty my will, that I may approve and love the things that are excellent,
that the belief of the Gospel of the blessed Jesus may engage me to Love, Obey,
and Rely upon him, give me such a lively sight, and firm belief of the things
not seen, as may raise me above all the corruptions which are in the world
through Lust, and make me partake of the Divine Nature, that so my Life may be
full of Joy, my latter end of Peace, my Soul in its Separation of Rest, and my
whole man in the Resurrection full of Delight and Glory. Amen, Amen, Blessed
Jesus.

Section 2. Of Love. 1. Of God. 2. Of our Neighbor. Of the Love of God.
Love is not a meet Approbation of the understanding, but also an affection of
the Will, (or Heart in Scripture phrase) And therefore Coldness and
Indifferency in Religion, and warmth, and passion for the world, cannot be
justified by bearing our selves in hand, that we do nevertheless Love God,
because we do prefer him in our thoughts above all things, and because we will
not do what will displease him; for the former of these may be an unavoidable
consequence of a clear understanding, and the latter of an innate Self-love,
which may be able to restrain us from the Commission of those sins, which we
believe will do us an unspeakable mischief.

These do well in their place, and are presupposed to the love of God, for no
man can love God unless he know him; nor will any man make any distinction of
Good and Evil (i. e. lovely or hateful by consequence) unless he love himself;
but yet these are apparently distinguishable from, and can stand separately and
alone without the love of God; and therefore let none deceive themselves, for
To love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our Soul, and with
all our strength, and with all our mind is something more, than to entertain an
honorable opinion of him, or to avoid affronting him, because he is able to
punish us; the Scripture expresses this love by Delight and Joy, by Desire and
Longing; Hungring, Thirsting, Seeking, and the like; and more fully; if we love
God above all things, our hearts will be where our Treasure is; our affections
will be fastened on things above; and our Conversation will be in Heaven,
because our God is there;

Now we cannot converse with Heaven but by Faith and Hope, Meditation and
Prayer, etc. And therefore it must follow, that they who love God must be
industrious to improve these Graces, and be frequent in the exercise of these
Duties, as the Means and Instruments of enjoyment: And

2 If we love God we shall hunger and thirst after Righteousness and Holiness,
which beautifies the Souls, and renders us like God, and therefore amiable in
his eyes; and we shall delight in all those good and virtuous actions, which
are the proofs of an inflamed affection, and indear us to God, he that loves
him keeps his Commandments: and we shall hate nothing so mortally as sin,
because it stains and sullies the beauty of our Souls, distastes the God we
love, and interrupts our peace and joy, and extinguishes our hopes; and, if
this be the frame and habit of our Souls toward God, then because we cannot
love or serve two such contrary Masters, as God and the World, therefore

3. These temporal things which are seen, will appear very cheap and
inconsiderable to us, and our concern for them will be so cold and indifferent
that no change which betides them, no imaginary excellency that is in them,
will be able to raise our Passions to distract our thoughts, to abate our
diligence, to divide our affections, and overthrow our Faith; for the love of
God, the prospect of a more glorious life will have disarmed the Glory, Beauty,
and Wealth of this World of all their Charm and Temptation; and if so how can
we then be led captive by what we do not in the least admire? How can we be
afflicted at the loss of what we do not value? or, Why can we not be calmly
divided from what our affections have renounced already?

Vain World adieu! I am above either thy Menaces or Flatteries: I fear nothing,
because I am at peace with the God I love; and I despise thy gilded dreams,
because the love of my God swallows up all my desires, and I am content to have
no portion but him alone: How my Heart pants after thy Courts, O God, the Holy
of Holies, the Heaven of Heavens, where I shall for ever behold thy face, and
Reign in the Kingdom of my blessed Savior for ever and ever! Now with St.
Paul, I long to be set at liberty, to be dissolved from this body, and to be
with Christ, nor should I willingly stay longer here on Earth, but in Obedience
to thy holy Will, and a design of spending this life in doing Service to thy
glory, and in expressions of my love, in Longings, and Watchings, and
Sufferings, etc. And when I consider this, merhinks my Life's too short, and I
shall go to Heaven too soon, and I could wish my Sun would stand still a little
that I might do and suffer something for my Lord before I go to enter into his
joy, and to receive a Crown.

It is true these are heights of Love, which all do not, tho it were to be
wished all could attain to, for we have need of sanctified passions to enable
us to do our duty with delight and vigor; But none are from the want of such
degrees of Ardour to conclude themselves, either wholly void of the Love of
God, or deserted by him; for God is a Being infinitely above our conceptions,
and that of him, which we do conceive, as Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, tho
amiable, yet are spiritual, and not the objects of sense, and therefore do not
move us with the same violence that sensible things do, whence it is easy to
conclude, that our love of God is of a different nature from that we pay the
creature, it is a more spiritual affection mixed with Adoration, it is an awful
desire of pleasing and enjoying him, not always terminating in so vehement and
sensible a passion as visible objects beget in us; and therefore the safest way
is to judge of our state not by transports, but by the firmness of our
Resolutions, and by the constancy and cheerfulness of our Obedience.

But because as there is a more peculiar presence of God (as I humbly conceive
evident by Scripture) so by consequence, there may be a withdrawing and
retirement of that presence; therefore when I find my understanding dim and
clouded, or distracted and shaken with suggestions to unbelief, my desires
lukewarm and grovelling, my Devotion faint and drowsy, and my communion without
gust and relish, I am weary of my self, and I have no rest by reason of thy
absence, O blessed Lord. Then first I lay before me my Life and review my
Actions, which are late and fresh in memory since this ill temper has seized
me, and examine what it is has displeased my God, and if I find the accursed
thing that drove away a holy God, I cast my self down before him, and abhor and
renounce it: But secondly, if sin do not appear to me to be the cause of this
indisposition and listlessness, then perhaps I have not been as watchful and
industrious to improve my Graces as I should; or if this be not it, perhaps
it is but an alteration in my body that clogs and benights this Soul, and then I
groan at the miseries of my Pilgrimage, and bemoan the infelicities of my
Nature; but if none of these appear the cause, Then thirdly, I rest humbly
patient, waiting till God please to return to his resting place: it were Pride
and Sawciness in me to expect my Heaven here; to be impatient, unless I live
always in ecstasies caused by the divine pretense: I will meekly set my self to
my duty, and submit to his blessed Will, whether he think fit to Crown my Cup
with overflowing joy, and to reward my labor by inward transports or not.

And is it not fit, I should thus Love my God; whatever there be which can take
and endear a rational and excellent spirit is to be found in him: all the
notions I can possibly frame to my self of a spiritual perfection and Beauty, I
conceive, united in him; Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Truth, Constancy, are the
Characters by which the Gospel discovers him to us, and these have unspeakable
charms upon all ingenious minds, and they are intelligible enough to any that
will consider them; it is true he is a spirit, and so, incomprehensible to us
in his essence and therefore I cannot frame to my self an Image for my Love as
one friend does of another, but the time will come when I shall be spiritual
enough to see him as I am seen, and then my delight and Love will be
proportionable in some measure to his beauty and perfection; in the mean time,
my Reason as well as the Gospel assures me that he is infinitely aimable tho
that beauty be now a Light that is inaccessible.

But besides this, that great Character of Love and Mercy, (manifested in its
most excellent luster in the Gospel) is enough to endear him to us; He is not
now our Father only upon the account, of Creation and Providence, because he
has made us, fed and clothed us, these are Common and trivial mercies
compared to the obligations of the Gospel, i. e. the Redeeming us from our evil
conversation by the blood of Christ and the power of his Spirit into that
holiness, which is his own Image and resemblance: the designing us for the joys
and pleasures of his own Heaven; his readiness to pardon our transgressions;
his care employed upon us against temptations, his delight in us, etc. If the
World could show us such evidences of Love, or could assure us of such an
Eternity, if it could tell us, as the Serpent did Eve, eat and ye shall be as
God then indeed there were temptation in it, but till it does there is none
really:

Besides these two considerations, of the aimableness of the divine nature in
himself, and his goodness to us including his infinite power too, there is but
one thing more which can be a proper motive to engage our affections; that is,
that such an object be lasting, and this is the great prerogative of God alone,
that he never changes nor dies, he will for ever be what he is now; most
perfect, and most gracious.

The Prayer.
O Glorious God, it is the sole excellence of my Nature, that I am capable of
loving thee; and it is my glorious privilege, that thou art pleased to suffer
and admit of the addresses of my Soul; in this only I am a kin to Angels. In
those talents which serve only to the end of a corporal life, I am out done by
Brutes: O therefore give me grace to dwell as often as I can in the divine
contemplations of thy nature, to look forward to that glory which thy bounty
has revealed and promised me; to consider by what methods of infinite Love
thou do prepare me for it; and let all this make me love thee above all
things, and desire to know nothing but Thee my Heavenly Father, and Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, Amen, Amen.

2. The Second part of Charity is the Love of our Neighbor, of which now.

Charity is in short, the Love of our Brethren, or a kind of Brotherly
affection one toward another; the Rule and Standard by which we are to examine
and regulate this Habit, is, that love we bear Ourselves, or that which Christ
bore us, that is, that it be unfeigned, constant, and out of no other design
but their happyness.

The Apostle 1. Cor. 13. taking Charity in a most comprehensive sense, as it
animates all other graces, and influences all our actions, which relate to our
Neighbor; does thus divinely describe it. Charity suffers long and is kind:
Charity envieth not: Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not
behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks
no evil, rejoices not in iniquity (or wrong) but rejoices in the truth
(faithfulness or fair dealing) bears all things (or rather covers or
concealeth, i. e. others Error) believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things.

But now to reduce all to fewer heads, and to consider Charity in a closser
sense, it contains two things. 1. The doing good to, and 2. Forgiving one
another. The things which are capable of receiving any benefit by our Charity
are our Neighbors Reputation, Body, Soul, and therefore,

1. Charity secures man's credit, by denouncing a Hell to the Slanderer, and
Whisperer, and Evil speaker, etc. This Charity obliges us not to give way to
weak surmises, but to be forward to believe the best, in favor and excuse of
an Error, not to proclaim another faults though true and real, unless the
discovery may serve a better end than the concealment; which is, that think
no evil, bears all things, that believes all things in the Apostle; and if
it forbid these sins, much more those blacker of open Slanders and private
whispers.

Nor does this Charity oblige us only not to wrong our Neighbors credit, but
as far as we can, not to suffer it to be wronged; to protect and generously
rescue their Reputations from the jaws of the Persecutor, to awe and check the
Slanderer by the Majesty of an holy Anger into shame and Confusion; for
otherwise we become accessory to those slanders we entertain and give ear to;

If we consider that to blast a man's Reputation, is to render him the Scorn and
Hate of others, and a Burden to himself, it cannot be that we should be willing
to heap such killing mischiefs upon the Head of one we Love, and Charity is
supposed to love all.

2. Charity ministers to the Body of our Neighbor; if we will act like men
possessed by that Charity which suits with the Spirit of the Gospel; our Hearts
and Hands must be always open to our Brothers necessities, our Souls must
delight to do good and to be kind; And if we are not able to redress their
grievances, or relieve their pressures by our wealth or interest, we must ease
them by our compassion, comfort 'em by holy advice, and succor them by our
Prayers'

All that profess Christianity, believe this a Duty, and yet how great and
numerous are the sufferings of the needy and distressed, and more great and
numerous are the luxuries, and the wantonnesses of the Rich; but it happens
thus all acknowledge the duty but shift it off by two pretenses. 1. Their own
inability. 2. The demerit, or unworthiness of the needy person.

In answer to the first pretense, it must be confessed; that it is not only
Lawful, but our duty to make provision, first, for our selves and those who are
more nearly related to us, but then. 1. The measure of this provision must be
our necessities not wantonness; for, if we refuse relief to the poor on this
pretense that we cannot support our vanity, and gaiety, and their poverty
together, undoubtedly we shall perish under the guilt of uncharitableness. 2.
The present time, not the vain fears of the future must determine this
necessity, for if we deny an alms out of our present plenty upon an idle fear
of future want, it is so far from being a just excuse, that it is a double
crime, distrust in God, as well as hard heartedness to our Brother,
contradictory to Faith, as well as Charity.

I will answer to the Second pretense by degrees: and therefore, 1. Suppose the
worth or worthlesness, or what is more, unworthiness of the distressed person, be
only doubtful and suspected, then certainly it is not agreeable to Charity, to
give up a Brother to ruin, upon a vain surmise; we are not to dispute their
deserts, but to regard their wants, I Am sure this is the safest side, Charity
may be mistaken, but shall never be unrewarded, we are herein, (I think) to
imitate that Wisdom and Goodness which dispenses the Alms of our Heavenly
Father; he has, no doubt on it, particular favors as well as a particular
kindness for the good and holy, but as he is the God of all, so those his
benefits, which all stand in absolute need of, are common to all: but 2.
Suppose the distressed person be really as Evil, as Needy, unless I am sure
that my Charity will feed his vices; I cannot tell though God has pleased to
pass a sentence of affliction upon him, whether he has appointed me to be the
Executioner of it, by withholding that aid which may reprieve his life; how
know I but that in those moments I lend him, he may return to himself and to
his God, nay, more whether my Charity may not be a motive to reduce him; and
happy I, if I may so cheaply bestow a double life of body and of soul, if I may
so easily retrieve a soul my Savior died for, and whilst I give an alms, in
some sense, bestow a Heaven too!

But if those I relieve should be the Children of my Father, the fellow heirs
of Salvation, how happy an opportunity is light into my hands of obliging those
who are so dear to Heaven, whose interest is so powerful with the God I
worship! Yet,

Lastly, in general, whatever the occasion be, whatever the persons; blessed be
the hour wherein I have an opportunity to evidence my Love to God, and to part
with something for the sake of my dear Savior! Blessed be the hour, wherein I
can lay out, the very superfluities of my trifling stock, for a Mansion in
Heaven, for an abode in everlasting bliss; where in I can honestly buy the
Prayers of the poor, i. e. it may be the intercession of the blessed spirit for
me; however, they are prayers which are very seldom insignificant, for if God
hears, when they curse in bitterness of Spirit, (when certainly it is his
goodness, not their piety, which makes their Prayers heard,) how much more
shall his goodness invite him to hear, when they bless, in the cheerfulness,
and refreshment of their soul. Lastly, how comfortable will my reflections on my
Charity be at the hour of Death, and in the day of Judgment, for (be it with
an humble reverence spoken, tho in imitation of my Savior) how will, that
Jesus whom I have fed, when hungry, clothed when naked, visited and comforted,
when sick and imprisoned, ever give me up to an Eternity of flames!

3. But yet this is not the whole of the object of our Charity; there are,
whose souls are poor, diseased, and destress'd, as well as their bodies, and
can an ulcer'd Leg, or withered Arm, deserve my pity more than a leprous soul!
can I choose but melt and soften at a sight which speaks a present, and boades a
future misery! is the eternal welfare of my Brother grown, so contemptible in
my fight, that I Will not spend an hour or word to ensure it! Alas, how then
dwells the same spirit in me which was in Christ Jesus.

Well then, I will go and visit sick souls, I will prescribe, and press, and
Watch, and Court, and if I see them profligate beyond the hopes of recovery,
I Will recommend them, as I do departing friends, in Prayers and Tears to God;
and whatever the success prove to them, it will be kind and favorable to me,
Angels will offer up the incense of my Prayers, and bottle up my Tears as well
as those spent on my own sins; and my God will multiply and increase my
Talents, when he sees that I spend them well; and the World will Love me, and
the very wicked will praise and justify my God, for these effects of his good
spirit.

Sect. 2. But nature it self seems to incline us to these Acts of Charity, as
far as they concern the Relief of the necessitous, the comfort of the
afflicted, and Ministry to souls; nor can we share in humanity, but that we
must partake of some degrees of, and aptnesses to Christianity: the most
difficult part of Charity is still behind, i.e. the forgiving injuries, or
more, the returning good for evil, and yet if we will be the followers of our
blessed Savior, the Children of our Heavenly Father. This is it, that we must
labor after, that our souls may be so exalted and heavenly, so good and holy,
that they may not be easily ruffled into peevishness and frowardness, much less
rankle into a settled malice and a resolved revenge, but that they may be all
calm and smoothness, all Love and sweetness.

Then indeed we may think our selves the Children of God, when we can look upon
injuries done us with the mildness, which arises from a sense of our own
frailties; with a meekness, which is grounded upon our own worthlesness* with a
compos'dness of midn which remits all to an Almighty and wise God; and with a
compassion which the consideration of their folly, and sin does awaken in us:
when we can have the Charity to believe a just cause of men's actions concealed
tho we can discover none: or if the malice be as plain and evident as the
wrong, then if we can pray for those who curse us, honor and Love those who
treat us with despite and scorn, if we can support the interest, and buoy up
the reputation, of those who have used us, shamefully and ungratefully, after
we have Loved, and after we have served them; if we can do this, then indeed
the spirit of the Gospel, a Spirit of Peace and Love abides in us.

And that I may arrive at this perfection, I reason thus with my self.

It Is true he has wronged me, but unless it were, for conquering wrongs what
need have I of Christian patience! Where is the meekness of the Christian
spirit, if I am hurried away by the same passion with an Heathen and Infidel! I
look for my reward from God not man, and therefore I am not at all concerned,
that he does not requite my kindness by gratitude in his behavior. I am the
Disciple of Christ, who laid down his life for his enemies, and the Child of
that God, who is kind even to Rebels and sinners, and why should I think it
enough to divide my kindnesses only amongst my friends. I am pressed by the
Conscience of a duty, and I do not so much mind an injury, as in what manner I
am obliged to receive it, least I transgress as much by impatience, as mine
enemy has done by injustice. I love my own peace and rest, and would not be
disordered, and breed a storm and tempest in my bosom, for why should I be so
foolish, as to transform another man's sin into my punishment: and lastly, I am
now upon my journey, and am hastening toward my Heaven, and I would not be
stopped and detained in my way, much less turned out of it, by the silliness
and impertinency of a trifling sinner.

And besides all this, I consider, that these men who wrong me, tho thus kind
and unjust they are yet my brethren, the workmanship of my Fathers hands, the
purchase of my dear Lord and Masters blood, partakers of the same promise, and
salvation, (unless they receive the Grace of God in vain,) and how can I do any
thing to them but pray for 'em and bless them.

Yet after all, being still but mortal, but flesh and blood, some little
aptnesnesses to impatience and revenge may remain in me, and therefore if at
any time my blood begin to Chafe my Choler boil, my Spirits chill with envy, or
mutiny with despite: I retire from the provoking object to my God, and am not
at rest till I have laid the evil spirit, till I have stifled the sin in its
first throws and pangs; I bemoan my unhappy nature, and blush at my own
weaknesses, and strive, and meditate, and read, and pray, till my Tears refresh
me, and my repentance ease me, and upon this sometimes, I find an extroardinary
calm and lightsomeness, ensue, such as I fancy that of a demoniack, when the
ill spirit was cast out, or of one suddenly cured of a disease by the
Almightiness of our Saviors word; sometimes I continue a little heavy and
oppressed, as when the ill spirit went out, yet so as to rend the man, and then
(not leaving off, but in ejaculations repeating my instances to God,) I betake
my self to something which may divert my thoughts and deceive my pain.

Secondly, In the survey of my daily Deportment, which I make each night, I
drag forth the Crime into the awful preence of an holy God; and there araigning
it of all the mischiefs it has done me, of all the troubles it has given me,
and laying before my self seriously and devoutly all the obligations I have to
the practice of the contrary virtue, I condemn it, with an holy indignation, I
cover my self with shame, and sorrow, and renew most solemn resolutions against
it, and earnestly beg of God his assistance against his and mine enemy.

This is a method which will undoubtedly lead us to a most certain conquest,
for it does naturally tend to soften and calm the mind, to possess it with
greater degrees of meekness, and deeper aversions for causeless wrath; and it
sets the soul upon its Watch and Guard, so that it cannot be frequently
surpised into passion; and lastly, it engages the Divine Spirit in the
quarrel, which sure is no impotent assistance:

And therefore I cannot for my life reconcile this deportment each night, with
a repeated frowardness and peevishness each day, much less with anger digested
into a sullen hatred; such (I am afraid) do not strive and therefore they do
not conquer; they neglect the means God prescribes them, and therefore he does
not vouchsafe to relieve them; either they do not at all examine and repent in
the presence of God; or else they do it transiently and perfunctorily; or else
they Love the sin, and therefore conceal and shelter it; or else they are fond
and partial to themselves, and therefore cover and excuse it; and any of these
falts is enough to undo them.

Having taken this survey of Charity, it is now time in the last place to
consider by what powerful motives, the Gospel obliges us to this duty;

1. The first, may be taken from the nature of Charity it self; it is
remarkable, that St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13. Designing to prove the excellence of
Charity above any other spiritual gifts, thought it enough to describe it; for
no body can know what it is, and not presently discern how useful and
serviceable it is, to the happiness of mankind; the pleasures of the Rich, and
comforts of the Poor; the safety of Government, the peace of Families, and the
delight of Friendships, are all built up upon it.

Next, Charity fails not, but abides for ever. ver. 8. of this same Chap. It is
a virtue that constitutes a part of Heaven, and helps to make up the enjoyments
of that state of most perfect bliss; and certainly if we could but imitate the
virtue and perfections of Heaven, we should in the same degrees and proportion
partake of its happiness too, and that which is one of the great ingredients of
the pleasure of the other World, would if practiced be no small addition to
that of this:

These being the glorious consequents of Charity, it is but natural and
reasonable, that we should love it as we do our selves, and pursue it with the
same eagerness we do our pleasure and our happiness.

2. From the nature of God; who has sufficiently manifested himself to the
world in all his works to be Love. God is Love: Of which, what more amazing
instance can we have, in him, than his giving his Son to die for us, and
pardoning us freely thorough his blood; and in his Son, than in offering up
himself for us!

And because uncharitableness bears such a contradiction to his Nature, he
therefore resolves, that no such monstrous and ill-natured Creature shall enter
into Heaven, and has frequently assured us that our deportment toward one
another shall be the Standard and measure of his toward us; If ye forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you
forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you your
trespasses, Mat. 6.14, 15.

The natural influences deducible from hence are, that he, who loves God must
love his Neighbor also, because he cannot be the Child of God, nor acceptable
to him without sharing of that blessed affection which God has for the world;
and tho the provocation of a Neighbor may have very justly incensed him into
hatred and desire of revenge, yet he cannot refuse his pardon to the requests
of a God who has done so much for him, and of Jesus who has died for him. And
Secondly if we cannot be pardoned our selves, unless we pardon others, it seems
our own necessities as well as theirs engages us to Charity, for we are become
both Criminals and Judges at once, and whilst we forgive others we are merciful
to ourselves, and whilst we revenge and hate others we are cruel and barbarous
to ourselves.

3. The Gospel establishes a closer Relation between mankind than that of
Nature: by the communion of the same Faith, the same Spirit, the same
Sacrament, (whereof one is but a holy league of Charity) and so in one word we
are incorporated, and become all but members of the same body: and therefore as
in Joseph nature prevailed above the sense of wrongs, and remembering not that
they were his enemies, but that they were his Brethren, he fell upon their
necks and kissed them, and wept through joy and tenderness toward those
Brethren, who without the least softness or relenting had exposed him, if not
to a certain death, to banishment and slavery: so must we Christians,
remembering by what ties we are fastened and united, no more harm or hate one
another than we would our own limbs, our own Bodies:

4. The Gospel convinces us of the meanness and worthlesseness of all things
here below, not only of Wealth but even of Reputation and Life too (of the
Body, the Soul's secured beyond the reach of man) and so makes it both the
easier task to part with them in the service of Religion, and not so easy to
ground the subject of a quarrel on them.

5. It annexes precious promises to the performance of this duty. i. e. an
assurance of Reward in this Life, and in the other, of happiness in overflowing
measures.

By this time it is easy to discern,

1. What kind of thing true Charity is: How sweet and gentle, how kind and meek
a temper it is: how beneficial to mankind, how delightsome to our selves, and
how like God and acceptable to him it makes us.

2. What a Stress God lays upon this duty; how dear a value he has for it;
that Charity is the very Life and Soul of Religion; and that to be a Christian
without Charity is an unnatural contradiction: And therefore

It cannot choose but raise my wonder to observe thar there are a sort of
people, who though they do no harm, do no good neither; who study nothing but
their proper interest and pleasure, and so if just (which is the most) are far
from Charitable; and yet they hope to be saved. Much more am I amazed to
observe, that there are another sort, who are mere Lions in their families,
Bears and Wolves in the Neighborhood, and it may be worst in the State, who
are bad Neighbors, worse Husbands and Masters, worse Subjects, and yet they
call themselves Christians, which is for men, who are not fit to live on earth,
to hope for Heaven. And yet I still wonder more, when I observe, that there is
another sort of men, who are great Devotionists, long and sometimes passionate
too in their prayers (unless the passion be merely threatical, which is not a
settled affection, but the mere sally of a sudden heat) severe and grave in
their outward deportment, and huge zealots for this or that cause or particular
doctrine, and yet they are froward, and peevish, sower, and sullen, and
censorious, and covetous, and proud, and insosolent, and disobedient, and yet
these men are so far from calling into question their Salvation, that they
count themselves spiritual, and the especial Favorites of God, despising the
rest of mandkind, as carnal, moral, blind things; by what means they arrive at
this dangerous state I will not now examine, but I will beseech all such to lay
to heart these general truths; that he who Loves his God, must Love his
neighbor too, he that prays must do good and communicate too, he that is
devout and zealous must be meek and humble, and charitable and obedient too, or
else their Religion is unnatural, their devotion a mere humor or melancholy
or any thing but holiness; they are so far from being Christians, that they
want some degrees of humanity, to perfect them into Men.

The Prayer.
O Most gracious and Merciful God; enlighten my understanding, that I may know
thee, and discern the loveliness and beauty of all thine attributes, especially
thy goodness toward the Sons of Men; and shed forth, thy spirit of Love in my
heart that I may seek thee, and delight in thee, and make it my business to
contemplate, and to serve thee.

And may the example of thy Mercy toward Mankind, and me in particular, and the
example of my blessed Savior, laying down his life for his enemies; enkindle
in me such a true affection toward my neighbor, that I may Love him as my
self, or as Christ Loved me; that I may walk as the blessed Jesas did, in
abundance of kindnesses and meeknesses, and patience, and in all instances of a
Heavenly Charity; and so may at last enter into that Heaven, which is the
eternal abode of peace and Love. Amen, Amen, blessed Lord.

Sect. 3. Of Temperance.
By Temperance is meant, such an abstinence from the pleasure of the body, as
the Gospel requires; and therefore I will enquire.

1. What rules of Temperance it prescribes us.

2. What motives to the duty it makes use of; and

3. What method it enjoins for the attainment of this grace.

1. Of the Rules of Temperance.

The common Rule and Standard which most have made use of to conduct men in
eating and drinking, etc. is the end of those Acts, that is the health and
strength, (the welfare) of the body, but I have great reason to dislike of this
Rule, for if extended any further than to eating and drinking, it is apparently
false; and, I hope, none will affirm, that all those pleasures, which are not
inconsistent with the welfare of the body, are therefore not inconsistent with
Religion; being applied to eating and drinking, etc. in a strict and close
sense, it lays a snare for men's consciences and must reduce all to the mere
necessities of Nature, and so many enjoyments which are innocent enough, nay
sometimes upon some emergences necessary, will be utterly sinful; and Religion
will be made a mere burden, and men's minds be filled with endless scruples: if
taken in as wide a sense, as some men, I see, understand it, it opens a gap to
sensuality and unchristian freedoms, for I do not question but that any man
without prejudice to the happiness of his body, may be guilty of intemperance
in that notion that I have of it; that is, any man may eat or drink to the
enraging of his lust, to the softening and sensualizing of his mind, etc.
without the hazard of a Fever or a head ach: On these accounts I cannot but
look upon this Rule as very useless and improper, if not dangerous for a
Christian, and a proper rule of nature only in such a state which has no
prospect of another life; and therefore I think my self obliged to inquire in
the Gospel for better. I think then we shall easily find what it is the Gospel
means by temperance, by enquiring.

1. What is the end it aims at in enjoining this Duty.

2. By what words it describes and expresses it.

3. The examples of our Savior and his followers in this point. Likewise the
motives it adds, and the method it prescribes, will serve to clear up its
intention to us.

The great end St Paul suggests to me, 1 Cor. 9.25. Every man who striveth for
the Mastery is temperate, in all things; intimating that the means are then
proper, when they are suited and fitted for the attainment of their end; and by
the allusion implying that the end of our Temperance is a striving for the
Mastery, that is a Conquest over the World, and the body; for the Gospel
represents the World and the Flesh, as those enemies, against which the
Christian is to be engaged in a continual warfare, and tells us, that the lusts
and pleasures of them do War against the Soul. Religion being nothing else but
the Love of God and heavenly things, the Gospel endeavors all that it can to
wean us from all fondness for, or delight in, the world and the flesh; it being
impossible to serve two such contrary interests: By a clear consequence from
all this, I conclude that we are to endure hardship as good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ; that we are to abstain from fleshly lusts as strangers and pilgrims; in
plainer words, that that abstinence from sensual pleasures, which renders the
body tame and governable, serviceable to the soul, and cheerful in the exercise
of Religion, which does enfranchise the mind of men from its captivity to
sense, which does establish its dominion over the brutish part; so that the man
lives the life of faith, and not of sense, is disengaged from the World, and so
ready to depart; is that Temperance which the Gospel of Christ requires: and by
consequence on the other hand, that that indulgence to worldly pleasures, which
tends to pamper and enrage the body, to awaken our passions for this present
state, to endear and recommend the World to us, to make the minds of men soft
and feeble, heavy and sensual, to make our temper delicate and wanton, unable
to suffer, and froward, if our appetite be not satisfied, is flatly
contradictory to the Temperance of the Gospel of Christ.

This is a Rule, which if well considered, and conscientiously applied to every
particular, will sufficiently conduct man in the paths of this great duty, and
answer all scruples concerning the enjoyment of pleasures, whether they be real
or fantastic ones. For is any man such a stranger to himself, that he does
not understand the working of his own soul: that he cannot give an account of
the passions which he feels nor, know by what methods he is betrayed into the
Love of the World, and a decay of his Religion. Does not every man feel what
kind of eating and drinking clogs the soul and emboldens the body; what kind of
sights or dalliance does dart the poison of lust and ambition into our very
souls? Or what does thaw and melt us, and make us Love and hate, delight or
grieve, hope and fear like the Children, not of Light but of the World;
certainly unless a man will impose upon himself, he must needs discern the
birth, and growth of his own Passions, and discover the methods by which he
does insensibly degenerate into a loose, or cold, or senceless Spirit.

2. This Temperance is in general expressed in Holy Writ by Mortification, and
Holiness: the former imports such a change in the body, as flattens and deads
its appetites for the World; I am crucified to the World, and the World is
crucified to me: The latter imports, an excellent and Godlike nature, a
transformation of man's into a spiritual a frame, as man in this imperfect State
is capable of arriving at.

And certainly, men thus qualified can not place their delight in the sensual
enjoyments of this life, how innocent soever they might be, the World has
nothing agreeable to souls of this Heavenly nature, nor nothing worthy of them:
Temperance in the particular branches of it, is called, Purity, Sobriety,
Abstinence, Modesty, etc. all which are to be interpreted; according to the
method of the Spirit, in a sense which does not only restrain the outward
Acts, but also the inward passions of man, in a sense which does not only
forbid the commission of gross sins, but also all tendencies toward them in
the body, and in the soul: Conformable to this Doctrine were

3. The life's and examples of the Holy Jesus, and his followers, (though
peradventure it would not be altogether errational to suppose, that the
extraordinary measures of the Divine Spirit, in his immediate Disciples, and
their conversation with the blessed Jesus, and afterward the fresh memory of
all his Power and Glory, might render a corporal discipline the less necessary)
I will not deny but that our blessed Master, did often accept of
entertainments, (nor did I ever design to forbid any such thing on particular
occasions, which may warrant them) but it is easy to observe, how course, and
plain, and sparing his constant Diet, with his Disciples was, how frequent in
his fastings, and his watchings, he was: As for his Disciples after his
departure, their lives were but a constant warfare, and the World, and the
flesh their enemies; they Lived like strangers and Pilgrims upon earth, and
their pleasures were altogether Spiritual and Holy.

These were the paths that they trod toward conquest, and a glorious Crown;
and I can easily conceive how their Life was filled with such spiritual
ravishments; how they longed for the appearance of Christ, and how they left
the World with such glorious assurances as that, I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith (all which may have regard not
only to his sufferings, but also to his conflict with the flesh too)
henceforth, there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day; and not to me only, but unto
them also that Love his appearance.

But, how that softeness of conversation, that full and luxurious feeding and
drinking, that garishness and wantonness of dress, that sloth and lazyness of
Spirit, which is so universal in the world, can become the life of a Soldier
of Christ, I am not wise, nor lucky enough to comprehend.

But I can now easily discern from whence it proceeds, that Religion seems so
unpleasant a thing, and that men are so unwilling to depart hence into another
life, it is because we are such imperfect Christians, and we live sensually.

It will therefore behove us, to lay to heart the great motives, by which the
Gospel engages us to this duty, as,

1. The nature of our present State in this World, the poor soul lives in a
treacherous body, and a tempting World, both which conspire its ruin; and
therefore it must be upon its watch, upon its guard; it is not a time for
mirth, and pleasure, and feasting, when the enemy has seized the outworks, and
entered into the very Subburbs; the soul is striving for the Mastery, and is it
sense to arm its enemy, and feed it into a fierce and brutish courage? by
indulging to those enjoyments which are the food and fuel to its lusts? every
sensual pleasure it indulges to the body is a plain giving ground before the
face of its enemy.

2. The reward of this spiritual conquest, which is fullness of pleasures in
the life to come, an Eternity of bliss and happiness; and how rational is it to
prefer Eternity to a moment, and that exceeding weight of glory and
unspeakable, unconceiveable pleasure, to the dreams and mockeries of this
imperfect State? even in this present life, we think it becomes our wisdom to
renounce trifling pleasures out of the prospect of greater; what a Discipline
of severities, did those contenders in the Grecian games run through out of the
hopes of honor and applause? from whence St. Paul excellently argues, if they
did this for a corruptible Crown (a Crown of Leaves,) how much more should the
Christian for an incorruptible one?

3. The example of a whole Cloud of witnesses gone to Heaven before us, who
pressed in thorough this narrow way and strait gate; but especially the
consideration of a crucified Savior; for what have we to do, who have taken up
the Cross of Christ, with rioting and drunkenness, with Chambering and
wantonness? What resemblance is there between his Crown of Thorns, his
Scourging, his Agony, etc. and the security and sloth, the gaiety and vanity of
a sensual life? for shame, let those, who profess Christianity do something
which may become men who have taken up the Banner of the Cross.

4. The great advantage and pleasure of the State of Mortification. 1. The Soul
enjoys a more entire peace, a more absolute empire, and is not alarmed by the
daily mutinies of rebellious lusts. 2. It is become a fit Temple for the Spirit
of purity to dwell in, for the Spirit of glory and of God to rest upon, and the
consequence of this will be abundance of inward pleasure, of peace, and joy,
and hope.

5. The uncertainty of the time of our Saviors appearance to judgment, and
who, that has a grain of sense, would be surpised by that day at unawares?
who would be overtaken by the Judge of the World, in surfieting and
drunkenness, or any other of the sinful pleasures of this Life.

The Prayer.
O Thou God who art a holy, and a pure Spirit, sanctify me in Spirit, Soul and
Body, that I may offer up my self unto thee, a holy, living and acceptable
sacrifice! Enable me to fight the good fight of Faith, to take up the banner of
the Cross against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; to imitate my holy
Savior, and his blessed Apostles, that having subdued the Flesh, and conquered
the World, I may enjoy a more entire peace, and pleasure in my life, and may at
last depart with the greater cheerfulness and triumph out of it, and receive
from my blessed Savior an incorruptible Crown. Amen, Amen, blessed Jesus.

Sect. 4. Of Humility.
This is the Ornament and Guard of all our Graces, that which sets off and
illustrates all our excellencies, and keeps us upon our Watch to secure them;
it is both the foundation and perfection of all virtue; even holiness and
goodness without it, would be unacceptable to God; and therefore it is well
worth your consideration in the next place.

Humility is a mean opinion, or rather the true knowledge of our selves, a
sober contemplation of our infirmities, and a real persuasion of our
imperfection: which is St. Paul's sobriety of Spirit, or humility of mind,
contrary to the being puffed up.

The sense of this shedding it self upon the will, renders men modest in their
desires, and humble in their deportment, which is that other part of humility,
whereby a man is enabled to reject praise and honor, and to debase himself to
the meanest offices; thus the blessed Jesus sought not his own honor, and he
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.

There are three things, which are liable to be made the grounds of pride, the
gifts of Grace, of Nature, and of Fortune: but the humble man, in respect of
the gifts of Grace, looks not upon what he has attained but what is still
before; he pays his sacrifice of honor, not to that earthen vessel, which
contains the treasure, but to the God from whose fullness it is derived; he
dwells not upon the pleasing spectacle of his good Actions, but mostly on the
catalogue of his frailties and his sins, and therefore rests himself on the
mercy of God thorough the blood of Christ, and from fresh repentances, he takes
up fresh resolutions and Spirits every Day.

As to the gifts of Fortune, the World is too much a trifle in the sight of an
enlightened understanding, to raise in a good man, any esteem or Love of it,
and if so, a man can never prize himself for the possession of what he slights,
nor be proud of what he despises.

As to the gifts of Nature, he must value them as they are the gifts of God,
but he considers withal, that they are but common ones, and are but the
imperfect ornaments of this imperfect State, which must be done away, when we
come into a better: and withal he reflects often upon his blemishes and
imperfections, his follies and miscarriages, and considering how poor,
miserable, and comfortless a thing, he should have been, if abandoned to the
conduct of Nature, he lays his mouth in the dust, and at once admires the
bounty and Goodness of God, and confesses his own vanity.

2. The fruit of this humility, is an entire subjection, and resignation of
ones self to God, meekness and patience toward man, a calm and tranquillity in
ones own bosom; for as to God, considering him as infinitely Glorious, and
himself entirely dependent of him, the humble man composes himself to believe
all he reveals to obey what he commands, to trust in him, to attend the
Decrees, and the leisure of Heaven, to suffer meekly, and enjoy modestly: As to
himself, out of the conscience of how little he deserves, he is neither
ambitious of wealth nor honor, but he is thankful for the past, satisfied with
the present, and neither impatient for, nor distrustful of the future. And out
of a sense of his own indisposition to good, and the weakness of his own
strength, he blesses God for the grace he has received, and tho he stands he
takes heed least he fall. As to his Neighbor, out of the distrust of his own
abilities, the sense of his own infirmities, or else taught by the example of
his great Master, who took upon himself the form of a Servant, the humble man
is more forward to obey than to command, to believe than to dispute, he is slow
to speak, swift to hear, not fond of opinions, but desirous to be enlightened
by God, and informed by man; -- and therefore on all these accounts, an humble
Man, can never be enthusiastical obstinate or seditious, for he can never
arrive at that height of Spiritual pride as to conceit himself the only
favorite of Heaven, and fit for extroardinary illuminations; nor at that
height of carnal pride, as to be a buisie body, a stiff asserter of his own
humor, or judge of his superiors on earth, and so think himself more fit to
Reign than to suffer.

In one word, Humilities whole deportment is sweet and gentle, its very zeal is
modest, its reprehension soft and timorous, its Prayers awful, its reflections
mournful, and its hopes of Heaven softly growing; it is neither severe nor
peevish, obstinate nor hasty, bold nor selfish insolent nor querulous, it can
suffer its wounds to be proved and searched, and kisses the hand, whilst it
loathes the filth, it does not insult over another errors nor excuse its own,
nay rather its modesty conceals its beauties, and blushes at the discovery of
its own excellencies, it never prostitutes to beg praises, nay if it
accidentally meet them, it is rather burdened and oppressed, than puffed up by
them. I will then account my self to have attained to some degree of this grace
when I can possess my soul at rest, when I delight in the milk of Gods word,
more than its heights and entricacies in obedience more than disputes and
fancies, when I can receive evil from the hand of God, as well as good; when I
can sacrifice my own will to the caprice of a Superior, the obstinacy of an
inferior, or the humor of an equal; when I can suffer wrongfully, and yet
meekly; when I can look upon the glories and the power of this World; and
contentedly say I am not born for these, I am not called to the enjoyment of
these, but of the Cross here, and Glory hereafter, I am to tread in the steps
of my dear Lord and Master, and nothing shall make me have any other designs
than those he had; and when I have done all this and am assured that I love and
serve my God, I rely only upon the merits and sufferings of my Savior for
Salvation and a Crown.

This duty of Humility is the most useful, and the most difficult in
Christianity: the most useful for it, recommends us to God, indears us to men,
and establishes a Peace, and calm in our own bosoms: -- the most difficult for
it is to renounce what is most near and dear to us, our interest and pleasures,
our reputation, nay our very selves, our understanding, will and affections;

There are two mighty motives which are most insisted on by the holy Spirit; the
one is that Humility is the way to the increase of Grace here, and to greater
measures of Glory hereafter; God resists the proud and gives grace to the
humble, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted: the other is the example
of our Savior, who tho so great as to be the Son of God, and to think it no
Robbery to be equal to God, so innocent that he had no guilt upon him, none
could accuse him of sin, so dignified as to be Prophet, Priest, and King, did
yet debase himself to the meanest services, on purpose that he might leave his
Disciples a pattern to imitate; tho he were adorned by all that might give him
a just claim to Honor, as Birth, Virtue, and the Dignity of the most
illustrious functions, yet he was as much the humblest as he was the greatest,
as much the most meek as the most innocent of the Sons of Men; and if he our
Lord and Master stoopt so low, what can we, who are at that vast distance
beneath him, do or suffer, that is capable of disparaging us.

Besides these considerations, it will be very useful toward implanting
humility in us, to know God and our selves: his Days are without Beginning or
Ending, his perfections have no bounds; he is Independent and immutable; he is
his own Heaven, and his own happiness: but we are dust, and the Sons of
Corruption, born yesterday, and we shall dye to morrow; our bodies heavy,
sluggish, crafie, beings of a few spans long; our souls are blind and
ambitious, passionate, froward, jealous, inconstant, foolish things: those are
the seat or abode of numerous pains and diseases, These of as numerous, and as
painful passions: the World we live in, is a mere phantasm and cheat; that
first invites, and then deludes our appetites; for enjoyment it self is but a
dying itch, and the mockery of a waking dream: the time past reflects our sins
and follies; the present is troubled with regret, and desires, and vexations;
and the future will be what the present now is; for when all is nothing, what
can be the end of our hopes and cares, but disappointment.

And all this considered, is not God most fit to Govern, and we to obey! he to
be exalted, and we to be humbled! but why do I compare Man to God! let us
compare him but to the Angels of God, and how inconceiveably more excellent is
their being, and their state, than ours; how wise and knowing! how refined and
pure their substances! we see but thorough a Cloud, and are clad with an earthy
body; they dwell in the Circles of Glory, in the Sunshine of the Almighty's
presence, and in a numerous Choire of the most pleasant, and delightful
company. We in long Nights, and cold Winters, and barren Soils, and
lonesome-shades, tired with sullen toilsome business, and dull insipid
conversation, and only wait for the approaching day, and the rendevouz of
blessed Spirits in Heaven:

Lord what is Man!

The Prayer.
O Thou God, who resistest the Proud, and give grace to the Humble, possess
me with a meek and humble Spirit! teach me to tread in the steps of my blessed
Savior, to serve and Minister, to obey and suffer; teach me to know Thee my
God, and my self, that the sense of thy incomprehensible glory, and my meanness
may level all my foolish conceits of my self, and cloth me with humility;
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O my God make me resigned and obedient to thee, Subject to my Superiors,
modest toward my equals, and meek to my Inferiors! make me to despise the
praise and honor of man, being content with the conscience of doing good! make
me see the imperfections of my best actions, and rely upon thy mercy for
Salvation, thorough the blood of Christ, that my Soul may here find rest, and
hereafter Glory. Amen, Amen. Blessed Jesus.

Sect. 5. Of Perfection.
It is an opinion generally received, that the least degree of true Faith will
save the soul: but I hope men mean such a degree of it, as overcomes the World,
and subdues the Flesh; for otherwise I should very much question, whether it be
not that seed which becomes unfruitful, thorough the cares of the World, and
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things, Mar. 4.19. -- If they
say that that Faith, which does not overcome the World and the Flesh is not
true Faith, it is as broad as long, for not to dispute whether (in the place
mentioned) the reasons of unfruitfulness was in the seed or in the ground,
whether it be true Faith or not, I Am sure it is not saving Faith; so that the
Rule given us, whereby to discern and judge of our state, is a very plain and
easy one, viz. He that overcomes the World is born of God.

If it should be further inquired, how a man shall know whether he overcomes
the World (tho he may with as much sense ask me, how he shall know what he
loves and hates? what he shuns and persues?) the answer is very plain, his
Servants ye are to whom you obey.

So that the whole State of this question may be in few words reduced to this,
no man can be a stranger to his own actions, nor to the operations of his own
soul: what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man, which is in
him, which words (if I have any logic) contain two things. 1. That a man
knows his own mind, (or if he do not, then.) 2. That no man else can:
therefore since a man knows his own actions and his own affections, what he
does, and out of what principles he does it, he cannot choose but know, who it
is he obeyes; but if his Life be so various, so made up of vice and virtue, and
the flesh and spirit be so evenly poised, that which has the pre-eminence,
whom he obeyes be a matter very doubtful and disputable to himself, then
whether he shall be saved or no, must remain to himself, and much more to all
others (God alone excepted) equally doubtful; and I can guess at no other
expedient for him, if he has a mind to rid himself of this scruple, than
entirely to complete his conquest over sin, and to shake off that empire over
sin, which it seems to me has been too long and deeply settled and
established; and to go on from one degree of grace unto another, till he
arrives at Perfection: (which is the only method to obtain, that full assurance
of hope mentioned. Heb 6 11.)

With which I intend now to close this first part of my discourse of the Nature
of Christianity, because tho it be not a particular grace, it is a particular
state, and therefore deserves a particular consideration, and tho we be not
obliged to it, upon pain of Damnation, yet we are invited and encouraged to it,
by several glorious motives and enforcements, as shall presently appear; and
therefore it is a Gospel duty: by Perfection (in the sense I now consider it)
the Gospel implies a State of Grace arrived at its full maturity and strength,
grown into Nature, and consummated into a vigorous and delightful habit; it
being in this as in all other qualities, they grow up into habit and nature,
that is, Perfection by degrees;

According to this, the Gospel describes this State by Manhood, and a perfect
Stature; and calls our procedure to it, growing, increasing, and going on; so
that perfection is nothing else but Faith, Love, Temperance, and Humility, in
their greatest luster and strength:

The effect of this State is, that the Life be not only constant, firm, even,
and like it self, but also pleasant and delightful too; not only that the man
abstain from evil and do good, but that also he do both with desire and
earnestness of spirit, with ease and with delight; not only that he do good,
but what is in its kind most so;

This is a State which is attainable in this Life, for the Gospel calls and
invites men to it; and if any deny it, it is because they frame to themselves
another kind of notion of perfection than the Gospel delivers us, which
requires of Man no other perfection than such as is suitable to his Nature, and
the assistances promised by God, and to this present State, never as much as
dreaming that perfection is the same thing in man, as in an Angel and, (what
ever men may talk) it does not reckon the unavoidable imperfections and
frailties of men for sins, at leastwise such as can hinder man from being
denominated perfect, witness the whole First Epistle of St. John.

The motives to this duty may be comprised under Four heads all derived from
the nature of the State it self. Perfection is a State.

1. More pleasing to God. 2. Of greater security. 3. Of greater pleasure. 4.
Entitled to greater glory in the Life to come.
1. More pleasing to God; if God Loves holiness, (which no body can doubt) then
every degree of holiness is a new charm, and what is most Holy is most lovely;
and if so every one that professes to Love God, must be obliged to aim at
perfection, because he cannot but be obliged to please God as much as he can;
and he that does not, may justly suspect his conformity to the divine precepts
to be rather policy than Religion, and to proceed from a desire of his own
safety, rather than the Glory and pleasure of God; unless a spiritual prudence
shall restrain him from attempts or vows of more Heroical instances of
obedience, for Reasons which Religion may approve of; in which case it will be
always necessary to observe this caution, that his choice of a better good do
not proceed from any desire of gratifying the body, or from want of Love to God
and holiness.

2. Perfection is a state of greater security; the more strong Faith and Love
grow, the more faint and flat, are all temptations that beset us; a soul which
is devout and raised, is not easily lured down by any of the flatteries of
lust; the soul being long accustomed to rule, and the body to obey, the soul
being used to spiritual delights, and the body being now perfectly crucified,
the man is become a quite different being from what he was, and therefore that
World which did before take him, has now no grace nor allurement in it; I am
crucified to the World, and the World is crucified to me. This State is called
in Scripture, Wisdom, and Knowledge, and Strength, which does intimate to us,
that that World, which did before gain upon us only by our blindness, and our
weakness, can now no longer prevail; besides this, the more like God we grow,
the more dear are we to him, and become the more near and peculiar charge of
Heaven, which St. Paul, Heb. 6, 9.10. alleges for a reason, why he was
persuaded better things of them (than Apostasy) and things that accompany
Salvation (that is perseverance) because God is not unrighteous to forget your
work and labor of Love, etc.

3. It is a State of greater pleasure: a State of Peace and Rest from sin, for
the Man, having established an entire conquest over himself, is not frequently
alarmed by the lusts of the body, because it is crucified; the soul being
raised and Heavenly is now too much exalted to be reached by the blasts of
every temptation. 2. It is the nature of a habit that its acts are easy and
delightful; for Habit is but another Nature (so Holiness is called in Scripture
a new Nature) and what is natural is pleasant; when our graces are full of Life
and Vigor, when our sight is grown clearer and our affections warmer, and we
converse with God and Heaven; then it is that we begin to enjoy the sweets of
Religion, that we anticipate our Heaven, by performing his will on earth, as it
is done in Heaven; Religion is at first employed in the unpleasant tho
wholesome severities, of cutting off Right Hands, and pulling out Right Eyes,
Lusts become so natural they were become our members; but afterward, having
conquered the World, his commandments are not grievous, but full of delight
and satisfaction; in Conversion, as in the alteration of an Old building, we
first demolish those parts, which are not uniform and beautiful, and this
presents us with nothing but rubbish and ruins, but afterward we raise up an
orderly, beautiful and lightsome building, where we may solace and entertain
our selves; 3. An Exalted Holiness is not only delightsome in the very acts and
exercises of its graces, but in the fruits and effects of them; Joy, and Peace,
and Hope are the natural consequences of this State of Perfection, and its
actions, because such a man's Love of God is now so evident and manifest, he
has no longer room to doubt of it; and then what a ravishing pleasure must it
be, to be able to survey all the glorious promises of the Gospel as such which
himself is an heir to? who can with full assurance, think himself just upon the
confines of Heaven, within a moment of entering into joy, without a very
sensible transport!

4. It Is entitled to greater measures of Glory in the Life to come: Tho the
lowest degree of future glory be above the merit of the most holy Life, and tho
God may do what he will with his own, so that the chiefest Saint could not have
just reason to complain, tho the meanest were equaled with him: yet it is
plain that there will be order in another World, and those stars of the Morning
of the Resurrection will differ in Glory, and this will be proportioned to
their Behavior in this life; he which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly,
and he which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. Is it not
therefore highly reasonable on this account that we should aspire after the
greatest degrees of Holiness we can, for who would not desire to be as happy
and as glorious as he can.

It is now apparent, that perfection is a duty proposed to us, upon very
powerful and glorious motives; for who that is wise will not take pains to
arrive at that perfection, which is a State of greater security, greater ease
and pleasure, more acceptable to God, and entitled to greater degrees of Glory
in Heaven.

For the attainment of this State observe these few Rules.

1. Believe a Holy, Just, Almighty God, every where present; neither is there
any Creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and
opened to the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. Nay, God is
greater than our hearts, and knows all things. If Heaven be his Throne, Earth
is his Footstool, and therefore walk not, only as preparing to meet him, but as
already before him: this will awe a wandering spirit, and it will not be easy
to fear and sin; and it will awaken a decaying affection, and it will not be
easy to omit a duty; it will teach us how to judge our actions impartially, and
we shall neither impose upon our selves by fondness, nor do any thing for
opinion sake, when we consider, that we have God for a Judge and Spectator. I
am the almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.2.

2. Consider frequently and seriously the Life and Death, the sufferings and
the Crown of the blessed Jesus; for his Life will convince you how lovely and
pleasant virtue is, although it seem to the World foolish, contemptible and
painful: his death will inform you what Obligation you lie under to Holiness,
for will you not love and obey, that Savior, who has redeemed you by his
Blood? and are you not sensible that our Heavenly Father is strangely in love
with Holiness, since he does propagate it, by such a method? his Crown and his
Kingdom will breath fresh Life and Spirits into your affections; this is the
motive, which the Apostle, Heb. 12. Makes use of to persuade us to lay aside
every weight, and the sin, which does so easily beset us, and to run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the
Cross, despised the shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of
God: for consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself; least ye be wearied and faint in your minds; upon the same bottom is
grounded that exhortation of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved
brethren be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
for as much as you know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.

3. Each morning endeavor to foresee what temptations you are to encounter
that day, and summon up all the strengths of Grace and Nature, of Religion and
reason, against the hour of Trial, survey each part of the Fort, and having
discovered which is the weak place of the soul, and most approachable, secure
it by a strong guard, by arguments, and Prayers, and a diligent watch; there
are many things harsh to flesh and blood, which are to be undergone for the
sake of Christ, and therefore weigh well the strength of your own resolutions;
whether you are able to engage so powerful an enemy as the World and Flesh:
thus our blessed Lord when, Luke 14.26, 27. he had told them that if they would
be his Disciples, they must bear his Cross, exhorts them to consider beforehand
their engagement, and to see that their preparations be suitable to the
difficulty, by the examples of a builder, who first sits down to count the
cost, whether he have sufficient to finish his intended building; and of a
King, who going to War, with another King, does first sit down and consider,
whether he has strength enough to meet him: and when you have done this,
commit your self by Prayers to God, and then march forth out of your Chamber
into the World, like a Soldier out of his Camp into the field, upon the day of
battle.

And each evening look over all the passages of the Day, and see how you have
behaved your self, what victory you have gained, what ground you have got, what
grace is most faint and sickly, etc. and always close this exercise with a
serious Reflection upon the nature of thy Life, how fast it steals away into
Eternity; enter in fancy into the dark chamber, and mark how thou must lie in
thy bed of sickness and of Death; consider how all thy hopes and comforts, all
thy designs and purposes, as far as they concern this world, must vanish like a
dream; and think what need thou will then stand in, of all the strength and
comfort which Reason and Religion, the Ministry and Prayers of thy Spiritual
guide and Friend, and the Conscience of a well spent Life, can furnish thee
with; then thou will need a strong Faith, and a vigorous Love, and an entire
Humility, to enable thee to bear thy agonies patiently, and part with the world
cheerfully, and meet thy God compos'dly.

4. Do not indulge thy self in the Enjoyment of the utmost liberty which is
consistent with Innocence, vice borders very closely upon virtue; he that will
not be burnt, must not approach so nigh the fire as to be singed* besides such
freedoms do insensibly instill sensuality into the soul, at leastwise if so
thick an air do not sully the soul, it is too gross and mixed to whiten and
clear it.

5. Catch at every opportunity of a holy discourse, and learn to raise from
every thing a heavenly thought, and to manage every Accident to some spiritual
purpose; embrace all examples of an Excellent virtue, and search after all
occasions of doing good; declining by all the Arts of prudence and Religion
what ever either company or discourse, whatever either sight or entertainment,
may soften thy temper, thaw thy Resolutions, discompose thy calm, or alay thy
heavenly mindedness, or endear the world to thee; sin steals in thorough the
eye or ear, etc. dressed up in Beauty, Mirth, Luxury, etc. but it wounds whilst
it delights, and it stains where it touches, and it captives what it once
possesses.

6. Be sure that thy Religion be placed in substantial and weighty things not
fancyful and conceited; for example, 1. As to matters of Faith, make it thy
business to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, the riches of divine
Love, and the merit of Christ's sacrifice; and do not mispend thy time, nor
weary and disturb thy Soul with Curiosities and vain disputes, which usually
grow out of interest and pride or an impertinent and trifling spirit: 2. As to
practice, let thy Religion be made up of Fundamental Duties not conceits or
will worship; of Charity and Humility, Obedience, Mortification and Purity;
pure Religion and undefiled is this, to visit the Fatherless and the Widows,
and to keep ones self unspotted from the world, Religion is not a devout
whimsey, a sullen Austerity, or a blind and giddy passion, but all that
promotes the Honor of God, the good of Mankind, and the peace of our own Souls.

The Prayer.
O Most glorious and Eternal God, guide me I beseech thee in the paths of
Holiness; I am the purchase of thy Sons blood; I have known the truth of thy
glorious Gospel, and received the earnest of thy Love, thy Holy Spirit; O grant
that I may not receive thy Grace in vain, that I may not suffer wreck in the
sight of my Haven! But assist me by the might of thy Spirit in the inward Man,
to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, to go on to the full assurance of Hope,
mortifying each day more and more the outward man, and growing in all godliness
and virtue, and every thing that is praise worthy; that so the nearer I
approach Eternity, the fitter for it I may be; that my state here being a state
of spiritual delight and pleasure, each day may give fresh vigor to my
Devotion, so that I may not faint, till I enter into the Joys of my Master and
receive a Crown. Amen, Amen, Holy Jesus.

I have considered, 1. Our Obligation to Religion upon the account of our own
Souls, which can neither be happy in this Life, nor that to come without it. 2.
The Nature and Substance of that Religion we profess, as it regards either
Belief or Practice; from all which it appears, that the Christian Philosophy is
nothing else but a Systeme of most exalted Holiness, such as may become Men,
who are designed for another life; it remains now 3. To consider by what
powerful motives the Gospel engages us to duties which are so far above our
natural state and strengths.

Practical Christianity. Part, II.
CHAP. I. Of the Motives which the Gospel proposes to Holiness.
THe Motives by which the Gospel obliges us to Holiness, are 1. The Reward of
Virtue and Punishment of Vice in another World. 2. The Consideration of the
Divine Nature. 3. The Consideration of the whole History of our Savior. 4. The
consideration of the vanity of all those things which are the temptations to
sin. 5. The nature of virtue and of vice. 6. The assistance of the Divine
spirit and 7. The consideration of the nature of the Gospel Covenant which
leaves a place for Repentance.


1. Of the first Motive.

Upon what account Life and Immortality is said to be brought to light thorough
the Gospel, I Will not determine; but it is certain that the Gospel shows us how
Death is abolished, and how Life and Immortality may be attained; 2 that it
has manifested this to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews; and that 3. The
Discovery of it is in full and clear words laid down in almost every Page of it:

The Wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the Righteous into
Life eternal, Mat. 25. and To. 2.5. there is a day mentioned which is called
The Day of the Revelation of the righteous judgment of God, because he will
then render to every man according to his Deeds, to them who by patient
continuance in well doing seek for Glory and honor, and immortality; eternal
Life: but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness; indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul
of man that does evil, of the Jew first and also of the Gentile, but glory,
honor, and peace to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile.

This being so, to sin must needs be so silly and weak a thing, no man of
common sense would be guilty of; for can any man of reason be at a loss in such
a choice as this, whether he will live eternally or die; whether he will be
happy for ever, or for a moment: (upon supposal that sin could make me live one
happy moment.)

It Is true, if there were no prospect of another Life, no account to be taken
in another world, the case would be much altered; for the Law of our nature
being (I humbly conceive) nothing else, but the Law or Dictates of Reason, and
the business of Reason being (in this respect at least) only to distinguish
between good and evil, our Reason would talk to us at another rate, because it
would proceed by different principles; good and evil would then peradventure be
different things, for whatever would make for the pleasure and interest of this
present State would be good; and even pleasure and interest would not
peradventure be the same thing then that now; for the soul would not challenge
so distinct a consideration or provision as now, for it would not be only
lawful but wise for it to become sensual and worldly, and so, the same pleasure
and interest would minister to the happiness of both Body and Soul. But now
that we are assured that we are to live to all Eternity, and that every action
of ours has an influence on that other life, we must needs conclude that every
action is good or bad, wise or foolish as it serves or hinders our happiness in
that State to come: that this motive may have its full force, it will behove
every man to take as lively a survey as he can of the joys and miseries of
another Life* And 1. Of Heaven.

It must be confessed, that to be able to speak properly of Heaven, we have need,
like St. Paul, to be rapt up into it; for the richest fancy would be but flat
and barren in its framing any resemblance of the joys and glory of that place:
they are unconceiveable.

Heaven is like the God of it, there is no searching of him out unto
perfection, but yet there is enough of him manifested to prove him to us
strangely aimable, and therefore I Will consider what is manifested to us of
Heaven.

1. The place.

2. The persons, (for the objects, they will fall in with these) which
constitute the happiness of Heaven.

1. As to the Place. Heaven, it is the sacred abode of God and Angels, and
therefore it must, as much exceed this World, as they do us, for no doubt on it
the wise Architect of all things made each Palace proper and fit for the
entertainment of that family, it was to receive, and indeed it appears to be a
place fit for the Favorits of God to live in, for Heaven is a place of
everlasting life, and everlasting happiness.

Heaven is the end and consummation of all things, all things will there be in
their highest perfection which they are capable of; we are now the rough
draught of what the great Artificer intends us; imagine to what glory we may be
raised; we once were dirt and clay, see now what comely glorious beings; yet we
are to be refined much more above what we are now, than flesh and blood is
above dirt and clay; what difference there is between Time and Eternity,
between corruption and incorruption, so much we differ in our existence and
essence now, from what we shall be afterward; for mortality must be swallowed
up of immortality and corruption of incorruption.

If Heaven be a state wherein all things are consummated, an end which has
none beyond it, then I infer, 1. That there will be nothing more for us either
to hope or fear, all will be full of quiet, and peace, no passions there but
Love, and Joy, and Wonder: there shall be no more death, neither sorrow nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain, Rev. 21. -- 2. Having obtained
our end, we shall have no further need of means there will be nothing which is
to be done merely for the sake of something else; as here below the covetous
man suffers hardship, and the toil of constant business, not because he loves
trouble, but because he would be rich; the Religious man offers violence to his
own body, not because it is actually pleasant to do so, but because it is in
order to a greater good; therefore there being nothing of this to be done in
Heaven, all the business and employment of that Life, will be delight and
pleasure; hence it is every where in Scripture described as a State of Peace,
and Rest, and Joy, and Pleasure.

2. As to the Persons. I a poor creature of this World below, I who have felt
the troubles of this mortal State, been tortured by the passions of Flesh and
Blood, Fears and Cares, Despairs and Hopes, even I am going to a Heaven, where
none of these can enter, where I shall be made happy, with those enjoyments,
which make God and Angels so, I shall be made (...) equal to the Angels in
Heaven, how far above them in my happiness! for what a value will the
experience of this World make me set upon the joys of another! the sense and
memory of misery will make my Heaven double.

I consider that in that Life to come, we shall have Soul and Bodies, (tho not
such,) as we have now; our Souls will be strangely raised and refined in their
nature, and endowed with strange measures of knowledge; this compared to the
other Life, being like Childhood to Manhood, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. We know
in part, -- but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part
shall be done away, when I was a Child I spoke as a Child, I understood as a
Child, I thought as a Child; but when I became a Man I put away Childish
things; for now we see tborough a glass darkly, but then face to face, now I
know in part, but then shall I know, even as also I am known; I am not willing
to infer what kind of measures of knowledge this Text imports, to determine how
well we shall be versed in the Philosophy of Grace and Nature, and the World
above: how experienced we shall be in the Annals and History of this Life and
the other; it is enough to say as the Text does, that what we do see, we shall
see plainly, not darkly; and what can we see in another Life, but God, etc. How
rich a pleasure this will be, only ingenious and excellent spirits are capable
of fancying: all may be able to guess that it will be a most unspeakable
pleasure, because knowledge is one of the Excellencies of God and Angels, and
the delight of the wiser part of Mankind:

As for the Souls Affections, they will surely be settled on God, or whatever
other objects there may be subordinate, they will be such as will become so
pure and holy a Being: for the Appetite of each Being flows from the
Constitution and Nature of it: it now indeed derives mean and degenerous
inclinations from its communion with the Body (whose contrivance is proper for
the state it lives in:)

But then the Body will be raised a spiritual glorified Body, which is to be
understood in opposition to a carnal natural one, 1 Cor. 15. a Body proper to
be an Inhabitant of such a place, and to be a suitable companion to such a
Soul, fit to comply with its desires, and in some measure sure to partake of
its joys, which I may place as the first ingredient of the happiness of the
Body in that Life to come, i.e. As it here grieves and joys in the pain or
pleasure of the Soul, so there it will much more: if the satisfaction of the
Soul, now, do by a happy influence impart health, and cheerfulness, and
pleasure to the body, it will there much more do so; because being raised
spiritual it seems to me that it will be knit in a closser union, and be more
capable of those influences: but besides this, 2. It will have pleasures
agreeable and natural to it self, which it will reap, 1. From the glory and
perfection it possesses, which will be one peculiar to it self, and of a
different nature from that of the Soul, thus in our Savior on the Mount, (from
whose transfiguration we may receive a little light) they were two different
things, which made up the beauty of his mind and of his body, Wisdom, Love,
Holiness, etc. were the charms and graces of his Soul, but light, and glory,
and proportion the Majesty and Beauty of his body: and since this body will be
in its nature distinct from the soul (for though spiritual, it will not be
intelligent) therefore too it will have objects fit to entertain it; what those
objects will be, that I Will not endeavor to discover, the Scripture does in the
general tell us, that the place it self will be filled with a mighty glory,
that our conversation will be strangely delightful, that there are things
prepared for us, (which are not therefore God himself) which the eye has not
seen etc. (if that place be to be understood of the entertainments of another
life.) but least any should mistake me, I do not in the least dream of any
gross pleasure: not the pleasure of the glorified body will be as spiritual a
the body, and no more; from all that I have said, I infer.

1. That the joy and pleasure of the Life to come is most perfect and
Excellent, for the more excellent the being the more delicat and refined its
pleasure, or else there could be no difference between the happiness of an
Angel that is ravished with the enjoyment, of Heaven and an Hog that fattens in
is stie and grunts at a full meal;) and if so, how unconceiveably great will
our pleasures be in that State, wherein the worse and meaner part of us, our
very bodies shall be spiritual and incorruptible!

2. That there is no reason that we should be the less moved and captived by
the promises of such pleasures in another life, because they are pourtrayed to
us in such an excellence, and luster, as does rather dazzle and amaze, than take
and please us, for tho now we are as far beneath them, as we are at a distance
from them, yet then our natures will be made equal to them, and when we stand
upon the same level with Angels, what makes up their Heaven, will constitute
ours too;

And now, what can man fancy more than this, that our natures should be raised
to the highest perfection they are capable of, and be entertained by the most
glorious objects imaginable! there is only one thing more to be added, that
this State be Eternal, that we not only have all which our hearts can desire,
but also that we have all this for ever and ever; and this is one property of
Heaven too, the things which are seen are Temporal, the things which are not
seen are Eternal; now Eternity is a duration that never passes; a stream of
time which still glides on, and yet never runs quite away; a day that never
sets in any Cloud or night; a State of Life, which shall never grow old by
time, nor decay by age; a pleasure which will always delight, and never
surfeit us; a meeting of the dearest friends never to part again.

O my God, how unconceiveable is the Glory thou do design me for, I cannot
comprehend what I am going to be! and what can be the influence of all this,
but that I should count all the advantages of this present Life, dung and dross
in comparison of the happiness of the Life to come; that I should count all the
afflictions of this present life, not worthy to be put in the balance against
the glory that is to be revealed; how is it almost possible for me to resist
the charms of such a Heaven! or not to despise this World, who have the
prospect of such a one to come! I need but cast an eye of Faith upon the joys
of Heaven, and it will be enough to confront and baffle all the allurements of
flesh and blood, and all the gaudy nothings of this fading World; one thought a
day of Heaven, will raise me so far above all the fears and troubles which
distract and disquiet this present State, that I could sit with unconcernment,
and see all my hopes and interests lost, and shipwrackt on the billows of an
inconstant Word, whilst I knew that my Heaven, my Eternity were sure; nay
death it self, would be the only thing on this side Heaven, which would be an
object fit for my desires and wishes; what is it then can tempt a man to sin,
who is thus armed? who is proof against the flatteries or menaces of the World,
against the soft addresses of a Wanton, or the impatiences and querulency of a
weak tender body? what conflict, if possible, can be difficult, which is to be
thus rewarded? who can faint or languish in his race, who has his eye fixed
upon such a Crown.

The Prayer.
O Most glorious God, strengthen my Faith in the belief of the invisible things
of another World, that it may enable me to conquer this! imprint in my Soul
such a lively Image of that future State, as may make me run with patience and
cheerfulness the race which is set before me! O let me not choose my portion in
this Life! Let me not exchange the Crown and Glories of Eternity, for the pomp
and vanity of this Life! Let me not forfeit, the pleasure and peace of that
State of bliss, for the dull momentary Lusts of this mortal earthly State --
but let me who have this hope purify my self! Let me make it my business to be
doing thy Will, for which way can I so advantagiously lay out my time and
strength, as for an infinite reward; O my God, let these considerations prevail
with me to Live so, that when I come to dye, I may have nothing to do, but to
receive a Crown, Amen. Amen. Blessed Jesus.

Of Hell.
Now tho a mere exile from this Heaven were Hell enough; and there needed no
flames, nor darkness to make that State miserable; for that there should be an
eternal day, whose light should never shine on me! that there should be full
tides of pleasures which I should never taste of, this is Hell enough.

Yet besides all this, there are real and endless torments to be inflicted upon
all impenitent sinners, when Christ shall come to take vengance on all them who
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The place is a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, of flame and darkness, which
together with a worm that never dies, imports the excess of that torment which
shall produce, weeping and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth.

The Company is the Devil and his Angels, the fearful and unbelieving, the
abominable, and Murderers, Whoremongers and Sorcerers, Idolaters and Liars,
and all the Enemies of God and Goodness.

The Duration of this State is for ever, as Eternal as the Joys of Heaven, an
Everlasting Punishment, the Worm never dies, and the Fire cannot be quenched:
And though the Almighty may not be bound up to fulfill his threats (which
whether so applicable to God as Man, I Will not dispute) yet certainly our
Savior and his Apostles, in giving us a Narrative or History of the different
Issues of things, are bound to speak truth.

Hell then is a fixed state of misery, wherein men have bid adieu to the
pleasures of Earth, and to all hopes of Heaven; the memory of past pleasures
does but increase their pain; and what is beyond all the misery of this world,
they enjoy not as much as the deceitful Dreams of flattering hopes. -- Hell!
where there is no light, nor ease, nor God, nor any harmless pleasure to divert
the pain a moment! Hell, where only the wretched Objects of an Incensed God do
for ever weep and wail!

Is this the Death which is the wages of Sin! Can Sin offer me any pleasure
that can countervail this Eternity of miseries: or is there any thing in
poverty, or shame, or banishment, or death, equal to this Hell! if not, what
blind brutish madness pusheth me on to sin? Can I dwell with Everlasting
Burnings? Can I be content to live in an endless Night of pains and horrors?
Adieu my fatal pleasures! I had rather starve and macerate this Body into
sobriety, than by Indulgence betray it to the rage and fury of Almighty
Vengeance? I Will shut my eyes against all forbidden Fruits, rather than for ever
deprive 'm of the sight of Heaven, and close them up in an Eternal Night:
Welcome whatever Penances Religion may impose upon me, whatever the World may
threaten me with for the discharge of a good Conscience; I Would watch and fast
till Death, rather than be Damned; I Would be the scorn and hate of Mankind, rather
than of God? Are not these terrible Truths? Are they not armed with Lightning
and Thunder, enough to startle the most hardened sinner? Good God, what makes
the World so dead, so callous, that such dreadful Objects cannot rouse nor
pierce them! It must needs be, because they put that evil day so far off, that
the biggest terrors of it look but like Moats at such a distance.

But surely we mistake our selves in our computation: we are now in Time; how
narrow is the Isthmus which parts Time from Eternity! or is there any Partition
at all? but one groan that the frame of our Nature cracks with, but one parting
moment wafts us over upon the shore of another world; Heaven and Hell they are
not at the distance of so many years from this world, but just of so much time
as will serve us to die in: And is this so much, that we should frolic and
wanton in our sins, as if we were not within ken of danger? there is scarce a
moment in the day, wherein some Soul or other, in some part of the world, does
not make its Exit into another life; and shall I sin as securely, as if my time
and death were at my own disposal? I came but a few years ago into the world,
and within a few more I must go out on it; how soon this day will come, I know
not, I Am sure that the Sentence of Death is past upon me already, I only wait
the hour of Execution, which any trifling cause can be the instrument of; I may
die of pleasure, or of pain; I may die of want, or fullness; I may die of
desire, or enjoyment; what is it then which cannot give Death! the very height
of health is a degree of sickness; my Scull is weak, my skin and flesh thin and
soft, my heart tender, and my passions easy; my inner part is full of strange
mazes, vessels curiously contrived, and subtly disposed; what a little will
ravel this intricate contexture, and discompose this delicate frame; and shall
I be as secure, as if my strength were Iron, and my sinews Brass, and the
position of my parts fixed as the Decrees of Heaven! -- No, no, I Will live in
continual expectation of my Death; I Will examine my Soul each Evening, and close
my eyelids, as if I were to awake next morning in another world; I Will often
take my leave of this world, and fancy I shall see this or that pleasant object
no more, no more; and I Will address my self to my God, as if my Soul were ready
to take wing, and I Will soberly consider the Nature of my God, the value of
Christ's Sacrifice, and the Truth of my Faith; and so I shall learn to disingage
my self from this world, and to die handsomely and comfortably, if not in
rapture.

The Prayer.
O Most gracious God, who have hedged about our ways, that we may not stray and
wander into ruin! who have endeavored to frighten us into happiness, by the
dread and terrors of a Hell! O grant that this fear may be fixed in my very
flesh, and produce in me a cautious and a wary depormtent; that I remembering
that our God is Consuming Fire, may not dare to provoke thee to wrath and
indignation against me! And grant, O most merciful Father, that I may not put
the day of death far from me, and flatter my self into security and misery, but
live each day as if it were my last, because I do not know but that it may be
so; that I may enter at last into that state where there shall be no more
conflict with sin, nor fear of death, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

SECT. II. Of the second Motive to Holiness, i.e. the consideration of the
Divine Nature.
THe knowledge of the Nature of God is so powerful an inforcement to Virtue,
and a determent from Vice, that Religion, and the knowledge of God, and
Irreligion, and a want of that knowledge, are made use of by the Spirit of God
as expressions of the same import: as 1 Cor. 15.34. Awake to righteousness, and
sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God. -- And this, not without
reason; for the knowledge of God will, 1. Discover to us the Nature of
Holiness, and of Sin. 2. It will convince us how reasonable it is that we
should serve him: And 3. It will confirm in us a full persuasion of the Reward
of Virtue, and Punishment of Vice.


To this purpose therefore let us consider the Nature of God, as it is taught
us in the Gospel of that Son of God who lay in the Bosom of his Father, and
has declared him to us: And the first thing is, that God is a Spirit, Jo.
4.24. and those Attributes which the Gospel assigns him, and which are a fuller
discovery of his Nature, are Knowledge, Wisdom, Holiness, (under which may in
the opinion of some be comprehended Goodness, Justice,) and Power, and
Dominion. -- Now from that resemblance which Religion implanted in the heart
has to these, it is called the Divine Nature, and the Image of God; and it is
highly reasonable, that the worship should be suitable to the God it is paid
to; and therefore the Rule and Standard of Holiness is the Divine Nature, and
nothing else; the beauty of Holiness, and the deformity of sin, is not to be
derived, at least primarily, from the convenience or inconvenieney of the one
or other in this present life, but from a tendency to imprint or efface this
Divine Image in us.

This is the way of our Savior's and his Apostles arguing from the Divine
Nature to our Duty thus, because God is a Spirit, therefore he is to be
worshipped in Spirit, and in Truth; because he is pure, therefore they must
purify themselves who approach him; because he is holy, therefore his
worshippers must be holy too; and because he is love, therefore they who abide
in him must abide in love; all his Children must imitate the perfections of the
Divine Nature -- Be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect.

From hence it is easy to discover why the God of Heaven has such an
Everlasting Quarrel against sin, and why he delights so much in Holiness and
Righteousness: Sin embases the man, and depraves the spirit which is in him
into a sensual natural man, and sets him at the farthest distance from, and
contradiction to God; but Holiness is a reflection of his own Beauty and
Excellency, it is the exalting man into a spiritual and heavenly Nature. --
This is a plain account of the Nature of Holiness and Sin, how the one is so
lovely, and the other so ugly, how the one is so dangerous, and the other so
advantageous.

2. The knowledge of the Divine Nature convinces us of the reasonableness of
serving God: There can be but two reasons for service, either 1. An Obligation
to the person we serve, and then our service is either Duty or Gratitude, or
else 2. A regard to our own interest or pleasure. In the knowledge of the
Divine Nature we shall find all these Obligations to his services. If we
consider God as that Principle in whom we live, and move, and have our being,
Act. 17.28. or as one who does us good, gives us rain from Heaven, and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness, Act. 14.17. What can be
more reasonable, than that we should be thankful to him? but, if we consider
him further, as Redeeming us by the Blood of his Son, instructing us by the
Light of his Gospel, assisting us by the Power of his Spirit, and adopting us
into the hopes of an Incorruptible Crown; what can be more reasonable, than
that we should devote our selves to his service, and offer up our selves a
holy, living, and acceptable Sacrifice to him? If we consider him as our
Creator, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth, what can be more reasonable, than
that we his Creatures should obey his Laws?

If we have regard to our own Interest, all our present enjoyments and future
hopes depend upon him; to be guided by Infinite Wisdom, to be protected by
Infinite Power, to be blessed by him who is above all things, and can make us as
happy as he pleases, are things which a wise love of our selves would make us
earnestly desire: As for pleasure, besides that which flows from the persuasion
of all these advantages which accrue to us from his service, and besides the
peace and true freedom which Devotion gains us, there is a strange pleasure in
the contemplation of the most Excellent Being, in whom is united all that is
any way taking with a Rational and Immortal Soul.

3. This knowledge of God will confirm us in a firm persuasion of the reward of
Virtue, and punishment of Vice: for whilst it discovers sin so exceeding
hateful, not only upon the account of its contradiction to the Divine Nature,
but also its base ingratitude and folly, and discovers the Excellency and
Loveliness of Holiness; it does at the same time manifest the reason, why God,
who is a holy God, does encourage the one by such glorious promises, and deter
us from the other by such amazing threats; for whether we consider him in
himself, the purity of his own nature makes him love goodness, and hate vice;
and how contemptible were either his love or hate, if happiness be not the
effect of one, and misery of the other; or if you consider him as the Governor
of this world, it is inconsistent with his Majesty to suffer the violation of
his Laws, without punishing the bold Offender.

So that now there is nothing further necessary to work this persuasion in us,
but that 1. We should be persuaded that neither our good nor evil actions can
be concealed from him: And 2. That he is armed with sufficient power to bless
and reward the righteous, and avenge himself of the sinner; and both these
Truths we learn from his infinite Knowledge, and infinite Power, both which we
are abundantly taught in the Gospel of Christ to belong to God: God is greater
than our hearts, and knows all things: Fear not them which kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him which is able to destroy
both soul and body in hell, Mat. 10.28. And this God, thus knowing, and thus
powerful, without any respect of persons, judges according to every man's work,
1 Pet. 1.17.

All this now amounts to thus much, that Virtue and Vice are not indifferent
things, but that the one is most lovely the other most loathsome to God;
therefore the one is most fatal, and the other most benificial to its Votaries;
for there is an infinitely glorious Being who is most deeply concerned, and
every way able to pour forth blessings on the righteous, and vengeance on the
sinner.

The Prayer.
O Glorious God, let my knowledge of thy Nature teach me to deny all iniquity,
and to be holy as thou art holy. Let thy goodness make me love thee, and thy
Power and Justice make me fear thee, and let both wing my Devotion, and clog
and damp my Lusts! Let thy Truth and thy Power beget in me a perfect affiance
in thee! Let thy Wisdom and thy Love persuade me to submit quietly to thy Will!
that I may walk before an Almighty God, and be perfect, and so may enter into
thy joys in the life to come, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

SECT. III. Of the third Motive to Holiness; i.e. the Consideration of the
whole History of the Son of God, Jesus Christ.
OUr Lord and Savior may be considered either in his Life, his Death, or Glory
beginning in his Resurrection; the knowledge of him, in each of these, is a
strong engagement to Holiness, and a determent from Vice. 1. In his Life: and
here we may look upon him with reference to his Doctrine or Example, both which
conspire in this one aim to implant Holiness in the world and to root out sin;
for look upon him with reference to his Doectrine, and we shall find this was
the great business of his Life, to instruct men in the will of God, to acquaint
them with a true and spiritual holiness for as the Law came by Moses, so grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ in regard of which he calls himself the way, the
truth, and the Life; and all this by Commission from the Father, Jo. 15.15. All
that I have heard of the Father I have manifested unto you.

From hence I may infer, That the planting the world with Holiness was an
undertaking becoming the Son of God; a Design worthy of his Incarnation; the
Jews vainly expected that he should have built them up into a glorious Empire,
and secured to them the Enjoyment of Honor and pleasure in this Life, but
since the meek and humble Jesus despised this as a trifling design, it
manifestly appears, that Mortification (in him self denial) is above all the
Romantic gallantry of ambitious spirits; That to be Good is somewhat more
noble than to be Great, to despise the world is more than to conquer it; to
subdue the flesh, a richer happyness than to be able to caress it with all the
flatteries of Luxury and greatness; and to know God and obey his will a greater
honor and happyness, than to command the Lives and fortunes of Mankind; -- How
can this consideration choose but beget in the minds of men, a strange
veneration for Religon, and a Love of Holiness, why should we with a
prepostrous ambition, affect those fooleries of the world, and neglect true
honor and happiness, true greatness and perfection! tho we our selves should not
be able to discover it, yet we may very reasonably collect both the beauty and
necessity of Holiness, from the value an infinitely wise God has of it which he
does sufficently express in laboring the reformation of the world with so much
earnestness; in employing so much care and so much wisdom about it; in making
use of so glorious an instrument as his own Son, the brightness of his Fathers
Image, etc. The works of nature and providence together with that light he shed
upon our nature (being sufficient to work in us a natural Religion,) had left
our disobedience inexcusable; when he added so many other miraculous
manifestations of his glory and his will, and the instruction of Prophets,
(authorized by Miracles and foreknowledge of things to come,) all this must
needs render them to whom it was addressed much more inexcusable; and what
shall we think of our selves to whom he has, in the dispensation of the
fullness of time, sent Jesus Christ, declared to be the Son of God by Power, by
the spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead? God might well
expect, as the Lord in the Parable, Surely they will reverence my Son: The
greatness of his Person is very fit to beget an Awe and Belief too; therefore
as the Grace is greater, so must the punishment of its rejection: This is the
conclusion S. Paul draws from the Divinity of his Person, proved in the first
Chapt. to the Heb. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip; for if
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, And every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we
neglect so great a Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, etc. Heb. 2.

If we secondly consider the Life of Jesus, only as a great example of the most
exalted Holiness, of obedience toward God, charity toward his Neighbor,
purity and self-denial toward himself, we shall not only find in it a clear
light to direct us in the practice of virtue, but also powerful motives to
engage us to it; for if our great Lord and Master, the Son of God, did thus
deny himself, and renounce the world, what kind of Humility and Mortification
will become us who are so far beneath him, and in whom are such violent
propensions to sin? how will it become us to walk; who profess our selves the
Disciples of so holy and so excellent a Master! we cannot be his Disciples,
unless we walk as he walked; for this was it he aimed at to set us an example,
and the thing we are to learn of him is his Holiness: If ye continue in my
word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, etc. Learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls: He that says he abides
in him, ought himself also to walk so, even as he walked. All which imports a
necessity of our imitation of him, and implies our straying from his example,
to be an interpretative Renunciation of our Discipleship. -- Secondly, In the
example of his Life, we may discern the Beauty and the Happiness of a Holy
Life; how lovely, how great, how Majestic was that Goodness and Innocence
which shined in him; and as a consequence of this Holiness, with what serenity
and calmness of affections did he enjoy himself? with what assurance of mind
did he encounter all afflictions, and look forward toward another life? these
are pleasures which all must needs value who can understand them, and all may
enjoy them who will lead godly lives. Thirdly, from him we learn how wise and
reasonable a thing it is, to prefer all the hardships which accompany Religion
to the vanities of this world, since he who was best acquainted with the
happiness of another life, and could have commanded all the advantages of this,
despised all the flattering pleasures of this life, and chose the Cross, and
the afflictions of Righteousness, that he might obtain an Everlasting Crown:
Let us choose as he did, and we shall never be mistaken; nor let us be
frightened at any difficulty, the same Spirit which strengthened him, shall
make us too Conquerours; nor can the World menace us with any thing worse than
what he endured, Want, and Scorn, and Travel, and Death, a shameful and a
painful death, -- which is that which constitutes the

Second part of the History of our Savior, and is a very passionate invitation
to Holiness, considered either as an Expiatian of our sins, or as an act of his
obedience to God; as an Expiation, it must 1. Plainly convince the world of the
fatal deadly nature of sin; for when I see the Son of God struggling with the
torments of the Cross, groaning under the pain of his Wounds, pale and ghastly
breathing forth his Soul in the agonies of Death, I cannot think that the
goodness as well as wisdom of the Divine Nature could have thought fit for sin
to have been atton'd by so bitter a Sacrifice, unless the weight and horror of
it had called for such an Expiation; and shall I play and fool with sin as a
harmless thing, when its guilt cannot be cleans'd but by the Blood of the Son of
God? Surely the greatness of the Sacrifice was intended to intimate to mankind
the fatal nature of sin the blood of Bulls and of Goats purified the flesh
indeed, but to purge the Conscience another kind of Sacrifice was needful, even
the Blood of the Son of God: I can easily read in these sufferings of my
Savior, that the wages of sin is death, and sin is not grown less ugly, or
less hateful to God, since the Death of his Son; before, the strength of (i. e.
that which gives the fatality to) sin, was the Law, but now much more the
Gospel; I mean not as the one was a Covenant of Works, and the other is of
Grace, but as the one, i. e. the Law had the Majesty of God stamped upon it,
and so each transgression was an affront to the Divine Glory; this other, i. e.
the Gospel arms its Laws with a double Obligation of infinite Glory and
inexpressible goodness, so that the death of the Son of God does exceedingly
enhance the guilt and aggravation of sin, and makes sin become exceeding
sinful. -- For 2. To lay down his life thus for our sakes, to expiate our sins
by his blood, was an act of such amazing love, as should transport us into a
cheerful and ready obedience; The love of Christ should constrain us, to live
not to our selves, but to him who died for us, and rose again: That the belief
of his bitter passion for our sakes, should beget in us no tenderness nor
affection toward him at all, is unnatural and unpardonable, or that we should
love him, and not obey him, is as unnatural; but that we should be so far from
loving him, that we should hate and persecute him, is a baseness I want words
to express; and yet not only Apostasy, but any course of sin does crucify him
afresh, and put him to an open shame; for whoever is an Enemy to Holiness and
Goodness, is so to him too.

If we look upon his Death as an Act of Obedience to his God, then we learn
from it the indispensable necessity of parting with life it self for the sake
of those truths we profess; that nothing ought to be so dear to us as obedience
to God: -- We learn the great Lesson of Mortification, called in Scripture,
being crucified with him, made conformable to his Death, in the subduing all
our carnal affections, it being highly unreasonable that we should expect an
entrance into Glory by any other path than that of suffering, and unreasonable
to expect a share in the Resurrection to Glory, if we do not first die with him.

3. His Glory is the third and last part of our Saviors History, which is a
powerful inducement to Holiness; this begins in his Resurrection: Now the
Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, is a very clear proof of our
Resurrection, as S. Paul argues, 1 Cor. 15. and so the great Argument to a good
Life, i.e. a Resurrection, being demonstrated to the very senses of Mankind,
leaves no excuse for sin; the wicked cannot flatter their Consciences into
confidence, by denying it, nor can the hopes of good men droop and languish
thorough doubting of it: No, if Christ be risen, then there is a Resurrection
from the Dead, and the same power which raised him, will raise us too at his
coming; and they who have done well shall enter into that glory which Christ
now enjoys at the right hand of God, as a reward of his obedience unto death,
Phil. 2. and all who imitate his Life, shall in their several degrees and
proportions partake of a reward of the same nature; for we shall reign with
him, we shall sit with him in his Throne: And surely this example of the reward
of goodness cannot but commit a kind of pleasing violence upon the affections
of man, and transport him above temptations; this was that Prospect which
ravished the first Martyr into an Ecstasy, though on the brink of dangers and
death, Act. 7.56. Behold I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing
on the right hand of God: And if we could often lift up our eyes, and fasten
them upon this pleasing sight, it would unavoidably raise us above this present
world; we should not be discouraged at the poverty or reproach of our Saviors
Life, at the pain or the anguish of his death, if we did but often contemplate
the peace, and the glory, and the happiness which now Crowns his Conquests. It
is very true, that a life led in Prayers, and Meditation, and Sacraments, and
an Abstinence from sensual pleasures, does not appear very gaudy or taking to a
carnal man; but if the same man could but behold one who had lived thus
translated into Heaven, how would he adore the wisdom and happiness of the
Saints! and how devout and holy, how pure and mortified would be his life
afterward! It is said of the Disciples who saw our Savior carried up into
Heaven, that they returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually
in the Temple praising and blessing God; a clear proof, that there would be no
painfulness in the industry and fervency of a spiritual life, if we did often
reflect upon the joys such a life prepares us for; there would be nothing
harsh, unpleasant or dishonorable in the modesty and mortification of a
Christian state, if we did but look forward to the Crown and Kingdom it does
gain for us; who that had seen our Blessed Lord received up with glory into
Heaven, would not have wished it had been his turn too, that he had lived and
died, suffered and conquered with him, and had been to ascend with him, out of
a troublesome sinful World, with joy and triumph into Heaven.

And thus now it evidently appears, that every part of our Saviors History is
full of very powerful Motives to Holiness; that all he did and suffered, tended
to destroy the works of the Devil, and to implant goodness and Holiness in the
world; and we must not think that a Design carried on by God in such a
wonderful manner, can be otherwise than strangely dear to him; and that we must
not think, that if we through our obstinacy and unnatural disobedience defeat
this Design, we can ever escape utter Damnation, a Damnation more unsufferable
than that of sinful Heathens, etc. Therefore

The Prayer.
O Blessed and holy Jesus, grant me thy holy Spirit, that I may lay to heart
the instruction of thy Doctrine, and thy Life, and may not only know, but do
thy will, when I look up on thy Crucified Body on the Cross, may I tremble at
the guilt and weight of my sins, which stood in need of so bloody a Sacrifice,
and may thy bitter Agonies for me melt me into love and passion for thee, and
this love constrain me to obey thee! O may I be willing to sacrifice all my
pleasures to thy Commands, who have laid down thy Life for me! and being made
conformable to thy Death, then I may look up with pleasure on thy Glory; and
Lord grant that the hope of partaking in it, may make me purify my self, and
walk as thou have done, in all Meekness, and Charity, and Faith, and Hope, that
I may be fitted for those Mansions thou art gone before to prepare for me.
Amen, Amen.

SECT. IV. Cantaining the fourth Motive to Holiness, i. e. the Consideration of
the vanity of all those things which tempt us to sin.
A Man who should have seriously laid to heart the strength and importance of
these Motives to Holiness (which I have considered) would be apt to think, that
nothing less than some unimaginable temptation, or some unavoidable necessity
in the contrivance of our natures, could provoke men to cast off all these
Obligations, and break thorough all these obstructions, that he might sin and
die; but on the quite contraty (which does strangely reproach the folly of the
sinner.)

1. Those things which are the allurements to fin, have little or no temptation
in them. 2. Sin it self is a silly base thing. And 3. Man has strength enough
offered to enable him to avoid it.
1. The first I shall have occasion to consider fully in the third part of this
Treatise, and thither I refer the Reader; only by the way we must take notice,
there is no more sttess to be laid upon this Argument than it will bear; and
that this Argument has still respect to the joys and punishments of another
life: the sensual satisfactions of Man are very little and trifling, compared
with the pleasures of Heaven, and it can never be worth a man's while to be
damned for them; yet sure if there were no life to come, it would behove every
man to be content with, and make the most of this: nor do I at all doubt, but
that men may manage their lusts so, as that they may not be able to infer
Reason enough to relinquish them from any influence they have upon their
interest; or if any one should think it necessary to purchase a pleasure by the
shortning of his life, or the lessening of his Estate, I cannot see why he may
not have reason on his side, for a short life, and a merry one; and my mind to
me a Kingdom is, would upon the former supposition be a wise Proverb; for upon
this supposition the pleasure of the mind would be very narrow and faint, and
the checks of Conscience would be none, or insignificant: But as the case
stands now, (though there be pleasure in sin, and deceitfulness in lust,
granted in Scripture) to abandon the hopes of Heaven for some carnal pleasures
upon Earth, is like Esau, to sell his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; and on
the other hand, to renounce all present enjoyments for the sake of Heaven, is
like Peter, to forsake a worn Fisher-boat, and broken Nets, a troubled Lake,
and uncertain Hopes, for the assurance of a Crown and Kingdom, which is surely
very reasonable.

And now I pass on to the second thing, and fifth Section.

SECT. V. Containing a fifth Motive to Holiness, from the Nature of Virtue and
Vice.
IN 1 Ep. Jo. 1. this is set down as the great Message which Christ came to
acquaint the world with, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all;
and therefore they who walk in the light have fellowship with him, and they
that walk in darkness have none; where it is plain, that S. John founded the
necessity of Holiness in the Divine Nature; because God is holy, therefore he
must first renounce his own Nature, e're he can establish any other (contrary)
Laws, or love or hate on any other condition, than Holiness and sin: This being
so, I think the best way to discover the Nature of Virtue and Vice, is to
consider how the one renders us like God, and the other unlike him.

The Account we have of the Nature of God is, that he is a Spirit of Eternal
Life, Infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Truth; these are the chief
of his Attributes, and such as Reason it self acknowledges to be the highest
perfections and excellencies imaginable: If Holiness therefore tend to implant
and improve some resemblances of them in men, and Vice to efface and extinguish
them, it will easily appear, how the one makes us like God, and the other
unlike him.

1, God is a Spirit; it is true, that Virtue and Vice do not change the
substances of things, and make Spirit Flesh, or Flesh Spirit; yet because they
do so wonderfully transform things, by instilling new qualities, and so
altering the operations of beings, they are in Scripture said to do so: Thus
because Virtue raises and refines the Soul, frees it from those Fogs which a
sensual dotage casts about it, scatters a new light upon it, and mortifies
those affections which reign in the body, and render it more obedient to the
mind; so that the man lives the life of Faith, as becomes a wise and an
immortal being, therefore it is said in the Language of the Holy Ghost, to have
rendered him a spiritual man: and on the other side, because sin does stupifie
and sensualize the mind, imbolden and pamper the body, so that the soul seems
to have changed its nature into flesh, and relishes nothing of those pleasures
which are properly spiritual, but is wholly taken up with those enjoyments
which are the proper and natural entertainments of flesh and blood, not a
Spirit; therefore sin is said to have rendered the man a natural man.

2. Eternal Life is the second Attribute of God: Life in man, is either of the
Body, or Soul; as to the former, Temperance, Employment, and a cheerful spirit,
are the great Preservatives of Health, and the best supports of such crazy
beings as our bodies are: Religion injoyns the two former, for no man can be
holy without being temperate, and imploid at least in doing good, and it
contributes very effectually to the later, i. e. cheerfulness of spirit, by
begetting in us a peaceful Conscience, a resigned mind, and glorious hopes; but
sin shortens our hasty days, by exposing us to diseases, violence, the Law; and
by the ill influence which a distempered mind has upon the body; as to the
Soul, Righteousness is the life of it, it is the nourishment and pleasure, the
freedom and the security of it, but sin is the death and plague of it, non est
vivere, sed valere vita, it is not the mere existing, but the welfare and
happiness of a being which is its life; and if so, how can a soul which is sick
of passions, daily tortured and distracted by an ill Conscience, be said to
live? Besides, sin does impair the faculties, o'recast the light and fetter the
powers of the mind, so that it neither understands, nor wills, nor commands as
it ought to do: it is rendered a poor, sickly, despicable being, and therefore
the sinner is said to be dead in trespasses and sins, or at least (because the
Metaphor is not to be pressed too far, as appears from the Text following) if
it has any life, it is as imperfect as that of a Lethargick drowsy body,
all is a thick night and steep about it: Hence is the address of the Spirit,
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, etc. Ephesians. 5.4.

3. Power is the third Attribute of God; Religion promotes even this in us, by
inspiring the mind with courage, and by the addition of strength conjoined to
it; Innocence makes a man bold as a Lion, it makes one dare and hope well,
Religion is a confederacy with the Almighty, and he becomes the good man's
strength, Ps. 18.1. and 19.4. it creates an awe and reverence for him amongst
men, and it makes him approach as near to self-sufficiency, as the state of a
Creature will let him; he is independent on the world, and has not half the
hopes, nor fears, nor cares, that the wicked man has; for this man has an ill
Conscience, and is therefore timorous; he that fears not God, dreads every
thing besides; he has many passions that are to be gratified, and therefore he
is very dependent on the world; he lives ill, and therefore is the scorn of
Man, and the hate of God.

4. Wisdom: The fear of God is the beginning of Wisdom; and therefore this is
easily proved, for Religion is nothing else but the knowledge of the most
Excellent Truths, the contemplation of the most glorious Objects, and the hope
of the most ravishing Pleasures, and the practice of such Duties as are most
serviceable to our happiness, and to our peace, our health, our honor, our
prosperity, and our eternal welfare; but sin, on the other hand, besots and
infatuates the man, it makes him passionate and foolish, consult ill, and
execute worse; he is blind to the most glorious Truths, and has no taste or
relish of those glorious Objects of another world, and he lives as if he were
in love with ruin; and though he see death, and confess it in the way, he is
spurred on by his passions, and dares not shun it; he covets mere trifles
vanishing fading pleasures, mere apparitions and dreams of happiness, and he
flies from real and substantial delights and satisfactions that would never
have an end; he trembles where no fear is, and yet is steeled and senseless
against Almighty Vengeance; and if this be not to be foolish, I know not what
is?

The fifth and last now is Goodness, by which I mean kindness, and
serviceableness to others; this Religion so far advances, that each man is so
far Christian as he is thus good; this goodness or love is the mere substance
of the Gospel; so that where ever the Spirit of Christianity has planted it
self, the man is not only just, but good and kind, he does not only put off
revenge, and frowardness, and hardheartedness, but he puts on the contrary
Virtues, Meekness, Tenderness, Charity; his goods and life are not too dear a
price to pay for the welfare of a Brother; but sin, on the quite contrary, arms
man against another, and sows nothing but dissension and ruin amongst mankind;
injustice, cruelty, rapin, murder, covetousness, hardheartedness, are the
Characters which constitute a sinner. Justice and Truth are as Essential parts
of Holiness, as Goodness, and therefore need not be spoken to.

Thus you see how Virtue and Holiness perfect and exalt the man, how it makes
him more spiritual, gives him power, life, wisdom, goodness, allies him to the
Angels, and makes him like God, but sin defaces all those Excellencies, makes
him a mere heap of Rubbish and Ruins, a silly empty Creature, that the Spirit
might well say of such, Rev. 3.17. That they are wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked: And who can now look upon sin as a little harmless
indifferent thing? He that should rob the ambitious man of his Honor, the
covetous of his Wealth, the vain person of his trifling gaity, should be
thought to have committed an unpardonable offense against them? and yet sure,
power, and wisdom, and goodness, are things of far greater Excellency than
wealth, or honor, or gaity; they are the Attributes of God, the things that
make him God, and when he pleases to communicate and impart to his Creatures
some, tho slender proportions of these; what can be a more fatal Enemy to the
Creature, than that sin which spoils and rifles him of these; he that should
stab the body, and through as many gashes as those of Caesar in the Senate let
out the imprisoned Soul, commits no murder like that of sin, which quenches in
man the spiritual life, and robs him of Eternity! O my Soul, does every
intemperate draught every sensual pleasure, quench the light, and damp the
spirit within me, and yet shall I still go on! Is it so inconsiderable a loss,
to change from Spirit into Flesh? Does all my sinful passions for this world,
Ambition, Covetousness, Dotage, etc. deface all Power, Wisdom and Goodness in
me, and make me weak and wicked, impotent and foolish, and yet shall I still go
on to dote? Is it so little desirable to be like God? Is it so inconsiderable a
change, like the unhappy Angels, to fall from light to darkness! forgive me, O
my God, I now begin to see a horror in my sins, I see its poisonous nature,
and the mighty wounds it gives, and I will shun it hereafter more than Death
and Ruin, more than the Sword, the Plague, or Famine; for I am well convinced
that there is nothing so excellent as Spiritual Life, Peace, Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, and nothing can wound or blast these, but sin.

And if secondly, Life and Goodness, Power and Wisdom are such excellent
things, how dear must they be to God? and how contradictory to his Will must be
all those Methods which men take to deface them? and this he has sufficiently
taught, in that he has thought it worthy the Incarnation, Life and Passion of
his own Son, to root out and banish iniquity and transgression from the Earth,
being things contradictory to his Nature, and to his Design too in the Creation.

From all this you see, that Holiness is agreeable to the Divine Nature, sin is
contradictory to it, and by consequence, that he who works Righteousness is
born of God, and he who commits sin is of the Devil; and that it is as
necessary to be really holy, as it is to be in the favor of God, for he cannot
love the unholy, unless he can renounce his own Nature.

The Prayer.
O Thou God who art light, and in whom there is no darkness at all, a holy and
pure Spirit! how infinitely are the sons of men obliged to thee, that thou have
givee them Immortal Spirits, and do travel by thy Word and Spirit to form and
fashion them into thy glorious Image, to make them share in thy Perfections,
that they may do so in thy Happiness too; O grant that I may hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, that I may labor day and night, to water and improve
those Resemblances of thy Divine Perfections which thou have imparted to me by
thy Spirit, that so I may, through Christ, increase in favor with God and Man!
And grant that I may abhor those sins which efface thy Image, and debase my
Nature, which render me a burden to my self, the hate of God, and scorn of
Man! which make me unhappy here, and miserable hereafter; Grant this, I beseech
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior! Amen.

SECT. VI. Containing the sixth Motive to Holiness, the assistance of the
Divine Spirit.
I Do not think, that in a Discourse of this Practical Nature, it will behove
me to enter into any Dispute about the strengths of lapsed Nature, about the
nature and necessity of Supernatural Grace; I may in short affirm, that we find
in Scripture sometimes the birth, sometimes the growth, sometimes the
perfection of the New Creature, assigned to the Holy Spirit, as the great
Author of it; all which does not yet discharge Man from the necessity of
exerting all the strength and endeavor that he can; for by those frequent
Exhortations addressed to Man, we may justly infer some ability supposed in
him; and by the frequent promises of the assistance of the Divine Spirit, we
may as reasonably infer an impotence which stands in need of this relief: and
from altogether we may conclude, that the Spirit of God is so far forth
dispensed, as serves the end of the Gospel, and the necessities of mankind.

Our blessed Savior after he had delivered upon the Mount a System of the most
refined Precepts of Devotion and Purity, Mortification and Charity, as if he
had foreseen, that his Hearers would be dazzled by the brightness of this Divine
Image, and look upon the Pattern as too high for the seize of Humane
Nature, does close the discourse, first, with an assurance of a Supernatural
assistance of the Spirit of God: And then secondly, with asserting the
necessity of a real and actual conformity of our lives to those holy Precepts,
Matthew 7. v. 7. etc. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for every one that asks receives,
and he that seeks finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened:
Where our Endeavors, and the Divine Assistance are joined together, as being
both necessary toward the great Work of Sanctification; in the 9, 10, 11.
verses, he goes on to confirm them in the belief of this Promise, from the
example of Natural Parents, who though evil, have that Natural Affection for
their Children, that if a Son ask bread, they will not give him a stone; or if
he ask a Fish, they will not give him a Scorpion: Much more is it inconsistent
with the goodness of the Divine Nature, to refuse Man that assistance which is
indispensably necessary to the propagation of Holiness; inconsistent with his
Paternity, to deny his craving Children that which is as necessary to their
spiritual life, as food is to their natural: If ye then being evil know how to
give good gifts to your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in
Heaven give good things (his holy Spirit, as appears from parallel places) to
them that ask him.

And when he had acquainted them with this, I do not wonder that he concludes
all with averring the necessity of Obedience to all those Excellent Precepts,
from verse 13. to the end; for in vain do men quarrel at the purity of the
Christian Doctrine, as if it were a Religion fit for Angels rather than men; in
vain do they complain of the prevailing passions of flesh and blood, and of the
soft insinuations of a flattering World: our ability to obey the Gospel, is not
to be measured by the strength of Nature, but of the Spirit; that God who has
called us to the profession of such Exalted Virtue, has allotted us an
assistance suitable to so glorious an end; so that these complaints are not the
groans of a Penitent, but the excuses of a fond and carnal mind.

All this certainly amounts to a very clear proof of the necessity and
Excellency of Real and Inherent Holiness; for to what purpose should we call
down an assistance from Heaven? to what purpose should the Divine Spirit be
powered forth upon men? if either there were no need, or no use of such a
Holiness, which he is the Divine Principle of! or if this Holiness were so
impure and imperfect, that it were not acceptable to God thorough Christ!

And which way now shall the impenitent sinner escape Divine Justice? what
Excuse can he frame for the defense of his Impiety? he sins and dies, not
because he cannot do otherwise, but because he will do so: he perishes not
through impotence, but obstinacy; and what punishment, think we, can
sufficiently avenge a contempt of, or despite done to the Spirit of God! The
Gentile is unexcusable, because he did not obey those Laws which his Conscience
did dictate to him, though the Characters they were published in were dark, the
Motives to, and the Principles of his Obedience, weak and feeble, at least
comparatively; what tribulation, and wrath, and anguish then will punish our
disobedience, who have not only our duty openly published by the Son of God,
and enforced upon our hopes and fears by glorious promises and dreadful
threats, but also the Spirit of God promised to enlighten our understandings,
to enfranchise and strengthen our wills, to imprint the Motives of the Gospel
in more sensible Characters on our spirits, etc. We must expect that our
tribulation in the world to come will be proportioned to our obstinacy in this,
and the anger of Almighty wrath will boil to a heat answerable to that infinite
love and goodness we have despised.

The Prayer.
O My God, how reasonable is it that I should obey thee, since thou commandst
me nothing but what thou giv'st me strength to perform! I feel the weakness of
my Nature, and the strength of Temptations, but this shall never discourage me,
thorough the might of thy Spirit I shall be sure to conquer; it must be a
weakness indeed which Omnipotence cannot relieve; it must be a strange assault
made by the world, which can storm that Fort which the Spirit of the Almighty
defends; and that Law must be more than Seraphick, which is exalted above the
imitation of a Soul inspired and actuated by thee: No, no, if thou vouchsafe
but one Ray of thine Infinite Power, I shall soon subdue the World, and
mortify the Flesh; I shall do the things which please thee here, and I shall
obtain everlasting life afterward; which grant for thy Mercies sake, and thy
Son Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

SECT. VII. Of the Gospel Covenant, as it is a Motive to Holiness.
THe Covenant of Works was, Do this, and live; Life was the reward of an
unerring obedience, and Death the punishment of every transgression of the Law;
so that by virtue of this Covenant none could expect to be Justified, but he
who had no sin to be charged with; and therefore since there never was any such
Man but Christ, Righteousness could not be by the Law; but now the Covenant of
Grace is, Believe, and repent, and you shall be saved; our sins cannot exclude
us from Heaven, if we forsake them for the time to come, and rely upon the
Mercy of God thorough the Blood of Christ; for he died to this purpose, that
every one which believes in him, might not perish, but have everlasting life:
Which Mercy extends it self, not only to the sins which precede Conversion, p.
76.
but to those also which follow it, as I have before proved: Now the result of
all this is: 1. That the overture of pardon incourages us to repentance. 2.
That the sense of the love and goodness of God, obliges us to love and obey bim.


Despair clips the wings, and cramps the vigor of the Soul; no man would be
good, if he knew it were to no purpose to be so; for why should he deny his
sensual satisfactions, if he could expect no fruits of his Mortification? but
when the Almighty makes a tender of Mercy, and invites the sinner to be
reconciled, what will not he do who is sensible of the advantage of his favor,
or the dreadfulness of his anger, that he may avoid the one, and gain the
other! The trouble of a wounded Conscience is an uneasy thing to bear, and who
would not rid himself of it, and possess his Soul of an entire peace, when he
sees that he may? who can be willing to be all his life in bondage, who may be
translated into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God? who would feed the
slavish fears of an approaching Death in his bosom, who may extinguish and
dispel them if he will! Salvation is not so inconsiderable a matter, but that
every one makes this naturally his enquiry, What shall I do to be saved? and
therefore when to do ones best is to do all; and to be sorry for our sins, is
to atone them, (in the acceptance of God) who would slight the happiness of
the Divine Favor, and Heaven, tendered upon these terms? O my Savior! thou
have indeed brought Life and Immortality to light, thou have freed me from the
curse of the Law, and thou have opened a plain and easy way to Reconciliation
and Heaven, thorough thy Body upon the Cross; without this, the Contemplation
of Gods Justice would have overthrown all those hopes which I could have
derived from the Contemplation of his Mercy and Goodness, and I could never
without an affront to his Holiness have flattered my self from his Clemency
into the hopes of pardon, for those numerous sins I have committed against my
Conscience: For ever blessed be thy Name, that thou have taken the weight and
burden of my sins upon thee! that thou have suffered, that I might be justified
through thy Blood: I will no longer deliberate whether I shall ease me of my
sins and guilt, whether I shall be happy or no! I come, I come, blessed Lord, I
renounce all the sins and vanities of my former life, and desire to devote my
self a holy, living, and acceptable Sacrifice to God for the time to come! for
why should I any longer sin against so much love and goodness.

When I had broken the Laws of God, and given manifest affronts to that
glorious Being, who created and does preserve me; when I had trampled upon all
his Obligations, and abused all his Mercies into wantonness, without any
temptation to it besides the baseness of my own Nature, I might have expected
that a just Wrath would have revealed it self in Thunder and Lightning, in
Judgments and Death, but instead of that, he continues the overtures of his
Mercy, and Courts me with the tenderness of an Indulgent Father! O my God, thou
have conquered me by thy patience and long-suffering, thou have taken me by
thine infinite love and goodness, I adore thy Clemency and Wisdom, and am
ashamed of the wildness and extravagancy of my own folly! O pardon me, and my
mourning and revenge shall witness what resentments I have of thy sweetness and
tenderness; I will serve and love thee much, because thou have forgiven me
much. -- Farewell my sloth and ease, I have devoted my self to my great Creator,
and I must redeem the time that I have spent amiss. -- Farewell my sinful
pleasures, and my vain diversions, I will no longer indulge that Body which
has betrayed my God, which has made me a Rebel against a gracious Father!
Farewell my ambitious and vainglorious aims, these are not the Ornaments which
become an Humble Penitent!

These, and such like Resolutions, are I think the natural results of a serious
consideration of the Divine Goodness, manifested in this Covenant of Grace; no
man can believe himself in a capacity of Pardon and Salvation, but he must
naturally desire to be rid of those fears which accompany his guilts, and to be
secured of Heaven; no man can see the Majesty of Heaven contending for Conquest
over us by love and goodness, but he must blush at his ingratitude, and melt at
the sense of the Stupendous Mercy.

The Prayer.
O Glorious Ood, grant that these may be the effects of my knowledge of thy
Covenant of Grace; that thy goodness may lead me to Repentance, and that I may
not by the contempt of thy Mercy, treasure up to my self wrath against the day
of wrath: Lord, what should make me backward, if thou art forward to a
Reconciliation! what should make me refuse thy pardon, when thou art willing to
bestow it! Is it not worth my while to be saved? or can I be saved in despite
of God! Lord, I cannot be so blind to think so; grant me then the Grace to
repent to day, whilst it is called to day, to mind the things which belong to
my peace before they are hid from mine eyes. Amen, Amen, blessed Jesus.

And now I have finished the second part of this Discourse, and considered all,
or at least the main Motives to Holiness which the Gospel contains, nothing is
here wanting that can justly beget our love or hate, nothing wanting that can
work upon our hopes or fears, nothing more to be desired which can invite or
encourage us; all the Arguments of interest and pleasure, of necessity and
possibility, of obligations and duty, are here combined and twisted, to make
the Cords that should draw us strong enough, that one might justly wonder how
any man can resist the power of such Arguments, and how it is possible to be
damned.

And yet we cannot see what effect Christianity has upon the generality of
mankind; they are as loose as Heathens, as covetous as Jews, and in a word, as
much addicted to the pleasures of the world and flesh, as if neither Life and
Immortality had been brought to light, nor there were any promises of
Supernatural assistance.

It will become us therefore, in the third place, to enquire into the reason of
this, and to discover those Temptations which detain men captive to sin,
notwithstanding all the Son of God has done to redeem them.

Practical Christianity. Part. III. Of Temptations to Sin.
THe Temptations to Sin are very numerous, yet they may be reduced to two
Heads, Pleasure, and Pain; for these are the great Springs of Love and Hate, of
Hope and Fear, and consequently of all Humane actions. I will begin with
Pleasure.

CHAP. I. Of Pleasure, considered as a Temptation.
PLeasure is the Idol of Mankind, and not without reason, for it is impossible
to love our selves, and not love our pleasure; and never any man denied himself
yet any the least portion of it, but in order to a greater; therefore though I
first premise, That he cannot be a true Christian, who is not willing to forego
all his present enjoyments for the hopes of Heaven; because it is inconsistent
with a true Faith of the things not seen, but yet eternal, to prefer these
temporal ones, because seen before them; and inconsistent with the truth of our
love to God, to obey him no longer than he commands pleasant things: Yet
because a misperswasion about this matter may prove a snare and a burden to
some in the practice of Religion, and deter others from it, I will enquire; 1.
How far Religion is an Enemy to our Sensual Pleasures. 2. What Remedies it
prescribes against them. 3. What Motives it lays down to Abstinence.


As to those instances of enjoyments which are forbidden, the case is plain;
all unnatural lusts are a Species of pleasure (if they may deserve that name)
utterly interdicted the Christian.

As to our degrees of enjoyment, in all the instances of pleasure which are
allowed us, (and such are all our natural appetites) it is first plain, that
all kind of excess is forbidden us; and in this sense the Precepts of the
Gospel are generally to be understood; the Body we are to mortify is described
to have such members as these, Col. 3.5. Fornication, uncleanness, (which
involve too an unnaturalness in them) inordinate affection, evil concupiscence,
and covetousness, which is Idolatry; -- and to walk after the way of the
Gentiles, or according to the world, is to have our conversation in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine revellings, banquetings, which is called
afterward excess of Riot, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.

2. It is not to be questioned but that the great design of Religion, is to
raise our hearts upwards, to make us spiritually minded; and therefore all
Sensuality which is contrary to this, is contrary to the Analogy of the Gospel;
and by consequence, I humbly conceive, that an immoderate love of any thing,
though an allowed instance of pleasure, is contrary to the Gospel of our Lord;
accordingly I find, that that enjoyment of this present life which it permits
to us, is such a one as is cool and moderate, not warm and passionate: 1 Cor.
7.29. But this I say Brethren, the time is short; it remains, that both they
that have Wives, be as though they had none, and they that weep, as though they
wept not, and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not, and they that
buy, as though they possessed not, and they that are of this world, as not
abusing it, for the fashion of this world passes away. -- And now thirdly by
consequence, whatever tends to the betraying of us into excess or dotage, is
unlawful, considered purely as the means to such an end. From hence we may
learn, how little injurious Religion is to men's present pleasures; we are
allowed all things but dotage, unnatural lusts, and excess, and all these are
contradictory to our present happiness; as for excess, and unnatural lust,
there is no question; as for dotage, whoever shall consider the emptiness and
uncertainty of this world, must needs conclude, that the greatest security of
our pleasure is a moderate affection; and bating now all these, the Gospel of
Christ is so far from injoyning us misery and trouble, that we are expressly
invited to it, by this Motive amongst others, that it has the Promises of this
life, as well as that which is to come; and we are permitted to look upon peace
and prosperity as great blessings, and we are allowed the delight of Friendly
Conversation, love without hypocrisy, and to love our Wives even as our selves.

So that whatever is necessary to make our lives comfortable, is not only
permitted, but promised us; but if we would make this Earth our Heaven, it is
this, that is to be Sensual and Carnal; it is easy to apply these Rules to our
Clothing, Eating, Drinking, Conversation, etc. and they will make us wise and
prudent Christians, and Religion will appear pleasant and delightful.

There is one more limit affixed to our enjoyments, and that is by Charity; we
must take care our satisfactions, by our examples, do not betray or tempt
others; Brotherly affection is not very hot in his breast, who rather than deny
himself any little liberty, will contribute to the damnation of his Neighbor.

2. The Remedies against pleasure.

1. A loose and a dissolute spirit, a gay and inconsiderate temper, is that
which commonly betrays us into excess and vanity, into softness and dotage; and
therefore Religion endeavors to possess our souls with sobriety and awe, by
the presence of a holy God, by the Judgment to come, by the value and
preciousness of our souls, and the manifold dangers and enemies they are
encompassed by; and therefore ingages us to pass the time of our sojourning in
fear, to walk circumspectly, to be upon our guard, and watch always.

2. Because the body is apt to grow wanton, it prescribes us watchings, fasts,
and frequent prayers, as the great instruments that do most tame and mortify
it, and at the same time improve and exalt the mind.

Besides these, that I may at once conquer my pleasures, and live pleasantly
too, I have drawn these other Rules from Scripture.

1. I never frame to my self rich Idea's, nor fancy I know not what Heaven in
any object, but am content with an indifferent pleasure, and hope for no more
than what befits mankind in this state on earth.

2. I train up my self to endure hardship as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ,
by passing thorough some chosen difficulties, by checking even a lawful
passion, by calling off my humor from too much freedom, and by accustoming my
outward man to endure a bridle; and thus my temper grows strong, and my mind
stanch and firm.

3. I observe that the Herd which aims at Sensual Pleasure, either seldom meets
it (and what a misery is it to be damned for Lusts they never satisfied) or
else they know not how to use it, or they are so soft and unmanly, they droop
in every interval wherein they want it; and therefore I compose my self on the
quite contrary, to meet a Storm, and to stem the Tide, and to arrive at my Port
through boystrous Seas; and so a small blast does not move me, a great one does
not sink me, and a Calm, like an unexpected blessing, is received the more
thankfully, and used the more moderately.

4. I labor that my Conversation may be above, and I endeavor to look beyond
this dark Horizon, and expect the breaking forth of the Sun of Righteousness:
Sometimes in my Contemplation I die, and strip my self of all, and bid farewell
to my dearest friends, and my fancy wraps my body in its winding sheet, and
wafts my Soul to God, and I enter as far as I can into Heaven, and I dwell
there; and so the taste of another world, like the eating of Manna, makes my
Palate too nice for the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt.

3. The great Motives of the Gospel whereby we are encouraged to despise
worldly pleasures, are --

1. The Love of God, manifested in his loving us, and in the sending his own
Son into the world for our sakes, that we might be the Sons of God: whence the
Apostles every where infer, That the love of God should constrain us to obey
him, as dear Children, and Sons of the most High God; and consequently, not to
walk as those who know not God, in the lusts of the flesh, and the fashions of
the world; but being renewed in the spirit of our minds, to please him in
holiness and purity -- and the inexpressible Love of the Blessed Jesus dying
for us on the Cross, will not suffer us to be guilty of such a baseness, as to
betray him at the solicitation of a Sensual Lust? and that blessed Spirit of
Love which dwells in the Children of Obedience, is quenched and grieved by
carnal lusts, and therefore they must deny all impurity, that the Lord may
delight to live amongst them. Nothing will seem difficult to us, if we but
consider these things, the Majesty of God, and the vanity of man, the height of
his love, and imperfection of man's obedience.

2. Our own Exeellency. We are the Temple of the Holy Spirit; we are the
Children of the living God, the Children of Light, the Purchase of the Blood of
Christ, the Delight of God, and the care of Angels; and shall we wallow in
brutish lusts, like those who have no knowledge, no hopes?

3. Our rewards here, joy, and peace, and hope, do constantly dwell in that
Soul which works Righteousness, and continues in patience and well doing; and
can any of the fulsom pleasures of the body be compared to the calm and
transport of a holy Soul? and yet these are but imperfect dawnings of an
Eternal Day; there are things laid up for those who love God, which the heart
cannot conceive, nor the tongue express; and these precious promises must needs
enable us to live above the corruption which is in the world through lust. --

So that now, though the pleasures which Christians are commanded to renounce
were very full and satisfactory, yet the love of God who injoyns this
Abstinence, the love of Jesus who suffered for us, and the love of that Spirit
which is tendered in the Gospel, to purify our minds, and fill them with
delight and pleasure, would render our compliance with these Commands very
reasonable and easy; and if we add the consideration of the peace and
satisfaction which flow from an entire Mortification, and the glorious promises
which are annexed to it, it will be almost impossible to resist the united
force of such powerful Arguments; and how much more if we consider --

4. The emptiness and vanity of all those pleasures by which the sinner is
ensnared The world has nothing in it which is truly great and satisfactory;
its most exquisite entertainments are strangely empty, mixed, and alloy'd, and
fleeting.

1. Empty. Every man's practice is a daily confession of this; for how taking
soever a pleasure may appear in fancy and prospect, yet it is common, that men
soon disrelish what they enjoy, and disdain what they possess; and if men daily
change and contrive new pleasures, is it not a plain confession of being
dissatisfied with the old? And what shall the poor Epicure do, if Enjoyment it
self prove fatal, is it not an evident proof that the choice is foolish, the
object empty, the faculties weak, and the world a Cheat? It were easy to prove
this, if I should run o^e particulars. What is Greatness, it is so much
nothing, I know not what it is, it is a slippery height, it is a glorious
slavery, a pretty Pageantry, and fantastic formality: What is Wealth, this
should not be reckoned as an enjoyment, it is but the mean to one; what is Lust,
but an outrageous ferment of the blood, a sudden mutiny of spirits; it is a
sudden blaze that flashes, and then dies; the delicacy and flavor of Meats and
Drinks, is scarcely perceptible to most, it is so much nothing; gaity of attire
is the pleasure only of Children, and of Fools, it is an imaginary prettiness.

But the truth on it is, pleasure here below is not to be measured by the weight
and substance of the Objects, but by the quickness and strength of Fancy, or
Imagination; for it is with Men as it is with Children, it is not the rattle or
the toy, but it is the silliness of the fancy which creates the pleasure; and
therefore I Will consider this a little: If the Imagination be childish, nice and
fond, it frames and creates Art and delicacy in the object, and begets passions
tender, impotent, and warm; possession now (one would fancy) would certainly
make one thus qualified happy; but the mischief on it is, these are the
characters only of a raw unexperienced sinner, who admires what he never tried;
like a man come into a new world, the strangeness only begets the wonder;
success will make him unhappy: when he has tried all objects, he will find all
but vanity; for as soon as Experience has defeated him of the Imagination, it
robs him of the pleasure too, and a weather-beaten sinner derives his
temptation only at last from custom, and he sins not so much because it is
pleasant, as because he is used to do so: This is the whole state of the case,
Imagination and Fancy is the pleasure, not enjoyment; and that cannot last
without this, nor with it: but besides, there is such an uneasiness accompanies
a violent desire of any thing that it more than punishes the pretty pleasures
which Fancy frames: hear a man essaying to discover what he feels, and he will
express his passion by flames and fevers, wounds and diseases, pleasing
smarts, and killing pleasures, so sick are they of their passions, and languish
of their desires, and die of enjoyment; it is in all pleasures, as in those of
eating and drinking, the painful appetites of hunger and thirst fore-run them,
and feeding and drinking extinguish the appetite and pleasure too! This is the
case of those who pretend to the greatest gallantry and wit in the choice and
contrivance of their sins; what shall we think of those who drudge for bafer
metals, and more dreggy course vices: the toilsom pleasures of gluttony and
drunkenness, of pride and covetousness; the malicious pleasures of frowardness,
faction and disobedience? Surely these are worse than vanity: the Soul of man
must be light, and airy and silly, and unballasted, e're it can please it self
in the Imaginary Charms of Honor, and Command, and Beauty; but it must be base
and earthly, degenerous and sottish, e're it can be taken by these. Emptiness
were enough to deter our pursuit; but besides,

2. There is an alloy and mixture in this world which renders it very vain: The
face of our fortunes here below is like that of waters, which the winds have
curled and shrivelled; you can scarce discern the little smoothnesses for the
numerous swellings; though enjoyment be the sinners aim, it is the least part
of his portion; for besides the cross accidents which befall things, and the
inconstancy of humors on which pleasure depends, the sinner himself lodges in
his bosom a whole Legion of mutinous lusts, which (though the Offspring of the
same parent,) do oppose and destroy one another; Love will not give way to the
Intrigues and Fatigue of busy Ambition, nor Ambition stoop to the softness and
laziness of Love; Covetousness will not admit of the waste and prodigality of
Lust, nor Lust comply with the severities, and stingyness, and drudgery of
Covetousness; a great Fortune's necessary to support great sins, and yet our
sins lay waste our fortune: our health is necessary to sensual pleasure, and
yet our sensual pleasures undermine our health: and thus the change of things
and humors, and the contradiction of Lusts, makes the sinners life a strange
mixture of Desires and disappointments, of pursuits and Repentances; and after
all, suppose the best we can.

3. Our pleasures are extremely transient; the fashion of this world passes
away, every thing is in continual flux and change; and what pleases most
commonly takes wing first; for the height and perfection of every thing
consists in such a point, that Nature seems rather to be still ascending to it
or declining from it, than standing still in it: But if the World were constant
we ourselves are not; our Temper daily alters, and our fancies are seldom the
same to day which they were yesterday; and how can our pleasures be constant,
when though their Objects continue Lovely we cannot promise our selves that we
can love them long.

We may therefore thus state our whole account, Time is but a moment to
Eternity, Life but a moment in Time, and enjoyment fills up but a very moment
in Life: Lord what a trifle and nothing is that, which we prefer to an Eternity
of Bliss.

Thus I have considered the Nature of the world (objects) to discover the
nature of pleasure, it will be proper to consider,

2. Our own Nature who enjoy: for this will give us further light into the
nature of sensual pleasure! And here, 1. That Ray of Reason and Wisdom, which
is shed upon the Soul, is a mere check and restraint to our sensualities; and
renders the pleasures of the Body in Man less pure and entire than in children
and Beasts: and he that has any greatness or wisdom in his mind, sins with the
uneasiness that the Learned and the Great feel, when they descend to play the
fool; they scorn their own easiness and are ashamed of their pleasures.

Our Fancies I have spoken to.

Our Senses are narrow scanty things, they can enjoy but a little, and but for
a moment; Let our fortune be wide and large as it will, our enjoyment can be no
larger than our senses; we may if we please study variety of Objects, but all
the while we only change often and possess but little, for such is the nature
of our scanty Organs, we can never enjoy a new pleasure without quitting the
old, i. e. Without losing as much as we gain. Our change of Humors is
unaccountable, we are often sullen and froward, and know not why; and then like
children we quarrel with our toys, and tear and throw away the bables which we
doted on.

Blessed God that ever rational men should forfeit Heaven and incur a Hell for
such a mixed uncertain state of empty pleasures as this is! Could we like Moses
climb some Mountain, and arrive within Ken of Canaan, with what regret, and
shame, and scorn, should we look down upon the dull pleasures of Earth! Well
does thy Holy Spirit describe the Slaves of Sin, to be blind and sleepy, dead
and senseless things; for we need but open our eyes, and see through all that
paint and varnish that mocks and deludes the fancy; we need but be Wise, and we
shall be holy too, for if we but once understand the world we cannot but
despise it.

5. The consideration of what our sinful pleasures stands us in; they are too
too dear a purchase without the consideration of the life to come. They
distemper and decay the Body; they exhaust our Estates; and blast our
reputations; they are the Furies which haunt and disquiet us with desires and
jealousies, despite, and Anger, and Vexation, etc. They dissever the clossest
Unions and the dearest Friendships: They rob us of the more manly satisfactions
of doing good; of being Wise and Learned; of a peaceful Conscience; of a soul
enlightened (like Moses face) by a daily converse with God; of Meditations grown
sprightly and cheerful, through a closser acquaintance with Heaven, and the
conscience of no guilt but what we have wept and prayed against: they bereave
us lastly of the satisfaction of a fixed and steady choice; of an assured and
confident mind; of obsequious and governable tempers; of an even and orderly
life; and of the joys of glorious hopes and a growing assurance.

6. And yet after all, if we state the Case between the Good and Bad, as to
point of worldly pleasure (according to the natural issue or consequence of
things from their Causes) those possess more and truer pleasures tahn these;
for whilst the Good only approve, and the Bad dote, the Good use, and the Bad
abuse the World; the Good are prudent in their choice, and constant and orderly
in their deportment; the bad are blind and rash in the former, and light and
disorderly in the latter; it must needs follow, that the Good are the Masters
of their pleasures, the Bad the Slaves; that the Good meet with what they
expect, because they have true notions of the World and things of it; but the
Bad are defeated in their hopes, because they swell and enlarge their desires
beyond all possibility of receiving satisfaction from an empty Creature: that
the state of the Good, is as well secured and settled, as the nature of things
below would admit; but that of the Wicked is confused and uncertain.

What a silly thing now is Impiety, and how wise and well contrived a thing is
Religion! what can we desire more of God; if he give us a pleasant fortune, he
prescribes us rules how to enjoy it prudently; if he involve us in a cross one
he supplies us, pleasures, and comforts, to sweeten it and support us.

The Prayer.
O Almighty God, and the kind and gracious Father of Mankind, I desire to adore
and bless thee, that thou have dealt thus by the poor Sons of Men, that thou
have secured our happiness by the Revelation of glorious truths, by the
encouragement of precious promises, and by the sanction of wise Laws: Grant
most gracious God, that I may be daily conversant in thy most glorious Gospel
to this End, that the pleasures of the world and the flesh may not ensnare and
entangle me; but that I may be enabled through thy word and Spirit, to live
above the corruptions of Lust; to possess my vessel in purity and honor; and
to enjoy thy blessings moderately and thankfully, that I may at last be
received into an Eternity of Rest, and Peace, and Joy thorough Jesus Christ my
Lord.

CHAP. II. Of Pain, considered as a Temptation to Sin.
BY Pain, I mean every thing which is troublesome: All troubles may be reduced
under two Heads, Imaginary and Real ones; by Real, I mean such as do actually
injure the mind or bodies of men; by Imaginary, I mean such as could have no
influence at all upon men, but through the assistance of prejudice or fancy.
I Will begin with the latter; and in speaking to both, I must premise this, that
I will not bring home every Argument by a close Application, (for then this
very Head would swell into a vast proportion) but content my self with proving,
That there is no pain which can be a just warrant for sin, because the Gospel
has provided such Remedies as may render it supportable, and such Rewards as
may countervail all our sufferings: There is no Temptation which befalls us, but
what is common to men, and God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be
tempted above what we are able, (the strengths he allows us) but will with the
Temptation, make a way to escape that we may be able to bear it.

There are many things which are not really harsh and unsufferable in
themselves, but they become such, because it is the custom of the world to
think them so: For example, a shallow Fortune (but sufficient for the necessary
comforts of life) an inglorious solitude or privacy, the Opinions of others
concerning us; these things have no real influence, either upon mind or body;
they cannot make the Soul less rational, nor the body less healthy; a man may
be happy here, and go to Heaven afterward without much fame or wealth; that
all the misery that is derived from these things, depends upon Opinion is
plain, because some have made that Poverty, retirement, and contempt their
choice, which is such a Bugbear to others; and so the same thing, which is
ones affliction, becomes another pleasure: So that it is plain, fancy gives us
the wound, not the things themselves; or else if misery were an inseparable
Companion to the things themselves, it were impossible that Content should ever
sojourn in Cells or Cottages, or ever be a stranger to Wealth and Honor. Of
this sort of troubles are all those other passions which are inkindled in us by
the impressions of things from without; for even Beauty, Grandeur, Gaity, etc.
though in their own nature innocent things, are sharpened and armed by our
fancies with trouble and danger to our repose. --

Now though it be true, that as the cold or heat of Climates are things
innocent enough to bodies inured to them, and yet are fatal to others; so here,
though all temptations of the world are in themselves harmless things, yet it is
plain, that upon Beings so disposed and tempered as ours are, they make
dangerous impressions: Therefore in the Gospel of Christ, the remedies
prescribed by him, do all tend to the removal of these ill dispositions, and
the reforming our false Opinions, and the suppressing our inclinations: As,

1. Our first care must be to frame our Opinions of things by the Rule of
Faith, and to root out all false Notions of things; to this end the holy Gospel
does every where insinuate the emptiness, the transitoriness, the uncertainty
of all things here below; the Excellency of Holiness and Righteousness, and the
little tendency which the things of the world have to promote it: And lastly,
the Weight and Eternity of happiness in another world; all which contribute to
our happiness, as they arm us against the impressions of outward objects, by
possessing us with a contempt of them, and with desires far greater, and
nobler, and contradictory to those other.

2. The Gospel of Christ injoyns us to shun and fly temptations all that we
can; we are to block up all the Avenues by which the world may make its
approaches, the lustful must not gaze upon Beauty, nor the ambitious on
greatness, etc. and because sin usually gains by Parley, we are carefully to
shun the least appearance of evil, -- not to entertain thoughts, etc.

3. We are to labor earnestly to mortify all the lusts of the Body by
Fasting, and Watching, and Prayer, and a constant temperance, encouraged to it
by the example of our Lord, and a whole Cloud of Witnesses gone to Heaven
before us, and the promise of rewards annexed to the careful performance of,
and unwearied perseverance in these duties. And

4. The assistance of the mighty Spirit of God, and a certain Victory is
promised to him who thus contends; and unless men will willingly deprive
themselves of such an Auxiliary by not contending, or not begging him of
Christ, or grieving him, it is not to be doubted but we shall obtain him, and
together with him sufficient strength, and glory, honor, and immortality, will
be the end of our warfare.

These are the Means, these are the Motives, this is the Assistance which our
blessed Jesus has prescribed and offered us, by which we may be enabled to
live above those miseries which they are entangled in who obey not his Gospel,
and defeat those Airy Apparitions which would fright us into sin.

Therefore in whatever condition I am I will still ask, what would my blessed
Savior have done, or said, or thought in this case? what opinion of, or value
for this or that thing, or condition, has God? and I shall soon find, that no
condition can make me truly miserable, but that wherein I cannot love God, I
cannot pray, or cannot do good: For if I can, I am both great and happy: If a
man love me, Joh. 14.23. my Father will love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. Happy abode! what can my Soul desire more! I
cannot think my self mean, who am his Favorite; nor can I be poor, who possess
that God whose presence makes up Heaven! My God, how happy should I be, could I
be content to make thee alone my Portion; but because I cannot be content to be
poor and contemptible, because I seek my comforts from without, because I am
not at leisure to entertain thee only, therefore thou do not dwell so
ravishingly with me.

But I will seek thee more diligently hereafter, vain world adieu, I have
Nobler hopes than thou can feed, and I shall have comforts thou can not rob
me of! How can I be miserable, if I be filled with joy and peace through
believing? or if I abound with hope through the power of the Holy Ghost? I can
think of that shine of Glory with which I shall be once invested, and then
suffer these Rags with patience, till my Nuptials come, and my new Suits be
made; I can love this contempt and poverty, because it shall make my Crown more
weighty, and my being more glorious. --

What is it, O my Soul, for which I complain? what is it that I have lost?
Estate, Reputation. It is affirmed by the Spirit of God concerning all sensual
pleasures in general, That they war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. in
particular concerning wealth, How hardly shall a rich man enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19.23. concerning vainglory, and how can they believe
who receive the praise of men, etc. Am I then so much troubled, because my
difficulties in the way to Heaven are diminished? my Chains grown lighter, and
mine Enemies fewer? because my ties to, or dependances on the world are few;
and consequently my distractions in, and diversions from holy duties, are the
fewer? I have no fears; no cares, no contrivances, no jealousies, because I
have no concern in it? How near Heaven am I grown, who am thus removed from
Earth? And being in this condition, I am not exposed to the changes of the
world, I have nothing wherein ill fortune can attacque or wound me? This state
is not so contemptible, which is thus full of peace, wherein I may possess my
self, and need not spend the greater portions of my life in things which fame
or greatness requires of me, not inclination or choice.

The Prayer.
LOrd teach me to form my Opinions according to the light of thy Gospel; to
guard my Soul against all the impressions of the World, and Flesh; to mortify
the inbred Inclinations of my Body to Lust, and to fix my mind so upon the
things that are not seen, that when ever vain fears assault me from without,
they may find the House guarded by the strongest Man! Amen, Amen.

SECT. II. Of Real Evils, whereof some are unavoidable, others only common to
this life.
THere are some Evils so natural and constant Appendages to this state of
Mortality and Imperfection, that unless men can cease to think them Evils, they
cannot be happy. For example, a Friend dies, or proves false, etc. or I am to
die my self, i. e. things happen in their natural course, and as I ought to
expect them -- I may as well quarrel with God, that he did not create me an
Angel, and that my first Station was not in the Courts of Heaven. Now though it
be true, that an Evil is not the less an Evil, because it is incurable, or
unavoidable, or yet universal.

I must from hence infer, that the wise man ought to be better provided and
confirmed against such, and that he gains no small step toward happiness, who
can divest these Evils of their affrighting shapes, which the man shall in a
great measure do, who shall expect nothing more in this state than what is
proper to it; and then can no more be aggrieved at Death, Chance, Folly, etc.
than at the imperfection of our intellectual capacities, the meanness of our
natural inclinations, and the frailties of our bodies, for those other are the
effects of these, and yet no man thinks himself miserable, because he does not
understand as much as God does; because being flesh and blood, he does not will
as Nobly as Angels; and why should he think it amiss or hard, that being
mortal, any thing should die, or being imprudent or passionate, any thing
should act so?

It is highly reasonable, that he who Created us out of nothing, should Create
us as he pleased; for he who was not bound to do any thing, cannot be blamed
for doing so much. -- But Christianity rests not here, it provides a Remedy for
all these Evils.

1. By the discovery of the Souls Immortality, of the Bodies Resurrection, and
of glorious Rewards which shall Crown those who suffer contentedly and
patiently.

2. By the discovery of Objects fitted for the affections of an Immortal Soul,
noble and great enough to fill the biggest capacities, and most enlarged
desires; such are God, and Jesus Christ, and the glories of another life, which
are unalterable and unchangeable; so that the happiness and pleasure of a
Christian Soul depends not upon these uncertain things below, but upon those
things which are above.

3. Since these misfortunes are such as are unavoidable in this life, they can
be no temptation to sin, because we cannot avoid them by sinning; and they who
endeavor to drown their sense of worldly afflictions by an indulgence in any
sins, do worse than those who kill themselves to get rid of some uneasy
passion; the very Remedy is the worst of mischiefs.

But to proceed, as to pains which are common to, though not unavoidable in
this life, I cannot choose but see there are a sort of men who suffer bravely;
and yet I must confess they suffer, and though they are patient, cease not to
be miserable; these are the only things which I could ever think so unhappy as
to deserve my pity; and yet it will not be reasonable to sin for the avoiding
such sufferings as these; for though Religion cannot remove all sense, and
pain, and passion, (for then this world would be a Heaven; and the Scripture is
plain, that no affliction for the present is joyous; and if they were not Fiery
Trials, they would be no temptations,) yet it supplies all the ease and comfort
which such a state is capable of, and such as is enough to make it supportable:
Therefore I first premise these two Propositions.

1. That no temptation befalls us, but what is common to men: That a whole Cloud
of Witnesses is gone before us in the severest and bloudiest paths; and
therefore that there is no state which is not supportable by Divine Assistance,
and may not be passed thorough without such an ill demeanor as may forfeit our
everlasting happiness.

2. That there is no condition so miserable, but it is capable of some mixture
of comforts; let us for an example, in matter of fact, regard the Apostle of
our Lord, 2 Cor. 6. In affliction, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes,
in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, and yet
the Cloud had a bright as well as dark side; for v. 10. Though dying, yet
behold we live, though chasten'd, yet not killed, though sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing, though having nothing, yet possessing all things.

Now it matters not, I confess, as to entire happiness, whether Scale of sorrow
or comfort outweighs, because to entire happiness it is required, that both
parts of us, as well Body as Soul, enjoy good; yet it will become a wise man to
get as much ease as he can, and when the Sun is set, not to despise a Candle:
-- And this proves thus much, that no man can be necessitated to sin, since a
man can triumph over such afflictions as these.

Having premised thus much, I go on to consider, that all Real Evils attack the
Mind, or the Body; for what assaults only Reputation, or Estate, or other
Possessions, I reckon amongst Imaginary Evils; and indeed they are none at all,
unless they make their passage thorough these to the Mind or Body. -- As to the
Body, I know not how to prescribe to it; what are Arguments to the Stone, or
Rhetoric to the Gout? but herein,

1. Either the pain is moderate, or exquisite; if moderate, it is supportable;
if exquisite, it cannot be lasting: we are somewhat beholden to the frailty and
weakness of our Nature, for it in a great degree prevents our unhappiness, a
small pain cannot make us miserable, and a great one will not let us continue
so, for it crushes it self as well as us, by its own weight, and our Nature
dies and droops under the pain which it cannot suffer; though for my part, I
must confess, were it not for Christianity, it would be but a poor comfort to
me, that my pain is great enough to butcher me, and make an end of me in a
moment, that those miseries which dispersed and straggling I could tolerably
well encounter, having combined and united all their forces overthrow me in a
moment; for men do not usually think themselves happy, because they do not meet
with miseries which are too big for, and therefore not incident to their
Nature; but miserable, if they meet with all the utmost they are capable of
bearing; yet through the assistance of Christianity, this consideration becomes
matter of much comfort, for by the Revelation of Life and Immortality, the
state of pain, by being momentany, is as much diversified to us; and those who
knew no other life, as the Red Sea to Israel and Egypt, when the one only
passed thorough it, and the other perished in it; and it is a mighty Obligation
to persevere in Holiness, maugre all the opposition of pain and trouble,
because this pain is not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed.

2. If the affliction be too big for our strengths, we are reasonably to expect
supernatural recruits; for since nothing befalls the good but by Divine
Permission, and in order to their good, I cannot see why, if God will have our
lives a Martyrdom, we may not reasonably expect the assistance he allowed the
Primitive Martyrs; for without it we cannot suffer as we ought to do, and
consequently it cannot tend to our good.

3. I am to enquire, what the Soul can contribute toward making our bodily
pain more easy, and our burden more light; That it can do somewhat, is evident
from examples of fact, as was showed in the second Premise. I Will take notice
farther only of two sorts of men as a proof of this truth (though I might urge
a hundred examples of the power of the Mind, in sustaining the pains of the
Body) the ambitious and the covetous, men which daily impose upon themselves
cruelties which would make up a very formidable burden, if laid on by
Providence. -- A vain man for an empty name starves in a Camp, lies on the
ground till his poor limbs grow stiff and clayy, as the Earth their Bed; and
after all charges through smoke and blood to meet his death, or comes off
trailing a shattered Limb about the Field, and is content with praise, for the
loss of a Leg or Arm, etc. The covetous man lives upon Eggs or Roots, clothes
himself with Sackcloth almost, despises Fame and Honor, Friendship and
Pleasure too, and all this that he may die rich; and if neither of these think
themselves miserable, I do not know why any other should? Such is the strength
of Whimsie, or of Passion, why Faith and Reason cannot do as much, I cannot
see, because Reason is stronger than Whimsie, and Faith calls in the aids of
Imagination and Passion to boot. -- Let it be granted then, that the Mind can
assist us somewhat in our sufferings; and then let us enquire what Christianity
prescribes as Remedies against Pain, to enable us to conquer it.

1. It discovers to us the true end of all afflictions, Gods glory, and our
happiness, for assuring us that all things are governed by a wise, powerful,
and gracious God, who does not afflict the Children of men out of any pievish
humor, it must needs follow, that his chastisements must be designed to
excellent ends and purposes; that all shall work together for the best to them
who love God; and why should we not submit willingly to the Conducts of a wise
God? or why should not we suffer that condition contentedly, which promotes
most our own happiness? Why should we be dissatisfied with a more boystrous
wind which drives us more speedily into our Port? If his glory be the main end,
and that be as much or more promoted by our patience in adversity, as
thankfulness in prosperity; and our own Sanctification no less advanced, is it
not just matter of comfort rather than repining!

2. It promises a weight of infinite glory which these light afflictions work
for us; so that that condition cannot be miserable which is full of the most
glorious hopes, and those too at a little distance, for this life is but a
moment.

3. It calls us to the just consideration of our own Merits, and having
displaid a Scheme of our own sins, it afterward assures us, that we are
punished here, that we may not be condemned hereafter: Both which
considerations beget in us Humility and Love, and both render all sufferings
easy; for as Pride makes every little disgrace intolerable, and magnifies
every affront; so Humility changes the face of the whole, and represents the
state, as very answerable to our merits, very reasonable and just.

4. It proposes us the examples of Gods dearest Children, and of the holy Jesus
himself, and invites us to weigh their shame and glory, their sorrows and their
Crowns together; to consider their patience, and the love of God, and so to
strive earnestly, beholding their end.

5. It assures us of strength in proportion to our necessities, that God who
looks on, and sees the Combat, will supply us with force answerable to the
danger; and then what matter how violent our afflictions are.

The sum of all is; afflictions are intolerable, because we our selves sharpen
their stings, and warm their poison; because we neglect or slight our own
strengths, we do not reason, believe and pray: I shall thankfully bless God for
my afflictions, if all the while I suffer I am washing off a sin, and laboring
for a Crown, and untwisting my self from the world, and dressing my Soul for
Heaven; I will thank God, that he has cast me into a condition void of those
snares which soften and sensualize the mind; to become sensual is a worse fate,
than to be scorned, or poor, for that is a change of our very Humanity, and
draws after it the contempt of Heaven; this is a change only of outward
circumstances, and is feared only by the vain and gay, and scorned by fools;
for to be truly humble, is to be truly honorable, and to suffer Christianly,
is the infallible Character of a great mind. Lord, I know that I am here but a
stranger and Pilgrim, and I will not propose to my self rest and lushious
pleasures, I am now in a state of warfare, and I expect not my ease, and a
Kingdom, till I have vanquished; I am the Servant of the Holy Jesus, and I will
take up my Cross and follow him; and if he calls me to walk upon the waters, I
cannot believe that he will let me perish.

I have in this discourse of Pleasure and Pain had an eye to two things, not
only to show, that there can be no reasonable ground for a Temptation to Sin in
either, but also to demonstrate the Excellency of the Christian Principles, by
showing how they serve to all the ends and necessities of this mortal life, to
regulate our Pleasures, and alleviate our Pains; for else it had been enough
for me to have said, that there is no reason to quit an Eternity of pleasure
for a moment's; and that no pain can be equal to that of Hell; and therefore,
that no man can be seduced from his duty by either Pleasure or Pain, if he do
really believe the Gospel.

The Evils which disquiet the Minds of men (as far as concerns this Head of
Pain) may be reduced to two.

1. Doubting or uncertainty, when we have no sure knowledge of matters of the
greatest moment. 2. Amazement and fear proceeding from guilt, and the
apprehension of future vengeance.
The first of these is now sufficiently removed by the Gospel of Christ, which
has brought Life and Immortality to Light, and discovered all those glorious
and important Truths which relate to our Eternal Welfare, and our belief is
herein founded upon Divine Revelation, for God bore witness to the Authors of
this Gospel by Miracles, and by his holy Spirit, by the Resurrection of Christ
from the Dead, etc. and such is the purity and excellency of this holy
Doctrine, that no man who believes a God, can choose but see that an obedience
to such holy Precepts must be acceptable to him.

The second proceeds from the Conscience of our sins, and a dread of the Divine
Nature, either of which if they drive man into despair, must necessarily plunge
him into profaneness and immorality, or into melancholy and madness.

The Gospel has removed both these Evils.

1. By the glad tidings of Reconciliation thorough the Blood of Christ, whom he
has set forth to be a Propitiation for the sins of all who will believe and
repent, to deliver them who through fear of death were all their life time
subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15.

2. By a clear Revelation of the goodness and mercifulness of the Divine Nature
which Courts our return, beseeches us to be reconciled to him, and waits for an
opportunity to show Mercy: Whence the Gospel Characters of him now, are that of
a Father, the God of Hope, the God of Comfort and Consolation, and Mercies, and
Love; so that the minds of Christians are filled with joy and peace in
believing, and abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. From all
which it follows, that no man can have any temptation to sin, from any rational
suggestions, from any rational fears or doubts; for this discovery of the
Divine Nature, and this Death of Christ, invites men to Holiness, by the
Obligations of Divine Love, and their own interest: But of this I have treated
before.

The Prayer.
O Thou God of Hope, of Love and Mercy! thou art become exceeding gracious to
thy people, thou have turned away our captivity, and refreshed us by an Eternal
Redemption; though this world be a Wilderness compared to the other, yet thou
here feedest us with Manna; those bright Truths, and that glorious assistance
which are able to scatter all the melancholy Clouds of afflictions and sorrow
which gather upon the face of this present life: Lord grant that I may make
this use of them, to raise my self above the weaknesses and passions of this
present life, that the trial of my Faith may be to praise and glory, and to my
everlasting felicity in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen, blessed
Jesus.

CHAP. III. Of some other particular sorts of Temptations.
THough these (Pain and Pleasure) are the great Magazines from whence the Devil
brings forth all his Arms and Temptations, yet there are some peculiar ways
whereby he does ensnare and entangle us; for he does not assault us openly,
unless he has before corrupted the Guards: he deals with us as with Eve, Ye
shall not surely die; for if he had told her plainly the fruit is fair and
pleasant, it is worth your while to die for it, certainly she would have bid open
defiance to him, and scorned the temptation. Thus he deals with us, he cheats
and deludes us into vain hopes, and false presumptions; we wound our selves to
death, and yet flatter our selves with life; we forfeit our Innocence, and yet
impudently promise our selves a Heaven.

I will therefore conclude this Part with a particular Chapter concerning
Temptations, -- which are mostly

1. Infidelity. This is the general way the Devil takes to destroy the Souls of
men, and to seduce them from their duty; for it will necessarily follow, that
it is the most notorious folly imaginable to oppose our inclinations, or to
deny our selves any thing, if there be no reward for holy souls; and therefore
against this, we are exhorted to take up the Shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.16. to
possess our hearts with a firm belief of the truth of the Gospel of Christ. For
this Reason the Evangelists and Apostles are so full and frequent in the proof
of the Fundamentals of Christianity, as the Resurrection; etc. and of this one
Proposition; That Jesus is the Son of God; proving it from his Power, and
Holiness, and Wisdom, and his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, and from
the descent of his Spirit upon his Followers in such a public manner; and I
heartily wish that all that profess the Name of Christ would

1. Lay seriously to heart the clearness and evidence of these proofs, and not
perfunctorily pass over all the passages of the Gospel, which are written on
purpose that we may believe, without weighing them.

2. That they would examine themselves what are the first Motives which prompt
them to Infidelity; Do they not love darkness, because their deeds are evil?
and do they not rather wish the Gospel false, than believe it so.

3. That they would not stifle their Reason, and refuse Audience to those Pleas
the Gospel offers in its own defense, when they cannot answer them; do not
think its enough to divert your Conscience awhile from its clamours and
importunity, but satisfy it, and do not rest, till you bring stronger proofs
against the truth of the Gospel than those are which Patronize it; for he that
will eject a received truth out of its possession, must do it by a greater
force and clearness of Arguments, than those are which establish^d it; and
being firmly persuaded of this that Jesus is the Son of God, etc. it will be
hard for any temptation to get much ground upon your minds; and therefore it
were well and wisely done, every morning to repeat our Creed soberly, musingly,
and thoughtfully, and confirm our selves in the belief of it.

Sect. 2. Late Repentance. But why should I resolve to amend after this sin,
rather than before it? Are my Accounts too little, that I would add this to the
score before I state them? Or has my God and Savior deserved so little of me,
that I think a short life too much to be spent in his service, though he should
give me a Heaven? or am I sure that I shall have a keener appetite to Holiness
after I have tasted the lusciousness of sin? or will sin be the more easily put
off, the more habitual it is grown? or do I hope to find God the more merciful,
the more I provoke him? or if the sin be now too sweet, too taking to be
rejected (which is in truth the reason) how do I know it will not be so always?
or if my body decay, how shall I know when it is weakness or repentance,
whether a change in my temper, or my mind? or how do I know that some other sin
will not grow up in its stead? not only Youth, but every quarter of our life
has some baits or other ripe, and in season? and how know I what limits the
Almighty has prefixed to his patience? he cuts off some sooner than some, and
the measure of one man's iniquities is finished before another? or how know I
that God will allow me more strength, who make so ill an use of this? O let us
remember our selves, and sin no more, we are blind, and do not see our danger;
the hazard we run of hardening our hearts, and forfeiting Gods Grace, and
provoking his wrath, and being cut off in a moment, when we think not of it.

Sect. 3. It is a little sin; he is a very ill Casuist, who deliberating upon a
temptation, forms that foolish distinction of Mortal and Venial sins, for he
proceeds upon a supposition which is wholly false; i. e. that there are some
sins which do not interrupt the love of God; God cannot approve of sin in the
least degree however: but if as some think, this Veniality or pardonableness is
not founded in the nature of the sins themselves, but in the good will and
kindness of God; it will behove him who will act securely, to prove that God
has any where declared that he will not be displeased with him for those sins
which he has nevertheless forbidden upon pain of eternal wrath; or if this be
nonsense, let him prove that God will not be angry with him for that very sin
he is about to commit. In few words, the true use of distinguishing sins by the
several degrees of mortality or pardonableness, is not to direct men how to sin
safely, or how to choose what sins they may commit, but to direct the man who
has committed them, concerning the nature and degrees of his repentance; for
in plain terms, no sin can be justly called little, which we deliberate and
consult about, sin receiving its aggravation not so much from the matter of the
sin it self, as from the strength of our passion, and the Excellency of that
God whose Law it is a violation of; for though the instance of the sin may be a
little one, yet if we sin as far as we think we safely may, it is a foul
argument of the baseness of our temper, and the imperfection of our love; like
Judas we betray our Savior for a contemptible Piece; a smile, a word, prevails
more than the love and bounty of my Creator; and do we not then deserve to
perish? if we will be so foolish to choose thus, why may not God be so just as
to punish us?

2. That sin is generally most fatal, which looks most Innocent; for the Devil
is never more apt to insinuate himself, than when transformed, he appears in a
shape of Innocence: Let but a man allow himself the utmost liberty he thinks
lawful, and he shall be soon betrayed into what is unlawful; and he that shall
indulge himself in any little vanity, shall be shrewdly tempted into greater,
besides the strange danger of growing sensual, and undiscerning; and besides
that, the least sin, even in the sense of those who most favor the
distinction, grows mortal by frequent Commission. -- Therefore in opposition to
this temptation, we are taught

1. To grow in Grace, and to go on to Perfection, as being a state of the
greatest security; and this requires the most careful and circumspect walking,
the most entire denial of our own wills and affections; all which is
inconsistent with the admission of the most Venial sin; for how can it consist
with an ardent love of God to choose to displease him a little; what ever a
little trifling injury may seem to an unconcerned Spectator, yet if it pass
between two who mutually love, it will seem great to both.

2. We are exhorted to shun, not only every sin, but every appearance of it,
not to dwell within the Confines or Suburbs of Temptations, not to act the
least thing which we but doubt may be unlawful; and therefore surely nothing
that we know, is not to dispute nicely what we may without danger do, but to do
all that is Noble and Praiseworthy.

3. When we have done all, we are but unprofitable servants, and therefore let
us, who I am confident shall never do all we ought, endeavor to do all we can;
when we have watched, and when we have prayed; when we have contended, and when
we have fought, when we have done all we can, there will be still sins enough
to exercise the mercy and goodness of God; sins secret which we know not of,
sins of sudden surreptions, imperfections mixed with our holy duties, and
innumerable evil motions, which unless the Blood of Jesus, our own Repentance,
and the mercies of God intervene, would unavoidably damn us.

Sect. 4. When these ways fail, he sets upon us by other Engines; by our
Friends; by some or other who have an Ascendant over us; and it is not seldom
seen, that the Friends of our Bosoms are the greatest Enemies of our Souls: For
the truth is, Friendship is the dearest and most pleasant thing in the world;
whence it often happens, that men of the most excellent tempers, and the most
generous Principles, have been often induced by Friendship to do or suffer,
what neither their proper pleasure nor pain could ever have engaged them to;
and in all honest and allowable instances, to prefer a Friend before our
selves, is, if not a Duty, yet certainly an Heroic and commendable action. But
here, as to our purpose in hand, the case is thus to be stated, Whether I am to
obey God or my Friend; whether I am to serve the interest of my own Soul, or
comply with a Friends peccant humor, to the manifest hazard of my own Soul,
and his. The case thus stated, is I think too plain to contain in it any doubt
or Controversy at all; for our Obligation to God, who has more powerfully
indear'd himself to us, supercedes all Obligations, in this case, to our
Friend; nay, Friendship it self obliges us rather to advice and reproof, than
compliance; it being the true duty of affection to do not what is most
pleasant, but most useful for our Friend: And I must say further, that
Friendship is or ought to be founded in Virtue; and therefore without the guilt
of Lightness or Inconstancy, I may lawfully as far renounce my Friend, as he
does his Innocence; for he is become quite another thing, and has nothing of
that Charm and Grace which made me love him: In this case it is enough to
answer, as our Savior did to the Devil, Thus and thus it is written; it is not
lawful for me to do so, and therefore I will not, for Virtue needs no excuse;
if they can act a Crime without blushing, I see no reason why I should be
ashamed to own a Virtue; and if they think it unreasonable that we should deny
them the liberty of enjoying themselves, I think it much more so, that they
should refuse us the liberty of denying our selves. -- And this way of plain
dealing will be every way more useful to your self and Brother, than disguizes
and excuses: For he that shifts off his Friends importunity to sin, not by a
flat denial, but a pretense, seems to confess that he denies compliance, not
out of Conscience, but convenience; and so exposes himself to a fresh assault,
because his Friend looks upon him as Conquerable, and only waits for an
opportunity wherein he may attack him in better circumstances, and a better
temper: all which would be avoided by a plain and hearty refusal. 2. This way,
in common reason, must prove most useful to our Brother; for how do we know but
the influence of our Friendship, by the assistance of Gods Grace, may gain upon
him, or open disallowance may at least startle him into a serious
consideration, which will be enough to defeat him of his Folly; and the example
of our Virtue may encourage his imitation, by letting him see that Virtue is
easy as well as lovely. -- Against all devices of Satan, and Temptations in
general, I lay down these three or four Considerations.

1. That be the Excuse or Imposture as cunningly wove as it can, it matters
not; be the Excuse what it will, I am to consider this, that by hearkening to
such devices of Satan, that Crowd which now throngs Hell descended into those
horrible Regions; never any man yet sinned with a design or persuasion to be
damned for it, but he contrived his excuse as subtly, and provided a reserve
as safe as possibly he could, and yet they miscarried; God cut them off
suddenly, or sin grew too strong, and they too weak.

2. It is easier to conquer a Lust, than to satisfy it; the Ambitious may grow
content sooner than great; the Covetous may sooner moderate their desires, than
satisfy them; the Unclean may more easily gain a chaste Spirit, than satisfy
the ravings of a wandering Lust; for a man's Frame grows tractable and governable
by wholesome Reasonings, and sound Advice; Heavenly, by Prayers and
Meditations: But if you listen to a wanton suggestion, it will kindle into
Lust; and Lust, if encouraged, will flame into a passion; and our passions will
grow savage and imperious, if fed and pampered, and then no greatness can glut
ambition, no enjoyments eat a Lust: And shall we choose a harder way which leads
to an Eternal ruin, before an easy way which guides us to happiness?

3. It ought heedfully to be considered, that temptations do not gain upon any
by strength of Argument, but by importunity and prepossession; no man that
weighs the things temporal and eternal, can prefer in his judgment those to
these, but those are seen, and these are not; those are continually with us,
and they carry their Arguments and Rhetoric in their looks, and every sense of
us is constantly beset, and applied; and so by insensible degrees they
insinuate, and then possess us, and captive us: The best way therefore to
secure ourselves, is either first to cut off all opportunities of being tempted
by retirement, and retreat from the world; or secondly, to countermine the
world by an equal diligence, making our Meditations and Prayers more frequent
than our entertainments of sense; that so the Soul may be called off from the
things without, to meditate upon the things above; as often at least as Gaity
and Luxury invite it out.

4. As there are objects of vanity, so there are too in the world objects that
advise and reprove us, such as distress and sickness; that raise our thoughts,
such as the works of Gods hand, and all others are capable of a good
observation; as for example, what is an evident vanity, may be the matter of
our pity, rather than love; Feasts and Music may suggest the Almighties
goodness, and lead us to the consideration of a better state; and if we use
this method, we shall reap a double benefit; First, We shall avoid the
insinuations to sin visible in outward objects; and secondly, We shall have our
Souls stored with excellent thoughts.

4. Never slacken nor abate thy diligence, though thou have arrived at a great
degree of Piety, and have mortified the flesh, and subdued the world, there is
no security on this side Heaven; many good men fall, the best may; and
therefore let him that stands, take heed least he fall; for what will be the
issue, God only knows. The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand; and will thou let go the Victory, when thou have broke the main strength of the Battle?
thou art almost above fears, and above struglings; thy life hastens away, and
thy task diminishes, and will thou shipwreck in the Port? Thou art just going
into the Arms of thy Lord, and will thou now suffer thy Beauty to fade, and thy
glories to languish? The Bridegroom is just at the door, and will thou now
suffer thy Lamp to go out?

The Prayer.
ETernal God, who see that I walk upon Snares, and in the midst of Enemies,
give me the Spirit of Fear, Humility and Watchfulness, that I may walk
circumspectly passing the time of my sojourning here in fear; incompass me with
the whole Armor of Faith, that I may be able to fight a good fight, to finish
my course with joy, and to have confidence at the appearance of my Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen, Amen, blessed God.

There are three things for which (because they could not properly be reduced
to any one single Head of those three which I have divided this whole Discourse
into) I have therefore reserved this last place; i. e. Sacraments, Prayer, and
Fasting; each of which may be considered in a threefold respect.

1. As Parts of Divine Worship, or of Holiness in general.

2. As Instruments of advancing Holiness.

3. As Remedies and Antidotes against Temptation.

In each of which Relations, I will consider each of them a little: And

1. Of Baptism.
Considered in the first sense of the three, it contains a Solemn Profession of
the Christian Faith, an actual Renunciation of those Enemies of Christianity,
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and a listing ones self into the service
and obedience of Christ.

And because I cannot think that there is any Essential part in the System of
Christianity merely Ceremonial, I cannot think, but that besides the Admission
into the Church, which is the Body of Christ, and consequently a Title to all
the glorious privileges of its Members; our blessed Savior does endow the
Person baptized with power from on high to perform all those great engagements
he takes upon him; as will appear to any one who shall consider the Nature of
Christianity, which does always annex a Grace to the external Mean or
Instrument; or

2. The great things spoken or this Sacrament; or

3. The value all understanding Christians have had for it, or the effects
which followed it, when practiced in the Infancy of the Church; and I humbly
conceive this to be the sense of the Church of England, which supposes the
thing signified by the outward Ceremony of Baptism, to be a Death unto sin, and
a New Birth unto Righteousness.

But whatever become of this motion, it is certain, that it is a strange
Obligation to a Holy Life, and a Remedy against Sin, as being a most solemn
engagement of our selves to the obedience of Christ; from which we cannot start
back, without drawing upon our selves the guilt and punishment of Perjury, and
forfeiting all those advantages we partake of by it; and I wish all would lay
this to heart, who plead the Obligations of Civility and Friendship, Custom and
Fashion, in defense of their sins, as if any trifling Ceremony were sufficient
to supersede our Obligation to Christ, and acquit us of that guilt which the
breach of the most sacred Covenant brings upon us.

The Prayer.
BLessed and holy Savior, give me grace to remember my Baptismal Vow, to
remember that I am a sworn Enemy to the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and
enable me to fight the good fight of Faith under thy Banner the Cross. Let me
have no truce, entertain no friendship with thine and my Enemies: Let them
flatter me, if they will, with smiles and promises, I am sure they mean nothing
to me but death and ruin; how shall any fantastic Obligations Cancel my duty
to thee, resulting from so solemn a Covenant! In vain does the World disguize
its temptations under the forms of Civility and Honor; I know no Civility
which can oblige me to renounce my Vows, no Honor that can excuse my Perjury;
in vain does the World assault me by Greatness, and Wealth, and Glory; these
are the very things I resolved against when I took up the Cross of my Crucified
Savior in my Baptism: Grant. O blessed Lord, that I may have mortified
affections, and a Victorious Faith, an humble meek Spirit, and glorious Hopes,
that after this troublesome life is ended, I may rest with thee in Everlasting
Glory. Amen, Amen.

Of the Lords Supper.
THe Supper of our Lord may fall under the same forms of Consideration which
Baptism did; that is, it may be considered, 1. As a part of Divine Worship. 2.
As an Instrument of Holiness. 3. As a Remedy against Temptation.


I will look upon it briefly under each of these notions, and herein I will
guide my self by that incomparable Office of this Church, which has admirably
expressed and reduced to a method the whole mind of the Gospel relating to this
matter; for which I have often blessed God, whilst I beheld and reverenced that
Primitive plainness, and truly Christian Spirit visible in it.

First then, our Lords Supper considered as an act or part of Religious Worship
or Holiness, contains in it these four things.

1. An humble acknowledgment of our sins.

2. A devout Profession of our Faith in Christ, that we are the Disciples of a
Crucified Savior, and expect Salvation by no other way, than that Sacrifice of
his Body and Blood offered upon the Cross.

3. A solemn Oblation of most humble and hearty thanks to God for this
inestimable benefit, his bestowing his Son upon us to die for us: and to our
Master and only Savior Christ, for his exceeding great love in dying for us.

4. A most solemn Oblation of our selves, souls and bodies, to be a holy,
lively, and acceptable Sacrifice unto God: so that this Sacrament consists of a
whole Constellation of Graces, Repentance, Faith, Hope, Charity: It is a nearer
approach into the presence of God, and more solemn exercise of the Graces of
the Gospel: and this gives a very fair account of the reason of its frequent
practice; for nothing can be

Secondly, A more effectual instrument of Holiness, upon these, and the
following accounts.

1. That the preparation necessary as a condition of our worthy Reception, does
awaken our Souls, and refresh all our Graces, and mortify all our sensual
Lusts, and draws us nearer to Heaven; and the necessity of such a preparation
as the Church-office prescribes, appears from hence, that Repentance, and
Faith, and Charity, are absolutely necessary to enable a man to exert those
acts (beforementioned) which constitute this Sacrament, considered as a part
of Divine Worship; and therefore to approach that holy Table without a Soul so
qualified, is to affront and mock the Majesty of Heaven.

2. That the exercise of our Graces in receiving, does increase and improve
them; that act of humble Adoration and profound Prostration of our selves
before God, under a sense of his Purity and Majesty, and our sinfulness and
meanness; that lively Acts of Faith, whereby the Soul does profess its firm
belief of, and dependence upon the Death and Passion of its dear Lord and
Savior for Salvation; that love whereby the Soul offers its praises, and its
self a Sacrifice to God, do leave such lively and lasting impressions upon men's
minds, as are not quickly nor easily effaced; and the Soul by the delight it
finds in its exerting these Graces, is inkindled with a desire of repeating the
same Acts.

3. That the Sacrament it self has a natural tendency to promote Holiness: 1.
By its sensible Representations of a Crucified Savior, the Symbols themselves
being fit to bring into our minds the pain and sufferings of our dear Lord and
Master. 2. By that inward Grace (inseparable from the worthy Reception of it)
bestowed upon us to refresh and strengthen our Souls, to root and confirm our
Faith, to inflame our Love, and perfect our Hopes. 3. By being a Pledge and
Assurance to us of the pardon of our sins thorough the Blood of Christ.

4. That it is a new and repeated Engagement of our selves to the service of
Christ, to an obedience to his Laws, and a Renunciation of those Enemies of the
Christian, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. From all this it is easy to
infer;

3. That it is a strong Fence and Antidote against Temptations; for these fresh
impressions of our Saviors love, the new strengths of Divine Grace, the vigor
of a new and solemn Engagement to Obedience, fill the Soul with a holy zeal
against sin, and with a glorious contempt of sensual pleasures.

The Prayer.
ANd now, O my God, what should make me so prodigally venturous of my own
safety, as to neglect the frequent use of this holy Sacrament! Have I not need
frequently to examine my self? Are not thy Graces apt to wither and decay,
unless thus watered and refreshed? Does not my converse with the World, and my
communication with Flesh and Blood, render it necessary for me to renew my
resolutions against them as often as I can? or is there not a holy delight in
the exercise of all this, that surpasses all the pleasures of a sensual life?
and is it not a Sacrifice that my Lord and Savior is highly pleased with? and
is it not reasonable that I should oblige him who died for me with this
frequent acknowledgment of his infinite love evidenced in his death? Pardon me,
O my God, that I have been so ungrateful to thee, so senseless of my own welfare
and advantage! for the time to come, I will delight in this holy Communion, I
will often offer up my self a Sacrifice to thee, and profess my Faith in a
Crucified Savior; and there beg thy assistance and conduct through the
difficult paths of this present life: And, O my God, accept thou of my
addresses and praises, thorough thine infinite Mercies, and the Blood of
Christ. Amen.

Of Prayer.
PRayer may be considered under those three Heads I before mentioned: And

1. As a part of Holiness. It is an acknowledgment of God's being our God; a
confession of his Majesty, and our meanness, being a solemn Adoration and
Worship of him; it is a Sacrifice of praise to him; it is an act of Humiliation,
and of Repentance, and of Faith, and Reliance upon him: And from hence we may
infer, what preparation of the Soul is necessary to a right discharge of this
Duty; that extempore Addresses are the most improper, and the most unwelcom to
God; for these are at best but imagined to raise those passions or dispositions
in the Soul, which ought to be presupposed in it beforehand, to the rendering
of our Prayers acceptable; for we draw near in prayer, to offer up a Sacrifice
which we had prepared before: And we may secondly conclude, that what ever the
gifts of Prayer be, the Spirit of Prayer is that which does dispose and prepare
the mind by such qualities as are fit to exert the acts I named before; and I
am apt to think, that a Soul which thus prepared, and fixing it self in the
immediate presence of God, dwells with an inward devotion upon those acts of
Adoration and Praise, Humiliation and Faith, without expressing these actings
of the mind in words (I speak of private prayer) does in S. Paul's sense, Romans
8.26. pray by the Spirit; and consequently in public those prayers are most
spiritual, which share most of this preparation.

2. As an Instrument of Holiness: it does exercise all our graces, and refresh
and improve them by exercising; the breathings of the Divine Spirit (which is
in an extraordinary manner assistant in this holy exercise) fill the minds of
men with joy, and peace, and hope, which confirms them in their Christian
Warfare, and makes them disrelish all the pleasures of a sinful life. Lastly,
Prayer has extraordinary promises annexed to it, of receiving whatsoever we ask
with Faith, Mat. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given to you.

3. It is an Antidote against Temptation; for it possesses the Soul with an Awe
of the Divine Majesty, with a sense of his unspeakable love, and with a horror
against sin, whilst we enumerate his benefits, and our sins, with all their
aggravating circumstances: And certainly no man can be so senseless as to repeat
those sins which he did just now bemoan and abhor, renounce and resolve against
before God; nor will it be easy for him to fall, who comes forth forewarned
and armed to encounter a Temptation. Lastly, Prayer convinces a man of the
loveliness and happiness of a holy life, for he finds that his peace and
reliance grows up or decays together with his Virtue.

If I did pray earnestly and often, how humble, how holy, how heavenly and
exalted would my Soul be! with what glorious Notions of the Divine Majesty,
what dreadful apprehensions of sin, what an unquenchable thirst of Holiness,
what fears and jealousies of the World and Flesh, would my Spirit be possessed
by! and what a mighty influence would all this have upon my Conversation! how
humbly, how warily, how fervently should I walk!

But when I do not pray often, or with this care and preparation, how lazy and
careless is my life! how dim and imperfect my conceptions! how stat and
tastless my relish of spiritual things! how does a worldly sensual temper grow
and increase upon me, and the Divine Life within droop and languish.

The Prayer.
O Therefore my God give me grace to be frequent and fervent in Prayer, assist
me by thy Spirit to dress and prepare my Soul for this more solemn approach to
thee! and then I shall experience this to be the high way of Commerce with
Heaven! I shall feel the wind blowing upon the Garden of my heart, and the
Spices flowing forth; I shall feel the Spirit fanning that spark of holy life
it kindled into a flame; and I shall feel my self transported and ascending up
above this vain world, and all the allurements of it: O therefore grant me, O
my God, thy holy Spirit, that I may pray with understanding and fervency, with
a prepared and a devout Soul; that my prayer may not be the sacrifice of Fools,
and turned into sin, but an acceptable Sacrifice to thee, an Instrument of
Holiness, and a Guard against sin, enabling us to fight the good fight of
Faith, that I may receive an Everlasting Crown; and all for the sake of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

I should now add something concerning Fasting, which the Universal practice of
the Church, besides our Saviors Rules prescribed to it, do plainly suppose to
be a Duty of Christianity; but yet such a one as is a Free Will offering, and
so dependent of various circumstances, that the practice of it cannot be fixed
by particular Rules; and therefore as I did on purpose omit speaking to it when
I had a fair offer (under that Head, the means to obtaining Temperance,
considered as a habit in the mind) so now I Will only consider it very briefly.

1. Who ever shall consider the constant practice of the devoutest men, the
Nature of this Body we are clothed with, or the frequent sins to which the
lusts of it have betrayed us, will discern Reason enough to invite him to this
Duty, either in order to our Mortification, and our future security, or as an
act of Affliction and Revenge for our past faults: Therefore

2. Who ever totally neglects this Duty, upon pretense of the ill effects it
has upon either Body or Mind, ought well to be assured, that the uneasiness of
the one or other, be not the effect of a wanton and carnal Mind, rather than of
the temper of the Body; and that his Body will admit of no degrees of this
Duty, otherwise he is obliged according to his capacity.

3. To Fasting must be joined Alms and Prayer, and Vainglory must be separated
from it; without the former it is insignificant, with the latter it is a sin:
But if any just Reasons disable any man to give Alms, or to devote the day
entirely to Spiritual Exercise, I cannot yet think but that Fasting may be used
as an act of Affliction, provided it be consecrated to God by a holy intention
at least.

The Prayer.
GLorious God, I see in what a world I live, and what a Body this Soul of mine
does dwell in; how little kindles those Lusts which blast the Innocence of my
Soul, and destroy my peace; I remember how often I have behaved my self
unbeseeming a Child of God, only to gratify the inclinations of an
ungovernable Body: Enable me therefore so to mortify and subdue it, that I may
enjoy an entire peace and conquest; so to humble and afflict it, that my
revenge may testify the sorrow I feel for my misdemeanors; and accept thou my
sorrow, to the atonement of my sins thorough the Blood of Christ. Amen.

The Conclusion.
I Am now earnestly to beseech the Reader, to reflect seriously upon this whole
Discourse; and consider, whether the Christian Religion be not a System of most
glorious, delightful, and important Truths; whether any Principles can raise
Man to such an entire Conquest over the world, and himself? whether Holiness
does not transform him into a great and a glorious thing? whether any knowledge
can create in him so perfect a peace, and so undisturbed a joy? whether there
be any thing besides Religion, can make a man spurn fawning pleasures, and
outbrave his fears? whether there be any thing which would turn the world into
so much Paradise, and secure our peace and interest on such unshaken bottoms,
and lead on the whole Train of a public or a private life in such a safe and
pleasant method. What then? Art thou fond of ruin! or has damnation any charm
in it! that thou will still resolve to persevere in such a manifold
contradiction to the Laws of the blessed Jesus! Will thou suffer thy soul to be
miserable here through those numerous lusts, which are the incessant torments
of it? and can thou think of abandoning all the hopes of a glorious
immortality?

Or do thou indeed look upon the Gospel of Christ, as cunningly devised
Fables, and read these kind of arguings, as only wise and politic
harangues? Surely so much Holiness confirmed by so many miracles, must needs
witness its divine authority; and if thou would but try thy self the
practice of it, thou would feel its divine principle, in the Life and the
joys of the Spirit!

But I am persuaded, the greater part of mankind, cannot choose, but indespight
of Inclination, acknowledge the truth of the Gospel, and the Excellency of
virtue; and confess that their vices are the effect, not of their choice but
weakness! Blessed God! What account then will these men give of their
Disobedience, at that day when Christ shall come to render the vengeance to
all, who have not obeyed his Gospel, when they shall be put in mind of the
prevalent motives made use of to endear Holiness to them, and of the mighty
assistance of the Divine Spirit, which was offered them toward enabling 'em to
live well, when they shall see, (as a perfect Refutation of all such excuses)
so many millions (I hope) of blessed Saints, who tho liable to the same
Passion, and encompassed by the same Temptations, did yet conquer all, and
entered into Life thorough the Straitgate!

But if this little Treatise should light into the hands of a perfect Atheist,
or at least of one who laughs at every particular Sect of Religion; to such a
one I address these last lines, and I beseech him to allow them so much
Consideration as he would to any other thing which pretended to so much
concernment and importance.

1. If there be a God, Nature seems to dictate, that he is a Rewarder of those
that seek him; and forgets not the Wise and Virtuous, neither in Life nor Death
(and Men, as wise and rational Creatures are his peculiar Offspring, and more
nearly related to him:) and on this Argument Socrates in his Apology founded
his hopes of another life; an argument much of a kin to that of our Savior,
God is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, now God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living; at the smartness and clearness of which
arguing the people were astonished: And

If there be another Life; Virtue and Goodness, must needs be the proper
qualities to recommend and endear us to the God who presides in that other
World: (for I can never fancy a Brutish and irrational Deity!)

If there be no God (which is impossible (it is a thing impossible to be
proved; and therefore an Atheist can never possess his Soul in any Rest and
Peace; and besides if there be none, the belief and practice of this Religion
of Christianity (as I Will make appear presently) can do no man any harm; and
what madness then is it, not to take the safest side in a mat-ter of this dear
concernment!

2. In behalf of Christianity in particular, I beseech such a one to consider,

That if those Miracles and Proofs of Divine Authority, which the Gospel
relates were true and real, then the matter is beyond dispute.

If they were not I would fain see some probable account, how Christianity
could so generally obtain, in despite of all the disadvantages it was to
encounter^ having neither interest, nor pleasure, nor force to countenance it
against the established Superstitions and Vices of the Age.

That it concerned them of Judea, which was the Scene of our Saviors Actions,
to have given the world a manifest account of the Imposture, and so have
provided for the security of Judaisme, which was subverted by it; that the
wisest and most religious Sects amongst both Jew and Gentile were quickly
swallowed up into Christianity!

That those early days were the most fit for a confutation of the Proofs on
which Christianity is bottomed, as being most nearly conjoined to the times of
our Saviors and his Apostles actions; and therefore capable of being easily
informed, and yet we find no such thing done; which must needs suppose the
world either monstruously ignorant, or stupid, and senseless not only of their
secular but eternal interest: the former is utterly false, and the latter
absurd; therefore it is more than probable, no such confutation could beform'd;

That the Wisdom and Majesty, the Purity and Holiness, the Mysteries and
Prophesies of it are so many tracks of Divine Glory, which bespeak God its
Author; it being very improbable, that e're the Devil should be so set against
himself, as to promote that Holiness, which is so contradictory to his nature;
and tho he should have blended it with speculative errors, that cannot be
thought a mischief able to satisfy him for all the good it has done in the
world; nor would such a design savor enough of the malice of Hell, for surely
God will never make a good man eternally miserable, for a speculalative Error
into which his Humility and Resignation to God, and such strong probabilities
(not to say more) betrayed him.

But suppose (against all Reason) that it were Fictitious; what can any man
suffer by the belief of these Principles; certainly they tend to make us like
God, and there is no article which reflects any disparagement upon the Divine
Nature, but discovers it to the World, in the greatest and the loveliest
characters; and therefore unavoidably, if any Religion, than this, will secure
our future Life.

As to the present, if our Life be clouded and o'recast by afflictions, these
Principles alone can support us under them, because these only are substantial
grounds of courage or content: if our Life be calm and fair, no man injoyes it
with a more constant and untroubled satisfaction than the Religious, for
Religion only crowns our outward prosperities with a firm peace and content
within:

And yet all the clamor raised against Religion is this, that it enviously
intrenches upon the pleasures of Nature, and wheadles us out of the possession
of present pleasures by the deceitful promises of future --

In answer, I would fain know of any the most fortunate Epicure, (for I confess
I have never been lucky enough to discover any such state) whether there be any
enjoyment rich as Fancy and ravishing as Dotage, if there be, of what constancy
and unmixt purity it is; for if it be not fixed and steady, then a constant,
cheerful Life, as free from uneasy fears, desires, and troubles, and
repentances, as from the taste of such luscious Meals, is surely to be
preferred before a few fortunate minutes, of a Life in the general disordered
and troubled: or whether accounts being stated rightly, we may not safely
conclude, that there is no such thing as such an enjoyment, much less any
permanent state of it, and then

I may easily defend Religion as to this point; for then it is but reasonable
that our desires should be calm and temperate, and that we should sit down
content with such easy and obvious pleasures as suit this state of
imperfection and childhood; and if so, what harm can Christianity do men? (as
God expostulates with his People, Testify against me wherein have I wronged
thee) It does not forbid us to like but dote; it does not forbid us to enjoy
the World, but it forbids us to equal it with Heaven.

And when it has once fixed the limits of worldly happiness aright, it is so
far from driving us out of the reach of it, that it is the only path to it; we
sail within those Sea marks, which if we slight we dash on Rocks and Sands, for

Answer me,

Are the Faculties of our Soul rendered more incapable of Happiness, because
cultivated and improved, employed to useful and ingenious purposes not lost on
trifles? are our Senses less subtle and judicious because the Body is preserved
in an entire and vigorous health by temperance and employment, and content of
mind?

As to the Objects of our affections: Is a Good Estate less useful or less
creditable by being spent temperately and Charitably? Is Greatness the less
firm or the less glorious, because its Basis is Virtue? Is a Beauty the less
taking, because innocent and virtuous? of all the pleasures of humane Life, I
have always thought Friendship the dearest, and certainly sense as well as
wit, true courage, and honor, and constancy, (the product of Religion) as well
as the Accomplishments of Nature and gentile Education, must go to make it
perfect and delightful: when any are endeared by a generous goodness, by an
innocent and undefigning passion, by a combination of virtues and a confederacy
of rational delights and glorious hopes; I am confident no debauched mind can
ever fancy any thing so charming and romantic; and if this be the case, if
this be all that Religion does; that is, if it be only a wise method to
happiness, fet on foot by the goodness, and contrived by the Wisdom of God, I
cannot discover any just ground of quarrel against it: I cannot see how the
sinner can get clear off from these Arguments; remember then it is a
disingenious kind of confidence to return only raillery for answer to
Arguments, and to think a loud laughter a sufficient confutation of important
truths: Be not deceived God will not be mocked; a day is coming, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be laid open, when God will argue his own cause in
a flaming vengeance; and then what a miserable Tragedy will thy Mirth and
Pleasure, the Sinner and his World end in! What astonishment and dread will
seize upon every Soul which has hardened it self against the Gospel of Christ!
how miserably fooled and cheated, will all the gay and jolly Sinners find
themselves! But glory, honor and peace will be the portion of every one, who
works righteousness.

The Prayer.
O Thou holy Spirit of God, thou divine principle of a divine life, remove all
blindness, hardness and impenitence from off the hearts of all those who read
the truths of the Gospel of Christ, and grant that they may receive the word of
Christ with an entire humility and pure Affections, and bring forth the fruit
of it in their Conversation; that when the winds blow, and the rain descends,
and the floods beat, they may be like houses built upon a rock, and stand
unshaken in the great day of Judgment. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books printed for and sold by Robert Pawlet at the Sign of the
Bible in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet.
VIllare Anglicanum, or, a view of all Towns, Villages, etc. In England and
Wales alphabetically composed, so that naming any Town or place, you may
readily find in what Shire, Hundred, Rape, Wapenstake it is in. Also the number
of Bishopwricks, Counties under their several jurisdictions, and the Shire
Towns, Boroughs and Parishes in each County, by the appointment of the eminent
Sir Henry Spelman, Knight.

The Nuns Complaint against the Friars, being the Charge given in the Court of
France by the Nuns of St. Katharines near Province, against the Father Friars,
their Confessors; showing their abuses in their allowance of undecent Books,
and Love Letters, and marriages of the Friars and Nuns, their Frolicks and
Entertainments, etc. several times printed in French and now faithfully done
into English.

Mary Magdalen 's Tears wiped off; or, the Voice of Peace to an unquiet
Conscience.

A Sermon preached by that eminent Divine Henry Hammond, Dr. in Divinity.

The Golden Remains of that ever memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaton College,
etc. The second Impression with many additions not before published, in Quarto,

Episcopacy as established by Law in England, written by the command of the
late King Charles by Robort Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln, in Octavio,

A Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and other public Records of the Church of
England, with a Preface by Anthony Sparrow Lord Bishop of Norwich.

A Rationale on the Book of Common Prayer of the Church of England, with his
Caution to his Diocese against false Doctrines, by Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop
of Norwich, in Octavio.

Whole Duty of Man laid down in a plain familiar way for the use of all, but
especially the meanest Reader: Necessary for all Families. With private
Devotions on several Occasions, in Octa.

Gentleman's calling, written by the Author of the whole Duty of Man, Octa.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety; or an impartial Survey of the
Ruins of Christian Religion undermined by unchristian Practice, by the Author
of the whole Duty of Man. Octa.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of Holy Scripture, or the certain and
indubitable Books thereof, as they are received in the Church of England, by
Dr. Cousin Lord B. of Durham. Quarto.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England as it stands separated from
the Roman, etc. by Sir Roger Twisden Baronet. Quarto.

Mr. Chillingsworths Reasons against Popery persuading his Friend to turn to
his Mother the Church of England from the Church of Rome.

The Book of Homilies appointed to be read in Churches. Fol.

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical. Quarto.

Divine Breathings, or, a Pious Soul thirsting after Christ in an hundred
excellent Meditations.

Hugo Grotius de Rebus Belgicis, or, the Annals and History of the Low Country
wars in English, wherein is manifested that the United Netherlands are indebted
for the glory of their Conquests to the valor of the English. Octa.

A Treatise of English Particles: showing much of the variety of their
significations and uses in English, and how to render them into Latin,
according to the propriety and elegancy of that language, with a Praxis upon
the same; by William Walker, B. D. Schoolmaster of Grantham.

The Royal Grammar, commonly called Lillies Grammar explained, opening the
meaning of the Rules, with great plainness to the understanding of Children of
the meanest capacity; with choice observations on the same, from the best
Authors by William Walker, B. D. Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

A Treatise proving Spirits, Witches, and Supernatural operations by pregnant
instances and Evidences, by Meric Causabon. Octa.

A Catalogue of all the Parliaments or reputed Parliaments from the year 1640.

A Narrative of some passages, in or relating to the long Parliament, by a
Person of Honor.

Nemesius, Nature of Man in English by George Withers, Gent.

Inconveniences of Tolleration. Quarto.

Tolleration intolerable. Quarto

A Letter about Comprehension. Quarto.

A Thanksgiving Sermon, preached before the King by J. Dolbin, D. D. Dean of
Westminster.

B. Brownrigs Sermons on Gunpowder Treason.

A Narrative of the burning of London 1666. with an Account of the Losses, and
a most remarkable parallel between it and MOSCO both as to the Plague and Fire.

Lluellins three Sermons on the Kings murder.

Iter Lusitanicum, or, The Portugal Voyage, with what memorable passages
intervened at the Shipping and Transportation of her sacred Majesty Katharine
Queen of Great Britain from Lisbon to England, by Dr. Samuel Hind.

A Charge given by the most eminent and learned Sir Francis Bacon, at a
Sessions for the Verge, declaring the jurisdiction thereof, and the Offender
herein inquirable, as well by the Common Law as by several Statutes. Quarto.

Mr. Whites learned Tractates of the Laws of England.

Graphice, or, the use of Pen and Pencil in designing, drawing and painting, by
Sir William Sanderson Knight.

Hippocrates Aphorisms Oct. in English.

The Communicant instructed for worthy receiving the Lords Supper, by Thomas
Trot of Barkstone near Grantham.

Petavius's History of the World.

Military and Maritine Discipline, viz. The exercise of Horse and Foot, with
Sir Francis Veers directions; and a Treatise of Invasion, by Capt. Tho. Venn;
the fortifying Towns with the ways of defending, and offending the same, by
the learned Mathematician and Tacquet; also Sir Samuel Morelands method of
delineating all manner of Fortifications; together with the art of founding
great Ordnance, the making Gunpowder, taking heights and distances, with the
manner of Fireworks.

Sir Francis Moors Reports,

Baron Savils Reports,

And All sorts of Law Books.

FINIS.

