THE DUTY OF SERVANTS, CONTAINING

First, Their Preparation for, and Choice of a Service.

Secondly, Their Duty in Service.

Together with Prayers suited to each Duty.

To this is added A Discourse of the Sacrament suited peculiarly to Servants.

By the Author of Practical Christianity.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1685.

THE EPISTLE TO SERVANTS.
Good Fellow Christians,
I Will not increase the Bulk or Price of this Book, by giving the World an
account of all the Reasons that moved me to publish it; let it suffice to tell
you, that it is a Design of great Charity for your Temporal and Eternal
Interest. I would, as much as lies in me, render your Estate easy, profitable,
and at least not dishonorable, which I shall certainly effect, if I can
persuade you to Contentment, and a faithful discharge of your Duty in your
Place; for it is not the Nature of Service, but the Faults of Servants, which
render this state uneasy and contemptible, the greatest Burden and Dishonor
of it being in truth to be imputed to the unreasonable Discontents, to the
negligent, unfaithful, or undiscreet behavior of many Servants. I would
possess you therefore with such Virtues as may render you the Favorites and
Confidents of your Masters, dear to them (as you ought to be) next to their own
Children; and by being so, you will become more considerable to all that know
you, and nearer every day to Advancement: These Virtues are Contentment in your
Condition, Justice, Truth, Industry, Humility, the Fear of God, and such like.
By the Practice of these, you will convince the World, that you differ from the
Rich and Great only in outward Circumstances, that you have true Honor and
Goodness in your Souls, and that you have nothing mean in you besides your
Fortune: These therefore cannot miss of making you worthy to be esteemed, to be
beloved, to be trusted, to be encouraged.

But this is not the utmost of my Design, I would make you Happy and Glorious
hereafter, I would make you the Children, the Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs
with Christ, though the Servants of Men; I would deliver you from the Bondage
of Sin and Satan, and make you partakers of the true Liberty of the Sons of
God. Now this cannot be done, unless you can be prevailed with to love and
pursue after those Virtues which become your condition in the World, and so
discharge your Duties conscientiously; for I must deal faithfully with you, no
man can be a good Christian, who is not good in that station wherein God has
placed him: You cannot then be Obedient Servants of God, unless you be Faithful
Servants of Men; nor yet do I confine the whole of your Duty within the compass
of your Service to Man, there is a Duty also which you owe to God, which you
are to perform in the first place, not only because he is your Chief and Best
Master, (I should rather have said, your Good Lord and Father too) but also,
because this is the best and most solid Foundation of your Duty toward Man;
and therefore easily conceiving that no good, nay no wise Man will grudge you
the time that is necessary for the Service of God, since unless this be
performed, they can neither expect that you should serve them as you ought, nor
if they did, that God would give a Blessing to your Service. I have taken care
to direct you also in this little Treatise, how to employ this time, laying
down such Rules as may be more peculiarly useful to you in Reading, Hearing the
Word, Receiving the Sacrament, etc.

The Method I have followed is very plain, and I need give you no other account
of it, than what you have in the Title. I have nothing more but to beseech you,
that you would join with me in hearty Prayers to God, that he would bless this
my Endeavor with success, not only to your Advantage and Comfort, but to the
Peace and Interest of all Families, which is nearly concerned in your
Behavior, that he would possess all of you with Virtues suitable to your
Quality and Condition in the World, with a Spirit of Meekness and Humility,
with a Spirit of Faithfulness and Industry, with a Spirit of Love and
Gratitude, and with a Spirit of Fear of, and Dependence upon him our God, that
so you may not only be considerable and useful in your Places, but also
Examples of an Excellent Virtue, and by a necessary consequence happy here, and
glorious hereafter, which is the sincere Desire of

Your Affectionate Friend, Richard Lucas.

The Contents.
PART I. Of Preparation for, and Choice of a Service.
Chapter 1. Of Preparation for Service. The Duty of Parents in this point. The Duty
of those who design themselves for Service. Chapter 2. Of the Choice of a Service.
The Importance of this Choice. Rules to be followed in making it.
PART II. Containing the Duty of Servants.
Chapter 1. Of the Servant's Duty toward God. Chapter 2. Of the Servant's Duty toward
his Master and Mistress. Chapter 3. Of the Servant's Duty toward the Children of
the Family, Sojurners, Strangers. Chapter 4. Of the Servant's Duty toward his
Fellow Servants. Chapter 5. Of the Servant's Duty toward himself; with 6. The
Conclusion of this part, containing general Motives to the Servant's
conscientious performance of his Duty.
PART III. Containing
The Seruant's Preparation for the Sacrament.
PART I. Of Preparation for, and Choice of a Service.
CHAP. I. Of Preparation for Service, as it is the Duty partly of Parents, and
partly of those Young People who resolve upon Service.
THERE is scarce any particular Work, The Necessity of Preparation.
or any single Action that is well done, unless by such who are trained up to
it, or fitted for it, either by an actual or habitual preparation; how can it
then be imagined, that Service, which is a state of Life, of so great
importance, to the welfare of all the other members of a Family, as well as
that of Servants themselves, should be wisely entered into, and happily
discharged without any Preparation? Many and important are the Duties of
Servants, great is the Trust reposed in 'em, the Estate, the Honor of their
Masters and Mistresses, the Peace, the Happiness and Virtue too of the whole
Family, does very often depend much upon 'em; and can any one question, whether
such a Charge, such a Trust as this does not require many Virtues and Excellent
Qualifications? and these cannot be obtained without due Preparation; for as no
man is happy, so neither is any man wise or virtuous by chance.

The Qualifications of a good Servant.
Now the Qualifications which make a good Servant, are such as these; Fear of,
and Dependence upon God, Contentment in their Condition, Love of their Masters
and Mistresses, Humility, Meekness and Patience, Faithfulness, Industry and
Discretion: These I confess, are eminent Virtues; and though they are necessary
in this lower station, they make men fit for, and worthy of the highest: These
will make a Servant both happy and considerable in despite of the meanness
either of his Birth or Fortune; and happy must those Masters be, who are served
by Persons of such Virtues: Since therefore the Trust is so great which is
reposed in Servants; since the Virtues necessary to make a good Servant are so
many and great; and since the fruit of their good Service is so extremely
profitable to themselves, and the Families they are Members of, it does
naturally follow, that they should with great Care and Pains be trained up, and
fitted for Service.

Now this Duty of Preparation does in the first place belong to such Parents
who are of that Rank in the World, that they have no better way of providing
for their Children, than by Service. And next it is the particular and immediate
Business of such Children before they enter upon this state. This Preparation
in part the Duty of Parents.


First, It Is the Duty of Parents. Every Parent is by the Law of God and Man,
bound to make provision for their Children, and then sure they who can make no
other provision for 'em, are much the more bound to be diligent and zealous in
their Education. Motives to the Parents Care.
There are indeed some sorts of Skill necessary to qualify Men for some
particular sorts of Service, which cannot be obtained without Charge; the
poorer sort may peradventure look upon themselves excused from bestowing this
sort of Education upon their Children by its expensiveness; but the Education I
require of 'em, consisting in the Fear of God, Truth, Industry, Humility, and
such like, is no way expensive; the Poor as well as the Rich may resolve with
Joshua Josh. 24.15.
, I and my House will serve the Lord. Good Example, good Instruction, and good
Government, does not cost much, nor does it put 'em to any Charge to acquaint
their Children frequently with Instances of God's Goodness and Power in
providing for all those that depend upon him in these ways of Humility and
Industry; and if Examples of this sort be picked out in the Neighborhood, such
as their Children are well acquainted with, men whom their own Industry, and
God's Blessing has raised from little, this will be very apt to affect 'em, and
to teach 'em the Excellent Lessons of Contentment and Trust in God: Parents by
this Labor bestowed upon their Children, will reap this great advantage; their
Children will be more serviceable and delightful to 'em, their mean Condition
will be more easy and honorable, being freed from the two Plagues of Poverty,
Disorder and Sloth: Their Children again will reap a double Advantage; first,
in being fitted to encounter every Fortune; and next, this Piety and Religious
Wisdom, visible in the Family they are of, will give them very great Credit and
Reputation; such a House will be looked upon as a Temple consecrated to
Religion; and he that takes a Child from hence, will believe that he receives a
Guardian Angel into his Family, or at least one whom God will bless in all that
he does, and for whose sake he will bless all that belongs to him. Thus a good
Edcucation is both a delightful and provident work; it is a good Estate to
Children, recommending 'em to the Favor both of God and Man, and making 'em
worthy of the best Fortune, The Mischiefs which pursue the neglect of this Duty.
and able to bear the worst: These are the Advantages which Parent and Child
reaps from this sort of Education, but this is not all the Motive to this Duty;
for there are as mischievous Effects which attend the neglect of it, as there
are good ones which attend the performance. How can the careless Parent answer
for his neglect to God, to himself, or to his Children, since by it he betrays
the Honor of God, the Happiness of his Children, and his own Peace and
Comfort? What shall those wretched Children do? Whither shall they go who are
as destitute of good Education and Virtue, as of a Maintenance and Provision?
Whither shall they go? to Service? they are unfit for it, and incapable of
obtaining it: For who will receive into his Family one o'respread with the
Leprosy of a Slothful and Vicious Education? Shall they stay at home, the
shame and burden of their Parents? Alas, there they must perish through want of
Bread, or abundance of Idleness: What remains then for 'em to do? they must
either betake themselves to unlawful ways to get a Maintenance, or else
miscarry through the Vices of their Education in lawful and good ones: Who have
these poor creatures to complain of in the day of their misery or of Judgment?
Shall they complain of God? he gave 'em Health, Strength and Understanding:
Shall they complain of themselves? It Is true, they will have Reason, for they
preferred Ignorance and Idleness before the means and opportunities of Grace,
which have been provided for 'em in Public at least, but most of all must
their Complaints be levelled against their Parents, who suffered 'em to perish
for lack of Knowledge, who suffered 'em to fall into the bondage and mischiefs
of sin, before they were thoroughly instructed, what sin was, nay prompted 'em,
and I had almost said, compelled 'em into both by the lewdness of their own
Examples: Let me speak to such Parents, with what hearts must you, if you have
any sense remaining, behold your Children lost to Virtue, engaged in sinful and
destructive Courses, and finally plunged into the misery that attends them;
when you shall reflect and consider that they have been abandoned, betrayed and
debaucht into all this, by you your selves? With what face can you beg of God
for 'em the assistance of his Grace, which you have your selves bereaved 'em
of, or at least refused to contribute what lay in you to implant it in 'em? Or
how can you finally beg of God support and comfort under the Calamity which you
have brought upon your selves? Go wretches, hide your selves from the sight of
those Children which you have undone, and if you can, from the sight of God,
whose Trust reposed in you you have betrayed!

Having put Parents in mind of this Duty of Preparation, The Childrens Duty in
this point.
as far as it concerns them, I must now address my self to Children and Young
Persons of the Rank and Quality supposed all along; for the Duty of Preparation
is not so to be cast off from your selves upon your Parents, as if no part of
it lay upon you. Motives to it.
As soon then as you come to years of Discretion, your first business is to
consider the Condition and Fortune of your Birth; you are seriously to consider
the narrowness of that Portion God has allotted you, and with what pains and
travail your poor Parents provide this; you see you are not sent into the World
to take your Pleasure and Pastime therein, but you are born to take Pains and
Care, or else you must ever suffer the straits of Poverty, the reproach of
Sloth, and the Plagues of Nastiness and Ignorance: When you have laid this to
heart, consider too the infinite kindness of God, who fills, or is ready to
fill all things living with his Goodness. Consider his Alsufficiency and Power,
that it is he Psalm. 75.7.
who pulls down one, and sets up another: There is no Cottage so retired
which God does not look into and regard; no Condition so desperate, so
destitute of Friends, and all means, that God cannot redress and relieve it: He
that called his People out of the Brick-kills, and from between the Pots, and
chose Herdsmen and Shepherds for his Prophets and Princes, this God can never
want means to raise or provide for such who call upon him, and serve him. Thus,
if you lay to heart your Quality and Condition in the World; if you demand each
one of himself, Who am I? What am I born to? What Station has God assigned me
in the World? This will soon convince you, that you have nothing to trust to
but God and your own Virtue: And if you lay to heart in the next place the
Goodness and All Sufficiency of God, you will easily conclude, that they who have
him for their Friend and Patron, can want no Encouragement, no Assistance, that
they who serve him, and depend upon him, Psalm. 34.
shall lack no manner of thing that is good; and so all together will put you
upon the practice of Virtue, and a dependence upon God, in which consists
almost the whole Preparation I am treating of.

Having advanced thus far, Children must accustom themselves at home to the
Duties they must practice in Service.
your next business will be, to learn and accustom your selves to those Duties
as far as you can, in the Family of your Parents, which you must practice
afterward in that of your Masters: Above all, practice those Virtues which you
shall find useful and necessary, wherever you shall come; such are Industry,
Humility, Contentment, and the like. First, Industry; for why should you not
ease and assist your poor Parents, who with much Affection, Care and Trouble,
nursed and succored you, when unable to help your selves? Or why should you
indulge your selves in Idleness, who cannot live but by taking pains? Secondly,
Humility; for why should you not pay that Respect to those who are your
Parents, which you are to do to those who will be your Masters? to those whom
the Law of Nature has set over you, which you must to those whom your
Necessities will set over you? Or how will you learn the Humble and Respectful
Language or Demeanours of a Servant, who accustom your selves to nothing but
Rudeness, Disrespect and Undutifulness toward your own Parents, whom though
you (which you ought not,) it may be, fear less, yet sure you love more, or
ought to do so? Lastly, Contentment in your state; for you are unfit to be
Servants, if you are wanton and discontented Children; your Diet, it may be,
and such other Circumstances, may be bettered by the exchange of a Father's for
a Master's House; but there may be other things which may be more insupportable
than your Parents Poverty; something every where must be borne with, and
therefore inure your selves betimes to Contentment in the meanest Condition,
without which you shall never be happy in the best. In a word, if you would
prove good Servants, you must first prove good Children; look upon your Parents
not only as your Father and Mother, but Master and Mistress too: Let not the
meanness of their Estate tempt you to slight 'em; 'twere a sin in a Neighbor
or a Stranger to despise them for their Poverty; but it is a Crime, a Crying
wickedness in you their Children: Make no use of the Indulgence and Fondness of
your Parents, but only this, to inform your selves of 'em more freely, what you
are to do, and more carefully avoid doing amiss, and more cheerfully to reform
what is amiss; for if you have no sense upon your minds of Duty and Kindness,
you will never make better than Eye-Servants, whom God as well as Man detests.

Thus prepared, The Resolution fit for such as are entering into Service.
as soon as you are invited to, or have your selves found a fit Service,
fortify and confirm your selves in this Resolution, that you will perform the
utmost that you undertake at least, and whatever more you can, that you will do
your Duty with Cheerfulness, and with all your Might, and with all imaginable
Faithfulness and singleness of Heart, as doing Service to God, not Man. Look
upon your Master and Mistress as your Adopted Parents; resolve to love and
serve 'em as such, and never to be persuaded that your own Interest can be
divided from theirs. Ah! would you but go thus qualified to Service, you would
find it indeed a state of True Liberty, not Slavery; you would not be driven to
poor and dishonorable shifts ever and anon; you would grow up and thrive in
the Affections of your Masters and Mistresses, and your Interest would ripen
with their Affection and Value for you; they would be your Adopted Parents, you
their Adopted Children, as necessary and dear to 'em, as their Feet, their
Hands, their Eyes.

Fraught with these Virtues, and Armed with these Resolutions, enter into the
World and prosper; having first begged your Parents Blessing and Advice, and
devoted that little time between your being hired to, and entering upon Service,
to Prayer, and the consideration of these things.

A Prayer to be used by Parents fitted to this Duty.
O Almighty God, Father of the Family of Heaven and Earth, possess my Soul with
a tender sense of the Duty of a Parent, that I may not be bereaved of the Peace
and Satisfaction which springs from a faithful discharge of it, nor of the
Pleasure and Advantage which Wise and Virtuous Children bring their Parents,
nor of that Blessing which thou do bestow upon all such as train up their
Children in thy Holy Faith and Fear. O suffer me not, instead of all these
Advantages, to fall into that wretched state, wherein my Conscience shall be
tortured, and my Soul afflicted by the sense of my Childrens Ruin, my own
Guilt, and thy heavy Displeasure. Suffer me not, O Lord, to imitate that wicked
One the Devil, who delights to betray his Children into Sin and Ruin; but make
me to imitate thee, my Heavenly Father, who do fill all things with thy
Goodness, whose merciful Providence is over all thy Works, who providest for
all thy Children both spiritual and bodily food, and art most infinitely kind
and gracious even to the undutiful and ungrateful. O Lord, open thou my mouth,
that I may pour forth Instruction. O Lord, purify and sanctify me, that if I
be slow of speech, and unlearned, they may yet learn from my Life more than
they can from my Tongue: But above all, O Lord, pour forth thy Grace in their
hearts, that they may be meek and teachable, industrious and dutiful, devout
and religious. Lastly, O Lord God, I resign and recommend these my Children
unto thee, O be thou their Father; take thou the Care of providing for 'em upon
thee, and do thou so direct the whole Course of their Lives by thy Gracious
Providence, that every passage of it may tend to thy Glory, to my Comfort, and
to their own Honor and Happiness. All which I most humbly and most earnestly
beg for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus Christ.

A Prayer to be used by Children under the Government of their Parents.
O Eternal God and Heavenly Father, thou that art the kind Author of my Being,
be thou the gracious Guide of my Life; my Age is simple and unexperienced; O be
thou pleased to inspire me with true Wisdom from above: I am come into a World
full of Snares and Temptations, O do thou fill me with the Knowledge and Love
of thy Truth, that it may keep me from the path of the Destroyer. O possess my
heart with the Fear of thee, and dependence upon thee, that I may walk before
thee the Almighty God and be perfect; that I knowing, that thou art my
exceeding great Reward, may neither be discontented in my present state, nor
distrustful of a Provision for the future. Possess also my heart, O my God,
with that natural tenderness for my Parents, and with that Christian sense of
my Duty toward 'em, that my Language may be respectful, my Actions dutiful,
and my whole Behavior such, that I may not increase the Burden and Care of
their Life, but prove a comfort and support to 'em. O my God, possess me lastly
with a spirit of Meekness, Justice, Truth and Industry, that by Reverence to my
Betters, by Courteousness, Truth and Faithfulness toward all, and by Diligence
in whatever I am employed, I may grow like a Tree planted by the Rivers of
Water, my Leaf may not wither, whatsoever I do, may prosper, and I may bring
forth my fruit in due season, increasing daily in Wisdom and Stature, and in
Favor with God and Man: Hear, O hear the Voice of my Petition, for in thee
only is my Trust, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer to be used by such as are just entering into Service.
O Almighty God and Heavenly Father, who art wont to lead and defend all those
who call upon thee, be thou pleased to go now and ever along with me, and make
my ways plain and prosperous before my face. Vouchsafe me, I beseech thee, the
Assistance of thy Grace, that I may both contentedly submit to thy blessed
Providence, and also do my Duty faithfully in that station to which thou do
call me. Make me always to remember that I do Service to thee my God, whilst I
do it as I ought, to Man; and that I am not only to expect my Wages from my
Earthly, but also my Reward from thee my Heavenly Master. And, O my God,
because I know that I am frail flesh and blood, I beseech thee to confirm and
strengthen me against all Temptations, that nothing may be able to prevail with
me to deceive the Trust that is reposed in me. Keep me also from all
unchristian frowardness and passion, which may disturb the Peace and Charity of
the Family whither I go. Above all, keep me from forgetting thee in my Success
and Plenty, and from preferring my Worldly Interest before thy Favor. Let me
find Favor in their sight, with whom I go to sojourn, and bless thou them, and
do good unto 'em for thy Servants sake: Thou art my God, in thee is my Trust,
to thee I dedicate and devote my Life; O hear me now, and whenever I call upon
thee, O God of my Salvation, through Jesus Christ my Lord.

CHAP. II. Directions to be followed in the Choice of a Service.
The Rules to be followed in this Choice.
I Do not design here to lay down any Rules of Carnal Policy, there are very few
so stupid, as not to be able to discern what sort of Services do best promote
their Worldly Interest; passing therefore over these, I shall only direct you
what way Servants are most likely to secure their Peace and Tranquillity, and a
good Conscience. Sometimes the Straits and Necessities of Servants are
pressing, and the Choice of Services is little or none at all: And in this
case, whoever draws you, as the Midianites did Joseph, out of this Pit, is to
be looked upon as appointed by Providence for your Master; provided the
Employment be lawful, and not repugnant to your Christian Profession, for then
it is much better to suffer by the want of an Employment, than thrive by a
sinful one: But whenever your wants are not urgent, it is much more advisable
to attend the Providence of God for a more suitable place, than out of Distrust
to put your selves into men, as you must again soon quit, not without some
guilt of Lightness and Ingratitude, or continue in very uncomfortably: But you
must in this deliberation take care that you do not impose upon your selves,
and pretend to do that out of Religion, which you do really out of Pride or
Idleness, or Wantonness. If several Services be offered, it is, no doubt on it,
highly agreeable to Reason and Religion, that a Servant should with great
wariness proceed to choose a Master whose Commands must be Laws to him, to choose
that company which he must always live in: It Is, in a word, highly reasonable
that a Servant should with good Advice put himself into a Family, by whose
Orders and Customs the whole manner of his Life is to be regulated and
determined, and both his Mind and Fortune probably to be shaped and fashioned.

Now, that you may not miscarry in this Choice, you are in the first place
earnestly to implore the Guidance and Direction of God; for if he interpose in
those things which seem wholly given up to Chance, as Solomon assures us, Prove.
16.33.
The Lot is cast into the lap, but the coming forth is of the Lord. How much
more will he be entreated to be present in those Affairs, wherein Men proceed
by Rules of Wisdom and Religion? And if the slightest matter of Life do fall
under his notice, which our Savior intimates, by telling us that Matthew. 6.
The Hairs of our head are all numbered, how much more the weightiest? 1. Beg
Gods Direction.
Look then up to God, and call upon him for his Direction in this matter; it is
he who by a secret Providence can overruled all things; it is he who can give
Light to obscure and doubtful things, or a more discerning Judgment to weak and
simple minds. 2. Consult Virtuous Friends.
In the second place; you are to take the Advice of Wise and Virtuous Friends,
and you are generally to look upon that Advice most sound, which presses you
most to Duty and Religion, and flatters not your Pride nor Sloth. In the third
place, 3. Weigh your own Capacities.
you must well weigh your own Capacities and Abilities, comparing 'em with the
business that you are entertained for; for if you undertake what you are unfit
for, it is impossible that your Master should reap any thing from your Service
but Vexation, and it may be Damage, or you your selves any thing but discredit;
so that this is both sin and folly, a downright deceiving others, and betraying
your selves: Sometimes indeed there is not so much Regard had to your Ability,
as Cheerfulness and Industry, and in this case, if your Capacity come not up to
their Expectation, you wrong 'em not; but then, they lay upon you a double
Obligation to good Nature and Diligence; for it is monstrously ungrateful, if
you force 'em to bear not only your Ignorance, but your Idleness and Ill Nature
too. In the fourth place; 4. Choose as if you were never to change.
you are to choose a Service, as if you were to make your Fortune in it, and as
if you mist there, you could hit no where: For if you only design it as a
Refuge for your present want and pressing necessity, if you only put in there,
as into a Port, to avoid a Storm, being resolved to hoise up Sail to the next
fair Wind, you will be shrewdly tempted to do your business very negligently
and carelessly, and so besides the guilt of Ingratitude, you will incur that of
Injustice too. A Religious Family the best Service.
In the last place; instead of all further Rules, take this; You are to account
that Family the best for you, which is in it self the most Religious; the best
for your Temporal, and the best for your Eternal Interest. First, for your
Temporal Interest; good men, if they are able, do generally more than they
promise; wicked men much less: Good Christians will look upon you as their
Fellow-Citizens, nay, Fellow Servants, for you have one Master; nay, what is
more, members of the same body, for you have one Head Christ Jesus; and
therefore such will treat you with Charity and Gentleness, and will as heartily
seek your Interest as their own; for it is impossible but that a good man should
make much of them that fear the Lord. But besides that gain which you will reap
from the Countenance and Assistance, or receive from the hand of a Religious
Master, there are two other Advantages which the Religion of any Family gives
the Servants of it, Credit and Reputation in the World, and the Blessing of
God, which how much they conduce to your Worldly Interest, I need not, I
suppose, acquaint you.

But, suppose this Choice of a Religious Family did not serve your Worldly
Interest altogether so well as the Choice of some other peradventure might, yet
surely it best serves your Eternal Interest; and therefore a Religious Family
is to be preferred, especially by people of greener years. It Is true, a good
man, like Joseph, may serve the God of Israel in the House of Potiphar; but
sure, nothing but Necessity, not his own Choice, shall bring him thither; the
Salvation of the Soul is the Luke 10.42.
one thing needful, and therefore this is the Interest that is first to be
secured. They have certainly but little Veneration for Religion, who will
prefer the gain of two or three Crowns in a year, with the hazard of their
Virtue, before all the Advantages of a Religious and well-governed Family. They
are certainly very little sensible of the danger of Temptations, and the
weakness of Human Nature, who for a very inconsiderable profit are ready to
expose themselves to the Infection of ill Company, to the Corruptions of ill
Example, which are much more apt to affect you, when Authority and Interest is
joined with the Deceitfulness of sin, as in the Examples of Masters and others
whom you depend upon and respect. It Is an unspeakable disadvantage to your
Virtue and Religion, to be in a Family where you must wholly want the common
means of Grace, I mean the Reading of the Word of God, good Instruction,
Prayer, and a Christian Discipline in the Family: But how much greater
disadvantage when these are not only neglected, but contemned and derided? To
live bereaved of the Means of Grace in a mere Dearth of Spiritual Food, is an
unhappy state; but to live amidst daily Temptations, and even Solicitations to
sin, is an unhappier still. If young unexperienced people are apt to forget
God, even in those Families where they are often put in mind of him, how will
they remember him where all forget him? If they can hardly be preserved by the
Care of a Religious Master, and the conscientious observance of Religious
Duties, how will they be secured in a Family where there are no opportunities
or means of Virtue? and not only so, but where there are all opportunities and
means of Vice, and where Vice is countenanced and encouraged by common practice?

But in all this, let me not be mistaken, when I say, What Family to be
accounted Religious.
that Family is to be chosen by Servants which is the most Religious; I do not
mean that they should measure the Religion of the Master by mere words, or mere
Opinions, but by the orderly Government of his Family, by the conscientious
Practice of Family Duties, by the peaceableness and gentleness of his
Conversation, by the Justice and Charity of his Actions; for this is true
Religion and undefiled before God.

A Prayer to be used on this occasion.
O Thou the only Wise and Almighty God, who wast with Jacob in his flight, and
Joseph in his Captivity, who did provide for thy Servant Moses a Retreat and
Entertainment in the Wilderness, be thou with me, guide thou and direct me; I
desire to resign up my self to thy Providence: O lead thou me, and I shall
securely and safely follow thee: O give me Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on,
and I will be thy Servant, and thou shall be my God. But O suffer not mine Eye,
my Imagination, to be dazzled by a vain show of Wealth and Plenty, so as to
prefer the Hopes of it, before the Advantages of Religion and Virtue. Suffer me
not to be led into Egypt by my Wantonness and Idleness. Let not my Lot be to
live in any place whence thou art banished. Shut me up, O Lord, in the Ark of
some Religious Family, that I may escape the Deluge of this wicked Generation,
and where I may enjoy thee, and discourse of thee, and tell of all thy wondrous
works, and be fed with Divine Truths. This, this, O Lord, is the thing I would
choose, though with hardship and difficulties, rather than to dwell with Ease
and Plenty in the Tents of Wickedness: But not my will, O Lord, but thy will be
done; if it be thy pleasure, that I should dwell amongst those who are
strangers to a Life of Godliness, O never suffer me to be ashamed to own thy
Truths, or practice thy Precepts. O never suffer me to forget thee amidst the
Temptations of ill Company, and ill Examples; but Lord, let me be a burning and
a shining Light, that the rest of the Family may be moved by my Devotion and
Virtue, to glorify thee. Let my Life so far adorn and set off the Doctrine of
Christ, that others may be in love with Holiness, and be ashamed of Sin. Hear
me, O Lord, for I wait upon thee; direct me, for thou art the guide of my
Youth: O my God and my Father, in thee is my Trust, through Jesus Christ my
Lord.

PART II. The Servants Obligations to Religion.
CHAP. I. Of the Servants Duty toward God; their Obligation to Religion;
Directions for Relative Duties, Reading, Praying, etc. The Virtues God requires
of 'em; dependence upon him; Contentment; Faithfulness to their Masters.
ONE Luke 10.40.
thing is needful, said our Savior to Martha, when she was cumbred about much
serving, when she was careful and troubled about many things, and that is
Religion. Religion is as necessary for a Servant as a Gentleman, for a Peasant
as a Prince; for Salvation is of equal importance to both, and I cannot see,
but that those of the meanest Rank lie under as strong Obligations to Religion
as any other men do. If the Condition of a Servant be well weighed, A Servant
is less liable to Temptations than others.
it will be found, that he has fewer Temptatations to, and consequently excuses
for sin, than any other sort of men; for he is restrained and kept within the
bounds of a Regular and Civil Life by the necessities of his Fortune, by the
confinement of his Duty, and by the indispensible Attendance of his Place:
Ambition, Idleness and Luxury, which are the great Incentives to sin and folly
in other men, are not ordinarily incident to the state of Servants: Besides,
that Labor and Care is a sort of good Discipline to the body, and keeps it
more modest and humble in its Appetite. It Is true, there are a sort of Servants
which serve rather for grandeur, than any necessary Duty, who are only the
state of the Hall and Antichamber, and the Ornament of Coaches; such are
generally too well fed, and too little employed, and consequently, they are
exposed in a state of Servitude almost to all the Temptations, that men of the
highest Rank are; it were heartily to be wished, that such as these would rescue
themselves from this worst sort of Servitude, by betaking themselves to
something that might consist with their Service; and it highly concerns the
Masters of such, as they would avoid the guilt of their Servants Ruin, to find
out some ways to employ them; in the mean time, they are to stand like
Soldiers on their Guard, and while they keep with Sobriety and strict
Attendance to their Post, I hope they may be said to be upon their Duty, and in
their Employment, and may be so accounted by God. But to pass on from the
Consideration of this Case, which is not altogether so common, and to return to
the Ordinary sort of Servants, besides the Restraints which Servants lie under,
which are so many Guards and Fences of Virtue, besides the Travail and hardship
which the Body undergoes, which is a sort of Discipline to it, they are
restrained from sin by the narrowness of their Fortune, which should
reasonably, nay must necessarily keep 'em from expensive sin, (and almost all
sins are such,) and by Hopes and Fears more peculiar to this state than any
other they dread, or at least should do so, not only the displeasure of God,
but of their Masters too: Their good Fortune depends directly and immediately
on their good Behavior, and it is next to an impossibility, that they should
fall into Vicious Courses, but that they must at the same time fall into Ruin
as well Temporal as Eternal, being discarded, disgraced, and not only
reproachfully thrust out of their present Service, but thereby made incapable
of another. To all these Considerations, I might peradventure add one more,
that sin in it self is not so taking or luscious to a Servant, as to those of
higher quality: The World does not court them in so much Pomp and Luster, as it
does the Rich and the Great: Temptations are not set off with so many Beauties
and Ornaments, when dressed and prepared for the Servant, as when for the
Master; and as this Rank of People does not encounter the same force and
allurement in Temptations; so they have more Allays, Fears and Checks mixed with
their sinful Enjoyments, than others have; so that upon the whole, I may
conclude, that the Servant who lives in any Course of Vice, is of all Sots the
most desperate; he breaks through more restraints to commit sin; he runs more
hazards to be damned than any other man whatever; he sets his Soul at a viler
Rate than any other Mortal, and rather than not be ruined and be damned; he
will be both without Temptation, and without Pleasure: Ah infatuated wretch!
that will be miserable in despite of God and Fortune too! that will be vicious
and wretched in despite of so many difficulties and discouragements, and are
content to be ruined rather than not be damned! A man would think Damnation had
Temptation in it, for the poor despicable sins, by which these wretched
creatures incur it, have none.

That station is very commodious for Virtue, A Servant enjoys many peculiar
Motives to Religion.
which has in it no Temptations to Vice: But besides this Advantage, Service
contains in it some Incitements to Holiness, almost peculiar to this state. A
mean Fortune, like Calamities, whets and sharpens those Minds that have any
sparks of honor or courage in 'em; he may be thought justly to deserve a mean
Fortune, and a servile Condition, who does not labor to qualify himself for a
better. Virtue then is wholly necessary to redeem mean persons from Servitude
and Contempt, and therefore, if a Servant had any Soul, it should, methinks, be
enkindled with an honest Ambition of coming up, though not to the Fortune, yet
to the Merit of those above him; he should be zealous to compensate the
meanness of his Birth and Condition, by the Virtue of his Life, and the
goodness of his Actions: This is that which will set him on the same level with
the Rich and Mighty, if any thing will; for whatever loose and vain people may
talk, great Virtues are excellent Qualifications, and render Men extremely
serviceable and necessary in the World. It Is very rare that any man does long
want a higher station, who has Ability enough to fill it; however it be, he is
as truly great who truly meriteth Greatness, as he that possesses it. Besides
this, that Virtue is the most natural way to advance a mean man's Fortune;
there is in this state one further Motive to Virtue, which is, that a Servant
stands almost in daily need of it: So many and various are the Pleasures of the
Wealthy and the Great, that while these last, as they desire not to exchange
their Paradise for a Heaven; so they do not discern the Use and Necessity of
those Virtues that qualify 'em for it; they do not feel the want of Spiritual
and Inward Pleasures, who are wholly taken up with Carnal ones; they need not
the support of Faith, or the Belief of another World, who are more than well
enough content with this; they see not the Use of Dependence upon God, who have
goods laid up for many years, and are secure in their hearts, as if their
station were such that they could defy the common Events of Providence to
reduce 'em to Necessity. What business have they for Patience, Industry,
Moderation, where every thing not only obeys their Will, but flatters their
Fancy, and their Wealth is sufficient to support Idleness and Riot too? But in
the condition of Servitude, all is the quite contrary, they cannot only not
live happily in another World, but they cannot live pleasantly in this without
Virtue; the Peace and pleasure of their Minds is necessary to compensate the
Travail of their Bodies, the belief of another Life to render this tolerable
and easy: Patience, Meekness, Industry is absolutely necessary in them, to
render them contented and satisfied in their station: The Reason's plain,
without these they cannot be good Servants, and every Service is a burden, and
slavery to an ill one: So that Virtue is as needful to the Happiness of a
Servant, as his Food or his Wages; his state is slavish and unsupportable
without it, free and easy with it. I will take upon my self the person of a
Servant, that I may the better express the force and strength of these
Arguments which I have made use of to persuade Servants to become Religious. I
see my Condition, my Parents are unable to serve me, I have no Friends, none
that can, or none that will be of any considerable use to me. What shall I do?
I have but one way to render my self dear to God, or valuable to Man, and that
is by living religiously and virtuously; if I do otherwise, God will cast me
off, I shall meet with Contempt from Man, and what is worse, I shall deserve
it; I shall ever be a slave, and ever deserve to be so: Pity and compassion is
the highest honor and favor from Man that I must ever aspire to, and when my
strength for drudgery fails, that, it may be, will do so too; and then Beggary
and Reproach must be the Portion of my decayed Age. I can never think on these
things, but I am filled with blushes and disdain; surely I have a Rational and
Immortal Soul as well as the Rich and Wealthy: and sure the Incense of Virtuous
Actions, and devout Prayers, would smell as sweet to God, if offered up by me,
as by a more Fortunate Man; and if so, what Reason have I to distrust, but that
God who is rich in bounty toward all, would be so toward me too? Well then, I
am steadfastly resolved, that I will lead an unblameable life, and whatever my
Fortune be, the World shall see I can deserve a good one; and by this, if I do
not thrive and prosper, and get in time into a better station, I shall obtain
this unspeakable Advantage, that I shall render my present one both honorable
and easy: It Is not a servile Birth, nor servile Fortune, but a servile Mind
that makes a Man contemptible, a Mind that has no Faith, no Truth, no Courage,
no Industry, no Gratitude, that is, in one word, no Honor in it: But if I have
all these, and if together with all this, Moderation, so that I am my own
Master, though another's Servant, I am in such case full of Honor, no Cloud of
Meanness can obscure or conceal me, I am a Star visible by my own Light, a Gem
valuable for my own intrinsic worth, I shall be beloved and respected wherever
I am; for Virtue, how ever it be clad, has beauty and majesty on its forehead;
nor is this all, my station will be full of ease as well as credit, for what
should trouble me? The Travail and Care of my Place? Alas! this is but pleasure
to the industrious! the displeasure of those I depend upon? Alas! I shall never
fall under it, or at least, I shall never deserve it! and then the peace and
the satisfaction of my mind will more delight me than ever their weakness can
disturb me! Finally, what can it be that can trouble me? The uncertainty of a
Servants station? why, while I live virtuously, I can never want; whatever
betides me, I have a God, an Almighty God that cares for me, and if the worst
comes to the worst, my trouble can be but short, my Life and it will end at
least together, and then Glory and Eternity will receive me.

Thus I hope I have convinced Servants of the many Obligations they lie under
to be Religious: I have insisted a little largely upon this, because I have
ever found it a harder Task to persuade people to do their Duty, than to teach
'em what it is. But against all that has been said, two things are wont to be
objected; First, The meanness of their Capacity, or at least Education: And
secondly, their want of time or opportunity for Religious Duties; Objection of
the Servant's Incapacity answered.
but both these are mere shifts and pretenses; for as to the first, their Souls
are endowed with the same Faculties and Capacities, they have the same Reason,
Courage and Immortality with the Rich or Mighty, as it is evident from
innumerable Instances of men, who, ascending from the lowest to the highest
station, have not only filled, but adorned it too. As to Education, here I
confess, there is some difference between those of a higher and lower Rank, but
as it is generally managed, it consists in such poor punctilio's, such trifling
and slight Accomplishments, that it is not easy to say on which side the
Advantage lies: But omitting this, I will put you in mind of one thing that
will silence all excuses of this sort. The Philosophy of Christianity, which is
the only true Wisdom, does not require a learned Education; a poor Fisherman
now, as well as formerly, is as capable and fit for it, as he that is bred up
at the feet of Gamaliel: The Belief of another Life depends not on niceties and
subtilties of arguing, but on the Resurrection of Jesus from the dead; not the
acutest Philosopher, but the best liver has the fullest Convictions, and the
most lively and transporting Representations of Divine Truths. John 7.17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of my Doctrine whether it be of
God. One thing further I am to put you in mind of, that the Book of God is the
great Rule and Standard of Discretion as well as Duty, and that Religion
naturally tends to make men wise as well as good: There is no action of life so
indifferent, but it has in some part or other of it, a Connection with, or
Dependence on our Duty, some degree or other of Service or Dis service to our
great End; so that true Rules of Policy are no where more successfully to be
sought, than in that Book which contains all the wise Rules of every Imaginable
Duty. If these things be rightly considered, there is no man can ever justly
think himself excused for his Folly or Irreligion by the meanness of his Birth,
his Fortune, or his Education; there is not one Christian Servant, but may
prove an Epictetus, or something much greater, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a holy Prophet, a Royal Priest: He may, in a word, be truly wise, and truly
good.

2 Objction, want of time, answered.
As to the second Objection, want of time: When I think upon Epictetus his Lamp,
and Cleanthes his Labor, who wrought and earned by night what might maintain
him in the study of Philosophy by day; when I observe how indefatigable
Ambition is, how wakeful Covetousness, how restless and obstinate all our Lusts
and Passions are, I cannot but blush to see, how lazy our Religion is; your
Meals, your Sleeps, your Divertions, your Talk and Chat (for there are few
Servants who spend not some portion of their days and nights in these last) can
lend you time for Reading and Devotion: He can never want time, who wants not
Zeal for the Service of God: But besides this, I must tell you, the Religion of
all Christians in general, if it be perfect, consists more in practice than
speculation; and yours no less in the faithful discharge of the Duties of your
place, than in acts of Devotion toward God; but I know how apt weak people are
to run from one extreme to another, and therefore I will not insist longer on
this Argument, lest I should be thought to place the Religion of a Servant
merely and solely in the Duties of his Service. There are many ways by which
Servants may redeem time, and consecrate it to the Interest of their Souls, and
the Honor of God, namely, by exalting their minds to Heaven in frequent
Ejaculations, by Pious and Religious Discourses to one another, by easing and
assisting one another, which will make the burden of the Family lie easier on
all, and gain time to each.

Having thus showed the Obligations Servants lie under to Religion, and
answered the little Pretenses, by which they endeavor to palliate their
Coldness and Negligence, I proceed to consider the Duties, wherein their
Religion toward God consists, which are, First, such as may be called
Instrumental or Relative, as Prayer, Hearing and Reading the Word, and
Receiving the Sacrament. Secondly, Trust in God. Thirdly, Contentment. And
Fourthly, Fidelity to their Masters.

The Duty of Reading the Word.
I will begin with Reading the Word. The Book of God is a Legacy of that value,
containing not only the Wisdom of God, but the ravishing expressions of his
Love too, and in a word, the only way to Life and Immortality, that no one can
be guilty of the neglect of it, but at the same time, he must be guilty of the
most ungrateful Contempt of God, and the most sottish Contempt of his own true
Interest. This therefore is the Book which the Servant must endeavor to be
familiarly acquainted with; with some portion of this he should begin the
Morning, and close the Evening. Hence is that Wisdom to be learnt, of whose
manifold use Prove. 6.22.
Solomon speaks in those few, but weighty words, When thou go, it shall lead
thee; when thou sleep, it shall keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall
talk with thee. No Guide, no Guard, no Company, no Divertion is wanting to any
one who is instructed as he ought to be in the Book of God. Now if you would
read profitably, you must observe the Direction of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.2.
As new born babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby. When you set your self to read, endeavor to banish all unruly Lusts
and Passions, all worldly Cares and Distractions, and to possess your Soul with
an humble Awe and Reverence for the Word, as the Word of God, and with a devout
thirst for it as the Word of Life. Secondly, Be not more fond of strong Meat,
than of Milk, of Mysteries, than of practical Truths; choose especially to read
those parts of the Bible which are most plain, most practical, most moving and
affecting. Thirdly, Propose this as the chief, nay sole End of thy Reading,
that thou may grow thereby; that is, that thy Conscience may be more and
more awakened, that thy Resolutions of Obedience may be more and more
strengthened, that thy Heart may be more purified, thy Affections more exalted,
and in a word, thy Faith may be more confirmed, and thy Love of God, thy Love
of Jesus, thy Love of Heaven, and thy Love of Righteousness may be more and
more quickened and enflamed: If your leisure will permit, and you desire to join
the reading of other Books with the Bible, let 'em be but very few, very plain,
and very practical; and such, if you can find 'em, as concern more particularly
the Duties of your station, or the particular state of your Soul; for it is good
Advice, especially to persons in your circumstances, in Spiritual as well as
Temporal Affairs, 1 These. 4.11.
Study to be quiet, and to do your own business. The Catechism of Our Church is
an excellent Abridgment of Christian Faith and Practice, it is a complete System
of all necessary Catholic Doctrines, not as some others are, of the
Controverted Opinions of a Sect and Party: I would therefore recommend this to
you, as being plain, short, and free from dispute, and if well digested, you
will not want any necessary Instruction.

The same Rules, The Duty of Hearing the Word.
with little variety, are to be observed in Hearing, which were prescribed in
Reading the Word; rising something the earlier on the Sunday, that you may the
sooner dispatch your necessary business, and be the freer from any distraction,
retire, and consider with thy self the great End to which God has dedicated
that day, namely, to bless and praise him for the Redemption of the World, by
the Death and Resurrection of Jesus, to commemorate that his bitter Death and
Passion in the Holy Sacrament, to prepare our selves for a Holy Death, a
glorious Resurrection, and a Kingdom wherein dwells Righteousness, to glorify
and honor God by a solemn and public Worship of him, that so his Name may be
honored upon Earth; and finally to hear and learn his blessed Will, and to be
strengthened and comforted in our Warfare upon Earth by his heavenly Truths,
and by his great and precious Promises, and then earnestly beg of God to
dispose thy heart into such an humble and grateful frame, that thy praises and
adorations may be acceptable to him, to possess thee with such a due sense of
thy wants and infirmities, and with such a devout thirst after the Grace of God
and his Truth, that thou may pray with a steady fervency, and hear the Word
with pure attention, and devout affection. Enter into the Church as into the
House of God, and the place of his more immediate Residence: In hearing, attend
to the great End, that is, that thou may grow thereby, that some Infirmity
may be cured, some Virtue improved, some fresh Resolution formed, and in a
word, thy Soul raised into a more heavenly and holy frame; being returned home,
as soon as thou can find an opportunity, bless God that he has spoke to thy
Soul, that he has affected thee by his Word and his Spirit, and endeavor by a
solemn Review and Consideration, of those things by which thou wast most
affected, to fix 'em better in thy memory, I should have said, in thy heart;
and then lay all thy Desires and Resolutions in devout Prayers before God, and
earnestly beg and depend upon his goodness for the obtaining the one, and his
grace for the performing the other: In the evening, the last thing thou do,
call thy self to an account, look back on every part of the day, examine thy
behavior, bewail thy defects, bless God for all thy spiritual Advantages of
the day, and thou shall find unspeakable comfort and peace, thy delight in
spiritual things will increase, and thy hopes will grow up, thou will begin to
relish and anticipate the joys, and long for the possession of Heaven.

The Duty of Prayer.
Another Duty we owe to God is Prayer, concerning which, a Servant is to observe
these three or four things; First, you must endeavor to awaken a steady
Devotion in your heart, by imprinting in it a holy Reverence, and awful Dread
of the Divine Majesty, by these or the like thoughts; O God, thou art the
Eternal God, the Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth, all things are upheld by
thy Power, and filled by thy Goodness; at thy Rebuke the foundations of the
Earth will tremble, and the Heavens at the Voice of thy displeasure; all the
Nations upon Earth, are but as the Drop of the Bucket, and the Grain of the
Balance before thee; Oh what then am I a poor, despicable, sinful, and
extremely small part of 'em! O suffer me not to forget thy Majesty, suffer me
not to forget my self. Or thus, O just and holy God, thou art the Creator and
Redeemer, thou art the Judge of all Mankind, thou art the Searcher of the
Heart, and Trier of the Reins; O suffer me not to be cold or careless, much
less hypocritical in my Addresses to thee; for not only Eccl. 16.11.
mercy, but wrath is with thee; and as thou art mighty to forgive, so art thou
too to pour out displeasure. O suffer me not therefore rudely and
inconsiderately to stretch forth my hands toward thine Ark, the place where
thine Honor dwells, lest I be smitten like Uzzah, and perish in my folly. Or
thus, O Lord, thou art MY God, by thee have I been holden up ever since I was
born, thou art my God, and I will praise thee; I will love thee, O Lord my God,
for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou God of Truth, thou Rock of my
Salvation; my Soul thirsts after thee, open thou my mouth, that I may praise
thee in the joys and transports of my Soul; inflame my heart, that I may cleave
to thee by the Embraces of Love, that I may wrestle with thee by unfeigned
Faith, and devout Desire, and not let thee go till I have obtained a Blessing:
for still I have many Infirmities that will separate between thee and me, O let
me never be divided from thee; Lord, save me, or I perish. Secondly, See that
thou do nothing that is repugnant to thy Prayers, for it is in vain to beg of
God that which thou deniest thy self; nay, it is extreme Hypocrisy to importune
God for that Grace which thou do manifestly resist, or incapacitate thy self
for by thy actions; if God or his Prophet bid thee wash and be clean, it is mere
presumption to expect the Cure of thy Leprosy without the use of the means
prescribed. Thirdly, Mark the Issue and Return of thy Prayers, that thou may
be thankful as thou have been importunate for a Blessing, or if thou receive it
not, that thou may correct and reform what is amiss; it may be, thy Prayer
wants Sincerity, or it wants Faith, or there is a Babylonish Garment, and a
Wedge of Gold hid in thy Tent, some darling Lust concealed in thy bosom, or thy
Petition it self is a foolish Lust, or wanton Passion, and it is well, if it
bring not down a Curse instead of a Blessing: As to your Prayer, I think it
matters not much whether it be a form, or a sudden Effusion, provided it have
in it a steady Faith, and humble Devotion, which is the Life and Soul of
Prayer: But as far as I am able to see, good forms fitted to their necessities,
are most useful for Servants, because mental Prayer, e're it can be such as it
ought, requires good ability, solemn preparation, or at least an habitual
exaltation of mind, and takes up much time: Particular Forms suited to
particular occasions, I have endeavored to provide in this Treatise, for
general ones, Morning and Evening, you may use these which follow.

A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord my God, thou have preserved me this night, which might have been my
last, and for this my Soul blesses thee: Thou have given me another day, O give
me Grace too, to spend it so as if it were to be my last: O let it not increase
my guilt, and the number of my sins, but enable me to work in it the work for
which thou have sent me into the World, for the night comes wherein I cannot
work: The number of my sins is great enough already, they would sink my Soul
down to Hell, if the blessed Jesus had not loved me, and given himself for me;
and if thy Mercy were not as thy Majesty, that is, Infinite; for I have
forgotten thee too too often; though thou have given me my Being, and have
provided for me when there was none other to help me, I have forgotten thee,
though thou gave me thine own Son to redeem me, not only to free me from the
punishment due to my sins, but also to procure for me Life Eternal. I have
feared the displeasure of man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, more than I
have feared thine, O thou just and holy Judge of Mankind; I have been more
solicitous for the Bread that perishes, than for thy Favor, which is better
than the Life it self; and oh, well were it for me, if I had only omitted my
Duty toward thee, or performed it lifelesly or sluggishly; but woe is me, I
have despised thy Goodness and Long-suffering; I have hardened my heart against
thy Commandments, I have dealt proudly and presumptuously, and have done
wickedly, (here mention those sins which most burden thy Conscience, if thou
have any such, and particularly those of thy Service) and yet after all this,
vain and senseless Creature that I am! I have repined and murmured at thy
Providence, been discontent in my Condition, and complained of thy Dealings
toward me: It Is true, O my God, that thou of thine infinite goodness have
convinced my Conscience of sin, affected my Soul with a sorrow for it, and
wrought in me Resolutions of amendment, but oh! how many have been my falls!
how many and grievous have been my Relapses! how negligent have I been of the
Covenant of my God! Oh how soon have the tears of my Repentance dried up! how
soon has the flame of my Devotion and Love slackened, and even gone out! O God,
thou holy God, thou Witness of all my actions, and Judge of all my thoughts and
affections, what would become of me, if thou should enter into strict
Judgment with me? how should I stand before thy Tribunal covered with the guilt
and shame of so many sins! But O thou God of Mercy, O thou God and Father of my
Lord Jesus Christ, I know that thou art always ready to pardon poor Penitents,
Lord I repent, increase thou my Repentance, trouble has taken hold of me, my
Soul is cast down and disquieted within me, I am ashamed, yea even confounded,
for I do bear the Reproach of the folly and ingratitude of my sins. O be thou
reconciled to me, pardon me I beseech thee by the Merits and Intercession, by
the Agony and Passion, and by all the painful Sufferings of thy Son, pardon me,
O pardon me I beseech thee, by thine own boundless goodness, by those tender
Mercies and Compassion which thou art wont to exercise toward Repenting
sinners: And Lord, not only pardon my sins, but deliver me I beseech thee from
the Dominion and Power of 'em; O assist me to break off those Chains of carnal
Lusts, and worldly Cares, in which I have been held bound; I have a false
deceitful heart, O give me Sincerity and Truth; have a sluggish and drowsy
body, O enkindle in me fervency of spirit; I am conscious to my self of great
weakness and fraily, O do thou confirm and strengthen me who alone can; make
me a clean heart, O O God, and renew a right spirit within me; give me a true
Faith, and inflame my heart with a holy Love, that I may delight my self in thy
Commandments, that I may walk before thee in uprightness, and fear, diligently
seeking thee, constantly depending upon thee, cheerfully submitting to thy
Will, and doing the Duty of my place in singleness of heart, as knowing that I
shall be accountable to thee, as well for those Duties which I owe Man, as for
those which are more immediately to be paid to thee: O Lord, keep me that my
foot stray not out of the path of Justice; O Lord keep me that I offend not
with my Tongue, and after I have done all, O Lord, suffer me not to fall short
of my Reward through my pride or ingratitude, but make me always thankful,
always humble, neither defrauding thee of the Praise due to thine infinite
Bounty and Mercy, nor Man of the Thanks due to him, for any act of kindness or
charity toward me; help me, O my God, to walk thus, that my Soul may enjoy a
true Liberty, that my Life may be full of comfort, my Death of peace, and my
Eternity of glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And, O my God, bless not me only, but this whole Family, thou that art the God
of Love, the God of Peace, sow in all our hearts the seeds of unfeigned
Charity, that we may all enjoy the comfort of a mutual Affection, and of a
mutual Assistance and Aid in our several places; and Lord possess every Soul of
this Family with a just sense of our Duty toward God and Man, that all of us
may be living Members of thy blessed Son, and being protected by thy
Providence, directed by thy Word, and assisted by the Influence of thy Spirit,
we may all at last meet in the Family of Heaven, where we shall adore and
praise thee, love and enjoy thee to all Eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer for the Evening.
O My God, my Strength, and the Rock of my Salvation, the Day is past, and the
Evening is come, O give me grace to remember, that this Life will one time be
past, and Death will come, that I may live so, that my work may be then finished
as it is this day, and I may have nothing else to do, but go to my Rest, where I
shall be invested with Liberty and Glory, Eternal, Eternal! O blessed Wages of
a short Life's service! how does my Soul praise thee, O Lord, in Transports, and
even Ecstasies! thou have called me indeed to be a Servant, but thou have called
me too to be a Son; thou have not indeed given me any great portion of the
Wealth or Honor of this Life, but thou have given me the blessed Jesus to be
my Redeemer, and thy holy Spirit to be my Sanctifier; O do but ever continue
thus to me, the Light of thy Countenance, thy Grace and thy Truth, and I shall
never think my self to stand in need of any thing that the World admires; but O
my God, how often are these my Comforts abated, nay even interrupted! how often
is this blessed, this cheerful Light obscured and orecast by my infirmities and
sins! my sins the only causes that keep good things from me; my sins the only
real troubles of my Life! Thus, O my God, though I renewed my Covenant with
thee but this morning, though I devoted my self to thee, vowing Obedience to
thee, and faithfulness to my Master, yet have I prevaricated my Duty, (here
mention the Errors and Infirmities of the day past) have mercy upon me, O
Lord, have mercy upon me, and forgive me these, and all other my offenses, and
give me grace to keep my self upon my watch and guard against them: Enable me
sincerely to endeavor to repair and reform 'em as much as in me lies, that I
may every day grow and increase in goodness, and be so much the fiter for
Death, the nearer I do every day approach to it, and whenever it comes, let it
find me, O Lord, with my Loins girt, and my Lamp burning, in a disposition and
frame of spirit fit to die, possessed with an unshaken Faith, with an humble
Resignation and Submission of Mind, with a holy Contempt of Earth, and a devout
Love of Heaven: In the mean time, thou, keeper of Israel, thou who never
slumbrest nor sleep, watch over me, and this whole Family, protecting and
delivering us in our coming in, and going out; particularly, let thine Angels
pitch their Tents about us this night; let us lie down securely; and let our
sleep be sweet to us, for thou Lord shall make us dwell in safety. Amen, Amen,
Blessed Jesus.

If any one expects from me Directions here for Mental or Extemporary Prayers,
I must tell 'em freely, that little less than a Volume much bigger than I
purpose this, is sufficient for such an undertaking. What I have to say in a
word here is this, they who would be extremely devout, must be extremly pious;
they who would find the pleasure of transports in Prayer, must be frequent in
their Retirements, strict in their Self-denial and Mortification, devout, if it
may be, even in their daily Conversation: In a word, they must be crucified to
the World, and delight in God and in Jesus above all things.

The Servants Duty, as it respects their Obligation to, and Preparation for the
Sacrament, shall be handled at large in the close of this Book.

I have insisted thus long upon these Duties, because whoever conscienciously
performs these, will not be like to miscarry in any other; I will now single
out those other Duties which do seem to me more peculiarly to concern Servants;
for as there are some times, so there are some stations which do more
particularly require the practice of some Virtues, as Adversity of Patience,
Prosperity of Thankfulness. The station of a Magistrate requires the practice
of Justice, and the station of a Subject the practice of Loyalty; and both the
one and the other is bound to this out of Conscience toward God: So is it in
the station of a Servant, though he must not look upon himself as dispensed from
any Duty common to him with others, yet there are some wherein he must
endeavor to excel and be eminent, as being more immediately and directly
necessary in his Employment; such are these three, Fidelity to his Master,
dependence upon God, The Servant's Fidelity to his Master a Duty owing to God.
and Contentment in his station. First, Fidelity to his Master; I place this
first, because all his Prayers and Sacrifices without this, cannot be accepted
by God; his diligence in reading and hearing the Word is, without this,
Hypocrisy; and his communicating of the Sacrament is, without this, but a bold
and presumptuous profanation of it: And I place this here as a Duty toward
God, because I would have every Servant know that it really is so; nothing can
be plainer than that the Ephesians. 6.5, etc.
Apostle thought so, which you will readily acknowledge, if you will read with
impartiality, that weighty and earnest Exhortation which he makes to Servants,
Ephesians. 6.5, etc. Servants, be obedient to them that are your Masters according to
the flesh, in fear and trembling, with singleness of your heart, as unto
Christ; not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ,
doing the Will of God from the heart; with good will, doing service as to the
Lord, and not to men; knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same
shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. How could the Apostle
more fully or more pathetically express your Obedience to your Masters to be a
duty to God? he tells you, that the discharge of your Place is a good work,
that God owns it, and will reward it as a Service done to him; that it does
very much concern the Honor of your Christian Profession, that the Rule by
which you are to behave your selves, is the Conscience of its being a Duty
toward God, a firm persuasion, that you are to be accountable for it to Christ
our Lord and Master, and our Judge; and for these Reasons, you are to perform
this Duty with fear and trembling, that is, not an apprehension of what you
shall suffer in your Temporal Interest, if you perform it not faithfully, but a
dread of dishonouring Christ, and provoking God by it. Those other Properties
of the right performance of this Duty, singleness of heart, cheerfulness, etc.
as they respect your Duty toward your Master, shall be treated in their proper
place. I am only here to mind you, that they are here pressed upon you as
Duties to God; the Apostle intimating, that where the Master's Eye could not,
there God's Eye would see, regard and mark the behavior of the Servant; and
that though his heart were not open to the inspection of his Master, yet it is
to God's; and therefore he must serve his Master from his heart too: He that is
acted by such a Conscience as this, will certainly do his Duty; for when he
shall think that God overlooks him, and fills every place which his Master
cannot, he cannot then easily be tempted to allow himself in murmuring, or
unfaithfulness, or idleness: Whatever he would not do or say, if his Master's
Eye were upon him, that being governed by this Conscience, he will not do, how
far soever he be absent; for he will fear Damnation more than the loss of his
Service, and the displeasure of God more than that of Man.

A second Duty toward God, which I would recommend to Servants, is, 2. Trust
in God.
Trust in him, or dependence upon him. There is no state so secure or so
fortunate, as not to stand in need of God, and consequently none wherein this
is not a proper Duty: But yet, it seems most proper and indispensible for such
as have fewest Friends, fewest supports to rely upon, and such are Servants;
they are therefore to endeavor to be eminent in this Grace; there is no way,
by which they can more directly and immediately own God, by which they can make
a more public and eminent Profession of their firm Belief of his Wisdom, Power
and Goodness. The Servant therefore must learn to look upon God as his Father,
as his Patron, as his Guardian, as all in all to him; to him he must resort for
Counsel, to him he must complain if wronged, of him he must beg assistance, and
on him alone he must rely for a blessing in all he does, and for Provision: He
must learn to call upon him in all his Straits, and praise him in all his
Enjoyments. From the conscientious practice of this Duty, the Master will reap
two great Advantages; the first, that his Servant will do his Duty with much
better courage, as aiming in all he does, to recommend himself not only to his
Master, whose power to requite him is, it may be very little, but most
especially to God, who, he knows, is a Patron that never wants either power or
will to recompense those that apply themselves to him: The second, that God
will bless him and all he has for his Servants sake: This was the Advantage
which Potiphar enjoyed in the Service of Joseph and Laban, in that of Jacob;
the Prosperity of those Idolaters being owing to the Religion of their
Servants; the Servant, besides the contentment and satisfaction of his mind
arising from his frequent Addresses to God; and besides the actual blessings
which God will one time or other certainly bestow upon those that trust in him,
will also find a good support, a ready Antidote against all the real and
imaginary Evils of his state: For, were but this Duty of Trust in God
conscientiously practiced, Servants of ability and spirit would never want
encouragement, nor those of meaner Capacity satisfaction and comfort: They who
served in hope, would be able in despite of an ill face and appearance of
their present Circumstances, to carry their prospect farther, and believe their
Advancement very easy to God, though it scarce appeared probable to the Eye of
Man; and they whose Ambition mounts no higher than a mean Service, would not be
frightened by fears of want in Sickness or in Age, as being fully persuaded that
God cares for them. Having said this, I cannot think it necessary to stir you
up to trust in God by any new Motives; for the two which I have insinuated are,
methinks, abundantly sufficient, namely, first, the pleasure and satisfaction
of mind that springs from it, in that it gives men an unshaken support and
security in a troublesome and uncertain World; hence that of the Psalm. 4.8.
Psalmist, I will both lay me down in peace and sleep, for thou only make me
dwell in safety. And hence it is, that a fearless Security, even amongst the
Menaces and Allarms of approaching Dangers, is by the Psalmist made the
Character of one that trusts in God, Psalm. 112.17.
He will not be afraid of any evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the
Lord. A second Motive is the actual Benefit this Trust procures you, namely,
Relief in all your Wants, and Deliverance in all your Dangers; for this is that
the Scripture teaches us; Psalm. 34.10.
Fear the Lord ye his Saints; for there is no want to them that fear him: The
young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not
want any good thing. And so Psalm. 46.1. God is our Refuge and Strength; a very
present help in trouble. O that you would be persuaded to make a Trial of the
Pleasure and Happiness of this Duty, that you would experience the blessedness
of that state, wherein a man has nothing to do, but Psalm. 4.5.
to sacrifize the Sacrifice of Righteousness, and put his Trust in the Lord.

A third great Duty of the Servant toward God, 3. Contentment in his place.
is Contentment in his place; this is a Duty necessary to your own Happiness,
necessary to the Service of your Master, and necessary to the Honor of God; To
your own Happiness, for though your Circumstances be never so good, yet if you
do not think 'em so, you must needs be uneasy; and discontent doubles the
weight and burden of any Service; To the Service of your Master, for you can
never serve him well, if you do not serve him cheerfully, and from the heart,
which you can never do, whilst you are sick of your Employment. Lastly, To the
Honor of God, which requires, that you submit to the Wisdom of his Providence,
and not murmr and repine at his Dispensations: This Humility is a Virtue so
consonant to common Reason, that it is just matter of wonder how any should be
guilty of the contrary; for though we should not be able to give a Reason of
God's dealings with us, yet sure the Reverence we have for his Infinite Wisdom,
and the persuasion we have of his Infinite Goodness, may easily induce us to
believe, that he has always a kind and good Reason for what he does; and
surely, you that look upon it as your Duty, to execute the Commands of your
Masters, without demanding the Reasons or Motives of 'em, cannot but think it
reasonable to treat God with as much Reverence and Humility as you do a mortal
man. I might in the next place, put you in mind, that all we possess is owing
merely to the favor of God, not to your Merit, and that he that has least, has
much more than he deserves, and if so, you have no reason to complain of him,
as if he had dealt niggardly with you, because he has dealt more bountifully
with others; May he not do what he will with his own? but there are two Motives
to Contentment, which I would more especially recommend to you; One is, that
whatever you undergo in this World, shall be made up and recompensed to you a
hundredfold in another, if you suffer with Meekness, Patience and Humility: So
that this state of Humiliation does but put you into a capacity of greater
degrees of Glory hereafter. The other is, that if you consider your state
aright, you have no reason at all of murmuring against God, as dealing
unequally with you; for in all these things, which are substantially good and
valuable, he has dealt as bountifully with you as with others: You enjoy the
Light of the Sun; the Beauties of the Creation are as much exposed to your
view, as to any Monarch's, the freshness of the Air, the coolness of the
Stream, the fragrancy of the Spring are imparted as bountifully to you, as any
others whoever. You have Rational and Immortal Spirits, healthy, strong and
active Bodies; the Food that is best for health, the Raiment that is best for
for warmth, is every where to be had; the things wherein God has made a
difference between you and others, are trifles, imaginary, and fantastic, not
real Advantages; but you take pains for what you have; your Labor is not half
so great a burden to you, as is their Idleness to them: But even of those
things which I call substantial blessings, they enjoy more than you. It Is true,
but you enjoy enough, and more than enough, like Manna, breeds but Worms, that
is, troubles and cares: And this puts me in mind that the state of a Servant
has some Advantages really and truly above that of a Master. Not to mention
that Obedience it self is not only a much plainer, but also a much easier Duty
than Government, that it has nothing in it disobliging, or unkind, as Reproof,
Chastisement, and putting away of Servants has, that it is no way responsible
for the discretion of its actions, etc. not to mention, I say, these and such
like Advantages which you possess, there are others of greater importance. You
enjoy the World without the Cares of it; Storms sink no Ships of yours, nor
scorching Vapors blast your Fruit or Corn; the Turns and Changes of Fortune
concern you very little, or not at all; and I do very much question, whether
your travail and labor, as well as your care, be not much less than that of
many Masters. It Is true, there are a sort of men who account Idleness and
Looseness as the Prerogatives of an ample Fortune, envy 'em not; you ought
rather to bless God that he has hedged in your ways, that he has put you in a
state of Life, wherein it is extremely difficult for you to be large or
intemrate, to be proud or wanton; for surly it is a blessed Advantage belonging
to your condition, that it has fewer incitements to sin, and more to Virtue
than that of the Rich and Great: But of this I have discoursed at large in the
beginning of this Chapter. There remains then nothing for you to quarrel at, in
the condition and quality of a Servant, unless you think it too mean and
contemptible for you in the Eye of the World; but why should you think that
Condition too mean for you, which our dear Lord thought not too mean for him?
For he came in the form of a Servant, Phil. 2. But if this trouble you, I have
showed you before an infallible way of redeeming your selves from Contempt;
namely, by a Religious and excellent Behavior; for true Virtue is much more
honorable than Nobility of Blood, or Ampleness of Fortune.

A Prayer for Contentment in your Condition.
O Eternal and gracious Lord God, before whom a meek and humble spirit is of
great price; O God who give Grace to the humble, but resistest the proud,
keep me, I beseech thee, from pride and frowardness, from discontent and
murmuring, and give me a meek and humble spirit: Make me adore thy Wisdom and
Goodness in every dispensation of thy Providence, and cheerfully submit to thy
Will, and follow thy Conduct. O suffer me not to despise or murmr at that
state, which my great Lord and Master honored, by taking it upon himself, for
he came not to be ministered to, but to minister. Make me always thankful to
thee for those Real Advantages which I enjoy in this state; thou have given me
all the necessary Comforts of Life without the Cares and Troubles of it; thou
have hedged in my ways, and kept me from Idleness, and Worldly and Carnal Lusts
by my Necessities and indispensible Restraints of my Calling. O never suffer me
to break through all these to commit sin, and die. O grant, that since my
station has fewer Temptations to sin, and more Encouragements to Virtue than
that of others, I may be so much more eminent and exemplary than others in all
virtuous and holy living, as knowing my offense more inexcusable: So shall I
ever have reason to bless thy Love for the meanness and necessities of my
state, when they shall have made me rich in goodness, then shall I adore and
magnify thy Love for those Restraints and Confinements thou have put upon me,
when they shall prove the meanest Instruments of my Eternal Preservation and
Safety, then shall I adore thy Mercy for the bodily hardships of my Service,
when they shall prove to me an excellent Discipline, to train me up to Virtue
and Glory. Amen, so be it blessed Jesus.

A Prayer for Fidelity to your Master, and Trust in God.
O Holy and Righteous God, whose Eyes are set upon the Righteous, and thine
Ears are always open to their Prayers, who feedest those that fear thee, and
art a present help in time of trouble, possess me, I humbly beseech thee, with
such a sincere Faith in all thy Promises, with such a firm persuasion of thy
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, that I may ever trust and rely upon thee, as my
God and my Savior; and O let me never be ashamed of my hope in thee, nor let
my distrustful or fearful heart ever give thee occasion to be ashamed to be
called my God: And because, O Lord, the Sacrifices of the wicked are an
abomination to thee, and the Prayers of the unjust a mere profanation of thy
holy Name, therefore I beseech thee, let thy fear be before mine Eyes, and make
me faithful and diligent in the station to which it has pleased thee to call
me. I know O Lord, that thou art a holy and a righteous God, and an Avenger of
all Covenant-breakers: O suffer me not therefore to fall into breach of Trust
with Man, lest I fall under the Vengeance of my God. I know, that my Duty
toward my Master is one great part of my Religion toward thee, O suffer me
not by idleness or falsehood to lose the Eternal Reward of my Service: I know, O
Lord, that all things are naked and bare before thee, and that though my
Master's Eye cannot, yet thine does in all times, and in all places, behold me,
that thou may render to me according to my works: O how fatal then must that
Laziness prove, for which I must be condemned to everlasting pain? O how fatal
must my frauds be, since though I may deceive my Master, I cannot thee? Lord,
therefore enable me so to serve with fear and trembling, and singleness of
heart, that I may have a good ground to trust and depend upon thee, for
protection and provision in this World, and for reward in another, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer for right performance of Instrumental or Relative Duties.
O Lord my God, I know that my Lamp will soon go out, unless there be Oil to
feed it; that my Graces will soon languish, unless they be nourisht and
refresht by thy Word and Sacraments; I know, O Lord, that my spiritual life, my
corporal life cannot be upheld, but by a daily supply, a supply of thy Grace,
the life and strength of my Soul; and I know, that this is not in thy ordinary
course otherwise to be obtained, than by fervent Prayer, awful Meditatation of
thy Word, and a devout and frequent Use of the Communion: I beseech thee
therefore, O my God, not only that thou would imprint upon my heart a just
sense of the necessity of these Duties, but also that thou would instruct
and assist me, that I may perform 'em devoutly and conscientiously, and
persevere in them constantly to my life's end. O do thou teach me to pray in
contrite groans, and transporting love. O do thou open my heart, that it may
receive thy Word with true Faith, and devout Affection; O do thou raise in me
such a grateful passion for the love of Jesus, that I may not only commemorate
his Death in joy and tears, but meet him with ardent love, and be inseparably
united to him, and he to me. But, O my God, how often shall I fall short of
this through my own default? Ah how seldom shall I come up to it? O therefore
pardon, pardon the infirmities of thy Servant! Ah! pardon me my want of
preparation to these Duties, my heaviness and distraction in 'em, and whatever
mixtures of other frailties may cleave to them; and however weak my
performances may be, let 'em not be wholly unprofitable, let 'em at least beget
in me Humility, clearer Convictions of my spiritual Poverty and Weakness,
greater Watchfulness, and new Resolutions for the time to come; and all this, I
most earnestly and most humbly beg for the sake of Jesus Christ my Lord.

CHAP. II. Of the Servant's Duty toward his Master and Mistress, consisting in
Obedience, Faithfulness, Love.
I Think, Injustice or Uncharitableness in Servants implies a double guilt.
nothing can be more evident, than that every Servant owes his Master and
Mistress in the first place all those Duties, at least, which every Man owes
another, whether he be Friend or Enemy, Neighbor or Stranger, namely, Truth,
Justice and Charity; nay, I believe, all will readily confess, that the
transgression of these Duties in Servants toward their Masters and Mistresses,
has many more and greater Aggravations in it, than any Error of this kind, in
one Man toward another; for the nearer any Relation is, the stricter is its
obligation to those Virtues. Two things do evidently aggravate the guilt of a
Servants Injustice or Uncharitableness: First, Trust reposed in Servants makes
it much more easy for them to do wrong, and much more difficult for their
Masters to guard themselves against it. Secondly, The Obligation Servants lie
under to Gratitude for the Benefits they enjoy, and to Fidelity enjoined 'em by
the Law of God and Nature, must needs render any wrong they do their Masters or
Mistresses, a more abominable Crime in the sight of God and Man, as being not
only a sin of Injustice and Uncharitableness, which is of it self a sin big
enough to damn any man; but also of the foulest Ingratitude, and basest
Treachery and Perfidiousness: This, I would have well considered, because, if
it were, it would make Servants dread the commission of some Crimes which they
seem not to have that sense of, which they ought: Such are for instance,
raising Dissension and Feuds in the Family, by lying and whispering. Secondly,
Blasting the Credit and Reputation of their Masters and Mistresses, whether by
false or true Reports; the guilt of these practices will be evident to him who
considers. The spreading Report, though true, to another's disadvantage, is
uncharitableness in any man; but in a Servant, it is not only a breach of
Charity, but of Faith and Secrecy too, and the blackest Ingratitude to boot;
and if it be a sin to spread an Uncharitable Truth, how much a greater to forge
a Malicious Lie? For one Neighbor or one Stranger to belie or slander another
by a false Charge, is an effect and property not only of a mean, but devilish
spirit; what name then can this sin find, when a Master or a Mistress is thus
treated by a Servant, who lies under not only the general Obligations of
Charity, Truth and Justice, but also more particular, and if it can be more
sacred ones, of Secrecy, Faith and Gratitude? The same thing may be said of
kindling strife; for if it be a heinous wickedness in any one to stir up
Contention by Lying and Whispering, how much more in a Servant, who is so
strictly obliged to preserve the Peace of the Family he lives in?

The very same is the case of a Servant in all other Injuries committed against
his Master; they are not only Violations of his Christian Profession, (as every
act of Injustice or Uncharitableness in all other men is) but also of the
particular Obligations of his Calling; and therefore such sins, as they have
greater aggravations, so shall they receive greater punishment than other
men's: This is extremely necessary to be remembered, that, as you have easier
opportunities of doing wrong, so you may also have greater dread and horror of
it, as looking upon every Injury that were but a single act of Injustice or
Defect of Charity in others, as a Complication of sins and villainies in you,
being a transgression not only of your Duty as Christians, but as Servants too.
Having laid this before you, as a strong Engagement to a most strict and
conscientious discharge of your Duty, I come now in the

Second place, to consider the particulars of this Duty. I might sum up all, as
our Savior does, under one Virtue of Faithfulness, for he makes a Good and
Faithful Servant to be terms equivalent, Matthew. 25. Well done good and faithful
Servant. But that you may more fully and distinctly comprehend the whole of
your Duty, I will speak of it under these three Heads; 1. Obedience. 2.
Faithfulness. 3. Love.

First therefore of Obedience: 1 Obedience.
This is that which constitutes the very nature of Service: Right to command
makes a Master, and obligation to obey a Servant; that Subjection which the
Centurion describes, Luke 7.8. I say unto one, go, and he goes, and to another
come, and he comes; and to my Servant, do this, and he does it, is an
indispensible Duty of every one that professes himself a Servant. This, Reason
teaches us, His Servants ye are, Rom 6.6.
to whom ye obey: And the very nature of the Covenant between the Master and
his Servant implies this, Obedience on the one hand, and maintenance on the the
other. God does strictly exact this Duty of Servants, and that upon pain of
damnation to the transgressor, and promise of an Eternal Reward to the observer
of it. Thus Col. 3.22, etc. Servants obey in all things your Masters according
to the flesh, not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart
fearing God. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, and not
unto men: Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the Reward of the
Inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ: But he that does wrong, shall
receive for the wrong which he has done; and there is no respect of persons. To
the same purpose is Ephesians. 6.5. 1 Pet. 2.18. and innumerable other Texts of
Scripture; by all this put together, you may easily discern how grievous a sin
the Disobedience of Servants is, it is a downright contempt of God's revealed
Will; it is a violation of the Law of Nature, disturbing that just and wise
Government which the Providence of God has introduced into the World, by that
difference he has put between the several Ranks of Mankind; it is a manifest
breach of the Servant's Covenant which he entered into with his Master, and by
consequence, the Disobedient Servant has no right to the Bread he eats, or to
the Wages he receives, and he can expect nothing from God, who is the Supreme
Lord of all, and by whose Appointment, the Distinction and Order which now is
in the World was established; but some severe Judgment, as upon an unrighteous
person, and a Covenant-breaker; and it is no wonder, that God should so strictly
exact this Duty, or so severely punish the Violation of it; for this sin of
Disobedience proceeds from Pride, or Frowardness, or Idleness, and ends in
Wrath, and Contention, and Confusion.

Nor is the Spirit of God in Scripture content only to enjoin Servants
Obedience, The properties of this Obedience.
but it takes care to acquaint 'em, what kind of Obedience this must be: First,
It must be in all things, that is, all things that are not repugnant to the
Will of God, who is our supreme Master; or the Laws of the Land, which are
stamped with an Authority superior to that of their Master in all things else.
Servants are not to dispute nor interpret, but obey the Commands of their
Master, for they are not to answer for the discretion or reasonableness of his
Commands. Their Obedience Secondly, must be in singleness of heart, not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers. He is a very ill Servant who obeys only when his
disobedience cannot be concealed or excused; for at this rate, the Master would
be the greatest Drudge in his Family, and the Care and Toil of overseeing
others in their work, would be more intolerable than the work it self. Thirdly,
This Obedience must be performed from the heart; the Servant must not only do
his Duty, and do it honestly, but he must do it willingly and cheerfully,
without this he will not be like to be very prosperous, exact, or diligent in
his Service; nor can his Service prove very acceptable to his Master; for to
all ingenious Tempers, the Affection and Zeal of a Servant is as valuable as
his Service; so that for want of this, he will incur two great Evils, his
Labor will be harder, and his Reward will be less: To all this, must be added
Fourthly, Humility; Self-conceit and Impatience are the most improper qualities
in a Servant imaginable; for what can be more absurd than Pride and Wilfulness
in one whose very profession it is to obey? These are grievous sins in any
Fortune, but more extremely grievous in a low one. The Scripture therefore does
not permit the Servant to answer again when reproved or blamed; nay, what is
more, it commands him to behave himself respectfully toward the froward and
peevish, as well as mild and gentle Master, and to 1 Pet. 2.
suffer patiently when he suffers wrongfully.

That you may perform this Duty as you ought, Means of performing this Duty.
you are to endeavor to persuade your selves, that an humble, honest, and
cheerful Obedience, is the glory of a Servant; that this is as much the honor
of your station, as Prudence, Liberality and Gentleness is of the Masters: That
the meanness of any business you are employed in, cannot so much disparage you,
as Murmuring and Pride; for it is the Master's, not the Servant's dishonor, if
he exacts what is not fit or becoming at the hands of his Servant: No Servant
can ever loose himself by his Humility, for he may with expressions of respect
and kindness quit his Service when he will, and so avoid any Rudeness or
Indecency; nor can I possibly conceive, that this course can be prejudicial to
any Servant, for let the Servant be of the highest Rank, and the business
commanded of the lowest and meanest, any man may do that once or twice out of
Humility, which yet he cannot take upon him as his constant work without the
imputation of Pusillanimity or meanness of Spirit. Secondly, The Servant must
endeavor to entertain a good Opinion of, and Value for his Master, for
otherwise it will not be easy to obey those whom you can think reasonable to
despise. Thirdly, And above all, the Servant must persuade himself, that he
obeys God in obeying his Master; he must look upon himself as placed in this
station by God, and he must look upon his Master as invested with Authority
over him by God, and this will be an encouragement to him to do his Duty, and a
comfort and support to him when he suffers wrongfully.

A second Duty which a Servant owes his Master is Faithfulness, 2 Faithfulness.
a Duty without which it is impossible that the Master can enjoy any real
pleasure or satisfaction, or the Servant any peace of Conscience; for how can
the Master's mind be at ease, if he be not secure of the Faith of those of his
own Family, but must needs suspect those whom he must needs trust? and what an
ulcer'd gauled Conscience must that Servant have, who dwells continually under
the Roof, and eats daily of the Bread of that man whom he wrongs and injures,
where every thing he does or sees calls his sin to remembrance, and every
Benefit, every Favor is a Reproach, and a stab to his Soul? Now this Fidelity
is to be practiced in all those things, wherein the Master is capable of
receiving any Benefit by the Faith, or suffering any wrong by the Falsehood of
his Servant; and besides this, it ought to be understood, that Fidelity obliges
the Servant not only, not to do his Master any wrong himself, but also not to
suffer any others to do him any. Fidelity taken in this large extent
compreprehends a great many Duties of the Servant toward his Master. As for
Example, Fidelity toward his Master's Soul.
First, That he endeavor, as far as it lies in him, to promote the Virtue, and
procure the Salvation of his Master, for this is his truest and greatest
Interest: This he may effect, partly by Prayer to God for him, partly by Advice
and good Discourse; if his Master give him any such opportunity, or admit him
into any such freedom: Partly like Serapion, by the Example of an excellent
Life, but if he cannot serve him this way, he must at least take care that he
be not guilty of the contrary; he must not be an Incentive to, or Instrument of
his sin; he must not be a Contriver of, or Purveyor for his Lust; he must not
flatter and applaud him in his wickedness; for this is the worst sort of
unfaithfulness, the betraying the very Soul of his Master, and how wretched a
state does the Servant reduce himself to by this perfidiousness, if his Master
never repents, he has drawn upon his own Soul the guilt of his Damnation; if he
do repent, he draws upon himself his Masters perpetual contempt and aversion.
Secondly, Toward the Peace and Honor of his Master.
The Servant must endeavor to preserve the Peace and Honor of his Master, for
these things are or should be dear to every one next to his Soul and Virtue.
Now the Peace of a Master may be disturbed either by the Contentions of those
of his Family amongst themselves, or by their unkindness and undutifulness
toward himself; the Servant therefore who by lies or slanders, by vile
whisperings and informations does alienate the Affections of the Family, or any
Member of it, from their Head, or sets them at variance between one another, is
guilty of the blackest treachery, for he perfidiously robs his Master of the
Peace of his mind, and the Affections of those of his Household, than both
which, nothing can be dearer to him: Nor is this all the aggravation of this
sin, for it loads the perfidious wretch with all the guilt of the numerous and
great mischiefs which always may, and very often do ensue upon the Contentions
and Divisions of Families. In a word, such a one draws upon himself the Wrath
of God, and as soon as he is discovered, the displeasure and hatred of the
whole Family. As to the Honor of their Master or Mistress, it may be wounded
by the Servant two ways. First, by speaking ill of 'em either abroad or at
home; or else Secondly, by promoting that Immorality in the Family, which must
necessarily tend to their disparagement and scandal: They therefore that will
be Faithful in this point, must be so far from making the faults of their
Master or Mistress public, that if it be possible, they must not see 'em
themselves; they must be so far from making 'em the subject of their discourse
abroad, that they must vindicate 'em all that possibly they can; nay, they must
not endure any such sort of Talk at home; they must no more connive at a
Fellow Servants that wrongs their Master or Mistress in their Honor, than if
they did wrong 'em in their Goods; they must excuse whatever will admit of
excuse, what will not, they must hate but not spread or censure; by doing this,
a Servant shall gain true Honor to himself, while he preserves his Masters;
for though the ill temper of some people be such, that they are pleased with
malicious Informations, with spiteful and slanderous Discoveries, yet I never
knew any temper so bad, that loved the Informer, if a Servant; for they cannot
but judge Ingratitude and Treachery as odious Vices in him, as are any that he
condemns in his Master. Toward the goods and possessions of his Master.
The Third and last thing wherein the Faithfulness of a Servant is required, is
the goods and possessions of the Master; in these the Servant must not wrong
his Master, neither by theft, nor fraud, nor wast, nor must he suffer others to
do so, for all this is downright Injustice, and expressly forbid by Almighty
God. Thus Titus 2.10. They are forbid to purloin, as being directly contrary to
that Faithfulness which they are commanded to show; nor is the consuming the
Master's goods by Riot and Intemperance, by unnecessary Wast, or by Sloth and
Carelessness, one jot a less sin than Theft or Fraud. The unjust Steward in the
Gospel, Luke 16. is accused, that he had wasted his Masters goods; and under
the Law, if Parents had brought a Son before the Congregation, and accused him
of these Crimes, he was to be stoned. Deuteronomy. 21.20.
This our Son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our Voice; he is a
glutton and a drunkard; and all the men of his City shall stone him with stones
that he die. And surely a wicked and slothful Servant is no less punishable
than a wicked and slothful Son. I will insist a little longer upon the
Servant's Duty in this point of Justice, both because the Servant is more apt
to offend this way, being betrayed by the Temptation either of profit or
pleasure, and because the Master is wont to resent offenses of this nature most
heinously, and to account 'em as the worst of Injuries he is capable of
suffering by his Servant, not (I hope) that he does esteem his Goods above his
Soul or his Honor, or above the Virtue and Peace of his Family, but because he
is less able to secure the one than the other against the perfidiousness of
Servants; for if he be a good man, he will easily be able to secure himself and
his Family against the slander by which any Servant endeavors to blast his
Honor, or against the Lies and Whispers by which he endeavors to breed
discontent, or against the Infection of his ill Morals; but there is no way to
secure himself against the wrongs which he may suffer by the Fraud and
Purloyning, by the Wast and Riot, or by the Sloth and Negligence of an
unfaithful Servant.

First therefore of Purloyning. of Purloining.
By this is to be understood, the converting the goods of your Master to your
own use; you cannot be so ignorant as not to know, that this is downright
Theft, and forbid by an express Commandment, Thou shall not steal: Nor can you
be ignorant, that Theft is a Crime of the foulest nature, as being not only
repugnant to the excellencies and perfections of Christianity, but even to the
common Morality of Heathens, to the natural Law of Justice, Thou shall do to
others, as thou would be done by; and you cannot but know, how outragiously
you would your selves resent such an Injury; for if you love the World so well,
as to venture the being damned for it, it is easy for me to conclude, how
grievously you would take it, to be robbed of it by another. How vile a sin
this is, in the Opinion of others, may easily be inferred from the indelible
stain and infamy which sticks upon it amongst all people, and from the severe
punishments pronounced against it in all civilized Nations; but most of all,
from the punishment which a wise and a merciful, as well as just God adjudges
it to. The punishment in the Old Testament, you may read, Exodus 22. But that
which most concerns you, is that of the New, which is exclusion from the
Kingdom of Heaven, and Eternal Imprisonment in Hell, in the Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone for ever. 1. Cor. 6.9.10.
Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither Fornicators, etc. nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. How grievous a
sin this is, all this may sufficiently convince you, and should methinks strike
a guilty Soul with horror and amazement; but some peradventure make less
Conscience to rob their Master than another man: How impudent a folly is this?
Can you think, that he by becoming your Master forfeits his Right and Property,
and is no longer under the fence and protection of the Laws of God? or can you
think, that you, by becoming a Servant, gain a License to commit that sin with
Impunity, which you could not have otherwise done without incurring Damnation?
Is not the Injustice the same? Is not the wrong the Master suffers notorious?
Nay, I must be free to tell you, that though the Injustice and Wrong be the
same, the guilt and sin of Theft is not the same in a Stranger and a Servant:
Or do thou think that base Ingratitude, and perfidious breach of Trust, adds
nothing to the guilt of the Injustice? Poor creature! Do thou not see, how
vile a sin thou do commit, a sin that nothing can attend, if it have it is
due, but reproach and infamy, bodily punishment according to Law, and, if not
repented of, Eternal Damnation? Nay do thou not discern what a heap of sins
thou art guilty of in one, Ingratitude, breach of Trust, Lying, and, it may be,
Perjury together with Injustice in every single act of this sort of Theft? And
what art thou to gain by all this? What is it that thou expectest as the price
of thy Honor, thy Life and thy Soul? It Is very often something so little, that
were it not for fear of thy being plunged by degrees in greater mischiefs, thy
Master would hardly think it worth his taking notice of: But be it what it
will, it can be but some small portion of thy Master's Wealth, and art not thou
a poor and desperate Slave indeed, who art content to sell, not thy Strength
and thy Liberty, but thy Credit, thy Blood and thy Soul at so vile, so cheap, a
Rate? After all, do but consider, what it is that moves thee, that draws thee
on to this sin, and thou shall find, that it is to gratify some other as bad
as it self; for what is it that thou do want? Food and Raiment is provided
for thee, thou must therefore either steal to gratify thy Covetousness, and
this is downright Idolatry in thee, or thou must steal out of distrust, and to
secure thy self against thy Infidel fears of Poverty hereafter. Unhappy
creature! who can not rely upon God, even when thou art provided for! What
could thou do worse than this, if thou were destitute of any provision? How
great a distrust of God, how vile and impious a piece of Infidelity is this?
And how great is the sin of Distrust and Infidelity without any extraordinary
aggravations? Revel 21.8.
The fearful and unbelieving, etc. shall have their part in the Lake which
burns with Fire and Brimstone. Or Lastly, Thou must steal to feed some other
Lust, such as Riot, Uncleanness, or the like, and then in what a course of
wickedness art thou engaged? Thou art then to satisfy, not only the
Extravagancies of thy own, but of others Lusts, and thou make thy self a
Slave to all that are thy Confederates in sin; nay, they are the Masters of thy
Reputation, thy Fortune, and thy Life; and when thou considerest what loose and
debauched wretches thou do trust these thy dear Concerns with, thou can not
but think thy self as desperate a Fool, as thou art desperately wicked: So
that, as to this end of thy Theft, the gratifying some wild and lewd
Affections, the more thou do succeed in it, the more desperate and deplorable
is thy state: The two other ends, namely, the satisfaction of thy Covetousness,
or thy security against future want, are in all probability subverted and
defeated by that very sin, by which thou do endeavor to attain 'em: For thy
Theft forfeits the favor and patronage of God, thy distrust, and this course
it puts thee upon, is an open renouncing and relinquishing the Care and
Providence of God over thee, so that though thy sin, should be concealed from
man, thou can expect no other, than that thou should be cursed in all thou
set thy hand to, and that thy fairest Hopes should be blasted; but if thou
art discovered, the least that can befall thee is the Restitution of thy Unjust
Rapines, and a brand or mark of Infamy fixed on thee, which will render thee
incapable of any Trust, and expose thee consequently to unavoidable and
perpetual want and beggary: Ah the wretched Life of an infamous and beggarly
Theif, forsaken and abandoned by God and Man!

I have said enough, I hope, to make any one sensible of this sin of
Purloyning; yet I am almost afraid, lest my Design may be in some part
defeated, by the foolish Collusions, and trifling Excuses of such, who though
they cannot deny Purloyning or Theft to be a damnable sin, yet they commit the
thing, and deny it to be Theft; just like men that acknowledge Rebellion a sin,
but will not own taking up Arms against the Supreme Magistrate to be Rebellion:
Give me leave therefore to tell you, that when I make Theft to be the
converting your Master's goods to your own use, I understand by it all acts of
yours, by which your Master suffers detriment and wrong. For Instance, not only
the deceiving him in what is in your own Trust, or the pilfering what is in
another, or the taking to your selves any way unjustly what is his, but also
the giving away to others without his knowledge, or contrary to his will any
part or portion of his, than which, nothing, I hear, is more common; Servants
as well as Masters, having their attendants and hangers on, their Parasites and
Flatterers, who at once sooth them in their Pride and Vanity, by fawning and
flattering, and cherish 'em in their Idleness by doing their business. I must
put you in mind further, that I mean by your Master's goods, whatever he
possesses, whatever it be wherein he can suffer, or you commit wrong. And in
the last place, I must put you in mind, that you are guilty, not only of the
wrong and injustice which you personally commit, but also of whatever is
committed by any other, if you consent to it, and connive at it, even though
you should receive no benefit by it: For thus far I conceive the Reproof of the
Psalmist may be extended, Psa. 50.18.
When thou saw a Thief, thou consented'st with him, which is there looked
upon as an abominable wickedness, and surely the commands of God, Thou shall
not suffer sin in thy Brother, but by any means reprove him, and Ephesians. 5.11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
'em, do nearly concern a Servant in this case, as he would avoid the guilt of
the sin which he does not reprehend, for the neglect of Reproof is here a tacit
approbation of the sin, and though peradventure this sort of theft be not to be
loaded with all the Aggravations of the former, yet the least that can be said
of it, is, that it is a downright injustice, a breach of trust, and extreme
unfaithfulness toward the Master: But you will demand of me, how is a Servant to
behave himself toward his guilty Fellow Servants, that he may, in such a case
as this, acquit himself with a good Conscience toward God and Man? If he
conceal his fault, he is unfaithful to his Master, if he discover it, he is
unkind to his Fellow Servants: He must betray the one or the other, if he do not
reveal the wrong^ he sees his Master suffers, and, what is more, his Conscience
must suffer too; if he do, he shall be hated and persecuted by his
Fellow Servants as an Informer, nay peradventure, what is worse than this, he
he that is accused shall out-wit him, or shall be able to form a Combination
against him, and so find more credit with the Master, and by consequence the
good Servant shall by his Integrity and Justice forfeit his Place, and it may
be, his Reputation, or at least live uneasily, persecuted by the vexatious
Calumnies, affronts and unkindnesses of those others that are combined against
him. To this demand take this answer, I should never have fancied this
Objection, had I not been extremely sensible of the frailty of Man; for, whence
should any one doubt, whether he should preserve his Faith and Duty to his
Master, or commit a sin to oblige a Fellow Servants? Whence should spring this
question, whether you should support and cherish a wicked Fellow Servants in his
Vice, or whether you should preserve a Master, (to whom you ow Fidelity, Truth
and Love,) from injuries and wrongs? How finally should a Man come to be
troubled with this scruple? Whether he should preserve his Integrity, a good
Conscience, and the Favor and Blessing of God by doing his Duty, or, by
deserting it, run the hazard of the worst that the wit or malice of his wicked
Fellow Servants can bring upon him? These you must readily acknowledge are
doubts and scruples, which do not become the sincerity and Faith of a good and
honest Christian: However, you shall not want here the best advice that I can
give you, for I know, there may be some little struglings of good nature and
interest, in opposition to your Duty in this point; the first thing then, you
are to do, is to reprove your guilty Fellow Servants, to lay before him, as well
as you can, the hainousness of his sin, together with the danger of it, both
with respect to his Temporal and Eternal Interest, acquaint him with the Beauty
and Pleasure, the security and advantage of Virtue and the Fear of God, advise
and exhort him earnestly to expiate his sin by Repentance toward God, and
restitution toward man, mix this Reproof ever and anon with Professions of
tenderness and affections for him, with expressions of your good meaning and
sincere intention, which he may discern by your accusing him only to himself,
and lastly with assurances, that, if he follow your advice, he shall not suffer
the least prejudice, either in his credit or interest by your knowledge of his
fault, nay, that it shall not diminish in the least your respect or Affection
toward him: For you are not insensible of the wiles of the Devil, and the
infirmity of man, it being commonly incident to humane frailty to fall into
sin, and it is the work of a true Faith to repent of it, and therefore, as your
compassion is kindled in you upon the former account, so should you necessarily
be engaged to honor and love him upon the latter, now if you prove successful
in this, you gain a Soul to God, a good Servant to your Master, and an
inseparable Friend to your self, and what is more than all, you gain peace and
satisfaction to your Conscience, together with the blessing of God, the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the increase of his Holy Spirit. Whereas suppose
you connive at, and he proceed in his sin, Ah! How fatal an obligation do you
lay upon him! You encourage him in his sin, and, if he never repent, you damn
his Soul Eternally; if he do repent, how must he needs condemn you in the
bitterness and grief of his Reflections, as one false to God and him, and no
less unfaithful to his Eternal, than your Master's Temporal Interest? And what
the guilt is, that you load your own Conscience with, I have showed you before:
But if you would do any good this way, you must take care, that you do it
betimes, and that you do not let his fault take air before you have thus
represented it to him, for if you first publish, and then reprove his guilt, I
cannot wonder, if he do question either your sincerity or discretion, and his
doubting of either must needs forfeit in him all respect for your advice or
reproof, and tempt him rather to stand upon his defense, than trust you with
his Confession or Repentance.

If you can effect nothing this way toward the reclaiming your Fellow Servants,
you must communicate his offense with some body else; as well that you may your
self avoid the Imputation of Connivance and Consent, as also that you may
deliver, if possible, his Soul from guilt without the ruin of his Credit and
Fortune: And in the choice of such a Person, you are, if it may be, to find out
some one that is considerable with him, one whose Virtue and Authority he
Reverences, and whose Affection and Discretion he can confide in; this will
make him more apt to be free in his Confession, and if he has any modesty, any
ingenuity left in him, he cannot but be wrought by this method into Repentance.
This very method may be made use of in other cases as well as this, as in those
injuries you see your Master suffer, either by the negligence or wast of your
Fellow Servants, only where the matter is little and trifling, you are not to
communicate it with others, for this will look like a formal and solemn
impertinence, but if he refuse to reform upon your single reproof, you are to
go directly to your Master or Mistress, for a slight wrong repeated daily may
grow a very outrageous one in time; However, they are the most proper Judges of
what is slight and trifling, or otherwise; for what may seem to you very
inconsiderable, may seem otherwise to them, who best know their own minds and
their own Fortunes. The same thing lastly you must do in matters of greater
moment, when those ways I have prescribed you fail, you must not provoke God,
wrong your Master, and wound your own Conscience, for fear of displeasing, nay
of ruining your unjust, slothful or wastful Fellow Servants, but you must
honestly and courageously do your Duty, leaving the issue to God, and to the
prudenc^ and goodness of your Master, and tho^ it should end in his ruin, or in
the forfeiture of your own place, or the disturbance of your quiet and peac^ in
it, (which I can hardly believe if you will pursue this method) ye^ you shall
have delivered your own Soul, God shall bring forth your Righteousness as the
Noonday, whatever calumnies the wit or the malice of your Fellow Servants
raise to obscure it, and you shall thrive and prevail in despite of all
confederacies against you.

A second Vice of Servants, Of Negligence.
by which a Master suffers is negligence, by which I mean, either a total
Omission or neglect of Duty, or such a careless and lazy performance of it,
that it were as good left undone, as be thus done: Or else, Lastly, heedlesness
or want of care. Now though this be very common, you cannot, upon due examination
of the nature of this fault, but confess it a very great one; for as to the
Master, (if he be hereby endamag'd) is it not the same thing for him to suffer
by your negligence as fraud? And I need not tell you, where there is much trust
or confidence on the Master's side, and no Industry or Care on the Servant's,
that all must necessarily go to wrack and ruin: Or if he suffer not in his
interest, he must suffer in the peace and contentment of his mind, for there
cannot be a greater plague and vexation to any man than a confident and
careless Servant: Nor is it a small matter, that the Master is forced to bear
the rudeness and contempt which a Servant's heedlesness and idleness is too
plain an expression of, it is a troublesome thing to a man to be levelled with
his own Servant, yet so he is in this case, for if there be no authority in the
Master, nor fear or care in the Servant, if though the Master may command, the
slothful Servant will perform only what he pleases, it is hard to say wherein is
the difference and distinction between 'em. Is it possible for any Servant to
think, that this is to do his Duty? Can any one think that this is to obey with
fear and trembling? Can any one think that this sluggishness is any thing
better than Eye-Service, so much condemned by God? Can any one who carries
himself thus heedlesly ever persuade himself, that he does service as if he
made it to God not Man? Or can he ever have the impudence to expect a reward
from God for this kind of Deportment? What such a one has reason to expect, he
may learn from the Parable of the Lord and his Servants, Matthew. 25. where he is
called a wicked and a slothful Servant, and adjudged to outer Darkness, who had
not answered the trust committed to him, who had only behaved himself idly and
unprofitably, though he had neither wronged his Master by fraud or theft, or
wast, and riot. Alas! The unprofitable Servant must not flatter himself that he
does his Duty, for care and industry are as essential and necessary parts of
the Faithfulness of a Servant, as truth and honesty, and he that any time
stands idle can never be excused, unless he can plead, what they in the
Marketplace did to that question, Why stand ye here idle all the day long?
Because no man has hired us. But you are hired, you have no doubt work to do,
for no Master will purchase heedlesness and sloth at the rate of such a charge
as a Servant puts him to: Nor can I think that a Servant himself would judge
this behavior a good discharge of any man's Duty in any other Station: Would
he think that Master did his Duty, who made no provision for his Family? And
yet care and industry is as indispensible a Duty of the Servant, as provision
or maintenance of the Master: But I need say no more, if nothing else will, the
effects of this ill demeanor may convince a Servant, how great an evil this
is, for besides the loss and vexation which it creates the Master, it begets
perpetual quarrels and discontents in the Family, for the Fellow Servants of a
sluggard are not only bereaved of that assistance which they should receive
from him, but also oppressed by that burden of which he eases his Shoulders;
the Drone himself is forced upon many Lies and Shifts to excuse his omissions
and errors, and finally after some time spent in the displeasure of his Master,
the contempt and hatred of his Fellow Servants: He is at last reproachfully
cast off, and branded with such a character as makes all that know him, shut
their Doors against him, as unwilling to receive such a trouble and encumbrance
into their Families.

There is a Third vice, Of Consumption and Wast.
which Servants are too often guilty of, where the Fortune of the Family can
allow it, and that is Consumption and Wast, whether by wantonness and delicacy,
whether by riot and excess, whether by junketting and drinking amongst
themselves, or also by drawing in others into the Club and Association, it
matters little, it is a downright injustice committed against the Master, it is
every jot as bad as theft, much worse than the common theft of poor people, for
the poor steal to relieve their necessities, but these rob to feed their
gluttony and wantonness, nay, it is every jot as bad as theft in a Servant (the
guilt of which has been sufficiently displayed to you before, for what
difference is there, either in respect of the guilt of the Crime, or in respect
of the effects of it toward a Master, whether a Servant steal from him out of
Covetousness or fear of future want, or whether he rob and plunder him out of
Luxury and Riot, if so, then you may be sure, that if the wrong be the same in
respect of the Master, and the guilt the same in respect of the Servant, the
Temporal ill consequences of it in this Life, and the punishment of it in
another, will be much the same; for such Servants must finally without
Repentance and Amendment, be abandoned and forsaken by God and Man: And
accordingly it is generally observed, and I have marked it my self, that such as
have been extremely Prodigal, Wanton and Wastful, in their Master's Houses,
have been afterward reduced to extreme Poverty, even to the want of a Morsel
of Bread; and that which adds to their misery in this state, is commonly this,
that such as have been sharers with 'em in the wast of their Master's goods,
have been the most apt to reproach their former Pride and Wantonness, and to
despise their present Poverty, and the only Persons from whom they could expect
relief, have been those very Masters and Mistresses whom they had before abused
and wronged.

Besides this Duty of Justice in Deed, there is another sort of Justice in
Word, which a Servant owes his Master, which is Truth; but because this is a
common and avowed Duty between Man and Man, I think it is not needful to dwell
upon it here, there is no body can be ignorant of the wickedness of this sin
which makes one of the greatest Prerogatives of Mankind, that is, Speech, an
Instrument of the greatest Mischiefs; which is 2dly, An Argument of a mean base
Spirit, and destitute of the Faith and Fear of God; which is 3dly, The Product
and Effect of some sin or other, for Virtue never needs the Service or
Protection of a Lie; which Lastly, Prevents Repentance for sin; for as soon as
men have obtained a great slight and dexterity in Lying, they grow hard and
confident in their faults, because they find they can without any difficulty
conceal or excuse 'em by a Lie.

And as no one can be ignorant of the evil of this sin, so neither of the evil
which will punish it: Who knows not how many plagues are denounced against it
by God? What infamy attends it from Man? What secret shame and disquiet it
tortures the mind with? and finally, how it certainly involves the Liar in
Temporal and Eternal Ruin? Let the Servant therefore, as he would avoid all
this, always keep up to strict Truth in his words; if he have committed a
fault, let him not go about to excuse it, by the commission of a greater, that
is, by Lying; let him rather choose to try the goodness of his Master by an
humble and honest confession, than tempt him to suspicion by frivolous Excuses,
or barefaced Untruths; however, if he should think his Master stupid enough to
be imposed on by any idle Tale, yet let him remember that he has a Master in
Heaven who may be conquered by Confession and Repentance, but cannot be imposed
upon, or mocked by any slight or artifice of words.

I have now spoke sufficiently of the Duty of Faithfulness, and will therefore
pass on to the

Third and last great Duty of Servants, 3dly, Of Love of Masters and Mistresses.
The Love of their Masters and Mistresses: This is a Virtue which is extremely
necessary in Servants, it being a very difficult matter to do their Duty
without it; but if this be once implanted in their hearts; if the Master be
looked upon as a Father, one whose Affection and Esteem for 'em they value as
their greatest worldly happiness, there will need no other motive either to
their Obedience or Faithfulness: For what St. John observes concerning the
Service of God, Ephesians. 5. that to them who love him, his Commandments are not
grievous; the same is true of the Service of Man, the burden of it is very
light, if Love help to bear it; for how natural is it for a Servant to obey
when he is as fond of the Love of his Master, as of his own Interest? and how
natural to be faithful, when he loves his Masters Interest as his own? He will
abhor to see him wronged in his Goods, or disturbed or disquieted in his Mind,
since if he loves him, he cannot but in every evil that befalls him, suffer
with him; how sacred will such a Servant esteem the Honor of his Master? How
much will he be concerned for the Virtue of his Children, the good behavior of
his fellow servants, and the success of his Enterprises in the World? Such a
Servant will not stand upon Punctilioes, and nicely weigh his Duty by grains
and scruples; but he will think all his Duty (whatever it be) wherein he can
serve his Master: And whatever he does, he will perform with that delight, that
care and cheerfulness, that one would think that he were like Eliezer to
Abraham, rather an Heir of his Master's blessing, and his own labors, than an
hired Servant; such a one will not stay to expect commands, where his Master's
interest requires his Service, much less will he be solicitous, which way he
may be excused from his Duty, for he accounts nothing more disingenious than to
stand in need of an excuse. Finally; how easy will it be for such a Servant to
receive direction humbly, to bear any infirmity of his Master patiently, to
answer respectfully, to remember heedfully, to reform carefully, and to do all
out of singleness of Heart?

How many and great the advantages of this Virtue are, both to the Master and
to the Servant, both in point of credit and delight, both in point of Religion
and Interest, is very easy to be discerned; the Master will have his business
done, and that very prosperously; he sees nothing miscarry under the hands of
his Servant, he hears no discontent nor contention in his Family, he sees that
his Servant is a good example and guide to his whole Household; in a word, he
meets with nothing to displease him when at home, nor is he disturbed by any
suspicions or fears when abroad; for he can as entirely confide in his
Servant's Faith and Affection as in himself; how will such a man be ready like
him, who bought Diogenes to run out into the Exchange and Market, to publish to
the World that a Guardian Angel is come into his House? Without any
Amplification of the matter, such a Master, if he be not savage and insolent as
well as stupid, must confess that he enjoys a great blessing, that he cannot
set too high a value upon his Servant, and by consequence, he is in Honor and
Justice bound not only to treat him with courteous words and kind looks, but to
reward him too, and this cannot but tend to the honor and interest of the
Servant, which cannot but reflect advantagiously upon the Master, for to have
good Servants, and to do well for 'em, is, I think, in the opinion of judicious
men, no small argument of a good and wise man: But to proceed, not only the
credit and interest, but even the content and Religion of Families is highly
concerned in the love and Duty of Servants; for Love is the Parent of Unity and
Peace, and it Nurses up the Children it brings forth, it maintains and
preserves the quiet which it procures, and in a Family where Charity and
Contentment reign, where order and peace dwell, how necessarily must Religion
thrive and flourish? They will watch over and assist one another, they will
affectionately give, and meekly receive advice, they will not want time for
Religious Duties, nor a sedate composure of mind to make the best use of that
time; no one's Prayers and Reading will be rendered useless through discontent
and distraction: No one will be kept back from the Sacrament by confusion of
business, or disturbance of mind: If all this be put together, I need not
trouble you with many motives or inducements to this Duty of Love, for what
greater blessings can a Servant desire than those are, which this gives him?
It Is a help to him in the performance of his Duty, lightens the burden of his
Service, it gives him the love of his Master and the Family, peace at home,
credit and reputation abroad, both which are the most solid foundations of a
Servant's interest imaginable, unless it be the favor of God; and this
behavior gives him a right claim to that too; for whatever is a work of
Religion, as this indeed is, whatever procures men more opportunities of grace,
and whatever prepares and disposes 'em for the best use of 'em, must needs very
much promote our Heavenly Interest, and I have sufficiently made it out, that
all these are the blessed fruits of this Duty. To all which I will add but one
consideration more to convince you of your obligation to it, which is this,
that you cannot without monstrous ingratitude be guilty of the contrary: Do you
think, that you owe no affection to your Master and Mistress, who have received
you into their House, reposed a confidence and trust in you, who are very
solicitous to inform and instruct you, who not only bear long with your
Ignorance, but wink at many other infirmities in you, who provide for you in
your health, and are tender of you in your sickness, who are desirous to oblige
and encourage you, and rejoice when you behave your selves so as to deserve it?
Is there nothing due to 'em for their compassion for your Souls, for their
watchfulness over your manners, for their care in providing for you spiritual
as well as bodily food? You cannot be guilty of hating or despising these who
have deserved so well of you, nay you cannot be guilty of what is less, the not
loving 'em, but you must be profligately ungrateful, you must be stupid and
base to a degree that brutish Creatures have never yet been guilty of; For the
Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib: Nay there is no beast of the
Field, or of the Desert so fierce and salvage, but he has been tamed and
obliged too by repeated courtesies and benefits,

A General Prayer relating to the Duties of this Chapter.
O Holy and Just God, I know that without Holiness it is impossible for me to
please thee here, or to enjoy thee hereafter; I beseech thee therefore, that my
understanding may be so enlightened, my Conscience convinced, and my whole
Heart enflamed with the love of Holiness, that I may be Holy in all manner of
Conversation: Beget in me a most tender and lively sense of the great Duties of
Obedience, Justice and Charity which I owe to my Master, that I governing my
self by these in all my actions, I may in my Station, advance the Honor of
God, the Contentment and Interest of my Master, the Peace and Virtue of the
Family, and my own both Temporal and Eternal Happiness. I know, O Lord, that no
acts of injustice or unfaithfulness between Man and Man shall go unpunished, I
know that for these things sake, the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, O
what then must be my punishment, if I heap upon the guilt of injustice and
uncharitableness many others, namely, of Ingratitude, Unfaithfulness, Lying,
Perjury. O preserve me therefore, O my God, from all falsehood and wrong; and
suffer me not to forfeit thy favor and destroy my Soul, for the sake of those
things that perish. O let me be fully convinced, that the ways of Righteousness
are ways of Pleasantness, and that all her paths are Prosperity and Peace, that
so I may delight my self in the Law of my God, and may find comfort, and a
blessing in the discharge of my Duty: Teach me O Lord, Humility and Obedience,
Faith and Truth, Care and Industry, Charity and Meekness, that I may adorn the
Doctrine of God my Savior, win others over to a love of Virtue, and after an
humble and contented, though laborious life here, may enter into Rest and Glory
hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Prayer for Obedience.
O Glorious and Eternal Lord God, who dwell with those who are of a meek and
lowly Spirit, behold me, I beseech thee, and pour into my Heart that Virtue of
Humility, which is so highly esteemed by thee: O Lord, my Heart is too too apt
to be filled with Pride and Vanity, O do thou convince me every day more and
more of my own vileness and worthlesness, that I may be preserved from
self-conceit and wilfulness; O give me Grace often to consider the Humility of
my Lord and Savior, that I may learn of him, and obtain the peace which flows
from a meek Spirit and Humble Obedience. And O my God, because I am to give an
account to thee, who art the searcher of the Heart, and the tryer of the Reins,
the Judge of my most secret Thoughts, as well as my most secret Actions, teach
me therefore to do my Duty cheerfully and in singleness of Heart; make me to
abominate all Lying shifts and pretenses, as well as all proud wilfulness and
sluggishness. Make me careful to learn my Duty, sincere in the performance of
it, patient under reproof, and diligent in reforming whatever is amiss; thus, O
my God, whilst every part of my Duty toward Man, shall prove an instance of my
Obedience toward thee, I shall enjoy the peace of a good Conscience, and the
hopes of an Eternal Reward: Hear me and answer me, O Lord, for thy Mercies
sake, and thy Son Jesus Christ's Sake.

A Prayer for Faithfulness.
O God thou God of Truth, Right and Just art thou, and there is no iniquity
with thee, fill my Heart, I beseech thee with the love of Truth and
Faithfulness, make me true in all my words, and upright in all my deeds: O
teach me to take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my Tongue; teach me to
keep my Mouth, as it were, with a Bridle, while the ungodly are in my sight: O
make me to abhor the sin of Unfaithfulness, and let no such cleave unto me. Let
no slander or detraction, no mischievous accusations proceed out of my Mouth,
nor suffer me ever to stretch forth my hand to iniquity: O let me not fall
through Covetousness or Distrust in God, and let me never commit injustice to
maintain my Pride or Riot, or Idleness, adding sin to sin: If sinners entice
me, suffer me not to consent to 'em, permit me not to have any Fellowship with
the Unfruitful Works of Darkness, but give me courage and discretion to reprove
'em, that so my Righteousness may be as the Noonday, and thou may make me
to prosper in the Land, and I may at last obtain the Blessing, Well done good
and faithful Servant, enter thou into thy Masters Joy, Amen, Amen, Blessed
Jesus,

A Prayer for Love.
O Thou God who art Love, give me thy Grace, that I may practice more
abundantly that Charity which I owe all Mankind, toward those of the same
Family: give me a grateful sense of the benefits which I enjoy under this Roof,
of the care and kindness of my Master toward me in providing for me, both
spiritual and bodily Food, that so I may make returns to him in the Fruit of
Love, Obedience and Faithfulness; Lord let his interest and his honor, let his
quiet and content be dear to me as my own, that I may not only serve him with
Justice, but Zeal too. And O my God, diffuse the gift of Charity through the
Hearts of this whole Family, that we may all live in Godly love and peace
together, that our Prayers be not hindered, nor we kept back from thy Holy
Table, or approach it unworthily: But that we all enjoy thee our God in the
beauty of Holiness, enjoy one another in the beauty of Charity, and enjoy those
Temporal Blessings which thou have richly bestowed upon us in the beauty of
order and virtue, and and all things may finally and uniformly tend to thy
Glory, and our Comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. III. Of the Duty of Servants. 1st. Toward their Masters Children,
consisting of Affection, due Respect, Care of their Morals, Care of their
Honor and Care of their Interest. 2dly. Toward Sojourners. 3dly. Toward
Strangers.
What the Servant owes his Masters Children.
WHatever it be that Servants owe the Children of the Family, it is only the
result of that Duty which they owe their Master: Children are (as it were)
parts of their Parents, their Blood and Birth gives 'em a just claim, as to the
care and love of their Parents, so to a proper share of the Affection and
Service, and all other advantages of the Family. First. Therefore a Servant
owes the Children of his Master a sincere Affection, Affection
which will easily be granted, if it be but considered, that it is impossible
for a Servant to bear Faith and Love to his Master, and have neither for his
Children; for Children are the dearest interest and most valuable Treasure of
their Parents; Children are the joys and hopes of their Fathers, they double
the pleasure of his prosperity by being sharers in it, and ease the toil of his
labors by being the Heirs of 'em. How therefore can any one pretend to love
his Master, who hates or despises what is dearest to him? Now this affection of
the Servant must express it self toward his Masters Children. 1st. In a due
Respect. 2dly. In his care for their Morals. 3dly. In a sincere Zeal for their
Honor; and 4dly. For their Interest.

1st. In Respect. Due Respect.
This their birth Challenges every slight or neglect offered the Children by a
Servant, is some diminution of the Reverence which he owes his Master, for the
Father must needs suffer in the contempt of the Son; and yet this Respect ought
to be wisely regulated; for as it ought not to be so slight as to reflect any
disadvantage on the other, so on the other hand, it ought to be so moderated
and tempered, that the Son be not to soon set up for a young Master, and so
soothed and fooled into Pride and Vanity, and the Father forfeit his Authority
by deriving too much of it upon his Son; for a foolish Child is too too apt to
assume and forget himself, and take as his due what he possesses but of
Courtesy, I mean of his Father; and a foolish Servant is too apt to forget his
Reverence to his old Master out of Complement to his young one.

Care for their Morals.
2dly. Servants must express their Affection to their Masters Children by a
tender Care for their Morals, I do not mean, that they should be Spies upon
their Faults, but Ministers and Assistants to their Virtues; This your Aid is
to be afforded according to the Age and Capacity of the Children, they may
instill into 'em early Instruction, in their green years; they may suggest to
'em their Duty, and excite and persuade 'em to it, as they grow up to Estate of
Reason; and all along they must take care, that they be no example of any Vice
to them; neither of frowardness, nor lying, nor disobedience to those of Tender
Years; nor of Riot, Intemperance, Idleness, Pride, Prodigality and Wilfulness
to those of Riper; for all are much apter to imitate Vice than Virtue: But in
stead of performing this excellent Service to their Master, it often happens
that some Servants are the Corrupters of their Children's Youth; they mislead
'em by their Examples, and prompt and instigate 'em to Sin both by word and
deed: They fawn and flatter 'em into Arrogance and Self-conceipt, they not only
conceal, but applaud their Errors, they instruct 'em how to play the loose
Gallant, and the disobedient Child, and are in a word ever ready to advise 'em
not what is consonant to their good, but to their humor and fancy. But you
will ask me, how shall a Servant acquit himself, if his Masters Child should
take ill courses. What shall he do? If he oppose and resist the Child what in
him lies in the Progress of his Sin, he incurs his hatred; if he favor him in
it, and aid him by secrecy and shelter, or any other way, he is unfaithful to
his Master: there is no upright man who measures his Obligation to a Duty by
the Event and Success of it; every man that will have a peaceful Conscience,
must do what becomes him, and leave the Issue of it to God, but however, he
must do it with all the discretion he can too, and his Duty will direct him
here how to perform another Duty which seems harsh and hazardous; for Instance,
in this Case Charity to the Son will so regulate the Servants Faith to his
Master, that he shall not only do his Duty, but do it with true discretion:
Thus Charity will direct him, First as to the nature of the Child's offense,
that he is not to take notice of little frailties, and inconsiderable defects,
much less to complain of 'em to his Parents; for this were, if not a peevish
malignity of Spirit, yet at least, a busy and officious piece of Impertinence
not without some mixture of defect of Charity, but such matters wherein the
Virtue, the Honor, the Health, the Interest of the Child, and consequently the
happiness and comfort of the Parent is concerned, deserve the Servants Care and
Faith: but Secondly in Errors of this nature, Charity will teach him to
distinguish between a slip or fall, and a settled depravity of mind, or Vicious
habit in the Child, so that, as he will not complain at all, of little and
trifling Errors, so neither will he too soon of greater: and in the last place
when he shall be convinced of the Indispensible Necessity of making known the
fault of a Child, Charity will teach him, that he should proceed in this with
all imaginable mildness, not aggravating or amplifying the Crime, and that he
should use all imaginable Caution both to prevent any mischievous effect of
such discovery, and to secure as much as in him lies, the good success of it.
And here Charity seems to me to point out the way to this, and to tell you that
First you are to try what you can effect your self by a modest humble and
affectionate Representation to your young Master of the sin and hazard wherein
he is engaged, for if this may prevail, it were not so Charitable to bring him
into peril of his Fathers displeasure or disesteem; but if this sort to no good
end, you cannot be bound by Faith and Secrecy to your Young Master to betray
your Faith and Duty to your Old, for this is in effect but to betray both: You
must therefore either make known the Son's ill Courses to his Father, or if
there be apparent Reasons to apprehend no good effects of this way, but rather
ill ones for want of a well poised judgment, or tolerable temper in the Father
you must then put the business into the hands of some faithful and discreet
Friend, whose Authority and good nature may so far mitigate the Violent Choler,
and sweeten the Implacable temper of the Father, that the Son's Virtue may be
repaired without the Ruin of his Fortune. I have in this Advice insinuated,
that as a Servant ought not to be peevish and impertinent in complaining of
trifling faults, so neither ought he to be too forward in revealing greater,
much less ought he to exaggerate and exulcerate the Crime: but my meaning is
not, that his Information should want any one grain or scruple of truth
necessary to give the Friend or Father a right notion of the offense, nor yet
that he should delay the discovery of a fault, where the concealment breeds
Danger, but if he cannot trust his own Judgment in this point, and the Issue of
his delay seem doubtful to him, he must then consult some body else, whose
Judgment he may better rely upon, and whose affection both to Father and Son,
he can be very confident of. The Servant who behaves himself thus in this case,
acquits himself with a good Conscience toward God and Man, he does Both very
considerable service, for there can be nothing more acceptable to God, than the
converting a sinner from his evil way, nor to a Father, than the Preservation
of a Child just on the brink of misery, nor indeed to the Son, than the
restoring him to his Virtue, and the preserving to him that Honor and Fortune
which were both ready to suffer wreck: So that this Servant will hereby procure
to himself the everlasting good will of his Master and Child, the Peace of his
own mind, and the Blessing and Favor of God. James 5.20.
* He that converteth a sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul
from Death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. Nor is he far remote from that
blessed reward mentioned Daniel 12.3. They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn many to Righteousness; as the
Stars for ever and ever. Whereas on the other side, that Servant who either
corrupts his Masters Children, or affords 'em his Aid and Assistance, his
Shelter and Secrecy in their Vicious Courses, betrays Man, falsifies his Faith,
not only to his Master, but his God; he does the drudgery of his Master the
Devil, who imploys all his Slaves in propagating sin, and shall certainly one
day receive the wages of his wickedness, even that Death which is denounced
against men of the most abominable Character; men Romans 1.32.
who not only do the worst of things themselves, but also have pleasure in them
that do 'em.

I have said enough to convince the Servant that he is to be careful of the
Morals of his Masters Children, but there are two Virtues which he ought to
have more especial care of, being those two which every Child should be eminent
in, which are in some sort the Foundation and Guard of all the rest, namely, a
filial and dutiful Love of his Parents, and hearty affection to his Brethren;
the Servant therefore, if there happen any breach or interruption of this
mutual and Reciprocal Kindness between Father and Son, or Brethren, must do all
that he can to repair it and make it up: But at leastwise if he cannot close,
he must not widen the Breach; Peacemakers are blessed, Math. 5.
and shall be called the Children of God. But they who sow strife and
contention, are the Children of their Father the Devil; it is the Villainous
Practice of some Servants to enkindle Emulation and Strife amongst Brethren,
and to take a side and party, when they have created a Faction to overvalue
one Child to the disparagement of the rest, and sometimes to fill their Ears
with Lies and Tales, that they may alienate their Minds from their Brethren:
And sometimes the very same method is made use of to withdraw 'em from the Love
and Duty which they owe their Parents, by possessing 'em of the partiality of
the Father and Mother, amplifying their kindness toward one even to fondness
and dotage, and aggravating their unkindness to another even to coldness and
hatred: One while they will not stick to insinuate the peevishness or
jealousi'e of a Parent, another while they will magnify the Fortune of the
young Heir, they will provoke him by laying before him the Liberty and Fineness
of this or that Young Gentleman who is of a meaner Fortune than he, they will
impute the strictness and care of Parents to the Niggardliness of their Temper,
the narrowness and Antiqueness of their Education, or to the natural Austerity
of old age, and thus they delude and betray the silly and unexperienced youth,
and make him cease to be a Child to his Father, that he may be a slave to his
Servant. Now I would earnestly entreat Servants to lay this sadly to heart,
that these and such like Practices are an abomination to God, that the more
successful they are in 'em, the more fatal they will prove to 'em, for if they be
not chastis'd in this world, they will be damned for 'em in another. Amongst
those things which Solomon tells us, the Lord hates, and are an abomination to
him, you will meet a Lying Tongue, Prove. 6.17. and verse 19. A false witness
that speaks Lies; and him that sows discord among Brethren; Nor is it to be
wondered at that God should abominate such a sin as this is, for the mischiefs
that very commonly ensue upon such divisions and animosities between Brethren,
or between Parents and Children, are not to be expressed: St. James tells us
briefly, chapter 3. v. 16. Where envying and strife is, there is confusion and
every evil work. And he certainly who alienates a Child from his Parent,
thrusts him headlong into sin and Ruin, and creates the Parent insufferable
vexation and discontent. But suppose God would not exact an account of you for
this sin, what is it a Servant can propose to himself from all this mischief?
He may flatter himself with strengthening his Interest, or raising his Fortune,
but generally, it happens quite otherwise, for that dearness and Familiarity
between a Child and Servant which is founded in the contempt of Faith and Truth
on the one side, and natural affection on the other, can never be firm and
steady, any little accident will undo all; Nature in the Child will return to
it is bent, some little Obligation past upon him, or wholesome advice insinuated
in a fit season will awaken his natural affection, and then he will make no
scurple to redeem his Error toward his Father or his Brother by the
discovery, that is, the Ruin of a perfidious Servant. But suppose this
Combination or Conspiracy should hold some time, how can a Servant rationally
expect a constant Friendship from him who upon very slight and trifling
pretenses could be divided from his Father and his Brethren, and tempted to
forget the Duty he owed the one, and the affection he owed the other.

I have spoken of the main care of the Servant toward the Children of his
Master, namely, his care to secure their good Morals; he that neglects this, or
what is worse, ministers to the corrupting of Children, is guilty of the most
fatal unfaithfulness to his Master: for he who betraies the Virtue of the Son,
destroys the happiness of the Father: But he that performs this, performs a
service that can never be sufficiently rewarded, not only, because a Child is
the greatest Blessing of a Father, and Virtue the greatest Blessing of the
Child, but also because he has hereby laid the best Foundation of the Child's
Honor and Interest, Care for their Honor and Interest.
which puts me in mind of another care a Servant is obliged to, namely, for the
Honor and Interest of his Master's Children; wherever you can advance these,
you are to refuse no pains, no hazard: The least you can do, is to conceal
Their defects, or excuse 'em, to lay hold on every opportunity to speak
honorably of what is Virtuous and praiseworthy in 'em, to increase the number
of their Friends, and to be wanting neither in advice nor travail to promote
their Interest: Nothing therefore can be more repugnant to this Duty in a
Servant, than to entertain their acquaintance with spiteful stories of the
silliness or viciousness of their Master's Children, or to raise a suspicion of
faults in 'em, where there are none apparent, or to lessen by any suggestion
whatever, the esteem of their Virtue, Parts or Person, or the Credit and
Reputation of their Estates; but of all the mischiefs, a Servant is capable of
doing his Master's Son, The Servant must not promote the secret Marriage of the
Child.
there is none I think greater than the assisting him in a concealed Courtship,
or aiding him in carrying on a Marriage without the knowledge, or what is
worse, contrary to the will of his Father; all the rest seem to be but single
sins, but this is a complication of all mischiefs together, the Child's Virtue,
Honor and Interest, are all betrayed at once; whereas other instances of
negligence or unfaithfulness did hazard 'em but single and alone, other
mischiefs are capable of a Reparatio^ but this very seldom, if ever: A Chi^^
may be recovered to the Duty and Virtue which he had forsaken, ^^e may be
restored to the favor (...) his Father, and the interest he ha^ forfeited, the
Honor which he ^ost by any single fault may be repaired by the Merit and
service of his following actions, but this, an unhappy Marriage sticks fast
like Hercules his poisoned shirt, he may tear away his flesh, but not the evil:
Not to aggravate the matter, it is a mischief very seldom retrieved, and no
wonder, for down what a precipice must a raw Youth tumble that renounces, First
his reason, then his Duty, that quits the Government of his Father, and the
conduct of God, that sells his Inheritance, his Father's, and God's blessing,
to gratify a dishonorable affection, or it may be a Fantastic Passion, or
it may be, something worse than both, a dishonorable Lust: What Bridewell, nay
what Gibbet does not that Servant deserve, ^^t aids the poor Creature thus to
^^^o himself, nay it may be, not himse^^ only, but his Father and his whole
Fa^^ly too?

. I pass on now to the Duty of Serv^nts toward Sojourners. Sojourners,
Servants Duty toward Sojourners.
^ho' they are not natural branches as the Children, yet seem they to be
grafted into the same stock, and to constitute one Family with them, and
therefore they have in their Place a Right to their proportion of all the
advantages of the Family; they have in their degree a claim to the love and
care of the Master, to the Brotherly Affection of the Children, and to the
Respect and Duty of the Servants: I need not therefore repeat here all the
Duties of the Servant, which are all of 'em in their time, place and degree,
due to these whom the Master has Adopted into his Family, and made members of
that body, whereof he is the Head, so that it is impossible, that the Servant
can wrong them, but that the injury must reflect and rebound on the Master.
It Is true, there is great variety in the case and circumstance of Sojourners,
and by consequence in the Duty of Servants toward them, so that it is hard to
fix a constant and general Rule by which it may be measured and regulated;
unless I should say, that since whatever degree of Duty is owing 'em, springs
from their Union to the Family, and Relation to the Master of it, therefore the
Service and Respect toward them is to be proportioned to the degrees of that
Union which is between them, and the other Members of the Family, and the
dearness and tie there is, or ought to be between them and the Master of it.

This Rule I think will generally hold good, or at leastwise, a very little
discretion will inform any Servant, what variation must be observed in this
point: But here to complete the Servants Instruction, I must put you in mind of
two Rules more. First, That you must avoid all occasions of difference between
you and the Servants of Sojourners, contending rather in courtesy to ease and
assist 'em, than putting off, what is your business and Duty, or any part of it
upon them; and you must abhor to be any way instrumental to breed
misunderstanding between Sojourners and your Master, for this is the unkindest
Office you can do both. Secondly, You must never go about to endear your selves
to Sojourners by any Unfaithfulness to your Master, that is, by entertaining
'em with the faults or secrets of the Family, or by preferring their Honor or
Interest, or Humor before your Masters: For in all this, you are ungrateful
and unjust, and will finally forfeit that esteem which you endeavor thus to
raise: For how can those which you caress at this rate, believe that you will be
kinder and trustier to Strangers, than you have been to those, to whom by the
Law of God and Nature, you owe Obedience, Faithfulness and Love?

3. Besides these Boarders, Servants Duty toward Strangers.
there are others, which though they are not of the Family, may be considered as
having some Relation to it, such are Visitants, Guests, Strangers; now the Rule
Servants are to observe here, are such as concern discretion and good manners;
in the First place, courtesy, civility and respect toward all, is an
indispensible Duty of every Servant, and reflects an Honor on the Government
of the Master, and the breeding of the Family; but as to the degrees of these,
a discreet Servant should behave himself as if he were acted and inspired by
his Masters Soul, and moved by his affections, showing an extraordinary
cheerfulness and even zeal to serve those the Master calls his Friends,
civility toward his Acquaintance, and coldness, though not rudeness, toward
Intruders, and downright Aversion toward such as the Master looks upon as
dangerous hangers on, Spies, Parasites, Suckers, and such like which are to a
House; what Moths are to a Garment, they stain the Honor and consume the
substance of it. Secondly. It Is a piece of justice to right such as are
traduced to your Master, and to convey to him the knowledge of all either kind
expressions, courteous or generous actions, which are designed on purpose to
pass an Obligation on the Master, and so it is to represent any Errand or
business truly and seasonably to him, the neglect of which is not only a
discourteous contempt of the Stranger, but also Unfaithfulness, and an affront
to the Master: But yet as to neglect an Errand or business you charge your
selves with, is unjust and discourteous, so to obtrude your selves upon the
affairs of Strangers, or to lie in wait for the secrets of your Master or his
Friends, is insolence and immodesty, and as great a folly as rudeness, and
commonly unfaithfulness is joined with this, and the Servant who takes pains to
discover, does generally take as much to vent a secret, and all finally tends
as much to their own disgrace as their Masters disquiet.

There is but one thing more that I would mind you of on this occasion, and
that is, your behavior upon a day of any Solemn Entertainment. Your Masters
and your own credit, as well as the satisfaction of his Guests are nearly
concerned in it, the decency of your attire, the diligence and cheerfulness of
your attendance, the order and silence of the whole management, being not only
one of the fairest Ornaments of the Entertainment, but also a good mark of your
breeding, and of your Masters prudence and good Government as well as an
addition to the satisfaction of all entertained by him: But above all, nothing
savouring of rudeness, immodesty, excess, or any other immorality, must be
practiced by you that day: For this must necessarily bring you and the
Discipline of the Family into contempt, nothing being a more certain symptom of
Folly or Looseness, or Poverty, or at least Meanness than this is.

A Prayer answering the End and Design of this Chapter.
O Holy God our great Creator, who do delight to be remembered by us in the
days of our Youth, assist me with thy grace that I may both worship thee
sincerely and devoutly my self, and may also be instrumental both by my example
and discourse to move others to do so; particularly as to the Children of this
Famimily, I beseech thee, that thou would give me a tenderness for their
Souls, that I may, as far as lies in me, promote in them the knowledge and love
of thy truth, and the fear of thy name: But O never suffer me to be any example
or occasion of sin to 'em, that I bring not upon my own Soul the guilt of their
ruin, my Masters trouble, and thy dishonor. Possess me with such an affection
for 'em, as may express it self in a due respect, and hearty care for their
true good. And O thou God of Peace and lover of Concord, make me always study
how to advance Love and Unity amongst Brethren, and to sow the seeds of peace
and mutual affection amongst all the Members of this Family, that I may not
only escape the Curses which attend Lying and deceitful Lips, and all the
Authors of strife and contention, but also may be called the Child of God, and
inherit the blessing of the Peace-maker^ Finally O Lord, I beseech thee, the
God of Order, and the Author of Wisdom, that thou would give me prudence and
discretion, that I may behave my self toward all with that Truth, Modesty and
Respect, that becomes me in my Station: I desire, O Lord, to take heed unto my
way according to thy word. O let thy word be a Light to my Feet, and a Lanthorn
to my path, and let Truth and Faithfulness never depart from me all the days of
my Life. Amen, Lord Jesus, So be it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Servants Duty toward his Fellow Servants, consisting in
Justice, Charity, Concord, Mutual Assistance: The Grounds of Discord between
Servants.
THE Duties which Servants owe one another, are the very same with those which
all Mankind are mutually obliged to, that is, Justice and Charity, only their
nearer Relation to one another ties this Obligation faster upon them, by adding
new motives and incitements to these Duties. Of Mutual Justice between Servants.
Thus, First for Justice, they are obliged to it toward one another under pain
of Damnation, and by the hopes of Salvation, as all other men are. But then,
they must further consider, that they are bound to it not only as Christians,
but as Fellow Servants, in which Relation, the more indispensible necessity of
Justice increases their Obligation to it, and renders the Transgression of it
more unpardonable. Fellow Servants are so necessarily exposed to the injuries
of one another, and those daily one's too, that their life would be
intolerable, without a strict observance of Justice. I need say nothing of the
injustice of pilfering and stealing, every one being watchful enough to secure
his own; but there are other sorts of injustice, to which Servants are more
prone, and against which they are less able to defend themselves, such are for
instance, Laziness in one, Insolence in another, and Lying in a third; the
sluggish Servant shifts the burden off himself, and this must lie somewhere;
now this is the highest injustice, for it is to ease one's own trouble by
increasing another. A second error to which Servants are prone, is Insolence;
there are no Masters so tyrannical and domineering as is one Servant over
another; and this is commonly the use a disingenious Servant makes of that
Authority, which the favor or trust of the Master confers upon him, namely, to
oppress, insult over, and despise his Fellow Servants; methinks it should now
be difficult to convince any of you of the injustice of this behavior; for how
can any one of you be so stupid as to think that behavior just in him toward
his Fellow Servants which he would think, were not to be endured in his Master
toward himself? besides, I cannot tell whether the folly of this carriage be
not greater than the injustice, not only, because such a Servant forgetting his
own quality, upbraids himself, whilst he insults over his Fellow Servants, and
renders the worst usage his Master and Mistress can treat him with, just and
reasonable, for he has no reason to complain of his Superiors for that usage,
which he is guilty of toward his Equals; but besides this, such a Servant must
expect to be undermined at home, and most certainly defamed abroad, and when
any ill accident befalls him, or lessens his interest in his Master, he must
expect the just return of his insolence in contempt and hatred. I would have
such Servants as these, call to mind what our Savior says of that Servant,
who being by his Lord made Ruler of his Household, Matthew. 24.49.50, 51.
Began to smite his Fellow Servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken: The
Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an
hour that he is not ware of: And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his
Portion with the Hippocrites: There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.
Now, though you should not eat and drink with the drunken, yet if you smite your
Fellow Servants, you shall have your share of this punishment in proportion to
your guilt, or if you do not smite with the Hand, yet if you smite with the
Tongue either by bitter and reviling Language, or by froward or malicious
accusations of your poor Fellow Servants, to their Master or Mistress, your
guilt is much the same; he that does the one, does not want Pride or
Uncharitableness enough to do the other, but is held in by some other motive
than Justice or Charity. A Third sort of Injustice incident to Servants, is
belying one another, which whether it be by libellous discourses abroad, or
unworthy and base detraction in private at home, which is a common Artifice to
make parties, and set one Servant against another: Or whether it be lastly by
sly insinuations or malicious accusations to the Master, it matters little;
this is in each instance the fruit of a naughty and wicked Heart, Matt. 15.19.
For out of the Heart proceed not only Murders, Adulteries, etc. but also evil
Thoughts, false Witness, Blasphemies; And these are the things which defile a
Man. It Is strange to observe, that if this sin were to be estimated by the
practice of Servants, it is so common, one would be tempted to think, it were no
sin at all: And yet if it were to be estimated from the word of God, one would
be tempted to think it were the greatest of sins; for I do not know, whether
there be any sin against which more judgments, more curses, are denounced, or
which is represented more detestable to God than Lying Lips, a Lying Tongue, a
spiteful and a malicious Heart. There is indeed a sort of Lying by way of
Recrimination and Self-defence, which is generally thought to have something of
extenuation in it, and something indeed it has, but not enough to excuse it,
for the best that can be said of it is this, it may sometimes have something
less of Malice and habitual Rancour, but it has never less of falsehood and
injustice, and therefore, is vile and dishonorable in the sight of Man, and
damnable in the sight of God. One sort of Injustice more, I must just touch
upon, and that is Envy; weak and base minds are extremely subject to this, such
as are too sluggish to have any Merit, and too self-conceited to see their want
of it; these, and these only are apt to be envious, and such a one will count
every excellence in his Fellow Servants a disparagement to himself, and every
favor vouchsafed another an injury to him: And this stirs him up to detract
from another good Service, and to supplant another interest by all imaginable
Arts, which shows the hainousness of this Crime consisting in the utmost
contradiction to Justice and Charity, but this sin is so great a Plague and
Torment to ones self, that methinks, there needs few motives to persuade men
not to entertain it, or to get rid of it. Thus much I thought necessary to
speak of this Duty of the Justice of Servants toward one another, and were
this well observed, this would lay a sure Foundation for Charity, and this
again for Mutual Assistance and Concord; for if you would not wrong one another
either in word or deed, all occasions of debate and contention would be cut
off: It were very happy for you your selves, and for your Masters and
Mistresses, if you could advance thus far, if you could come up to the pitch of
honest Heathens, but this is not enough to make you perfect Christians, there is
something more required of you, if you will be the Disciples of our dear Lord and
Master, than merely not to do wrong. I will proceed therefore to the second
Duty of Servants toward one another, namely Charity.

I need not insist on the necessity of this grace in general, Mutual Charity
between Servants.
you well enough know, you cannot be saved without it; the heart that is void
of love, is void of God, for 1 John.
God is Love; if you be destitute of Charity, you cannot be the Children of
God, or the Disciples of Christ. 1 John 4.20.
If a man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar. And our
Savior says, hereby shall I know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one
another. This is an irresistible motive to every one that believes and weighs
it, but there are others which being more peculiar to your state, ought to
prove strong engagements to it; for instance, how uncomfortable must strife and
hatred render your service? it must needs be extremely troublesome to be
condemned to the company and conversation of those you cannot endure, nor will
this only bereave you of the pleasure you would take in one another, but of the
assistance you would afford each other, if you did love as Brethren: nor is
this all, your discontents do generally rebound upon those above you, and you
grow by degrees as uneasy and unacceptable to your Masters and Mistresses, as
you are to one another; nay any discreet man though he could brook the trouble of
your quarrels and discontents, yet to deliver himself from the disparagement
and scandal of 'em, will judge himself obliged to discard all peevish and
contentious Servants, what over other good qualities they may have: And then
another ill consequence is, you lose your good name, and lie under such odious
characters, that being cast out of one house, no other will receive you; for
who can be fond of noise and mischief? This little, if it be seriously
considered, is sufficient to convince you of your obligation to Charity, and
Brotherly affection toward one another. I will now go on to show you in what
instances you must express this affection, having first only put you in mind
that your Charity must be real, and not feigned, that you must love not in
word, but in deed and in truth; for Hypocrisy and Dissimulation is as sinful
and mischievous, and in common account at least more odious and despicable,
than professed hatred or open contention. Having premised this, I proceed;
there are two ways by which you are to express your mutual Charity, First, by
the mutual assistance you are to afford each other. Secondly, by preserving
constant peace and unity amongst your selves. 1. If you be possessed with
Charity toward one another, it will show it self in the good turns you will do
one another, in the assistance you will yield to each other, and here sure, the
Soul of your Fellow Servants deserves your aid in the first place, if he be
ignorant and unacquainted with Religion, and not only so, but incapable through
the meanness of his education to inform himself in it by reading, for if he be
not ignorant, but what is worse, viciously inclined, if he know God, but do not
fear nor glorify him as he ought, you cannot do God or him a more eminent
service than by endeavoring to instruct and inform him, reading to him, and
teaching him to read, or by endeavoring to convince his Conscience of his
Duty, and to make him sensible of the necessity and happiness of a Religious
and holy life. Next to the ignorance of Religion, and Immorality, a Servant's
ignorance in his business, requires your compassion and aid, and what help you
afford him in this, is a work of excellent Charity in you, and ought to be
acknowledged not only by your Fellow Servants, but your Master too, as an
obligation; for it is a Real benefit to both: To be brief, if you will behave your
selves with that goodness, gentleness and sweetness, that may evidence your
love to one another, you must in a literal sense bear one another burdens,
you must pardon and forgive one another's infirmities, you must excuse and
conceal one another Errors, unless they be such, as imply manifest
unfaithfulness to your Master, in which case, they are no longer Errors and
Frailties, but Crimes. Concord, which was the second instance of Charity I
recommended to you, is the natural result of all this. For these mutual
Assistances and Obligations can never miss of preserving a right Understanding,
and nourishing a sincere Friendship between you; but yet because Concord must
be preserved, where Friendship sometimes cannot, and you must wish well to, and
carry your selves fairly toward some Servants whom you cannot fancy, whom you
cannot take any complacency or delight in: therefore I will say something of
this.

I need say nothing more to convince you of the necessity of Concord, than what
has frequently been insinuated all along this Treatise; only I will remind you
how great the evils of Discord and Contention are; perpetual Vexation and
Disturbance to the Father of the Family, who must either with great prejudice
to order and government dissemble his knowledge of your misdemeanors, or to the
lessening of his Authority become a party in the quarrel, or else seem guilty
of that severity which is very uneasy to every good Temper. The next evil that
attends Discord, and that a very sore one, is, it generally infects the Family
with a peevish and froward disposition, and by degrees sours the most sweet and
obliging humor. A Third evil is confusion and disorder in all business, for
mutinous and quarrelsom Servants are like factious men in a State, instead of
assisting, rather than not cross one another, they will obstruct the business
and good of the Family. The Last evil of Discord is this, that it utterly
indisposes you for Religious Duties; and this is a sad consideration, that by
your brawls and quarrels, you not only afflict and vex, but damn one another;
these and many more being the mischiefs of disagreement, it is plain, that you
are to purchase Peace almost at any Rate; it will not then seem hard to you
that I should prescribe you two things for this end. First, that you would not
suffer your selves to be easily provoked, much less, be rude or irreconcilable
upon any provocation; if you can maintain Peace with none but those who are
exempt from faults, you must converse only with Angels, not Men: And if we are
all liable to Errors and Offenses, we must be all alike forward to bear and
pardon 'em, which, methinks, should be no very difficult matter to one who
considers the Long-suffering and Patience of God toward him; I beseech you to
remember, what sentence was past upon that wicked Servant who would not use
that goodness toward his Fellow Servants, which his Master had showed toward
him. Matthew. 18.32, etc.
O thou wicked Servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst
me, should not thou also have had compassion on thy Fellow Servants, even as I
had pity on thee? And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors
till he should pay all that was due unto him: So likewise says our Savior,
shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not
every one his Brother their Trespasses. This is a dismal Issue of contentions,
he is miserable who does wrong, how much less miserable is he who does not
pardon it? the wrath of God will swallow up both. Secondly, that you may
preserve Peace, you must often do more than is your business to do, nor can
this seem an unreasonable advice to him that shall consider, that the trouble
of that work he does above his own, is not half so great as the trouble of
quarrel and contention which he prevents by it: Nor can you possibly take a
more ready way to rid your selves of a slothful and quarrelsom Fellow Servants;
for the more diligent you are to supply his Errors and Defects, the more
confidently will he commit 'em, growing every day more negligent and
intolerable, till his sloth, and folly, and your Industry and Prudence can no
longer be unknown to the Master. I have but one thing more to recommend to you
in this place, and that is, that you should be very tender of one another
credit and reputation, for this is the Livelihood and estate of a Servant, it
is become fashionable with men of all ranks, to make other's faults the subject
of their discourse and entertainment, and the meaner a man's Education is, the
more subject is he to do this; but the commonness of the sin does not lessen
it, much less excuse it. It is the Character of one of the worst of men, Psalm.
5.19, 20. Thou give thy Mouth to evil, and thy Tongue frames deceit. Thou
sit and speak against thy Brother, thou slanderest thine own Mother's
Son. Nor is the folly less than the guilt of this sin, for thou teach others
an evil Lesson against thy own Soul, and do justify the worst practices
thine Enemies can devise to defame and disparage thee.

I had designed here to discourse of the grounds and causes of strife and
contention, but this labor is prevented by what I have said upon the Duties of
Justice and Charity, where you may easily discern, what are the general springs
and causes of Discordn, amely, Laziness, Lying, Envy, and such like, and how
great the mischief and guilt of these is; but besides these, there is a proud,
froward, and churlish Temper, which renders some Servants utterly unfit for
Conversation, makes 'em apt to do wrong, without any motive to it, and apt to
be provoked without any ground for it: this is a temper directly contrary to
Charity, and therefore is by a necessary consequence sufficiently condemned
already under that Head: However, I cannot be too careful to secure you against
this sin, and therefore it will not be labor lost to take particular notice of
it here: Pride and Frowardness are the dishonor of the greatest Men; how
intolerable then must they appear in the meanest? They are indeed vices, which
one would think, the frailty and contemptibleness of our nature would easily
restrain us from, for proud and haughty wrath is unbecoming a poor sinner, a
corruptible mortal Creature; what should such a one be proud of? or what can
inspire him with the arrogance of frowardness? Now if there be in the nature of
every man, let him be never so high, Argument enough for Humility, ground
enough to shame him out of Pride and Peevishness; what excuse can there be for
either in that man, where the meanness of his nature is rendered yet more
contemptible by the meanness of his Fortune? But what do I talk of? these are
mean, impotent and beggarly vices; these are weeds which grow no where but on
dung-hills. A proud and peevish Temper is generally the symptom of a foolish
understanding; a low birth, and a lower Education: For the wiser any man is,
the better born, and the better bred, the more courteous and the more humble he
is, a consideration which methinks, should make you extremely sensible of the
dishonor and scandal of this Temper: But after all, there is another Argument
behind which should even scare and frighten you into meekness and humility, and
that is, that a proud and froward heart is an abomination to the Lord; to be
hated or despised by man, which is the general fate of all such tempers is an
uncomfortable state, but to be hated by God, this is infinitely more dreadful
and astonishing: As then you value, I will not say, your Service, but your
Salvation, subdue this devilish Disposition: for assure your selves, whoever is
unfit to live peaceably in any Family, can never enter into the company of
Angels and Spirits of just Men made perfect: For all these are meek and gentle,
kind and loving Spirits.

Now for the Conquest of all these Vices which engender strife, you must
observe the same method, which is wont to be prescribed for the Conquest of any
other, that is, you must lay before you frequently and seriously the guilt and
mischief of these sins, you must endeavor to persuade your selves of the
loveliness and advantage of the contrary Virtues, you must carefully avoid all
occasions of, and temptation to these sins, you must watch over the motions of
your own Hearts, you must resolve sincerely upon reformation and amendment, you
must call your selves to an account for these your resolutions, you must not
faint nor be weary, though you do not presently conquer; but you must repeat and
reinforce all your vows and purposes, and go on patiently till you have brought
forth Righteousness unto Victory; and with all this, you must join fervent
Prayers to Almighty God for his Assistance.

A Prayer on the Subject of this Chapter.
O Lord my God, who art the Author of Peace and Lover of Concord, enable me, I
beseech thee to live in that Brotherly Affection, Unity and Concord with my
Fellow Servants, that we may be a Mutual Comfort and Assistance to one antoher,
as well in our Spiritual as Temporal concern. And to this end subdue in me, O
Lord all unnatural and unchristian Pride and Peevishness; and give me the
Wisdom which is from above, which is not only pure, but peaceable, gentle and
easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruit, without partiality, and
without Hypocrisy. O never suffer me to be guilty of Malice, Guile,
Hypocrisy, Envy or Evil-speaking, but let my Heart be always tender and
affectionate, and let the words of Truth and Meekness, and Charity, proceed out
of my Mouth, that I may never minister any occasion of strife, and contention,
but way ever preserve and make Peace; And O Lord, because offenses will come,
make me I beseech thee, slow to anger, ready to forgive, and that from the
Heart, that I imitating thy Divine Mercy and Compassion, may be made partaker
of it in the full pardon of my sins, and the Salvation of my Soul through him,
who was also the great Example of Patience and Forgiveness, even Jesus Christ
our Lord.

PART II.
CHAP. V. Of the Servants Duty toward himself, his Credit, which way raised
and preserved; the Love of his Master, etc. how to be abtain'd. His thrift, etc.
It Is certain that every man's Duty, is his Interest, and that in whatever
station a man is, there is nothing can render him more prosperous in it, or
more effectually recommend him to a better than a faithful and conscientious
discharge of the Duties of his place. Nor did Solomon, when he ascribed to
Wisdom these glorious effects or fruits, length of days, Riches and Honor,
understand by wisdom, Subtlety, Craft or worldly Policy, but purely a sincere
performance of our Duty toward God and Man: having therefore fully discoursed
of a Servant's Duty both toward God and his Master, it might suffice here to
tell him in general, that a sincere performance of this, is his only true
wisdom, his only true policy. However, that this may more evidently appear, and
that the Servant may be more sensible of the obligation he lies under to the
Duties prescribed him, I will descend to a particular consideration of his
Interest, a thing which Servants as well as others, are allowed, nay obliged to
pursue and advance by all fair means.

It will easily be granted, that the Interest of a Servant consists in these
three things, his Credit, the Love of his Master, etc. the profit of his place;
it is therefore a duty which concerns a Servant to consider what course he must
take to promote these three. The Servants Credit, how advanced.
First then, if we consider the grounds of a Servant's Credit or Reputation, it
depends upon an opinion of his Religion or Virtue, and of his ability or
sufficiency for the place he undertakes; As to this latter, it is not my
business to direct you in it, only I must put you in mind that there are some
greneral qualifications, such as Truth, Industry, and Humility, which are
necessary recommendations to all sorts of lawful Employments; without which
whatever skill or experience any man has, he is unfit for any service. The
other Basis or Pillar of a Servant's Credit is, Religion and Virtue, he that
has raised in others an opinion of his Virtue, has by consequence rendered
himself more valuable and considerable to 'em, for such is the Beauty and
Majesty of Virtue, that it commands from all some degree of affection and
respect; and such is the manifold use of it in the world, that he who is
possessed of it, is presently accounted of as more worthy and more serviceable
than other men, which is a Character which commands esteem. Now if you would
possess men with the persuasion of your Virtue, the most effectual way is
really to be, what you would fain appear to be; for a Hypocrite cannot long be
concealed, and when he is discovered, he looks more loathsome than an open
sinner: besides that a Hypocrite lies under this one great disadvantage, that
his Dissimulation once proved upon him, his Credit can never be redeemed by his
following sincerity, his very Repentance shall never find Credit with men,
there being no way left man to distinguish it from a strain of his known Art:
You must therefore be really virtuous if you would gain a Reputation for
Virtue; you must endeavor to be most eminent in these Virtues which are proper
to your station, sobriety, industry faithfulness, etc, for these are the
Virtues men require and regard in you. There is scarce any place wherein there
is not an opportunity of practicing these in some degree, which practice is one
way, and the best too of raising your Reputation; but besides this, that you
may both confirm and increase these Virtues in your selves, and the opinion
that you have of 'em, in others, you must First industriously avoid all vicious
company. For this, if it do not destroy your Virtue (which were next to a
miracle) it will certainly destroy your credit; for no wise man will ever
believe, that you can be otherwise than vicious in vicious Company. This is
generally the ruin of most Servants; it is here they learn to despise Virtue,
and their Masters; it is here they learn to love Liberty and Idleness; and
Finally, it is here they learn those sins which they can neither maintain nor
enjoy without the guilt of disobedience and unfaithfulness to their Masters,
therefore follow the advice of Solomon, Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the Path
of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it,
turn from it, and pass away; where the wise man does excellently insinuate,
that he that would be safe, can never keep too great a distance from evil
company. Secondly, you must resolutely arm your self against, and carefully
resist the Temptations of the Family you are in; let not the Authority of great
examples delude or deceive thee; let not any prospect of Interest ensnare thee;
let not the solicitations of thy fellow Servants persuade thee; let no
opportunity betray thee into sin; for thou do purchase thy profit or the
favor of man at too dear a rate, if by the loss of thy Virtue, thy Soul, thy
Heaven, thy God: Never be ashamed of singularity, where thou can not be
virtuous unless singular, Eccles. 4.20, 21, 22.
Observe the Opportunity, and beware of evil, and be not ashamed, when it
concerns thy Soul; for there is a shame that brings sin, and there is a shame
which is glory and grace: Accept no person against thy Soul, and let not the
Reverence of any man cause thee to fall. For thou may assure thy self, that
Virtue is never more honorable than when it stands the shock of Temptations,
and despises the allurements of Opportunity, and that whatever profit or honor
sin may flatter thee with, it will prove shame and bitterness in the latter
end. Thirdly, besides the practice of Religion in private, and the frequenting
the Sacrament in public, as often as you have Opportunity, you must
conscientiously attend to Family Duties, for this peradventure is the only Rule
by which your Master will measure your esteem for Religion, and your esteem for
Religion is the only thing, or at least the main thing, by which he will judge
of your Truth and Faithfulness: Not that this should be your first and chief
motive to it, for that must be not the opinion of others concerning you, but
the Honor of God, and the improvement of your Soul; There lies upon you more
than common Obligations to these Duties, for your absenting your selves from
'em, is not only a slight put upon the Worship and Truths of God, but also an
Act of Disobedience to your Master. In the second place, the meaner your
Education is, the more ought you to covet these opportunities of instruction,
and the less your time for Religion is (which you are often wont to pretend at
least) the more carefully ought you to embrace this time of Worshipping God.
Thus much of the First thing, wherein the interest of a Servant does consist,
which is his Credit or Reputation. The Second is the affection which his Master
and others bear toward him, of which now.

And here it is certain that the surest Foundation of this affection or love, is
the merit of your Service, The Affection of the Master, how attained.
a Faithful, that is, honest and careful discharge of your Duty; but besides
this, there are some qualities that do more immediately tend to recommend and
endear a Servant, such are First, an humble and cheerful temper, which always
puts 'em forward even beyond the bounds of their indispensible Duty, makes 'em
ready to undertake even more than they are bound to, if they think it tends in
the least either to the interest or satisfaction of their Master, and in doing
this, they must appear glad of the opportunity, desirous of purchasing their
Masters favor at any rate; and this is such an obliging temper, that it is
almost impossible to fancy a Master so stupid or ungrateful, as not to take
notice of, Love and Reward such a Servant. Secondly. He that will win the
affection of those he serves, must make it appear that he loves 'em, he must
rejoice in every good that befalls 'em, and be afflicted in every evil; he must
be extremely tender of creating 'em trouble or disturbance, not so much out of
the fear of any damage growing from it, as out of a filial delight in their
satisfaction, and a filial affliction in their trouble; besides all this, he
must always speak well and kindly of 'em, he must look upon it as a lucky
accident, when ever he has opportunity to check the ingratitude of a
Fellow Servants toward 'em, or to vindicate their Reputation against the
calumnies of a Stranger; and if he will take my advice, he must not only speak
well of his present, but his former Master: For I can hardly be persuaded that
a Servant will speak well of me, when gone from me, who speaks ill of him whom
he served before; but if there be nothing good which he can speak of him, yet
at least, let him never speak any ill of him, unless he be unavoidably forced
to it. Nor let the Servant only speak well of his former Master, but let him
serve him to the utmost of his power, for gratitude to a former, is the
Servants highest merit with his present Master. Lastly, That the Servant who
desires to be beloved, keep at the greatest distance he can from all sorts of
quarrels and contests in the Family, let him never make any himself, nor be a
party in those made by others, and let him be so far from insinuating himself
into those things which his Superiors or any others would keep secret, that on
the contrary, he must rather fly from the knowledge of a secret, which others
would disclose to him, unless they have some good use to make of his trust; all
this that I have here directed, I would have performed, not with art and skill,
but sincerity; for a Servant cannot counterfeit an obliging temper long, if he
do not endeavor to possess himself really of it: He must endeavor to love his
Master truly and heartily, or else it will be very hard for him to make a good
show of that love which he has not; and he must be finally endowed with an
humble and quiet spirit, or else it will be a very difficult task for him to
stand neuter amidst the quarrels of others, and to close his Eyes and Ears
against the secrets, news and tattle which most are so naturally inquisitive
after.

The third thing on which the interest of a Servant depends is the profit or
gain of his Place: The Servants Profit, how advanced.
And here I need not tell you, that a Faithful discharge of your Duty serves
most to promote this, for this, as you have seen, gains you affection at home,
and credit abroad, and the Master will certainly give most countenance and
encouragement as far as he is able to the Servant he loves best, and every
Member of the Family will favor and assist such a one as far as they can; and
if there be no ground for a rational expectation of reward from those he
serves, his own credit, will in a little time open the way to it, an
extraordinary Virtue can be no more concealed than the Light, the meanest and
most private Employment is Theater enough to an excellent Person, but what is
most considerable of all, he that serves faithfully in any Station, has God for
his Spectator and Patron: There is therefore one thing only which I am to put
you in mind of, and that is, that you be good Husbands of what you gain; I
mean, that you do not wast and lavish it out in unnecessary expenses, whether
in fine Attire, or the extravagancies of gaming or entertainments. And to this
good Husbandry, you lie under the strongest obligations that can be, for First,
By these ways, you bring into question not your Discretion only, but your
Virtue too: For if a Servants expenses look bigger than his gains, it cannot be
thought uncharitable in the Master, if he do not only condemn his folly, but
also enter into a suspicion of his unfaithfulness to him; or else his
engagement in some unlawful course or other for the supply either of his Pride
or Prodigality. But Secondly, The loss of your credit is not the only evil, you
are to apprehend from this Folly, but also Distress and Poverty one time or
other: For Alas! The Revenue of a Gentleman is not able, (we see by daily
experience) to support the folly of a spend-thrift, and how much less, the
narrow salary of a Servant: it is true indeed, it is the extremity of unkindness
in a Master to turn a faithful Servant to the Common, after he has spent his
strength and youth in his service, but I think it is extremity of folly in a
Servant to expect that his Master should be kinder to him than he is to
himself, or to eat the bread of his old age at the Courtesy of others, when if
he pleases he may eat his own. This cannot but prove a very strong engagement
upon Servants to thrift, especially if it be considered, that they are more
unable to sustain the wants and hardships of Poverty, than Common Day-Labourers
are; for he generally has not the same palate who is accustomed to feed at his
Master's Table, that the poor man has, who feeds at his own.

But whilst I recommend Thrift to you, and a regard to your own profit, I would
not have you make use of this advise for a pretense to justify either your
want of Charity, or your quitting a service wherein you have been highly
obliged upon the least show of a little more gain in another: For first as to
Charity, it is the Duty of Servants as well as Masters, The Servant's Charity.
God requires of every man in proportion to that wealth which he gives him, a
part of it for the poor; and if the reward of the Servants Mite cast into the
stock of the Poor, shall be as great as that of the pounds of the Rich, no
doubt the punishment of his uncharitableness shall be as great as that of
their's: For the refusal of contributing this his Mite, cannot but be judged an
extreme wickedness, if it be considered that he may spare it easily, and that
the reward of it is no less than a Heaven. A Servant must not for a slight
gain, quit the Service where he has been long instructed and born with.
As to the second thing, the quitting a service wherein you have bin obliged
upon show of a very little gain, it is an action of extreme folly and
ingratitude, for a raw and untutoured Servant after he has bin formed and
shaped, and fitted for service, immediately to relinquish that Family where he
has bin thus instructed in prospect of a slight gain, is extreme ingratitude;
for certainly he ought to think his service most due to those who have made him
a Servant, and taught him how to perform it: they have done more for him, than
they who after he is well qualified, give him larger wages: I do not know,
whether I may not add, that this is Injustice in a Servant; for surely he that
plants and waters a tree, has best claim to it is fruit, and that Master who
has born the trouble of a Servants Ignorance, has the best right sure to his
better service, which is but the fruit of his own Care, Patience and
Instruction: Nay it is easy to be conceived, that this is due to him by a Tacit
Pact and Contract; for the Servant cannot but think, that no Master would give
himself the care and trouble which the instruction and Patience to be used
toward a raw Servant requires, did he not propose to reap some ease and fruit
from it afterward, to defraud him then of this rational expectation, does look
extremely like Injustice as well as Ingratitude; Nor is the folly of this
action generally less than the ingratitude, for Masters generally love most,
and confide most in those whom they have themselves bred up and fitted, so that
generally such a Servant may thrive better by keeping than quitting his
service: But if this once grows to an humor of flitting and shifling from
place to place, then the folly of it is remarkable even to a Proverb, A
Roulingstonce never gathers Moss, for whatever good Qualities such a Servant
may be possessed of, they cannot turn much to his profit, because he does not
allow time for the raising of his Credit, or the establishing a value of, and
affection for him in any Master; and these are the usual seeds of a Servant's
gain.

The Conclusion.
Thus I have given you a short, but I hope a clear and full view of your Duty;
some of you may peradventure fancy, that I have bound a heavy burden upon you;
but I must tell you, it is no heavier than what God lays upon you, than what the
reason of every one of you, if you would make use of it, would lay upon you;
than what lastly, the necessities of your place and station, and your own
Interest does indispensibly require of you: Nor have I only presented you with
a draught of your Duty, but I have also pressed and recommended every part of
it by such reasons as may convince you of the truth of what I have last said,
namely, that your Interest, your Conscience, and our God, exact the observance
of those things I have here perscrib'd you; there is therefore less need of of
any pathetick address to you here by way of Conclusion: However, I cannot
forbear putting you in mind briefly of two things: First, The great and many
evils the neglect of your Duty is the cause of. Secondly, The great and many
benefits the right performance of it will procure both to your selves and
others: The First thing is too sadly and notoriously evident to be denied, who
can reckon up the Children who have been corrupted, or betrayed the Families,
whose Fortunes have been subverted by the falsehood or negligence of Servants?
Who knows not how often the love of the Master and Mistress has been dissolved,
and their Honors blasted by the lying and deceitful Tongues of those of their
own household? who knows not how miserably the peace and quiet of Families has
been disturbed, the beauty and order of 'em deformed and confounded, and the
Religion of 'em obstructed, and their substance consumed and exhausted by the
pride and peevishness, by the sloth and carelessness, by the lavishness and
unfaithfulness of ill Servants. And can you think, that these, and innumerable
other mischiefs which your transgression of your Duty creates, the World shall
go unpunish't? Shall not God, who in his compassion hears the cry of an injured
Servant, in his Justice, behold the wrongs and crimes of an evil one? Shall
that God, who will not wink at the transgressions of the Rich and Mighty, the
Monarch and the Potentate, pass over, and connive at those of the Servant; No,
no, assure your selves, you shall be as accountable to Almighty God for your
negligence and falsehood, for your disobedience, unfaithfulness and discontent,
as the rich and great shall be for their Luxury or Covetousness, for their
Ambition or Oppression for their Mutinies, Factions, and Disloyalty: For these
your sins are but a Copy and Transcript of their's, though in an humbler style,
and less character, according to the circumstances of your Fortune and Station;
and when God shall enter into Judgment with you for these things, it will be
well for you if he punish you only with Temporal Chastisements; you will escape
well, if your Pride end only in contempt, your Frowardness in a general hatred
and aversion, your Carelessness and Wastfulness in Want and Beggary; and your
Unfaithfulness in indelible Reproach; God will I say be extremely tender and
compassionate in distributing Justice, if this be the worst that befalls you, if
you buy repentance at so cheap a rate as the suffering any or all of these
evils; and yet how dreadful these appear to you, I appeal to your own thoughts;
for I believe a sluggish and evil Servant can hardly read this without
Impatience and Murmuring against me, because I do not prophecy to him smoother
things: but alas! I have not half vented the Burden which the Lord has charged
me with against wicked and unfaithful Servants; for I must tell you, Tophet is
ordained of old, as well for undutiful Servants, as tyrannical Kings; for as
your sins are sins of accumulated aggravations, your acts of injustice and
uncharitableness, when they are put into the balance, being pressed down, not
only by their own weight, but that also of Ingratitude, Lying, breach of trust,
an impudent contempt of all restraints, and a bold defiance of all the
necessities of Virtue which God's providence imposed upon you: Your sins, I
say, being of such an accumulated guilt, you cannot but in reason expect, that
your punishment shall be laid on in good measure, pressed down, heap't up, and
running over. Ah poor Souls! my bowels are moved, my compassions are kindled
toward you, when I consider this your wretched Fate, must you pass from a
state of travail and meanness, to a state of Eternal Pain and Eternal Reproach?
Must your servitude end in a Hell at last; and can you be content it should do
so?

But that I may not seem to delight to prophecy evil and not good concerning
you, let me beseech you, that you would deliver the World and your selves from
all these evils with which your miscarriages plague and threaten them and you:
Let me beseech you, that you would rescue your selves from the contempt, from
the insolences and severities, with which, not your Fortunes, but your Vices
now oppress you, and that you would by sincere and Christian Virtues recommend
your selves to the love and esteem of Mankind, and make your selves an useful
and considerable part of the World as good Servants indeed are: O redeem at
least your Souls from slavery, let not your Unfaithfulness and Pride, your
Disobedience and Frowardness, your Looseness and Carelessness exclude you from
Heaven, and bereave you of Crowns and Glory, which the meanness of your Birth
or Fortune never can. No, no, God is not such a fond accepter of Persons, as
partially to condemn any of his poor Creatures to meanness here, and misery
hereafter: Your Service is but an opportunity of Merit and of Glory, it puts
you into a capacity to do and suffer more, with design that you should receive
more too than other men in another World at least, proportionably to those
hardships you undergo, and these Virtues which you practice in this. And the
blessed Jesus, who took your Form and Character upon him, did not disdain the
lowness of your condition, but shed as much Blood for you as for the Rich and
Noble; he purchased for you the same Peace of God, the same Favor, the same
Kingdom; all that is required of you is, that you should live in those Virtues
that are suitable to your condition, that you should do the Duty of your
Station, when you are assured you shall have your Reward from God, which shall
be nothing less than a never-fading Crown of Righteousness: Besides the love
and esteem of Man, and a Provision of all things necessary made for you by the
blessed Providence of God; nor let it seem strange to you, that your Service in
so low a Station, should entitle you to such great Rewards, your Virtue is as
necessary in the World as that of Men in a higher Station; the motion of the
Feet, and motion of the Hands, is as necessary to the Body, as the direction
and guidance of the Eye: It Is by you the order and beauty of the World in a
great measure subsists, for were there no Servants, there could be no Masters:
It Is by your Travail, that not only the necessities of Mankind in general are
supplied, but also the Pleasure and Grandeur of States supported; for neither
would the Earth bring forth it is increase, nor would our Tables be covered with
the Fish of the Sea, the Beasts of the Earth, or the Fowl of the Air without
your Ministry and Attendance; nay farther, it is by you that we enjoy the
Studies of the Learned, and the Prudence of the Statesman, for the necessities
of Life would so wholly take Men up, that they would have little time for these
Nobler Works, were not those lower Cares devolved on you: If we come to more
particular effects, the Prosperity, the Virtue, the Peace, the Unity of
Families depends not a little upon you: Thus you see; you are not the least
useful Members of the Community, and therefore it is not to be wondered at, if
the Rewards designed you, should be proportioned to the Service required of
you: Acquit your selves then like Men, like Christians; you serve God while you
serve Man Faithfully, and of him you shall receive your Reward.

A Prayer.
O Lord my God, thou have made and do dispose of all things in a wise and
excellent order, thou have placed me in this Rank of Mankind, thou have
appointed me this my Station; O grant, that I may discharge the Duties of it
Zealously and Faithfully, enable me to employ and improve the Talents thou have
entrusted to me, and make me useful and serviceable in my Place. Lord, let not
my Soul lie under the guilt of the discontent or ruin of any Family or Person,
but make me an instrument of Peace and Prosperity where I am; I know, O Lord,
that Humility and Industry are Virtues that are not so pleasing to a Carnal
Mind, but Lord, make me sensible, how great the recompense of my self-denial
will one day be: Make me O Lord remember that I am always in thy sight, and
that thou do ponder all my Paths, that I may be fully convinced that both my
Temporal and Eternal Interest depends upon the Conscientious performance of my
Duty; that so I may not be seduced or discouraged by any Temptations whatever,
but still looking up to God, and having regard to the recompense of Reward, I
may run with patience the Race that is set before me, Amen, Blessed Jesus. So
be it.

PART III. The Necessity of Communicating; Concerning the Sacraments of the
Lords Supper, there are two things which Servants are to be Instructed in.
First, Their Obligation to Receive it as often as they can have an opportunity.
Secondly, What Preparation is necessary to it.
CHAP. I. The Servants Obligation to Receive the Sacrament.
General Obligations.
THE Obligations to Commemorate the Death of our blessed Lord, which arise from
the consideration of his great Love in dying for us, and the great benefits we
are made partakers of in that Holy Communion; and from the need we stand in of
the Grace and Mercy that is conveyed and sealed to us in this Sacrament; these
and such like are Universal Obligations, and equally concern all Mankind, the
Servant as well as the Master, the Poor as well as the Rich, for the Son of God
has died for all alike; Mercy to pardon us, and Grace to assist us is tendered
to all alike, and all do alike stand in need of both: And of this sort of
Obligation is the command of Christ, and the practice of the Primitive Church,
and the nature of the Duty, as it is the renewing of our Covenant; all these do
oblige all Men alike to frequent Communion; for no sort of Men were excepted in
the command of our Savior, no Rank of Men were excluded in the practice of the
Church, and since it is a public owning of our Covenant, it seems to me that it
cannot be utterly neglected, much less contemned without Relinquishing the
Communion of Saints, Renouncing the Faith, and falling almost into the guilt of
open Apostasy: All these Arguments and Motives to the frequent use of the
Sacrament do as strongly bind, and forcibly press Servants, as any other sort
of People whatever. Obligations peculiar to Servants.
But besides these, there are some considerations which may more peculiarly
concern Servants than others, and which seem to render the neglect of this Duty
more inexcusable in them than in any others. As First; As they enjoy not the
pleasures which Men of plentiful Fortunes do, so neither are they distracted by
the cares which Masters of Families may reasonably be supposed to be: Nor are
they engaged in so many contentions as the many designs and interests of their
Superiors do necessarily expose them to; they live, if it be not their own
fault, by constant Rules, they have all the advantages of retirement in the
midst of the World, lying under no pressing Temptation either to care, or
contest, or sensuality: So that unless they be extremely careless of their
Souls, unless they be extremely insensible of the love of Jesus, they must live
in an habitual preparation for the Sacrament, or at least they can have no
tolerable excuse for the neglect of it. It deserves well to be further
considered, that the great stress of business which lies upon many Masters of
Families, in their Trades and Employments, lies not alike upon them, or if it
do, it may indispose and incapacitate the Master for the Communion, and yet not
the Servant: It Is the Masters choice, but the Servants necessity that puts him
upon it; it is often the Masters Ambition and Covetousness, but it is the
Servants Obedience and Faithfulness that engages him; so that the weight of
business which may be the Masters fault, is the Servants Duty; and therefore
though it keep the one, it must not the other from the Sacrament; for it is
impossible that any one should be made unfit for the Communion by doing his
Duty. It Is true, (to advance a little further) that the love of Jesus in dying
for us was equal toward all, for all were subject to the punishment of sin;
but if there were any difference, the obligation would be greater on the poor
and mean in one respect than on the rich: Because such do need the support and
comfort which they derive from this Blood, not only to uphold 'em against the
terror of another Life, but also under the troubles of this; and certainly the
more low and mean any man's State in this present World is, the more
unpardonable in him, is the love of this Life, or the neglect of another: for
the less pleasure we enjoy from without, the more natural is it to seek the
pleasures of Religion, the pleasures of Faith, the pleasures of the mind, from
all which, it necessarily follows, that a Servants coldness toward his blessed
Lord and Master, has something less of excuse in it than any other Man's: For in
what Heart shall the blessed Jesus find an Entertainment, in what Soul shall he
find place to dwell, unless in that which has no Temptation to love the World?
Where should the love of Heaven, the love of Jesus, and the love of Virtue,
take deeper Root than in that Heart which has rationally no Foundation, no
place to raise any other hopes on that are considerable? Where might our dear
Lord expect sooner to be received with open Arms, and the whole Heart, than by
these who have no other Friend, no other Patron to trust to? According to this
discourse, this was the success, the real issue of things in the first times.
The Poor had the Gospel Preached unto 'em, that (...), these (generally
speaking) were the only Men which were affected and wrought upon by the
Preaching of the Gospel. But now, ah now! The times are inverted, the Servant
and the mean Man appears as much more stupid and negligent in the things of
another Life, as he has less share than others in this; they seem to be sunk as
much beneath the Virtue, as Fortune of their Superiors, and being freed from
the Cares and Emulations, from the Ambition and Designs of those above 'em,
their Souls seem to be grown so unactive, so thoughtless, so dark, that they
carry not one Meditation beyond the works of their hands, like him in
Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 38.25.
How can he get wisdom that holds the plough, and that glories in the goad,
that drives Oxen, and is occupied in their Labors, and whose talk is of
Bullocks? For shame show your selves men, and convince us that you have
Rational and Immortal Souls: let me entreat you, consider how great a dignity
you are advanced to, how great an honor you are vouchsafed by God in being
invited by him to this feast: you do here more nearly approach God, you are
feasted and entertained by him as his Children, you are united in the closest
Ties and Bonds with your dear Lord and ours, you are become one with him, and
he with you, and with us all, for in Jesus Christ there is neither bond nor
free; you all sit equal guests, equal favorites at this table, O let not the
humility, the condecension, the love of Jesus be slighted and despised by you;
ah how trifling a favor in comparison of this, conferred upon you by your
Master, or any body else, wherein you value as supposing him rich and great,
would transport you into all the heats of thankfulness, and put you upon any
task how hard or how mean soever, by which you might do him honor. I Will insist
no longer on this point, I Will only mention the little and mean objections
against this Duty, Objections Answered.
with which you are nevertheless wont to content your selves; you have, you will
say, so much business, so much work, that you have no time to prepare for the
Communion. You do then serve not only a very hard, but a very foolish Master,
so foolish, that I can scarce believe, there is any such: for who can be such a
sott as to be unwilling to give you time wherein you may give him the greatest
security, the surest pledge of your Fidelity, Industry, Humility, and all other
Virtues of a good Servant, that his heart can desire? Can any man be such a
sott as not to give a bad Servant time to reform in, or a good one time to
repeat his Vows and Resolutions of his perseverance, and to fortify himself,
in his Duty by fresh engagements? And this benefit certainly every Master reaps
by his Servant's conscientious frequenting the Communion: and yet after all,
let your Master be never so unreasonable toward you, or ungrateful toward
God, (for he is both in this) I must tell you to your comfort, no Servant is
rendered unfit for the Communion by doing the Duty of his place, the discharge
of your Duty toward man is a part of your Religion toward God; this
peradventure may render your preparation less solemn and laborious, but never
less acceptable; a sincere sigh or groan from you in such a case as this, (if
such a one can be supposed) shall be admitted for as good satisfaction, as the
most solemn confession consisting in a particular enumeration of every sin, and
an act of sorrow appropriated to each when performed by others who are Master's
of their own time; a Devout Ejaculation shall be accepted from you as well as
the most careful trimming of their Lamps, the most studious dressing of their
Souls from others: But here let me beseech you, that you do not abuse that unto
a plea for your negligence and security, which I have taught you only as a
comfort under the necessity of your circumstances: For when you have time for
more solemn preparation, you must not out of presumption or laziness content
your self with this, but this I must leave to your own consciences, and to God
the searcher of hearts to determine: this then, that you have no time, is a
vain excuse; but you will say, you are ignorant and unlearned, and do not
understand the nature of this Duty, why do you not then consult those that do?
Is it so that there is no good Christian in the Family? Is there no Pastor in
the Parish? Is it possible that in these days of light, any, though the meanest
of the people, should perish for lack of knowledge. But you are unworthy to
approach that table; and are you resolved that you will ever continue so? If by
unworthiness, you mean any course of sin; break it off speedily, lest you
perish in it, peradventure this call to the Sacrament may otherwise be the last
Invitation to Repentance, the last tender of mercy that shall be ever made you:
but if by unfitness, you mean Frailties and Imperfections, Defects and
Weaknesses, if this should make us unfit, who then could be fit? If this should
make us unworthy, who then could be worthy? Sin and folly would be a
qualification for the Communion, if none were fit for it, but such as were
arrogant enough to think themselves so, for that in this sense of fitness, were
to think themselves void of defect and frailty, which were flatly repugnant not
only to Humility, but Truth too; But you will lastly say, you are conscious to
your selves of great weakness, and are afraid of entering into Engagements,
which you have much ground to fear you shall not be able to perform: If you
prove unable, it will not be your sin, but misfortune, but I am afraid, you
mean, which you shall not be always willing to perform: And if so, I must
confess, I fear you are not fit for the Communion; for this insinuates that
your Heart at present is not sincere, that your meaning is not right, and that
you have some darling sin, or at least some remainder of sin, which you cannot
yet be fully persuaded to part with: If it be otherwise, the weaker you are,
the more need you have of that Sacrament by which you will be confirmed and
strengthened; if you are sincere, you are always safe.

PART III.
CHAP. II. Directions for the Servants Worthy Receiving the Lords Supper.
Contemplations tending to stir up a Devout Conviction of this Duty in the Soul.
OUR Savour's Institution of this Sacrament is thus related. Our Lord Jesus the
same Night that he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he
brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take, eat, this is my body
which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise after Supper, he
took the Cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to 'em, saying, drink ye
all of this, for this is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you,
and for many, for the remission of sins. Do this, as often as ye shall drink it,
in remembrance of me. Out of these words, our Church forms that excellent
Prayer, Almighty God our Heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy, did give
thy only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for our Redemption,
who made there (by his one oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect
and sufficient Sacrafice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the sins of the whole
World, and did institute, and in his Holy Gospel command us to continue a
perpetual memory of that his precious death, until his coming again; hear us, O
merciful Father, we most humbly beseech thee, and grant that we receiving these
thy Creatures of Bread and Wine, according to thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ's Holy Institution, in remembrance of his death and passion, may be
partakers of his most blessed Body and Blood: On the parts of this Prayer you
may descant thus, O my God, and my Father, did thou give thine only begotten
Son to suffer death upon the Cross for my Redemption! what then was my state,
that it was capable of no lesser Redemption than the bitter death of thy Son? A
state of sin and misery; a state of bondage and fear; a state of darkness and
affliction; a state of wrath and death, death, eternal death; and shall I be so
fond of this state, as to continue in it, after thy Son has shed his blood to
redeem me from it? Shall I despise this Redemption, and not hasten to be
partaker of his Blood, and all the benefits of his death and passion? O my God,
and my Father, it was an act of the most tender mercy in thee, to offer up thy
Son to death for me. Ah what Ingratitude must I be guilty of toward thee, what
cruelty toward my self, if I neglect this great salvation, if I renounce, or
at least forget my Savior, and exclude my self from any Interest in his death?
O blessed Jesus, did thou by thy one painful oblation of thy self upon the
Cross, make a full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction
for the sins of the whole World? and can there be any thing more dear to me
than the memory of this thy love, more worthy of my remembrance than the
redemption of the whole Word? Redemption! ah blessed word! What happiness, what
Heaven does it import to be redeemed by Christ, is to be translated out of
darkness into a marvelous light, out of the Regions and shadows of death, into
the glory of the Sons of God, out of a state of bondage, into the most perfect
liberty, out of a state of wrath, into a state of Love and Mercy, out of a
state of Dread and Terror, into a state of Peace, and Joy, and Hope, or at
least, into a capacity of all this! and does not all this deserve, that I
should ever commemorate this thy Redemption of me and of the World, with devout
joys, with humble transports, and the most grateful passion? Did thou need, O
my Blessed Savior, to institute, and in thy Holy Gospel command me to continue
a perpetual memory of that thy precious death until thy coming again, lest I
should forget it? Ah wretched nature! Ah wretched state! Can there be any
temptations that can betray me into so vile a baseness? Can the love of the
World, a false deceitful World, make me forget thee, thy Agonies, thy Wounds,
thy Death, thy Love? Ah my dear Savior! can it be so hard a matter to keep my
remembrance and love of thee awake, alive, that thou should need to command
me thus to commemorate thy death in the lively symbols and representations of
it, and to enforce thy command by putting me in mind of thy coming again?
Methinks, without all this, my love for thee should have been so bright and
flaming, that I should have despised all things as dung and dross in comparison
of thee, and have desired to have known nothing but Jesus Christ and him
crucified! methinks I should have lived in the devout contemplation of thy
great and excellent actions, and thy great sufferings, till I had been weary of
this World, and of this body of this poor Beggarly and Imperfect state, and
have longed for my Dissolution and Entrance into thy presence! this, thy love
deserved from me, even though I had been encompassed with the pleasures, and
crowned with the honors of this World; how inexcusable then must I be, who am
one of the meanest of the people, who have no allurements, no temptations in my
Fortune, if I forget thee and forsake thee! Ah! how shall I stand before thee
when thou come again. How shall I behold thee in the glory of thy Father, and
on this tribunal, if I should now forget thy sufferings for me, forget thy love
of me, and neglect thy last, thy dying commands, the highest token of thy
passion for me, showing how solicitous thou wast lest I should lose the benefit
of thy blood, when thou had shed it! ah! with what, not shame and blushes,
but horror and amazement would my guilty Soul be covered at thy appearance!
but this shall never be my Crime, this shall never be my state, never shall my
Soul be guilty of such ingratitude to the Tender Mercys of my God, or the
tender love of my Savior: No; my sorrows overflow me, my heart is wounded
within me, that I have forgot thee so long already, that I have remembered thee
so seldom, that I have turned my back so often upon that Holy Sacrament,
wherein thy passion ought to have been commemorated by me; O pardon, pardon,
blessed Lord thy unkind, thy unfaithful Disciple: I come to thee, I come to
confess thee, I come to worship thee in the troubles and desires of a broken
Spirit, a contrite passion, a restored Faith, and a Revived affection. O
receive me, covered with my tears, and with my shame, but ravished with thy
love too; henceforth, O my Savior, I will live with thee, nothing shall divide
thee from me; not Business nor Interest, not Relations nor Friends, not the
sluggishness of the body, nor distractions of the World, not life nor death it
self; I will live with thee in devout Prayers and Holy Meditations, and with an
impatient passion, I will have to meet thee in the Holy Sacrament which thou
have appointed as the representation of thy death, the pledge of thy love in
the symbols oif thy extraordinary presence: And, O blessed God, who of thy
tender mercy did give thy Son to suffer death upon the Cross for my
Redemption, out of the same tender mercy assist me with thy grace, that I may
commemorate that his death, with that Faith and humble gratitude, that I may be
made partaker of the Redemption wrought by it; help me so to approach these
Holy mysteries, so to receive these Elements of Bread and Wine, that I may be
made partaker of the most precious body and blood of my Savior, that so being
washed from my sins by his blood, united and incorporated with him by Faith and
Love, I may be strengthened and supported, governed and protected by him, while
I am in the body, and may meet him at his coming again with unspeakable
rejoicing, and be acknowledged by him as his Faithful Disciple and Follower.
Amen, Amen, for the sake of the same my crucified Redeemer and Savior Christ
Jesus.

A Devout Exercise of Faith, Repentance, Love, and Hope, by way of Preparation
for the Sacrament.
FIrst, The Exercise of Faith. The former Exhortation of our Church, to the
Receiving of the Sacrament, lays down the design of Communion in these few, but
full words; The most comfortable Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, is
to be received in remembrance of his meritorious Cross and Passion, whereby
alone we obtain remission of our sins, and are made partakers of the Kingdom of
Heaven. On which you may thus comment, Lord, I believe, help thou mine
unbelief, I believe that thou the Son of God, did take upon thee the form of
a Servant, and wast made in the likeness of Men, and being found in fashion as
a Man, did humble thy self, and becamest obedient unto death, even the death
of the Cross. I believe, that by that thy painful Death, painful indeed to
thee, but comfortable and happy to us, thou did not only make an Oblation and
Satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, if they would believe and repent,
but also purchase for 'em an Eternal Kingdom: I do therefore desire in this
Holy Sacrament to make a public Confession of my Faith in thee, I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of my God unto Salvation, I
am not ashamed of thee my Crucified Savior, for I know, there is no other name
given unto Man, by which he may be saved, but only the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. I do therefore most earnestly desire to be made partaker of the
benefits of thy Death; and to have the assurance of my Redemption by thy Blood
sealed to me; for I have, O Lord, a weight of sin that hangs upon my Soul, from
which, unless thy Death deliver me, it will sink me down into the lowest Hell;
therefore with impatience does my Soul desire to approach this comfortable
Sacrament, where I may give thee the sincere assurances of my Faith, Repentance
and Love, and may receive from the assurances and pledges of my Redemption
wrought by thy Cross and Passion: But Lord, I know, that they only can draw
near with comfort to this Sacrament, who with hearty Repentance, and true Faith
turn to thee: I do therefore desire to place my self first as in the presence
of God, and under the awe of his all-seeing Eye, to examine and try my Life and
my Heart, and to enter into the most sincere purposes of reforming what is
amiss in me; and help thou me, O my God, that I may do this as I ought to do,
give me that just sense of the weight and importance of this work, that I may
do it with care and vigor, convince me so of the indispensible necessity of
sincerity, that I may neither hide nor disguise any sin in my Examination, nor
make any, the least reserve for any in my Resolution of amendment. And, O my
God, if through the necessities of my Employment, or through the straitness of
my time, or through the ignorance or prejudice of my Education, any thing shall
escape me, O impute it not to me, but have compassion upon the Frailties of my
Nature, and the Infelicities of my State, and upon whatever weaknesses unknown
to me, are grown upon me.

Secondly, The Exercise of Repentance. O Almighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Maker of all things, and Judge of all Men, thou Holy, All-seeing and
Impartial Judge, I present my self before thee in the Humility of my Soul, in
the grief and bitterness of my Heart, to confess and bewail my sins, and
actually and sincerely to renounce 'em.

Here consider first the course of your past Life in general. Thus, how you
have behaved your selves toward your Parents when under their Government, I
mean not the particulars of your actions, which it is impossible to recollect,
but such generals as these: Whether you have been notoriously disobedient,
whether you have notoriously neglected the means and opportunities of your
Education, or by any other way procured the grief, affliction or shame of your
Parents: Then consider your course of Life since you came into Service, as
whether you have lived carelessly and coldly toward God in an habitual neglect,
or it may be, contempt of Religion, whether you have been a Faithful and good
Servant, or on the contrary, whether you have lived in the custom and habit of
Disobedience or Unfaithfulness to your Master: And lastly, as to your selves,
consider whether you have lived in a habit of Drunkenness, Gluttony,
Uncleanness, Pride and Wilfulness; now if upon Examination, you find your
selves to have been guilty of any of these things in your past lives, it will
be necessary to confess and bewail your error, although you have now long ago
renounced it, broken off your sin, and lived a new Life; and it will not be
amiss to consider what aggravations are to be found in these your sins; for
example, what convictions you have resisted and stifled, what restraints you
have broke through, what inconveniences you have suffered by your sins, what
extraordinary Mercies and Deliverances you have had, what extraordinary
Chastisements God has inflicted upon you, what Opportunities of Grace you have
slighted; these and such like considerations serve to render the Soul more
Humble and Contrite, and to quicken the sense of Gods Goodness and
Loving Kindness toward you: When you have thus examined what the State of your
Life past has been, you are secondly, to examine what the present State of your
Soul is, and here, you are to consider, First, Whether you are now under the
dominion and power of any sin, and this your Conscience, if it be not seared,
will soon inform you, for it cannot but tell you, that it has accused you for
the Commission of this or that sin: But lest you should deceive your selves,
you may examine your selves in the former manner upon those several Heads of
your Duty treated of in this Book, as you stand related to God, to your
Parents, to your Master and Mistress, to their Children, to your
Fellow Servants, to your Neighbors in general, and to your selves: Weighing
your present behavior and affection toward each in this, as you did your past
in the former part of this Examination.

If upon this view of your selves, it appears to you, that you live in any sin,
you must not only bewail it, and resolve against it, but you must also make
Restitution, if you have wronged your Master, your Fellow Servants, or any
other; if you have wronged 'em in their goods, you must restore it if you can;
if you cannot, you must confess the wrong, and beg their pardon: If you have
wronged 'em by Lying, you must discover the truth, and take the shame to your
selves: If you have grieved, disturbed and troubled 'em by rudeness,
contumelious Language, or any such way, you must make 'em what amends you can,
by confessing your error, promising Reformation, and begging Forgiveness: If
you have been injurious to the Souls of any, you must be as industrious to
reclaim 'em; when you have done all this, I would not have you make too much
have to the Sacrament: But first, make some trial of the Truth and Sincerity of
your Repentance; but in giving this Rule, I would be understood to speak either
of sins of habitual Omission, or else of those notorious transgressions of Gods
Laws, which the Scripture calls, the works of the Flesh, the wickedness in
which the Gentile World lay, the filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; for as to
defects and frailties, though we must strive against 'em, we shall never be free
from 'em: As to Lukewarmness, Stupidity or Lifelesness in Religion, if you mean
by it a form of Godliness without the power, that is, that you profess to
believe and live civilly, but the Duties that you perform are done heedlesly
and perfunctorily, without any seriousness, or any relish, and the whole
application of your mind runs upon the World; this is a State to be repented
of, and you must enter upon resolutions of greater care and watchfulness, and
fervency; and having done this, you may proceed to the Sacrament, without
making so long a trial of your selves as in the former case; because neither
the Church nor your Neighbor can receive any scandal thereby.

Now beside this part of Examination consisting in an enquiry what sins you
have been guilty of, or now live in: there is a second part of Examination
consisting in this enquiry, what good you have done, what resemblance there is
between your life and the life of Jesus, your Spirit and the Spirit of Jesus?
for negative righteousness is not sufficient to make a man a good Christian,
and though it be true, that we are not bound to the highest perfection under
pain of damnation; yet the love of God, the love of Jesus, and the hopes of
eternal glory do all oblige us to aim at it, and therefore we ought to bemoan
our non-proficiency, barreness and unprofitableness, I mean not, absolutely
such, but comparatively with respect to what we should attain to: And that you
may do this aright, demand of your selves, what requital have we made our
Parents? What assistance have we afforded them since God has blessed us? What
share, of what God has prosper'd us with, have we given to the poor, the
hungry, and the naked? What service have we done for the comfort and support of
any that have been any ways distressed? After this, read with a sober devotion
the Beatitudes, Mat. 5. and examine the state of your Souls by 'em; thus, am I
poor in Spirit, contented in the lowest state, resigned up to God both as to my
undderstanding and my will, filled with humble thoughts of my own endowments
both natural and moral? do I mourn under the sense of my past sins, and my
present defects and infirmities? Do I weep in secrets for the sins of my
people, for the Desolations and Divisions of the Church of Christ, for the
infidelity of Jew and Gentile, and in general, for the dishonor God's name
suffers in the World? Am I of a meek and quiet Spirit, peaceable, and slow to
anger, full, of humility and reverence toward all, but especially my
Governors and Masters, studying to do my own business, and to live quietly in
my Station? Do I hunger and thirst after righteousness? Is my Soul inflamed with
a desire of saying knowledge? Do I delight in the meditation of Heavenly
truths? Am I ravished with the Loveliness and Beauty of works truly great and
truly Christian? Am I merciful? do I delight to imitate my heavenly Father as
far as I am able, being bountiful to the needy, compassionate to the
distressed, long suffering toward the offender, gentle and easily entreated,
carefully studying and resolv'dly pursuing the good of all, even of mine
Enemies, and such, whose either Ingratitude to me, or their aversion to their
own good, renders the work much more difficult? Am I pure in heart? Is the
World crucified to me? Do I account all things but dung and dross in comparison
of the excellence of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord? Do I love my God,
and love my Jesus, even to a thirst after a dissolution, that putting off the
body, I may enjoy 'em in Heaven? Do I in the singleness and simplicity of my
heart pursue the honor of God without regard to any by-interest or corrupt
affection? Am I a peacemaker, content to purchase it for my self, or promote
it amongst others by any travail or pains, and by very great disadvantages to
my self? Do I pursue peace in the Church of Christ, in the State, in the
Neighbor hood, in the Family, in my narrow, capacity withal imaginable zeal?
Lastly, Am I willing, if the will of God so be, to part with all, and follow
Christ, to undergo not only reproach and contempt, but if need be, the spoil of
all I have, nay Stripes, Imprisonment, and Death it self? These are the heights
you are to labor after, and though you may fall very short of 'em, this
Examination will serve to increase your humility, to make you more importunate
for the assistance of God, and more desirous of being strengthened and
refresh't by the Holy Sacrament, nay it will excite and quicken your graces in
you; for there is a loveliness in Virtue, and therefore the oftener you
seriously behold it, the more you will be enamored of it.

When you have discovered by this Examination the state of your Souls, then
proceed to bewail 'em before God, thus; These and many more which I cannot
recollect, are my sins, O thou Judge of the World, and these have all been
repeated from time to time, so that they now are grown formidable to me for
their very number, and yet besides this, how provoking are the aggravations of
them, that I should sin thus in defiance of the brightest revelation of thy
will, in contempt of thy long suffering, patience and goodness; in contempt of
thy astonishing love manifested in my redemption by the blood of Jesus, in
defiance of thy great and precious promises, and of all the calls of thy Spirit
and of thy Providence? nay, O my God, I have trampled under foot all my most
solemn engagements, and returned to the commission of sin, in contempt even of
my repentance, my vows and resolutions, and can thou have mercy upon such a
wretch as I am? I know, I have most justly provoked thy wrath and indignation
against me, my sins are gone over my head as a thick cloud, they are a sore
burden, too heavy for me to to bear, they are more in number than the hairs of
my head, and my heart has failed me; but O Lord God, I do earnestly repent, and
am heartily sorry for these my misdoings, the remembrance of 'em is grievous to
me, the burden of 'em is intolerable, I am ashamed, yea even confounded under
the sense of my folly and ingratitude, I have considered thy terror, and
fearfulness and trembling has taken hold upon me; I have considered thy tender
mercies, and my Soul is wounded within me, for having so falsely and unworthily
forsaken and offended thee: I have considered the humiliation and the
sufferings of my blessed Savior, and my Soul suffers an Agony of love and
shame with in me for what I have done against my dear Lord. I have considered
the Beauty of Holiness, and I loath my self for the deformity and pollutions of
my sins: O therefore thou, who do delight to show mercy to repenting Sinners,
thou God of love and mercy, have mercy upon me, and O thou Lamb of God, which
did shed thy blood for sinners, have mercy upon me; thou that take away the
sins of the World, have mercy upon me; and O my Heavenly Father, deliver me not
only from the guilt, but from the power of my sin; I tremble indeed at thy
wrath, and my soul faints within me, when I think of being excluded forever
from tny presence; but I do also loath and detest my sin, O deliver me from it:
aid me by thy blessed Spirit that I may conquer and subdue all my corrupt
affections: O let that Spirit which was in Jesus be in me also, that the life
of Jesus may be seen in all my actions, and the image of Jesus may be formed in
my Soul, and my conversation may be in Heaven; and here O Lord, I offer up and
devote to thee even my Soul and my body, resolving to live a life of Devotion,
a life of Justice and Charity a life of Meekness and Humility a life of
Industry and Watchfulness, a life of Purity and Sobriety: O Lord strengthen me,
O Lord establish me by the might of thy Spirit, by the power of thy Word, by
the protection of thy Povidence, that I may persevere and be faithful unto the
end, and so obtain a Crown of Righteousness, through Jesus Chirst our Lord.

3dly. The Exercise of Charity. O my my God, thou have taught me by thy holy
Word, that thou art love, and that he only who dwells in love, dwells in
thee; and accordingly, I do find that thou art long-suffering and merciful,
that thou fillest even the Wicked and thine Enemies with thy goodness; and O my
blessed Savor and Redeemer, I find that in this also thou art the express
Image of thy Father, and the brightness of his glory; for thou came from
Heaven to Earth to die for thine Enemies, to reconcile man to God first, and
then to reconcile and endear us all to one another, and has taught us that we
cannot be thy Disciples unless we love one another: I do therefore most readily
forgive all those that have wronged me either by word or deed, I do from my
heart readily pardon all those who have or do wish me evil, or who endeavor or
design me any; I do earnestly desire to be the Child of my Heavenly Father, and
the Disciple of my dear Master in this point, and therefore being jealous lest
my reconciliation should not be sincere or perfect enough, I do firmly purpose
upon every opportunity to express my Charity toward mine Enemies, my acts of
Love and Kindness; and lest after all, I should not be zealous enough to
promote that Love and Unity which is so dear and acceptable to my God and my
Savior, lest I should not thoroughly copy out the Divine pattern that is set
me, I will not only with unfeigned Humility and Affliction of Soul confess my
offense, make reparation, and beg pardon for any wrong I have done others, but
I will woo and importune those who have wronged me into a reconciliation: For
how well must this become me when God himself courts and beseeches the sinner,
and the Son of God Preached and Prayed, and Wept and Died for those who were
irreconcileably set against him; To be used by such as are conscious of
Undutifulness toward their Governors.
and O my God, I do now call to mind how unkindly, how unchristianly I have
behaved my self toward those who are my Governors in Church and State; I have
often made false, slanderous and spightful reflections upon 'em, and have aided
and countenanced others in the like, I cannot make to them a Personal
Acknowledgment of my offenses, nor sue to 'em in particular for the pardon of
'em: Here therefore before thee my God and my Judge, whom I have hereby
offended, I do confess and bewail my sin and folly, humbly imploring thy
pardon, and the assistance of thy Grace, that I may henceforth walk in
Christian Charity toward those who are my Governors, thy Ministers for my
good; not only forbearing all Disloyalty, Disobedience, Malice and
Uncharitableness my self, but also discountenancing and opposing it in all
others, as far as in me lies.

O thou God of Love, fill me with thy Divine Spirit, fill me with Brotherly
Affection, and with a Fervent Zeal for the good of my Neighbor, nor suffer me
ever to be wanting according to my capacity to increase the happiness of the
Prosperous and the Pious, or to relieve the misery of the Afflicted and the
Sinner.

But O my God, whilst I pray for a Spirit of Love toward my Neighbor, I must
not forget to beg, and beg earnestly, that by the same Spirit thou would shed
abroad the Love of thee my God in my Heart: O Let me ever remember the great
things which thou have done for me; O Let me ever think upon the Patience and
Long-suffering, which thou have exercised toward me; above all, let my Soul
ever adore, and love, and bless thee, that thou have given thine own Son out of
thy Bosom to die for me, and for all Mankind, that whoever believed on him
might not perish, but have Everlasting Life. And O let me ever love and
glorify that Son of thy Bosom, who have loved me, and given himself for me,
and washed me from my sins in his own Blood; and O may I ever express this my
Love by a frequent Commemoration of it, by Devout Addresses to thee my God, by
a Devout Zeal for thy Glory, and the propagation of the Kingdom of my Savior.
Amen, Amen.

Fourthly, The Exercise of Hope. After all these reflections which I have made
upon my sinfulness and the Divine goodness, upon my guilt and the atonement,
and satisfaction wrought by the Blood of Jesus, I find, that as the
consideration of the one begets sorrow, so does the consideration of the other
beget hope in me; and I find the trouble of my Soul clear up into Christian
Peace and Comfort: My past sins indeed, and my present unworthiness, fill me
with grief and shame, and reproach of Conscience, but there are other things
that lift me up from the Earth, that wipe away my Tears, and remove the
Garments of my mourning, and fill my Soul with cheerfulness and delightsome
expectations; such are these, when I consider the Divine Nature, I am assured
that God delights not in the death of a Sinner, but delights in exercising
Loving Kindness, Righteousness and Mercy upon Earth: When I consider the death
of Jesus, I am well assured, that it is a full, perfect and sufficient
Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for my sins, and the sins of the whole
World; when I lastly consider the tenor of the Gospel Covenant, as it is
published to the World by the Son of God and his Followers, I find contained in
it pardon of sins to all repenting and believing Sinners without Restriction,
without Limitation, without Exception of any Person, or Reservation of any
case: Math. 11.28.
Come unto me all that travail and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
John 3.16.
So God loved the World, that he gave his only Begotten Son, to the end that
all that believe in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life. 1 Timothy
1.15.
This is a true saying, and worthy of all Men to be received: That Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners. 1 John 2.1.
If any Man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. And now I lift up my Heart
O Lord unto thee, I approach near thee, and Sacrifice to thee in the joy of
hope and thankfulness. For though I do not presume to come to this thy Table
trusting in my own Righteousness, yet I do firmly trust in the multitude of thy
Mercies, I know I am not of my self worthy to gather up the Crumbs under thy
Table, yet I do with all know, that the Son of God has died for Sinners; and
that thou art the same Lord, whose property is ever to have Mercy; I do not
therefore doubt but I shall be a welcome and acceptable, though in my self an
unworthy Guest to this Table, and being assisted by thy Grace, shall so eat the
Flesh of thy Son Jesus Christ, and drink his Blood, that my sinful Body shall
be made clean by his Body, and my Soul washed through his most precious Blood,
and I shall evermore dwell in him, and he in me. Amen, Amen.

Aug. 5. 1685.
Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus, The Duty of Servants, etc.

H. Maurice Rmo. Dno. Wmo. Archpo. Cant. a sacris.

^INIS.
There is lately published by the same Author a Book entitled, An Enqutry
after Happiness, etc.


