THE Loyal Protestants VINDICATION, FAIRLY Offered to All those Sober Minds WHO
Have the Art of Using REASON, AND The Power of Suppressing PASSION.

By a Queen Elizabeth Protestant.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Sign of the Bishops-Head, in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

THE Loyal Protestants VINDICATION.
Fellow Natives and Brother Protestants.
FOR by Birth and Charity we are bound so to call you. And we hope, That (upon
the Ebbs of your heat and humor) you will out of humility think it fit at last
to call Us so too.

It cannot de denied, but that (ever since the Blessed Reformation)
Protestanism is the Common Cause and Interest of England. And that he only is
to be reputed Our Enemy, who shall and does by Plots and Designs endeavor,
either to Subvert or Alter our Government, as it now stands by Law established
both in Church and State.

Now for the Blasting and Defeating of all wicked Conspiracies against Our
Established Government, both at present and for the future, I can assure you,
that you have our Heads, our Hands and our Hearts. Nor can you be more zealous
for the Overthrow of the late discovered Damnable and Hellish Popish Plot, and
the suppressing the Growth of Popery, than the true honest-minded Church of
England men are. Pardon them only in this; That they love a Zeal regulated with
Prudence, and softened with Moderation.

You all very well know, That it has been of late the great artifice of the
Jesuited Party to intrude (if possible) their damnable Plot upon that Classis
of Protestants called Presbyterians. Who I am persuaded have learned from their
former miscarriages, That it is both theirs and all Protestants Interest, not
to disturb our National Government, or disoblige their Prince.

And I could heartily wish that the Papists might never have had any colorable
pretense for fathering their Brat of Rebellion upon any sort of Protestants
amongst Us. And this they would never have had, if the years between 1640. and
60. could be razed out of the Book of Time, and the memory of this Age.

But whatever things the Papists may Revive to serve their Cause, We are
willing to forget them, so it may heal our Breaches, and Cement us together in
a Brotherly Assistance of each other, for the saving both of You and Us, and
our Protestant Religion.

And for the effectual promoting of so considerable and public a concern, I
think all judicious and thoughtful men will allow that there is nothing so
essential and necessary as our Union. And though it is not reasonable to expect,
that all the sorts of Protestants in England should in a moment concentre in
one mind, in one judgment and opinion: Yet what should hinder, but that they
may have a reciprocal kindness and love one for another, and one and the same
Loyalty to their Prince?

Unless the Protestant parties in England are like the Princes in Germany,
wherein every one is so much wedded to his own interest, that he had rather see
the Emperor dethroned, and the whole Empire lost, than lose one little Regalia
of his own to save it.

Never were the Papists so full of Plots, and so big with hopes as now. And
never was the Wicked one so busy in sowing the Seeds of discord and contention
as within this month or two last past. For to an observing eye the Print of
the Cloven foot has been easily seen in all the Roads, Cities, Towns and
Corporations of England within that time.

And whatever Sentiments some Over-zealous and misguided men may have of
linking and listing themselves and names, under the form of a Petition; yet
certainly none but the Jesuit, (who alone has the Art of out doing the Devil
in malice and mischief) could have invented a more proper and effectual way of
setting Protestants in England at a greater variance and distance than ever
they were before.

The Old weather-beaten course which the Jesuits used to make us Protestants
hateful to, and hating one of another, was to cast upon some the name and
character of Calvinists, upon some Arminians, upon some Socinians, upon some
Pelagians, upon some Cavaliers and Malignants, upon some Covenanters and
Roundheads after the old style; but now Churchmen and Fanatics, or Court and
Country party, after the style of the newest fashions.

But now since the Jesuit perceives that We Protestants begin to smell the
device of these Nicknames, and that we are growing so skilful as to discern
that these are only bones thrown in amongst us, merely to make us snarl, and
bite, and devour one another; Therefore the Jesuits (to perpetuate and continue
the Protestant fray and scuffle, which is the only advantage to their Cause)
have now at this time (if not invented) yet at least set on foot a Form and
mode of Petitioning, which must inevitably run us into fearful Broils, if not
timely prevented.

For pray observe, With what heat and earnestness did some press the
Subscription of it upon others their fellow subjects? With what Reluctance and
stubbornness did others deny and refuse it? How passionately and bitterly did
many in Coffee-Houses and other places debate and argue the lawfulness and
unlawfulness of it?

And it is to be wished, that in some Towns, Parishes, and Neighbourhoods it be
not the standing cause of irreconcilable feuds and quarrels among the people.
For such has been the imprudence of some Hotheaded men that carried this
Petition about for Subscriptions, that they told the un-thinking vulgar, it was
the Shibboleth to discern between the Protestants and Papists in England.

And hence many of them (poor Souls!) out of fear and ignorance set their
Hands, but more their Marks to it: when as they, and those that Pressed it upon
them, can give no just positive account, whether this Petition, and the Solemn
League and Covenant, were invented and framed either by a Papist or a
Protestant.

And now is not this a pretty piece of Sport to our Common enemy the Papist, to
see a Leaf of paper set all England in a Flame, and create most desperate
Animosities amongst its Protestant natives? Could there be any Project or
Device (next to the killing of our Gracious Sovereign whom God long preserve)
so essential and proper for the Ruin of Us, and our Protestant Religion as
this?

What need have the Papists of Collections from their friends? or moneys from
the Holy Chamber? or of Armies from Foreign Popish Princes? when as our
Divisions, which they have set up amongst us, will with good looking after most
certainly and inevitably do this work to their hands, without any such cost or
trouble.

Serious and frequent have been our Addresses to you for a Brotherly
Correspondence and Reconciliation, and your Joining with Us in the Defense and
Preservation of the Protestant Religion. Nay we have made it Our Humble
Requests to You, that you would do Us that Right and Justice, as to own and
allow us to be Protestants as well as your selves. And yet such has been the
hard fate and misfortune of Our Gentleness and Meekness toward you, that like
the Grace of God to proud and wanton sinners, they have been scorned and
rejected.

For instead of any Civilities to us for this our Humble Demeanor, you have
imperiously ascended the Seat of Judgment, and the Chair of the Scorner:
Loading us with Scoffs and Reproaches, and condemning us for Heretics and
Papists. Nay, so mightily Sowr'd are you in your Opinions and Judgments of an
English Churchman, that you nauseate him, as you pretend to do a Papist, and
shun his converse and sight as much as a man of curdled blood does Cheese.

But whatever Treatments you are pleased to give us, or whatever Liveries you
think fit to Clothe us withal; yet (begging your leave) we shall desire this
freedom as to cleanse our Garments from those foul Aspersions thrown upon them
from Pulpits in Conventicles, Libels from the Press, and those Scurrilous
Reproaches vented by Republican Tools and Tantivy's.

And therefore let him that has Eyes and Learning to read, Consider the Loyal
Protestants Vindication, In these following Particulars,

FIRST, We do own and love all Protestants of whatever Sort, Title and Name,
that do really abominate the Superstitious fooleries and Heretical Doctrines of
the Church of Rome.

Secondly, We do Approve and Delight in all Persons, which assert and vindicate
the King's Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes both in Church and
State.

Thirdly, We countenance and commend all such, who mind their own business and
study to be quiet, and who out of Duty as well as Modesty have so good and just
opinion of their present Sovereign's Art and Judgment in Governing, that they
will not presume to prescribe him rules and methods of managing the people
which God has committed to his care and charge.

For such has been his Education, and so much experience has he learnt in
foreign Courts and Countries, during his Exile, that we can positively say, He
is the Wisest King in Christendom, and the best Statesman in all his whole
Kingdom.

Fourthly, We are for giving all men their just dues according to their
Dignities, Places, and Qualities, and do abominate all those harsh and rough
methods, which irritate our Superiors anger and displeasure. For certainly of
all persons, Governors chiefly are to be obliged and not forced.

Fifthly, We do verily believe, that according to the Contents of our New
Testament, no man ought to Affront and Vilify his Princes Person and Authority
either in words or deeds. And that if he cannot conform to the Government of
his Prince, yet he is bound in Conscience, not to be openly, publicly, and
actually disobedient, especially where the Prince is Christian and Protestant
too. And where the ground of Subjects Obedience and Disobedience is purely
about Things Indifferent, which is a thing that wholly excludes all doubts and
scruples of Conscience.

Sixthly, We do abominate, and as seasonably and prudentially as we can, rebuke
and suppress all sorts of Vices and Immoralities without respect had to
persons. And should be heartily glad to see Whoredom, Adultery, Drunkenness,
Swearing and Pride, to grow out of fashion in the Kingdom; as we wish, Malice,
Spite, Backbiting, Censuring, Slandering, Railing and Bitterness of Spirit may
decay amongst you.

Seventhly, We heartily Love, and highly Applaud all plain-hearted and
publick-spirited men, who aim and endeavor at things for the Kings Honor and
Greatness, and the real good of the whole Kingdom. But we do detest and abhor
all self-ended and self-seeking men, especially those who engage a whole
Kingdom for a particular disgust; and study revenge for a private defeat they
have received, or who design to make themselves Popular, great and rich under
the Pretense of serving the Public.

Eighthly, We heartily pray, and use all the interest we have, that this late
Damnable Hellish Popish Plot, (which God in mercy to us all has brought to
light) may be daily more and more detected and brought to a final Period. And
we join with you in our souls, that the Parliament may sit for the Trial of
those Great Conspirators, who cannot be otherwise Tried but by Parliament. But
as for the time, when this Parliament should sit about this weighty affair, we
humbly leave it to His Majesty's Prudence, who, of all men has the sole right,
and is best able to choose the seasonableness of doing it.

Ninthly, We do firmly believe, that the Present Actings and Designs of Our
Enemies the Papists are so wicked and evil, and Our Cause so Good and Just,
that we dare (with the use of lawful and justifiable means) in an humble
confidence refer the whole matter into the hands of Providence, not doubting
but that God will so rule the heart of our King, and direct his Councils, that
We and Our Religion will at last have as Memorable a Deliverance, as any of
those which have been in the Days of our Ancestors.

Tenthly, We do affirm, and can justify it: That the Men of the Church of
England are the true, right, and only Protestants. And for this we dare appeal
to the known Laws of the Land, to the Hugonots of France, and all the
Calvinistical and Lutheran Churches abroad; for whenever they write or speak of
the Church of England, they mean that which is established by Law in our Nation.

And because the Memory of Queen Elizabeth is always so fresh and fragrant in
your minds, that you keep her Anniversary Coronation-day above all other
Protestant Kings of England, with the solemnities of Bonefires and ringing of
Bells. We therefore take the opportunity to declare to you; That it is not you,
but we are the Men, who are not only the Legal, but the true Queen Elizabeth
Protestants. And I would advise you, the next time you observe that Day, (which
I shall observe with you) that you would enquire into your selves, whether you
are the Protestants of that mould and stamp, which she loved, and her Laws
protected in her Reign.

Eleventhly, Though you take a pride or pleasure, or both, to represent us to
the Vulgar under those filthy characters of Mungrel Protestants, Half
Protestants, Protestants in Masquerade, and Church Papists. Yet under our
patient bearing of your Reproaches: We beg your pardon to make this
Declaration: That we do abhor and detest those black and odious Titles. And had
you but a spark of modesty, or a grain of reason, or the least insight into our
Laws, you would have long since forborne to persecute us with this slanderous
Accusation.

What was Queen Elizabeth a good Protestant, and now must the Queen Elizabeth
Protestants be counted no Protestants, or called half Protestants, and
Protestants in Masquerade? What does the Jesuit and Papists hate us, and plot
to destroy us, because he finds us the best and truest Protestants? And must
you to Revile us and seek to Root us out: because we are not Protestants
according to your standard?

Certainly had you but any wit or Reason about you, you might plainly see; That
whatever you think of us, the Papists take us only to be the truest
Protestants, and their greatest Enemies. For it is against Us that all these
malicious Plots are levelled. And they have only set you up as Tools and
Instruments to complete their design. For alas, there is hardly one amongst all
your Parties has writ so Judiciously and Rationally against the Church of
Rome, as to deserve either a Learned Papists reading or answer.

And now must our Bishops, Doctors and Divines be the only Champions for the
Protestant Religion against the Romanists. And yet must their Hearers and
Followers be branded with the Ignominious Names of Half Protestants, Church
Papists, and Protestants in Masquerade?

For shame forbear these unchristian slanders; or else all foreign Protestants
will say, that you want both manners and modesty, or which is worse, brains and
reason.

Go on, if you please, with your trade of Calumniating: But thus plain we will
be with you, to acquaint you, that our Eyes are so open, as to see you use one
way, and the Papists use another way, to destroy and Ruin the Church of
England, with its Protestant professors. And we declare, That from our
knowledge of you Both, we expect no Quarter or mercy from either of you.

For the Church of England men have already endured two Persecutions, the one
of Fire in the Reign of Queen Mary, the other of the Sword in our late
Unnatural Wars, when men of your own kidney Plundered, Sequestered, Imprisoned,
Hanged and Beheaded many Thousands, for no other Crime, but that they were
Loyal Subjects, and Queen Elizabeth Protestants. And now we are Expecting to
fall under a Third Persecution: But whether it will come from the Papists, or
You, we cannot as yet so easily Discern.

Lastly, Because you so arrogantly call your selves The Protestants, and the
True Protestants; and so scoffingly call us the Half Protestants, and Church
Papists, and Protestants in Masquerade:

We therefore send you this Challenge.

Go if you dare with us into Westminster Hall, to the Assizes and
Quarter Sessions before the Judges and Justices of the Peace; and there (if you
dare) take with Us the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. Renounce with us the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the Solemn League and Covenant. Subscribe
with us the Declaration of the Unlawfulness of taking up Arms against the King.
And bring with us your Certificates of Receiving the Sacrament according to the
Church of England.

This, This is the Test and Shiboleth to distinguish Protestants from Papists,
and not your Form of Petition which lately went in Procession; and should your
boasted multitudes of Subscribers be brought to this Touchstone, we know that
three parts of five would run a great danger of being convicted for Recusants
by Law; for many of you who proudly call your selves the True Protestants, will
as stiffly deny the doing of these things as the Rankest Papist in England.

In love therefore I desire you to refrain from the Villifying us with the
filthy characters of Protestants in Masquerade, and Church Papists, since that
we have been so kind to you for many years, as not to put you upon this Trial,
which we know would be as ungrateful and prejudicial to you as any Papists.

And if you cannot out of Modesty and Charity, yet out of Interest learn to be
more Sober and Moderate to your fellow Natives and Protestant Brethren; and do
not Calumniate the Honest Churchmen of England who Pray for you, and love you
better than you do your selves, and would be glad to have you to join with them
in all lawful and justifiable ways, for the overthrow of all Popish Plots, and
the Preservation of that Protestant Religion which is Established by Law.

And now let all the World Judge, whether We or You, are Half-Protestants, and
Protestants in Masquerade; since that We will abide by those Legal Trials and
Touch-stones, which are the National Discriminations between Protestants and
Papists: and You, or the major-part of You, refuse these Tests as well as the
Papists; and as long as You stand in the Refusal of them, You are but Papists
in a Protestant disguise.

FINIS.

