LICENSED.

July 19. 1686.
A LETTER TO Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. etc.

In ANSWER to the Epistle Dedicatory before his SERMON, Preached at a Public
Ordination at St. Peter's Cornhil, March 15. 1684/5.

TOGETHER WITH Some Reflections upon certain LETTERS, which Dr. Burnet wrote on
the same occasion.

By SIMON LOWTH, Vicar of Cosmus Blene, in the Diocese of Canterbury.

Sed non idcirco, frater charissime, relinquenda est Ecclesiastica disciplina,
aut sacerdotalis solvenda est censura, quoniam convitiis infestamur, aut
erroribus quatimur. B. Cyprianus, Ep. 55. ad Cornelium.

Impp. Honorius and Theodos. A. A. Anthemio, P. F. P. Hirenarcharum vocabula,
quae adsimulata provincialium tutela, quietis ac pacis per singula territoria
haud sinunt stare concordiam, radicitus amputanda sunt. Cesset igitur genus
perniciosum reipublicae: Cesset rescriptorum Hirenarchas circiter inconsulta
simplicitas, and celsitudinis tuae seeds provinciarum defendenda suscipiat,
pacis hujusmodi locupletioribus commissura praesidia. 12. Cod. Theodos. Tit. 14.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, in Amen-Corner, MDCLXXXVII.

A LETTER TO Dr. Stillingfleet, In ANSWER to his Epistle Dedicatory, prefixed
to his SERMON Preached at a Public Ordination in the Church of St. Peter's
Cornhil, March 15. 1684/5;.
Reverend Sir,
HAVING perused your angry Epistle, I am now abundantly satisfied, that after
all the clamorous Objections and riotous Noises against my Book of
Church Power, raised and kept up by Men of your Party and Complexion, and all
the endeavors of such Champions as your self, and that renowned Hero the
famous Dr. Burnett, you have been able to say nothing in reply to it, besides
personal remarks and accusations. I might add choice Epithets and
embellishments of Wit, that might have become a Tripas Exercise in the
Sophister's Schools, but by no means the Gravity of an old exercised Master of
Polemicks. If you can reap any satisfaction from loading me with the general
Titles of a Plagiary, ridiculous fool, malicious, unskillful maker of
Controversies, a barbarous and rude Disputer with his Brethren, an accuser of
his Brethren, an implacable man, uncharitable, unjust, slanderer, proud, void
of prudence and common discretion, the usual Complements you are pleased to
bestow upon me, you may be happy in the enjoyment of your humor, though it has
not an Irenical Complexion: But I that design nothing but the pursuit of Truth
and Honesty, shall only endeavor in an easy method, and plain words, to come
to the true state of the Controversy between us, and my reply you may be
pleased to take in this order: First, I shall presume to make some return to
those little Pleas and Excuses that you give in for your self; and those
Accusations of any weight that you are pleased to bring in against me; and
withal take the liberty to reflect a little upon the Treatment I have received
from your Friend and Advocate, Dr. Burnett, upon the same occasion: For I
foresee that opportunity will be offered. Secondly, I shall make it appear,
That the account you give of your Irenicum is not fair nor true; and that you
conceal your Crime in the very confession of it: The whole design and plot
being merely laid against the Re-establishment of the Church of England.
Thirdly, I shall enquire more particularly how far you have recalled, and
recanted the principal Errors of it; and particularly the Imposture of your
Manuscript: not doubting to make it appear, That you still owe a public
Recantation for it, not to the poor Vicar of Cosmus Blene, but to the Church of
England.


First, I shall consider herein the little pleas you make use of for your self,
and your trifling Accusations against me, together with your Characters of me;
and also take the liberty of some Reflections upon Dr. Burnet. And here your
failure is so evident and notorious at the very entrance, and your conclusion
so inconsequential, that it plainly appears you began your Epistle in a
passion, and without a due consideration of those things which in course follow
upon one another. Otherwise, how could you say to your most Reverend Diocesan;
That as you have the satisfaction of doing your duty in obeying his Lordship's
command, for Printing the Sermon you Preached at his last solemn Ordination, so
you hope others will have so much at least in Reading of it, as to be convinced
how unjustly you have been, not long since, represented to the world, as an
enemy to the very being of Churches in general, and to the constitution of this
Church in particular. Pray how does it follow, because you Preached sound and
orthodox Divinity at that one time, that you had never Preached or Printed any
thing Erroneous or Heretical before? Or what connection is there in this, such a
one is now a sound Divine, and therefore he was so always? Had you in that
Sermon made it appear that my Accusation was not True, or that I had said you
would never retract those unsound tenants that I accused you of, then you might
have depended, with some tolerable assurance, upon the Reader's conviction of
the injustice I had done you: But since so it is, that you neither attempted to
clear your self concerning those things I accused you of; neither did I say,
you would never retract them; to infer injustice on my part, because some years
after that I had accused you, you Preached a Sermon which was Orthodox in those
points, wherein I said you were once defective, is a conclusion he alone can be
guilty of, whose common perceptions are choked with Choler: No Man could
suspect that Dr. Stillingfleet made it, had not the following part of the
Epistle been of his Composure also, consisting mostly of the like undecencies.
I said you were guilty of such Doctrines at the time when I Printed my Book;
but I did not say you would never retract them. It was part of my design in
writing that Book to inform you better, and that you might come to a sense of
those Errors, which I apprehended at that time you were not sensible of: I told
you I judged a retractation necessary; and that you ought to make one, (which
was my crime in that I spoke so plainly and boldly to you) and no Man rejoices
more, or thanks you more than I do, for what you have performed of that nature
in your Sermon.

You argue on at the same rate, and say, That my Calumny (as you are pleased to
call it) is groundless and ridiculous; because you have since proved the Church
a distinct Society, and vindicated her power in general, and the particular
constitution of this Church. Now this supposes the truth of my accusation, and
that you once had asserted the contrary; only I am so disingenuous that I take
no notice of your retractation, but still urge that first Error against you:
and this is the full of all that you can be interpreted to plead for your self.
The conclusion indeed seems larger upon the first reading, by the advantage it
has from the embellishments of your style, or your artificial disposition of
the whole; but he that duly considers the premises, will find no more: And
indeed it is only a sham way of arguing; just as afterward you tell the
History of your Irenicum; where not one word you say comes up to the point
under debate. The reality of the Controversy betwixt us (which you say I have
with so much folly, and malice, and unskilfulness made; and the world will
laugh at me for, only the comfort is, they must first discern it with your
Eyes) lying here; whether you have in your latter Writings given sufficient
evidence to the World of the change of your judgment as to these Points of
Church Power in general, and Episcopacy in particular? or (as in the words of
your Epistle) you are not still the same Enemy to the very being of Churches in
general, and to the constitution of this Church in particular, that I own I
once did represent you to be, for which I gave my reasons in my Book, and
private Letter, since Printed before it; but never had any Answer, unless you
shall be pleased to say that this Epistle Dedicatory is an Answer; (and yet I
hear you do say so) which is indeed a Libel: Besides, it did not come forth
until two full Years after. So then, the ground is laid out, and the
Controversy stated. You affirm; I deny. I shall put it upon a fair Trial; your
own writings shall be my Evidence, and the Readers the Jury.

You continue on and object, That I produce not one considerable Argument which
I did not steal out of a Discourse of yours; but this must never be taken
notice of. Dr. Burnet, and Mr. Dean of St. Paul's have sufficiently blazoned me
abroad for a Fool, and non-sensical fellow; and truly with reason too, if you
could prove me so silly as to steal and tell. When my Papers came first to
London, in order to the Press, and you, with some others, had got them into
your hands; the artifice then used, whereby to bespatter me about the Town,
was, to tell it abroad, That I was not the Author of them: And there was, it
seems, other grounds for it than we were at that time aware of; because they
were yours. But when Men are in the Net, the more they struggle, the more they
are entangled. I confess you owed me a turn; for I had peremptorily accused you
for stealing out of Robert Parker; and pointed you to the very time, Book,
Chapter and Margin, when and where he was transcribed by you: And certainly
nothing was ever more imprudent, if not unpardonable, than for you to take his
credit and testimony against our Church and Episcopacy, who professedly
designed their defamation and destruction; and really was the greatest
Incendiary, and most malicious, implacable Schismatic that appeared in his
time against us; or perhaps that had appeared since our Reformation, excepting
Thomas Cartwright: A Man could in Conscience do no less than expose you for it.
And if you had but dealt as heartily with me, and named the particular time,
Book, etc. your Accusation would have had greater weight, and my Vindication
might have been more particular and satisfactory; whereas now I can only
proceed upon Conjectures. I remember, once being assaulted by an impertinent
Quaker, amongst other stuff, he told me, That I was a thief; the reason that he
gave for it was, because I stole all my Learning from Books. Now in this sense
I confess my self a thief; and in particular that I stole my Book out of the
Fathers, Councils, Church History, etc. and more, that I might possibly steal
now and then out of your Irenicum; it being such a Farce of all manner of
Quotations, that it is a hard matter to miss of some of them: And I will say
thus much, That if those Quotations were as aptly applied as they are numerous,
you might, at that time, have been placed in the first file of Learned Men. I
have been informed, That the Regalia of France, published some time since by
your Friend Dr. Burnet in his own name, were the labors and collections of Mr.
Brisbon, his Countryman, who delivered his Papers unto him, and desired his
judgment of them; but the wise Doctor (whose Back is of steel, as his Face is
of brass) liked them so well, that he went not to bed till he had transcribed
them; and immediately Printed them for his own. Now this is thieving in our
profession.

Your next Objection is levelled against my style; that it is without
embellishments: that I follow the Schoolmen only in Two things, viz. A
barbarous style, and a rude way of disputing with my Brethren: And you engage
that posterity will not make me their pattern: And Dr. Burnet has insisted on
the same subject before you, with enlargements; and in the close of his Letter,
dated December. 20. 1684. this is one of the two short advices he is so kind as
to give me; That if you intend to write any more, you will learn first to write
true English, and then to write good sense: but I believe this will prove so
very hard a task, that the best and easiest advice can be given you, is, That
you would write none at all. So that in plain English, you give me the
character Luther once gave Carolostadius, viz. That I have neither Sense nor
Words.

Res and verba Philippus, res sine verbis Lutherus,
Verba sine re Erasmus, nec res nec verba Carolostadius.
As to the former, I have put my self upon my trial, which is God and my
Country; only you and Dr. Burnet are excepted out of the Jury; because Men so
notoriously incapacitated to be there, through manifest prejudice and interest.
As to the latter, I plead, in some measure, guilty; acknowledging my defect,
and that I have been less careful and industrious therein than I ought, and
might have been: And yet I cannot say, (under my present circumstances, to be
sure) That I really repent of it; for these two Reasons: 1. Because you had
thereby lost an opportunity of making this Objection against my Book, and so
much less of your Passion in opposing me must have appeared; which is really my
advantage. 2. If my style had been agreeable with your embellishments and
smoother polite phrases, how can I tell but that you might have taken all my
Book away from me; especially since you have laid actual claim already to my
considerable Arguments.

But as to the Schoolmen in particular, I must confess, That I am no admirer of
their Terms and Niceties, yet I cannot condemn all; but (if my little skill in
them do not deceive me) their rude way of disputing, such as it is, might
become both your own and others imitation: For they are seldom guilty of the
embellishments of soul language; very rarely name persons, but when the case
necessarily requires it; and avoiding all personal heats and quarrels, keep
themselves close to their Matter and Argument, but never repute a nickname, or
cramp Epithete a Confutation of their Adversary. And again, I less admire your
inconsiderateness, in that you accuse so eminent an Order of Divines of
rudeness in their disputations, at the same time when you implead me as guilty
of the same misdemeanor, in respect of your self, and aggravate it against me
as the greatest crime. Besides, you seem mostly peccant herein, having been so
peculiarly beholden to the Schoolmen for your palmarium argumentum, or capital
Argument (as you call it); for the mixed and communicative power of Bishops and
Presbyters (for they were the first that set that design on foot; and their
Arguments still support it) to which you adhere to this day: Do you not boast
and value your self upon that one adventure? It appears by the Epistle
Dedicatory that you do; where you tell us, That the design of it was, to gain
upon Dissenters from our Church; and it did not want success that way, both
here and in a neighbor Kingdom. (I thought our Church and the Pope of Rome had
never gained Proselytes one and the same way.) All that can, with any show, be
pleaded for you is, you looked upon Peter Lombard and Thomas Aquinas, the
Master of the Sentences, and the Angelical Doctor to be Country Vicars, or to
be no Deans; and upon your self as under no obligation of gratitude, or common
civility toward them for that only reason; and hence concluded that you had a
right to theirs, equally as to my Arguments; and so much the more, because you
can put them into better words, your style is less barbarous, or has more
embellishments. And if you hope this way to recommend your self as a pattern to
posterity (though my Charity obliges me to wish them better presidents to copy
after) I shall not envy your acquisitions. I assure you the bar you have put,
that I may not be the like pattern, is no ways ungrateful to me. All that I aim
at is, to appear to posterity an honest Man in my profession; your giant
Objection will then be on my side. And admit my style to be as rude and
barbarous as your Eloquence can represent it to be, the advantage will be the
greater thereby to that truth, which (though so rudely composed) the greatest
Orators have offered so little against. And this point once gained, I value no
more the repute of a Grammarian or Elegant Composer, than the Grammarian in
Aelian valued Helena's Picture, that was drawn by Zeuxes the Painter, who
discerned no one feature in it; being a Gramarian, no Limner, as the reason is
given.

And yet, if we consider a little farther, another reason may be given for this
your Master-Objection: You were an early Disciple of David Blondel's, and the
rest of that Tribe; who assaulted the Epistles of the most Holy and Primitive
Martyr, St. Ignatius, at the same rate. And among those many Arguments from
whence he concluded them to be spurious (wherein you have particularly
concurred with him in your Irenicum; and I wish it were all the rubbish he
bequeathed to you) there are some a dictione petita; from his unusual and
uncouth style, which he defames and renders contemptible, being unmindful of
that of St. Jerome, Scio inter Christianos verborum vitia non solere
reprehendi; as the late most Learned Bishop of Chester reproves him for it,
from the authority of that excellent Father, in his Vindiciae Ignatianae. And
Blondell is so insolent, and puffed up with a conceit of his success herein
against the Apostolical Martyr, that (in his Praefatio ad Apologiam pro
sententia Hieronymi, page 52.) he sets upon Franciscus de Clara in the same
way; and concludes himself to have baffled his Apology for Bishops, only by
giving an account of his solecisms in Grammar, and other barbarities; of which
I have here given a taste En Barbarismos, viz. Satis testium sunt Zelotes. In
recto regiam petierunt Majestatem. Veriverbium sonat. Ecclesiae gubernium.
Primitas. Practica Ecclesiae. Maxima, id est, axioma. Verbulum. Dubiolum vocat,
quod postea pro grandi objectione habet. Nihil sanxierunt. Epilogat.
Amonibiles, etc.
: Though I cannot tell whether something else might not be at the bottom. For
de Clara writes himself Minoritarum; which sounds like a Vicar.

I have sometimes met with more solid and grave Divines (or at least that
believed themselves such) who call their Adversaries Grammarians; thereby
implying the contempt they had of their persons, as altogether unqualified for
those performances in Divinity, in which they had engaged themselves. As I
remember, either Blondell or Salmasius, or both, thus revile Dr. Hammond: But
for certain, Salmasius is thus upbraided by John Milton (who thought himself
somebody) in his Pro populo Anglicano defensio: as also our most learned Bishop
Montacute by Labbee, in his Dissertatio Historica de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis. But your greatness, or Typus Theologicus takes a contrary
method; becomes Splenetick, and swells and insults over me, with this term of
disgrace, No Grammarian; and because I have less regarded words and
embellishments, since matter of Fact, and Argument, are the only object of my
search and enquiry; to which you have not made one exception.

But my matter is accused as unintelligible; to which I Will return the Answer
Mr. Thorndike gave for himself upon the same occasion, in the Preface to his
Epilogue: The obscurity of my matter I am not sorry for; if writing in English
(because here the occasion commenceth) the reasons, if the consequence of it,
in some matters seem obscure; I conceive it ought to teach the world, That the
People are made parties to those Disputes, whereof they are not able to be
judges: and I am willing to bear the blame of obscure, if that lesson may be
learned by the People.

My crime is more heightened yet, in that I am not only rude with my Brethren,
but with two Archbishops and a Bishop, viz. Whitgift, Bancroft, and Bilson;
whom I remarque for writing inconsiderately. I am sorry that a Man of your
Dignity and reputed Learning in the Church, should be brought so low, as to
stand in need of such a palpable Cavil, or groundless Accusation as this is;
your case surely is the same with that of a great person you elsewhere mention;
who, when he had undertaken to manage an ill cause before a public audience,
and one of his Friends asked him what he meant by it, replied, Trouble not your
self, our own side will believe me. Only such a presumption could put you upon
this particular indictment of me: In plea to which, I will only tell the naked
story, and leave the Reader to judge of your candid dealings with me. Robert
Parker (one that ought not to be named by an honest Man but with a mark of
infamy) accused these eminent Bishops for placing the Church Authority in the
Prince. I vindicated them as well as I could, and as I thought, satisfactorily.
All that I there said of them appearingly capable of an exception was, That in
laying their Argument, they did not consider that so ill-natured a Man as
Parker might at some time or other have advantage against them: And I am so far
from acknowledging it a fault, that I accuse them of more inconsiderateness of
the same nature, (you may make it their fault if you can) in that they did not
foresee also, That such a Book as the Irenicum would come into the world;
taking occasion from their writings, and by their authority, to degrade and
depose them; expressly making them a party against themselves, and the
institution of their Episcopal Order; and with as much perverseness and ill
nature as ever Robert Parker acted against them. And now, you see my crime, it
is well if the offense does not lie the other way; in that I made Parker appear
a defamer: the familiarities one, that I know, once had with his writings,
taking them for his own, gives a shrewd suspicion of it.

Yes, but I lay to their charge the bringing in a new sort of Henrician
Heresy: which is as new to me, as the name it goes under. Henrician Heresy! I
am at a loss to find who this Henricius, or Henricianus, the Author of an old
Heresy, is. I have consulted all my Books, as Epiphanius, St. Austin; with
others of the Ancients, that wrote of Heretics, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, and
particularly the Notes of Pamelius upon Tertullian's Prescriptions against
Heretics; where the Catalogue of them is explained; and am still as ignorant
as when I first set out. Who can this Haeresiarcha be? I considered a little
farther, and the word appearing Novel, I consulted my modern Authors, down to
Edward's Gangraena; but neither fell nor fall appeared here either. At last
reading Dr. Stillingfleet's Answer to Mr. Cressey's Epistle Apologetical, page
406. I found the Man, but in great obscurity, among the moldy Papers in the
Cottonian Library. And truly, Sir, though I will not presume to offer to you any
advice of my own; yet I will venture to recommend the advice which an excellent
Friend of yours gave to me, as he supposed, in the like case; and because I
appeared to him unintelligible; it is your Advocate Dr. Burnet's, in his Letter
that he was pleased once to write to me, page 7. You had best to do as another
Emperor did, write of your self, and illustrate your Epistle with Annotations.

That which comes next is a flight of your wit upon the Vicar of Cosmus Blene
and the Vicar at Rome; but falls as much short of it, as Cosmus Blene and Rome
are distant from one another: But more ill nature accompanies it, (without
which some have no wit at all) and you insinuate that to attack you, is to be a
Papist, or at least to be their Friend, as certainly as the Devil is known by
his cloven foot; for so Dr. Burnet speaks out in his last Letter; and farther
adds, That we equally degrade Kings from their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and at
length will make them Reign at the mercy of the Church, and at the Pope's
courtesy. The Doctor was in a heat during the whole time of his Epistolizing,
and did not consider immediate consequences; for he brings Mr. Dean of St.
Paul's as evidently into the praemunire, as he does me, and accuses him of the
same Popery; who has declared himself to be of my judgment; and that the Church
is a distinct Society: And further, That I have not produced one considerable
Argument which he had not made use of to that purpose, in a Discourse published
above Twenty years since. But if the Doctor and the Dean have no better
Arguments to prove us Papists, (as we are very well assured they have not) we
may better bear the charge: I Will add, Or than these which are farther produced
in the following part of the Paragraph; though once thought to be very good ones,
'till my great humility, in writing my self Vicar of Cosmus Blene better
informed you. As, Because I proceed so like a judge in Controversies, and after
an imperious manner summon, by a kind of Citation, etc. (It seems then, that
every judge of Controversies is a Pope, and each Citation is a Bull from Rome)
or else, that my private Letter, begging a more full information from your own
hand, (for that was all which I desired of you in my Letter) is of the same
nature as a Summons or Citation from the Courts Ecclesiastical; and you
suspected, lest an Answer to it, had been a declining your Diocesan's Authority
and Jurisdiction. One of these, or all you must be interpreted to mean, if you
mean any thing; and choose whether you please, it is pure Irenicum all over, or
the very Weapon-salve Doctrine and Argumentation. Thus Men usually run into the
contrary extreme, thinking thereby to atone for the first Error. And you who
have before asserted your Bishop to be really void of Power, or a mere name
without Authority; now enlarge his Power as much too far, and make it a breach
of Canonical Obedience, to Write, or Answer a Private Letter, without his
knowledge and License.

However, notwithstanding the danger of Popery, (for you will certainly say
again, That I proceed like a judge of Controversies, and summon you after an
imperious manner by a kind of Citation, and you may as well say so now, as
before) I Will venture to ask you Two Questions more: 1. Where the crime really
lies in proceeding like a judge of Controversies? does not every one that
writes of Controversies become a judge of them? he ought to be so; or else he
ought not to write about them. And if you had laid your calumny here, That I am
not fit to write Controversies, but undertake to be a judge when I am not
qualified for one, and proved it, you had done something more than every
Traducer can do. Your Objection seems co-incident with Dr. Burnet's, in his
rude Letter, which he sent me, December 20. 1684. Because I published my Book
after a course of studies, upon full thoughts, and a through consideration; or
that I did not Print it, as he does Manuscripts, without fear or wit: or as he
did his Letters in their defense; with such rash, heady precipitancie, that he
is forced to retract in one, what he wrote in another; and each contradicts the
other; as will appear in due place. 2. Admit that I had sent you a summons by
citation to Answer such Questions as I should demand of you, supposing you in
great Errors, and the Church of God had received great damages by your
publication of them; you of all Men ought to have taken the least exceptions
against me for it, who in your Irenicum have enstated me, as a Presbyter, and
by virtue of my Orders, in full power for the doing of it; as to superintend,
inspect, preside over, and govern the Churches; and from the best authority and
precedents Ecclesiastical. So that if I had transgressed, since Dr.
Stillingfleet led me to it, he need not have been so very harsh and severe upon
me for it: Especially, since the utmost of my crime can amount no higher, than
that it was done unclassically. I Will only repeat your own Words for my
authority; Irenic. page 355. That they ( viz. the Presbyters) concurred in
governing the Church, and not only by their Council but Authority, appears from
the general sense of the Church of God, even when Episcopacy was at the
highest. Nazianzen speaking of the Office of Presbyters, (...): he knew not
whether to call it Ministry, or Superintendency (the lofty Superintendant of
Cosmus Blene:) And those who are made Presbyters, (...), from being ruled, they
ascend to be Rulers themselves. And their power by him is in several places
called (...) They are called by him (...). Chrysostom gives this as a reason of
St. Paul's passing over from Bishops to Deacons without naming Presbyters,
(...) because there is no great matter of difference betwixt a Bishop and
Presbyters: For those likewise have the instruction and charge of the Church
committed unto them. With more to this purpose produced by you, to show that
the Presbyter's power is every way equal to the Bishop's; even to summon and
censure the disobedient. And consequently, upon your own terms, the lofty
Superintendent of Cosmus Blene went not beyond his commission, if it were true
(as you scandalize him) that he did actually Summon and Cite you, in order to a
recantation of your Error, as publicly, as the error, scandal, and offense
given by it.

The next Character you affix upon me is not so easily to be born, or pardoned;
[This accuser of his Brethren] because the character which is given to the
Devil, Rev. xij. 10. and you repeat it over again [as my accuser calls it.] I
have made a very strict examination of my self in that performance, and cannot
find that I have given any occasion why you should expose me to mankind under
so odious a Character. I am so confident of my Innocence, that, in order to my
Vindication, I Will here also tell the naked Story, and make my Enemies my
Judges. Sixteen years after the first publication of your Irenicum, (for which,
as you say well, many Men made allowance, considering the scepticalness and
injudiciousness of Youth, and the prejudices of Education) the Manuscript that
is there, and the most Scandalous part of it, (made more Scandalous, by your
declaring it to be the Sense of our Church) was reprinted, with your order, in
Doctor Burnet's History of the Reformation, as an authentic Record; and with
the Approbation of both Houses of Parliament (by the undue procurement of your
Party) affixed unto it, which, by the way, you have declared to be the Mouth of
the Church of England. And this was done without any caution or alteration,
excepting for the worse; because concealing Cranmer's (probable at least,)
Retractation. And about this time also Mr. Dean of Canterbury Preached before
the Court, and afterward Printed Doctrines to the same purpose, or rather more
offensive. Hereupon I apprehended a farther design, than many were aware off;
and not without Reason: For what, appearingly, adds more to the confirmation of
these Doctrines, as the Sense of our Church, than the approbation of both
Houses of Parliament, and the popular names of Dr. Tillotson, and Dr.
Stillingfleet; and all this might make a greater impression upon me, than on
some others; because I had for many years applied my Studies to search after
the Rights of the Church, and that Power which our Savior had vested her
withal, and appointed to be continued till his coming again: Especially, I
being not in the number of those Subscribers, who believe themselves no ways
obliged to defend what they have assented and consented unto. I therefore
revised my Collections, and digested them in that order, according to which
they have since been Printed: where, as I make some reflections upon you, so I
always refer to your own Words and Sense to vouch them. And yet when my Papers
came to London, all the Objections that I found to be made against them by some
Learned Men, into whose hands they lighted, were occasioned by reason of your
self, and Doctor Tillotson; on whom I seemed, in their Eyes, to reflect
over-severely. Hereupon I wrote a private Letter to you, (since Printed before
my Book) the sum of which, is, to tell you the ground of that Charge I had
laid against you, and that I conceived Posterity would be concerned by reason
of your Writings in this Cause, (not in my Writings, as you are pleased to
misreport me) if no Public acknowledgment of the error be made by you; further
adding and desiring, that you would inform me wherein I had wrongfully accused
you; engaging, upon due notice, that I would expunge whatever was in my Papers,
relating that way. To this you vouchsafed me no Answer, unless Scorn and
Contempt (enough of which came abroad every day) are to be reputed one; or the
Epistle Dedicatory, published two years after; which is only a Defamatory
Libel. And now I appeal to the whole World, Whether there is any thing in all
this on my part that is Diabolical; or that may fix upon me the Character of
ACCVSER, in Capital Letters? As also how unjustly you have farther slandered
me, with the Epithets of Implacable, Whom no recantation will do good,
Intractable etc.? or wherein any public scandal or offense is given by me?

If the Scandal and offense be laid here, (and some have so laid it) as
exposing our own Members to the scorn of the common Adversary, especially in
these divided times: Or if it be farther pleaded, That since our Church is well
known, to have neither published nor countenanced any such Doctrines in her
Articles, Homilies, Canons, Rubricks, etc. it had been much better and safer,
to have passed over, and concealed some few, though heterodox Opinions of one or
more particular Doctors, which cannot be supposed to influence and debauch
mankind, against the judgment of a whole Church to the contrary. To this I
answer. Those always have been observed as the worst of Heretics, that arise
among our selves, and within the Bowels of a particular Church: and they have
the greatest advantage to delude and seduce. St. Paul therefore gives
Directions for severe proceedings against those that are within, 1 Cor. 5. and
by the parity of Reason, the Rule is to extend to other offenders, than those
there mentioned by him. And as to my own particular, I do here produce these
following instances, whereby it will appear, that other Writers have taken the
same course and method before me.

1. And Dr. Stillingfleet shall be the first, in his General Preface to an
Answer to several late Treatises, etc. The learned Doctor having at large
discovered several corruptions among the Romanists; and more particularly in
the point of Repentance; they endeavor to clear the honor of their Church, and
thus argue: That where the Church has defined nothing in her Councils, it is
to no purpose to object that such Doctrines are taught in it; for those who
defend their Separation from the Communion of a Church, by reason of its
Corrupt and Erroneous Doctrines, must make it appear those are taught by it,
and the belief of them also exacted by its subjects. To whom he thus replies:
But supposing there were no such foundation for this Doctrine in the Council of
Trent, as we see there is, would there be no danger to Men's Salvation, if
their Confessors generally told them these things, and they knew it to be the
general Opinion among them? Is there no danger of falling into the Ditch when
the blind lead the blind, unless a General Council expressly allow of it? Is
there no danger of Empiricks and Mountebanks, unless the whole College of
Physicians approve them? And then he adds farther: I confess when we debate the
causes of separation from their Communion, we think it then reasonable to
allege no more than what they impose on all to believe and practice (and we
have enough of all Conscience without going any farther;) but when we present
the hazard of Salvation to particular Persons, we may then justly charge them
with pernicious Doctrines and Practices, which are received and allowed among
them, although not decreed by the Church in Councils. For otherwise it would be
just as if one should say to a Man, that asked him whether he might safely
Travel through such a Country? Yes, without doubt you may; for although there
be abundance of Thieves and Highway Men, yet the Prince or the State never
approved them, nor gave them liberty to rob Travelers. Do you think any Man
would venture his Person or his Purse on no better security? yet such security
is all they can give, as to the Roman Church; for they dare not deny the bad
consequence of the Doctrines and Practices charged upon them, but only say, The
Church has not decreed them.

2. When Doctor Jeremy Tailor published some Tenants concerning Original Sin,
which opposed the Doctrine of our Church; Doctor Warner, Lord Bishop of
Rochester, wrote a Treatise against him, and detected his error as openly as he
had divulged it. A great deal might have been pleaded in the Doctor's behalf;
as much, nay, more than can be pleaded for any Man now a days; such was his
eminency in all Learning, his great and daily service for the Church in her
present distress, he standing almost alone in the gap, and in opposition to her
many Enemies ready to devour her, and still gaping with their Mouths upon her:
She was at a very low Ebb, and the Channels were seen at God's chiding, at the
rebuke of the blast of his Displeasure. But none of these things moved the
excellent Bishop, or diverted his purpose. He knew full well, that such
breaches were advantageous to the common Enemy; and therefore the healing them
by due Argument and Authority, was the only way to stop their Mouths. And I
have been informed, those few Bishops surviving in that dismal overthrow of our
Church, Summoned the Doctor to the house of Doctor Duppa, at Richmond, who was
then Lord Bishop of Sarum, where he submitted, and made his acknowledgment.

3. When some Puritanes at Frankford, had opposed the Government and Liturgy of
our Church, and set up their own in its room; Doctor Cox first, and then Dr.
Horn, undertook them; notwithstanding they were little better than banished
Men, and the Marian Persecution raged at home, which made England too hot for
them all. No pleas of Peace and Unity ought to prevail for the complying with,
and countenancing those who oppose the received Doctrines, and Constitutions of
that Church, whereof they are Members; every good and knowing Man will
withstand such to the face, although they do in many things unite with him
against the common Adversary. And those that understand the nature and
constitution of the Church of Christ, as a distinct Society, and its
obligations upon Christians, believe also its Laws, equally established and
binding, when the Secular Power frowns upon and disowns her, as when it
maintains and protects her: and that confusion in all things (as you are
pleased to express it) or a Laxation of outward reward or penalties, gives no
liberty to any one man to choose his own way; but much less does it authorize
and indemnifie any one particular Doctor, or more, to draw up new Schemes and
Modes of Worship; or make easier Terms than were before required, for the
bringing Men in unto them. Under these circumstances Dissenters are least of
all to be born with, and tenderness toward them is to have no place. And it is
judiciously observed by the Author of Religion and Loyalty, Part 1. p. 566.
that under the Reign of Julian the Apostate, the Church more strictly united
than she had done before, in executing her Discipline, and that power which
Christ had enstated on her; she then put an end to the vexatious Arian
Controversy, established the Nicene Faith over all the Christian World, and
prevented new Schisms and Factions, that were at that time breaking out in the
Christian World. And then to be sure the Eusebian Latitude-Trimmers had no
favor showed them, because of the present Confusion.

4. The Romish Doctors themselves gave us these like instances; and the most
sober of them do not think, that their Unity (in which they so much boast) is
violated, or any occasion of Scandal and Offense given to those which are
without, in that the errors of particular Doctors (though otherwise deserving
from their Church) are openly taken notice of and refuted; but, on the other
hand, conclude such proceedings necessary, and useful for the preserving their
Faith laudable in the unity and peace of it. It is but the other day that Mr.
White, and Mr. Sargent, (who are known to have been great Zealots for Rome, in
this Kingdom) published some Tenants injurious (as it was thought) to the
Romish Faith; for this they were severely censured, and a Book came out against
them, Autore M. Lomino Theologo, Printed at Gaunt, 1675. whose Title is,
Blackloanae Haeresis Historia and Confutatio, so called from Blacklo, a name by
which White used, sometimes, to be called. Upon this Publication, the
Blackloists made great clamors, and not only they, but the Roman Catholics at
large, and who were not engaged in the Controversy: As, That these were not
times for Catholics to write one against another, admonishing, that, Tempori
ac Haeresi cedendum, way is to be given to the Time and the Heresy together;
the danger of Schism is now hanging over our heads, and that the Orthodox will
be hereby laughed at by the Protestants, because disagreeing. To whom Lominus,
in his Preface, gives this answer, which being of so full weight, and able to
satisfy any Man in this or the like case, I will here Transcribe; thus
Translated.

Doleo vehementer hoc unicum Blackloistarum effugium (ultimum utique morientis
jam sectae gemitum, quo commiserationem movent imprudentibus) tam patienter
audiri. Itane vero? nec detegendi, nec damnandi sunt Novatorum errores, ne
scilicet Pharisaicum arripiant scandalum Haeretici, dicantque imperiti,
Ecclesiam ob haereseon censuram esse dividendam? Ad quid ergo supra muros
Jerusalem posuit Dominus custodes qui tota die and nocte non tacebunt? ad quid
sunt Episcopi and Pastores, nisi ut Haeresi obstent, ac invigilent gregi;
rationem pro animabus sibi commissis reddituri? si oportet haereses esse,
oportet ut haeresum oppugnatores in Ecclesia non taceant. Fas ne erit Thomae
Albio and Joanni Sargentio fidei Christianae fundamenta convellere, and non
licebit Georgio Leyburno, and Archiepiscopo Dubliniensi, hos scriptores and
illorum fautores redarguere, ac monere fideles, ut sibi caveant a lupis ovina
pelle contectis? Diuturna Schismata in Haeresin tandem converti, testatur
maximus Ecclesiae Doctor Hieronymus; at nemo qui Orthodoxus est, dixerit, per
haeresum detectionem ac damnationem nem gigni Schismata. Fidei Catholicae
unitas, corporisque Ecclesiae compago, and integritas, non in eo consistit, ut
nullus a fide cadat, nullus Haeresin doceat, sed in eo maxim, ut casus non
dissimuletur, aut pravum dogma cum sana Doctrina non confundatur; rescindi
oportet membrum putridum, priusquam corpus corrumpatur; exeat igitur
expellaturque a nobis innovator, etsi olim noster fuerit. Scio charitati
Christianae maxim consentaneum esse, ut infirmos in fide foveamus; sed
charitati Christianae minime contrarium est, imo valde conform, ut alienos a
fide and calamo and censuris feriamus. Eoque vel baculo pastorali insigniti
sunt Episcopi, Apostolorum Successores. Dum baculo and calamo utitur Ecclesia
contra haereticos, sana and una est fides, nec tam delicatae sunt oportet
fidelium aures, ut disputantium sono ac strepitu contra ingruentes haereses
offendantur; in castris sumus, in castris inquam Ecclesiae militantis, and
merito irridetur is miles, qui armorum strepitum non ferens, praeliorum id
genus adhortamenta reformidat.

I much lament this only refuge of the Blackloists (as the last groan of a
dying sect, thereby to move pity from imprudent People) is heard so patiently.
Is it so then? are the errors of the Novellists to be neither detected nor
condemned, lest that Heretics may take a Pharisaical Scandal, and those that
are unskilful say, The Church will be divided by reason of the censure of
Heresies? To what purpose then has the Lord placed Watchmen upon the Walls of
Jerusalem, that shall not hold their peace day nor night? For what use are the
Bishops and Pastors, unless to withstand Heresy and watch over the Flock; as
those that are to give an account of the Souls committed to them? If there must
be Heresies, it is fit that the oppugners of Heresies in the Church do not hold
their Tongues. Shall it be lawful for Thomas White and John Sargent to pull in
pieces the Foundations of the Christian Faith, and shall it not be lawful for
George Leyburn, and the Archbishop of Dublin, to reprove these Writers and
their Abetters, and to warn believers, that they take heed to themselves, by
reason of Wolves in Sheeps clothing? That eminent Doctor of the Church, Jerome,
does witness, that daily Schisms at length turn into Heresy: But none that is
Orthodox, has said, that Schisms are produced by the detection and
condemnation of Heresies. The unity of the Catholic Faith, and close joining
together of the Body of the Church and its integrity, does not consist in this,
That none fall from the Faith, or none teach Heresy; but herein especially,
That the Fall be not dissembled, or that their corrupted Doctrine be not
confounded with the sound; a rotten Member ought to be cut off, rather than the
Body be destroyed; let then the Innovator go out, and be expelled from us,
though heretofore he was ours. I know it is mostly agreeing with the Christian
Faith, that we nourish the weak in the Faith; but it is no ways contrary to
Christian Charity, but every ways conforming, that we strike with the Pen and
Censures, such as are Strangers to the Faith. And therefore the Bishops, and
Successors of the Apostles, have also a Pastoral Staff committed unto them.
When the Church uses the Staff and the Pen against Heretics, the Faith is one
and sound; neither ought the Ears of the Faithful to be so delicate, as to be
offended with the sound and noise of those that dispute against Heresies coming
in upon us; we are in the Tents of the Church militant, and that Soldier is
deservedly laughed at, who not enduring the noise of Arms, fears the
provocations of Battles of that nature.

But why should I wonder at your dealings with me, since you are so bold with
the best of Kings and Men? I mean Charles the First, and the Martyr; whom you
hale in as a Party to that most false Assertion, which he always opposed, viz.
That, the Form of Church Government is mutable: Or that, there is no certain
Form of Government prescribed in the Word. It is the least that he meant by
those Words, that you take the confidence to produce, or that any Man can
interpret him to have meant by them; and this will appear all along in his
several Writings, and Declarations of his Judgment in the point. I will at
present, for evidence of it, confine my self to his Majesty's final answer
concerning Episcopacy, deliverd in to the Commissioners of Parliament, the
first of November. 1648. where he contends for the Immutability of the two Orders
of Bishops and Presbyters, to whom he assigns distinct, appropriated,
incommunicable Offices and Acts; and bottoms it, first, upon the Scriptures,
and then upon this very Apostolical primitive Practice (which you say he
recommended only as a decent rule to your Arbitrary Modellers of
Church Government, to be followed by them, as they shall be pleased) resolving
in his own practice never to vary from it: Or in the true application of your
Words, Whose sufferings could never make him warp from what his judgment
directed. And the injury you have done to his Sacred Memory and Reputation (as
also to the Church of England) will be farther notorious to him that consults
the Twelfth and last Chapter of his Royal answer; where he tells the
Commissioners, That, until one of these three things can be clearly evidenced
unto him, (viz.) Either that there is no certain Form of Church Government
prescribed in the Word; or, If there be, that the Civil Power may change the
same as they see cause; or, If it be unchangeable, that it was not Episcopal,
but some other; he thinks himself excusable in the judgment of all reasonable
Men, if he cannot as yet be induced to the utter abolishment of that Government
in the Church, which he found here settled to his hands, which has continued
all over the Christian World, from the times of the Apostles, etc. Now, his
Majesty never did receive any satisfaction from them in any of these three
things, as he farther declares, and thereupon complains of their shyness and
unwillingness to discover their minds in a matter of so great and necessary
consequence: And therefore, he cannot be conceived to have allowed
Church Government to be changeable; or that Humane, or Christian prudence has
any thing to do in the erecting or abolishing of any one sort of it, as Doctor
Stillingfleet represents him to have done. Some modes in the execution might,
but the two orders did not fall under time and circumstances, in the opinion of
this wise King, and eminent Martyr. I confess, how it would have fared with his
Majesty, as to these points, if the great boldness and resolution, which since
appeared in our Rector of Sutton, had been in the Commissioners, tho in a
lesser measure, is uncertain. Or had Providence so ordered it, that himself in
person had been in Commission with them, Who knows but that he might have made
a Convert of his Majesty, and become thereby an happy instrument in preventing
the most horrid of Murders, which was, within a very little while after,
committed upon him: For in all likelihood, if the King would have submitted in
any one of the forementioned points, the Scandal and Dishonor in cutting off
his Head, had never fallen upon these three, thereby most unfortunate,
Kingdoms. It is certain, that he opposed the change of the Government in the
Church, as well as in the State, with his last Blood. But I shall have another
opportunity to insist more at large on these things, in my Vindication of his
Majesty, and the most eminent Bishops and Doctors of our Church, whom he has
defamed all at once, in that last Chapter of his Irenicum, which I intend to
make public in a little time, if God give me Health, and my Superiors give me
leave, and therefore shall forbear at present. I Will only add,

That since you have dealt thus familiarly and plainly with a King, and profess
to have assumed your errors from him, I hope your Friend Doctor Burnet will not
fall foul upon me any more, for want of Modesty, or for being over-lofty;
because I once borrowed a Figure from a Crowned Head, and applied to my self an
instance of Policy, that a King of Israel once used. A crime which I do not
think so great (in any other eye, but the worthy Doctor's,) as to need a
purgation, though he urges it over and over in his Letters. It is our Duty to
imitate the King of Kings in Heaven; and there is something in his Vicegerents
on Earth, which may become our imitation also. It is true, that some attributes
in God are incommunicable, and unimitable; to attempt them is the height of
presumption: and so have Kings their Prerogatives, which no Subject can copy
out but by Invasion: And yet the Divinity is again imitable in other
attributes, and so are Kings too, in many of their Perfections; and in none
more than in their common rules of Policy and Reputation, or in those advices
of the like nature with this which was given to King Saul, viz. That he would
not employ his Strength against David, who was already at his Footstool; or
attempt a Victory by which no advantage could return to him. But it is very
usual with a sort of Men, to make shows and jealousies for some things, as the
enclosures of Princes, which are not really such, or bring no benefit and
security unto them: And again, on the other hand, tread upon that which is
really sacred and separate; when they will inrode and invade without any scruple
their Crowns, Dignities and Prerogatives. There are a sort of Men, who start at
the biting of a Flea upon a King's hand, and with no concern pour out his Blood
upon the Scaffold. They come too near Kings, that do it without a Figure, who
stain their sacred Memories, by imputing to them their grosser Errors; who
assault their Guards, and confine their Persons, or lead up a Field Conventicle
against them. It was one of the usual Aphorisms of King James the First, of
blessed Memory: God keep me from my Friends, and I know how to keep my self
from my Enemies. If the Doctor please he may say again, The application is
somewhat extraordinary: But nevertheless I have made it to my self; and do
declare, That I have imitated both the Warlike King of Israel, and the Wise
King of England; and it was part of my design in publishing my Discourse of
Church Power (which is the very bottom of the Doctor's course Behavior toward
me) to give caution to the People of England, that they beware of their
Friends: i. e. a sort of People within our selves, who go to the House of God
with them as Friends, but betray and give up the Rights and Powers of the
Church of God to the will of its Enemies; and if they will do this, they need not
fear what their Enemies can do unto them. And I am certain withal, that, that
Wise Prince, if he were again among us, would account me neither immodest nor
lofty, for imitating his Prudence, and using his Aphorism. But if my Figure be
too lofty, and Application extraordinary, in comparing my self to Kings, Doctor
Burnet's Figure is as much too low and mean on the other hand, when he compares
the King of England to a Postillion; for so he calls Henry VIII. The Postillion
of the Reformation, and concludes the Character to befit him too, in his
Preface to his History of the Reformation, etc. Surely, however, the waxed
Boots and oyled Coat became Luther, or whoever it was represented him in them,
they are Robes no ways becoming that great and magnificent King: Besides, not
only the dignity of Majesty, but the merit of the Reformation, is much abated
and diminished thereby. The Postillion is altogether at the direction, and
under the discipline of one in the Box, who commands with a Lash in his hand,
and is really his Auriga, Gubernator, sits at the Helm and governs him: And if
you had called this great King, the Coachman of the Reformation, the Metaphor
had been much more apt, and agreeable. And the reason of the Figure fails also;
for, the Reformation was not managed at the rate, and with designs, as when Men
ride through thick and thin: That suits a Desperado much better, and describes
one that makes strength the Law of Justice, and regards neither right nor
wrong; but the aim of the Reformation was, to remove the filth and mire, and
purge it away, by casting off the Pope's Supremacy, and other encroachments;
and to reassume that supreme Right of our Kings, annexed by the anteceding
Laws of our Land to their Crown Imperial. And since he has lighted on so
unseemly a Similitude, taken from the puddle, the Scavinger of the Reformation
had been a more apt and proper Epithete. Furthermore, I will appeal to the
whole World, whether it be not more pardonable to imitate a King in his
laudable Actions and Policies, performable by him as a Man, than to resemble
him to so base and abject a person, as a Postillion is known to be. The Doctor
very well knows, that this is one rule always to be observed in taking a
Metaphor, That it be not from any thing filthy or sordid, especially when the
Translation is to Kings; and it is very much to his disrepute, that he who
values himself at so great a rate for his style and oratory, should so grossly
fail in the common and known rule of a Similitude. And yet I will not be over
rash, and impute all to his mistake. The intimacy that he says he had with Mr.
William Petit, Councellor of the Inner Temple; and that he had his Assistance
and Directions, as to the Laws and Customs of this Nation, in writing his
History of the Reformation, give some suspicion, that he might have no very
high thoughts of our Kings. Mr. Petit's late Printed Book indicates too much of
his Temper, and his choice of Doctor Burnet; for the digesting and publishing
his Collections, argue too much of Doctor Bunnet's also; and there is no
question to be made, but that they consulted together, as, in order to the
composing of the History of the Reformation of the Church, so, for the writing
of that History of the Reformation of Kings, which Mr. Petit a little after
published under the Title of, The Ancient Rights of the Commons of England,
etc. in the Preface to which, he delivers this as an undoubted and authentic
story. Apud Britannos populus magna ex part principatum tenet, page 4. and
page 6. De minoribus rebus principes consultant, de majoribus omnes. Among the
Britains, the People have the Government for the most part. The [Princes]
consult concerning the lesser things, but [All] concerning the greater. And
further says, That Parliaments were instituted to hear and determine the
Complaints, and the wrongful Acts of the King, the Queen, and their Children.
Now all this very well agrees with the Metaphor of the Postillion; and we may
also hence conclude, That it was not from the Doctor's principles of
Government, but some other particular interest (which is easily discerned) that
he publicly declared at the King's Bench in Westminster Hall, He did not
believe that part of the late most hellish Plot, against the Person and
Dignities of our late Sovereign King Charles II. of blessed Memory, which was
laid for seizing his Person, and giving him only some due Chastisement.

Your disingenuity to your Superiors in the Church, is as great as your
injustice to King Charles the First: of which an higher instance cannot be
given, than to represent them as Patrons to your Errors, because they have been
civil to your Person. There is, I see, great care to be taken of treating some
Men with common kindness: And the arguing seems more particularly unbecoming
those of your Complexion, or Moderation; whose temperamentum ad pondus, or just
mixture, consists in this, viz. To indulge every Man in his particular
judgment, and treat him with a fair converse, when retaining quite different
sentiments from him. And I am very confident that your self will take it very
ill from that Man which shall call you Phanatick, because you have trimmed for
them, and drawn up a scheme of comprehension, and had so frequent meetings with
them at Doctor Burton's Chamber. Besides, the grand Case at the King's
Bench-Bar at Westminster Hall, last Summer, has made it fully appear, That a
Man may be under a heavy guilt, and yet, such be the circumstances as to
persons and things, that his Superiors cannot, with prudence, call him to an
account, and retribute to him his condign punishment; nay farther, so hard may
the necessity be, as to enforce from them a civil treat, and with more especial
kindness.

You plead, That before the Church was re-established, you received Episcopal
Orders from an excellent Bishop of this Church: which may be true; and I
question not but that it is: But it is no proof that you were then an Episcopal
Divine. Several in those days took that prudent way, upon this consideration;
because, though some denied a Presbyter to be a Bishop, yet all owned a Bishop to
be a Presbyter; and consequently must accept of your Ordination: The divine
appropriated Right of the Bishop, and singular Power, enstated on him by
Christ, might not be considered by you in that action.

And in the last place; you are very unjust to me, in adding to all your other
Calumnies, this one, viz. That I am therefore so severe unto you, and enhaunse
your supposed crime, because an Offender my self; as if it were some atonement
for my own miscarriages, to be always finding fault with my Brethren. And though
this Scandal be of less concern to the public, than those other which you laid
upon the Royal Martyr, and your Church Governors; yet it is every way as
groundless and false. Whatever my other failings have been; yet I dare appeal
to, and do provoke my greatest Enemies to produce one instance wherein I have
declined, or warped from any one public duty, interpretable to be incumbent
upon me, as a Subject or a Churchman: But those Men that answer Books by
Reproaches, and purge themselves by Recriminations, must be allowed to make use
of all the Topics that are within that compass; and to improve their design by
the general advantages it tenders to them. A method used by your predecessor
Dr. Burnet, who after this manner discharges his Gall upon me. You are pleased
to acquaint the world, That you received Episcopal Orders in the late
Confusion; and think it sufficient to vouch your early Zeal for our Church and
Episcopacy. I can say more, That in the year 1658, I was made a Deacon by that
most worthy Father and reverend Prelate, Brian, then Lord Bishop of Sarum; and
within that year had the further Power of the Priesthood conferred upon me: And
by virtue of this power I served the Church in the daily Ministrations,
according to the Rubricks and Law established, but not protected, among us, the
secular Power being disenabled to do it, by reason of that most horrid
Rebellion which was then prosperous. I served the Church when she was not able
to reward me; when without a prospect of it; and have had the honor to attend
Mr. Peter Gunning, at Exeter Chapel, with the Chalice: One that then looked the
Tyrant in the face, (...). Clem. Strom. 4. p. 480.
and whom the Church of God, in ancient times would have placed among her most
renowned Martyrs, though he died in his Bed, full of years and honor but the
other day; being Lord Bishop of Ely. And thus I have answered those little
pleas you have given in for your self; and wiped off those Calumnies that you
laid upon me; and finished my first part.

Secondly, I shall make it appear that the account you give of your Irenicum,
is not fair nor true, and that you conceal your crime as much as in you lies in
the representation; the Design and Plot of it being mostly laid, if not
altogether, against the Church of England. And this I undertake to make good in
these following Particulars.

1. The main subject of your present debate, you say, is this, Whether any one
particular Form of Church Government be settled upon an unalterable divine
Right, by Virtue whereof, all Churches are bound to observe that individual
Form? or, Whether it be left to the prudence of every particular Church, to
agree upon that Form of Government, which it judges most conduceable within it
self, to attain the end of Government, the Peace, Order, Tranquillity,
Setlement of the Church? as is to be seen in the latter end of your Preface,
and Part 1. c. 1. Sect. 1. page 4. The first you determine in the Negative, the
second in the Affirmative; the issue of both is this, That God by his own Laws
has given Men a Power and Liberty, to determine the particular Form of
Church Government among them; (you had done well if you had produced this Law
of God, and what the express words of it are; none other being sufficient for a
lasting divine institution by your own Rules: but this is your (...)) That though
one Form of Government be agreeable to the word, it does not follow that
another is not; or because one is lawful, another is unlawful, but one Form may
be more agreeable to some parts, places, people, and time, than others are:
That the case is the same as to Church Government, whether by many joined
together in an equality, or by subordination of some persons unto others, as it
is to dipping or sprinkling in Baptism, whether thrice or once? As to attending
the Lords Table, whether at Supper time, or in the Morning, fasting or after
meat? (You add, whether kneeling, or sitting, or leaning:) and as to preaching
the word, you mean doubtless, Whether by an Hourglass, or not? Vid. Part I.
Cap. 1. Sect. 1. page 3.. 2. p. 9, 10. Part. II. Cap. 4.. 2. etc. And hence it
is as plain and obvious as words and consequences can make it: That by the Law
of God, enstating Mankind with this perpetual indefectible Power, the
Independent Congregational Form of Government, is equally to be received as the
Presbyterian and Classical; and either of them, as the Episcopal and the Papal,
has as firm a bottom as any of them all; any one of them ought to be called,
and really is, the Church of England, and of God, within this Dominion, if the
Pastors, or the Magistrate, or (when these are knocked of the head) the People,
or any one prevailing interest or faction, shall appoint and setle it among us.
So that now you are for a Toleration of several Forms of Government, by the
Authority of the Church of England: And it is plain whence our Sects had it,
when with so much confidence they said upon each occasion (having obtained an
indulgence from his late Majesty) That they were the Church of England, they
meant according to Dr. Stilling fleet's Irenicum. And indeed according to this
Principle of yours, Richard Baxter's Conventicle in St. Martin's Parish in the
Fields, was once as much of the Church of England, as Dr. Stilling fleet's
Church in St. Andrew's Holborn: Neither is this the only Case that they use
your Authority in, thereby to rend in pieces this Church; and I did not speak
improperly, nor without reason, when I called that Treatise an unlucky Book.
This issue is plainly and clearly set down by Mr. Hobbs in his Leviathan, Part
III. Cap. 42. page 299, 300. and upon your very Principles, to whom you had an
Ear no doubt; From this consolidation of the Rights Politic and Ecclesiastic
in Christian Sovereigns, it is evident they have all manner of Power over their
Subjects, that can be given to Man, for the Government of Men's external
Actions, both in Policy and Religion; and may make such Laws, as themselves
shall judge fittest for the Government of their own Subjects, both as they are
the Commonwealth, and as they are the Church: For both Church and State are
the same Men, (which is your very notion, as will appear anon.) If they please
therefore they may (as many Christian Kings now do) commit the Government of
their Subjects in matters of Religion to the Pope; but then the Pope is in that
point subordinate to them, and exercises that charge in another Dominion, jure
civili, in the right of the civil Sovereign, not jure divino, in God's right;
and may therefore be discharged of that office, when the Sovereign for the good
of his Subjects shall think it necessary. They may also, if they please, commit
the care of Religion to one supreme Pastor, or to an Assembly of Pastors, and
give them what power over the Church, or over one another, they think most
convenient; and what Titles of Honor, as of Bishops, Archbishops, Priests or
Presbyters, they will; -- and these Rights are incident to all Severeigns,
whether Monarchs or Assemblies: For they that are representants of a Christian
People, are representants of the Church; for a Church and a Commonwealth of
Christian People, are the same thing. The inconsistences and most pernicious,
insufferable consequents of this Principle, are abundantly represented to the
World, by a most judicious Hand, in the Case of the Church of England, Part
III. more particularly page 246, 247, etc.

2. You deny Episcopacy in particular, or a Disparity of Power in the Ministry,
to be by the Laws of Christ, always binding and immutable; wherein you oppose,
to be sure, the Church of England: And further, the overthrowing the immutable
Right of Episcopacy, seems to be the main thing you aim at throughout the whole
Discourse, (though you pretend more;) for the management of which, you all along
mingle Fire and Water together, urging any thing that will give a varnish, or
make a show of Argument in order to it, though really destructive to the common
Christianity we all profess; but either lightly touch, or designedly pass by,
the most credible motives, even demonstrations to the contrary; even those
which have been owned for such by your self in the like cases. This will appear
to him that weighs these following Considerations.

To avoid this prelatical Power, or Superiority of our Bishops, you tell us,
That though it be proved that the Apostles had a Superiority of Order, and
Jurisdiction over the Pastors of the Church by an Act of Christ; yet it must be
farther proved, That it was Christ's intention, that Superiority should
continue in their Successors, or it makes nothing to the purpose, Part I. Cap.
1.. 8. page 25. Where, you do not consider, That though it be proved that St.
Peter and the other Apostles had, by an Act of Christ, the power of the Keys
delivered unto them, and thereby were invested, in their Persons, with the
Ministerial Authority; yet, upon the same terms, it must be farther proved,
That it was Christ's Intention that the same power should continue in their
Successors, or it makes no more to the purpose for a settled Ministry, than it
does for a fixed Episcopacy; and this same Argument which overthrows a
Superiority of Churchmen over one another, for want of an Express of Christ's
intention to continue it always, overthrows also the Ministry it self, both
having the same bottom and alike promises. This the Independent and Socinian
saw, and considered full well, and upon your own grounds reject them both
together with the two Sacraments; because there are no express Texts declaring
their Perpetuity. But this is agreeable enough with the Rector of Sutton; who,
as he makes all Gospel-Laws for Church Government an Escheat to
Westminster Hall: so is he to be supposed to receive none as perpetually
obliging, except those that are made and conveyed in the Hall-Phrase, and by
its Precedents, with an express Declaration, Entailing them upon the Heirs and
Successors for ever.

But, because Apostolical practice still presses you hard, whose force, apart
from the Act and Donation of our Savior, seems to infer a divine Right (the
matter of Fact being apparent and beyond contradiction, That the Apostles were
invested with a Superiority beyond Bishops and Presbyters, and did accordingly
execute it.) Hereupon, with a deep design, but very Superficial Policy, that is
easily seen through and baffled, you place their juridical consistorial Acts
and Practices, amongst those other Acts and Practices of theirs, that were
purely occasional, and with regard to the present times and circumstances; such
as, abstaining from Blood and things strangled, eating or not eating, the order
of Widows, the Love-Kiss, Celibacy, St. Paul's working with his own Hands,
Preaching the Gospel freely, Circumcising Timothy, etc. all which are
confessedly mutable, and did alter in a very little time, both in their
Practice and Obligation. But your Error is not only in ranging these quite
different Practices, under the same head and order, whose distant natures are
so plain and obvious; but in that you do not consider that the Lord's Day and
Infant Baptism, will, for the same reason, come under that head of
Indifferencies, and Practices mutable: and therein (besides the ill
consequences in Religion) you plainly contradict your self, who tell us at the
same time, and in the same Section (and in doing of it dart your self through
with your own Weapon) That though there be no particular express Revelation for
the Lord's Day and Infant Baptism; yet Practice Apostolical, or of Persons
guided by an Infallible Spirit, is sufficient to enact and declare them
perpetually obliging. For, surely, Apostolical practice, guided by an
infallible Spirit, is equally manifest son a Superiority in the Ministry, as
for those two: It is far more notorious and frequent; but your Plot that was
laid against the Immutability of Episcopacy, engaged you to take no notice of
it, vid. Part I. Sect. 3. Part. II.. 20.

Farther yet, That you may be every ways secure in your design, and wholly
baffle and defeat all Plea for a divine and immutable Right from Apostolical
Practice in the point of Episcopacy; you go on in a sure way, treading
Antiquity under your Foot, and impleading the most holy Primitive Bishops and
Confessors of Defectiveness, Ambiguity, Partiality and Repugnancy, that hereby
you may root out their Order, and destroy it from the Face of the Earth; and
you say in so many words, That we cannot have that certainty of Apostolical
Practice, as to constitute a Divine Right. It is not my business to argue
points, but to collect your particular Opinions, or rather to write the History
of your Theology; otherwise I might here reply by demanding, How, and by what
hands it is that we have any certainty of the Apostolical Writings? or know
their minds and intentions there? The Church has all along received the Canon,
and Sense of the Scriptures, from the Faith and certainty of Antiquity, and the
repute and integrity of these holy Bishops, Martyrs and Confessors: Our Church
of England certainly does so, and they are her Rule in Reforming, as to both:
and when the Authority of some Books of the New Testament were called in
question, the Tradition of Faith alone declared them Canonical, and they remain
such upon that Testimony, in the account of the whole Christian World to this
day. And why then is the same evidence defective and less authoritative
concerning their practice, and sense in the point of Government? But thus you
expose the Scriptures, their Authority, their Sense to every Atheist and
Enthusiust, to uncertainties and conjectures; or at the best to the
intemperance of each violent, heady and skeptical undertaker: And thus it comes
to pass that so much work is made for a Nicephorus Calisthus, a Simeon
Metaphrastes, the very Jacobus de Voragine of the Greek Church, those Tinkers
that think to mend a hole, and make three instead of it; you taking away hereby
the great evidence and muniments of our Christianity, both as to the matter of
Fact, and the intent of it; that which is next to the Foundation, is cast down,
and what can the Righteous do? Hence so many Whimsies and Forgeries of Men's
Brains, and monstrous Opinions fill up our Bodies of Divinity (and your many
forms of Government, as by Divine Right are no less portentous than any of
them) as Geographers do Maps with some fabulous Creatures of their own
Inventions. Our Church of England, I say, in her Reformation supposes certainty
and sufficiency in the Records of the Primitive Church; and, that matter of
Fact is faithfully transmitted down unto us, with the true sense of the
Scriptures and Apostolical Practice, both in matter of Doctrine and Government;
and her Reformation is received by the Civil Power, and made Law in the Kingdom
upon these terms alone; viz. As bottomed on the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, and what the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have thence
collected, particularly in the Four first General Councils, or any other
Council, X. Elizabethae, Cap. I. Sect. xxxvi. And yet upon a Scandalous
Interpretation of Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 4.) perverting his
Sense, quite contrary to his plain words and design, (which is to set forth the
Succession of Bishops immediately from the Apostles, over the known Parts of
Christendom) you blast the credit of all Antiquity, and that with as much show
of rancor and contempt, as the scornfullest manner of expressing your self can
declare. What becomes then (with our Rector of Sutton) of our unquestionable
Line of Succession of Bishops of several Churches, and the large Diagram made
of Apostolical Churches, with every ones name set down in his order, as if the
Writer had been Clarenceaux to the Apostles themselves? Is it come to this at
last, that we have nothing certain, but what we have in the Scriptures? And
must then Tradition be our rule to interpret Scripture by? An excellent way to
find out the truth, doubtless; to bend the Rule to the crooked Stick; to make
the Judge stand to the Opinion of his Lacquey, what Sense he shall pass upon
the Cause in question; to make Scripture to stand Cap in Hand to Tradition, to
know whether it may have leave to speak or no. Are all the great out-crys of
Apostolical Tradition, of personal Succession, of unquestionable Records,
resolved at last into Scripture it self by him, from whom these long Pedegrees
are fetched? Then let Succession know its place, and learn to veil Bonnet to the
Scriptures; and withal, Let Men take heed of overreaching themselves, when
they would bring down so large a Catalogue of single Bishops, from the first
and purest times of the Church: For if Eusebius professes it so hard to find
them, well might Scaliger then complain, that the Interval from the last
Chapter of the Acts, to the middle of Trajan, in which time Quadratus and
Ignatius began to flourish, was tempus (...), as Varro speaks, a mere Chaos of
time, filled up with rude conceptions of Papias, Hermes, and others, who like
Hannibal, when they could not find a way through, would make one either by
force or fraud. Rare embellishments of style and choice Oratory all along! When
others plead for a Succession of Persons in Apostolical Power, out of Irenaeus,
and Tertullian, you shuffle them of, and say, That those Fathers are to be
interpreted of Succession in that Apostolical Doctrine, which was so eminent
and notorious at Rome, Smyrna, Corinth, Philippi and Ephesus: Now you deny the
truth of Succession, as to Doctrines also; but you are in an high strain of
Oratory, which is a kind of natural Enthusiasm or worse, and your indisposition
plainly appears, in that you give such grave advice to these traditional
Doctors; that they place not Succession before the Scriptures: You can only
mean, that they deduce it not from Felix or Pontius Pilate, Annas and Caiaphas,
the Highpriests, or the Jewish Sanhedrim. And have not Scaliger and you finely
combined together, in giving a Character of the times immediately after the
Apostles, as filled only with fraud and force? And for this reason alone, Lest
an unquestionable Succession of Bishops from the Apostles should appear, and
their Divine Right become thereby undeniable, vid. Iren. p. 2. c. 6.. 15, 16,
17.

Besides, it hence plainly appears what your purpose was in writing this
Treatise, in that you have sided all along with the foreign Divines, and used
their Arguments against the Divine Right of Episcopacy. It is the common
policy, when Men design to divest any Person or Order of that superior power
which they cannot well bear, or rather desire to have enstated on themselves,
first to set up for a level, and the Project works mightily. Thus we know the
thing aimed at in the beginning of the great Rebellion here in England, was,
That the King, Lords, and Commons were three equal States. And when by this
stratagem they had wrested the King's Prerogative out of his hands, they then
soon made themselves uppermost, assumed and appropriated that very power, they
had so violently contended against, as what ought not to be fixed, except in
the three Estates in conjunction. So here, your sham is, That all forms of
Government are equally practicable; no one being of Divine Right, in that
nature as to exclude another; but any one may be established, as Persons, Times
and Places accord thereunto. But then your Eisotericks, or that which you
effectually recommend to your particular Friends and Confidents, is, The
perpetual fixation of the Presbyter, as by Divine Right unalterable; and having
hereby lowered the Bishops top-sail (in your own expression) and removed from
him all that which has been heretofore appropriated to his Order, asserting
him to be an accidental humane creation only; in this Stirrup the Presbyter
sets his foot, and ascends; (as the Assembly-men did at Westminster.) You
invest him with the full power of Order and Jurisdiction; and accordingly thus
determine, Part II. c. 4.. 12. That every Presbyter (from Christ, and
perpetually fixed, Cap. 2.) has the whole Ministry derived unto him in actu
primo habitualiter; viz. The Power of Preaching the Word, Visiting the Sick,
Administering the Sacraments, of Visiting Churches, Taking care that particular
Pastors do their duty, of Ordination and Church Censures, and making Rules for
Decency in the Church: (The severest Asserter of Episcopal Power cannot invest
his Bishop in more.) And the same in effect you say over again: That every
Presbyter (whom you call a fixed Officer in the Church) has a radical,
intrinsecal Power of Order in himself: And further, That every one, being
himself advanced into the Authority of a Church Governor, has an internal
Power of conferring the same upon Persons fit for it; and accordingly every one
did exercise this Power in the Churches first State and Period; or, In the
first Primitive Church, before the Jurisdiction of Presbyters was restrained by
mutual consent; by way of accumulation, upon one Person, of a power more than
he had; not by a deprivation of themselves of that inherent Power which they
enjoyed. -- It would be very strange that any Officers of a Religious Society,
should be upon that account Outlawed of those natural Liberties, which are the
results and products of the free actings, (page 252.) To which you add, That
whole Churches, and Nations were without Bishops for several Years together;
some of which had only Presbyters at their first Planting; and in those
Churches where Episcopal Government was settled, Ordination by Presbyters was
looked upon as valid, notwithstanding; which could not be, unless their
Ordainers had an intrinsecal Power of Ordination; or, had they not been a fixed
Order, under no prohibition by Scripture; (Part II. c. 6.. 13. page 273, 275.
cap. 7.. 6, 7.) In all which, I say, (whatever you have pretended against the
divine perpetual Right of any one individual Government, that the Bishop might
fall with more gentleness and plausibility) You set up a fixed lasting
Government in the Church by Presbyters, as unalterable as the Ministry it self;
in whom you place the whole Power of the Ministry, never to be alienated or
lost by any authority, or under any accident, they receiving this Power with
their Ordination in actu primo habitualiter, radicaliter, intrinsically: and
their execution of it is effectual, at any time, and in any place, even to
Ordination it self; and the Church has approved and accepted of it; as when
Paphnutius (though but a Presbyter) Ordained Abbot Daniel and Colluthus Ischyras,
etc. ( page 379.) And hereby you give to many of the principal Patrons of the
Presbyterian Parity, (as Calvin, Beza, Chamier, Gersom, Bucer, Du Moulin, even
Salmasius, Blondel and Daillee) what they desire and contend for; they having
all along allowed of our Hierarchy upon your terms: And all the advantage the
Church of England receives by the Irenicum, is, You make Bishops for her, as
the Common-wealth-men make Kings, by Accumulation, not Deprivation (in your
Expressions just now mentioned;) and consequently, retaining the Power entire
to themselves, they unmake them again when they please; or, (to express it
farther in your own words, which are the aptest I have met withal) When Persons
and Circumstances, Prudence and Discretion, or the Interest of the Government
requires it. And so the Bishop (like those inferior Officers of old, as
Subdeacons, Acolouthi, Door-keepers, etc.) may be outed, as the Perpetual
Presbyter shall see occasion. Mr. Prolocutor to the Assembly-men at
Westminster, never spoke more bravely to the point. And to fix all this surely
on the less wary, and inconsiderate Reader, as a Nail driven by the Masters of
our Assembly also, you bring in several of our own Bishops for evidence against
themselves, and their Order, in the days of Edward VI. and our whole Church
established by Law, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: As is to be seen in your
Manuscripts, and those other Citations throughout your last Chapter. And when
you had with so much ease and scorn rejected the Doctrines of all the Primitive
Bishops in the case, it was no small piece of confidence to think to carry your
Cause by the testimony (whether true or false) of our own Prelates of the last
Age. But you are not content to overthrow their Order, unless you may fix such
a Scandal upon their Persons, as the Betrayers of it.

And, indeed, your stating this case of the mutability of Episcopacy, can be
only a design to fool and baffle it, and thereby render it a very Babel or
Idol, in the language of its madder Adversaries; and in the conception of every
one else, so trivially accidental a thing, that it cannot be really contended
for upon a Church account; every accident giving occasion (though Prudence will
always be pretended) for its abolition. And it is observable, That there are
not any of your judgment that conclude themselves under an obligation to adhere
unto it, any longer than it supports and serves them by the advantage of the
secular Power. As the Church is that Tree in the Psalmist; so Episcopacy is one
of its bearing Boughs, in which you can be content to sit and sing, so long as
you fill your Pockets; but when the gathering time is over, it is to be cut
down as that which cumbereth the ground: And you plead the same express
directions for it our Savior once gave concerning the Fig Tree in the Gospel.
I Will state it together with the Presbyterian and Episcopal Hypotheses, thereby
to make it obvious upon the naked prospect. The Presbyterian asserts, That each
Presbyter has the whole Power of the Ministry, and is enabled to discharge
every Church-Office; and that a restraint or enlargement is sinful. The
Episcoparian asserts, That this Power is placed in the Bishop and Presbyter;
but unequally: And that the Bishop has some instances of it, peculiar to his
Order, as Prerogatives, and Incommunicable; which if laid aside, will be
Sacrilege in him, as also if assumed by the Presbyter. You assert all that in
the Presbyter, and lose all that from the Bishop, that the Presbyter desires
and contends for: only here is the difference; You allow the Presbytery, upon
some occasions, and in some instances of their Office, to make a Deputy, with a
reserved Power to recall the Deputation at pleasure, or upon each suspicion of
his undue behavior. And this is the honor and service you do the Church of
England; These the Dissenters, you tell us, you designed to gain upon; and that
your design did not want success both here and in a neighboring Kingdom. If
you mean our Northern Neighbors, I hope Episcopacy is settled there upon better
grounds: if it be not, some of the thanks for it are due to you. If you mean
our Neighbors in the South; they came over indeed, but it is with their own
Presbyterian Orders, which they still adhere to as their commission from
Christ: The Episcopal Ordination which they receive here, only enabling them
for the Loaves; to which they could have no right otherways, by the Laws of our
Kingdom. And accordingly D. Blondel first offered his assistance to Archbishop
Laud, to write in defense of our Episcopacy, whilst it was uppermost; but upon
the ensuing Rebellion he deserted it; nay he turned his weapons against it:
Witness his Apologia pro Hieronymo, which he Dedicated to the Rebellious
Parliament, and Schismatical Assembly at Westminster; owning thereby the
Usurpation of the Regal Power in one; and of the Episcopal in the other.
Salmasius did, in effect, the same; and within the space of four Years, both
applauds and condemns Episcopacy, and the Rump Parliament for removing it,
according to his present subject and design; and John Milton, the worst of Men,
takes from thence a just occasion to harangue and vilify him, in the Preface
to his worst of Books, Entitled, Pro Populo Anglicano Defensio. And the
reasons for it are plain, as themselves state the case: the Bishop's
Consecration being only an humane Rite, performed at his Deputation and
Enlargment to the execution of that Power which he had before, when he was made
a Presbyter; by virtue of which, there is no farther power conferred; but only
a Church Blessing, with Imposition of Hands; a legally qualifying him for
possession, according to the particular custom of that Kingdom in which he is
to exercise his Episcopal Function. And lastly, for our own Countrymen; it may
be wished some of them have not on this score also received Episcopal
Ordination; and then they may be bound to thank you, because they kept their
Benefices thereby, and had farther accession of Church Dignities, upon his late
Majesty's blessed return: But I cannot think it is for this, that your
Superiors in the Church have for so long a time been pleased to treat you with
that kindness you seem to boast of. Sure I am, all the kindness you have done
hereby to the Church of England and her Bishops, may be put in their Eyes, and
they see never the worse for it. Though I will not say so of the unkindness she
has received from you.

Besides, it will farther appear with what affection and bias you wrote this
Treatise, if we consider your different behavior to the Bishops and Doctors of
the Church of England; and the Presbyterians, Independents, even Anabaptists
and Quakers, upon each occasion. It is but a little to reflect upon those
slender civilities, which you show all along to that great and eminent Divine,
Dr. Henry Hammond, one that was every ways great and considerable, provoking
reverence and respect from his Adversaries, that were in any measure civilized:
Such was his Learning, Integrity, Courage, in those perilous times he lived
in; the Ark it self rested peculiarly upon his Shoulders. But, I say, your
unhandsom behavior to him may easier be passed by, because he was but one
single Doctor in our Church; you seem to treat him with disdain (though, all
things considered, there was then as great a distance betwixt him and the
Rector of Sutton, as there is now betwixt the Vicar of Cosmus Blene, and the
Dean of St. Paul's;) you reject at once his Five and thirty Testimonies,
produced out of St. Ignatius in the behalf of Episcopacy, as inconluding: Even
that one, which seems to have some Semblance, you say is clearly mistaken; and
your proof is so precarious and inconsistent, that there needs no other
evidence of your partiality, and that your Plot was only to expose Him and the
Cause. ( Part. II. c. 6.. 17. p. 309.) And no wonder when you have rejected
Ignatius himself, as Spurious and Counterfeit; and the story of him (as much as
it is defended with his Epistles) as not to seem any of the most probable;
placing it among the uncertain fabulous narrations of Antiquity, (. 16. p.
298.) When you have derided all Antiquity at once, you go on against our most
worthy Doctor, rejecting what is offered by him, as that which has neither
evidence nor pertinency enough to stop the passage of one who is returning to
his former matter: that is, in plain English, it is not worth the consideration
of your pondering self, employed on a more pertinent and advantageous subject,
and which has better motives of credibility. (Sect. 9. page 260.) You farther
yet represent him (if possible) more contemptible, and as one that betrays the
Reformation by his infirm Hypothesis, which was built upon reasons of greater
strength and evidence, than what he has pleaded. (. 9. p. 258.) Once more, and
which may go for all, You represent him as a Rattle Head, without any show or
appearance of Reason, and his performance (with the embellishment of your rare
Similitude) is thus expressed, Only the Wind-Egg of a working Fancy, that wants
a shell of Reason to cover it: When all may be true that he there asserts,
notwithstanding your Eight Reasons that are brought against it, ( Cap. 6.. 3.)
However your Metaphor is to be admired, especially for the great humility of
it: It is not like that lofty Similitude some have used, borrowed from a
Crowned Head, but from an Egg shell; and nothing but another of your own can
parallel it, only the strain is a little higher, and you strike at all Mankind
therewith, which does not think, opine, reason (in the words of the Leviathan,
and with the same haughtiness) as you do: Which prejudice being the
Yellow-Jaundice of the Soul, leaves such a Tincture upon the Eyes of the
understanding, that till it be cured of that Icterism, it cannot see things in
their proper colors. (Sect. 2. c. 5. p. 200.)

You go on from Dr. Hammond to the whole Church of England, which you hit at
one blow; and enquiring more strictly into the causes of the great Distances
and Animosities, which have risen upon this Controversy, you fix upon the
Episcopal Men, as the Troublers of Israel, whom you thus divide. Those whom the
prevalency of Faction and Interest overruled, their Revenues having come from
the Rents of the Church (which is the odious old way of Characterizing (for
scorn and contempt) to the People the ancient and zealous Bishops and Clergy of
our Church) and others of greater Integrity; (you mean that were less Covetous
and Rapacious, and believed their Order to be more than their Revenues;) but
descend also with this false Principle or Hypothesis, which Men are apt to take
for granted without proving it, viz. That it is in no case lawful to vary from
that Form, which by obscure and uncertain Conjectures, they conceive to have
been the Primitive Practice. (Part I. c. 1.. 1. p. 4.) And as you begin, so you
end, fixing this farther Character upon them, in your last Chapter; I know it
is the last Asylum which many run to, (meaning such as found all things upon a
Divine Right,) when they are beaten off from their Imaginary Fancies, by
pregnant testimonies of Scripture and Reason, to shelter themselves under the
(...) of some particular persons, to which their understandings are bored in
perpetual Slavery: But if Men would once think their understandings at age to
judge for themselves, and not make them live under a perpetual Pupillage, etc.
rendering hereby our most eminent Clergy as such Ignaro's, that they understand
not the State of their own Church, which they have Subscribed and Sworn unto,
and as she determined in the days of Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, (from page
384. to p. 394.) And the greatest part of that Chapter is spent in representing
our Bishops and Doctors to be against themselves, to their manifest injury,
reproach and dishonor, as I shall make it appear in public in a very little
time, if God continue me Life and Health. And if at any time you give a Church
of England Man his due, or a favorable Character, it is when he is on your
side, or the question of Divine Right is not under debate, or you design
thereby to advance your own cause; and you range him with our Reverend and
Learned Mr. Baxter in his Christian Concord; and then he must be a pure Church
of England Man in your conceptions of him.

But when you have to deal with any of the other Parties, even to Anabaptists
and Quakers, your behavior toward them is after another rate; you argue as
one that is evidently biassed, and with apparent shows of tenderness and
affection; the same hand, and at the same time, grants their pardon, that
contends with and opposes them: They are not represented to be the Men that are
overruled by Faction and Interest, or their Church Rents, with understandings
bored in perpetual slavery; but as Men of great Moderation, whose Errors are
the Religious weakness of well-meaning but less knowing People. (Part I. c. 2..
11. page 63. to 70. c. 6.. 4.7. page 122, 128, etc. Part II. c. 7.. 2. page
339, 348, etc.) In short, in the very first Chapter of your Book, you appear
particularly cautious of preserving your reputation entire with the
Presbyterian Party, at least the mobile of them; and confess so much in your
Epistle Dedicatory to my Lord of London; acquainting his Lordship, That when
you set your self to answer their Arguments for a Perpetual Right of
Presbyterian Parity, you did it without mentioning their Books. The meaning of
which can only be this, That it was done with as little disadvantage to the
Party as you could: That you made no such signal Remarks, Exclamations and
Excursions against the Divine Right of Presbytery and its Maintainers, as you
did against the Divine Right of Episcopacy, and those that asserted it. Nay,
you state the case and apply it directly and solely against Episcopacy, or a
Superiority of Order and Jurisdiction over the Pastors of the Church, (Sect. 8.
p. 25.) which was not fair, nor consequently a due means to bring those over to
a compliance to the Church of England, (then likely to be re-established,) who
stood upon the supposition, That Christ had appointed a Presbyterian Government
to be always continued in his Church. And it is easily observable, that you
have omitted nothing that was pleaded by them, whereby Prelacy might be
rendered detestable as an unlawful Usurpation: but whether you have done the
same, thereby to render Presbytery as such, I appeal to that very Chapter. You
are so far from it, that the same design is managed throughout the whole Book,
where your Plea is against the Divine Right of any one individual Form of
Government; but the instance is mostly against Episcopacy: Presbytery is seldom
mentioned with any mark of disrespect; or if it be, it is accidentally. I do
not remember any one set discourse particularly levelled against it, as there
is sometimes against the Independents, but all along against the Church of
England; both in this and several other of her most considerable Tenants, and
Articles. Nay, you expressly, and in so many words, give the precedence to
Presbytery, founding it upon one of your necessary and unalterable Divine
Rights, (Part I. c. 1.. 7, 8. page 23, 26.) and say, That the Presbyterians
seem more generally to own the use of General Rules, and the light of Nature,
in order to the Form of Church Government, as in the Subordination of Courts,
Classical Assemblies, and the more moderate sort, as to Lay Elders: And to the
Independents in the next place, who plead the general Rules of Scripture, and
evidence of natural Reason. Now all this you must be supposed to remove from
the Episcoparians, because therein you place the opposition, if you do any
thing. And besides, you say further, The Episcopal Men will hardly find any
evidence in Scripture, or the Practice of the Apostles, for Churches consisting
of many Congregations for Worship, under the charge of one Person in the
Primitive Church for the Ordination of a Bishop, without the preceding
Election of the Clergy, and at least consent and approbation of the People; and
neither in Scripture nor Antiquity, the least Footstep of a delegation of
Church Power; and leave them no other Foundation, but the Principles of humane
Prudence, and those not very well observed. ( Page 416, 417.) So then, upon the
winding up of your Book, the Church of England is represented, without evidence
of natural Reason, and the Rules of the Light of Nature, with little evidence
from Scripture, or the Practice of the Apostles, in some instances of her
Worship and Discipline; but with none in others; neither is Prudence her
constant Guide. And was not this a hopeful way and delicate means to bring over
Dissenters to a compliance with the Church of England, then likely to be
established? But none of it is to be wondered at, if we consider the account
you have given of the Government of our Church, in the name of the Foreign
Divines a little before, (page 409.) and the inconveniences it is liable unto,
as a step to Pride and Ambition, and an occasion whereby Men might do the
Church injury by the excess of their Power, if they were not Men of excellent
Temper and Moderation; insomuch, that our Bishops are begged rather to lay down
their Power, than to transmit that Power to those after them, who, it may be,
were not like to succeed them in their Meekness and Moderation; and at last
they are left to the Judgment of those who have the Power, not only to redress,
but prevent abuses incroaching by an irregular Power.

And yet you have not left her barely to her Judges, (or the Civil Magistrate,
for such you can be interpreted only to mean,) to stand and fall at their
discretion; your self appear as Council against her, prepossessing them with
new fears and jealousies; to which purpose you produce a ridiculous Prediction
of Padre Paulo, viz. That the Church of England would then find the
inconveniences of Episcopacy, when an high Spirited Bishop should come once to
rule the Church: A Prophecy, that in all likelihood was forged in the Brain of
some Puritan; and my reason for it is, Because I find it placed in the front of
a Latin Treatise, writ by one of great intemperance and violence against the
Church of England; the Title whereof is, Irenaei Philadelphi Epistola ad
Renatum Virideum, in qua aperitur mysterium iniquitatis novissime in Anglia
redivivum, and excutitur liber Josephi Hall, quo asseritur Episcopatum esse
Juris Divini. Eleutheropoli, 1641. The design of it is to inveigh against the
praetorian Authority of Bishops, with their Pride and Usurpation over the
Clergy: and he states the case just as you have done in your Irenicum, viz.
against their Solitary appropriated Power by Divine Right, allowing a Ministry
by the Law of Christ; and that general Rules are given in Scripture, for the
great ends of Peace and Order. But the particular Form depends upon the choice
of the Presbyters, and as they do judge it best agreeing with that Kingdom or
Commonwealth in which it is settled. So then it seems, the Presbyterians first
instructed and brought over you, not you them; (as you told my Lord of London.)
And this also confirms what I said before, viz. That you come up to the
principles of them all, excepting some of the rigider Scots, who believe that
no Church is duly administered, where there are Bishops; from whom my Worshipful
Author declares his dissent, though he is never the nearer to the Church of
England for it; (that is purely your mistake;) and he, notwithstanding, follows
on his design against our Church, with all manner of indecency and dirty
Language: He begins with Archbishop Land, and takes occasion to vilify him by
reason of his Book against Fisher, as worth no Man's reading, and that it is
unsaleable Quis enim operam perdere voluerit in evolvendo hoc libro quem audio
fidum esse custodem officinae bibliopola^um?
: thence he goes on to Richard Montacute, Bishop of Norwich; upon whom he
empties his Spleen, calling him a Chief Coal-blower (...) ciniflones
Archiepiscopalis culinae primas tenet.
in the Archbishop's Kitchen; reviling him as wise in his (...).
own Eyes: swelled with Pride and Malice; with a little learning, but more of
self-conceit. Bishop Andrews is his next Man; whom he accuses of Plagiarism,
and for stealing his determination against Usury out of Rivette; upbraiding him
for his ill style De ferreo stilo, per scabra decurrente.
: adding that Du Moulin and Rivette are as much before him in Learning, as he
thinks a Bishop to be above a Presbyter, and places him at length amongst the
Men, mediocris Doctrinae, of mean Learning: The last I shall produce (though
there be many more against whom he raves at the same rate) is Bishop Hall, and
he impleads him for want of Prudence, in that he wrote his Book of Episcopacy,
carried on to it with an unseasonable itch of Scribbling, casting Oil thereby
on that pyle in which the Church of England was burning; and thereby had cut
off all hope of a Reconciliation (your Plot then, it seems, was not like to
have Success,) and that the Bishop of Exon had not duly consulted the
Reputation of Joseph Hall.

And though it is really sad to consider, That such eminent Professors are thus
rudely treated; yet there is some pleasure in reflecting, with what sort of
Arguments our Episcopacy was encountered in 1641. and the multitude thereby
incensed and enraged against it: and to me there is something peculiar in it,
because that your Advocate Dr. Burnet, and your self, have treated and opposed
me at the same rate; and upon the same occasion, viz. Because I wrote, as
Bishop Hall did, (all the other concurring with him) in defense of the Divine
Right of Church Power and Episcopacy. How frequently do you upbraid me also in
the same manner? As that I am wanting of Prudence and common Discretion: That
few read my Book. It can hurt no body but the Bookseller and my self; but
mostly the Bookseller, because you have not heard that the Chancery ever gave
Equity against an Author for an unsaleable Book. That I and my Book are under
great neglect. That I discharge my spleen on two such eminent Men, whose Works
(as well as their Persons) will be had in honor, long after both I and my Book
shall be forgotten. That I am indeed proud of assaulting two such eminent Men.
My style is unintelligible, barbarous, whose embellishments are not to be
envied. It is, indeed, hairy all over: And so rough is the shag, that it will
not submit to the Discipline of a Comb. It is overgrown with Hair. In short, I
write neither True English, nor Good Sense. I do not produce one considerable
Argument, which you had not made use of to that purpose in a Discourse
published above twenty years since.

But the Malice and Rage of Philadelphus does not rest here, in that he has
thus revile^ ^he Persons of so many of our most eminent Church men, and
represented them in their Offices, as Tyrants and Usurpers over their fellow
Brethren, the Pastors of the Church; but he goes on raving and running mad upon
them, as dangerous in respect of the State also, to Kings and Secular
Governors, out of whose hands the Scepter will be wrested by them, with the
first opportunity, as they have already snatched the Government of the Church
from their fellow Presbyters: so that the Kings of England are in danger, by
reason of the Episcopal Power here among us: The Horse is already equipped, and
the Rider has one foot in the stirrup. And for proof of which, he produces the
very same impertinent Prophecy of Padre Paulo, which you thought so
considerable, that it is (in effect) translated in the Irenicum, and urged for
the same purpose; (and withal to let the World know, that it was the Opinion of
wiser heads than your own) That the Episcopacy in England was dangerous to the
Monarchy of it; as a step to that Pride and Ambition, which, at length, would
get the upper hand of it: And all the difference betwixt you and him seems to
be but this; He had more discretion than to put his right Name to it. I will
here transcribe the whole Prophecy, as it is placed in the Wast-page of his
Book; and leave it to others to judge how far thereby you have served the
Church of England, or rather Faction, and Sedition, and Schism, and the Opposer
of it; though you pretend quite otherwise in your Epistle Dedicatory.

Anglis ego timeo. Episcoporum magna illa potestas, licet sub Rege, prorsus
mihi suspecta est; ubi vel Regem facilem nacti fuerint, vel magni spiritus
Archiepiscopum habuerint, Regia autoritas pessundabitur, and Episcopi ad
absolutam Dominationem aspirabunt. Ego equum ephippiatum in Anglia videre
videor, and ascensurum propediem equitem antiquum divino. Verum omma Divinae
Providentiae subsunt.

But there is no wind that blows not some profit; and I have hereby another
advantage as to my own particular; for, nothing is more certain, than that I
did not take all those considerable Arguments, which you allow to be in my
Book, out of the Irenicum; it being my design and business there, for several
Sections, to make it evident, That Kings are in no danger by the Episcopal
Power; but on the contrary, Episcopacy and Monarchy are every ways compitable
and consistent; they strengthen and support one another, and were owned so to
be and to do by the Empire it self.

Dr. Burnet seems the honestest Man of the three; because speaking out his
mind, and plainly, (unless he speak your sense too in that Paragraph, and that
he may easily be supposed to have done; to be sure you approve of it in the
Epistle Dedicatory, and it is very likely he was but your Journey-man) for in
his last Letter he tells us, whose the Horse is (thus fatal to our Troy) and
who equipped him; and the particular Place and Person, that our Bishops are
riding whip and spur unto. As for the Zeal that all this sort of Men pretend
for the Crown, the Book that is the foundation of this stir is a good
indication of it. -- There is another Sect besides Presbytery, that has first
wholly degraded Kings from their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and after that point
was gained, made them Reign at the mercy of the Church, and at the Pope's
courtesy. It were too bold to attempt both at once; and it is ingeniously
enough done, to seem to yield up the one wholly, till the other is gained. Pure
Irenaeus Philadelphus, who together with Doctor Burnet, and the Rector of
Sutton, are the Triumvirate in the cause: But as long as Archbishop Laud,
Bishop Montacute, Bishop Andrews, and Bishop Hall ride along with us, we are
well enough; there is no true Church of England man will be ashamed of their
company; but will repute it his greatest honor and triumph.

And as to that which the Doctor adds here, viz. That I fall so evidently under
a Praemunire, as he hears an honorable person has observed, That I owe my not
being questioned for it, to his Majesty's Clemency: I could Cap it, with that I
heard an honorable person observe upon him, That, for Six Pence, Barbara, a
noted Scold in the neighborhood, would answer my Book better than he has done:
But I am not now inclined to so much mirth. Though it may not be in raillery to
consider what black guilt, and worser malignancy, Dr. Burnet's Crimes were made
up of, which, Charles the Merciful could not forgive, but banished him his
Royal Palaces of Whitehal and St. James's many years since; and a little before
his death, by his own Royal Edict, silenced him at the Rolls; and since,
England is become too hot for him.

But what can be expected from Men of this complexion, who answer Books, made
up of matter of Fact and Argument, with only Revilings, and personal
Defamations? Or, indeed, from your self in particular, when your Younger years
were seasoned with such kind of Authors as they appear to have been. I Will
instance only in two, Irenaeus Philadelphus, and Robert Parker, unless Martin
Mar-Prelate be adjoined: Men so unplacably seditious and revengeful against our
Church; especially, since you are to this day, of an Opinion, That you served
the Church of England in writing your Irenicum. An Erynnicum is more likely to
be an effect of such studies: And I wish that Book had made less heart-burnings
and contentions among us; and you had less promoted them by so many
Impressions. In fine, if such a procedure, as I have in part made yours already
appear to be, and shall more fully declare in this Epistle, be the way to
re-establish the Church of England, and your Zeal and Affections be thus only
indicated; then, they were for the Succession of the Crown, who still attended
the Earl of Shaftsbury, and dined twice a Week with the Lord Russel, making the
rest of that Conspiracy their daily Associates and Confidents; who kept the
Green-Ribbon Clubb, sided all along with Ignoramus Jurymen, and abhorred all
Mankind besides: That supplied Johnson's courses, that he might with more
Dispatch answer Dr. Hicks, and defend his Julian, lest the Party complain, and
grow weary of their tedious carryings on; or be discouraged and beat off by the
Strength of the Doctors reasonings, and demonstrations against it; who had West
for their standing Council, and Rumball for their Malt-Man, and bought their
Tables and Wainscot of the Protestant Joiner, as we know he declared at the
Gallows at Oxford, of whom he had some of his Doctrines.

Thirdly, You take all Power out of the hands of the Church Officers, for
determining Indifferencies, and making occasional Laws, for the better Ruling
and Governing their Body, and ending Controversies as they arise, and place it
wholly and solely in the Magistrate, or Secular Governor, as the only Power and
Person that can make Church-Laws binding the Conscience. And this you have done
deliberately, upon full thoughts, and after a through enquiry and debate, in
order (as you tell us) to the laying a Foundation for Peace and Union. (Part I.
c. 2.. 6, 7. and c. 6.. 7. page 106, 127, 131.) I Will recite these principal
passages for the satisfaction of the Reader. You place in him the external
Imperative Power of Jurisdiction, concerning matters of the Church; or (as you
explain your self) the Nomothetical Legislative Power, as it is distinguished
from that which is properly called Politicial: And you say the same again; in
matters undetermined by the word, concerning the external Polity of the Church
of God, the Magistrate has Power of determining things, so they be agreeable
to the Word of God. That no other Persons have power to make Laws binding Men
to obedience, but only the Civil Magistrate; withholding nothing from him, but
Preaching the Gospel, and Administering the Sacraments; in which two things, you
say, consists the Authoritative Exercise of the Ministerial Function, derived
by Christ unto his Ministers, making the Magistrate his own Guide, according to
the Word of God in the Administration of his Function, (and by consequence his
own Preacher) not subject to the Power of the Ministers; that is, he is to
interpret the Scriptures to himself; which comes very near to that of Mr. Hobbs
in his Leviathan, (Part III. c. 4. p. 252.) No Man ought in the Interpretation
of Scripture, to proceed farther than the bounds that are set by their several
Sovereigns. As also (p. 295. c. 42.) That the right of judging what Doctrines
are fit for Peace, and to be taught by Subjects, is in all Commonwealths
inseparably annexed to the Sovereign Power Civil, whether it be in one Man, or
in one Assembly of Men. You go on at the same rate, and say, The Power of
declaring the Obligation of former Laws, and of consulting and advising the
Magistrate for settling of new Laws, for the Polity of the Church, belongs to
the Pastors and Governors of the Church of God; but they have no more Authority
to make any new Laws or Constitutions binding Men's Consciences, than a command
from the Supreme Authority, that inferior Magistrates should be obeyed, does
imply in them any Power to make new Laws to bind them. Power arising from
mutual compact and consent of parties, is most agreeable to the nature of
Church Power, being not coactive but directive: And such was the confederate
discipline of the Primitive Church, before they had any Christian Magistrate;
thence the decrees of Councils were called Canons, and not Laws. The great use
of Synods, and Assemblies of Pastors of Churches, is to be as the Council of
the Church to the King, in matters belonging to the Church, as the Parliament
is in matters of Civil Concernment. Elective Synods, substituted in the place
of Authoritative Power, to determine Controversies, are (...), will never be
sovereign enough to cure the distemper it is brought for, (that is reserved for
your Weapon-Salve,) and bind no farther than the party concerned does judge the
Sentence equal and just. So that they help us with no ways to end Controversies
in the Church, any farther than the Persons engaged are willing to account that
just, which shall be judged in their Case; they having no juridical Power. The
Church Power, as to divine Law, is only directive and declarative, but being
confirmed by a Civil Sanction is juridical and obligatory. As for that time
when the Church was without Magistrates ruling in it, in those things
undetermined by the Word of God, they acted out of principles of Christian
Prudence, and from the principles of the Law of Nature. And the reasons that
you give for all this are many, I Will instance in but two. First, Because
Churchmen have no Authority, but are bound up to the commands of Christ,
already laid down in his Word; (and why may not the same be said of the
Magistrates, and that they are equally tied up to the Laws of Christ?) For a
Power to bind Men's Consciences to their determinations, lodged in the Officers
of the Church, must be derived either from a Law of God, giving them this
Right; or else from consent of Parties: For any Law of God, there is none
produced with probability of reason, but that, Obey those that are over you in
the Lord. But that implies no more than submitting to the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Gospel, and to those whom Christ has constituted as Pastors
of his Church, wherein the Law of Christ does require Obedience to them, that
is, looking upon them, and owning them in their Relations to them as Pastors;
but that gives no Authority to make Laws, etc. Secondly, He who can null and
declare all other Obligations void, done without his Power, has the only Power
to oblige; for whatsoever destroys a former Obligation, must of necessity imply
a Power to oblige, because I am bound to obey him in the abstaining from that I
was formerly obliged to: But this Power belongs to the Magistrate. (I might
here also again demand, By what Law in your Sense? But it is your bare Opinion
I am now to relate, and the Reasons you produce, not to show the rottenness of
them.) For suppose in some indifferent Rites and Ceremonies, the Church
representative, that is, the Governors of it, pro tempore, do prescribe them to
be observed by all, the Supreme Power forbids the doing those things; if this
does not null the former supposed Obligation, I must inevitably run upon these
absurdities: First, That there are two Supreme Powers in a Nation at the same
time. Secondly, That a Man may lie under two different Obligations as to the
same thing; he is bound to do it by one Power, and not to do it by the other.
Thirdly, The same action may be a Duty and a Sin; a Duty in obeying the one
Power, a Sin in disobeying the other. Therefore there can be but one Power to
oblige, which is that of the Supreme Magistrate, (where, by the way, I note
that these last reasons are the very same that Mr. Hobbs urges against this
very Branch of Church Power, in his Leviathan, Part II. c. 29. and Part III. c.
10. page 248.) The sum of all is this, and I choose to express my self in the
words of a very Learned and Judicious Writer upon the like occasion; You
distinguish betwixt the Sacred Function, which you grant to be the proper
Office of the Church, and the Power over Sacred Things, which you annex
entirely to the Civil Power. By which distinction, you leave the Governors of
the Church no other Power, than to administer the Offices of Religion, without
any Power of punishing Offenders against the Laws of Religion. I confess (Part.
I. c. 8.) you own the Church to be a Society distinct from other Societies,
with Laws, Ends and Governors of a distinct Nature, (and you had done the same
before, (Cap. 2.. 3. p. 35.) just, almost, before you entered upon this grand
determination) and with punishments distinct from the Civil, and for Spiritual
ends, which you call Excommunication, or an Exclusion of the offending Person
from Communion with the Society; and say, That this Power is peculiar to the
Church: But this reaches not to the point, as to Church-Laws, or to the Power
of punishing Offenders against the Laws of Religion. Besides, you have called
this Church the Magistrate all-along; and invested him alone with Church Power,
or a Power distinct from that properly called Political, which can be no other
than Ecclesiastical: and you have instanced only in Preaching the Word, and
Administering the Sacraments, as the two Offices, in which the Authoritative
exercise of the ministerial Function, derived by Christ to his Disciples, does
consist: But all this I have showed to be contrary to the judgment and Practice
of the whole Church of God, both Bishops, Fathers, and Councils, of the
Emperors themselves, in the best Ages of the Church, and when they were her
Defenders; to the determinations of our own Church, and the Laws of our
Kingdom: It is the design and subject of my whole Book, and I am also mightily
secured that I did not take one Argument that Doctor Stillingfleet had used
before, to be sure, in his Irenicum.

Fourthly, You give to the Prince, and enstate on him, as his right and due,
those very Offices and Acts, which you have appropriated to the Pastors of the
Church, as their peculiar Authoritative Power; such as to Ordain, to
Excommunicate, Baptize, etc. and undertake to censure every Man, exposing him
as ignorant of the State of our own Church, that is not of your judgment;
wherein you and Mr. Hobbs so exactly jump together (for I consider what you
produce out of the Manuscripts as your own particular Opinion) that I have here
placed your words in two distinct Columns, desiring the Reader to compare and
judge of them.

Irenicum, page 391, etc.
All Christian Princes have committed unto them, immediately of God, the whole
cure of all their Subjects, as well concerning the Administration of God's
Word, for the cure of the Soul, as concerning the Administration of things
Political and Civil Governance.

And in both these ministrations they must have sundry Ministers under them, to
supply that which is appointed in their several Offices.

The Civil Ministers under the King's Majesty, in this Realm of England, be
those whom it shall please his Highness, for the time, to put in Authority
under him: as for example, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord
Great-Master, Lord Privy Seal, Mayors, Sheriffs, etc.

The Ministers of God's Word, under his Majesty, be the Bishops, Parsons,
Vicars, and such other Priests as be appointed by his Highness to that
Ministration: as for example, The Bishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Winchester, the Parson of Winwick, etc.

All the said Officers and Ministers, as well of the one sort as the other, be
appointed, assigned and elected in every place, by the Laws and Orders of Kings
and Princes.

In the admission of many of these Officers be diverse comely Ceremonies and
Solemnities used, which be not of necessity, but only for good Order and seemly
Fashion: For if such Offices and Ministrations were committed without such
Solemnities, they were nevertheless truly committed.

And there is no more Promise of God, that Grace is given in the committing of
the Ecclesiastical Office, than it is in the committing of the Civil. In the
Apostles time, when there was no Christian Princes, by whose Authority
Ministers of God's Word might be appointed, nor Sins by the Sword corrected,
there was no remedy then for the correction of Vice, or appointing of
Ministers, but only the consent of the Christian Multitude among themselves,
with an uniform consent to follow the Advice and Persuasion of such Persons
whom God had most endued with the Spirit of Wisdom and Counsel. And at that
time, forasmuch as Christian People had no Sword nor Governor among themselves,
they were constrained of necessity to take such Curates and Priests as either
they knew themselves to be meet thereunto, or else as were commended unto them
by others, that were so repleat with the Spirit of God, with such knowledge in
the Profession of Christ, such Wisdom, such Conversation and Counsel, that they
ought even of very Conscience to give credit unto them, and to accept such as
by them were presented. And sometimes the Apostles and others, unto whom God
had given abundantly his Spirit, sent or appointed Ministers of God's Word;
sometimes the People did choose such as they thought meet thereunto. And when
any were appointed, or sent by the Apostles or other, the People of their own
voluntary will, with thanks did accept them; not for the Supremity, Impery and
Dominion that the Apostles had over them, to command as their Princes or
Masters; but as good People ready to obey the voice of good Counselors, and to
accept any thing that was necessary for their edification and benefit.

A Bishop may make a Priest by the Scriptures, and so may Princes and Governors
also; and that by the Authority of God committed unto them; and the People also
by their Election. For as we read that Bishops have done it, so Christian
Emperors and Princes usually have done it: And the People before Christian
Princes were, commonly did elect their Bishops and Priests.

In the New Testament, he that is appointed to be a Bishop or Priest, needs
no Consecration by the Scripture; for Election, or appointing thereunto is
sufficient.

If it fortuned, a Prince Christian learned to Conquer certain Dominions of
Infidels, having none but the Temporal learned Men with him; it is not against
God's Law, that he and they should Preach and Teach the Word of God there: And
also to make and constitute Bishops and Priests, that the Word of God should be
there Preached; and the Sacrament of Baptism, and others be administered. But
contrary, they ought, indeed, so to do; and there be Histories that witness,
That some Christian Princes and Laymen unconsecrate have done the same.

A Bishop or Priest by the Scripture, is neither commanded nor forbidden to
Excommunicate. But where the Law of any Region gives him Authority to
Excommunicate, there they ought to use the same in such Crimes as the Laws have
Authority in. And where the Laws of the Region forbid them, there they have no
Authority at all: And they that be no Priests may also Excommunicate, if the
Law allow thereunto.

Leviathan, page 295, etc.
Christian Kings are still the Supreme Pastors of their People, and have power
to Ordain what Pastors they please, to Teach the Church; that is, to Teach the
People committed to their Charge.

Again, let the Right of choosing them be in the Church; for so it was in the
time of the Apostles themselves; even so also the Right will be in the Civil
Sovereign Christian. For in that he is a Christian, he allows the Teaching; and
in that he is a Sovereign, (which is as much as to say, the Church by
representation) the Teachers he Elects, are Elected by the Church. And when an
Assembly of Christians choose their Pastor in a Christian Commonwealth, it is
the Sovereign that Elects him, because it is done by his Authority; in the same
manner as when a Town choose their Mayor, it is the act of him that has the
Sovereign Power: For every act done, is the act of him, without whose consent
it is invalid.

Seeing then in every Christian Commonwealth, the Civil Sovereign is the
Supreme Pastor, to whose charge the Flock of his Subjects is committed; and
consequently that it is by his Authority, that all other Pastors are made, and
have Power to teach, and perform all other Pastoral Offices: It follows also,
that it is from the Civil Sovereign, That all other Pastors derive their Right
of Teaching, Preaching, and other Functions pertaining to that Office: and that
they are but his Ministers, in the same manner as Magistrates of Towns, Judges
in Courts of Justice, and Commanders of Armies, are all but Ministers of him
that is the Magistrate of the whole Commonwealth, Judge of all Causes, and
Commander of the whole Militia; which is always the Civil Sovereign.

If a Man therefore should ask a Pastor, in the execution of his Office, as the
Chief Priests and Elders of the People ( Matthew. 21.23.) asked our Savior, By
what Authority do thou these things? and who gave thee this Authority? he can
make no other just answer, but, That he does it by the Authority of the
Commonwealth, given him by the King, or Assembly that represents it: All
Pastors, except the Supreme, execute their charges in the Right; that is to
say, by the Authority of the Civil Sovereign, that is, Jure Civili. But the
King and every other Sovereign, executes his Office of Supreme Pastor by
immediate Authority from God; that is to say in God's Right, or Jure Divino.

But if every Christian Sovereign be the Supreme Pastor of his own Subjects, it
seems that he has also Authority not only to Preach (which, perhaps, no Man
will deny) but also to Baptize, and to Administer the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, and to Consecrate both Temples and Pastors to God's Service. There is
no doubt, but any King, in case he were skilful in the Sciences, might, by the
same Right of his Office, read Lectures of them himself, by which he
authorizeth others to read them in the University.

And lastly concludes, That Imposition of Hands is not needful for the
authorizing a King to Baptize, and Consecrate, or Exercise any part of the
Pastoral Function; every Sovereign, before Christianity, having the Power of
Teaching and Ordaining Teachers; but it only directed them in the way of
Teaching Truth: And consequently, they needed no Imposition of Hands (besides
that which is done in Baptism) to authorize them to exercise any part of the
Pastoral Function, as namely to Baptize and Consecrate.

So that upon the whole matter, whereas before you only contended, that the
sole Power of making Laws relating to Religion, was subjected in the
Magistrate, taking it quite out of the hands of Churchmen; now you place in
him the whole Priesthood, and allow its Offices to have no force, excepting, by
the Power which is derived from him: and the dispute is brought to this issue,
not that the King may govern the Church by a parity, or imparity of Officers;
but that he may govern it without any, or consecrate whom he please. And this
you deliver not only as your own Sense, but as the Synodical Resolution of the
Church of England, in the days of Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth.

Fifthly, After that you have thus invested the Magistrate with all
Church Power (...), in the full latitude and extent of it; You at length
abdicate the Magistrate himself, and take from him, in effect, all Power in
Religious things, placing it in Believers in common, who are supposed to have a
Power antecedent to all positive Injunctions; which you call a Liberty of
Judgment, and Liberty of Practice: That is, (in my plain way of expressing my
self) they are under no Obligation, either to take notice of what he says, or
to obey what he commands, or to abstain from what he prohibits, and so are
their own Lawgivers. It is (you say) the Princes duty to defend and protect
the publicly owned and professed Religion of a Nation, to restrain Men from
acting publicly, tending to the subversion of it: (page 39.) But it is no
bodies duty to obey him unless he please, or cannot help it: And consequently
the enactments of Empires, are not Laws but Canons, like the decrees of
Councils, (as you have termed them;) and as the use of the Assemblies of the
Pastors of the Church, are the Common Council of the Church to the King; so the
Assembly of the King, and his Ministers of State are the Council to the People;
as Elective Synods, so Elective Parliaments are a (...), which will never be
Sovereign enough to cure the distemper that it is brought for; and bind no
farther than the Party concerned, does judge the Sentence equal and just. So
that, these too, will help us no ways to end Controversies in the Church, any
farther than the persons engaged are willing to account that just, which shall
be judged in their Case: And the Power of the State is no more Juridical and
Obligatory, than the Power of the Church. And in pursuance to this, it is laid
down as a rule, (Part I. c. 6.. 6. page 117.) Where any Church retaining purity
of Doctrine, does require the owning of and conforming to any unlawful or
suspected Practice, Men may lawfully deny conformity, etc. Whereby you
evidently take away the Obligation of all Laws; because a suspicion of
unlawfulness gives Men a lawful ground for their denial of Obedience and
Conformity to them, which the ignorant always may have, (not to say, will have)
and the wisest may always pretend to: And it is not in the power of the
Lawgiver to teach and convince them, nor consequently to punish and coerce
them. You argue on to this purpose in the same Section, That as it justified
our separation from Rome, because the Pope commanded things unlawful, as
conditions of Communion; so it will justify other Men's Nonconformity, in
things supposed by them unlawful, and it may be as lawful to withdraw Communion
from one as the other. It is the highest Usurpation to rob Men of their
Liberties of Judgments. That every one has a judicium privatae discretionis,
which is the rule of Practice as to himself: And though we freely allow a
Ministerial Power, under Christ, in the Governors of the Church; yet that
extends not to an obligation upon Men, to go against the dictates of their own
reason and conscience: Their Power is only directive and declarative, and in
matters of duty bind no more, than reason and evidence brought from Scripture
by them does. A Man has not the Power over his own Understanding, much less
can others have; if Governors must be Judges, what things are lawful in this
case, what not, the Power will be absolute: for to be sure what ever they
command, they will say is lawful. If every private Person must judge, (as when
all is said every private Man will be his own Judge in this case, in things
concerning his own welfare) then he is no farther bound to obey, than he
judges the thing to be lawful which is commanded, And at last, after other
Arguings of this nature, you conclude: So that, Let Men wind and turn
themselves which way they will, by the very same Arguments, that any will prove
separation from the Church of Rome lawful, because she required unlawful
things, as conditions of her Communion; it will be proved lawful, not to
conform to any suspected or unlawful Practice, required by any Church-Governors
upon the same terms; if the thing so required be after serious and sober
enquiry, judged unwarrantable by a Man's own Conscience. You particularly
accuse the present Government and Governors of our Church, (because not
complying to offers of union and accommodation,) as wanting of that tenderness
and prudence, that was visible in the first Primitive Church; in our Church at
the composure of her Liturgy; and in the French Churches at the making of
theirs. I will repeat your own Words, because I would not lie under a suspicion
of doing you injury. Were we so happy but to take off things granted
unnecessary by all, and suspected by many, and judged unlawful by some; and to
make nothing the Bonds of our Communion, but what Christ has done, viz. one
Faith, one Baptism, etc, allowing a Liberty for matters of indifferency, and
bearing with the weakness of those who cannot bear things which others count
lawful; we might, indeed, be restored to a true primitive luster far sooner,
than by furbishing up some few antiquated Ceremonies, which can derive their
Pedigree no higher, than some ancient Custom and Tradition. God will convince
Men one day, that the union of the Church lies more in the unity of Faith and
Affection, than uniformity of doubtful Rites and Ceremonies. Were there that
Spirit of mutual condescension, which was most certainly in the first and
primitive Church, in the Apostles time, our breaches, as to this thing too,
might soon be closed up, and the voice of Schism be heard among us no more. --
Certainly those Holy Men, in the composing our Liturgy, who did seek by any
means to draw in others, at such a distance from their Principles as the
Papists were, did never intend, by what they did for that end, to exclude any
truly tender consciences from their Communion. That which they laid a bate for
them was never intended by them as a hook for those of their own profession.
The same reason which at that time made them yield so far to them then, would
now have persuaded them to alter and lay aside those things, which yield matter
of offense to any of the same profession with themselves now: It cannot but be
looked upon as a token of God's severe displeasure against us -- if any fair
offers of union and accommodation be coldly embraced and entertained.

Neither is this all; but you have equally obliged the Faction in other parts
of your Book, and censured our Church after the same manner. Your words are
these, ( page 64.) I am sure it is contrary to the Primitive Practice and
Moderation then used, to Suspend or Deprive Men of their Ministerial Function,
for not Conforming in Habits, Gestures, etc. which you incomparably prove out
of Walafridus Strabo; Because there was no distinction of Habits in the Church
in the Primitive times; and then to be sure there was no Suspensions and
Deprivations for not wearing them. And you again pretty handsomely gird our
Church and Churchmen, as Publick-Prayer-Readers; and for not answering the end
of their Ordination; which is, To be Dispensers of God's holy Word: That the
Apostles were not sent forth to Pray, but to Preach; and therein Ministers of
the Gospel are to succeed them: That Prayer (among our Churchmen) is esteemed
as Sarah, and Preaching almost undergoes the hardship of Hagar, to be looked
upon as the Bondwoman of the Synagogue, and to be turned out of doors: That
they are setting up the honor of one Person, and make the Offices of the
Church a matter of State and Dignity, more than Employment; consulting their
Ease and Honor; judging of the Service of God rather by the practice of the
Church, when it came to enjoy Ease and Plenty, than by the ways and practices
of the first and purest Apostolical times: when the Apostles, who were best
able to judge of their own Duty, looked upon themselves as most concerned in
the Preaching of the Gospel, (page 333.) by which every one knows what you
mean; and that you hereby designed to disgrace the daily Sacrifice and
Common Prayers of our Church; even to turn them out of it; and at that time,
when the Authority of the Kingdom (the miraculous Providence of God making way)
concurred to their restoration; like another Sanballat, using this common
highway insinuation thereunto, taken from the scandalous Rabble, and worst of
our Enemies. And I have been credibly told, That your self did neither
Subscribe nor Read the Service Book, till that fatal (as some call it) St.
Bartholomew; and you had otherwise been deprived of your Rectory of Sutton.

And this subject you reassume in your Preface, spending a great part of it
with a vehement zeal and ardency in defense of Libertinism; so far, as, That no
Church Laws ought to be enjoined as Terms of Communion, but those which Christ
has himself given us, or, those that were immediately directed by the guidance
of the Spirit of God. Those things (you say) are sufficient for that, which are
laid down as the necessary Duties of Christianity by our Lord and Savior in
his Word, which are sufficient for Salvation. Would there be ever the less
Peace and Unity in a Church, if diversity were allowed as to practices supposed
indifferent? Yea, there would be so much the more as there was a mutual
forbearance and condescension as to such things. The Unity of the Church is an
Unity of Love and Affection, etc. Doctrines that are justly called Damnable by
the University of Oxford, and condemned (with certain pernicious Books) in
their Judgment and Decree past in Convocation, July 21. 1683. as destructive to
the sacred Persons of Princes, their State and Government, and of Humane
Society; and presented to his late Majesty, of blessed Memory, July 24. in the
Twenty first and Twenty second Propositions; and in these words, viz. It is not
lawful for Superiors to impose any thing in the Worship of God that is not
Antecedently necessary. The Duty of not offending a weak Brother is
inconsistent with all humane authority, of making Laws concerning indifferent
things. But yet you endeavor to make them good from these several Topics.

1. From the Design and Example of our Savior; whose business was, to ease Men
of their former Burdens, and not to lay on more. The Duties he required were
no other but such as were necessary. He that came to take away the
unsupportable Yoke of the Jewish Ceremonies, certainly did never intend to gall
the Necks of his Disciples with another instead of it. What Charter has Christ
given the Church, to bind Men up to more than himself has done? Or, to exclude
those from his Society, who may be admitted into Heaven?

2. From the Example of his Apostles; who do not warrant any such rigorous
Impositions either. We never read of the Apostles making Laws, but of things
supposed necessary. When the Council of the Apostles met at Jerusalem, for
deciding a case that disturbed the Churches Peace, we see they would lay on no
other burden besides the necessary things, Acts xv. 29. It was not enough for
them, that the things would be necessary, when they had required them; but they
looked on an antecedent necessity either absolute or for the present state,
which was the only ground of their imposing those Commands upon the Gentile
Christians. All that the Apostles required as to these, was a mutual
forbearance, and condescension toward each other in them.

3. You parallel the Laws of our Church, as to indifferencies, and in limiting
of them in particular practices, with those Impositions of Rome, as to the Rule
of Faith, and her other Idolatrous Superstitious Practices.

4. From the Example of the Primitive Church; which (you say) deserves greater
imitation by us in nothing more, than in that admirable temper, moderation and
condescension which was used in it, toward all the members of it. It was never
thought by her worth the while to make any standing Laws for Rites and Customs,
that had no other original but Tradition; much less to suspend Men her
Communion for not observing them. And you instance in that objected case
related by Sozomen, (Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 19. and the same is in Socrates,
Hist. l. 5. c. 22.) which every one rallies our Church withal, that can but
read the Historian in English, or the Libellers of our Church, who in their
Pamphlets represent her to them, as you do here, to her disadvantage. It is
granted that these Churches there mentioned, as Antioch, Rome, Egypt, Thessaly
and Caesarea, did differ from one another in diverse Customs and Rites; as in
times of Fasting, manner of Meats, etc. and therein they were not to judge or
condemn one another: But you must prove that Antioch, Rome, etc. did allow
different Rites in their particular Churches; which you cannot do from that
place, the contrary is evident there. For, the examples you bring, That there
were diverse Rites and Customs, not only in different Churches, but in different
places belonging to the same Church, and many Cities and Villages in Egypt,
differed from the Mother Church of Alexandria, prove nothing against us. For
the Diocese of Egypt (as the Notitia informs us) had abundance of Provinces in
it, which had also their distinct Metropolitans and Laws. And Alexandria
(however it might be the Patriarchical See, or Mother Church, in relation to
them all) was otherwise but the first Church in one of these Provinces, called
Provincia Aegypti primae, and so a Sister Church. And Socrates farther tells
us, That the People of Thebais (which is a distinct Province also of Egypt,
with its Metropolitan) had this different custom from Alexandria: And those
whom he calls Neighbors to the Alexandrians, were in all likelihood another of
the Egyptian Provinces. Socrates plainly severs them one from another as
distinct Provinces. All this will be fully exemplified in the Diocese of
Carthage, in the days of St. Cyprian; where there were several Provinces, with
their particular Bishops, whose Primate he was: But yet every one of those
Bishops had his distinct and appropriated Power in his Province. Neque quisquam
nostrum se Episcopum Episcoporum constituit. -- Quando habet omnis Episcopus
libertatis suae arbitrium proprium, etc. Vid. Council. Carthag. de haeret.
baptizand. inter opera Cypriani. But then, though the Bishop had this Power in
his own Province, to establish what Rites and ways of Worship he judged most
convenient; yet no Man but your self, or with your design, ever hence asserted,
that each Village or Parish Church in the Province, had the same Power, or
might erect their own mode of Worship also. I remember immediately after the
Conference at the Savoy (which was the first Summer, upon his late Majesty's
happy return) there came forth a large stitched Quarto, containing the
Dissenters Reasons and Argumentations against the re-establishment of our
Church; it was without a name, but drawn up, as was supposed, by Richard
Baxter: And one of his principal heads which he much insisted on, was this
passage in Sozomen and Socrates. I fear me you had been dabling here; and so
transcribed it for authentic History in their sense of it; a thing in those
days too usual with you. And yet St. Cyprian with St. Augustine, and St. Jerome
are brought for farther instances of this supposed admirable Temper in the
Primitive Church, and for freely allowing Liberty to Dissenters from them in
matters of Liberty and Practice; whom you hope our Church of England (then upon
its re-establishment) will follow in not imposing Rites; but leaving Men to be
won by the observing the true order and decency of Churches, whereby those that
act upon a true principle of Christian ingenuity, may be sooner drawn to a
compliance in all lawful things, than by force and rigorous Impositions;
notwithstanding those Testimonies of St. Austin, etc. speak as if they had
foreseen the case of our Church, and had designed so to determine on her side,
as to stop the mouths of all gainsayers. For as they allow of different Rites
(in things not unlawful) in distinct Churches, so they as strictly require
compliance from all the Members of a Church, with the Rites of its own Church;
and they are so far from allowing any difference as to these matters in one and
the same particular Church, that in case any of their Members travel to another
Church, they are directed to comply with the lawful Rites of that Church,
although different from the Rites of that Church of which they more
particularly own themselves, that so no division might be made. And this I take
to be the Doctrine of the Church of England, and the very way of arguing; and
the occasion, and the design of those Testimonies do so palpably confirm it,
that nothing but a Man, who had Sacrificed his Judgment either to his Passion
or the humor of a Party, would have set himself to pervert them thus quite
contrary to their meaning.

5. You tell us, That those who first brake this Order in the Church, were
Arians, Donatists and Circumcellians, whilst the true Church was known by its
Pristine Moderation, and Sweetness of Deportment toward all its Members. So
that the worst of Heretics, the worst of Christians, and the worst of Men,
(and such were these three Sects) are the only persons to be found in all
Antiquity, that restrained Men, by Laws, from being of what Religion they
pleased, and reduced them to an Uniformity in the Worship of God. Or thus, That
Church-Laws, laying limits to Men's practice in God's Service, are from the same
rise, as Usurpation, Rebellion, Murder, Burglary, Schism, Sacrilege,
Church-robbing, Spoiling Men of their Possessions, all manner of Profanation of
Holy Things and Persons, forcing Mankind to Heterodoxies in Religion,
Immorality in Manners, and Rebellion in Government, Perjury, Hypocrisy,
Deceit; for these were the constant Practices of those three Sects, and the
Laws and Rules that they proceeded by in their pretended Reformations, and
attempts to reduce, what they called, Christianity: And the Canons, Rubricks,
and Injunctions of our Church (and the whole Christian World beside) take away
and invade Christian Property and Liberty, equally as those worst of Heretics
and Schismatics did. I do not now wonder that you have showed so much dislike
to that part of Dr. Parker's Book of Religion and Loyalty, where he makes it
appear, That Eusebius and his followers, that Spawn of the Arian Heresy, were
for Comprehension; and therefore opposed the Holy Athanasius, and the first
Council of Nice, because limiting the Christian profession of Faith to Laws and
Canons, and denounced the Anathema's of the Church against all such as should
violate them.

6. And lastly, You magnify the indulgence which was granted at Breda by King
Charles II. as the effect of his excellent Prudence and Moderation; when it was
purely his misfortune and necessity that engaged him to it, occasioned by a
sort of Men in this Nation, no ways behind the Arians, Donatists and
Circumcellians, those Cutthroats of Christendom; and therefore the Wisdom of
the Nation (to whom he at first referred it) immediately advised him against
its farther establishment, and it was re-called. Neither was he the first
Christian Prince that complied with the like necessity; the very Gentile
Worship having been indulged for some time, and for the same reasons, and by
good Emperors, by Constantine himself, as is evident in Church-Story. And your
self would deride your own inference, if another did make it; viz. That
therefore the Heathen Worship ought not afterward to have been silenced; and
that the succeeding Imperial Laws, to that purpose, were unwarrantable
Innovations.

And so you have my account of this your unlucky Book: I own, that it was not
my first design to make it thus public; and I had not done it now, had I not
been provoked to it, in part, by your indirect and unscholar-like dealings with
me, in that, (instead of an answer to matter of Fact and Argument,) you have
only Libelled me to a principal Bishop of our Church, in a Two-Penny Paper; to
which is tacked (and therein your farther disingenuity appears) one of your
Four-Penny Sermons, that it may with the greater dispatch and advantage be
posted over the Kingdom, and I be certainly condemned by Bell, Book and Candle,
of those (even your Female Admirers) into whose hands the main Controversy
never came, nor, indeed, are they competent judges of it: And whether my style
or your usage of me in this affair, be more Barbarous, I appeal to the common
Reader. You have outdone Dr. Burnet's rudeness, who only cried me about London
Streets, though these Artifices never take long, and a due discovery only breaks
their Necks more surely: But I was mostly prevailed with, in that you have not
only defamed me, but vindicated this Book, to that eminent Bishop, your
Diocesan, as serviceable to the Church of England, and designed to that end by
you. If this be to serve our Church, by using and urging all sorts of
Arguments, whereby her Form of Government by Bishops is represented without any
bottom and foundation as from Christ, cheap and contemptible; their Offices
rendered suspicious to the Civil Magistrate, and as his Supplanter; their
abetters and maintainers slighted and ridiculed; their manner of Worship
vilified, and described as set up in opposition to the Primitive Example; their
power wholly taken from them, and a Liberty granted to all Pretenders: In a
word, Where your chief design seems to be levelled against them, then you have
done it in the Irenicum; and yet these are not all the Heterodoxies, and
dangerous Doctrines therein contained. It is a Hotch-potch or mixture of all
Religions; in which something is to be found for the defense of each Sect, that
has infested us since the Reformation, and only the Church of England is
constantly opposed: I may safely say, It has perverted many Thousands, (should
I add Millions I did not exceed,) which otherwise would have been true Sons and
Adherers to her Doctrine, and Worship, and Discipline. It is the very center of
Puritanism, and Epitome of Fanatic madness, rendering us guilty of the same
Schism in respect of the Dissenters, as the Church of Rome is charged with in
respect of us.

If it be objected, that you have in some particular passages of this Book,
declared your self in a different manner than is here represented. I answer, My
business is not to reconcile every contradiction in your Book; that were
imposible: These Tenants which I have here given an account of, are what you
have deliberately determined, setting your self on purpose thereunto, and,
which is more, repeated in your Preface, (at least the most considerable of
them,) which, though Printed in the head of the Volume, yet is always composed
last, and a sure indication of the Sense of the Author. I have observed your
own rule in the like case, by which you give your judgment of St. Jerome, who
had some little flights against Truth, and his constant opinion, as you have
here for it, and against yours. (page 278.) I would fain know whether a Man's
Judgment must be taken from occasional and incidental Passages, or from
designed and set Discourses; which is as much as to ask, Whether the lively
representation of a Man by Picture may best be taken, when in have of other
business he passes by us, giving only a glance of his Countenance; or when he
purposely and designedly sits in order to that end, that his Countenance may be
truly represented? And I must hence conclude, that you are as much for those
particular points, because giving a glance of your Countenance toward them, as
passing by, as you have concluded St. Jerome to have been for the Divine Right
of Episcopacy, which you then certainly believed him not to be.

Thirdly, I come now, in the last place, to consider what satisfaction you have
made, for these your Heterodox defamatory Tenants; thus in opposition to the
Doctrines, Laws, Discipline and Practice of our Church; together with your
vainer and ill-natured jealousies and fears that you have insinuated against
our Bishops, their Power and Office, as hazardous to Kingdoms; together with
your defamations of our most eminent Doctors; some of which first promoted our
Reformation, and sealed it with their Blood; others zealously defended and
maintained it against all manner of Dissenters. The late account that you have
given to my Lord of London of your Irenicum is a strong prejudice against you,
that you are still satisfied with that performance: I am sure that
acknowledgment and retractation, which the reason and equity of things, and the
Laws of God and Man require at your hands, is not to be met with there. You are
so far from it, that you justify what you have written concerning Episcopacy,
and by the greatest of humane authorities: For you say, If you have erred
therein, it was with a most excellent Prince, and a true Friend to the Church
of England, whose sufferings could never make him warp from what his Conscience
and Judgment directed, King Charles the First. And thus, when you have
slandered all our Princes and Bishops since the Reformation, to amend the
matter you here make the unparalleled King Charles the First, and elsewhere,
all our present Bishops, of your party: What thanks the latter will give you I
know not, but scarce any good Man will forgive you the fixing so bold a Slander
on the former: Nor can your Friends of the Presbytery take it well at your
hands, that you should attempt to persuade the World, they brought that
Glorious Martyr to the Block for being a Presbyterian. But the asserting the
same thing over again, you think to be proof enough against me, especially if
it be eek'd out with some ill Language.

I have had this account of Dr. Pocklington, a noted Divine of our Church, in
the days of the blessed Martyr just now mentioned; That when he was accused and
censured for delivering in a Sermon (probably, that which he Preached before
the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, at his Lordship's Visitation at Ampthill in the
County of Bedford, Aug. 17. 1635. called Sunday no Sabbath,) some Tenants
concerning the Lord's Day, which were thought to be Heterodox, (or rather
thought convenient that they should be declared so, by a Faction which then
prevailed, by reason of their compliance with the Puritan Party;) his Penance
was to make a Recantation, which he began thus, If Canto be to Sing, Recanto is
to Sing again, and so went on with a defense of his Sermon. If you designed
your Epistle Dedicatory for the same purpose, that he was enjoined to Preach a
Second Sermon, your performance is the same, or a Singing the Second Part to
the same Tune; it being only a Self-justification: And for the better seeting
it off, I am brought for the foil, whom, by the embellishments of your Wit and
Oratory, you abundantly represented as a Knave and a Fool, Malicious and
Ignorant; and this is the whole subject of it. But, notwithstanding, I have
considered that the Epistle was written in a great Passion, and indeed it is
mostly a discharge of your Choler upon me: and designing to be as favorable to
you as I can, I have set my self to a particular examination of your other
Writings, which were made public since the date of your Irenicum, to the time
that my Book of Church Power was put into the Press, (which was September
1683.) when your thoughts may be supposed more calm, and your Meditations less
disturbed. (For if since you have made any notable retractations, I am not in
the least concerned in them.) But alas! little of amends is to be found here
either; in some instances, you have offered nothing like a satisfaction; in
others, nothing plenary, and as might be expected form a person of your
Learning, Dignities, and Quality in the Church. I do therefore thus farther
charge you, and produce your self for my alone evidence;

1. That you have made no satisfaction for the Manuscript which you have
Printed; and thereby done so much injury to our Church in general, in the days
of King Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, and to our most eminent Doctors in
particular. In all your works there occurs not one word that mentions it; much
less that either by confession, sorrow or satisfaction, makes any thing like an
amends for it: And though it may be disputed, whether any one of these alone are
sufficient; yet, where there is no one of them, to be sure is no repentance.
Nay you are so far from any remorse, or sense of the black guilt that is upon
you, for this great and groundless Scandal, that you have to your utmost, made
it more public and authoritative: For, it was by you delivered to Dr. Burnet,
as he owns in his Preface, and Printed, by your order, in his Collection of
Records, with the Title of Doctor Stillingfleet's Manuscript, and with the
approbation of both Houses of Parliament; and this was Eighteen Years after the
first publication of it in your Irenicum, (a sufficient time for Second
Thoughts;) and your continued fixed Judgment is thereby notoriously made known
to all Men. And so, this vagrant, illegitimate Script, without any date of its
own, as to time; without any original, to make it a Record; all your account of
it being only this, That by the hand of Providence it happily came to your
hands, (which account is very scandalous, Providence being the Sanctuary for
every Impostor,) is placed in the History of the Reformation of the Church of
England, with the time and year when the Conference was held, and has the
Character (as well it may upon your terms) of an Authentic Writing; and
hereby Dr. Burnet is equally dishonored as an Historian, with your self as a
Divine of the Church of England.

And first; that your own reputation, as a Divine of the Church of England,
must be shrewdly called in question hereby, is most manifest, because, this
Manuscript, upon your alone authority, and with the Character of stupendae
eruditionis theologum, is made use of by the most rigid and rude of the
Presbyterian Party, to prove, That our first Reformers did not believe a Bishop
and a Presbyter to be two distinct Orders; but that it is in the power, and at
the pleasure of the Prince to Govern by Bishops and Presbyters, or by
Presbyters without them: And they farther hereupon assert, That our own Divines
were generally of the same Opinion, during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; though
Bancroft and Laud have since maintained the contrary, and asserted Bishops to
be by Divine Right, and a distinct Order. This is to be seen in Mr. Hickman's
Apologia pro ejectis in Anglia ministris, vulgo Non-conformistis; but a
particular of this passage in it, is given by the Reverend Dean of Windsor, Dr.
Durell, in his Ecclesiae Anglicanae Vindiciae, cap. 28. I might add, because
the Erastian Party is hereby much confirmed and strengthened. Now, can any Man
think that a true Son of the Church of England (who by his relation to her
alone, must be supposed to believe, that the Power of the Prince is quite
another thing from the Power of the Church, as also the Power of a Bishop, from
the Power of a Presbyter) would willingly, and under such circumstances as
these, have given this great advantage to the Adversary, that you so manifestly
have done by reprinting this Manuscript, and with the approbation of the two
Houses of Parliament; and not add one Note in the Margent; disowning the evil
consequents have been drawn from it? Is it not rather a yielding to them, and
complying with the objection, giving new Strength and Sinews unto it? Or, is it
not a thankful acceptance of the honor that was done you by the Presbyterians
in the Quotation? And I fear you were over-tickled with that higher Eulogy, and
wonderful commendation they bestowed upon you. Sure I am, you could not have
served them, and their design, more advantageously. I must confess I was
startled at the first reading of it.

Again, the reputation of Dr. Burnet is equally at the Stake also, as an
Historian. The grounds and reasons produced by the Dean of Windsor, in his
forementioned Vindiciae, cap. 28. upon which he suspects the Manuscript to be a
fraud, and not the writings and determinations of Cranmer, and those others,
whose names it bears, seems to me very considerable; they amount indeed to a
demonstration; his words are these, Nam quifactum, etc. For how comes it to
pass that these things, in that Manuscript, were altogether unknown to John
Fox, that most diligent compiler of the Acts and Monuments of Cranmer and the
other Martyrs, (a Man over much addicted to the Faction of the Puritans,) "and
the other most diligent writers of the Church of England? Whence is it that
Cartwright, and other ancienter Puritans heard nothing of them? And they are to
be believed to have heard nothing, since they have made no mention of them. How
happens it that no one Historiographer of that time, has remembered so
memorable a thing, as was that Conference of so many illustrious Men,
concerning the affairs of so great moment? For, (if we may believe the
Manuscript) there was enquiry of many, and the principal heads of Religion, as
of the Rights of the higher Powers about holy things; and those most eminent
Men, and learned Prelates, did there dispute of them all. I Will add, how came
Mr. Hobbs not to find it out? He was a Man well acquainted with English Story;
and the concurrence of Archbishop Cranmer, and so many of our first Reformers,
in his Scheme of Government, (which I have showed to be the same with this in
the Manuscript,) would have been very pleasing unto him: He did not hate our
Church and Divines so much, but that he was glad, on each occasion, to serve
himself of them, and did so. Surely a wise Man would have considered these
things, some way or other; the Doctor wanted full thoughts and a thorough
consideration here, to be sure; and it shall go for part of his punishment, for
that he has so much despised them in others: Surely no one would have gone to
the Press without laying these things together, and their consequences, but he
who looks upon himself as the very Pillar of Truth, which will bear out any
inscription it is entitled withal, and his own Authority, as sufficient to
make credible whatever he shall think fit to recommend to Mankind. And this his
Arbitrary, Precarious, Self-authoritative way of writing History, and
Record-making, is so much the more culpable in the Doctor, because he has
particularly blamed Peter Heylin (a Man much better and honester than himself)
upon the like (as he supposed) occasion. His words in his Preface (after many
severer Animadversions upon him) are these; In one thing he is not to be
excused, that he never vouched any Authority for what he writ, which is not to
be forgiven any, who write of Transactions beyond their own time, and deliver
new things not known before; so that upon what grounds he wrote the greatest
part of his Book we can only conjecture: For surely it is much safer, and a
great deal less disingenuous, to produce no Authority, but leave Men to their
own conjectures, than to produce and vouch that Authority which is false, and
has no bottom at all, except that of one single Doctor; or, in his own
Language, a Skeptical injudicious Youth, who vouches Providence for it; by
which he can only mean, that the Manuscript came to his hands immediately from
Heaven; for, no humane hand reached it unto him: All Historians, all Men of what
sort soever, that can be conceived to have been concerned in things relating
that way, being altogether silent about it. And I shall hereafter no more
believe him, in whatever it is that he delivers, (unless I see the originals
with mine own Eyes, or have them vouched by a better Authority than his own,)
than I believed the late Dialogue between him and the Groaning-Board. The old
malicious Fable of the Nag's-Head-Ordination, (by which the Emissaries of Rome
defamed our Church one way, as you have by your Manuscript another) carries
much more likelihood of truth and credibility in it. For, our Bishops and
Divines had a meeting at the Nag's-Head-Tavern; but it was only to Dine there,
when the confirmation performed at Bow Church, was over: But there is no show
or semblance of so much as a meeting of these Churchmen that can be produced,
of whom your counterfeit Manuscript gives a Relation. For my part, I cannot
imagine which way he and you could have more effectually contrived, whereby to
cast dirt in the Face of our Reformation: You have most certainly given two of
our present and principal Adversaries those advantages their Predecessors never
were aware of; and the best services you can propose in the Printing of it,
will not countervail the certain and most notorious damage it has brought to
our Church. I Will here tell what I sometime since met with in Livy, l. 40. c.
30. In the ground of Petilius, the Scribe, were found two Chests, the one had a
bundle in it containing seven Books in Latin, de jure Pontificio, or relating
to Religious matters; they were perused by several, and, at last, read to the
Senators, who immediately condemned them to the Fire, (and they were
accordingly burnt before the People,) because in many things tending to the
dissolution of their Religion. The Wisdom of that Government knew full well the
ill consequences of admitting such looser Papers into competition with their
received Worship, supposed at first to have come from Heaven, and made
afterward the Law of the Kingdom. And if every musty Script, really moth-eaten
by time, or disguised by design (as were the Gibeonites Shoon and Bread) be
received as an Authentic Manuscript, reached forth by the hand of Providence,
the World will never want abuses, and providential Provisions of that nature.

But admit the Manuscript is really such as you represent it to be; and those
Bishops and Doctors did actually meet at such a Conference, and make those
determinations; yet, you and Dr. Burnet are not discharged, but stand accused
of Unfaithfulness, and underhand Dealing in the Printing and Publishing of it;
and that upon these two accounts: 1. For altering the general method of it. 2.
For leaving out Bishop Cranmer's Subscription to Dr. Leighton's Opinion
concerning Church Power, by which he retracted his first Erroneous Judgment.
The first is granted by Dr. Burnet (viz. that the method is altered) in his
preamble to the Manuscript; the other is urged against you by Dr. Durell in his
Vindiciae, cap. 28. whose Narrative of the matter of Fact I only repeated;
accusing you but of the same Unfaithfulness, he before had told the World you
were guilty of, upon his own knowledge and perusal of the Manuscript in your
presence. Dr. Burnet takes a great deal of pains to vindicate himself and you
herein, in his several Letters; but he does it with such an embittered Spirit,
so great rudeness of Language, and such struglings and convulsions within
himself, even apparent contradictions, that he must be concluded upon sight to
have the worser cause; and, withal, a load of guilt upon him. I thought to have
left him to the due chastisement he has already received from a judicious
hand, in two Letters; but having a fresh provocation in the last Paragraph of
your Epistle Dedicatory, I look upon my self as engaged to say something more.
You seem to boast e're the harness is put of, and to triumph before the
Victory, in these words following: As to his accusation about Archbishop
Cranmer 's Manuscript, I think he has heard enough of that already, and he
owes me a Public Recantation upon his own terms, for charging me with
Unfaithfulness therein, for the Scandal and Offense has been very public.
Pray how comes it that I owe a Public Recantation more than Dr. Durell? Or in
what have I charged you, or given such Public Scandal and Offense, which he
had not done before? I only produced his Words, and alleged his Authority. It
seems very strange that you should not be sensible of this heavy Charge,
Scandal and Offense till now; or, if sensible, that it was not removed. Dr.
Durell wrote his Vindiciae at least Fourteen Years since, and yet your story is
told without naming him; and all the Folly, and Madness, and rude way of
Disputing with his Brethren is laid at my Door. I confess I did not treat you
with those most ample magnificent Titles that he did; and if that omission be
the instance of my rude way, you might have said so. But there are reasons why
you did not accost him: A Vicar in the Country is trod upon with more ease and
acceptance, than a Dean, who is your equal: And I find a general prejudice
against me, because I have not a Stall in a Cathedral. And that you may not
think that I speak this at random, I must here tell you, That there is a Dean
of a Cathedral in this Kingdom, and of your acquaintance, that has openly and
passionately exclaimed against me, without any consideration of the matter of
my Book, as guilty of unpardonable audaciousness; and farther said, That, all
the Deans in England were concerned in it: So that it is with me not altogether
unlike what the Bishop of Salzbourgh said of Luther; And let a Dean say what he
will, it is an unsufferable thing that he should be told of it by a Country
Vicar: But I am inclined to believe your chief reason to be, that you were so
Opinionated, as to presume your self really to be the King in Israel, and all
other, whether Deans or Vicars, to be but as Fleas, when coming out against you.

But after all, What is this Publicly, Scandalous, and Offensive charge, that
Mr. Dean of Windsor and I have conspired against you in? The thing is matter of
Fact, which may easily be adjusted, if allowed a fair Issue. Your Accusation is
this; That when you Printed Archbishop Cranmer's Manuscript, first, in your
Irenicum, and then in Dr. Burnet's Church History; you dealt Unfaithfully,
because, that notwithstanding the Archbishop had retracted his first Opinion
concerning Church Power, wherein he was Erroneous, and subscribed to Dr.
Leighton's Opinion with his own Hand, setting Th. Cantuariensis below the
Doctors, and blotting out his first subscription. You have wholly omitted all
this, without giving an account of it to the World. And does not Dr. Burnet,
acknowledge it in his Letter to me upon that occasion, and in his two other
Letters? For he there argues to this effect; That though he left out Cranmer's
Subscription that was under Leighton's, concerning Church Power; yet he placed
it with Leighton's at the end of the last question, concerning Extreme Unction;
which was in effect the same, as if he had placed it under that of
Church Power; his disign in putting Th. Cantuariensis to the last Article,
being, not that it should be interpreted, as if he Subscribed only that one
Article with Dr. Leighton; but, as his Subscription to all the questions
preceding; and accordingly he set down on the Margent of the last question,
over against Cranmer 's Subscription; [These are the Subscriptions that are at
the end of every Man's Paper:] And hereupon, in those his clamorous Lines, he
does not accuse me, in that I said that he left out that particular
Subscription and Recantation of Cranmer's, without giving any account of it;
but that I Accused him uncharitably and Slandered him falsely, in that I said,
That he concealed and denied Cranmer's Subscription and Recantation, because he
had omitted it there: Whereas, it was set down in Durell's own Sense, (though
with some variation in the Words) under the question of Extreme Unction. Hence
he proceeds, as upon a Victory, insulting, and calumniating; he bids me go read
the Epistles and Gospels more carefully, and learn to practice the Rules of
Justice and Christian Charity, not to speak of Prudence and common Discretion,
at this rate exercising his Talent of Evil-speaking upon me.

But, the worthy Doctor, cooling by degrees, and brought to his second
thoughts, by a due Correction, in two Letters, for this Extravagance (the
advices of his Friend prevailing more with him than his own heats,) changes his
Note, and tells a new Story; viz. That, it is true, a Man's Subscription belongs
to every line in his Letter; but by this same Art of reasoning, it will not
therefore follow, that, one Subscription at the end of Seventeen Questions of
different Subjects, in sundry particulars, opposing one another to
contradictions, can be his assenting to all the Opinions contained in them;
hereupon the Scene is altered, and another Plot comes upon the Stage; he owns,
That Cranmer's name was Subscribed under Leighton's in the question of
Church Power; (though left out by himself and Dr. Stillingfleet;) but not by way
of Recantation; but all that he can make of the Subscription is, that he might,
according to a Rule that some Ministers of State have observed, set his hand to
those Papers, as a mark that they might not be altered; and as to Leighton 's
Paper, there may be this particular reason for it, that Leighton's not being in
the Commission, Cranmer, who it seems ordered him to write answers to those
Queries, might have set his hand to his Paper, as a warrant to him for having
writ them. And is not this fine juggling? Or rather, it is no juggling at all,
but downright barefaced impudence: And the Doctor is resolved to say any thing
rather than give up his bad Cause. You may assure your self, that however these
conjectures (for he professes them to be no more) or rather dreams, may be
received, as of force enough to put an end to the whole matter, (whereupon he
has resolved not to write one word more on this Subject,) by those of your own
Party, who, as so many absorpt Stars, move only in your Vortex; yet, there will
be found some considering Men in the Kingdom, that will not be caught with such
baits; who do not shelter themselves under the (...) of some particular
Persons, to whom their understandings are bored in perpetual Slavery, believing
their understandings of age to judge for themselves. (You see I make your
Writings a pattern for my style.) And since the Historian has no more to say
for himself, it can avail very little with others, That a very eminent Person
took the direction of the whole into his Care; or to say farther, the method
becomes the exactness of his Judgment who advised it. And he farther brags,
(which no doubt but he mentions as the particular of his merit) That no Person
had ever observed before him that Cranmer had changed his mind, so that without
his evidence it cannot be proved to this day; and the Erastians may still cite
him on their side; it seems to be but a mere sham; because no Man but he ever
accused him in that nature, and he brings for it only the Authority of your
Manuscript; so that in effect he feigns him guilty, and pleads his own merit in
acquitting him; makes a Plot and then discovers it.

Had you (Sir) designed ingenuously in this affair, and with that integrity Men
use, who aim at Truth only, you would not, upon Printing the Manuscript in Dr.
Burnet's Church History, have passed over with silence, the account that Mr.
Dean of Windsor gave to the World concerning it: Neither would you have waved,
as you did, that after notice and opportunity that I gave you, in my Letter
dated May 1. 1682. of consulting with him about it, for he was then alive; and
a Journey from London to Windsor is not so great and expensive, but that a full
compensation might thereby have been made to your self, if not to the Public:
And in truth, so bad do your circumstances appear in every respect, that I must
tell you plainly, I have not met with a more notorious Artifice, and palpable
abuse in all my reading; unless, I accept that of the Pope's Legates in the
Council of Carthage, for the Adulterating of the Nicene Canons: And there seems
but one way left, whereby in any measure you may vindicate your Reputations; it
is by Printing the Manuscript entire, (though, how Dr. Durell will be answered at
this time of the day, if any thing be otherwise than he has represented it, I
cannot tell,) it is the advice, as I have been informed, some of your Friends
have given you already; a^^ that you replied, You had lost it; but that cannot
be, for it is one of the Topics, whence Dr Burnet, in his Letter, aggravates
my supposed Crime, in accusing him of Unfaithfulness; because refusing to give
my own Eyes that satisfaction, which he desired a Neighbor Clergyman of mine
to offer me: Now, though this is very false, as that Neighboring Clergyman has
satisfied him by Letter; yet he must be a falser Man if he had not it then by
him. Besides, it is well known, that the only revenge he pretended to take,
was, so soon as my Book was made public, to fix the Manuscript upon the
Bookseller's stall: I did joyfully expect it, and am confident that Mr. Took
would not have sued him for it, either at the Chancery or Common Law, as
rendering thereby his Book unsaleable. I was so fair as to produce my Authority
at the first, and upon the producing of yours, if it be found better, I shall
willingly and heartily submit.

2. You have not made a just satisfaction for those very Erroneus and Heterodox
Opinions, which you have published and maintained, concerning that Power
enstated by Christ on his Church Officers, for making of Laws, as occasion, and
their Prudence directs them; whether as to matters of Indifferencies, or Faith,
or Manners. Which Power you have either translated to the Civil Magistrate, or,
in effect to the People, or Believers in common.

The Appendex to your Irenicum is the Treatise, to which, as I have been
informed, you still refer all those who require better satisfaction from you as
to those points. And, to be sure, this is your Discourse, out of which, you
say, I have taken all my considerable Arguments to prove the Church a distinct
Society; for there is none published by you above twenty years since, except
this, that treats of the same subject. And it may be expected to find some
amends here, if ever you have made, or designed, any because it seems to be
added to the Irenicum, on purpose to rectify what appeared amiss, or to supply
something wanting in it. Now he that duly and seriously considers it, will find
the whole performance to consist of these two Heads: And that, you there
assert, the Church a distinct Society from the State, always to subsist by a
Charter from Christ, in the outward visible profession of Christianity; though
the Powers and Laws of the World are against it; and this in opposition to the
Leviathan, who says, That the precepts of the Gospel are not Law, till enacted
by Civil Authority: And your arguments are common but good, by which you prove
it; which he that treats on the same point, cannot well omit, all agreeing so
far, that really own Christianity. Again, you farther assert, That our Savior,
by a special Charter also, has enabled some of this Society to govern;
commanding all the Members of it to obey, and which comes to the very point now
in hand. But this Power, which is fixed by you on the Pastors of the Church, is
also limited to the Power of Excommunication, as the argument of it (answering
to the Title) speaks; but you leave all other Acts and Offices of the Church,
where you had placed them before in the main Treatise; i. e. (excepting the
Offices of Teaching and Administering the Sacraments) in the hands of the Civil
Magistrate. So that, as I said above, the Power over Sacred Things is annexed
entirely to the Civil Power: And the Church Governors are only to administer in
the Offices of them, without any Power, whereby to punish offenders against the
Laws of Religion. And this is with Dr. Stillingfleet, To defend the fundamental
Rights of the Church; or his asserting the just Power of the Magistrate in
Ecclesiastics as well as Civils, in opposition to the extravagances of those,
who screwed up the Church Power to so high a peg, that it was thought to make
perpetual discord with the Commonwealth; and others, that melted down all
Spiritual Power into the Civil State, and dissolved the Church into the
Commonwealth; as you tell us, in the entrance to the Treatise. And so, though the
discourse, as to the main, is Sound and Orthodox; yet in the present design of
it, it is a collusion and fallacy put upon the Reader. It seems of the same
nature with that lie of Ananias (and it is to the Holy Ghost) whereby, as he
kept back part of that possession, which he sold for the use of the Church, and
said it was the whole; so have you kept back part of the Power of the Church,
and said you have given in the whole. And the reply that Peter gave to Ananias,
may not unfitly be returned to you also: Why have thou conceived this thing in
thine Heart? Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God. Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

The next Treatise that I have made enquiry into, for the finding out your
after judgment in these points, is, Your Vindication of Archbishop Laud; in
which I find little amends for these your Erroneous Irenicum Doctrines; but,
rather, an evident confirmation of many of them, if not doing worse. In your
First Part. Cap. 2. Sect. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. your work is to overthrow that
Erroneous Assertion in the Church of Rome, viz. That, the Definitions of the
Church are to be believed to be as necessary to Salvation as the Articles of
the Creed. In order to which, you take a most secure and effectual way; and
assert, That the Being of the Church it self is not necessary to Salvation;
(meaning thereby the Church Organical, consisting of set Officers, as may be
gathered from your following Discourse, though you ought to have set out the
opposition in the entrance of it; for want of which, the terms in your
conclusion are perplexed and involved; and you talk of a Church antecedent to a
Church, and of a true Church out of a true Church, without any Specifications)
for the proving of which, you take a great deal of pains to inform us, what
things are necessary to the Salvation of Men, as such, or considered in their
single and private Capacities; or (in your own words and sense) out of the
Church Society, or Ecclesiastical Communion: And having concluded, That
believing in Christ and walking in him; or an hearty assent to the Doctrine of
Christ, and a conscientious walking according to the precepts of it, are that
Faith and Duty indispensably necessary to the Salvation of Private Persons. You
then add, That, that which we call the Catholic Church; or, as you farther
speak, the being of a Church, supposes this antecedent belief in Christians, as
to these things necessary to Salvation, it being only a combination of Men
together, upon that belief, and for the performance of those Acts of Worship
which are suitable thereto. You go on, and say, whatever Church owns these
things, (where by a Church you can only mean those which are not a Church, but
out of the combination, and in their private capacities, or antecedent to it;
but you are to look to your terms, not I,) which are antecedently necessary to
the being of a Church, cannot so long cease to be a true Church (where the
contradiction recurs, and you ought thus to have expressed it; That Men in
their private and personal capacities, believing these necessary things, cannot
cease to be true Christians, though out of that Church and Combination; for such
is your meaning) because it retains the foundation of the being of the
Catholic Church. Again, the distinction that you use is equally
unintelligible, and contradictory; viz. Here we must distinguish those things
in the Catholic Church, which give it its being, from those things which are
the proper acts of it, as the Catholic Church: As to this latter, the solemn
Worship of God in the way prescribed by him is necessary; in order to which
there must be supposed lawful Officers set in the Church, Sacraments duly
Administered; but these I say, are rather the exercise of the Catholic Church,
than that which gives it its being, which is the belief of that Religion
whereon its subsistence and unity depends; and as long as a Church retains
this, it keeps its being, though the integrity and perfection of it depend upon
the due exercise of all Acts of Communion in it. How these things can be said
to be in the Catholic Church, and give it its being, as Faith, etc. whose
being you told us, a little before, supposed them, and to which they are
antecedent, you, not I, are to make out when you can: Or how the exercise of
Church Communion is the perfection of Faith and good Works. I have always
learnt the contrary; viz. That Faith and good Works are the perfection of
Church Communion, in attendance to the ordinances. You say farther, That the
Union of the Catholic Church depends upon the agreement of it, in making the
Foundations of its being (that is, Believing in Christ and walking in him) to
be the grounds of its Communion: From whence it necessarily follows, that
whatsoever Church imposes the belief of other things, as necessary Articles of
Faith (and not only agreements for the Churches Peace) which were not so
antecedently necessary to the being of the Catholic Church, does, as much as
in it lies, break the Unity of it, and those Churches, who desire to preserve
its Unity, are bound thereby not to have Communion with it, so long as it does
so. To which you add, That nothing ought to be imposed as a necessary Article
of Faith to be believed by all, but what may be evidently propounded to all
persons, as a thing which God did require the explicit belief of. As also,
That nothing ought to be required as a necessary Article of Faith, but what
has been believed, and received for such, by the Catholic Church of all Ages.
All which, whosoever please may read more at large, from Page 48. to Page 57. I
having only digested it, and put in as narrow a room, and with as much
perspecuity as I could: For, since the rule is, He that gives must take, I
venture to be so bold as to tell you, It is there all along very roughly and
incoherently, both as to matter and form, even contradictorily put together by
you; though not altogether so unintelligibly, but that it is plain and evident,
that you have quite overthrown the Jesuit: For, as I said before, If all
Articles of Faith necessary to Salvation, be antecedent to the being of the
Church, and its Governors, the Pastors of it; they cannot then, how great
soever that Power is, wherewith they are enstated by Christ, be conceived to
have created any one of them: But the main doubt is, How you will answer for
those many and palpable injuries our common Christianity suffers thereby, and
rescue your self from the perverser conclusions, which are the immediate result
of your Arguing. As,

1. That a Man may be a Christian, and not a Church Member.

2. That true Faith and Obedience may be attained out of the Church.

3. That the being of the Church is not necessary to Salvation.

4. That the Church is a subsequent Combination for Acts of Worship.

5. That Church Officers are not of the essence of the Church.

6. That the exercise of the Communion of the Catholic Church adds only to her
perfection. And by consequence,

7. That the Church does not cease to be a Church without it, any other ways,
than a Man cease to be a Man without a Hand or a Foot.

8. That the Union of the Catholic Church depends upon its agreement in the
Foundation; or in that assent and belief which is antecedaneous unto it. Or
thus,

9. That Schism, which is a breach of the Churches Union, does not relate to
Church Officers, in their Church Laws and Canons.

10. That all necessary Articles of Faith are antecedent to the Catholic
Church; and consequently, that Article of the Holy Catholic Church in our
Creed.

11. That the being of a Ministry is not the object of a Christian Man's Faith,
so as necessarily to be believed by him.

12. That, that Church which imposes it as such, as much as in it lies, breaks
the Unity of the Church: And other Churches are not bound to have Communion
with it, so long as it does so.

13. That the Church Explanations of Faith, are not a necessary object of Faith.

14. That the Church ought not to explicate any one Article of Faith, or
deliver and recommend it in any other words, for the assent of Faith, than
those we find in Scripture.

15. That when any such Explication of Faith is made, it must be made evident
to all persons, that God did command that Explication, and require the
explicit belief of it.

16. That the determinations of Faith made by any Council, but more
particularly, by the Four first General Councils, are an Usurpation, and
Imposition upon Christendom; because, there is no Declaration of God's will,
that those higher Articles should be so explained and imposed on Christians, as
in those Councils they are determined.

17. That Athanasius and the Homoousians were the imposers upon the Church of
God, in that great Controversy betwixt them and the Arians.

18. That, Universality as to persons, time and place is not that which makes a
necessary Article of Faith; because, all necessary Articles of Faith are
supposed by you to have been antecedent to the Catholic Church, as to persons,
time and place; and consequently, you must either say, That the Article of the
Catholic Church, is no necessary Article, or object of Faith; or those
conditions are not necessary to the making such.

19. That the placing some Books of the New Testament in the Canon, which were
not once there, for some time of the Church, is an imposition.

20. That all the Laws and Definitions of the Church, concerning the highest
Articles of Faith, oblige no otherwise, than when concerning an ordinary
Ceremony.

21. That there is no more guilt in denying the Doctrine of one Substance, than
in not standing up when the Nicene Creed is said, supposing that a Rubric has
enjoined it.

22. That the Church of England has put the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds into
her Church service, and enjoined them for an instance of her Confession of
Faith, when she does not require that we believe them; or if she do, she goes
beyond her Authority.

23. That she greatly erres, not only in imposing the Athanasian Creed for our
Confession of Faith, which, either she does not require us to believe; or if
she does, we ought not to believe; but turns out the Apostles Creed, upon
certain days, to bring that in its room.

24. That her breach of trust, together with the affront, is much more
unpardonable; because the Athanasian Creed is commanded to be said in the room
of the Apostles, on the highest days, and in the highest Offices of our
Christian Service and Worship; viz. The great Festivals of the Year, as
Christmas Day, Easter Day, Ascension-day, Whitsunday, Trinity-Sunday; when a
more particular, signal Confession of our Faith, with the greatest Zeal and
Ardency, Courage and Resolution, is implied to be a Christian Man's Duty.

And lastly, That, herein and hereby, you give support and countenance to the
many Sectaries that are among us; as, Anabaptists, Socinians, Independents,
Quakers; who, upon these very grounds that you have laid down to oppose the
Church of Rome, quite fling off the Ministry, or Church of God, as altogether
useless as to its public Acts of Worship, or Decrees and Declarations: Or
else, they, to be sure, look upon it as that which cannot be supposed
absolutely necessary to Salvation. And, indeed, the consequence comes
unavoidable upon you; for, if that which is necessary to the Salvation of all
Men, be antecedent to Church Society, or Ecclesiastical Communion, and
attainable without it, you will find very little left, whereby to persuade Men
to submit to that Society.

It is yielded, that Believers, in some sense, are antecedent to the Church,
viz. as the Church is a Society vested by God with Power to oblige the whole;
because, this Power cannot be received, and vouched, as true, and not an
imposture, but upon a presumption of the Scriptures being God's revealed Word,
approved as such by Signs and Wonders, to the Sense and Reason of all Men;
there being no other way, whereby the truth of any Power pretending from
Heaven, can be tried, and vouched: That, by which, a thing is tried and made
manifest, must be before that which is tried by it. We must first believe that
God has erected such a Society or incorporation, ere we can be satisfied, that
it is our duty and interest to enter into it. But, surely, no Man was ever
reputed a Christian, (or Society of Men a Church,) till actually entered into
that Church Communion and Combination; nothing less can be interpreted,
believing in Christ, and walking in Christ, in the ordinary way; (and of
extraordinary or exempt cases you cannot be understood, for that would be no
answer to this Adversary, who was disputing of what was, or ought to be,
ordinarily,) nor is there any coming to Heaven in a personal capacity; i. e.
not a Church Member. And that Doctrine which maintains otherwise, is the center
of all Enthusiastical Fanatic madness; to talk of a true Church, with all
things necessary to the being of a Church, antecedent to this
Church Membership, and not in relation to visible Communion, and visible
Duties, under visible Officers and Persons, is an Eutopian Scheme, or building
of Castles in the air. Those that expect any benefit by the Redemption of
Jesus, out of the visible Church, would do well to plead with those Gnostics
in Irenaeus, That they are rendered invisible to their Judge also, at the last
day. Adv. Haeres. lib. 4. c. 9.

You are so ingenuous in your Irenicum (Page 32.) as to caution the Reader,
That all the Rules and Practicks you there draw from the Laws of Nature, were
but the fictions of your own Brain, and a Scheme of Nothings. Your words are
these, A State of Nature I look upon as an Imaginary State; for it is confessed
by the great asserters of it, That the Relations of Parents and Children,
cannot be conceived in a State of natural Liberty, because Children so soon as
Born are actually under the Power and Authority of their Parents: And it is
some engagement in order to the obtaining his pardon, for the impertinence and
extravagances in that nature, he was to meet with. I think the same caution
would have been equally seasonable here also; for your State of Nature is not
more Imaginary than your State of Grace: And it will be as difficult to meet
with a Christian out of the Church, and independent to his Spiritual Father and
Governor, as to find a Child without a Father, or in no tie of Duty to him.
Christianity is a Body by God's institution and command, and not purely by
after voluntary Acts of Men; it can neither suppose nor leave Men at Liberty;
no Man lays limits to the Power and Mercy of God; those that have no Law, he
may save without the Law; and those Christians whose unhappy circumstances, and
harder necessity, have cast them into that dry Land where no Water is, or out
of Church Privileges, and it was not in their choice to obviate and prevent it,
will be saved by the Mercy of God. But then no Man ought to enlarge that, which
God, by his Revealed Will, has bound up and limited; or, (where his Church, in
her Offices and Administrations, is in actual being and settled) give to any the
promise and assurance of Salvation out of it, and take upon them the confidence
to prescribe what things are necessary to the Salvation of Men, as such, or
considered in their single and private capacities, or out of the Church Society
and Ecclesiastical Communion.

It is your own observation, from Father Layne the Jesuit, at the Council of
Trent, (Iren. p. 133.) That it is not with the Church as with other Societies,
which are first themselves; and then constitute the Governors. But the Governor
of this Society was first himself, and he appointed what Orders, Rules and Laws
should govern this Society. And wherein he has determined any thing, we are
bound to look upon that, as necessary to the maintaining that Society. And, as
our Savior had all Power in Heaven and Earth committed to him of the Father,
and to him alone, it was confined to his person, as Mediator; so, he
transmitted it to a certain Succession of Men only; viz. the Apostles, who were
Governors of his Church in his absence, and derived the same Power to their
Successors, to be continued till his coming again, for the governing and
guiding Mankind into all truth, that brings Salvation. And so far were the
first Propagaters and Planters of Christianity, from consenting to your methods
of Salvation antecedent to this Ministry, or Government, that they pitched upon
the quite contrary Rules; and Church combination, under its Officers, and in
its Ordinances, seems to be the first Christian Principle they taught those
Candidates to whom they were sent, and their first work was to setle a
Ministry. So St. Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians, tells us, That they
constituted approved Men to be Bishops and Deacons, (...), over those Regions
and Persons that had submitted to the truth of the Gospel upon its general
motives, and designed to go on to perfection; unto which they could alone
attain (i. e. to a believing in Christ and walking in him) by the help and
cooperation of their Ministry. And when St. John returned out of Patmos, it is
said, That he betook himself to the Neighboring Provinces, and constituted
Bishops, setting whole Churches in order. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 23. And
the only notion that the Ancients have of a Church, is, as made up of Pastor
and People. Ecclesia in Episcopo and Clero and omnibus stantibus, Cypr. Ep. 27.
Ecclesiam esse plebem Sacerdoti suo adunatam, and gregem suo pastori
adhaerentem, Ep. 69. Ecclesiam non esse quae non habet Sacerdotem, Hieron. Adv.
Lucifer. Ecclesia sumitur pro coetu fidelium cum Episcopo, sine quibus privatim
congregare Anathema esse, Conc. Gangr. Can. 6. An Essential Church, that is not
organical, appeared not in these Coasts.

I confess, your unusual improvement of this Argument against the Church of
Rome, with so much disadvantage to the Church of England, was so surprising
unto me, that I was inclinable to persuade my self, the Fairies had changed
these particular Sheets, as some talk they do Children at Nurse; or else, that
some unlucky Jesuit had Transubstantiated them. But reading on, I met with
Reasons that made me believe it might be the Genuine Product of your own Brain;
you having farther declared your self with the like Liberty, in these following
particulars: As,

That the Church has no declarative Power in matters of Faith; or, supposing
any Article obscure to us, or inverted and involved by Heretics; so that the
matter of it has not been explicitly acknowledged in all Ages of the Church
anteceeding, when the present Church gives the true meaning of it, according to
the tradition of Faith, evidencing thereby the Sense of the Article; or, which
is the same, the sense of Scripture, on which the Article is founded, and
engages the assent of all Christians thereunto: That, hereby, she creates a new
Article of Faith, ( page 75, 945.) as if there were no mean betwixt the Power
of the single Church of Rome, who resolves all her actings into her own
immediate Authority, and the true Power of the Catholic Church of God, which
determines antecedent truths, that were (though less known, or misinterpreted)
from the beginning; and, when the reason of her decree is not from her own
Authority, but the Tradition of Faith, delivering the sense of the Holy Ghost
down unto us.

That, the Church representing, and the Church diffusive are all one; nothing
can make the Church teaching and representative, but the belief of what is
necessary to Salvation. (Page 86, 87.) I thought a distant Power, by
Ordination, had constituted the Pastors of the Church. You go on at the same
confused rate, Page 251, 252. I Will only write out your words at large, and let
the Reader judge of them; That which being supposed a Church is, and being
distroyed, it cease to be, is the formal constitution of it; but thus it is
as to the Church, The belief of Fundamentals makes it a Church, and the not
believing them makes it cease to be a Christian Church: I speak of an
essential, not an organical Church: And I know not who those persons are, who
out of those places (Luke 10.16. Matthew. 28.19, 20. Joh. 14.16.) do infer the
perpetuity of an organical Church; nor if they did, does it thence follow, they
must suppose an infallible assistance, beyond an essential, ('it is strange that
nothing should be found betwixt these two in your own sense of them, to
constitute Pastors of Christ's own sending) to make it an organical Church; for
I cannot imagine what necessity can be supposed of infallibility, in order to
that which may be sufficiently constituted without it. The perpetuity of the
Church, does rather argue the infallibility of the promise, than of the Church.
Supposing then, that the promises, by you insisted on, should be so far
extended as to imply a perpetuity of a Christian Church, what does that argue
but only this, that to make it appear that promise is infallibly true, there
shall always be a Succession of Christians in the World? Suppose I grant that
the being of a Christian Church does suppose the assistance of God's Spirit, is
there no assistance but what is infallible? If not, no one can be a Christian
without infallibility; for we speak of no other assistance, but what is
necessary to make Men Christians; for what makes them such severally, take them
conjunctly, makes them a Church. But if you, besides what assistance is
requisite to make Men Christians, do suppose somewhat more to make them a
Church, I pray name what it is? And whatever it be, it will not be owned by
such who infer a Perpetuity. But if in order to that, no more be meant (as no
more can be meant) than what is necessary to make Men Christians; then
infallibility will grow so cheap and common, (I add, and Church Power and
Offices together with it) it will not be worth challenging by you for your
Church; neither will a Ministry be worth challenging by us either. But this is
agreeable enough with the Title you still give the Archbishop in this Treatise;
and as if he had no other Prelation, but what is derived from his Majesty, and
is purely Secular, you call him his Lordship only. I much question, Whether it
might not have discomposed the Calm that most exemplary Prelate died in upon
the Scaffold at Tower Hill, if he could then have been aware that he should
have had such a Vindicator. I cannot here but repeat it again, though it be so
very Offensive, How gladly I should see the Church of Rome opposed, and our
common Christianity not struck at with the same blow and hand: Surely the due
Power of God's Church might have been vindicated, and Rome's Usurpations
rejected, without this intermingling all as one, both Priest and People, as you
have done here most Scandalously.

And at the same rate you dispute also against the Monarchical Government of
the Church, and an infallible judge (Page 464.) because Christ no where, that
we read of, took care that we should be freed from all kind of Controversies;
and we no where find such a State of Christian Church described or promised,
where Men shall be of one mind, (only that peace and brotherly love continue,
is all that Christians are bound to,) and that every Man have the same
Understanding. Which Arguments conclude as forcibly against any other
Government, even that of our Savior himself, and his Apostles, were they upon
Earth again, and in the same circumstances, as when here before. Nay, you have
used these very Arguments against all manner of Government in your Irenicum.
And farther ( Page 172.) you infer, Because it is not in the Power of the
Church of Rome judicially and authoritatively to determine what Books belong to
the Canon of Scripture, and what not: Therefore, the Church in this case is but
a Jury of grand Inquest, to search into matters of Fact, and not a Judge upon
the Bench, to determine in point of Law: And thereby take away all judicial
Power from the Church, to oblige her Members or Subjects by, for their assent
and submission to her Acts and Decrees, upon a due search of matter of Fact,
and full evidence of the Truth and Certainty of those Articles, Rules and
Canons, enjoined and commanded. And thus you particularly affront the Practice
of our own Church; she having made it Law, that only such a certain number of
Books of the Old and New Testament be accounted and received as Canonical, and
withal requiring Subscription thereunto (as a judge upon a Bench to be sure) by
all that are admitted by her into holy Orders.

And as you have before concluded, That whatever Power can be supposed by
Christ to be promised and derived to his Church, from Matt. 28.19, 20. etc. is
that which each private Christian partakes of. So again ( Page 516.) you say,
That whatever Power can be supposed in a General Council, must be first in the
Church diffusive, and from thence be derived to the Council. Which in effect is
thus, That the Bishops of Christendom (who by right are only to sit in Council,
and such Presbyters as have sat and acted there, did it only as their
Substitutes, and by virtue of their deputation) receive their Power either from
the Presbyters and Deacons; or, which is worse, from the Laity or Believers in
common. The Presbyters, indeed, make the lower House of Convocation in our
Church of England; but the reason of that is from a particular Law in our
Kingdom, which imbodies no Canons, giving to them the Secular protection, but
such as pass the Votes of all the inferior Clergy of the Nation, represented by
the Presbyters that sit there, as well as the Votes of the upper Clergy or
Bishops. Such Stuff have you put together, and yet there is worse; for you add,
The utmost then can be supposed in this case, is, That the parts of the Church
may voluntarily consent to accept the decrees of such a Council; and by that
voluntary act, or by the Supreme Authority enjoining it, such decrees may
become Obligatory: As pure Irenicum as any in the World.

I Will add but one instance more, by which it will farther appear, how you run
against, or at least evade, the true Power of the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church, vested in them by Christ, for the obliging the whole; and it is that of
Schism, which (in prosecution of your foregoing notion) you assert ( page 290.)
to be a violation of that Communion, which Christians are obliged to, upon the
acknowledgment of the truth of Christian Religion, or upon owning Christianity
the way to true Happiness; Quisquis ille est, and qualiscunque est, Christianus
non est, qui in Ecclesia Christi non est, Cypr. de Novato, Ep. 52.

Inde enim schismata and haereses oboriuntur, dum Episcopus qui unus est, and
Ecclesiae priest, superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur. Et homo
dignatione Dei honoratus, indignus hominibus judicatur. Idem, Ep. 171.

Et non attendisti inter schismaticos and haereticos, quam magna distantia sit:
inde est quod ignoras, quae sit sancta Ecclesia, and omnia miscuisti, Optat.
cont. Parmen. Donatist. lib. 1.

Catholicum facit simplex and verus intellectus, singular and verum
sacramentum and unitas animorum. Schisma vero sparso coagulo pacis generatur --
and deserta matre Catholica, impii filii dum for as exeunt and se separant a
radice matris Ecclesiae, invidiae falcibus amputati, errando rebels
abscedunt, nec possunt novum aliquid aut aliud agere, quam quod jamdudum apud
suam matrem didicerunt. Haeretici veritatis exules, sacri symboli desertores,
etc. de se nosci voluerunt, ideo and falsum habent Baptisma. Vobis vero
Schismaticis quamvis in Catholica non sitis, haec negari non possunt, quia
nobiscum vera and communia traxistis Sacramenta, ibid. the very Schism in the
days of St. Paul at Corinth. For if he that comes Preaches another Jesus,
whom we have not Preached; or if ye receive another Spirit, which ye have not
received, or another Gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear
with him, 2 Cor. 11.4.

Immanes, non habentes Dei dilectionem, suam utilitatem potius considerantes,
quam unitatem Ecclesiae, and propter modicas and quaslibet causas magnum and
gloriosum corpus Christi conscindunt and dividunt, and quantum in ipsis est,
interficiunt, pacem loquentes, and bellum operantes, vere liquantes culicem,
and camelum diglutientes. Nulla enim ab iis tanta fieri potest correptio quanta
est Schismatis corruption, Irenaeus l. 4. c. 62.

-- Sed crimine Schismatis, a quo immanissimo Sacrilegio, nemo vestrum se
dicere potest immunem, quamdiu non communicate unitati omnium gentium, Aug. l.
2. Cont. Petil. Donatist. c. 96.

Quid ergo prodest homini vel sana fides, vel sanum, fortasse solum, fidei
Sacramentum. Vbi letali vulnere Schismatis perempta est sanitas charitatis, per
cujus solius peremptionem, etiam illa integra trabuntur ad mortem, Idem, l. 1.
de Baptismo contra Donatist. c. 8.

Nobiscum enim estis in Baptismo, in Symbolo, in caeteris dominicis
Sacramentis, in Spiritu autem unitatis, in ipsa denique Catholica Ecclesia
nobiscum non estis, Ep 48. Vincentio.

Quisquis ab hac Ecclesia Catholica fuerit separatus, quantumlibet laudabiliter
se vivere existimet, hoc solo scelere, quod a Christi unitate disjunctus est,
non habebit vitam, sed ira Dei manet supra eum, Ep. 152.

And so in the Apostles Canons, Can 31. The Schismatic is he, that altar
aliud erigit, nolente Episcopo, and Can. 6. Conc. Constant. 2. Genesis The (...)
are called Schismatics, though of a sound Faith. Schisma est recessio a proprio
Episcopo, Can. 13. Conc. 1, 2 Constantinop. And to the same effect, Can. 10.
Conc, Carthag. (...), contra proprium Episcopum. I Will add but this one
Authority more, and it is St. Basil ad Amphiloc. Can. 1. Haereses quidem, eos
qui omnino abrupti sunt, and in ipsa fide sunt abalienati: Schismata autem,
propter aliquas Ecclesiasticas causas, and medicabiles questiones, inter se
dissident. -- Schisma autem est, de penitentia dissentire ab iis qui sunt ex
Ecclesia. Haereses autem, ut Manichaeorum, and Valentinorum, and
Marcionistarum, etc. statim enim de ipsa in deum fide est dissentio.


herein contradicting all the ancient Fathers, Doctors and Teachers of the
Church of God, and the whole current of Theology; who still speak of Schism as
a breach of the Laws and Canons Ecclesiastical, of which those are guilty, who
receive and own the Foundation or the Scriptures, as the indispensable Rule of
Faith and Manners, but recede from their Pastors or Bishop; that break the
outward peace, when owning the same Articles of Faith, and for little things
make divisions: And in this respect it is, that St. Austin lays such blame upon
the Donatists, telling them, That a true Faith will avail them nothing; nay,
that they are worse than Idolaters. Dr. Hammond, in his Book of Schism,
considers it also in this Ecclesiastical notion; and therefore concludes us to
be no Schismatics, not because retaining your essentials, or being of a
Church, consisting in a belief in Christ, and walking in him; but, because,
keeping those due Subordinations, in which our Christianity placed us, in
respect of our Church-Governors, whether to the Deacon, or Presbyter, or
Bishop; Metropolitan, Exarch or Patriarch; as also that due co-ordination, as
fellow Christians, without breaches of Charity made upon one another. And to
what end you should give this notion of it, differing both from the Church of
God, and our own Doctors, is not conceiveable; only, that you designed thereby
to gratify and comply with those amongst us, whose Maxim is, That to strike a
Schismatic is to hit a Saint. That Schism, in this Church-Sense of it, is a
mere Chimera, invented only by Churchmen, to keep the People in Dependence and
Subjection unto them; that Unity does not consist in Uniformity, but in owning
the general Truths of the Gospel, and obeying them, or believing in Christ, and
walking in him, to which every Man may attain by his personal Capacity,
antecedent to the being of a Church and Church-Governors: Or in the words of
Mr. Hales (made your own by citing of them) in your Irenicum, page 108. Schism
is but a Theological Scar-crow, set up by such as hold a Party in Religion.
And, by consequence, the Church of England is upon the same terms, in respect
of the Church of Rome, as the Dissenters are in respect of the Church of
England. The Impositions of both are alike Antichristian, which is again the
very Doctrine of the Irenicum.

Your Answer to several Treatises, etc. is the next of your Writings that I
have pitched upon, whence to inform my self and others of your particular
Judgment in these points of Church Power, and its Obligation. And that, which I
hence report, will be so much more satisfactory, because in your Answer to Mr.
Cressy's Epistle Apologetical, etc. you refer him hither, from page, 260. to
page 291. as those Pages, in which you maintain as much Authority in the Church
of England, as ever the Church of England challenged to her self. But here you
have left the Church in the same condition you had placed her in before, and
altogether without Power to make her Declarations Law, whether in Council, or
out of it; and the Office assigned by you to her Pastors, is, to Teach,
Instruct, Propose and Recommend, engaging them in Toil and Labor enough, in
order to the search of Truth; but they are no where vested with an Authority to
oblige the whole Body of Christians, or the Church diffusive: Each Private Man
is left at Liberty to receive or reject, according to his Eyesight; and as he
apprehends the Reasons, Motives, Tradition, Context, Criticism or inward
Revelation, of that which is delivered. And you say withal, That the ancient
Church did not pretend to more Authority, as is to be seen in the Pages
foregoing.

As for that branch of Authority you assign her in making Rules and Canons,
about matters of Order and Decency in the Church, it is no more than, in
effect, you had said before in your Irenicum, (and accordingly you refer to it,
in the point, in the Preface to the Unreasonableness of Separation,) where,
notwithstanding, you contend with all might and main, sometimes, against the
Laws themselves, as Antichristian; sometimes, against the execution of them,
that they be not imposed upon doubtful Consciences: (as I have already showed:)
And you have since been engaged for a Toleration, or Non-execution of
Church-Laws in the said Preface, page 83, 84, 85. then, when you had Preached
but a little before against Separation; and this is the last, and all the
account that I can give of you in this affair: He that is most favorable to
you, must yield, that you are wavering and unfixed in your Judgment. And did
you really believe, that there is an advantage on the side of Authority, which
ought to overruled the Practice of such, who are the Members of that Church,
where the Authority is exercised, (as you speak,) you would also be so kind to
Dissenters, as to urge, with more constancy, upon them their duty in obeying,
as a Private Man, you ought to propose nothing less unto them. Though I cannot
see why we should less doubt of your good will to them and their Cause, when
you drew up those Terms and Articles of Toleration; than of Coleman's kindness
to the Papists, when he drew up his Declaration for Dissolving the Long
Parliament, in order to a Toleration also: And it will be difficult to
determine, which of the two was more presumptuous. I know what course the
Ancient Church would have taken with a Private Presbyter, who, after a full
debate in Council, seconded with a Church Sanction, and confirmed by the
Imperial Constitution, should have dared to have made Proposals, or draw up
Rules and Limitations, and make them public in opposition thereunto: and yet,
this was not your first attempt of this nature; your good will to
Comprehension, Latitudinarian Principles has all along been manifest and
notorious. Those many Meetings which you and your Church of England, and Mr.
Baxter and his Church of England had, were not so private but that some took
notice of them; where you made Proposals for altering the Church Government,
settled and confirmed by all that is sacred in Church and State. And the reason
is plain why those Men, afterward, dealt so severely with you, (of which you
complain in the abovementioned Preface,) upon that Sermon which was Preached
before my Lord Mayor; because after your healing Condescensions in private, you
appeared a Revolter and Apostate; and they were to deal with you as one that
had broken his Faith. If some other had Preached that Sermon, they might
possibly have born with him, (he acting according to his principles) when you
were not to be endured, (and tu Brute) their Friend, with whom they took sweet
Council together concerning the House of God. I add farther,

1. That in your Treatise of the Unreasonableness of Separation, you no where
(that I could take notice of) have pressed Christians to Obedience as they are
a Corporation, imbodied under Governors and Laws of their own, (which is the
original and fundamental Obligation to submission and conformity,) arising from
the nature of that Kingdom, which Christ erected by the promulgation of the
Gospel, of which Kingdom every true Christian is a Subject. I do not deny but
that your performance is competently well done, upon your principles, and so
far as it reaches: You have abundantly set forth the reasonableness of our
Book of Common Prayer, in the Administration of the Sacraments and other Rites
and Ceremonies, and urged Obedience thereunto from the destructive
consequences, that must inevitably follow in that Church or Society of
Christians, which retains not an Uniformity of Worship; and more especially
this reasonable one, that we have in our Church of England. But all is left
still as matter of Dispute, like the Corporation it self, as Arbitrary, and at
the pleasure of its Subjects, to retain or reject them; and he that sees not
with your Eyes (by your own principles) has no Obligation for Obedience and
Conformity to any one Rubric, Law or Injunction, therein contained. And it is
observable in your Epistle Dedicatory, that you beg pardon, indeed, of your
Superiors, for going beyond your bounds in your projects of accommodation: But
it is not for any one reason relating to them, as your Governors; or because
you have been injurious thereby to their Power and Government in the Church of
God, which you, in so doing, had inroaded and invaded. But, because (forsooth)
the Dissenters would not come up to you, and their untractableness rendered your
Project useless, admit you had jumped together, and united in the project, What
then? Why you had never begged their pardon: And it was success, not design,
was wanting, by your own confession. The very case of Coleman. Besides, is not
this a delicate Apology for your self? After you have Mountebank'd and Quack'd
for full Five and twenty Years, and find your Patient worse and worse under
your hands, and that you are unable to work a Cure, you then return him to the
Church and her Laws of Discipline, for a just Habit and Temperature. The
College of Physicians, I am sure, would not think themselves beholden to such
an Empirick.

2. The reason which you give for that great tenderness you showed to
Dissenters, when writing the Irenicum (Preface page 84.) or that plenary
Toleration all Men ought to have, is, because the Laws were not then
Established; and return it upon them, that they have not very well requited you
for the tenderness and pity you had for them, and the concernment you expressed
to have brought them in upon easier terms than were since required: But pray,
was not the Church of England the same under the Rump Parliament and Cromwell,
and the Committee of Safety, as it now is? And what had you to do to enlarge or
limit her terms then, more than now? It was then a Pragmatick Encroachment, and
so it is now. I do not believe that Bishop of this Church, from whom, you say,
you received, in those days, Episcopal Orders, gave you any such Directions: I
am sure you received no such Authority at your Ordination by him. When the
Empire frowns upon the Church, or Anarchy relaxates the due Exercise of her
Worship and Discipline, Churchmen, and every good Christian, are to consider
what is most necessary to be practiced: And some directions are given in the
case, by the Author of the Discourse of Church Power, etc. cap. 5. But none are
to think themselves acquitted of their Obedience to Church-Laws, during the
Suspension, or Interregnum; much less, that they are Authorized to prescribe
easier terms, and acquit the first Obligation. Besides, this Answer and
Practice is no ways agreeing with him, who has told us, That the Church is a
peculiar Society, in its own Nature, distinct from the Commonwealth, subsisting
by Powers of its own, apart from it; subjected in the hands of its own
Officers, by a Charter from Christ, never to be divorced, but remaining
formally in the Church, after its being incorporated into the Commonwealth. For
how can this Church be disestablished by any confusions in the State, or lose
this Power? All that can be said in your behalf is this, (and I am resolved to
say what is to be said for you) That according to this reason, you do not
believe the Power that is enstated on the Officers in this Body and
Association, for governing the whole, to extend to Acts and Laws, restraining
their Liberties in these cases; or that the Church is a Body subsisting by her
own Laws; but assert the Legislative Power in the Secular Hand; which being at
that time so much lessened in this Church and Kingdom; you thereby (amongst the
rest of the Arbitrary Subjects) became at liberty to act apart, and did so;
conceiving that no Law, as a Churchman, or in Episcopal Orders, did enjoin you
the contrary. And hence it is plain, why in the Appendix to the Irenicum (where
we have also the abovementioned Definition of a Church) you say, That you have
slit the Hair betwixt the Church and State, adjusting to each that Power which
belongs to them, when you name only Excommunication, and Administration of the
Sacraments, as her Rites. And hence it is as evident also, as any thing can be,
That I did not Steal my considerable Arguments out of this Appendix, which I
used in behalf of that other instance of the Power of the Church, (viz. to
govern her own Body by her own Laws) the asserting whereof, makes up the Body
of my Discourse. And it farther appears, That, that was not one of those
points, concerning which, you saw reason to alter your Judgment in Twenty Years
time. As in the Preface to the Unreasonableness, etc.

3. In that Preface (page 53.) upon the clamors of Dissenters, by reason of
your Sermon against Separation; and that you Preached not for Abatements and
Alterations, and taking away Ceremonies and Subscriptions, and leaving them
full Liberty to do what they pleased, by which you might have gained their good
Opinion, and have been thought to have Preached a very seasonable Sermon: Or,
in plain English, because you did not make Proposals for Toleration, as you did
a little after. To all this you suggest, supposing my private Opinion were
never so much for some Abatements to be made, that might tend to strengthen and
unite Protestants, and were consistent with our Nations setlement; had it been
seasonable to have spoken of the alteration of Laws before Magistrates and
Judges, who are tied up to the Laws in being? What the Power of Magistrates and
Judges is, relating to Church-Laws, I have showed at large elsewhere; and that,
according to the constitution of the Empire, when Christian, and the Statute
Book of our Kingdom since the Reformation: And I do allow your Plea to be just
and good. Christian Magistrates always were, and still are, Preservers and
Executors of Church-Laws; the Church owes her support in a great measure unto
them. And it is impious as well as unseasonable for a private Man, but much
more for a Man in the Pulpit, to make Proposals for Nullities and Repeals of
those Laws and Enfranchisements, which the Religious favor of the Prince has
granted God's Church; and the Zeal and Vigilance of good Magistrates, take care
to preserve entire and serviceable unto her. But, yet, this is not all the
guilt that is contracted, or undecency that is committed by such attempts:
There is a Church Power, which you have defined to be distinct from the State,
and remaining in the Church, after its Incorporation into the Commonwealth: And
no other reason can be given, why your doing the same before these Magistrates
and Judges had not been alike unseasonable; or why you pleaded not the equal
regard which you ought to have to them also; only that you in reality are still
of your Irenicum judgment; viz. That the other Magistrates are the Church, and
all Power to make Church-Laws, or execute them, relating to outward decency and
order, is invested in them; and that there is no Legislative Power enstated by
Christ on his Officers. You, who could tell your Story, and defame me to your
Bishop (whom I honor as one, that is vested with the utmost of Power, that our
Savior was pleased to have continued in his Church till his coming again; and
do owe an Obedience in special unto him, and all that are of that Sacred and
Superior Order in God's Church) in your Epistle Dedicatory, might have
considered also, that he was your Diocesan, or that Spiritual Magistrate, to
whom you owe a more immediate Subjection; and, in respect of whom, an attempt
to alter Established Laws, had been equally unseasonable: Neither did the
absence of his Person at the Guild Hall Chapel, render him less awful and
tremendous unto you.

4. When you come to the Discourse it self ( Page 134.) you seem, at least, too
unwary in your Expression; asserting, That if the whole Nation in Parliament
consent to the passing a Law for removal of Pastors, and putting in of others,
this is sufficient for the satisfaction of that People, to whom they are
appointed as Pastors by virtue of that Power, or for the making them true
Pastors. I yield, that the right of Investiture is originally in the Secular
hand, and, by consequence, the right of deprivation, upon the breach of those
terms on which the Investiture is made. Thus Abiathar was removed, and Zadok
put in his room: But the question is, supposing Zadok had not been of the
Priestly Line, Whether Solomon's placing him in the High-Priest's Chair, did by
virtue of his Kingly Power alone, create him High Priest, and the People were
thereupon bound to own and submit to his Ministry? Or to bring an instance
nearer home, supposing an Act of Parliament appoint a certain Person to be
Minister in such a Parish, when he is really no Minister, because without
Ordination from a Bishop; Whether, by virtue of that Law, he is made a true
Minister, and ought to be received as such by that People, to whom, by Act of
Parliament, he is sent? No understanding Christian will own him as his Minister
upon such terms. We have a great instance of this nature in the Church of
Scotland about Fourteen Years since: The Secular Power commanded Dr. Burnet,
Archbishop of St. Andrews, to admit into particular Churches, and in the
relation of Ministers, certain Men that had no Episcopal Orders, and by
consequence, were not of the Gospel Priesthood; the most excellent and
exemplary Prelate refused for this reason, Because the Prince may promote to
what temporal Possessions he please, but he cannot promote to the Authority
which is Spiritual; as to the former he must be submitted to, but not as to the
latter. And his Lordship was a great example of the last case; for, denying
their Institution, he was Suspended from his Bishopric, and sustained it with
a due resignation; though the Government, upon second thoughts, restored him with
greater honor and estimation, in which he died. But as to the more immediate
question, and which occasioned this Section, you ought to have urged, That the
consent of the People did not constitute a Minister; neither was it any
necessary qualification in order to it, as Mr. Baxter and his Combination
pretended: But instead of doing this, you reply, That an Act of Parliament is
sufficient to constitute him such, which savours too much of the old Vessel. I
confess, the consequents would be really evil in the Government both of Church
and State; if he be an Usurper in a Parish, to whom the People do not consent,
the disorders thereby must become intolerable; and the consequents would be as
noxious on the other hand, if the Parliament had the Power of qualifying for
it: For, then the Ministry will be quite swallowed up in the State, and every
Usurper (be his Religion what it will) may alter the Priesthood; or, as in the
days of Jeroboam, make Priests of whom he please. But thus it fares with your
Arguments, and it is their usual fault, That they prove too much. You take away
Infallibility and the Ministry at once, in other places, and maintain here the
Secular Power, to the destruction of the Spiritual. I Will receive him in
Seculars whom my Prince is pleased to set over me; but none in Spirituals, who
has not an Authority, which the Secular hand cannot derive unto him.

5. But that which crowns all, is, ( Page 300.) when you scatter those mists,
which some pretend to have before their Eyes, that they cannot clearly see what
we mean by the Church of England; and tell us, it is so called, because it was
received by the common consent of the whole Nation in Parliament. Surely, if
now we be not a Parliament Church, we never were in the opinion of any, nor
ever shall be. Should any Man ask me what the Church of England is, I would
tell him, It is that due Succession of Authority, Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, which are now made Law in the Kingdom of England; but if that Law
cease to own and protest them, I should not thereby think it to become less
the Church of England. For certain, there was a Church of England when there
was no Parliaments in England, according to those who carry their era or date
to the highest pitch: And we say, There was the very Church of England that now
is, and neither Parliament nor Pope had appeared in our Coast. Besides, What if
the Parliament of England pass a Bill of Abjuration against the present Church,
as they did the other day against the Crown of England? The Rump Parliament did
it. Why then your definition of the Church of England is much at the same as
Socrates defined a Man, Homo est Animal, bipes, implume; A Man is a living
Creature, with two Feet and without Feathers. Diogenes's Jackdaw was as good a
Man, when he had plucked his Feathers off. The being of the Church of England
does not depend upon any such outward advantages, or upon the Votes of the
People, whether in Parliament, or out of it. We thankfully own the outward
advantages she has had, and now enjoys, by Parliaments; but we own, withal, her
separate Being abstracted from them; the Church of God here in England, is
antecedent to them all. One while I was willing to think, That this Book was
wrote by you at a time, when the general design was on Foot, for enlarging the
Privileges of Parliaments, or rather of the House of Commons by the Men of
Shaftsbury, and you might think your self engaged to cast in something; and if
so, you add that which is very considerable, making the Being of the Church of
England to depend upon their owning and acceptance of it. The Kingdom must have
Parliaments once a Year at least, only for this; for, otherwise we may have no
Church once a Year. But then again, this seems not to be the reason, because I
find you to have been of the same Judgment some years before; and you reckon up
this among the Encroachments and Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome; (and spoil
thereby a good cause;) viz. That Acts of Parliament were no certain indications
of the Judgment of the Church, or the generality of the People in that time.
(Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle Apologetical, etc. page 448.) I must therefore
conclude, that you were somewhat discomposed; neither is this the only unwary
expression you have let fall within the distance of one or two Pages: For, you
there mix the Pastors and People together, as of the same Church diffusive. You
say farther, That to assert in every Church a constitutive regent part, as
essential to it, is the same as the Pope's universal Pastorship. And again,
That the Acts of the Convocation are to be allowed and enacted by the King and
the three States of the Kingdom: Flatly against the King's Prerogative, in
making Church-Laws by the Convocation alone. As also, your term, National
Church, is as incongruous as any. National, Congregational, Classical, are
Relatives, and give life to one another.

6. It does not appear why you Reprinted that scandalous Manuscript, which so
immediately opposes all Church Power, in the utmost latitude of it, and by the
Authority of so many of our most eminent Reformers: Nay farther, with an
artifice to conceal Archbishop Cranmer's Retraction, unless it be to give all
the seeming Authority you could to the Doctrines there asserted. There is not
one Note in the Margent by which it appears, that you had then altered your
first conceptions of it, as Printed in the Irenicum. Nay you have owned and
justified it in part, in your Epistle to my Lord of London; or if there be any
alteration made, it is, least there might be occasion to suspect that Cranmer
had deserted you.

3. And in the last place, you have made no satisfaction at all to the Church
of God, for that Irenicum Doctrine, which equals the Presbyter with the Bishop.
There is not any thing like amends for it in all your writings that I have met
with. It is true, you often speak of Episcopacy, as the most ancient Government
derivable from the Apostles: But you have not any where asserted it in the
number of those Institutions and Practices Apostolical, which are perpetual and
immutable: And until you say this, all you can say besides is to no purpose.
The Bishop is, notwithstanding, at the mercy of your Prince, or your
Presbyters, when their prudence sees fit to degrade and depose him. There is no
more Obligation to continue the distinct order of Bishops, than that order of
Widows, in the Epistle to Timothy.

And thus (Sir) I have showed, that you have not made due satisfaction for
those errors in your Irenicum, concerning the Power of the Church in general,
and the constitution of our Church in particular; of which I accused you in my
Letter, dated May 1. 1682. I have also showed more at large the grounds of my
Accusation. I beg only this Favor of you, That if you think fit to return an
Answer, you will do it in a Scholar-like way; i. e. by Argument and Matter of
Fact, not Raylings and Nicknames; it is really below your quality in the
Church to Act Andrew Marvel. It was thought by J. O. to be a thing below him:
And therefore, we know on whom he set that Buffoon, when his case was much at
one with yours, and he wanted argument. Besides, though Dr. Burnet was pleased to
assign me the Province, yet I am not at leisure to catch Flies. But if you keep
to these terms, I shall certainly make a reply, and you will thereby oblige,

November. 6. 1685. Reverend Sir, Your Humble Servant, SIMON LOWTH.

FINIS.

