My Lord Lucas HIS SPEECH IN THE House of Peers, Feb. the 22. 1670/1 UPON The
Reading of the Subsidy BILL the second Time, in the presence of his. MAJESTY.

Aude aliquid brevibus, Gyaris and Carcere dignum
Si vis esse aliquis Probitas laudatur and alget.
JUVENAL Sat. 1. London, Printed in the Year 1670.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Need not tell you that this Speech was Burnt by the hand of the Common
Hangman, it being done in a public place, to the great grief and astonishment
of all True-Englishmen, to whom my Lord Lucas his Loyalty to his Prince, and
his inviolable Love to his Country, was abundantly manifested.

But I dare affirm this Barbarous usage did so little discourage him from doing
his Duty, that he would have submitted himself to the same Fate, if his Death
might have prevented these approaching Calamities and evil Counsels, which have
since been so fatally Destructive to this poor Kingdom. But God has taken him
from an ungrateful Generation, and from the Evil to Come, and left us to lament
the loss of so worthy a Patriot; for now he is gone, who shall show his Sacred
Majesty, those dreadful precipices, whereon French Fraud, and Popish Malice has
placed him? From whence they daily expect not only to see him fall, but to dash
himself in pieces.

Who shall tell the House of Peers by what Generous Steps their Ancestors
ascended to those Immortal Titles of Honor and Renown?

And who shall tell the House of Commons, of their profuse and Lavish
Squandering the Wealth and Liberties of this now weak and perishing (but once
Mighty and Invincible) People.

If none are left amongst us that dare imitate the Virtues of this Noble Lord;
I hope that there are some that will venture to Read this SPEECH, and if they
have any Relicts of Virtue, and of a Pious L^ve to their Country; I am
confident it will give them a New Soul, and inflame them with a Generons Desire
of doing that for their Country, which this Just and truly Honorable Lord
intended; if an unhappy Death had not prevented him.

My Lord Lucas's Speech, etc.
My Lords,
WHen by the Providence of Almight God, this Nation recalled his Majesty to the
exercise of the Regal Power, it was the hope of all good men, That we should
not only be restored to his Majesty's Royal presence and Divine Laws, but we
should be free from those heavy Buthens, under which we had lain so long
oppressed; We did believe that from thenceforth every man should sit under his
own Vine, enjoying the Fruits of Peace and Plenty; and Astrea her self, (long
since for the sins of men fled up to Heaven,) should have been invited by his
Majesty's most Gracious and Happy Reign, to return hither, and dwell with us,
and converse here amongst us Mortals again.

But alas! we are fallen very short of our expectations and our Burdens are so
far from being made lighter to us, that they are heavier then ever they were!
and as our Burdens are increased, so our Strength also is diminished, and we
are less able to support them.

In the Times of the late Usurping Powers, although great Taxes were exacted
from us we had then means to pay them, we could sell our Lands, our Corn and
Cattle, and there was plenty of Money throughout the Nation; now there is
nothing of this; Brick is required of us, and no Straw allowed to make it with.
For that our Lands are thrown up, and Corn and Cattle are of little value, is
notorious to all the World.

And it is evident that there is scarcity of Money; for all the Parliament
money called Breeches, (a fit stamp for the Coin of the Rump) is wholly
vanished, the Kings Proclamation and the Dutch, have swept it all away, and of
his own Majesty's Coin, there appears but very little, so that in effect we
have not left for Common use, but a little old Lean Coined Money, of the late
three former Princes, and what Supply is preparing for it my Lords? I hear of
none, unless it be of Copper Farthings, and this is the Metal that is to
Vindicate (according to the Inscription on it,) The Dominion of the four Seas.

And yet if amidst this scarcity, the vast Sums given were all employed for the
King and Kingdom, it would not so much trouble us: But we cannot without
infinite Regret of Heart, See so great a part of it pounded up in the Purses of
other private men, and see them flourish in Estates, who at the Time of his
Majesty's most happy Restoration, were worth very little or nothing; and now
the same Men purchase Lands, and keep their Coach and Six Horses, their Pages,
and their Lacqueyes; while in the mean time those that have faithfully served
the King, are exposed to Penury and want, and scarce sufficient left to buy
them Bread.

And is this my Lords the Reward of our Services? have we for this born the
Heat of the Day, been Imprisoned, Sequestered, ventured our Lives and Families,
our Estates and our Fortunes? And must we after all this Sacrifice so much of
our poor Remainder to the Will of a few particular Men, and to the Maintenance
of their Vanities?

But suppose all the Money given were employed for the Use of his Majesty, and
his Majesty were not Couzened (as without doubt he is) is there no bound to, or
Moderation in giving? will you say that if we shall not plentifully Supply his
Majesty, he will not be able to defend us, or maintain the Tripple League? And
we shall thereby run the Hazard of being Conquered.

It Is true, My Lords that this may be a Reason for giving something, But it is
so far from being an Argument for giving so much, that it may be clearly made
out to your Lordships, that it is the direct and ready way to be Conquered by a
Forreigner, And it may be the Policy of the French King, by those often Alarms
of Armies and Fleets to induce us to consume our Treasure in vain Preparations
against him; And after he has by this means made us poor and Weak enough, he
may then come upon us, and Destrey us.

It is not my Lords, the giving of a great deal, but the well managing of the
Money given that must keep us safe from our Enemies; Your Lordships may be
pleased to call to mind the Story of Sampson, who while he preserved his Hair
wherein his Strength lay, was still Victor over his Enemies; But when (by the
enticement of his Dalilah,) his Hair war cut off, the Philistines came upon
him, and overcame him: And so my Lords, if we shall preserve and Husband well
our Treasure wherein our Strength and the Sinews of War lie, and apply it to
the right Uses, we shall still be Superior to all our Enemies, but if we shall
vainly and imprudently mis-spend it, we shall become an easy prey to them.

Besides my Lords, what is this but Ne morari Mori, and for fear of being
conquered by a Forreigner, put our selves into a condition almost as bad,
pardon me My Lords, if I say in some Respects a great deal worse; for when we
are under the Power of the Victor, we know we can fall no lower; and the
certainties of our Miseries are some kind of diminution of them: But in this
wild way we have no certainty at all, for if you give thus much to day, you may
give as much more to morrow, and never leave giving till we have given all that
ever we have away, and the Anxiety of mind which arises from this doubtful
Estate, is an high Addition to our Afflictions.

All that we beg My Lords, is that we may be able to make some Estimate of
ourselves; would his Majesty be pleased to have a quarter of our Estates, for
my part he shall Have it: would his Majesty be pleased to have half, for my
part upon a good occasion he shall Have it: But I beseech your Lordships then
that we may have some assurance of the quiet enjoyment of the Remainder, and
know what we have to trust to.

My Lords, the Commons have here sent us up a Bill for the giving his Majesty
the twentieth part of our Estates at the full extended value; and I hear there
are other Bills for Money also preparing, which together according to the best
computation, will amount to little less than three Millions of Money, a
prodigious Sum, and such that if your Lordships shall not afford Relief, we
must of necessity sink under the weight of so heavy a Pressure.

My Lords, the Scripture tells us that God Almighty sets hounds unto the Ocean,
and says unto it, Hither shall thy proud Waves come and no further. And so I
hope your Lorships in imitation of the Divinity will set some Bounds, some
Limits to this over Liberal Humor of the Commons, and say to them Hither shall
your Profuseness come and no further.

My Lords, either your Lordships can deny or moderate a Bill for Money coming
from the Commons; or if you cannot, all your great Estates are wholly at their
disposal, and your Lordships have nothing that you can properly call your own,
and then let us pass this Bill without further Examination; But if you can deny
or moderate (as without Question you can) your Lordships never had, nor
possibly ever will have such a fair Occasion to show it.

My Lords, upon the whole matter, I most humbly propose to your Lordships, that
your Lordships will be pleased to reduce the 12 d. in the Pound to 8 d. And
truly My Lords I have some reason to hope that if your Lordships will duly
reflect upon it, ye will find it fit to do accordingly; for in the first place
it will be so far from being a service to his Majesty, that your Lordships will
do his Majesty in it the highest Service in the World; for although ye shall
thereby take from his Majesty a part of the Sum, you will give him a great deal
more in the Love and Hearts of his Subjects; and there his Majesty must Reign
if he will be Great and Glorious.

And next your Lordships acquire to your selves eternal Honor ye shall thereby
indear your selves to the whole Nation, who for the future will look upon you
as the Ancients did upon their Tutelary Gods; nor shall the House of Commons
but the House of Peers, be hereafter Precious in their Sight.

My Lords give me leave to mind your Lordships, that Noble Acts are Steps
whereby the Great Men of the World ascend the Throne of Glory. And can there be
a nobler Act to Release a distressed Kingdom, which lies Languishing under so
hard Oppressions, and about to be so much more Oppressed.

I do detain your Lordships too long, and therefore shall say no more, But must
beg your Lordships Pardon, and submit all to your Better Judgments.

Reader,
I shall give you a short though not a full Account of the Mischief happened
since this Speech.

1. THe Sirict Alliance with France.

2. Shutting up the Exchequer.

3. Breach of the Triple League, and the present War with the Confederate the
States of the Low Countries.

4. Fall of Lands. and decay of Trade.

5. Sending so great Forces to France, under French and Popish Commanders, to
be debauched in their Religion, and thereby to introduce an Arbitrary Power at
Home.

6. Our Losses at Sea by Privateers, amounting to at least two-Millions.

7. Corrupting of Members of Parliament.

8. Drunken and debauched Elections.

9. Oppression in Quartering of Soldiers.

10. Pressing of English men to serve in the Wars out of the Nation.

11. Loss of many Thousands of our Seamen in this Picture War.

12. Making Papists, Atheists, and French Pensioners, Ministers of State.

13. Great Consumption of the Treasure of the Nation by the Privy Purse.

14. Sending Ignorant and ill-affected Ambassadors abroad.

15. Debauching the Nation by Masquerades.

16. Favor shown to Papists at Court.

17. Continuing Salaries to those that refused to abjure Transubstantiation.

18. Dissentions at Sea between Protestant and Popish Officers.

19. Encouragement of Popery in Ireland, notwithstanding the late Addresses of
Parliament.

20. Defrauding of our Seamen of their Pay.

21. Great and Grievous Taxes, notwithstanding our Grievous Poverty.

22. Suspending the Penal Laws against the Popish Priests and Jesuits.

23. Loss of the Dominion of the Seas by the Treachery of the English.

24. His Highness refusing the Tests for prevention of Popery, and Marrying a
Papist ( Neice to a Cardinal) to the great strengthening of the Popish and
French Interest at home and abroad.

25. Making a French Lieutenant General, to the great Dishonor of the English
Nobility.

26. Making French Carwell an English Duchess, to the great Disgrace of the
Ladies and Gentlewomen of this Nation.

This was Printed in haste, but I intend shortly to make it appear, that the
Moneys given to his Majesty by the Parliament, since his blessed Restoration;
Amounts to more then this poor Kingdom is now worth.

FINIS.

