The LOYAL ADDRESS Of the Eminent Town of LYNN-REGIS, In the County of NORFOLK.
WE Your Majesty's Obedient Subjects, the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council,
and other the Chief Inhabitants of Your Ancient Borough of Lynn Regis in the
County of Norfolk; In all Loyalty and Dutiful Reverence, do give Your Majesty
Our Humble and Hearty thanks for Your Royal Affection, and Continuance to the
Excellent Constitution of the Church of England, and constant care to defend it
against the ill designs of Popery, and all other Oppositions whatsoever; For
Your Firm Resolution, to maintain both the Just Rights of the Monarchy, and the
Liberty and Property of Your People; Particularly, for Your late Gracious
Declaration, and those Instances of Your Princely Goodness, and Condescentions
contained therein, which We think sufficient to Allay the Fears, and remove the
Miss-understandings of all well meaning and Reasonable Men; And with Gratitude
to Your Majesty, We Account Our selves highly obliged to Praise Almighty God
for the manifold Blessings We enjoy from, and under Your Majesty's Government,
Exercised with great Justice, Wisdom, and Clemency; Wherefore, as Religion and
Allegiance engage Us, We in a deep and grateful sense, of Your Princely Grace
and favor, do Beseech the King of Kings, that he will Grant Your Majesty, a
long and Prosperous Reign, And to Our utmost We shall endeavor with Our Lives
and Fortunes, the Preservation of Your Royal Person, and the Support of Your
Royal Authority.

This Address is Sealed with the Town Seal, and was delivered by the Mayor,
etc. of the Town.


