A REPORT Containing an ESSAY FOR THE Amendment OF THE Silver Coins.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.

To the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury.
May it please your Lordships,
IN Obedience to your Lordships Command, I have endeavored to inform my self
of diverse Matters which concern the Gold and Silver Moneys, and of the most
Practicable Methods for New Coining the Latter, and Supplying, in the mean
time, sufficient Coins to pay the Kings Taxes and Revenues, and to carry on the
Public Commerce; and I do humbly represent to your Lordships,

That I have made diligent Search into several Records, Books and Writings, to
see what Acts or Things have been formerly done or practiced, which might serve
for Precedents, or give any Light for the Reestablishment of the Coins that
should now go, and have Course as the Lawful Money of the Kingdom.

It is true (as I find in a Book of great Authority, remaining in the
Exchequer, called The Black Book, written by Gervase of Tilbury, in the time of
Henry the Second) that there were anciently Falsifiers and Clippers of Money;
for when King William the First, for the better pay of his Warriors, caused
the Firmes, which till his time, had for the most part been answered in
Victuals, to be converted in Pecuniam Numeratam, he directed the whole from
every County to be Charged on the Sheriff, to be by him brought into the
Exchequer; adding, That the Sheriff should make the Payment, ad Scalam, hoc est
(as the aforesaid Author expounds it) solveret preter quamlibet numeratam
libram sex denarios; and the Money afterward declining, and becoming worse, it
was Ordained, That the Firmes of Manors should not only be paid ad Scalam, but
also ad Pensam, which latter was the paying as much Money for a Pound Sterling,
as weighed Twelve Ounces Troy; so that Payment of a Pound de Numero imported
Twenty Shillings, ad Scalam imported Twenty Shillings Six Pence, and ad Pensam
imported so much as weighed Twelve Ounces. And in the time of King Henry the
Second, when the Bishop of Salisbury was Treasurer, who considered, that though
the Money did Answer Numero and Pondere, it might nevertheless be mixed with
Copper or Brass; therefore ( Consilio Regis and ut Regiae simul and Publicae
Provideretur Vtilitati) a Constitution was made, called the Trial by
Combustion. The whole Progress whereof, as it was practiced in the Exchequer in
those Days, is exactly set down in the said Book, and differs little or nothing
from the present method of Assaying Silver for its Fineness; as plainly appears
in that place where the said Gervase treats of the Office of the Miles
Argentarius, and that of the Fusor, an Extract whereof is hereunto Annexed.

It appears also that the Crown Rents were many times reserved in Libris Albis
or Blanch Firmes; in which case the Payer was holden Dealbare Firmam, that is,
His Base Money or Coin worse than Standard was Molten down in the Exchequer,
and Reduced to the Fineness of Standard Silver, or (instead thereof) he Paid to
the King Twelve Pence to the Pound by way of Addition.

But the most Remarkable Deceipts and Corruptions found in Ancient Records to
have been committed upon the Coins of the Kingdom, by Offenders, were in the
time of King Edward the First, when there was Imported a sort of Light Money
made with a Mitre; another sort of Light Money with Lions upon it; a Third sort
of Copper Blancht, to Resemble the Money of England; a Fourth sort of Light
Money Resembling that of King Edward; a Fifth kind that was Plated: And the
Crime of Rounding Money (which I take to be the same with Clipping) was then in
Fashion, all which was done out of England. And the Merchants to avoid the
Search at Dover and Sandwich, concealed the Parcels in Bails of Cloth, and
brought them in by other Ports. Les queux chooses si else suissent longent so
efferts (says the Book) else mettere yent la Monye D'englitere a nient: And
the Chief Remedies then Applied were,

First, To Cry down all Money that was not of England, Ireland or Scotland:

Secondly, That such as arrived from beyond Seas, should show the Money they
brought with them to the King's Officers:

Thirdly, And not hide it in Fardels, upon Pain of Forfeiture:

Fourthly, That the Light Money and the Clipped Money might be Bored through
without contradiction:

Fifthly, And that the same should be Received and Paid by Weight at a certain
Rate; and that the Persons having such Clipped or Light Money, should bring the
same to the King's Changers, who were settled in several great Towns in the
Kingdom, to be new Coined. And by what I have Read in Libro Rubeo (which is in
the upper Exchequer) concerning the Changers (who, as well as the Masters of
the Mint, had several Offices Erected in diverse Parts of the Kingdom; Namely,
at London, Canterbury, Bristol, Kingston upon Hull, Newcastle and Exeter) a
Principal Business of these Changers was to Buy in the Silver of the Bad Money;
que les Pollards and Crockards and les autres Mauvaises Moneis Contrefaits
Soront, abatues: And there was a Writ then directed to the Sheriffs, to
Prohibit the Importation of Clipped or Counterfeit Moneys, and the Use thereof in
Merchandising or Negotiating, under severe Penalties, and Commanding those that
had such Money to Bore it through, and to bring it to the King's Change to be
new Coined.

And I find by an Indenture in the Third Year of Queen Elizabeth (at which time
there was Base Moneys that had been Coined by Public Authority.) That it was
Ordained that Fleetwood, Under Treasurer for the Upper Houses of the Mint in
the Tower, should take in by Number and Tale, the Base Moneys therein
mentioned, at such Rates or Values as were Appointed by a Proclamation in that
behalf; giving Bills to the Parties under his Hand for the Receipt thereof. And
the Officers of the Mint were to Melt down and Repay the same in Sterling
Moneys, to the Parties or their Deputies, showing and delivering their Bills,
having regard to the time when every Man brought in his Money. And the Base
Money Received, and the Sterling Money Repaid were to be Entered in Two Legers;
one to be kept by the said Under-Treasurer, and the other by the Tellers. And
the Comptroller and Assay-Master were to keep several Books of Refining and
Melting the Base Money, to the intent they might be Vouchers to the said
Under-Treasurer, who was to Account to the Queen for the whole.

These or such like Provisions might serve well enough in those Times, when
there was not much Money, and but little Trade or Occasion for it, and when the
Species then in being, which one would think consisted Anciently of Pence or
Pieces of small Denomination, were not Corrupted or Diminished to that degree
as they are at this day.

But considering the present low Condition to which Our Moneys are almost
generally Reduced, and the necessary Use thereof in daily Occasions, and
particularly in the ways of Trade, upon which this Nation depends more at this
time than it did formerly; I do not see how the Prudence of our Ancestors
(which in many Constitutions relating to the Exchequer and the Mint, appears to
have been Transcendent and Admirable, especially in Matters of Charge and
Discharge, and preventing Frauds and Abuses upon the Crown) can, without the
devising new or additional Means and Methods, be made Applicable to a present
Work of new Coining the Silver Moneys, and Supplying Current Coins for the
Commerce, and for the Payment of Taxes and Revenues in the mean time.

If therefore the King (to whose Regality the Power of Coining Money, and
Determining the Weight, Fineness, Denomination and Extrinsick Value thereof
does Solely and Inherently Appertain) shall Judge it necessary to have the old
or present Species of Silver Coins, or so much thereof as has been Clipped or
otherwise Dimnished, to be Melted down and Recoined, I humbly conceive new
Means and Methods for doing the same must be Devised. And in Regard Money
(which some Lawyers have called Firmamentum Belli and Ornamentum Pacis) is most
certainly of the greatest Importance to His Majesty, in supplying the Taxes,
Revenues and Loans, for Carrying on the War, and Supporting His Royal Estate;
as also to His Subjects, with relation not only to their Trade and Commerce,
but also to all other ordinary Means of Livelihood: The said Means and Methods
for Re-establishing the Coins, and the many weighty things depending thereupon,
ought to be well Excogitated, and to be Considered and Adjusted by Persons of
the greatest Judgment and Sagacity; and (if I had not been Enjoined by your
Lordships) I should scarce have Adventured upon a Subject so very Difficult and
Curious.

I have Employed my Thoughts chiefly upon such Matters as are Reduceable to the
following Heads, viz. First, Concerning the Standard of the Gold and Silver
Coins, and the Establishment of a Just and Reasonable Foot for the Course of
the same. Second, Concerning the Present State and Condition of the Gold and
Silver Coins. Third, Whether it be or be not Absolutely necessary at this Time
to Re-establish the same. Fourth, The Proposing of Means that must be Obtained,
and the Proper Methods to be used in and for the Amendment of the Silver
Moneys. Fifth, To Consider what must Supply the Commerce, Pay Taxes, etc.
Whilst the Clipped Money is under its New Fabrication.


As to the Particulars.

First, Of the Standard.
This properly brings under Consideration Two matters relating to the Coins;
namely, the Degree of Fineness, and the Weight of the Pieces. In treating upon
which I shall humbly take leave to observe this Method.

First, To explain what is meant by Sterling Moneys.

Secondly, To set down Historically the Proportions of Fine Gold, and Fine
Silver, with the respective Allays, which the Masters or Workers of the Mints
have been holden to Observe in the Fabrication of the Moneys of this Realm, by
their respective Indentures which I have found out, Beginning with those in the
time of King Edward the Third, (the farthest Extant) and Ending with the
Indenture of the Mint now in being.

Thirdly, To propose the Standard of Fineness, which (in my humble Opinion)
ought to be continued for the new Coins, which His Majesty may be pleased to
direct at this time, with my Reasons for the same, to be deduced from the
Experience of former times, and an Impartial regard to present Circumstances.

Fourthly, To set forth how the Value of the Gold and Silver in our English
Coins has been Raised from time to time, which considers the Weight and Number
of Pieces in a Pound Troy.

Fifthly, To Offer my humble Opinion upon that Subject, in reference as well to
the Old Coins now in being and Unclipt, as also to the New Moneys, which may be
directed to be made, as aforesaid, together with my Reasons for the same, to be
also Grounded upon the Experience of former Times, and a due Consideration of
present Circumstances: All or most of which Points being of great Moment, to be
well weighed in this Affair, I do humbly pray your Lordships that I may Discuss
them severally.

First, It is believed by some Authors, (and not without Reason) that in the
most Ancient times, when Money was first Coined within this Island, it was made
of Vide Hales of Sheriffs Abcounts. p. 5.
Pure Gold and Silver, like the Moneys now Current in some other Nations,
particularly in Hungary and Barbary, where they have Pieces of Gold called
Ducats and Sultanesses; and in the Kingdom of Industan, where they have Pieces
of Silver called Rupees, which I have seen, and wherein (as I am informed)
there is little or no Allay: And that afterward it being found convenient in
the Fabrication of the Moneys, to have a certain Quantity or Proportion of
Baser Metal to be mixed with the Pure Gold and Silver, the Word Sterling was
introduced, and has ever since been used, to denote the certain Proportion or
Degree of Fineness, which ought to be retained in the respective Coins composed
of such mixture, as aforesaid. There are some Authors that fancy this Word
Sterling took its Name from a Castle in Scotland, as if it were first Coined
there. Some have derived it from a Star or Astracism, which they imagine to
have been Impressed thereupon. There are those that fetch it from the Name of
an Ancient Indenture or Bond which was taken by the Jews (those old Userers)
for Security of their Debts, and which was called the Jews Star. But others
think it comes from the Name of a People called Easterlings, as the first
Workers of it in England. Of which latter Opinion is the Author of a very old
Treatise concerning Money, Entered at large in the Red Book abovesaid, in the
time of King Edward the Third. For my own Part, I do not believe the Word
Sterling (denoting the degree of Fineness or Goodness, as aforesaid) was known
in the time of the Conqueror, in regard there is no mention thereof in Libro
Iudiciario or the Doomsday Book, which Valueth every Manor (as it was worth in
the times of the Confessor and Conqueror respectively) in Money ad Numerum, or
ad Pensam or ad Pondus, but not in Sterling Money, and yet the Denomination of
Sterling was soon after introduced, because the Statute of the Twenty fifth of
Edward the Third refers to Ancient Sterling, and so do the Old Indentures of
the Mint, and the Ancient Entries concerning Money. By reading of which it
seems evident to me,

First, That a Sterling or Easterling, in a restrained Sense, signified nothing
but a Silver Penny, which at first was about three times as heavy as a Penny is
now, and was once called a Lundress, because it was to be Coined only at
London, and not at the Country Mints.

Secondly, That the Words Sterling and Standard are Synonimous Terms.

Thirdly, That the Ancient Sterling of England, mentioned in the said Statute,
and the Standard and Allay of Old Easterling, mentioned in the Indenture, Le 20
jour de May l' an du Regne Edward III. cestassavoir d' Engletere quarant sisme
and de France trent tierce enter le Roy and Bardet de Malepilys de Florence;
and the Old right Standard of England, which I find in other Indentures of the
Mint, are to be understood thus: A Pound Weight Troy of Gold was divided into
Twenty four Carats, and every Carat into Four Grains of Gold; and a Pound
Weight of the Old Sterling, or Right Standard Gold of England, consisted of
Twenty three Carats and Three Grains and an half of Fine Gold, and half a Grain
of Allay. Which Allay (as the Red Book says) might be Silver or Copper. Again,
a Pound Weight Troy of Silver, was then (as it has been ever since) divided
into Twelve Ounces, every Ounce into Twenty Penny Weight, and every Penny Weight
into Twenty four Grains; every Grain of Silver was called a Subtle Grain,
Sixty of which were equal to One Grain of Gold, and a Pound Weight of Old
Sterling, or Right Standard Silver of England, consisted then (as it does now)
of Eleven Ounces and Two Penny Weight of Fine Silver, and Eighteen Penny Weight
Allay.

Fourthly, That Sterling Money generally in Judgment of Law, upon the Fines,
Covenants, and other Instruments that have had occasion to refer thereunto,
has always imported, and does still import only such Coins of Gold or Silver,
as have been made by successive Masters and Workers of the Mint, in certain
Proportions of Fine Metal, mixed with Allays, according to their respective
Indentures or Covenants with the Crown, from time to time, and made Current by
the same Indentures, or by Proclamations or Commands of the Sovereign: Which
Proportions of Fineness and Allay, have differed from time to time. And (having
thus Expounded what is meant by Sterling and Old Sterling) those Differences
will come properly to be Considered.

Second, In the next Place therefore, I am to set down Historically the
Proportions of Fine Gold and Fine Silver, with the respective Allays, which the
Masters or Workers of the Mint have been holden to observe in the Fabrication
of the Moneys, by their respective Indentures: Of which there is one mentioned
in the Red Book, to bear Date in the Eighteenth Year of King Edward the First,
who sent for Workmen from beyond Sea, to inform him of the manner of Making and
Forging of Money; but not finding any Indenture by which one can judge
certainly of the said Proportions, till the Reign of Edward the Third; from
whose time the several Indentures of the Mint, or most of them, are in the
Receipt of the Exchequer, in Custody of your Lordships and the Chamberlains
there, and where I have had the Opportunity carefully to Inspect and Examine
the same. I shall therefore humbly take leave to begin with these, and Proceed
in the Order following.

18 E. 3.
The Standard for the Gold Coins was the Old Standard, or Sterling of Twenty
three Carats, Three Grains and Half Fine, and Half a Grain Allay. And the
Standard for the Silver Coins was the Old Sterling of Eleven Ounces Two Penny
Weight Fine, and Eighteen Penny Weight Allay.

20 E. 3. 23. 27. 30. 46. 18 R. 2. 3 H. 4. 9 H. 5. 1 H. 6. 4. 24. 49. 5 E. 4.
11. 16. 1 R. 3. 29 H. 7.
All these imported the same Standard, as above, both for Gold and Silver.

Ralph Rowlett and Martin Bows, 1 H. 8.
Masters and Workers, Covenanted to make Two sorts of Gold Coins; to wit,
Sovereigns, Rialls, Angels, George-Nobles, and Half-Angels of the said Old
Standard, and Crowns of the Double Rose, and Half-Crowns to be Twenty two
Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay; and Silver Moneys, to wit, Groats,
Half-Groats, Sterlings, Halfpence and Farthings of the Old Sterling.

23 H. 8.
Another Indenture to the same Effect.

34.
The said Ralph Rowlett and Martin Bows, Masters and Workers, Covenanted to
make the Sovereigns, Half-Sovereigns, Angels, Angellets, and Quarter-Angels of
Twenty three Carats Fine Gold, and One Carat Allay; And Silver Money, to wit,
Testoons to go for Twelve Pence; and Groats, Half-Groats, Pence, Halfpence and
Farthings, to be Ten Ounces Fine, and Two Ounces Allay.

36.
The King was to have out of every Twelve Ounces of Fine Gold Coined Two Carats,
which yielded Fifty Shillings: And the Silver to be Coined after the Rate of
Six Ounces Fine and Six Ounces Allay; which was a wretched Debasement.

37.
The Gold Coins, called Sovereigns, Half-Sovereigns, Crowns and Half-Crowns,
were to be only Twenty Carats Fine, and Four Carats Allay; and the Silver
Coins, to wit, Testoons, Groats, Half-Groats, Pence, Halfpence and Farthings
to be Four Ounces Fine, and Eight Ounces Allay, which was worse.

The same with the last Preceding. 1 E. 6.


A Commission to make Sovereigns, 3.
Half-Sovereigns, Crowns and Half-Crowns of Gold at Twenty two Carats Fine, and
Two Carats Allay: And Shillings of Silver of Six Ounces Fine and Six Ounces
Allay.

Another to make Sovereigns, 4.
Half-Sovereigns, Crowns and Half-Crowns of Gold of the Old Standard; Namely,
Twenty three Carats Three Grains and an Half Fine, and Half a Grain Allay.

Another to make Shillings of Silver, 5.
Three Ounces Fine, and Nine Ounces Allay.

To Coin Sovereigns, 6.
Angels and Half-Angels of the Old Standard, to wit, Twenty three Carats Three
Grains and Half Fine, and another sort of Gold, to be Twenty two Carats Fine
and Two Carats Allay.

6 E. 6.
To Coin Silver Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Six Pences, Three Pences, Pence,
Halfpence and Farthings, Eleven Ounces One Penny Weight Fine, and Nineteen Penny
Weight Allay.

1 Mar.
To Coin Gold Twenty three Carats, Three Grains and an Half Fine; and Silver
Eleven Ounces Fine.

Phil. and Mar.
The Old Standard for Gold and Silver.

2 Eliz.
To Coin one sort of Gold of the said Old Standard, and another sort to be only
Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay; and Silver Moneys of the Old
Standard.

Eliz.
Two Mints were in the Tower, whereof One to convert the Base Money into
Sterling, which continued about a Year. And here it may not be improper to
Note, that not long after, Vide Cotton's Speech to Cha. 1. Anno 1626.
the Queen in a Public Edict, told her People, That she had Conquered the
Monster which had so long devoured them; meaning the Debasing of the Standard.

The Old Standard perfectly restored both for Gold and Silver Coins. 19 Eliz.


The same continued. 25.


The same for Gold. 26.


A Commission to make Sovereigns, 35.
Half-Sovereigns, Crowns and Half-Crowns of Gold to be Twenty two Carats Fine,
and Two Carats Allay.

To make Angel-Gold Twenty three Carats Three Grains and half Fine, 43.
the Old Standard; and to make Sovereigns, etc. Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two
Carats Allay; and to make Crowns, Shillings, etc. of Silver Eleven Ounces and
Two Penny Weight Fine, and Eighteen Penny Weight Allay, the Old Standard.

To Coin the Unites, Jac. 1.
Double Crowns, British Crowns, etc. of Gold to be Twenty two Carats Fine, and
Two Carats Allay, and the Old Standard for Silver continued.

3 Jac. 1.
To Coin Rose-Rialls, Spur-Rialls, and Angels of the Old Standard of Twenty
three Carats Three Grains and an half Fine.

10.
To Coin Rialls of the same Standard, and Unites, etc. Twenty two Carats Fine,
and Two Carats Allay.

2 Car. 1.
To Coin Rialls and Angels of the Old Standard of Twenty three Carats Three
Grains and an half Fine, and half a Grain Allay; and to Coin Unites and Crowns
Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay; and to Coin the Silver Moneys of
the Old Standard of Eleven Ounces Two Penny Weight Fine, and Eighteen Penny
Weight Allay.

12 Ca. 2.
To Coin Rialls and Angels of the Old Standard of Twenty three Carats, Three
Grains and an half Fine, and half a Grain Allay; and to Coin Unites and Crowns
Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay; and Silver Moneys of the Old
Standard of Eleven Ounces Two Penny Weight Fine, and Eighteen Penny Weight Allay.

To Coin the Pieces (since called Guineas) running for Twenty Shillings, 22 Ca.
2.
Half-Guineas, etc. Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay; and Silver
Moneys of the Old Standard.

To Coin Ten Shilling Pieces, 1 Jac. 2.
Twenty Shilling Pieces, Forty Shilling Pieces, and Five Pound Pieces, of Gold
of Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay; and Silver Moneys of the Old
Standard of Eleven Ounces Two Penny Weight Fine, and Eighteen Penny Weight Allay.

The same Standard for Gold and Silver. 1 W. and M.


Upon duly considering this History or Relation for so many years past, it may
not be improper to Observe to your Lordships thereupon,

First, That above Four hundred Years ago, the Standard for the Silver Coins
was Eleven Ounces Two Penny Weight Fine, and Eighteen Penny Weight Allay. And so
it is at this day by the present Indenture of the Mint, and the same is that
which was called the Old Sterling, or Easterling.

Secondly, That the Standard for the Gold Coins Four hundred Years ago, was
Twenty three Carats Three Grains and an half Fine, and half a Grain Allay. And
at this day the Standard of Gold by the Indenture of the Mint is Twenty two
Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay; the difference of which is only One Carat
Three Grains and an half.

Thirdly, That the Old Standard obtained for the most part of the said Number
of Years, and the chief Deviations from the same were in the Reigns of Henry
the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth.

The which being premised, the Third thing coming under Consideration
concerning such new Coins as His Majesty shall think fit to Direct, is my own
poor Opinion, which I humbly offer, and (as I conceive) with some clearness,
That the present Standard of Fineness, or Purity ought to be continued, namely,
of Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay for the Gold; and Eleven Ounces
Two Penny Weight Fine, and Eighteen Penny Weight Allay for the Silver, in all the
New Coins that shall be now directed. And my Reasons for the same are as
follows,

First, Because our Ancestors (whose wisdom we have no cause to distrust) have
for many Ages endeavored to keep up the Old Sterling, or to a Standard very
near it; which obtained (as evidently appears by the foregoing Narrative) for
the greatest part of Four hundred years.

Secondly, Although the former Debasements of the Coins by Public Authority,
especially those in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the
Sixth, might be projected for the Profit of the Crown; and the Projectors might
measure that Profit by the excessive Quantities of Allay that were mixed with
the Silver or the Gold: And although this was Enterprized by a Prince who could
stretch his Prerogative very far upon his People; and was done in Times when
this Nation had very little Commerce, Inland or Foreign, to be injured or
prejudiced thereby: Yet Experience presently showed that the Projectors were
mistaken, and that it was absolutely necessary to have the base Moneys
reformed; the doing whereof was begun by King Edward the Sixth himself, carried
on by King Philip and Queen Mary, and happily finished (though not without
great Charge, Vexation and Trouble, the only Offspring of such Designs) by
Queen Elizabeth, who (as is noted above) in the Third Year of her Reign, when
Money was not plentiful, Erected a Distinct Mint in the Tower, to convert the
Base (not Counterfeit Money) into Sterling.

Thirdly, Because making of Base Moneys will Disgrace this Government in future
Generations, the Critics in every Age being apt to Estimate the Goodness or
Badness of Ancient Governments by their Coin, as has been done, especially in
the Case of the Romans; and a Temptation of this kind ought not to be left for
future Ages, to the prejudice of the Honor of the present King.

Fourthly, Although it must be acknowledged, That the putting a greater Allay
into the Coins, so long as they should still retain so much Purity or Fineness
as would render them answerable to the Current Price of Silver in Bullion,
would be no real Injury to the Subject: Yet it must be considered, that when
the Causes which at present make Silver Scarce and Dear shall cease, Silver it
self will fall in its Price. And if in the mean time the Coins shall have been
Debased, then after the Retrieving of the Trade and Wealth of the Nation, and
the Bringing down of the Price of Silver thereby, the Damage which the Crown
will sustain in its Taxes, Revenues and Loans, and the Loss which the Nobility,
Gentry and Commonalty (especially Ecclesiastical Persons) will find thereby, in
the payment of their Debts, Rents and Annuities (many of which are so Fixed and
Established upon previous Reservations or Grants in Fee, or in Tail, or for
Lives, or Years certain, or are so payable by Assurances, already perfected, as
that it will not be in their powers to alter the same proportionably to the
Debasement of the Coin, and the loss or damage, after such Bringing down the
Price of Silver, will be proportionable to the excessive Allay to be put into
the Money) will continue and have duration at least till all such Base Money
can be abated: The mere Reforming of which would take up a considerable time,
and be a new trouble and difficulty after the Ending of the present War, and
after the Re-establishment of the Trade and Wealth of the Kingdom.

Fifthly, Our present Standard is well known in the World, the same agreeing
with most of the Foreign Mints in Europe, and all Foreigners that deal with us,
regard the Intrinsic Value more than the Extrinsick Denomination, and Exchange
with us accordingly. If Base Money should be made, the Intrinsic Value thereof
would be uncertain, or might be disputed; and in Disputes of such a Nature, it
is more likely that they will gain upon us, than we upon them, and so the
Exchange become more to our prejudice than it is at present.

Sixthly, The Debasing of Money by Public Authority is needless and frivolous;
for whatsoever Advantages (grounded upon necessity) can be proposed thereby,
will arise more easily, and have better Precedents in Raising the Value of the
Standard; which is the next Subject to be Discussed: Not doubting but that your
Lordships by these, and other Reasons which might be given (if they were not
too tedious) will be fully convinced, That the present Standard of Fineness is
to be continued.

The Fourth thing which I have undertaken, in respect of the Standard, is to
set forth how the Value of the Gold and Silver in the English Coins has been
Raised from time to time, which considers the Weight and Number of the Pieces
in the Pound Troy. And because (in case of new making Silver Moneys) the
Adjusting and Establishing the Extrinsick Value or Denomination thereof, at
which the same must have Course, is of the greatest Moment and Consideration in
this Affair, both to the King and all his People; I could not spare my self the
trouble of making the following Deduction from the Indentures of the Mint;
which being duly meditated upon, will give a good deal of Light and Precedent
for the Rates, to which the Value of Gold and Silver in our Coins are to be
Raised and Established at this time.

28 E. 1.
An Indented Tryal-piece of the goodness of Old Sterling was lodged in the
Exchequer, and every Pound Weight Troy, of such Silver was to be shorn at
Twenty Shillings Three Pence, according to which, the Value of the Silver in
the Coin, was One Shilling Eight Pence Farthing an Ounce.

Memorandum, I find no farther Indentures concerning this Matter, from Edward
the First, till Edward the Third.
Every Pound Weight of Gold of the Old Standard abovementioned, 18 E. 3.
namely, Twenty three Carats, Three Grains and a Half Fine, and Half a Grain
Allay, was to be Coined into Fifty Florences, to be Current at Six Shillings
apiece; all which made in Tale Fifteen Pounds, or into a proportionable Number
of Half-Florences, or Quarter-Florences: This was by Indenture between the King
and Walter de Dunflower, Master and Worker.

A Pound Weight of Gold of the Old Standard abovementioned, Eod. an.
was to contain Thirty nine Nobles and an Half, at Six Shillings Eight Pence
apiece, amounting in the whole to Thirteen Pounds Three Shillings and Four
Pence in Tale, or a proportionable Number of Half-Nobles, and Quarter-Nobles:
Which was by an Indenture between the King and Percivall de Perch.

Memorandum, By this Indenture the Trial of the Pix was Established.
20 E. 3.
A Pound Weight of Gold of the said Old Standard, was to make by Tale Forty Two
Nobles at Six Shillings Eight Pence apiece, amounting to Fourteen Pounds, or a
proportionable Number of Half-Nobles, and Quarter-Nobles: And a Pound Weight of
the Old Sterling Silver was to make Twenty two Shillings Six Pence: And
Percival de Perch was Master.

23.
The like when John Donative, of the Castle of Florence, and Philip John Denier
were Masters and Workers.

Memorandum, By this Indenture were also Coined Halfpence and Farthings of
Silver.
27.
A Pound Weight of Gold of the Old Standard was to make by Tale Forty five
Nobles, amounting to Fifteen Pounds, or a proportionable Number of Half or
Quarter Nobles: And a Pound Weight of Silver of the Old Sterling, to make by
Tale Seventy five Grosses ( i. e. Groats) amounting to Twenty five Shillings,
or One hundred and fifty Half-Grosses, going for Two Pence apiece, or Three
hundred Sterlings going for Pence apiece: And Henry Brissell was Master and
Worker.

The like, 30 E. 3.
only adding Half-Sterlings, of which Six hundred in a Pound Troy.

The like. 37.


The like: 46.
And Bardet de Malepilys was Master and Worker.

The like: 18 R. 2.
And Nicholas Malakin, a Florentine, was Master and Worker.

The like: 3 H. 4.
And here Halfpence are called Mailes.

A Pound Weight of Gold of the said Old Standard was to make by Tale Fifty
Nobles, 9 H. 5.
or One hundred Half Nobles, or Two hundred Quarter Nobles, amounting to
Sixteen Pounds, Thirteen Shillings, and Four Pence in Tale. And a Pound Weight
of Silver of the said Old Standard, was to make by Tale Ninety Grosses or
Groats, or One hundred and eighty Half-Groz, or Three hundred and Sixty
Sterlings, or Seven hundred and twenty Mailes, or One thousand four hundred and
forty Farthings, amounting to Thirty Shillings: And Bartholomew Goldbeater was
Master and Worker.

1 H. 6.
A Pound Weight of Gold of the said Old Standard was Coined into Forty five
Rialls, going for Ten Shillings apiece, or a proportionable Number of
Half-Rialls, going for Five Shillings apiece, or Riall-Farthings, going for Two
Shillings and Sixpence apiece, or into Sixty Seven Angels and an Half, going
for Six Shillings and Eight Pence apiece, or a proportionable Number of
Angelets going for Three Shillings and Four Pence apiece: And consequently the
Pound Troy of Gold was Coined into Twenty two Pounds Ten Shillings by Tale, and
a Pound Weight of Silver of the Old Sterling was Coined into One hundred and
twelve Groats and an half, making in Tale Thirty seven Shillings and Six Pence,
or a proportionable Number of Half-Groz, Sterlings or Pence, Halfpence or
Farthings: And here Sir Giles Dawbeny was Master and Worker.

Is the same with that of the Ninth of Henry the Fifth, 4 H. 6.
lowering the Gold to Sixteen Pounds Thirteen Shillings and Four Pence, and the
Silver Moneys to Thirty Shillings: And Robert Mansfeild was Master and Worker.

Note, Here the Value of the Silver as well as the Gold in the Coins was
brought down again.
The same. 24.


A Pound Weight of Gold 49.
of the said Old Standard was to make by Tale Sixty seven Angels and an Half at
Six Shillings Eight Pence apiece, amounting to Twenty two Pounds Ten Shillings,
and a Pound Weight of Silver of the said Old Sterling was to make by Tale One
hundred and twelve Groats and an Half, amounting to Thirty seven Shillings and
Six Pence, or proportionably in the lesser Coins: And Sir Richard Constable was
Master and Worker.

4 E. 4.
A Pound Weight of Gold of the said Old Standard was to make by Tale Twenty
Pounds Sixteen Shillings and Eight Pence, and a Pound Weight of Silver, Old
Sterling, was to make Thirty seven Shillings and Six Pence, as in the last
Article: And William Lord Hastings was Master and Worker.

5.
A Pound Weight of Gold of the Old Standard was to make Forty five Nobles going
for Ten Shillings apiece, or Ninety Half Nobles, or One hundred and Eighty
Quarter Nobles, or Sixty seven and an Half of the Pieces impressed with Angels
going for Six Shillings Eight Pence each, and consequently was Coined into
Twenty two Pounds Ten Shillings by Tale, and the Silver Moneys were shorn at
Thirty seven Shillings and Six Pence the Pound Weight Troy. This Indenture was
between the King and the Lord Hastings His Chamberlain, and Master and Worker
and Warden of all his Exchanges and Outchanges in England and Calis.

The like. 8 E. 4.


The like. 11.


The like. 16.


The like: 22.
But Bartholomew Read was Master and Worker.

The like: 1 R. 3.
And Robert Brackenbury was Master and Worker.

The like: 9 H. 7.
And Robert Fenrother and William Read were Masters and Workers.

A Pound Weight of such Gold to be Coined into Twenty seven Pounds by Tale; 1
H. 8.
to wit, into Twenty four Sovereigns, at Twenty two Shillings and Six Pence
apiece, or Forty eight Rialls at Eleven Shillings and Three Pence apiece, or
Seventy two Angels at Seven Shillings and Six Pence apiece, or Eighty one
George-Nobles at Six Shillings and Eight Pence apiece, or One hundred forty
and four Half-Angels at Three Shillings and Nine Pence apiece, or One hundred
sixty and two Fourty-peny Pieces, at Three-Shillings and Four Pence apiece; and
a Pound Weight of Gold of the Fineness of Twenty two Carats only, was to be
Coined into One hundred Crowns and an Half of the Double Rose, or Two hundred
and one Half-Crowns, making by Tale Twenty five Pounds two Shillings and Six
Pence; and a Pound Weight of Silver of the Old Sterling, was Coined into One
hundred and thirty five Groats, or Two hundred and seventy Half-Groats, or
Five-hundred and forty Sterlings ( i. e. Pence) or One thousand and eighty
Halfpence, or Two thousand one hundred and sixty Farthings; and so every Pound
Weight of Sterling Silver was Coined into Forty five Shillings by Tale: And
Ralph Rowlett and Martin Bows were Masters and Workers.

23 H. 8.
The like.

A Pound Weight of Gold of Twenty three Carats Fine, 34 H. 8.
and One Carat Allay, was Coined into Twenty eight Pounds Sixteen Shillings by
Tale (by which Indenture there were Coined Sovereigns at Twenty Shillings
apiece, Half-Sovereigns at Ten Shillings, Angels at Eight Shillings, Angelets
at Four Shillings, and Quarter Angelets at Two Shillings apiece) and a Pound
Weight of Silver of Ten Ounces Fine, and Two Ounces Allay, was Coined into
Forty eight Shillings by Tale, Namely, into Testoons (going for Twelve Pence
apiece) Groats, Half-Groats, Pence, Halfpence and Farthings.

A Pound Weight of Gold of Twenty two Carats Fine, 36.
and Two Carats Allay, was Coined into Thirty Pounds by Tale; to wit, into
Thirty Sovereigns at Twenty Shillings apiece, or Sixty Half-Sovereigns at Ten
Shillings apiece; or One hundred and twenty Crowns at Five Shillings apiece, or
Two hundred and forty Half-Crowns: And the King had Two Carats of Fine Gold
for Coinage, which yielded him Fifty Shillings. And Silver was Coined by the
same Indenture of Six Ounces Fine, and Six Ounces Allay, into Forty eight
Shillings by Tale. This Silver was to be Coined into Testoons, Groats,
Half-Groats, Pence, Halfpence and Farthings; and the Indenture was between the
King and Sir Martin Bows, and others.

37 H. 8.
A Pound Weight of Gold of Twenty Carats Fine, and Four Carats Allay, was Coined
into Thirty Pounds by Tale, as in the last; and the King had Four Carats, which
yielded him Five Pounds Two Shillings: And a Pound Weight of Silver of Four
Ounces Fine, and Eight Ounces Allay was Coined into Forty eight Shillings by
Tale, which raised the Pound Weight of Fine Gold to Thirty six Pounds; and the
Pound Weight of Fine Silver to Seven Pounds Four Shillings.

A Pound Weight of Gold of Twenty Carats Fine, 1 E. 6.
and Four Carats Allay, was Coined into Thirty Pounds by Tale, out of which the
King had a great Profit; and a Pound of Silver of Four Ounces Fine, and Eight
Ounces Allay, was Coined into Forty eight Shillings; after which Rate every
Pound of Fine Silver made in Current Money Seven Pounds Four Shillings, and the
King's Profit on every Pound Weight was Four Pounds Four Shillings: John York
and others were Masters and Workers of the Mint in Southwark.

Another Indenture to the same Effect with William Tilsworth at Canterbury.
Eod. an


Another Indenture to the same Effect with Sir Martin Bows for the Tower. Eod.
an.


Another Indenture to the same Effect with George Gale for the Mint at York. 2
E. 6.


Another Indenture to the same Effect with John York for Southwark, Eod. an.
differing only in the Charge of Coinage.

Eod. an.
Another Indenture to the same Effect with William Tilsworth, differing only in
the Charge of Coinage.

3 E. 6.
A Pound Weight of Gold of Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay, was to
be Coined into Thirty four Pounds by Tale, into Sovereigns at Twenty Shillings
apiece, Half-Sovereigns at Ten Shillings apiece, Crowns at Five Shillings, and
Half-Crowns at Two Shillings Six Pence apiece: And a Pound Weight of Silver of
Six Ounces Fine, and Six Ounces Allay, was to be Coined into Seventy two
Shillings; which Shillings were to go for Twelve Pence apiece by Tale, of which
the Merchant, for every Pound Weight of Fine Silver, Received Three Pounds Four
Shillings, and the King above Four Pounds Gain, by a Commission to Sir Edmund
Peckham and others.

A Pound Weight of Gold of the Old Standard, 4 E. 6.
of Twenty three Carats, and Three Grains and a Half Fine, was Coined into
Twenty eight Pounds Sixteen Shillings by Tale, to wit, into Sovereigns at
Twenty four Shillings apiece, Half-Sovereigns at Twelve Shillings apiece,
Angels at Eight Shillings apiece, and Half-Angels at Four Shillings apiece, by
a Commission to Sir Edmund Peckham and others.

A Pound Weight of Silver of Three Ounces Fine, 5 E. 6.
and Nine Ounces Allay, was Coined into Seventy two Shillings at Twelve Pence
apiece; And the Merchant Received for every Ounce of Fine Silver which he
should bring to the Mint, Ten Shillings of such Money; by which means Twelve
Ounces of Fine Silver was exorbitantly Raised to Fourteen Pounds eight
Shillings, by a Commission to Sir Edmund Peckham and others.

A Pound Weight of Gold, 6 E. 6.
of the Old Standard aforesaid, was Coined into Thirty six Pounds by Tale, to
wit, Twenty four Sovereigns at Thirty Shillings apiece, Seventy two Angels at
Ten Shillings apiece, or One hundred forty four Half-Angels: And a Pound
Weight of Crown Gold of Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay, was
Coined into Thirty three Pounds by Tale, viz. Thirty three Sovereigns at Twenty
Shillings apiece, or Sixty six Half-Sovereigns at Ten Shillings apiece, or One
hundred thirty two Crowns, or Two hundred sixty four Half-Crowns: And a Pound
Weight of Silver, consisting of Eleven Ounces, One Penny Weight Fine, and
Nineteen Penny Weight Allay, was Coined into Three Pounds by Tale, viz. Twelve
Crowns, or Twenty four Half-Crowns, or Sixty Shillings, or One hundred twenty
Six-pences, or Two hundred forty Three-pences or Seven hundred twenty Pence,
or One thousand four hundred and forty Halfpence, or Two thousand eight
hundred and eighty Farthings.

A Pound Weight of Gold, 1. M.
of the Old Standard, was Coined into Thirty six Pounds; and a Pound Weight of
Silver Eleven Ounces Fine, was Coined into Three Pounds by Tale: And Thomas
Egerton was Master and Worker.

A Pound Weight of Gold, 2 Eliz.
of the Old Standard, of Twenty three Carats three Grains and an Half Fine, was
Coined into Thirty six Pounds by Tale; to wit, into Twenty four Sovereigns at
Thirty Shillings apiece, or Forty eight Rialls at Fifteen Shillings apiece, or
Seventy two Angels at Ten Shillings apiece, or One hundred forty and four
Half-Angels at Five Shillings apiece: And a Pound Weight of Crown Gold of
Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay, was Coined into Thirty three
Pounds by Tale (to wit, Thirty three Sovereigns at Twenty Shillings apiece, or
Sixty six Half-Sovereigns at Ten Shillings apiece, or One hundred thirty two
Crowns at Five Shillings apiece, or Two hundred sixty four Half-Crowns.) And a
Pound Weight of the Old Sterling Silver, to wit, Eleven Ounces Two Penny Weight
Fine, and Eighteen Penny Weight Allay, was Coined into Three Pounds by Tale, of
Half-Shillings, Groats, Quarter-Shillings, Half-Groats, Three-half-peny Pieces,
Pence and Farthings, by Indenture between the Queen, Sir Thomas Standly and
others.

19 Eliz.
John Lonison, Master and Worker, Covenanted to Coin a Pound of Gold of the Old
Standard into Seventy two Angels at Ten Shillings apiece, One hundred forty
four Half-Angels at Five Shillings apiece, or Two hundred eighty eight
Quarter-Angels, amounting in Tale to Thirty six Pounds; and a Pound Weight of
Old Sterling Silver into Half-Shillings, Three-pences, Three-half-peny Pieces,
or Three-farthing Pieces, to make Three Pounds by Tale.

Richard Martin Covenanted to Coin Gold, 25 Eliz.
as in the last; and a Pound of Silver into Sixty Shillings, or into Three
Pounds by Tale, in any of the Denominations mentioned in the last Indenture.

A Commission to him to Coin the Pound Troy of Old Standard Gold into Forty
eight Nobles at Fifteen Shillings apiece, 26.
or Twenty four Double Nobles at Thirty Shillings apiece, making Thirty six
Pounds.

The same to Coin the Pound Weight of Gold of Twenty two Carats Fine, 35.
and Two Carats Allay into Thirty three Sovereigns, at Twenty Shillings apiece,
or Sixty six Half-Sovereigns, or One hundred thirty two Crowns, or Two hundred
sixty four Half-Crowns, making Thirty three Pounds by Tale.

The same to Coin the Pound Weight of Old Standard Gold into Seventy three
Angels at Ten Shillings apiece, 43.
or One hundred forty and six Half-Angels, or Two hundred ninety two Quarter
Angels, making Thirty six Pounds Ten Shillings in Tale; and the Pound Weight of
Gold, of Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay, into Thirty three
Sovereigns and an Half, at Twenty Shillings apiece, or Sixty seven
Half-Sovereigns, or One hundred thirty four Crowns, or Two hundred sixty eight
Half-Crowns, making Thirty three Pounds Ten Shillings in Tale; and the Pound
Weight of Old Standard Silver into Three Pounds two Shillings by Tale; Namely,
into Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Six-pences, Two-pences, Pence and
Halfpence.

2. Jac. 1.
Sir Richard Martyn Knight, and Richard Martyn his Son, Masters and Workers,
Covenanted to Coin a Pound Weight of Gold of Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two
Carats Allay, into Thirty seven Pounds four Shillings by Tale, viz. into Unites
going for Twenty Shillings, Double-Crowns at Ten Shillings, Britain-Crowns at
Five Shillings, Thistle-Crowns at Four Shillings, and Half-Crowns at Two
Shillings Sixpence apiece; And a Pound Weight of Silver of the said Old
Standard, into Sixty two Shillings by Tale; Namely, into Shillings, Six-pences,
Two-Pences, Pence, Halfpence, Crowns and Half-Crowns.

3. Jac. 1.
A Pound Weight of Gold of the Old Standard of Twenty three Carats, Three Grains
and an Half Fine, was Coined into Forty Pound Ten Shillings by Tale; to wit,
into Rose-Rialls at Thirty Shillings apiece, Spur-Rialls at Fifteen Shillings,
and Angels at Ten Shillings apiece.

There was a Proclamation for Raising Gold Two Shillings in every Twenty
Shillings. 9.


A Pound Weight of the Old Standard Gold was to be Coined into Forty four
Pounds by Tale; to wit, Rose-Rialls, Spur-Rialls, and Angels; and a Pound
Weight of Gold of Twenty two Carats Fine, was Coined into Forty Pounds
Eighteen Shillings and Four Pence; to wit, into Unites at Twenty two Shillings,
Double-Crowns at Eleven Shillings, British-Crowns at Five Shillings and
Sixpence, Thistle-Crowns at Four Shillings and Four Pence Three Farthings, or
Half- British Crowns at Two Shillings and Nine Pence apiece.

A Pound Weight of Gold, 2 Car. 1.
of the Old Standard of Twenty three Carats Three Grains and an Half Fine, and
Half a Grain Allay, was Coined into Forty four Pounds Ten Shillings by Tale,
to wit, into Rose-Rialls at Thirty Shillings apiece, Spur-Rialls at Fifteen
Shillings apiece, or Angels at Ten Shillings apiece; and a Pound Weight of
Crown Gold of Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay, into Forty one
Pounds by Tale, to wit, into Unites at Twenty Shillings, Double-Crowns at Ten
Shillings, or British-Crowns at Five Shillings apiece; and a Pound of Silver of
the Old Standard of Eleven Ounces, Two Penny Weight Fine, into Sixty two
Shillings by Tale; Namely, into Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Half-shillings,
Two-pences, Pence and Halfpence, by Indenture between the King and Sir Robert
Harleigh.

The like both for Gold and Silver Moneys, 12 C. 2
by Indenture between the King and Sir Ralph Freeman.

An Indenture between the King and Henry Slingsby Master and Worker, 22.
to Coin Crown Gold Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay into Forty
four Pounds Ten Shillings by Tale; to wit, into Pieces to run for Ten
Shillings, Twenty Shillings, Forty Shillings, or Five Pounds apiece; and a
Pound of Silver of the Old Standard into Three Pounds Two Shillings by Tale, to
wit, into Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Half-shillings, Groats,
Half-six-pences, Half-Groats and Pence.

A Pound Weight of Gold, 1 Jac 2
Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay, to be Coined into Forty four
Pounds Ten Shillings by Tale; and a Pound Weight of Silver of the Old Standard
into Sixty two Shillings by Tale, just as the preceding Indenture: And Thomas
Neale Esquire; was Master and Worker.

1 W and M.
The like.

By the careful observing of which Deduction here made, from the Indentures of
the Mint for above Four hundred Years past (many of which are yet extant, and
have been seen and examined by me) it does evidently appear, That it has been a
Policy constantly Practiced in the Mints of England (the like having indeed
been done in all Foreign Mints belonging to other Governments) to Raise the
Value of the Coin in its Extrinsick Denomination, from time to time, as any
Exigence or Occasion required; and more especially to Encourage the bringing of
Bullion into the Realm to be Coined (though sometimes, when the desired End was
obtained, the Value has been suffered to fall again.) So that in the whole
Number of Years, from the Twenty eighth of Edward the First, until this time,
by such Variations the Extrinsick Value or Denomination of the Silver is Raised
in about a Triple Proportion; that is to say, In the Reign of the said King
Edward the First (as is plain by this Narrative) a Pound Weight Troy of
Sterling Silver was shorn at Twenty Shillings and Three Pence, and consequently
Two hundred forty three Pence, or Twenty Shillings and One Fourth of a
Shilling, or One Pound and One Eightieth Part of a Pound by Tale, were then
Coined, out of the said Pound Weight Troy: Whereas at this day, and for about
Ninety years past, a Pound Weight Troy of like Silver, is and has been Coined
into Seven hundred forty four Pence, or Sixty two Shillings, or Three Pounds,
and One tenth of a Pound by Tale, the Pound Weight Troy having then and now the
same Weight and Fineness. And as to the Gold, I need only to observe from the
foregoing Deduction, That in the Eighteenth of Edward the First, a Pound Weight
Fine, Twenty three Carats, Three Grains and one Half, was Coined into Fifteen
Pounds by Tale: Whereas at this day a Pound Weight of Gold, of the Fineness
only of Twenty two Carats, is Coined into Forty four Pounds Ten Shillings. And
this Method of Raising the Extrinsick Value of the Gold and Silver, in the
Denominations of the Coins, as it has been constant almost in the Reign of
every King, so no Inconvenience, Disgrace or Mischief (as can be observed) has
ever accrued by the doing thereof at any time, when a Just, Necessary or
Reasonable Cause gave Occasion thereunto.

The which being Premised, and every Project for Debasing the Money (by the
Reason before given) being Rejected as Dangerous, Dishonorable and Needless:
It remains that our Nation in its present Exigence, may avail it self, by
Raising the Value of its Coins, and this may be effected, either by making the
respective Pieces called Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, etc. to be lesser in
Weight, or by continuing the same Weight or Bigness, which is at present in the
Unclipt Moneys, and Ordaining at the same time, that every such Piece shall be
Current at a higher Price in Tale.

But before I proceed to give my Opinion upon this Subject, it seems necessary
for me to assert and prove an Hypothesis, which is this, namely, That making
the Pieces less, or ordaining the respective Pieces (of the present Weight) to
be Current at a higher Rate, may equally raise the Value of the Silver in our
Coins. The former of these finds many Precedents in the Indentures above
recited, but the latter seems more suitable to our present Circumstances, as
will afterward be showed more at large.

This Hypothesis or Theorem is easily demonstrated thus, Let it be granted,
That a Crown Piece by the present Standard contains in Sterling Silver (as it
really does) Nineteen Penny Weight, and 354838/1000000 parts of a Penny Weight:
Or (which is the same thing) Nineteen penny Weight Eight Grains and an Half, and
a very small fractional part more, going at this time for Five Shillings, or
Sixty Pence. And let it be supposed (which is practicable, and the thing aimed
at) that this very Crown Piece be ordained to pass for Six Shillings and Three
Pence, or (which is equal) Seventy five Pence. Then I say by Inverse
Proportion, as Seventy five Pence are to Sixty Pence, so Sixty will be to
Forty eight Pence, which are equal to Four Shillings. From whence I infer,
That if the Extrinsick Value of the Silver now in a Crown were to be Raised to
Six Shillings and Three Pence (by diminishing the Weight of the Piece according
to former Precedents) then such Diminitive Crown must weight only Four fifths
of the said 19.354838/1000000 Penny Weight, that is to say, it must weigh
Fifteen Penny Weight, and 4833704/10000000 parts of a Penny Weight, and in this
case Five Three Pences to be Coined in the same Proportion, to complete the
Raised Value of Six Shillings and Three Pence, must weigh One fourth part of
the Diminitive Crown, as in the Margin.
Again (by direct Proportion) if 15.4838704 Penny Weight of Sterling Silver is
to go or be Current for Five Shillings, of Sixty Pence, then 19.354838 Penny
Weight of Sterling Silver (which is the Quantity in an Unclipt Crown by the
present Standard, and equal to the Sum or Aggregate of the other Two
Quantities) ought to go and be Current for Six Shillings and Three Pence, or
Seventy five Pence, and consequently will Raise the Extrinsick Value of the
Silver, as much as diminishing the Pieces would do; which was to be
demonstrated.

And now (having cleared my way) I humbly take leave to offer my Opinion, That
all such Silver Moneys as are after Enumerated of the Lawful Coins of this
Realm of England, Memorandum, Moneys Clipped or Unclipt, are afterward Described
by certain Weights.
which are now in being, and are not at all diminished by Clipping, Rounding,
Filing, Washing, or any other Artifice, be Raised by Public Authority to the
foot of Six shillings and Three pence for the Crown, and proportionably for the
other Species, namely, the Crown to go for Seventy five pence, the Half-Crown
to go for Thirty seven pence and an halfpenny, the Shilling for Fifteen pence,
and the Half-shilling for Seven pence halfpenny, leaving all the other old
Vnclipt Pieces, as the Thirteen pence halfpenny, the Nine pence, the Groat, Two
pence, etc. which are very few in Number, and much worn, to go upon their
present Foot, and to find their Values in pence, and parts of a penny, as they
do at this day. And that the New Coins to be made, either of the Clipped Money,
as it shall be brought in, or of any other Sterling Silver, be made, in their
respective Weights or Bigness, by the present Indenture of the Mint, that is to
say, One Piece which may be called the Scepter, or the Silver-Unite, or by such
other Name as His Majesty shall Appoint, and to be exactly of the Weight and
Fineness of the present Vnclipt Crown Piece, but to run for Seventy five Pence
Sterling; of which Pieces so made, there shall be Twelve, and Two fifths of
such piece in a Pound Weight Troy; and Three of the said Pieces called Sceptres
or Unites, or by such other Name, as aforesaid, together with a Fifteen Penny
Piece, after mentioned, shall make by Tale One Pound Sterling, or One Pound of
Lawful Money of England, in all Accounts and Lawful Payments whatsoever.
Another Piece which may be called the Half-Sceptre or Half-Unite, or by such
other Name as His Majesty shall Appoint, which shall be equal in Weight and
Fineness to a present Vnclipt Half-Crown, but to run for Thirty seven Pence and
an Halfpenny Sterling; of which Pieces last mentioned, there shall be Twenty
four, and Four Fifths of such a Piece in a Pound Weight Troy; and Six of the
said Pieces called Half-Sceptres or Half-Unites, or by such other Name as His
Majesty shall Appoint, together with One Fifteen Penny Piece aftermentioned,
shall make by Tale One Pound Sterling, or One Pound of Lawful English Money, in
all Accounts and Legal Payments whatsoever. One other Piece which may be called
the Testoon, or Fifteen Penny Piece, which shall be equal in Weight and Fineness
to a present Vnclipt Shilling, but to run for Fifteen Pence Sterling, of which
there shall be Sixty two in a Pound Weight Troy, and Sixteen of the said Pieces
called Testoons, or Fifteen Penny Pieces, shall make in Tale One Pound Sterling,
or One Pound of Lawful English Money; or Ten of these Testoons, together with
Two such Grosses or Groats, as are after mentioned, will make a Mark Sterling,
or Five of them, and One such Gross or Groat, will make a Noble, which the Law
used to call the Hauf Merk, or Eight of them will make the Angel, or Four of
them will make the Crown, or Two of them will make the Half-Crown: And they may
be proportionably varied, many other ways in all Accounts, Reckonings and Legal
Payments whatsoever. One other Piece, which may be called the Half-Testoon,
which shall be equal in Weight and Fineness to the Half-shilling by the present
Standard, but to run for Seven Pence Halfpenny Sterling, of which there shall
be One hundred twenty four in the Pound Weight Troy; and Thirty two of the said
Pieces to be called Half-Testoons, shall make in Tale One Pound Sterling; or
Twenty of these, with Two of the Grosses or Groats, will make a Mark in Tale;
or Ten of these Half-Testoons, with one Gross, will make a Noble; or Eight of
the said Half-Testoons will make a Crown by Tale; or Five of them with a
Half-Groat, will make the Half-Noble, or Three Shillings and Four-pence by
Tale, or Four of the said Half-Testoons, will make an Half-Crown; or Thirty two
of them will make Twenty Shillings by Tale, or Sixteen of them will make Ten
Shillings by Tale; or eight of them will make Five Shillings by Tale; and they
may many other ways be proportionably varied in all Accounts, Reckonings and
Legal Payments whatsoever, One other piece which may be called the Gross or
Five-peny piece, to be equal in Weight and Fineness to a Groat by the present
Standard, but to run for Five pence Sterling, of which there shall be One
hundred eighty six in the pound Weight Troy; and Forty eight of the said
Grosses or Five-peny pieces, will make in Tale One pound Sterling; or a
proportionable Number of them in many Cases (too tedious here to enumerate)
will answer to the said Denominations of Pounds, Marks, Half-Marks,
Quarter-Marks, Angels, Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings and Pence used in
Accounts, or in Acts of Parliament, Records, or other Legal Instruments, which
are absolutely necessary to be continued. One other piece which may be called
the Quarter-Testoon, which shall be equal in Weight and Fineness to a Three
penny piece by the present Standard, but to run for Three pence three farthings
Sterling, of which there shall be Two hundred forty eight in a Pound Weight
Troy, and Sixty four of these Quarter-Testoons will make in Tale One pound
Sterling, or a proportionable Number of them will answer in a greater Number of
Cases to the said Denominations used in Accounts, or in the Laws of England.
One other Piece which may be called the Half-Groat or Half-Gross, which shall
be equal in Weight and Fineness to a Two penny piece by the present Standard,
but to run for Two pence halfpenny Sterling, of which there shall be Three
hundred seventy two in a Pound Weight Troy, and Ninety six of the said
Half-Groats will make in Tale One pound Sterling, or a proportionable Number of
them will answer, in most Cases, to the said Denominations used in Accounts, or
in the Laws of England. And one other Piece which may be called the Prime,
which shall be equal in Weight and Fineness to a present Standard penny, but to
run for Five farthings, or for One penny, and the fourth part of a penny
Sterling, of which there shall be Seven hundred forty and four in a Pound
Weight Troy; and One hundred ninety and two of the said Primes will make in
Tale One pound Sterling, on a proportionable Number of them (the Combinations
whereof are almost infinite) will answer almost in all Cases to the said
Denominations used in Accounts, or in the Laws of England. And because it may
be convenient to have the Denomination of Shillings continued, let there be
added One Piece to be called the Shilling, or Twelve penny Piece, to be equal in
Fineness, though not in Weight, to any Standard Money now in being, to run for
Twelve pence Sterling, (which will be a Fifth part less in Weight then the
present Shilling) of these there shall be Seventy Seven and an Half in a Pound
Weight Troy, and Twenty of them will make a Pound by Tale, whereby every Pound
Weight Troy of the Silver Moneys aforesaid, will be and hold in Number and
Tale, and in the Value will be Raised from Three pounds Two Shillings, to Three
pounds Seventeen Shillings and Six pence Sterling, by the Pound Troy: And my
Reasons for this Opinion are as follows:

First, The Value of the Silver in the Coin ought to be Raised to the Foot of
Six Shillings Three Pence in every Crown, because the Price of Standard Silver
in Bullion is Risen (from diverse necessary and unnecessary Causes, producing at
great length a great scarcity thereof in England) to Six Shilings Five Pence an
Ounce: This Reason (which I humbly conceive will appear irrefragable) is
grounded chiefly upon a Truth so Apparent, that it may well be compared to an
Axiom even in Mathematical Reasoning, to wit, That whenever the Extrinsick
Value of Silver in the Coin has been, or shall be less than the price of
Silver in Bullion, the Coin has been, and will be Melted down. Although the
melting down of Coin, for private Lucre, be done in secret (because it is
Punishable by 9 F.3 and 17 R.2. Prohibited Goldsmiths and others to Melt down
small Coins, under pain of forfeiture of the Molten Silver. 14. Car.2.
Prohibited the Melting any the Silver Moneys, under pain of Forfeiting the
Same, and double the Value; if by a Freeman, he is to be Disfranchised; and if
not a Freeman, he is to be Imprisoned Six Months. 6 and 7 W. and M makes the
Conviction of Melters more Practicable, and inflicts Six Months Imprisonment
for the Offense.
Law) yet no man can doubt but that it has been Practiced for a long time past,
to such a Degree, upon the Weighty Money, as that in particular, the Crowns and
Half-Crowns of Edward the Sixth and Queen Elizabeth are quite vanished: Those
of King James the First are become very rare: Those of King Charles the First
(though the most numerous of all that remain) are in great measure Reduced, and
will appear to be so the more plainly, when they come to be distinguished from
the Counterfeits, which are mostly contrived to Resemble these: The Crowns,
Half-Crowns, and indeed the lesser Coins of King Charles the Second (the far
greatest part whereof were Milled Money) in all Payments at the Exchequer, and
other Public Offices, do not, by Estimation, exceed the Proportion of Ten
Shillings per Cent. or a Two hundredth Part. And if this Wicked Fact of Melting
down has been notoriously Committed, at times when there was no great
difference between the Value of the Silver in the Coin and that in the Bullion;
or when the Goldsmiths and other Artificers could make no other Profit thereby,
than the final Overweight, which (by Weighing and Culling the Pieces Coined at
the Tower) they found to be in some of them, which being Molten, might be
carried back to the Mint, and there Re-coin'd at the King's Charge into a
greater number by Tale for their own Use: Then one may easily conclude, That
the temptation of Melting down, is grown of late much more prevalent; since, at
this day, Standard Silver in Bullion is commonly sold at the said Price of Six
Shillings and Five Pence, or for Seventy seven Pence an Ounce. And in regard
Twenty Penny Weight (equal to an Ounce) bears the same Proportion to Seventy
seven Pence as Nineteen Penny Weight, and (...)8^8/100 000 of One Penny Weight
(equal to the Standard Silver contained in a Crown Piece) does to Six Shillings
and Two Pence Halfpenny; it is most plain, that he now Melts down (for
Instance) a Crown Piece, which whilst it retains the Image and Superscription
of His Majesty, or either of the late King's runs only for Five Shillings, can
immediately sell the Silver of it here for Six Shillings and Two Pence
Halfpenny, and gain the Sum of Fourteen Pence Halfpenny upon every such Melted
Piece, By such Sale of the Silver here, or (by reason of the great Loss which
this Nation at present suffers in its Foreign Exchange or Remittances) he may
make a greater Profit of the same Silver, by Exporting it into Foreign Parts,
if he can effect the same, either by Stealth, or by Eluding the late Act of
Parliament, Prohibiting such Exportation. One may also foresee, that continuing
the Silver Moneys (either Old or New Coins) upon the present foot, whilst
Bullion is so much dearer, will inevitably produce Consequences pernicious to
the whole; in effect it will be nothing else but the furnishing Offenders with
a Species to Melt down at an extravagant Profit, and encouraging not a
necessary, but a violent and exorbitant Exportation of our Silver to the
Foreign Parts, for the sake of the Gain only, till we shall have little or none
left in the Kingdom. And upon an Impartial Consideration of these Matters, we
may be able to make a more mature Judgment upon the Suggestion that has been
raised by some Men, Namely, That Raising the Value of our Coin, or Continuing
it on the present Foot will be the same thing. If these Gentlemen mean, that
Silver in Bullion will always, during this War, be dearer than Silver in Coin,
because of the necessity to Export it for the Foreign Expense of the War, and
to answer the Balance of Trade, occasioned by the Interruption of our
Navigation, I Answer,

First, That this Necessity may be diminished; but it cannot in any Sense be
Augmented, by Raising the Value of our Coin.

Secondly, That supposing the worst, to wit, a further Advance of the Silver in
Bullion, yet even in that case, the Offenders before mentioned will not find so
much Encouragement or Temptation, when their Profit, whatsoever it be, upon
every Raised Crown, must evidently be less by Fourteen Pence Halfpenny than it
is at present, upon a Crown running in Payment for Five Shillings only.

Thirdly, It is hoped that the Exchange to Holland, (which by the way has risen
a little of late) may by the Success of some good Designs now on Foot (though
the War should continue) be kept at a stand, at least from falling much lower.
In which Case I think the Arguments of these Gentlemen will have little or no
Weight.

Fourthly, There must be a great difference with regard to the Service and
Disservice of the Public, between a necessary Exportation of Bullion or Coin,
(perhaps the One may be as well Disspensed with as the other, by Public
Authority, and to a Limited Sum; only for the Service of the War) and such an
Exportation thereof, as proceeds Originally from the said exorbitant Profit of
the Melters, who being Goldsmiths, Refiners, or other Traders, and by this
Means, and by the Clippings, getting great Quantities of Molten Silver into
their Hands, know well enough (though by Unlawful or Indirect Means) to convey
the same beyond Sea, either to buy Gold there, which is afterward brought
hither and Coined into Guineas, passing at Thirty Shillings apiece; or to buy
Prohibited Goods, as Lace, Lustrings, Muslins, diverse East India Goods, or
other enumerated Commodities, or for other Purposes, which, though unlawful or
needless, do all help or combine, at this time, to Augment and Inhance that
Balance of Trade between us and our Neighbors, very much to our Detriment, as
will be showed hereafter.

Fifthly, These Gentlemen consider only the use of our Coin in England, as it
has Relation to Foreign Exchanges or Remittances, whereas it serves
principally the Inland Commerce, and supplies many other occasions, which will
be advantaged by the Rise and Plenty thereof. And whereas it is apprehended
that the proposed Advance of the Silver in the Coin, will produce a
proportionable loss in all Rents and Revenues, Public or Private, settled or
ascertained by Antecedent Reservations, Grants or Agreements, and in all Debts
now standing out upon Specialty, or without Specialty: I humbly conceive these
Apprehensions must entirely vanish, when it shall be impartially considered,
That this Nation is, and has been for some time past, engaged in a necessary
War, which has not only caused a great Expense of our Wealth in Foreign Parts
of Europe, but has Interrupted the Navigation, which used to Supply us from
East and West Indies, and from other Parts of Asia, Africa and America, with
much greater Quantities of Goods than served our own Consumption, and
consequently afforded us a large Overplus, which, together with our own Native
Product or Manufacture, were Exported to our Neighbor Nations, in Barter or
Exchange for the Goods we received of them. That reckoning on the one side the
Value of the Naval Stores, Linens, Silks, Saltpeter, and many other Enumerated
Commodities, which we receive from our Neighbors, and adding thereunto our
Foreign Expense for the War: And on the other side the Value of so much of our
Native Manufactures, or Produce, and the small Overplus of Goods brought from
the East and West Indies, etc. as we have lately Exported, or can Export into
our Neighbor Nations of Europe, there would appear a great Difference or
Excess between the one side and the other of such Account or Reckoning; which
Difference or Excess is or may be called the Balance of Trade. That it cannot
be conceived how this Balance, Difference, or Excess has been or can be
answered by us in any thing other than our Coin or Bullion. That to answer this
Balance of Trade, there has been already Exported a great part of our Coins
and Bullion, namely, Clippings, which I think must have been equal in Value to
at least a Fourth part of our whole Species of Silver Moneys, the Molten Silver
of a good part of our heavy Coins, part of our heavy Coins themselves, our
whole Stock of Foreign Silver, for I am told there is little or none of that to
be bought in England at this time, and the Molten Silver of a great deal of our
English Plate and Vessels, which People have been induced to part with at a
good Price. That by this means Silver in Coin or in Mass is actually grown very
Scarce in England. That every thing having any Value or Worth whatsoever, when
it becomes Scarce grows Dear, or (which is the same thing) it Rises in Price,
and consequently it will serve to pay more Debt, or it will buy greater
Quantities of other Goods of Value, or in any thing else it will go further
than it did before. That Silver in England being grown Scarce, as aforesaid, is
consequently grown Dearer. That it is Risen in Price from Five Shillings and
Two Pence, to Six Shillings and Five Pence an Ounce: And by Daily Experience
Nineteen Penny Weight and Three Tenths of a Penny Weight in Sterling Silver
(equal to the Weight of a Crown Piece) in England, does, and will Purchase more
Coined Money than Five Shillings by Tale, (though the latter be delivered bona
fide in Unclipt Shillings, or in a good Bill) and consequently does and will
Purchase and Acquire more Goods or necessaries, or pay more Debts in England,
or (being delivered here) it fetches more Money in any Foreign Parts by way of
Exchange, than Five Shillings by Tale, or the Sixth Part of a Guinea by Tale,
or Goods to the Value of Five Shillings in Tale only, do or can Fetch, Purchase
or Acquire. That this Advanced Price of the Silver has been growing for some
time, and is Originally caused by the Balance, Excess or Difference
abovementioned, which Naturally and Rationally produces such an effect. And
there is no reason to expect that Silver will decline in its Price or Value
here, till it be made more plentiful, by turning the Balance of Trade to our
Advantage, which seems to be a Work that can be accomplished with Success in
times of Peace, or by such a Protection of our Trade, as will render our
Exportations as large as they used to be in times of Peace. That the Raising
the Value of the Silver in our Coins to make it equal to Silver in Mass, can in
no Sense be understood to be a cause of making Silver Scarce. That there can
never be proposed any just or reasonable Foot upon which the Coins should be
Current, save only the very Price of the Silver thereof, in case it be Molten
in the same Place where the Coins are made Current, or an Extrinsick
Denomination very near that Price: It being most evident, That if the Value of
the Silver in the Coins should (by any Extrinsick Denomination) be Raised above
the Value, or Market Price of the same Silver, reduced to Bullion, the Subject
would be proportionably Injured and Defrauded, as they were formerly in the
case of the Base Moneys Coined by Public Authority, but if the Value of the
Silver in the Coins be less than the Value or Market Price of the same Silver
reduced to Bullion, then the Coins are always Melted down for Luore, as they
have been, and are at this day in the Case of the Unclipt Moneys, and as they
will certainly be, in Case of any New Coins that shall be made, to be Current
upon the Old Foot of Sixty Pence for the Silver of a Crown Piece; which
sufficiently proves, That the Medium proposed is the true Foundation for the
Course of our Moneys. That for this purpose we need only to consider the very
Price that Silver bears in England, where these Coins are to be Current,
although if we will have Relation to Neighboring Countries, particularly to
Holland, we shall find that the Current Price of an Ounce of Silver there,
adding thereunto the Difference of Exchange from London to Amsterdam or
Roterdam (which Difference in the Exchange, is but another Effect of the
Balance of Trade beforementioned) will still make up the Price of Six
Shillings and Five Pence for the Ounce of Silver at London. And if this were
not so, your Lordships might be sure that no body would buy Silver at London
for Six Shillings and Five Pence an Ounce, carry it to Holland, and sell it
there perhaps for Five Shillings and Five Pence an Ounce, or for so much in
their Coins, the Silver whereof is not equal to Five Shillings and Five Pence
by our Standard. That it ought not to be Alleged that Silver has no Price; for
every Indenture of the Mint (having first Ascertained the Extrinsick
Denomination of the Current Coins) has taken care also to Determine the Price
or Value of the Silver to the Merchant or Importer, which was to be Answered in
those Extrinsick Denominations; and daily Experience shows every Man, in Buying
or Selling of Silver, that it has a Price or Value still Reckoned in those
Extrinsick Denominations, although at present it much exceeds, as aforesaid,
the said Rate of Sixty two Shillings for a Pound Troy. That Five Shillings
Coined upon the Foot hereby Proposed, will actually contain more real and
Intrinsic Value of Silver by a great deal, than is in the Current Moneys now
commonly Applied to the Payment of the said Rents, Revenues and Debts, upon
which the imaginary Loss is Apprehended, and in Reason will and ought to go
further to all Intents and Purposes, than Five Shillings in Clipped Moneys, or in
the Sixth Part of a Guinea, does or can go; which will be better understood,
when the Mischiefs of these Clipped Moneys and Guineas come to be Explained in
the Third Chapter. And lastly, That as the Foot or Foundation hereby Proposed,
for the Course of the Moneys, will be Just and Reasonable, with regard to the
Price of Silver, and more Advantageous to the Receivers thereof, than Payment
in Clipped Moneys or Gold at the present Price; so every Person that shall
Receive any Money Coined or made Current upon this New Foot, will have the
Payment, Issuing and Expenditure thereof at the same Rate. And it is freely
submitted to Impartial Judgments, whether the proposed Advance of Silver in the
Coins can infer a Real Loss upon any Persons, other than such as can propose to
themselves particularly the Receipt of Moneys in Weighty or Unclipt Pieces
only, and the Conversion thereof to an Advantage, which Law or Reason would not
allow them.

Secondly, The Value of the Silver in the Coin ought to be Raised, to encourage
the bringing of Bullion to the Mint to be Coined. It is a Matter of Fact well
known to your Lordships, and (by the small Number of the Pieces of the present
King, or of His Majesty and the Deceased Queen) it is perceivable by every body
else, that since Bullion has born a greater Price than Silver in the Coin,
there has been none brought to the Mint to be Coined, either by Importers or
others, unless some small Parcels, that were Seized or sent thither by Public
Authority. And it is utterly against Reason for any Man to think, that any
Bullion of Silver will be carried thither voluntarily to be Coined, till the
Value of Silver Coined be Raised, at least as high as the Value of Silver in
Bullion. By the proposed Advance to Six Shillings and Three Pence, the Sterling
Silver in the Coins will be set at Six Shillings and Five Pence Halfpenny per
Ounce, which will exceed the present Price of Sterling in Bullion by One
Halfpenny per Ounce, and give (though by a small Profit) an Encouragement to
those that have English Silver or Plate, and particularly to the Retailers of
Wine, Beer, Ale and other Liquors, (whose Tankards and other Vessels are herein
after Proposed to be brought in) and generally to all those that have or can
have Silver Imported, to carry the same to the Mint to be Coined. And this will
be agreeable to the Policy that in past Ages (as has been observed upon the
aforesaid Deduction) has been Practiced not only in our Mint, but in the Mints
of all Politic Governments, namely, to Raise the Value of Silver in the Coin,
to Promote the Work of the Mint.

Thirdly, The Raising the Value of the Silver in the Coin, will increase the
whole Species in Tale, and thereby make it more commensurate to the general
need thereof, for carrying on the Common Traffic and Commerce of the Nation,
and to answer the Payments on the numerous Contracts, Securities, and other
daily Occasions, requiring a larger Supply of Money for that purpose. This
Reason may be farther Illustrated, by considering that the want of a sufficient
Stock of Money, has been the chief Cause of Introducing so much Paper Credit
(which is at best hazardous, and may be carried too far) and the Setting up of
Offices, both in City and Country, for Bartering of Goods or Permutations.

Fourthly, The Silver in the Old Unclipt Moneys, and in the New Coins now
Proposed to be made, ought to be Raised (as I have offered) Equally, to avoid
Confusion and Uncertainty in Payments: For if Pieces, having the same Bigness,
should have different Values, it might be difficult for the Common People
(especially those not skilled in Arithmetic) to Compute how many of one kind
will be equal to the Sum of another; and there might be some Dispute about the
Lawful Money of England, to be Paid upon Mortgages, Bonds, Contracts, or other
Legal Securities referring thereunto.

Fifthly, The Foot of Six Shillings and Three Pence for the Crown, here
Proposed, will not only be suitable to the present Rate of Bullion, but it
happens to be such a Sum as is Deviseable into a great Number of Aliquot or
other Integral Parts, to serve for the lesser Coins before Proposed, so that
none of them will come forth in any Fractional Part of a Farthing, which will
obviate much Perplexity amongst the Common People: And I think there is scarce
any other Sum near it that is Deviseable in like manner.

Sixthly, By this Project, all Computations in Pounds, Shillings and Pence,
used in Accounts; and the Reckonings by Pounds, Marks, Half-Marks, Shillings
and Pence, practiced in the Law of England, and in the Records, Contracts and
other Instruments, relating thereunto, will be Preserved as they ought to be.

Seventhly, By this Method, the bringing in of the present Unclipt Coins, to be
cut into lesser Pieces, are rendered needless; which Species being at present
(for the most part) Hoarded, will, upon Raising their Value, come forth, and go
a great way toward Supplying the Commerce and other Occasions, whilst the New
Money is making. And I think it will be Granted to be utterly impossible, in
this time of War, to Re-Coin the Clipped Moneys, if at the same time the Unclipt
shall be brought in to be new Cut; or if the Unclipt Pieces should not (by such
an Encouragement) be brought forth to Supply the Commerce, Pay Taxes, and serve
other Occasions in the mean time.

Eighthly, It is difficult to Conceive, how any Design of Amending the Clipped
Moneys can be compassed, without Raising the Value of the Silver remaining in
them, because of the great Deficiency of the Silver Clipped away; which (upon
Re-Coining) must necessarily be Defrayed or Born one way or other.

Ninthly, As our Unclipt Moneys, and the New Coins here Proposed to be made,
will, by the former Proposition, retain the Ancient Sterling, or Old Right
Standard of the Mint for Fineness and Purity (the Alteration of which could
never be Justified by any Necessity;) so by this Proposition they will both
Continue the Present Standard of the Mint in the Weight or Bigness of the
respective Pieces, without being cut into Less, as they have formerly been (the
New Shilling only excepted:) These Propositions indeed, dealing with nothing
but the very Value of the Silver in the Coins, to make it equal to the Current
Price of our own Bullion or Silver in Mass, with a very little Excess, to wit,
of an Halfpenny in an Ounce, to encourage the Coinage, and to make it bear the
like Reason or Proportion to the Price of Foreign Moneys now Current amongst
us; Namely, the Pillar Dollars, which go at Seven Shillings and a Penny per
Ounce, and Sevil and Mexico Dollars at Seven Shillings per Ounce, and to effect
an equality in all Pieces, having the same Extrinsick Denomination, and thereby
to cure such Mischiefs relating to our Coin, as are not to be Paralleled in the
Records of former Ages: Which Raised Values may be Lowered again by the Wisdom
and Authority of Parliament, when the Wealth of the Nation shall (by Gods
Blessing) be Re-establisht without Trouble or Charge of Re-coining or Cutting
the Silver Pieces into other Sizes.

As to the Gold Coins which are now almost wholly Reduced or Converted into the
Pieces called Guineas and Half-Guineas, they were first Coined by King Charles
the Second, not long after the Restoration; and were ordained to go at the
Rates of Twenty Shillings for the Guinea, and Ten Shillings for the
Half-Guinea; but I do not remember that they ever passed at so little, as the
Prices which were then set upon them because our Nation has been always too apt
to overvalue its Gold. And at this time the Guinea runs for Thirty Shillings,
although the Gold of it (if it were carried to Spain, Italy, Barbary, and some
other Places of the World) would not Purchase so much Silver there, as is equal
to the Standard of Four of our Crowns, or Twenty Shillings. And here it is
necessary for me to Observe, That if the Gold had Advanced proportionably with
the Silver, then because as Five Shillings (the Standard Value of the Silver in
a Crown) is to Six Shillings and Two Pence Halfpeny, the present Value of the
same Silver in Mass, so Twenty Shillings (the Standard Value of the Gold in
Guinea) is to Twenty four Shillings and Ten Pence; It should follow by Reason
that a Guinea at this day should go for about Twenty four Shillings and Ten
Pence, but it apparently runs for about Five Shillings more, so that in the
time that the Silver in a Crown is Risen about a Fifth part, the Gold in a
Guinea is Risen in a much greater proportion, namely, a complete Third part.
Which Advance of Five Shillings in a Guinea (over and above the proportionable
Rise which it should have had to make it keep pace with the Silver) is
exceedingly detrimental to our Nation at this Day (as will be hereafter showed
more at large.) And seeing it can be attributed to nothing but the present
Badness of our Silver Coins, which are so exceedingly Counterfeited, and Clipped,
that the Common People will take Guineas almost at any Rate, rather than stand
the hazard and vexation of such Silver Moneys as are now Current amongst them:
I am therefore humbly of Opinion, That altering the present Standard of our
Gold Coins (which prescribes Twenty two Carats Fine, and Two Carats Allay, and
that Forty four Guineas and an Half shall be cut from a Pound Weight of such
Gold) would avail nothing. And that the only remedy to fix these Gold Coins
upon a right Foot, will be the Re-establishment of the Silver Coins, which (as
soon as Achieved according to these Propositions) will in all likelihood and
probability, presently reduce the Guineas to about Twenty five Shillings apiece
by the most Natural and Easy way, without fixing any limited Price thereupon
by Public Authority, which (if one were to judge by past Experience) would
never be observed, at least for any time.

A Corollary: The abovementioned Balance of Trade being (as is before
observed) the Original Cause of the Scarcity of Silver in England, and of the
Loss by the Foreign Exchange or Remittances, he that can propose any proper
Expedients, either to lessen that Balance, or convert it to our Advantage,
ought to be well heard. But any Proposal which supposes the Balance of Trade
must be Rectified before our Coins be Amended, or a Reasonable Foundation can
be fixed for the Course of the same, does but postpone the Cure of a Disease
which may destroy us before such a Remedy can take effect.

The True and Reasonable Adjustment of that which is called by the French, Pied
de Monoye, and by others Anciently Pes Monetae, was and is of principal
Consideration in this whole Affair: And therefore I hope your Lordships will
Excuse me for having been so prolix in the Subject of the Standards.

The Second General Head concerning the present State and Condition of the Gold
and Silver Coins.
IT cannot be thought improper before the Enterprizing of a Work of so great
importance as the Re-establishment of the Moneys, and Determining a New Foot
for the Course of the same, to be instructed (with as much certainty as is
possible in things of this Nature) in the present State, Plight, or Condition
of the Coins of this Realm; wherein one must necessarily consider several
Matters of Fact, whereof some can be known or found out, and others can only be
estimated or guessed at. I have endeavored, as much as I could in a little
time, to Inform and Satisfy my self in the Particulars following:

First, The several Forms or Fashions which have been used in the Fabrication
of the Moneys, and which of them have been and are most likely to be most
Secure against Clipping and Counterfeiting.

Secondly, The Quantities of Silver Coins Clipped and Unclipt, that may be
reasonably thought or imagined to remain in the Kingdom at this day.

Thirdly, How far the Clipped Pieces now in being may be Conjectured to have been
diminished in their Weight. And upon Consideration of these Articles, I have
endeavored to Compute the Loss, which (upon Re-coining the Clipped Moneys) must
be born either by a Public Aid, or by Particular Persons, or by both; and to
make such other Remarks and Inferences as may be suitable to the present
Occasion: In all which, my Sense and Opinion are humbly presented to your
Lordships in the manner following.

As to the Particulars; All the Moneys we have now in England, both Gold and
Silver, are reducible to Two sorts; the one Stamped with the Hammer, and the
other Pressed with an Engine, called the Mill. The Gold or Silver of the Hammered
Money is first Cast from the Melting Pot into long Bars, those Bars are cut
with Sheers into several square Pieces of exact Weights, for Sovereigns,
Angels, Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, etc. Then with the Tongs and Hammer
they are Forged into a Round Shape; after which they are Blanched (that is,
made White, or refulgent by Nealing or Boiling) and afterward Stamped or
Impressed with an Hammer to make them perfect Money. This Method of making
Money with the Hammer (as appears in the said Red Book) was practiced in the
Reign of King Edward the First; who (amongst other great Archievements of his
most Prudent Government) left that of Restoring and Establishing good Moneys
for the Use of his People, to recommend his Name to subsequent Generations. He
sent for Mr. William de Turnemire, and his Brother Peter, and others from
Marseilles, and one Friscobald, and his Companions from Florence, and Employed
them in the Working this kind of Money, and the Buying and Exchanging of Silver
for that purpose, for which he had Thirty Furnaces at London, Eight at
Canterbury (besides Three the Archbishop had there) Twelve at Bristol, Twelve
at York, and more in other great Towns, in all which Places they made the said
Hammered Money of Silver, supplied by the Kings Changers Established at the
same Places, who (according to certain Rates or Prices prescribed to them) took
in the Clipped, Rounded and Counterfeit Moneys to be Re-Coined, and Bought Gold
and Silver of the Merchants, and others, to be Fabricated into New Money; at
the same time Ordaining, Quod Proclametur per totum Regnum quod nulla fiat
tonsura de Nova Moneta sub periculo Vitae and Membrorum and amissionis omnium
Terrarum and Tenementorum, etc. And this kind of Hammered Money continued
through all the Reigns of Succeeding Kings and Queens, till about the Year of
our Lord, 1663. when by several Warrants, and Command of King Charles the
Second, to wit, by One Warrant Dated the Fifth of November, 1662. One Warrant
Dated the Eighth of April, 1663. And a Third Warrant Dated the Twenty fourth of
December, 1663. The other sort called Milled Money was first Fabricated to be
Current in England in this manner: First, The Gold or Silver is cast out of the
Melting Pot into long flat Bars, which Bars are drawn thorough a Mill (wrought
by a Horse) to produce the just Thickness of Guineas, Half-Guineas, Crowns,
Half-Crowns, Shillings, etc. Then with forcible Engines, called Cutters, which
answer exactly to the respective Sizes or Dimensions of the Money to be made,
the Round Pieces are cut out from the Flat Bar, shaped as aforesaid (the
Residue whereof, called Sizel, is Melted again) and then every Piece is
Weighed, and made to agree exactly with the intended Weight, and afterward
carried to other Engines (wrought secretly) which put the Letters upon the
Edges of the larger Silver Pieces, and Mark the Edges of the rest with a
Graining. The next thing is the Blanching performed, as above; and at last,
every Piece is brought to the Press, which is called the Mill (wrought by the
Strength of Men) and there Receives the Impression, which makes it perfect
Milled Money.

By duly reflecting upon these different Kinds, and Considering that the
Principal Offenses against the Coins of the Realm, have been, and are either
Clipping, Counterfeiting or Melting down, It may be proper to Remark,

First, That the Crime of Clipping has been Practiced upon the Hammered Money
in all Ages more or less, but most exorbitantly of late Years; notwithstanding
the many Examples of Justice: For that the Offenders make an excessive Profit
by doing a thing so easy in it self, that even Women and Children (as well as
Men) are capable of the Act of Clipping or Rounding. But this Practice of
Clipping has never been Exercised upon the Milled Money, and I think never can
be, because of its Thickness and Edging, although no further Provision against
the same should be made by Law.

Secondly, That as to Counterfeiting, the Hammered Money is liable thereunto,
because the Tools for Resembling the same, are cheap, and easily made and
procured, and the Fabrication thereof may be performed in a little Room, and
with less Art; so that Smiths and other Artificers can readily attain
thereunto. But the Engines for the Milled Money are many and very costly, not
easy to be procured. The Makers or Users of such Engines cannot be concealed
without great difficulty, and the Milled Money it self, being of a much Finer
Print than the other, requires more Solemnity, Skill, and curious Workmanship
in its Fabrication; and when it is finished, shows better the true Color of the
Silver, to distinguish its Genuine from its Counterfeit Pieces: Which latter
could never be brought to Perfection. So that Reckoning only since the said
Year 1663. (without any regard to the Precedent time) I verily believe for
every single Piece of Milled Money, that has been Counterfeited, or rather been
attempted to be Resembled, there have been more than One thousand of the
Hammered Moneys not only Counterfeited, but actually Imposed upon the People,
who have been defrauded therewith, and are now likely to suffer greatly thereby.

Thirdly, That as to the Crime of Melting down, it has plainly affected both
the Hammered and Milled Moneys in their respective turns very fatally; insomuch
that the Hammered Gold Coins which were made in the Reigns of the several Kings
and Queens, from Edward the First inclusively, till the beginning of the Reign
of King Charles the Second (which would amount to an incredible Sum, if they
were all in being) are almost totally vanished, having been Molten (as I
suppose) from time to time, either to make Vessels or Utensils, or to Export
for Lucre, or to Convert into Gold Coins of more Modern Stamps (in which last
Case the same Metal came to be Coined over and over again) it being evident
that we have now in England only the Pieces called Guineas, and Half-Guineas,
or few other of Gold Coins, as is before observed. And I think the like must
have been done with all the Hammered Silver Moneys that were made before the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, a very few only excepted; although the latter would
amount to many Millions, if they were all now in being. As to the Coins of that
Queen, and her Two immediate Successors (though they make the Bulk of our
present Cash) the Number of them must needs have been extremely diminished by
Melting, especially whilst they were weighty, and not much worn. But since the
Milled Money came into Play, because of its Intrinsic Weight and Worth, I
believe the Crime of Melting has been chiefly practiced upon that kind, which
has apparently reduced it to a small Quantity. Nevertheless, when both kinds
come to have the same Weight and Fineness, and to be Current at the same Price,
I think the one will not be more liable to this Mischief than the other; and I
hope both will be Secured against the same, when the Silver in the Coin will
fetch as much as the Silver in the Bullion.

Secondly, The Quantities of Silver Coins Clipped and Vnclipt that may be
reasonably thought or imagined to Remain in the Kingdom at this day, cannot
with any certainty be Computed. I know several Conjectures have been made
thereof, very different, and (as I think) without any Grounds at all, and I
confess my self to have none but such as follow.

First, To Compute all the Silver Moneys Coined in the Three Reigns of Queen
Elizabeth, James the First, and Charles the First. Secondly, To Guess how much
thereof may have been Molten or Lost. Thirdly, To Substract the Latter from the
Whole. And, Fourthly, To the Difference to add something for the small
Remainder, as well of Moneys Coined before the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, as of
those Coined since the Reign of Charles the First.
The Silver Moneys Coined in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (as I am informed by
the Master of the Mint) did Amount to Four Millions Six hundred thousand
Pounds: But by a Copy which I took some time since from the Archives at
Westminster, of an Account which was Compiled by Archbishop Williams, which I
take to be more exact (which Archives, with the Choice Collections thereof are
since Burnt) all the Silver Sterling Moneys Coined in the Reign of the said
Queen, (excluding some base Irish Moneys that were then made) did Amount to --
l. s. d. 4632932. 3. 2


The Silver Moneys Coined in the Reign of King James the First (as the Officers
of the Mint inform me) cannot be known at their Office, because their Memorials
thereof are either Imperfect or Lost: But by the abovesaid Copy I find, That in
the first Twelve Years of his Reign there was Coined in Silver Sterling Moneys,
One Million Five hundred fifty eight thousand and Fourteen Pounds, Nine
Shillings and Nine Pence; and I find, That in the last Seven years of his
Reign, the Silver Moneys Coined did amount to One hundred and two thousand Nine
hundred and eighty one Pounds Nine Shillings and eight Pence, and then adding
39004 l. o s. 7 d. by estimation for the Two or Three intermediate years of the
same Reign, the whole of the Silver Sterling Money Coined by King James the
First, was -- l. 1700000.


And it appears by an Account from the Officers of the Mint, That there was
Coined of Silver Moneys in the Reign of King Charles the First- l. s. d.
8776544. 10. 3.
l. s. d. In all 15109476. 13. 5


Now considering how far this Sum is to be abated.

First, By the want of the Crowns, Half-Crowns, Groats, Quarter-Shillings,
Half-Groats, Three-half-peny Pieces, Three-farthing Pieces, and Halfpence of
Queen Elizabeth, which are wholly sunk.

Secondly, By the Diminution of the Number of the Shillings, and Six-pences of
the same Queen, many of which may be supposed to be Melted down, Re-Coined, or
Lost.

Thirdly, By the Loss of the Crowns, Groats, Two-Pences, Pence, and Halfpence
of James the First, and Charles the First, which seem to be quite gone, and by
the Melting, Re-Coining, or Loss of many (if not most) of the Half-Crowns,
Shillings, and Six-Pences of those Two Kings, one can hardly believe there is
now in being, of the Coins of the said Three Reigns, above One Third Part,
which Amounts to Five Millions Thirty six thousand Four hundred ninety two
Pounds; to which if there be added Five hundred Sixty three thousand Five
hundred and eight Pounds more, for the Unmelted Silver Coins of Charles the
Second, James the Second, King William and Queen Mary, and for the small
Quantities which remain of those which were made before the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; then the whole of the Silver Sterling Coins Clipped and Unclipt,
Hoarded and Current now in England, will be Computed at Five Millions and Six
hundred thousand Pounds. And if it be Granted that Four Millions of this Sum
consists of Pieces that are Diminished, some more, some less, by Clipping, then
it will follow, that there remains in the Kingdom about One Million, and Six
hundred thousand Pounds of Heavy Money, a great part of which is supposed to
lie in Hoards, and the rest Current chiefly in the Counties most remote from
London.

Thirdly, I am to Compute, as well as I can, How far the Clipped Pieces, now in
being, may have been Diminished in their Weight. In reference to which, your
Lordships may be pleased to be Reminded, That when the Earl of Rochester was
Lord Treasurer, several Good Orders were Established by him for the Exchequer;
One of which was, to have all the Bags of Money there Received to be Weighed.
And I have Extracted from the Books of One of the Tellers, the Weight of Five
hundred seventy two Bags of One hundred Pound each, which were brought to the
Receipt promiscuously, in the Months of May, June and July last. Now, whereas
the Weight of One hundred Pounds Sterling in Silver Moneys, according to the
Standard of the Mint, ought to be Thirty two Pounds, Three Ounces, One Penny
Weight, and Twenty two Grains Troy, and consequently the said Bags, containing
Fifty seven thousand Two hundred Pounds by Tale, See the Annexed Account for
this.
ought to have Weighed Two hundred twenty one thousand Four hundred and
Eighteen Ounces, Sixteen Penny Weight, and Eight Grains Troy: It was found that
the said Fifty seven thousand and Two hundred Pounds by Tale (comprizing some
Weighty Pieces, though few) Weighed only One hundred and thirteen thousand
Seven hundred and Seventy one Ounces and Five Penny Weight Troy. So that if all
the said Sum of Fifty seven thousand and Two hundred Pounds by Tale were good
Silver, yet it was Deficient in Weight, One hundred and seven thousand six
hundred forty seven Ounces, Eleven Penny Weight and Eight Grains Troy; from
whence I infer,

First, That the Moneys commonly Current are Diminished near one Half, to wit,
in a Proportion something greater than that of Ten to Twenty two.

Secondly, That going by the Medium of the said Number of Bags, and making but
a very small Allowance for the Unclipt Pieces in the said Bags, and for the
Difference of Money brought to the Exchequer, and that which passes amongst the
Common People (the former being in most Payments the best of the Clipped Moneys)
every one must be convinced, That if all the Clipped Pieces of Silver Moneys in
England could be weighed together, they would be found Deficient a full Half of
their Standard Weight. Again,

Thirdly, If all the Pieces in England that are more or less Clipped, do Amount
by Tale to Four Millions (as is before supposed) then I infer, That by
Re-Coining the same upon the Old Foot, it will make but Two Millions, and the
Loss would be as much: But by Re-Coining the same upon the Foot of Six
Shillings and Three Pence for the present Crown Piece, as is above proposed,
the same Quantity of Clipped Money will make Two Millions, and Five hundred
thousand Pounds, and the Loss will be Fifteen hundred thousand Pounds, to be
born either by Public Aid, or by the Particulars interested in the Clipped
Moneys, or by both.

The Third General Head Discusses this Question, Whether it be or be not
absolutely Necessary at this time to Re-establish the Coins.
IT will readily be Granted, That the Melting and New Fabricating the much
greater Part of all the Silver Moneys of the Realm (as the Clipped Pieces are)
would be a Work very improper to be Enterprized in the heat of an Important and
Expensive War; if the doing thereof were not indispensibly necessary, to render
effectual the very Ways and Means, which in Parliament may be Resolved upon, in
reference to Aids or Supplies for Carrying on of the same War, and to produce a
Species of Money that may be Useful and Serviceable for the Upholding of the
Commerce, and for answering not only of the Public, but also of all Private
Revenues, Rents, Debts, and other Occasions, which concern the very Existence
of the great Political Body.

It were enough for me upon this Occasion, to say, That the House of Commons
judged it necessary to have the Clipped Moneys Re-Coin'd, having Resolved
thereupon, after many long and mature Deliberations, in the last Session of
Parliament. But the Evils which for some time past have been growing upon us,
in respect of the Coins, being at length actually Arrived, and more sensibly
Felt, I shall take leave humbly to State the same according to the best of my
Understanding, and submit the Judgment thereof to Public Authority.

First, Because such of the Silver Coins as are usually Current, or offered in
Payments, are very Bad and Defective; the Common People (without any visible
Reason, other thanto avoid the Danger and Vexation of such Moneys) by almost an
Unanimous Consent and Agreement, do take Guineas at Thirty Shillings apiece,
little more or less, which Raises the Gold here (as has been observed) to a
much higher Price in Proportion than Silver in Bullion now goes at, or that
Silver in Coin will go for, when it shall be Raised to the Foot of Six
Shillings and Three Pence for the Crown Piece according to this Projection. And
this exorbitant Price of Gold here, has encouraged Foreign Merchants to Import
it upon us in great Quantities: And in Return for the same,

They either Export our Silver in Coin or Molten; which lying in a little Room,
the Exportation thereof cannot easily be Prevented. Or,

Secondly, They Buy our Native Commodities (the Interruption of the Navigation,
not Allowing us such an Overplus of Goods, brought from our Colonies in
America, and other Foreign Parts, wherewith England in times of Peace could at
least Balance its Trade with its Neighbors.) Or,

Thirdly, They draw back the aforesaid Value of their Gold, by Bills of
Exchange or Remittances. In every one of these Cases, they make an unreasonable
Profit by their Gold, which must needs, in a little time, Exhaust a great part
of the Real Stock and Wealth of our Nation; But particularly in the first Case,
the Bullion or Coin in Silver that is Exported, is really worth much more than
the Gold Imported for it; and the Difference becomes a Dead Loss to England,
which Labors too much already under the Scarcity of Silver, and will
inevitably find it much Scarcer and Dearer than it is, if this Golden Trade
continues. In the Second Case, they can Furnish Foreign Markets with our Native
Commodities, which would be carried thither by our own Merchants, who want the
aforesaid Profit of the Gold, to enable them to Buy those Goods as Dear, and
Sell them as Cheap as the Foreigners can. And in the Third Case, by the great
occasion they have for Bills to draw back the Value of their Gold to the Places
from whence it came, they have Contributed in a great measure toward Lowering
the Exchange to the Low Countries; which from diverse Causes (whereof the
Importing of Guineas is none of the least) is sunk so very Low, that the
Public loses about Four Shillings in the Pound upon all the Moneys Remitted
thither; which Loss Amounts to a great deal in the Charge of the Army. And the
Exchange to Hamburgh and the East Countries for all Naval Stores, and other
Goods, is Lower, and to all Places in the Mediterranean (where our Fleet is at
present) the Exchange is yet more to our Prejudice. And in regard the aforesaid
excessive Advance of the Guinea Pieces, at least a great part thereof, can be
Attributed (as has been before observed) to nothing else but the Baseness and
Defects of the White Moneys, there is no Prospect of Reducing the Gold to a
more moderate or reasonable Price, by any means consistent with the Interest of
the Nation, other than the Amendment, and Restoring of the Silver Coins.

Secondly, In the present Condition and Circumstances of our Silver Money, this
Nation and the Trade and Dealings thereof, are in a great measure Deprived of
the Use and Benefit of the whole Species now in being, as well the Heavy Pieces
as the Light; the former of which (especially since the Parliament in the last
Session appeared desirous of making a Reformation or Amendment) have been for
the most part Hoarded by the particular Persons Possessed thereof, in prospect
that the Silver contained in those Weighty Pieces will be Raised to a Value
suitable to the Bullion thereof if Melted, which they may think will turn more
to their Profit than Lending at Interest, Purchasing or Trading therewith in
the mean time; or at least they may think these Hoarded Moneys (when the
Mischiefs of Corrupting and Diminishing their Coins, come to their last
Extremity) will particularly stand those Men in stead that have them; however
it be, its certain the Weighty Moneys at present do very little appear Abroad,
and it is not likely they will soon be brought to Light, without Raising their
Value, and Re-Coining the Clipped Moneys; and as for the latter, a great Part
thereof, when offered in Payments, is utterly Refused, and will not Pass, and
consequently does not serve to the end or Purpose for which it was made: so
that both the one and the other (for the greatest Part) are become as it were a
Dead Cash in the Kingdom.

Thirdly, In Consequence of the Vitiating, Diminishing and Counterfeiting of
the Current Moneys, it is come to pass, That great Contentions do daily arise
amonst the King's Subjects, in Fairs, Markets, Shops, and other Places
throughout the Kingdom, about the Passing or Refusing of the same, to the
disturbance of the Public Peace; many Bargains, Doings and Dealings are
totally prevented and laid aside, which lessens Trade in general; Persons
before they conclude in any Bargains, are necessitated first to settle the
Price or Value of the very Money they are to Receive for their Goods; and if it
be in Guineas at a High Rate, or in Clipped or Bad Moneys, they set the Price of
their Goods accordingly, which I think has been One great cause of Raising the
Price not only of Merchandises, but even of Edibles, and other Necessaries for
the sustenance of the Common People, to their great Grievance. The Receipt and
Collection of the Public Taxes, Revenues and Debts (as well as of Private Men's
Incomes) are extremely retarded, to the Damage of His Majesty, and to the
Prejudice of a Vigorous Prosecution of the War; so that there were never (at
least since I had the Honor to serve the Crown) so many Bonds Given, and lying
Unsatisfied at the Custom-Houses, or so vast an Arrear of Excises. And as for
the Land Tax, your Lordships know how far it is affected with the Bad Moneys, by
the many Complaints transmitted daily from the Commissioners, Receivers and
Collectors thereof, and by Comparing the Sum brought into the Exchequer this
Year, with the timely Payments of the like Tax in preceding Years. In fine, the
Mischiefs of the Bad Money (too many to enumerate) are so sensibly Felt, that
(I humbly conceive) they are sufficient to Confute all the Arguments against
the Re-Coining the same in this time of War, and even the Objections against
Raising the Silver in our Coin to the Proposed Value. Which Arguments and
Objections (how Plausible or Weighty soever they have been heretofore) have not
at this time sufficient Ground or Reason to Support them, especially when the
doing of these things is not Projected for the particular Gain or Profit of the
Crown ( which formerly Received a Duty of Seigniorage upon Coining or
Re-coining of Moneys) but for the Common Good and Utility of the King and his
People. But whether all the Evils and Mischiefs before mentioned, and the
Increase thereof, which the Nation must undergo, till a Remedy be Applied, do
infer, or are tantamount to an absolute Necessity for the present Enterprising
the Work aforesaid, must be and is with all Humility submitted to a better
Judgment than my own.

The Fourth General Head is to propose the Means that must be Obtained, and the
proper Methods to be used in and for the Re-establishment of the Silver Coins.
IN Case His Majesty (taking into His Princely Consideration the great
Inconveniences which the Nation Labors under by the badness of the Moneys)
shall be pleased to Direct, That all such Silver Coins called Crowns,
Half-Crowns, Shillings or Testers, as have been formerly Coined in the Royal
Mint, or Mints of England with the Hammer, and are more or less Diminished by
Clipping, Rounding, Filing, or any other Artifice, shall be Melted and
Re-Coin'd, my humble Opinion is, That the General Cautions following are to be
Observed;

First, That the Work ought to be Performed and Finished in as little time as
may be, not only to Obviate a further Damage by Clipping in the interim, but
also that the needful Advantages of the New Money may be the sooner Obtained
for the Service of the Nation.

Secondly, That the loss, or the greatest part of it ought to be born by the
Public, and not by Particulars, who being very Numerous will be prejudiced
against a Reformation for the Public Benefit, if it is to be Effected at the
Cost of particular Men, and who have great hopes of being Indemnified by the
Votes Passed in their favor in the last Session of Parliament.

Thirdly, This whole Affair must be rendered Easy, and very Intelligible to
the Common People, so that they must not be compelled to Travel very far when
they part with their Clipped Money, or when they receive back the Value of it in
the New Coins; and in the mean time they must be furnished with a Useful and
Transferrable Credit that must take Place in Course of Repayment, as fast as
the New Coins can be made.

Fourthly, That no room must be left for Jealousy. And therefore all the Clipped
Moneys in the several Counties, far or near, are not to be brought entirely to
London, to be Minted there; which would leave all the Countries very bare, and
create great Suspicions till its Return.

Fifthly, That as soon as the King's Officers begin to take in the Clipped
Moneys, or presently after, the Course for Repaying the Stated Value thereof in
New Moneys ought to begin also, and to be Carried on by the New Moneys, which
shall be Coined from the Silver of the Old, so far as it will Extend; And that
an Aid be given in Parliament to Supply the residue, in such time and manner,
as that there be no Interruption or Intervals in the Course of Repayment, till
such times as the Registers for the Clipped Moneys to be brought in shall be
fully satisfied.

According to these General Propositions, and some other Requisites which have
Occurred to me, I have employed my Thoughts to Reduce this whole Affair into
Practice, and do humbly Offer to your Lordships Consideration the Particulars
following, as the Scope and Design of my Report: That is to say,

First, That an Aid be granted in Parliament, and strictly Appropriated for or
toward the making good of the Loss by the said Clipped Moneys, or so much
thereof as shall be thought Reasonable to be Defrayed by the Public, and the
incident Charges which shall be necessary in the Performance of this Service.
Which Aid, if it be Commensurate to the whole Loss, will, by Estimation, as
above, Amount to Fifteen hundred thousand Pounds; and if it be Resolved that
the Public shall bear but half the Loss, or any other part of it, then the Aid
(in the grant thereof) may be proportioned accordingly. And the said Aid is
humbly proposed to be either by a Land Tax of Twelve Pence in the Pound, or by
a yearly Sum to be Answered out of the continued Impositions upon Goods
imported, or some other certain Fond, to take Effect within a year to come at
the farthest.

Secondly, That all the New Moneys, whether they be Gold or Silver, shall in
the Coining thereof be made in Fineness or Purity, according to the present
Standard, that is to say, the Gold to be Twenty two Carats Fine and Two Carats
Allay: And the Silver Coins to be Eleven Ounces Two Penny Weight Fine, and
Eighteen Penny Weight Allay, for the Reasons above given.

Thirdly, That every Pound Weight Troy of such. Gold, shall be cut into Eighty
nine Half Guineas, or Forty four Guineas and an Half, or proportionably for
greater Pieces, as the same ought to be by the present Indenture of the Mint;
with a Remedy for the Master, of the Sixth Part of a Carat, in Case the Gold be
found too strong or too feeble in Weight, or in Fineness, or in both. And that
every Pound Weight Troy, of the New Silver Moneys, to be made as aforesaid, be
cut into such Numbers of Pieces as will correspond in Weight with the
Undimished Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings, Six-pences, Groats, Three-pences,
Two-pences and Pence, Coined by the late Indentures, except the Twelve Penny
Pieces, all which may be performed, as is above offered. And that the Master be
allowed a Remedy of Two Penny Weight in every Pound Weight Troy, of the Silver
Moneys, in case they be found too strong or too feeble in Weight, or in
Fineness, or in both.

Fourthly, That by Authority of Parliament, or by a Royal Proclamation to be
Grounded on an Act of Parliament, the Silver Crowns, Half-Crowns, Shillings and
Six-pences of the Lawful Coins of this Realm now in being, and not Diminished
by Clipping, Rounding, Filing, Washing, or other Artifice, be Publicly Cried
up, and Raised to the Foot of Seventy five Pence for the Crown, and
proportionably for the rest, as I have also proposed; and that the other small
Pieces of the Old Coins (which are few in number) go as they do at present. And
that the New Coins to be called the Scepire, or Unite, the Half-Scepire, or
Half-Vnite, the Testoon or Fifteen Penny Piece, the Shilling or Twelve Penny
Piece, the Half-Testoon, the Gross or Five Penny Piece, Quarter-Testoon, the
Half-Gross and Prime be made Current upon the same Foot, as I have also
proposed, Page 61, etc.

Fifthly, That Coin, as well as English Bullion, not exceeding a limited Sum
yearly, may be Exported for the Service of the present War by His Majesty's
Warrant and Command, and not otherwise; which will help to keep down the Price
of Silver.

Sixthly, That all the New Moneys be made by the Mill and the Press, and not by
the Hammer.

Seventhly, That all the present Silver Pieces called Crowns, Half-Crowns,
Shillings and Six-pences of the Hammered kind, which are Diminished by
Clipping, Rounding, Filing, Washing, or other Artifice, be Cried down, so as
not to be Current after a Day to be prefixed. And that no Person whatsoever
shall hereafter be obliged to accept in Legal Payment any Money whatsoever that
is already Clipped, or may hereafter be Clipped or Diminished; and that no Person
shall Tender or Receive any such Money in Payment under some small Penalty, to
be made easily Recoverable; the Passing, Selling, or Changing of such Clipped or
Diminished Moneys, in Order to the Re-Coining thereof, as is herein after
mentioned, only Excepted.

Eighthly, That no Crown Piece (of Old Hammered Money) shall be said or
alleged to be Clipped or Diminished, or be Refused as such in any Payments
whatsoever, if it hold Eighteen Penny Weight; and proportionable Weight shall
render the Half-Crowns, Shillings and Six-pences of the said Hammered kind to
be Current in all Payments; which seems necessary, because of the wearing of
the Old Pieces, though they are not Clipped.

Ninthly, That besides the Principal Mint within the Tower of London (where Six
Presses can be wrought at the same time) there be Settled and Established Nine
other Mints within England and Wales, to Work with Two Presses in each, Namely,
One at Newcastle upon Tyne, to serve principally for the Counties of Durham,
Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmerland: One at York to serve for the
Counties of York and Lancaster: One at Nottingham to serve for the Counties of
Nottingham, Lincoln, Derby and Leicester: One at Chester, to serve for
Cheshire, Staffordshire, Salop and North Wales: One at Hereford to serve for
the Counties of Hereford, Gloucester Worcester and South Wales: One at Exeter
to serve for Cornwall, Devon and Somerset: One at Salisbury to serve for the
Counties of Wilts, Dorset and Hantshire: One at Oxon, to serve for the Counties
of Oxon, Bucks, Warwick, and Berks: And One at Cambridge, to serve for Norfolk,
Suffolk, Huntingdon, Cambridge and Bedfordshire; and that at London will serve
for the rest. Nevertheless these several Mints are not intended to be so
Restrained but that a Man may carry his Money to any of them that lies most in
his way; whereby there may be Coined Weekly (as I am informed) about Fifty or
Sixty thousand Pounds easily, which will finish the whole Work in much less
than a Years time. And that the Dies, Presses and other Implements may be
providing with as much haste as is possible, so as to be all sit for Use by or
before Christmas next.

Tenthly, That the Warden, Master Worker, Comptroller, and Assay-Master of the
Mint do continue at the Tower, and take the immediate Care of the Work there:
And that they Substitute Fit and Skilful Persons as their Deputies (such as the
King, or the Lord Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time
being, shall approve of, and such as must be Answered for by their respective
Superiors) to Carry on the Works of the said Nine Mints in the Country; which
Substitutes shall be all Sworn, for the faithful Discharge of their respective
Trust; and that the Members of the Corporation of the Moneyers, and other
Ministers, Officers and Servants, be distributed accordingly, and small Private
Marks (if thought fit) may be made to distinguish the Money that shall be
Coined at the respective Mints.

Eleventhly, That the Charge of making every Pound Weight Troy of Silver
Moneys, which at present is One Shilling and Four Pence Halfpenny, be made more
Reasonable, now so much is to be Coined and Re-Coin'd.

Twelfthly, That at or near every Town or Place where there shall be a Distinct
Mint Established, as aforesaid, there shall be also Settled and Fixed an Office,
which shall be, and be called An Office of the Kings Change; and the Chief
Officer therein (to be Named by His Majesty, or the Lord Treasurer, or
Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being) shall be called The Kings
Changer; and that these Changers shall have Tellers or Substitutes under them.
And they, as well as their Substitutes, shall be Sworn for the Due and Just
Execution of their respective Trusts, with regard not only to the King, but
also to every Person that shall have to do with them in respect of their Places.

Thirteenthly, The said Officer called The Changer, with such Tellers or
Substitutes as shall be necessary, shall daily and every Day ( Sundays only
excepted) attend at the Public Office whereunto he or they shall be Assigned,
or at some other Market Town within the Counties of his District; and when he
is to attend at such other Market Town, he shall cause the same to be Publicly
Notified there, by Affixing a Paper in some open Place in the Market next
preceding; and at the said Public Office, or at such other Market Towns, as
aforesaid, the said Changer by himself, or by his Tellers or Substitutes, shall
Receive and Take in all such Clipped or Diminished Money as are beforementioned,
as any Person or Persons shall bring to him in order to be Recoin'd; and in
Performance of his Office or Duty, he or they shall be holden to Observe the
Rules following.

RULE I.
HE or they shall carefully View and Examine by the Sight every Piece or Parcel
of the said Moneys as shall be so brought in; and if he or they shall Observe
any Piece or Pieces, which shall seem to be so Weighty, as that by the Eighth
Proposition, the same ought to be Current upon the New Foot (of Six Shillings
and Three Pence for the Crown) abovementioned, he or they shall forthwith cause
the Weight thereof to be Tried in the Scale; and if he or they do thereby find,
that such respective Piece or Pieces are of such Weight, as that the same ought
to be Current upon the said New Foot, without being Melted down, the same shall
be immediately Marked (with some Impression) by a Hammer, and Redelivered to
the Bringer thereof to be Current at the Raised Value, intended as aforesaid.
The Marking is Designed chiefly to prevent his being troubled with it again at
the Office.

RULE II.
IF the Changer, or his Teller or Substitute, shall suspect any Piece or Pieces
of Money, brought in as aforesaid (either Alone or in a Sum) to be Counterfeit,
or to be such money as was not Originally Coined in the Royal mint of England,
that then, and in every such Case, he or they shall and may cause such
Suspicious Piece or Pieces (in the Presence of the Bringers) to be Divided by
Shears for that Purpose to be kept and used in the Office. And if upon Dividing
the same, it shall Appear by the Grain or the Touch, that such Piece or Pieces
are of the goodness of Sterling Silver, that then and in every such Case, he or
they shall retain such Silver (as if it were not divided) in order to be
Recoin'd. But if upon such Division, the Silver shall appear to be worse than
the Goodness of Sterling, every Piece so divided shall be delivered back to the
Bringer thereof, who in that case must be contented with his own again, in such
a Condition that it will not serve to Defraud any Body else.

RULE III.
AS to all the said Clipped or Diminished Moneys, which shall consist of the Old
Crown, holding any Weight less than Eighteen Penny Weight; the Half-Crown
holding any Weight less than Nine Penny Weight; the Old Shilling holding any
Weight less than Three Penny Weight, and Sixth Tenth Parts of a Penny Weight; and
the Old Tester or Sixpence holding any Weight less than One Penny Weight, and
Eight Tenth Parts of a Penny Weight, which shall be so brought in to be Melted
down and Recoined; whereupon the loss abovementioned is to be Born either by
the State or by particular Persons, or Both; It is not certain at present, how
much of the said Loss, by the Resolution of the Parliament, shall fall upon the
one or the other. Neverthelss, for the Explanation of this Project, and to show
how far it is practicable, one may (as I humbly Conceive) Assume any certain
Part of this Loss, to be born by the Public, as if it were Resolved. And
Considering that One hundred Pounds by Tale of all these Clipped or Diminished
Moneys, if they were in One Heap, would not (by the Estimation which I have
made thereof under the Second General Head) hold above Sixteen Pound Weight
Troy, or thereabouts, one with another (which the King's Subjects dealing
therein, do also find by daily Experience) I do from thence infer, that if the
said Sixteen Pounds Weight Troy (which now Runs for One hundred Pounds by Tale)
be brought to the Changer, to be by him Received at Eight Shillings per Ounce;
then the said Eight Shillings per Ounce, when it comes to be Paid in the New
Money, will Amount to Seventy six Pound and Sixteen Shillings, which will
plainly cast about Half the Loss upon the State and the rest upon the Owner of
the Money (who will also find some Recompense in the Raised Value of his
Unclipt Moneys, if he has any such.) Therefore let Eight Shillings per Ounce in
the New Money be the Assumed or Stated Price, to be Computed by the Changer,
for all the real Silver which he shall find to be remaining in these Clipped
Moneys; which Method of making good part of the Loss to the Subject by Allowing
him a large Price for every Ounce of the real Silver remaining in his Clipped
Money, seems to me to be much more secure, and to be (in all respects) a better
way, than by Allowing him a Market Price only for the said Silver remaining,
and Contributing to his Loss in Proportion to the Deficiency or Silver Clipped
off; because in the latter Case it will be in his Power before he brings in his
Money to Clip it over again, and Reduce it so low, as that the deficient Weight
(if it were to be made good at the Charge of the Public) might be Twice,
Thrice, Four times, Five times, etc. as much as the real Silver brought in by
him would amount to. Whereas by this Third Rule, the danger of far- Clipping is
perfectly obviated, for no Man will Clip off Silver to Sell at Six Shillings
Five Pence an Ounce by the Market Price, when he may carry it to the King's
Change, and there Receive Eight Shillings per Ounce for it.

RULE IV.
WHereas the said Clipped Moneys, so to be brought in, do retain very different
and uncertain Weights and Sizes, as they are more or less Clipped; and it is
evident that a Clipped Crown, holding more than Twelve Penny Weight and Twelve
Grains, will produce more than Five Shillings in New Money if it should be
Changed by it self at Eight Shillings an Ounce; and an Half-Crown holding more
than Six Penny Weight and Six Grains, will (if it were Changed by it felf for
Eight Shillings an Ounce) produce more than Two Shillings and an Half in the
New Money; and the like may be said of the Old Shillings and Six-pences not
Clipped to a lower Degree in Proportion. I have Considered (although the
Government would not suffer in this Case) that Goldsmiths and other Subtle
Dealers in Money, will be very apt (if an effectual Remedy be not Provided
against their Artifices) to Cull out the Heaviest of their Clipped Pieces, and to
get such into their Hands from their Neighbors, to Change them at Eight
Shillings an Ounce, and thereby Gain for them more New Moneys in Tale than ever
they Amounted to in their old Denominations. And in regard One hundred Pounds
by Tale of the said Clipped Moneys, holding in Weight Two hundred and fifty
Ounces Troy, when it is Changed at the said Rate of Eight Shillings an Ounce,
will produce one hundred Pounds in Tale of the said New Moneys; therefore it is
Proposed, That every Person who brings any Clipped or Diminished Moneys to be
Changed, as aforesaid, shall be obliged to mingle so many of his lighter Pieces
with his heavier Pieces, as that upon the Draught or Weighing of them together,
they may not at the said Rate of Eight Shillings an Ounce fetch more of the New
Moneys in Tale than the said Clipped Money was Coined for in its Old
Denominations, that is to say, One hundred Pounds by Tale of such Clipped Moneys,
shall be so mingled with heavier and lighter Pieces as that it shall not exceed
Two hundred and fifty Ounces in Weight; and every other Sum of Clipped Money
shall be restrained to the same proportion: This will effectually prevent the
said trick of Culling, and create little or no Difficulty in Practice, because
amongst all the Clipped Moneys, those which might be converted to the Advantage
abovementioned are few in comparison of the rest, and a Sum consisting only of
such Weighty Pieces will not in probability ever be brought to the Changers by
any, but by Crafty or Designing Men. And by this device your Lordships may be
pleased to take notice that there will be no need of Weighing every individual
Piece, which (as I think) would render the Work endless and impossible. The
Changer, or his Substitute, when he shall have carefully Counted and Weighed
the said Clipped Money (observing the Caution aforesaid) shall compute the Value
to be paid for the same, at the said Rate of Eight Shillings an Ounce, and
enter into a Ledger Book to be kept for this purpose, the Day, Month and Year of
his Receipt thereof, the Name of the Person that brings it, the Sum of the
Clipped Money told, the exact Weight thereof, and the said Value which is to be
paid for the same in New Moneys in several Columes to be made for that purpose,
for which Value a Bill or Ticket is to be given, as is after-mentioned.

RULE V.
THe Changer, or his Substitute, shall from time to time deliver over the Clipped
or Diminished Moneys, by him or them received and taken in, as aforesaid, to
the proper Officer of the respective Mint for that District where it was
Received, in Order to be Re-Coined, taking Receipts for the same, by the Weight
and Tale of every Quantity so delivered over; which Receipts are to be the
Vouchers for the Account of the Changer, and the same, together with his Ledger,
will serve to Charge the Accounting Officer of the Mint.

RULE VI.
THat there shall be provided for every Changer a Book or Books, in which every
Leaf shall be divided into Two Columes by a Figure or Cipher to be Printed
therein, and shall be so drawn with Lines cutting the Cipher at Right Angles,
as that Six Pair of Bills may be contained in every Leaf, and so that every
Counter-part may be separated from its Principal Indent-wise, by cutting
through the Cipher or Flourish, all which Bills shall be numbered in Pairs
Arithmetically (1, 2, 3, etc.) as far as there shall be occasion, and there
shall be Printed thereupon the Name of the Place (where it is at last to be
satisfied) and other Words to this Effect:

No. 1. Nottingham. This Bill Intitles the Bearer to the Sum of to be paid with
Interest, after the Rate of Five Pounds per Centum per Annum out of the Fond
Settled by Parliament for Satisfaction of the Register for Clipped or Diminished
Money kept at the Place aforesaid.

And the said Changer, or his Substitute, upon Adjusting (by the Third and
Fourth Rules aforesaid) the Value which is to be paid in New Money for any
Parcel of Clipped or Diminished Moneys brought in, as aforesaid, shall deliver to
the Party bringing the same, an Indented Note (to wit, one of those of the
Extreme Colume) cut out from the said Book, and Signed by himself for the said
Value, to be paid in Course as is hereafter mentioned, taking Care that the Sum
Expressed in the Note so delivered be also Written in Words at length in the
Counterpart remaining in the Book, which Book by this means will not only be
useful and ready in the City or Country to Cheque the Principal Bill, if there
should be occasion for so doing, but will also well serve for an Exact Register
(without making any other) to Guide and Govern the Payment of the Principal in
the due Course intended, and the just Computation and Payment of the Interest
upon every such Bill.

RULE VII.
THat no such Bill shall be given, or asked for any Sum less then Twenty
Shillings in Tale of the New Money; and if several Pieces be brought to the
Change for any Sum or Sums smaller then Twenty Shillings, several of them may
be joined in One Bill, which may be taken in such Name as the Owners of the
Money shall desire; and if they cannot agree, it may be in the Name of the
Mayor, Bailiff, or other Chief Magistrate of the Place or (if there be no
Magistrate) in the Name of the Minister of the Parish, in Trust for the several
Owners of such small Sums.

The Seven Rules before going concern the Duty and Office of the Changer only.

Fourteenthly, That all the Silver which will arise from the said Clipped or
Diminished Moneys, or from the Plate of the Vintners and Victuallers, or that
shall be brought to be Coined by the Merchants, or by any other means, shall be
Coined into Moneys, according to these Propositions. In the doing whereof the
Chief Officers of the Mint, and all their Substitutes, Officers and Servants
shall be subject to the same, or the like Constitutions and Orders touching
Assaying, Melting, Refining, Trying, Charging, Discharging, or any Matters or
Things relating to the Fabrication of these Moneys as are already Established
for Moneys made at the Tower of London: And that the respective Substitutes
shall be Accountable to their respective Superiors, and that the Superior
Officers shall be answerable to the King, as now they are.

Fifteenthly, That the aforesaid Bills for the Values of the Clipped or Diminisht
Moneys shall be payable to the respective Bearers, who shall show forth, and
bring in the same Bills, whereby the Property thereof will be easily
Transferrable without Writing; and the Voluntary Acceptance thereof in payment
shall be a good Discharge, as if the Payment were made in Money. And the better
to Encourage the Currancy of these Bills, it is Proposed, That they bear an
Interest after the Rate of Five Pounds per Centum per Annum from the Date
thereof (which will plainly appear not only in the Bill it self, but in its
Counter-part, remaining in the Register Book) until its full Satisfaction. So
that it cannot be doubted, but these Bills being Charged upon so good a Fond,
in so near a Course, and made Profitable by the Interest, will be preferrable
to the Bills of any Banks, or Goldsmiths, or private Persons whatsoever, and
serve as well (to all intents) as so much Cash, whilst the Clipped Money is
Converting into Sterling Money; and for the sake of the Interest those that
have the Clipped Moneys will bring them in the more speedily.

Memorandum, As soon as the Bill becomes payable in Course, although the Owner
do not fetch his Money, it must be reserved for him, only the Interest must
cease from that time.

Sixteenthly, That the time for taking in of the Clipped Moneys be limited to Six
Months.

Seventeenthly, For Settling and Establishing an Ample and Sufficient Fond and
Security for the Payment and Satisfaction of the Principal and Interest, to be
contained in the aforesaid Bills, in such due Course and Order as that every
Person who parts with his Clipped or Diminished Moneys, may plainly see and be
satisfied, That he or his Assigns shall certainly receive the Value thereof;
and that the Course of the Payments will Commence in a very little time, and be
continued without any Interruption till the whole be completed (which will
very much influence this whole Affair) It is humbly proposed that it may be
Enacted as follows,

2ly, That it shall and may be lawful to or for any Person or Persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate to Advance or Lend at the Exchequer, in such Unclipt
Moneys as will be Current by this Project, any Sum or Sums of Money not
exceeding, Eight hundred thousand Pounds (which by Estimation will make good so
much of the loss as is to be born by the State, or Public, if the Clipped Moneys
are taken in at the said assumed Rate of Eight Shillings an Ounce) and such
Loans will consequently be accepted in Money at the Raised Value
abovementioned. And the same, together with Interest after the Rate of Seven
Pounds per Centum per Annum, may be Charged upon the aforesaid Aid, in the same
manner as Loans at the Exchequer have usually been Charged upon other Aids. And
that the Weighty Moneys that shall be so Lent, be also Appropriated, and be
made Auxiliary to the Paying off the said Bills in the several Registers
thereof, and be Applied, Distributed and Transmitted to and amongst the same,
by the Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Lord Treasurer for the time
being, in such Proporitons as they shall find to agree with the Sum, that shall
be Due and Owing from time to time upon those Registers respectively.

3dly, That any Merchant, or other Person whatsoever, having, or that shall
have any Silver Bullion whatsoever, whether it be Foreign Silver, Plate in
Vessels, the Silver of Counterfeit Moneys, or any other kind of Bullion
whatsoever, shall have liberty to carry the same to any of the said Mints, and
have it in his own Election, either to have it Coined into New Money, upon the
New Foot to his own use; in which case he must receive his Coined Money,
according to the present Course of the Mint; or else to declare that he will
Lend the Value of it at the Exchequer, as part of the said Sum, not exceeding
Eight hundred thousand Pounds. In which Case last mentioned, the Officers of
the Mint shall Certify to the Officers of the Exchequer the Quantity of
Sterling Silver, or Silver reduced to Sterling, that shall be so delivered to
them, and the Value thereof, after the Rate of Six Shillings and Five Pence
Halfpeny an Ounce, and the Officers of the Exchequer, upon producing these
Certificates shall give to the Party Tallies and Orders, Charged upon the said
Aid, for the Values so Certified, as if it were Lent in the said Current Money
at the Receipt, in part of the said Sum not exceeding Eight hundred thousand
Pounds, and for the Interest thereof. And in this Case the New Moneys which
shall proceed from the Bullion so Lent, shall be Appropriated, and be
Transmitted, and Distributed to and for the satisfaction of the said Registers,
in the like manner as the other Moneys which shall be lent, as aforesaid.

4thly, In Case the Silver of the Clipped Moneys, and such Loans, as aforesaid,
shall not suffice to clear all the Registers, then the Remainder must be paid
by the Overplus Moneys, to be Collected for the Aid it self; and in Default
thereof (which is not very likely) the last Deficiency ought to be paid out of
the then next Moneys to be Raised by Parliament.

Eighteenthly, That the present Coinage Duty may be Applied toward the Charge
of the said Mints in general.

Nineteenthly, That the Commissioners of the Treasury, or Lord Treasurer for
the time being, and such Person as the King shall Appoint to be the Under
Treasurer, or Supervisor for this purpose, shall have the Oversight, Rule,
Order and Government of this Affair, according to the Laws that shall be
Enacted for the same, and shall have power to Administer the Oaths, and take
sufficient Securities in the Kings Name, from all the Officers belonging to the
Change, and such of the Officers of the Mint as ought to give Security, and to
require Weekly, or other Accounts from the several Offices, and particularly to
cause the general Accounts of the said Changers, and of the Accompting Officers
of the Mint, to be Passed in the Exchequer, in such due Form as they ought to
be, and to allow such Salaries, and Incident Charges as shall be reasonable for
the performance of this Service, and also to allow the reasonable wast in the
Coinage.

Twentieth, That all Persons Concerned may have free Access to the several
Legers and Registers beforementioned; and no Fee or Charge shall be asked or
taken of them, for any Matter or Thing which is to be done by any Officer in
Execution of this Project.

Twentyfirst, That at the First Session of Parliament after Michaelmas, 1696.
the said Commissioners of the Treasury, or Lord Treasurer for the time being,
and the said Under-Treasurer or Supervisor General for this Affair, shall
deliver fairly Written to each of the Two Houses of Parliament, a True and
Exact Account of all the Clipped or Diminished Moneys which shall have been
brought in to be Recoin'd, by the Tale and Weight thereof, appearing in the
respective Offices of the Changers; and of all the New Moneys which shall have
been Coined in the said several Mints, distinguishing those proceeding from the
Silver of the Old Moneys from the Coins made of any other Bullion, and showing
particularly the Plate of the Retailers of Wine, Beer, and other Liquors, and
the Quantities of Money made thereof; also the Totals of the said Registers for
the Values of the Clipped Money, and the Discharging of the same, and how much
(if any part) shall then remain Unsatisfied, and the like Account shall be
Presented to His Majesty.

The Fifth General Head Considers what must Supply the Commerce, Pay Taxes,
etc. whilst the Clipped Money is under its New Fabrication.
THis Question is to be Answered, by Reminding your Lordships of several
Particulars which have already occured in this Report, with a small Addition,
as follows.

First, The Weighty Money (both Milled and Hammered) now Hoarded, will come
forth at a Raised Value, which (according to the above Estimation) may make One
Million and Six hundred thousand Pounds more or less; besides the Guineas and
Half Guineas, which are but too numerous at their present Rate.

Secondly, The Bills for the Clipped Money will be so Profitable and Certain, and
have such a quick Course of Payment, as aforesaid, that they will serve as so
much Running Cash; and in the coming forth, the Number of them will increase
from day to day; that from First to Last, they will by Estimation amount to
above Three Millions.

Thirdly, As those Bills are Paid off, the New Moneys Coined, with the Silver
of the Clipped, will come in their stead, the Fabrication whereof will begin
presently, and the Work will be Carried on with as much Expedition as can be
made by Ten Mints.

Fourthly, Importers of Bullion, and all others that have or can have any
Foreign or English Silver (even the Silver of Counterfeit Moneys) in their
Hands, will have a visible Encouragement to carry the same forthwith to the
Mint to be Coined.

Fifthly, It may be Enacted, That all Persons that Sell Wine, Strong Water,
Bear, Ale or other Liquors by Retail, shall by a Prefixed Day, bring their
Tankards, Cups, Dishes and other Plate to some or one of the Mints, to be
Coined into New Money, at the Rate of Six Shillings and Five Pence Halfpenny an
Ounce, under Pain of Forfeiture thereof, and that the New Money proceeding from
the same shall be Delivered to them according to the present Course of the Mint.

I have ( my Lords) in this difficult Matter Considered and Digested as many
things as were possible for me in so short a time; and I cannot forbear (before
I end) to Allege, that if the Coins are to be Amended and Established
according to these Propositions (which may be Rectified and Improved by Men of
greater Judgment and Skill) I cannot foresee that even whilst the Work is
Carrying on, there will Accrue such Public Disorder, Damage or Distress, as
the Nation Labors under before the Work is put in hand.

All which is most humbly submitted to Your Lordships great Wisdom and
Judgment. WILLIAM LOWNDES.
12 September. 1695
In quodam libro vocato nigro scripto tempore Regis Henrici Secundi, per
Gervasium Tilburiensem, de Necessariis Scaccarii, remanente in Curia Receptae
Scaccarii, inter alia sic continetur.
Cap. 21. Officium Militis Argentarii and Fusoris.
POrro Miles Argentarius ab inferiore Scaccario ad superius differt Loculum
examinandi Argenti, cujus supra meminimus, quem cum intulerit Signatum Sigillo
Vicecomitis, sub omnium oculis effundit in Scaccario xxiiii. Solidos quos de
Acervo Sumptos prius Signaverit, factaque Commixtione eosdem, ut ponderi
respondeant, mittit in unum Vasculum trutinae libram ponderis, in alterum vero
de Denariis quod Oportuit, Quo facto, numerat eosdem ut ex numero constare
possit, si legitimi ponderis sint, cujuscunque vero ponderis inventi fuerint,
seorsum mittit in Ciffum libram unam, hoc est xx. Solidos, ex quibus examen
fiat, reliquos vero xxiiii. Solidos mittit in Loculum. Item duo Denarii praeter
libram examinandam dantur Fusori, non de Fisco, sed de part Vicecomitis, quia
in praemium sui laboris.

Tunc eliguntur a Praesidente vel a Thesaurario, si ille absens fuerit, alii
duo Vic. ut simul cum Argentario, Necnon and Vicecomite, cujus examen faciendum
est, procedant ad Ignem, ubi Fusor ante praemonitus, praeparatis Necessariis,
eorum praestolatur adventum. Ibi iterum praesente Fusore and hiis qui a
Baronibus missi sunt, diligenter computantur, and Fusori traduntur. Quos ille
Suspiciens manu propria numerat, and sic disponit eos in Vasculum ignitorum
Cinerum quod in Furnace est. Tunc igitur Artis Fusoriae lege servata, redigit
eos in Massam, constans and emundans Argentum: Caeterum cavendum est ei, ne
citra perfectionem subsistat, vel importunis aestuationibus vexet illud atque
consumat. Illud propter Regis, hoc propter Vicecomitis Iacturam, set Modis
omnibus provideat and quanta procuret industria ut non vexetur, set ad purum
tantum excoquatur, hoc autem ipsum providere dicunt hii qui ad idem missi sunt
a Majoribus. Facto igitur examine defert illud Argentarius ad Barons,
Comitantibus illis, and tunc in omnium Oculis ponderat illud cum libra
praedicta ponderis, supplet autem mox quod ignis consumpsit, appositis denariis
ejusdem loculi, donec aequilibriter se habeat examen cum pondere. Tunc
inscribitur idem examen desuper ducta Creta hiis verbis, Everwicscir, libra
arsit tot vel tot denarios, and tunc illud Essaium dicitur. Non enim
inscribitur nisi praeconcessio quod sic stare debeat. Quod si Vicecomes, cujus
est, Calumpniatus fuerit, illud quasi plus justo consumptum fuerit ignis
scilicet exaestuatione vel plumbi infusione, vel and Fusor ipse, qualibet
Occasion defecisse fateatur examen, iterum numerentur xx. Solidos qui residui
sunt in loculo praedicto, coram Baronibus sicut demonstratum est, and eadem
ratione Servata, fiat examen. Hinc igitur constare potest, qua consideratione
de acervo magno propositae pecuniae xliiii. Solidos seorsum ab initio mittantur
in Loculum, apposito Vicecomitis Sigillo. Notandum vero est, quod Fusor duos
percipit denarios pro Examine, sicut diximus. Quod si quovis Casu aliud
faceret, and si tertio examinaverit, non percipiet quicquam, set contentus erit
semel susceptis duobus.

Discipulus. Miror a tantis tantam adhiberi diligentiam in unius librae
examinatione, cum nec magnus ex ea quaestus nec multa jactura proveniat.

Magist. Non propter hanc tantum fiunt haec, set propter omnes illas quae ab
eodem Vicecomite sub eodem nomine firm simul cum hac persolvuntur. Quantam
enim ab hac libra per ignem purgatorium decidit, tantundem ex singulis aliis
libris Noverit Vice-comes de summa sua substrahendum, ut si centum libras
numeratas solverit, and libra examinis iii. denarii exciderint, Non computentur
ei nisi nonaginta quinque.

A Computation of the Common Weight of a Hundred Pounds by Tale, in Ordinary
Silver Money at this Day, taken from a Medium of the Bags, Weighed at the
Receipt of Exchequer, in May, June and July last.

Memorandum, The Weight of One hundred Pounds by Tale in Silver Moneys,
according to the Standard of the Mint, ought to be Thirty two Pounds Three
Ounces, One Penny Weight and Twenty two Grains Troy.
No. Bags What they ought to Weigh. Weight at the Exchequer. Deficiency. oz.
dw. gr. oz. dw. gr. oz. dw. gr. 40 15483 16 16 8095 5 0 7388 11 16 74 28645 1
20 14373 5 0 14271 16 2 133 51483 14 22 27318 0 0 24165 14 2 120 46451 10 0
23496 15 0 22954 15 0 105 40645 1 6 20899 15 0 19745 6 6 100 38709 11 16 19588
5 0 19121 6 16 572 221418 16 08 113771 05 0 107647 11 08

oz. dw. gr. The Medium of the Weight of each Hundred Pounds -- 198 18 00 fere.
The Medium of the Deficiency -- 188 03 21 387 01 22

FINIS.
THe Amendment of the Silver Coins, being looked upon as a Matter necessary to
be Performed, it is thought convenient that this Report should be Printed, to
the end that any Persons who have Considered an Affair of this Nature, may (if
they please) Communicate their Thoughts, for Rendering the Design here aimed at
more Perfect or Agreeable to the Public Service.


