Humane Life: OR, A SECOND PART OF THE ENQUIRY AFTER HAPPINESS.

By the AUTHOR of Practical Christianity.

LONDON, Printed for George Pawlet at the Bible in Chancery Lane, and Samuel
Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1690.

IMPRIMATUR,

Z. Isham R.P.D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris.

July 5. 1690.
THE CONTENTS.
THe INTRODUCTION. Page 1 SECT. I. Of the true Notion of Humane Life. CHAP. I.
Life a great blessing in it self, proves a great evil to some. And why?
Happiness perfect only in Heaven. 3 CHAP. II. Life, what in a Natural Sense,
what in a Moral? Life, Perfection and Enjoyment, inseparably united. More
particularly, Life consists not in Sloth, Sensuality, Worldliness,
Devilishness; but in the Regulation of all our Actions according to right
Reason. 8 CHAP. III. Inferences drawn from the former Chapter. First, To
cultivate our Reason. The use of which is more particularly insisted on with
respect to three things: that is, The employing our Faculties, the bearing
Evil, and enjoying Good. Secondly, To renounce every thing that opposes it, as
Fancy, Passion, Example, Custom. Thirdly, That it is possible to be happy in
every State. Fourthly, That a long Life is a great Blessing, considered either
in it self, or with respect to the Life to come. 25
SECT. II. Of the different kinds of Life. 40 CHAP. I. The Conveniences and
Inconveniences of the Active and Contemplative Life. The Active more necessary.
The Several Grounds on which men determine their Choice, that is, Interest,
Providence, Inclination; etc. p. 42 CHAP. II. Of the Civil Life, or the Active
Life of a Gentleman. Sect. 1. The Gentleman's Obligation to an Active Life,
from the consideration of what he owes to God, to his Country, to himself. The
Active Life not injurious to the Gentleman's Pre-eminence, Liberty, Pleasure.
Sect. 2. The Regulation of the Civil Life, i.e. The Knowledge and Virtues
necessary to this sort of Life. The constancy required throughout the whole
Course of the Gentleman's Life. Some Vacations from Business necessary, and to
what ends. 48
CHAP. III. Of the Trading or Negotiating Life. Sect. 1. Rules relating to
Success in Trade. First, That the Trader be Industrious. Secondly, that he be
not above his Profession. Sect. 2. Rules relating to his Religion. 1st. The
Trade must be a lawful one. 2ly, It must be managed with Justice, Truth, and
Charity. 3ly, It must not interfere with Religion. 4ly, The Trader ought to
propose to himself wise and rational Ends, such are a Competency for himself
and Family; the charitable Assistance of others; a timely retirement or retreat
from the bussel or distractions of too much Business. 97
CHAP. IV. Of a Contemplative Life. For whom this Chapter is designed. What
kind of Life is to be understood by a Contemplative one. Sect. 1. The Ends or
Reasons warranting the Choice of such a Life. First, Enjoyment. Secondly,
Self-Preservation from the Assaults of Temptation. Thirdly, The better serving
the the World. Fourthly, A more entire Dedication of ones self to God. Sect. 2.
The Conditions or Qualifications necessary to a Contemplative Life. 1. A
plentiful Fortune. 2. A peaceable and humble Disposition. 3. A good
Understanding. Sect. 3. The Regulation of a Contemplative Life, with respect,
1. To Time; 2. To Place; 3. To the Exercise or Employment of a retired Life.
The Conclusion, containing the Pleasure and Happiness of a Contemplative Life.
p. 125

SECT. III. Of the right husbanding Life. 166 CHAP. I. The usual Arts of
preventing or retarding the Decays of Nature, and lessening the Fears of Death
exploded, and better substituted in their room. Physic, instead of which
Courage and Contempt of Death; Paint, etc. instead of which the Beauties of the
Mind. Children, instead of which Good Works, and so forth. Surviving Honor not
wholly rejected, but a truer Immortality preferred. 168 CHAP. II. Of Lengthning
Life. Sect. 1. The fatality of the Period of Life refuted. And Objections from
Scripture, from Astrological Predictions, from Divine Prescience, answered. A
sort of Fate admitted. Sect. 2. Of the ways of prolonging Life. First,
Cheerfulness of Mind. Secondly, Health of Body. Thirdly, The Protection of God
and Man. Sect. 3. Objections against this last Assertion from such Texts as
assert the promiscuous Events of Things, and from the early Death sometimes of
the Righteous, Answered. p. 178
CHAP. III. Of improving Life, or living much in a little time. What is to be
understood by improving or exalting Life, and the Advantages of this Notion.
Three ways of improving Life. Sect. 1. By perfecting Nature; Man and Life mean
things, till Wisdom and Virtue stamp a value on them. This Particularly
exemplified with respect to Knowledge, and the due Regulations of the
Affections. Sect. 2. By beginning to live betimes, or at least immediately: No
Objection against becoming presently wise and happy, but the Difficulty of
becoming so. An Exhortation addressed, First, To the Young. Secondly, To those
advanced in Years. Closed with a Reflection on the Day of Judgment. Sect. 3. By
avoiding all those things that are injurious to Life, as Sloth, Impertinence,
Remisness, or Coldness in Religion; Levity and Inconstancy. Some other
Directions deferred to the following Treatise. 214


HUMANE LIFE: OR, A SECOND PART OF THE Enquiry after Happiness.
INTRODUCTION.
I Am not ignorant, that Dedications and Prefaces, if they have in them a
genius of Eloquence, if they sparkle with Wit and Fancy; if they be enriched
with Sense, and animated by moving and vital Language, are like graceful
Accesses, and beautiful Fronts to Buildings; which while they raise in the
Beholder a secret Delight, do prepossess him with favorable Opinions of them:
But this being only a Continuation of a former Treatise, and having little
Encouragement either from my Humor or Talents to any attempt of that kind, I
never suffer my self to be unnecessarily engaged in it, I will therefore in
this place only give a short Account of what I have performed in the first
Volume, and design in this: In the first Chapter I showed that Happiness was
neither so great and divine a possession as to be above the Ambition of Man,
nor so inconsiderable, as not to deserve it: And next that it was not to be
expected from Time or Chance, Fancy or Inclination; but from Reason and
Industry, Virtue and Religion. In the second, having first briefly stated the
Notion of Happiness, I endeavored to demonstrate the possibility of obtaining
it, and to rescue so important an Opinion from the Prejudices and Objections
that might stifle and oppress it. In the third, I just pointed out the Causes
of humane misery, or of unsuccessfulness in this Enquiry, and the Remedies of
it.

Having thus removed whatever might discourage or frustrate our Endeavors
after Happiness, I am now to proceed to a more strict and particular
Examination of the Nature of it, and the Ways and Methods that lead to it. In
which I am obliged, according to the General Design or Scheme laid down in the
former Volume, to treat of Life, Perfection, Indolence, and Fruition,
accordingly I here begin with Life, and dividing this Book into three Sections.
I will in the first, discourse of the true Notion of Humane Life. In the
second, of the right Conduct or Regulation of the two different kinds of Life,
Active and Contemplative. In the third, of the right husbanding Humane Life, by
prolonging and improving it.

SECT. I.
Of the True Notion of Life.

CHAP. I.
Life a great Blessing in it self. Proves a great Evil to some. And why?
Happiness perfect only in Heaven.

THo Life render us capable of Pain as well as Pleasure, yet has it ever been
valued as the richest Blessing, the Love of it is the earliest and the
strongest Principle in us, it moves the Infant before he knows how to rate the
Pleasures of Life, or can apprehend any Evil in Death; it grows up to strength
and maturity in Man, and is the Sovereign Passion in him, to which all the rest
pay homage; Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his Life:
Age does very little diminish it, and Misery it self cannot extinguish it. Nor
does this Passion want the suffrage of the wisest and the greatest men, or the
approbation of God; for one chief design of Society and Government, of Laws and
Arms, is the protection of Life; and God, who best understood the bent of
Humane Nature, has proposed as the biggest Blessing and powerfullest Motive to
Obedience, a long Life (I examine not now what it farther prefigured) under the
Old Testament, and an eternal one under the New. And for all this there is
plain reason, for Life, if it be not, when rightly understood, Happiness it
self, yet is it surely the Foundation of it, and the Foundation in a Building,
if it be not as beautiful as upper Stories, yet is it ever as necessary. I
wonder not therefore that the Sentence of Death shook the Piety of Hezekiah,
and the Courage of Saul, so that the one wept sore, and the other fell to the
ground.

But to all this will it not be objected? Alas! How many are there, who all
their days are no more sensible of the good of Life, than of the Pleasures and
Repasts of a Dream, who being come to Threescore years and ten, that is to dye,
do not yet understand what it is to live; ah! how many? which is yet worse, to
whom Life is a burden, and yet Death a terror; who when they are to give back
the Breath of Life, have just reason to wish they had never received it; and to
curse the day that they were born. And do not Elijah, Job, Solomon, Jeremy,
Esdras, and many others, great and good men, talk of Life at a different rate
from what I here do, and represent it to us under another Notion, and quite
contrary Character? Better is the day of death than the day of ones birth. Let
the day perish wherein I was born, and the night wherein it was said there is a
man-child conceived. The Reflection of Esdras on the common misery of Mankind,
has as much weight and sense, as Job's on his own, has passion; For what profit
is it for men now in this present time to live in heaviness, and after death to
look for punishment? These and such like Passages we meet with every where,
which seem to give us no very taking Idea of Life. To all this I answer, It Is
with Life as with all other Blessings, the right use of it is our happiness;
the abuse of it our misery. There is nothing in the nature of the thing that
implies evil or trouble: nor has it any necessary and inevitable tendency to
it. We must not therefore estimate a Blessing by the mischief it occasions such
as pervert and abuse it; nor by the Complaints which Humane Frailty sometimes
forces from wise and good men in a melancholy fit, or finally by the
Reflections they sometimes make, not on the intrinsic worth, or natural
tendency of Life, but on the Evils which flow from the Corruption or
Deprivation of it. It Is true, when all is said, Heaven is the proper Region of
Happiness; there it dwells in its glory and majesty, in all its fullness and
excellence; but what then, because Perfection does properly belong to Heaven,
is there no Virtue upon Earth? because all things are in their maturity and
consummation there, shall we deny that there is any sweetness or beauty here:
Just so must we think of the happiness of this, in comparison of that of
another world; it is here in its Infancy, we do slumber, and are scarcely ever
fully awake; we see little, penetrate and comprehend less; and we move very
feebly and unsteadily; but all this while we grow up to strength, we advance
toward perfection, our Joints grow firmer, our Stature increases, our
Understanding dawns toward day, and our Affections are gradually animated with
a more generous and lasting heat; so that all this while this infant state of
Happiness is pleasant and promising, and every step in the whole progress
toward Perfection, presents us with fresh Beauties and Delights; but I know no
body so fantastic, as to despise the present Life because it is not equal to
that above; and he that thinks there is none above, sets the more value on
this, because he has nothing more or further to expect. I will not therefore
spend any more time in endeavoring to prove Life a valuable Blessing, but
rather proceed to show how every man may really make it such to himself, which
I think I cannot more compendiously do, than by stating the true Notion of
Humane Life; for as our Misery flows from the abuse, and our Happiness from the
right use of Life, so does the abuse from false, and the right use from true
Notions of it.

CHAP. II.
Life, what in a natural sense. What in a moral. Life, Perfection, and
Enjoyment, inseparably united. More particularly, Life consists not in Sloth,
Sensuality, Worldliness, Devilishness, but in the Regulation of all our Actions
according to right Reason.

LIFE may be considered either in a Natural or Moral Sense; in the former
acceptance, what it is, is an Enquiry very abstruse and intricate, like the
Egyptian Nile, tho its Streams be visible to every Eye, its Source or Fountain
is concealed; or like Grace, tho we feel its Energy, and taste its Fruits, yet
we cannot discover, and define its Essence; but to carry our discovery thus
far, is accuracy enough in Moral Discourses, whose end is not Speculation, but
Happiness.

Life then, whatever it be in the Fountain and Essence, as far as we can
discern it, is nothing else but that force and vigor which moves and acts the
Man; and to live, speaking in a natural sense, is to exert the Powers and
Faculties of Nature; according to which account of Life, it is capable of as
many Notions as are the different Offices it performs; it is Sense and Motion in
the Body, it is Perception and Fancy in the Imagination, it is Knowledge in the
Understanding, and Love and Hate, with all their Train or Retinue of Passions
in the Heart or Soul.

Now because all Morality consists in the right use of those Blessings which
our great and bountiful Author confers upon us, therefore in a moral sense, the
true Life of Man is nothing else, but the right use of our whole Nature, an
active employing it in its due Functions and Offices, a vigorous Exercise of
all our Powers and Faculties, in a manner suitable to the Dignity and Design,
to the Frame and Constitution of our Beings: To live then in a moral sense, is
to know and contemplate, to love and pursue that which is the true Good of Man,
this is the Life of the Understanding, Will, Affections, and of the whole Man;
and whatever acts of ours are not some way or other conversant about Truth and
Goodness, are not properly Acts of Humane Life, but Deviations from it.

And here I cannot choose but pause a little, to admire and magnify the
infinite Wisdom and Goodness of the Almighty Architect, who has contrived an
inseparable Connection and necessary Dependence between Life, Perfection, and
Fruition, every rational Act, every right Use or Exertion of our Natural Powers
and Faculties, as it is of the Essence of Moral Life; so does it contribute to
the Improvement and Perfection of our Beings, and to the Pleasure and Felicity
of our state; for Perfection is the Result of such repeated Acts and Pleasure
of our entertaining our selves with proper and agreeable Objects. Happy man! to
whom, to live, improve, and enjoy is the same thing; who cannot defeat God's
Goodness and his own Happiness, but by perverting his Nature, and depraving his
Faculties, but by making an ill use, or none at all, of the Favors and
Bounties of God.

If we examine this Notion of Life more closely, and distinctly, and resolve
this general Account of it, into several Particulars, we shall easily arrive at
a fuller and clearer Comprehension of it.

First, It Is evident from this Account of Life, that it does not consist in
Sloth, in the mere marriage or cohabitation of Soul and Body; in mere Duration
or Continuance in this World. Solomon indeed, out of a natural Abhorrence of
Death, tells us, Truly Light is sweet and a pleasant thing it is to behold the
Sun, Eccl. 2.7. Something it is, if we must call it pleasure, it is but a faint
and low one, such as all the Irrational Creatures, but Bats, and Owls, and
Moles are capable of, but, according to my Philosophy, it can never deserve the
Name of Life: He that possesses Vital Powers and Faculties, is in a Capacity of
Life, but he only that exerts them Lives. To live is not to spend or wast our
time, but to employ it: It Is a lamentable History of Life, when it can all be
summed up in the few Syllables of a Funeral Ring; he lived to, or rather as it
is wont to be expressed, he died such a day of the Month, such a year of his
Age; for indeed he lived not at all; Life is a mere Dream, not only on the
account of its shortness, but also of its Night and Lethargy, when stupid
Ignorance confines and dims the Prospect, and Sluggishness enfeebles all the
powers of the Mind, Vigor and Activity, Fruition and Enjoyment, make up Life;
without these Life is but an imperfect Embryo, a mingled twilight that never
will be Day; the Images, the slothful form of things are faint and obscure,
like Pictures drawn in watery Colors, and weak and imperfect strokes, and
vanish as easy as those half Sounds and imperfect Forms which we take in
between sleep and waking; all their Passions move drowsily and heavily, and all
their Entertainments have no more relish than abortive Fruit, which can never
be ripened into Sweetness or Beauty. When I have observed any one thus wasting
away a whole Life, without ever being once well awake in it, passing through
the World like a heedless Traveller, without making any Reflections or
Observations, without any Design or Purpose beseeming a Man; ah! thought I, is
this that Creature for which this great Theater the World was made? for which
it was so adorned and so enriched? Is this the Creature that is the Epitome of
the World? the top and glory of the visible Creation, a little inferior to
Angels, and allied to God; Is this Machine acted by a moving Flame, and by a
wise and immortal Spirit? Ah! how much is this poor useless stupid thing sunk
beneath the Dignity and Design of its Nature? How far short is it fallen of the
Glory to which God had destined it? Shall this contemplative thing ever be
admitted to Eternal Life, who has so wretchedly fooled away this Temporal one?
Or can Crowns and Kingdoms be reserved for one who has been so ill a Steward of
all these Talents God has committed to him? No surely, I could upon the first
thought imagine his sluggish Soul would vanish like those of Brutes, or as the
Stoics fancy, those of Fools; I could easily imagine that it could sleep, not
as some fancy all Souls do to the Resurrection, but to all Eternity. But upon
better consideration, I find this ignorant and incogitant Life, is not so
innocent as to deserve no worse a Fate; For is it a small Crime to live barren
and unfruitful, endowed with so many Talents? to frustrate the design of our
Creation, to choke and stifle all the Seeds of a Divine Life, and Perfection,
to quench the Grace and Spirit of God. In a word, is it a small Crime to be
false and perfidious to God, unjust and injurious to Man? No, it cannot be; and
therefore in the parable of our Savior, wherein the last Audit or Day of
Accounts is represented, the slothful and wicked Servant signify one and the
same thing, and must undergo one and the same Sentence.

Secondly, Life cannot consist in Sensuality, that is, in the mere caressing
our Senses, or the gratification of our Carnal Appetites. The Reasons of this
Assertion are evident from the general Notion of Life. For first, This is not
the Exercise of the whole Nature, but a part of it, and that the inferior and
ignobler too. Secondly, It is not an Employment suitable to the Dignity of our
Nature.

First, Sensuality imploys only the meaner part of us; St. Paul makes mention
of the outward and the inward man, and seems to make up the whole man of
Spirit, Soul, and Body; and some both Divines and Philosophers of no small
note, both Modern and Ancient, have taught that there are two distinct Souls in
man, a Sensitive and a Rational one; if this be so, the Sensualist, tho he seem
fond of Life, does foolishly contemn the better half of it; and as much a Slave
to Pleasure as he is, he chooses to drink only the Dregs, and lets the pure
Streams of sprightly and delicious Life pass by untasted; for if there be a
Sensitive and Rational Soul, there must be a Sensitive and a Rational Life too,
distinct and different from one another, and one as much elevated above the
other, as are the Principles they flow from. But whether this be so or no, does
not import much; for it is plain that Life, whatever it be, is like Seed, which
according to the different Soil it is sown in, produces Fruit more or less rich
and succulent, more or less luscious and beautiful; here it sprouts forth like
the seven poor and lean, there like the seven plump and rich Ears of Corn in
Pharaoh's Dream; and should it by way of fiction be supposed, that one and the
same Soul did communicate Life to Men, Beasts, and Vegetables; however, Life in
each would be equal in the dignity of its Original, it would vastly differ in
its Effects and Operations; so whether Life in Man flow from one or two
distinct Principles, it is evident that its Price and Dignity varies according
to the different Powers and Faculties which it moves and animates, and by
consequence that Life which displays it self in the acts of our Rational Part,
will be as different from that which consists in Sensation, and the Motions of
Bodily Appetites, as is the Light that glitters in a Diamond from that which
faintly imitates it in a Pebble; the more numerous and the more exquisite our
Faculties, the vaster is the Empire of Life, and the more delicate and charming
all its Functions and Operations: How evident is this in all the Organs and
Senses of the Body? Let Darkness invade the Eye, and Deafness the Ear, and then
within what narrow and scanty Bounds is the bodily Life reduced? How few and
ignoble are the Vital Acts and Operations of the Body? How vile and
contemptible are all the Fruits or Instances of a sensitive Life? If then there
be no Sense or Organ of the Body superfluous, can we think the rational Soul it
self can be so? If there be no Power, no Capacity of a sensitive Soul, by which
Life is not enlarged or enriched, must we not needs conclude, That to
extinguish the Immortal Spirit within us, and as it were, to discard all its
Powers and Faculties, must needs be to impoverish, mutilate, and stifle it;
since I have a Soul as well as Body, since the one is as capable of conversing
with God and Heaven, with Truth and Moral Goodness and Perfection, as the other
is of conversing with this World of visible Objects, I cannot but conclude,
That to be destitute of Knowledge, and Faith, of Hope and Love, is more
injurious to the true Life of Man, than to be Deaf or Blind; that Stupidity or
Lethargy in the Soul, such as renders it altogether incapable of rational
Pleasure, is as inconsistent with the true Life of Man, as Lethargy or a dead
Palsy in the Body can be; and to be excluded from Commerce with the invisible
World, is as fatal to it, as to be debarred the visible one. From all this it is
evident, that whether we consider Life with respect to its Excellence and
Dignity, or to its Enlargement and Extension, Sensuality is extremely injurious
to it in both respects, so far does it debase and contract it, that I may
boldly conclude, to place Life in Sensuality, is to renounce the much more
valuable and delightful part of it, to banish our selves the much better World,
and to rob our selves of a thousand Joys and Pleasures which we might reap from
the rational Powers and Faculties, that is, the noblest Capacities and
Endowments of our Nature. Tho this be abundantly enough to evince, that Life
consists not in Sensuality, yet this being of the highest Importance to Humane
Happiness, I will proceed to the second Argument against it, that is,

Secondly, It is not consonant to the Dignity of Humane Nature, or which is all
one, to the Design of our Beings, conspicuous in our Frame and Constitution,
who, that ever considered what Sensuality was, how narrow the extent of Sense,
how mean and brutish the Pleasure that terminates in it; what a Corruption and
Degeneracy it ends in; Who? I say, that has ever considered these, and a
thousand things more, can believe that Sensuality is an Employment worthy of
Man? Is this the Business of a vast and comprehensive mind? Is this consistent
with ambitious Desires of Immortality, with unquenchable Thirst of Truth, with
a Capacity of discovering Spiritual Excellencies and Moral Beauties and
Perfections? Was it for this we were endowed with Propensions to worship and
adore a Deity? What can be as much as fancied the use of Wisdom, Magnanimity,
Conscience, Sagacity, Caution, Fear, Foresight and anxious Enquiries into
future Things and Times, if Sensuality had been the only Employment designed
Man; how much more fit had we been formed for this end, if there had been in us
no Reason to check and control us, no Conscience that could fill us with
regret for the past, or fear for the Future; no Wisdom that could teach us that
there were any thing above us, nor greatness of mind that could reproach us for
stooping to any thing below us.

Thirdly, It Is almost superfluous here to add, That Life consists not in
Worldliness or Devilishness; as to the former of these, by which I mean the
Cares and Pursuits of the World, it is plain, that to employ our Time or
Faculties in this alone, is not to Live, but at best to provide for Life:
Necessity may sometimes subject us to the drudgery and slavery of the World,
but a voluntary Choice never should. I know no other difference between a mean
Fortune and a great one, than this, that the great one sets a Man above those
Cares and Toils, which the mean one forces him to submit to; that the one puts
the fortunate Man into the immediate possession of all the Means and
Instruments of Life, Improvement and Fruition, and of Leisure and Opportunity
to make use of them; but the latter obliges the less fortunate Man to purchase
these Advantages with Toil and Sweat, Solicitude and Care; it is therefore an
unpardonable wilfulness or blindness, whenever that Vassalage, which is the
Infelicity of the mean Man, is the choice of the rich and fortunate one: Nor is
it a more pardonable Error in any who continue the drudgey and care when the
necessity is over, and voluntarily suffer all the disadvantages of a narrow
Fortune, even when they have attained to a plentiful one, who never think it
time to begin to Live, or to enjoy the Success of their Cares and Diligence,
this is an Absurdity as gross as his, who after he has plowed and sowed, should
refuse to reap; or his, who having, with much cost and labor, furnished out a
plentiful Table, should not at length find in his heart to fall too and eat.

Life then consists not in the abundance of the things which a man possesses,
much less in the vexation or toil of acquiring, securing, or increasing them,
which is that I intend by Worldliness; but least of all can Life consist in
Devilishness, that is, Wrath, Strife, Revenge, Pride, and such like; this
cannot be called the Vigor and Activity, but Storm and Agony of our Nature;
this is a state wherein the Understanding is covered with a Darkness of Hell,
that is, Ignorance of Good and Evil; and the Passions are but Furies unchained,
and let loose.

Fourthly, Having thus, by resolving particularly concerning Life, that it
consists not either in Sloth or Sensuality, Worldliness or Devilishness,
pointed out those fatal Errors which mislead and seduce Men from the Paths of
Peace and Happiness; it is now time to show in the last place, what it is,
wherein Life does more immediately and particularly consist, that is, in a
vigorous and active Employment of the whole Man, according to the Rules and
Dictates of right Reason: When I make Reason the Director and Guide of Humane
Life, when I constitute it Dictator over all the Powers and Passions of Man, I
do no more mean to exclude the Aid of Revelation, and the Spirit of God, than
when I affirm the Eye to be the Guide of the Body, I intend to deny the
necessity of Light to good Eyes, or of Spectacles and Collyriums to dim or
disturbed ones: The Proposition thus guarded, will appear indisputable to any
who shall consider the frame and make of Man, that we are rational Creatures,
is a Truth never hitherto controverted; and that Reason is the Sovereign
Faculty in us, appears from the Universal Appeal of all Sides and all Sects to
its Tribunal. Not the virtuous and wise only, but the loose and the vicious
plead the Authority of Reason, in defense of their Choice and Actions; and in
all the numberless Disputes that are in the World, tho only one side can have
the warrant and countenance of Reason, yet all do pretend to it; so that tho
there be no Power or Authority which in reality be more frequently opposed and
violated, there is also none which is more unanimously owned, and universally
acknowledged: As therefore it is plain, from what has been discoursed before,
That Life consists not in vital Powers and Faculties, but in the Exercise and
Employment of them; so is it as plain, that in this we are not to follow the
Conduct of Fancy and Imagination, of Lust and Passion, but of Reason: This is
the right use of our Natural Gifts, which distinguishes Man from Beasts, and
Men from one another; the Hero from the Caitiff and Villain, the Philosopher
from the Fool, and the Saint from the Sinner: In this consists the Order and
Dignity of Humane Nature, in this the Beauty and Tranquillity of Humane Life;
and in this the inward Joy and Peace of the Mind of Man. This will be yet more
manifest to whosoever will take the pains to enquire what the Office of Reason
is; it is this which teaches us what rank we hold among the Creatures of God,
what station we fill in the World, what our Relations and Dependencies are,
what the Duty and what the Hopes, what the Benefit and what the Pleasure that
result from each: It Is this which prescribes all our Powers and Passions, their
Order, Place, and Work; It Is this which distinguishes Truth and Falsehood, Good
and Evil; It Is this which fills us with the Knowledge, and enflames us with the
Love of our Sovereign Happiness, and Judges of the Means and Ways that lead to
it; and finally, it is this which teaches us to set a true rate and value upon
all inferior things, in proportion to their tendency, either to promote or
obstruct our Sovereign Good: Happy therefore is that Life where Reason is the
Sovereign Arbitrator of all our Actions, and where the Imagination and
Passions, all the Powers of the Soul, are yet Servants and Instruments of
Reason: Happy this Life, for it can neither want Pleasure to entertain it, nor
Business to employ it; happy the Soul which thus lives, for it shall never want
Comfort to support it, Hopes to encourage it, nor Crowns to reward it; for as
it grows in Wisdom and Goodness, so must it in Favor with God and Man; and its
Peace and Tranquillity, its Joys and Expectations must receive a proportionable
Increase too.

CHAP. III.
Inferences drawn from the former Chapter. First, To cultivate our Reason. The
Use of which is more particularly insisted on with respect to three things,
that is, the employing our Faculties, the bearing Evil, and enjoying Good.
Secondly, To renounce every thing that opposes it as Fancy, Passion, Example,
Custom. Thirdly, That it is possible to be happy in every state. Fourthly, That
a long Life is a great Blessing, considered either in it self, or with respect
to the Life to come.

FRom the Notion of Life thus stated, it is evident, First, That our Business is
to Cultivate and Improve Reason, for this, as you have seen, is to be the Guide
and Superintendent of all our Powers and Faculties, and the Arbiter and Judge
of all our Actions; If the light that is in you be darkness, how great is that
darkness, Matthew. 6.23. Vigor and Activity, if Reason do not steer them, will
but prove mischievous and fatal to us; Diligence and Industry themselves will
only serve to corrupt our Nature, and embroyl our Life, every deviation from
Reason is a deviation from our true Perfection and Happiness; the Fool and the
Sinner do in the Language of the Scripture signify the same thing, and so do
Sin and Misery. This is the true Original of all those Mischiefs which infest
the World, the neglect or contempt of right Reason; It Is this which makes our
Complaints so numerous, and so bitter; It Is this that makes us so weak and soft
in Adversity, so restless and little satisfied even in Prosperity it self; It Is
this creates all those Disasters and Disappointments which make us often
quarrel at Providence, and curse our Fortune; The folly of man perverteth his
way, and his heart fretteth against God, Prove. 19.3. Well therefore did the
Wiseman advise, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get Wisdom,
and withal thy getting, get Understanding. The Necessity of this does easily
appear from the slightest Reflection upon the Work or Office of Reason, of
which I have given a brief and general Account before, much more from the use
of it, in three great Points; The Employing our Faculties, the Enjoyment of
Good, and the Bearing Evil.

First, The Employing, etc. the Soul of Man like a fertile Field, seems alike
apt to produce either Herbs or Weeds; the Faculties of it are capable of being
the Instruments of the greatest Evil or the greatest Good; the greatest Good,
if regulated and conducted by Reason; the greatest Evil, if blindly and rashly
led by any other Principle. What is the Imagination of a Fool, but a Shop of
Toys and Trinkets, not the Laboratory of a Philosopher, where a thousand vain
trifling and empty Ideas flutter confusedly up and down? What his Memory, but a
Receptacle and Sink of Sins and Follies, of mean and shameful Things and
Actions, not a Treasury of excellent Truths, laid up like Ammunition and
Provision for time both of Peace and War? What his Heart, but the Rendevouz of
a thousand mutinous violent and dishonorable Lusts which rend and tear him,
worse than the Devil in the Gospel the Man possessed? Nay, what is even Fancy
and Wit it self, if destitute of sound Judgment and true Reason, but I know not
what sort of flashes, which dazzle but do not guide, serve for amuzement rather
than nourishment or delight, and therefore the Author is very well paid, if he
be praised and starved, which is generally his Fate. In a word, neither
Business nor Diversion can have in them any thing truly useful or truly
pleasing, if they be not regulated and conducted by right Reason, and all the
Dispositions and Faculties of our Nature will be, but either lost upon
Fooleries, or abused to our Ruin.

Secondly, The use of Reason is conspicuous in the fruition of Good. Knowledge
is like Light shed upon the Face of the World, which discovers all its various
Beauties and wondrous Wealth, which while Darkness covered them, were as tho
they had not been; without Reason we shall not be able to discern nor value our
own Happiness, nor be sensible of our Blessings and Goods, even tho they crowd
and throng upon us; without this our very Enjoyments will prove fatal to our
Repose, and we shall meet Gall and Wormwood in the bottom of our Draughts of
Pleasure: For the turning away of the Simple shall slay them, and the
prosperity of Fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1.32. It requires no small
Philosophy, either to render Business pleasant, or Pleasure innocent, either to
discharge those Duties which a great Birth or eminent Station call men to, or
to employ that time which an ample Fortune makes them entirely Masters of. And
to husband a Life of Ease and Enjoyment to the best, and fill it with Virtue
and Honor; ah! how often have I seen the vigor of Nature dissolved by
Pleasure, the edge and fineness of its parts matted and blunted by sloth and
softness? How often have I seen men rendered mean and contemptible by Success
and Prosperity, for which they were not big enough, whereas had the Mind been
well cultivated and enriched with true Wisdom, Pleasure and Diversion
themselves had refined and recruited Nature, and Power, Honor, and Plenty, had
only placed worth and greatness in a better Light; this is true in its
proportion from the lowest to the highest station; it requires sense and reason
to govern and enjoy Prosperity; an obscure and narrow Fortune is most
convenient both to conceal and preserve a Fool; for Plenty and Power, Dignity
and Preferment do but expose him to scorn and danger, and it were well if the
poor Creature could perish or suffer alone; but the mischief is, like a false
and sandy Foundation, overthrows the Designs and Interests that are built upon
him, and miserably betrays the confidences reposed in him: But how great soever
the use of Reason be as to the Goods, it is no less in relation to the Evils of
this World; for,

Thirdly, Reason is the Pilot of Humane Life, and steers it steddily through
wild and tempestuous Seas, amidst the Rocks and Shelves of Lust and Fancy,
Fortune and Folly, Ignorance, Error, and a thousand Cheats and Impostures:
It Is this alone that enables Man to despise imaginary Evils, and vanquish real
ones; it arms the mind with true and lasting Magnanimity, furnishes it with
solid Comforts, and teaches it to extract Life and Health, Virtue and Wisdom,
out of the madness and mutability of Men and Fortune, like Antidotes and
Cordials out of things poisonous and baneful in themselves: It is not now to be
wondered at, after this Account, how imperfect soever it be, of the use of
Reason (which sufficiently shows how essential it is to the Being, the Ornament
and Felicity of Humane Life) if I have resolved it to be the great Business of
Man to improve and cultivate it, surely all the great Men of the World, and all
the inspired Ones, have been of my Opinion; for their chief, if not only
Design, ever was, either to obtain Wisdom themselves, or propagate it amongst
others; and it is evident that God himself has ever carried on this one Design
of advancing Wisdom amongst the Sons of Men; this is the pre-eminence of his
Laws above those of Men, that these restrain the Actions, but those enlighten
the Mind; these punish Offenses and Crimes, but those by informing the
Judgment, and strengthening the Reason of Man, prevent the commission of them,
and direct and instigate him to the practice of Virtue. This then is the great
Work that God and Man invite us to, that we should make daily progress and
proficiency in Knowledge and Understanding, That we should incline our ears to
Wisdom, and apply our hearts to Understanding, that we shall seek her as
Silver, and search for her as for hid Treasures: And this is that which our
Nature and State invite us too, for our Perfection and our Pleasure, our
Success and our Security, our Repose and Tranquillity, and in one word, our true
Happiness depend upon it.

Secondly, It easily follows from the right Notion of Life, that we are to bid
open Defiance to all those things which directly oppose, or secretly undermine
the Authority of Reason, or any way obstruct the free exercise of its Power and
Sovereignty; for it is to no purpose to travail and labor to advance Reason, if
afterward we refuse to be governed and conducted by it, Reason, if we do not
live by it, will serve only to increase our shame and guilt: St. Peter thinks
it better never to have known the way of Righteousness, than after the
Knowledge of it to turn from the holy Commandments delivered unto us, 2 Pet.
2.21. To stifle the Sparks of Reason by negligence and sloth, to choke the
Seeds of Wisdom and Perfection by a lazy or vicious education, is a great
Crime; but to desert and betray our Reason, grown up to some maturity, to hold
it in captivity and fetters, to defile and prostitute it, by compelling it to
serve and flatter abominable Passions; this sure must be a far greater degree
of wickedness and profaneness, and consequently must needs expose the Man to
the scorn or pity of the wise and rational part of Mankind, to the reproaches
and confusion of his own Conscience, and to the wrath and indignation of God;
or if none of these Mischiefs should attend the contempt and profanation of
Knowledge, yet there is one more of it self sufficient to make Man miserable,
it precipitates him into all the irregularities and wildnesses imaginable,
nothing being so insolent and ungovernable, so savage and untamable as those
Passions which are accustomed to overpower and master Reason, it is from all
this manifest, That whoever loves Life, and would experience it a real
Blessing, must with all his power set himself to remove and defeat, whatever
may hinder his ready and entire Submission to the Dictates of Reason. Now the
things which enfeeble the strength of our Reason, and baffle its Authority, are
such as these, Fancy, Passion, Example, Custom, these we must ever Combat, till
we have reduced them within their Bounds: Fancy surprises, Passion over-powers,
Custom and Example betray our Reason; we must therefore always oppose the
giddiness of Fancy, and the violence of Passion, and guard our Minds against
the insinuation of Custom and Example; and to do this well, to do it
successfully, is of greater importance than any work of our Secular Calling,
than any attendance upon Trade, or a Temporal Interest; this can only make us
great, but that can make us wise; this can make us rich, but that will make us
happy; this therefore must be the next great Business of Life, to assert the
Majesty and Sovereignty of Reason, and never suffer it to be held captive and
enthralled by any vicious Principle, or impotent Lust: Happy the Man who
succeeds in this! his Sincerity shall be to him as good as Infallibility; his
Conscience shall never reproach him, nor God condemn him; and tho he may not
always hit the next way, he shall never wholly miss the right way to Happiness,
therefore from this Notion of Life,

Thirdly, We may infer the possibility of Humane Happiness in every state; for
since to Live is but to act regularly, to use and employ our Powers and
Faculties rationally; and since Life, Perfection, and Fruition are one and the
same thing, or else inseparably and intimately united, it is evident that no
Circumstances can destroy our Happiness, unless they destroy our Reason; no
Condition can render us miserable, but that which can render it impossible for
us to act rationally, that which obstructs our attainment of knowledge, or our
liberty of acting conformable to it. But what Circumstances can these be? what
Condition can we fancy? wherein it shall be impossible for a Christian to know
his Sovereign Good, and pursue it, to learn his Duty, and to practice it;
wherein it shall be impossible for him to search and contemplate Truth, to love
and follow after Righteousness and Goodness, and to be meek and humble, modest
and magnanimous, just and charitable, pure and devout; wherein, in one word, it
shall be impossible for him to live by Faith, or which is the same thing in my
sense, by Reason. Solomon long since observed, That Wisdom uttered her voice in
the Streets, and in the meetings of the Highways. This is more eminently true
now, since the Reason of Mankind has been refined and defaecated by Revelation,
and true Philosophy has been diffused and published through the World; the
Fountains of Truth and Wisdom lie open to all who thirst after them, and God no
more denies any his Grace, than his Revelation. All which being so, it is
evident that as God has put it in the power of every Man to act rationally, so
has he put it in every Man's power to be happy; that Humane Happiness is not
precarious or dependant on Fortune, but our selves; for Life consists not in
the abundance of things which a Man possesses, but in the right use of them;
and better is a poor and wise Child, than an old and foolish King, Eccl. 4.13.
For the good estate of the Mind consists not in foreign but domestic
Possessions, not in the riches of Fortune, but of Grace and Virtue; and
Fruition cannot consist, either in the abuse of Temporal Things, or the
depravation of our Nature, but in the true Cultivation and Improvement of the
one, and the right use of the other.

Fourthly, From hence, Lastly, it easily appears on what account length of days
is a great Blessing, whether considered in it self, or with respect to a future
Life. First in its self; If Life did consist in earthiness, that is, the
scraping and raking together sums of Money, it is plain that Life must ebb and
flow with our Fortune, and when ever the Revolutions of Times or Trades should
put a stop to the career of our Success, and give a check to all our further
Hopes and Projects, we should have nothing else to do but to break off the
Thread of Life; for what use could we make of the remains of our miserable Days!
Or if Life did consist in Sensuality, we should have little reason to desire to
survive our youth and strength, and length of days would be rather a Burden
than a Blessing, for we should soon outlive our Pleasures, and shrink and
wither into dull, impotent, and contemptible things. But if my Notion of Life
be true, the Pleasures and Joys of it must increase and multiply with our
Years, since Reason ought day by day to advance to a more perfect Maturity, and
more absolute Authority: With the Ancient is wisdom, and in length of days
understanding, Job 12.12. And the paths of the Righteous are like the shining
light that shines more and more unto the perfect day. A thorough Experience of
the emptiness and uncertainty of this World with a longer and more intimate
acquaintance with another, should possess the Soul of this Man with a
magnanimity that nothing could shake, with a tranquillity that nothing could
disturb: The Custom of doing good, together with the Peace and Delight that
spring from the Reflections on it, should make the current of his Actions run
smooth and calm; his Observations on the Changes and Turns of Humane Affairs,
the Rise and Declension of Parties and Causes, the secret Springs and Wheels of
the Passions of the Mind of Man, together with all the various Arts of managing
them, do fill him with a sort of a Divine foreknowledge, and entertain him
with a wondrous prospect, and how happy must this Man be in himself? and how
much honored and revered by others, consulted as an Oracle, proposed as an
Original of Goodness, the absolute Master of this World, and the immediate Heir
of another. For which is the second thing.

Secondly, This is the only Notion of Life which can render it a Blessing in
reference to its influence upon another; none but Rational Pleasures, which are
the Antepast of Heaven, can enkindle our Thirst, or qualify us for the
Enjoyment of those above; nothing but the wise and rational Employments of our
Faculties can prepare us for a Heaven, or entitle us to it. Nay further, if
Life had not this influence upon another World, length of days would be an
Injury, not Advantage to us; it would only keep us from our Heaven, delay and
put off our Happiness; but now, when according to this Notion of Life, every
act of Life does perfect our Nature, enlarge our Capacity, and increase our
Appetite of Glory, when every day that is added to Life by the production of
some new fruit, does add new Stars to our Crowns of Righteousness, and new
Treasures to our heavenly Inheritance: It is evident that a long Life is a
great Blessing, not only on its own account, but also of that Life which we
expect hereafter. Blessed God! how conspicuous is thy Goodness in this whole
contrivance? how closely and inseparably have thou united Virtue and Happiness?
and how natural is the assent from a rational Life here, to a glorious Life
hereafter?

SECT. II.
Of the different Kinds of Life.

THEY who handle Morals nicely and abstractedly, seem to me to forget the
Nature of their Subject, which requires to be handled after its own way, that
is, practically, and if I might so say, grossly and corporeally; for the Mixture
and Variety, the Complication and Confusion, the Mutability and Inconstancy of
Humane Affairs and Actions, which are the Matter of Morals, are not subject to
Rules of Art and speculative Exactness: and therefore, tho I will follow the
received Division of Life into Active and Contemplative, as squaring exactly
with my Notion of it, yet I would not be understood to design under these Heads
to treat of all the various kinds or states of Life; I touch not the Military,
the Sacerdotal, the Scholastic Life, nor do I here use the words Active and
Contemplative strictly and nicely; but by the first I understand any sort of
public Life, and any sort of private one by the last; nor do I much concern my
self, whether the Life of a Trader or Artisan be logically reducible under the
one or the other; or whether it ought to constitute a distinct and particular
kind of Life by it self; but accomodating my self to the nature of things, and
pursuing my own design, without any scrupulous regard to words or forms, I will
discourse first of a Civil, secondly of a Trading or Negotiating, and thirdly
of a Private and Retired Life. Having first in a Preliminary Chapter said
something in general of the difference of an Active and Contemplative Life, and
the Reasons or Grounds which ought to prevail and determine Man in his Election
of the one or other.

CHAP. I.
The Conveniences and the Inconveniences of the Active and Contemplative Life.
The Active more necessary. The several Grounds on which men determine their
Choice, that is, Interest, Providence, Inclination, etc.

THE Felicity or Infelicity of Man depending not a little upon the choice he
makes of his Course of Life, it is worth the considering which of these two
Kinds, the Active or Contemplative, is to be preferred. If they be compared in
themselves, the Active seems to have more in it of Glory, but also more of
hazard; it seems more serviceable to others, but not so easy to a Man's self:
He therefore that would render each state perfect, and remove the
Inconveniences of each, must study how to relieve the toil, and obviate the
hazard of the Active, and to prevent the barrenness and ingloriousness of the
Contemplative Life.

But which soever of these two be the more excellent in it self, it is certain
the Active Life is the more necessary and indispensible to the well-being of
Humane Society. Such is the Nature of Mankind, that being liable to various
Necessities, it requires the various Relief of manifold Assistances, to which
every Man is bound to contribute his share: We have Minds that must be
cultivated, Bodies that must be provided for. The state either of War or Peace,
has its several wants, all which call for several Arts to wage the one, and
enrich and adorn the other; without these we should find no Defense in War, nor
Pleasure in Peace; without these Humane Life would grow wild and savage, and
Humane Nature would be uncultivated and unsociable; without these our Houses
had still been Caves and Grots, our Food Acorns and Water, our Clothing the
Spoils of Beasts, and the speculative Man would soon suffer those Necessities
which would convince him that he lived in a World, and in a Body, which
required more at his hands than mere musing and thinking, and would soon force
him to give over his Speculations for the more necessary Enquiries of Food and
Raiment: And if he could be content with that Provision which Nature, unaided
by Art and Industry, would yield him and the Beasts of the Field, yet would he
not be able to promise himself the continuance of this mighty Blessing; without
Laws and Arms, the undisciplined Rabble would disturb his Musings, Avarice and
Violence would invade his Walk, and drive him from his little Cottage and Brook
where he had chose his Retreat: For these, and a great many other Reasons, the
World has enrolled the Authors and Inventors of Laws and Arts amongst their
Gods, and has gratefully recorded the Memories of such as have been the
Benefactors of Mankind: And holy Writ it self has not been wanting to do Honor
to all such, for it has registered the Names of such as have excelled in any
thing beneficial to the Public.

But however this be, whatever be the Excellence and Advantage of an Active
above a Contemplative Life, either considered in it self, or with respect to
its serviceableness and usefulness to the World, it is certain that Men
generally speaking, are not determined to the one or to the other, by these
Considerations, but by such particular Circumstances as often render that which
is less excellent in it self, more fit and proper for them; thus sometimes
Education trains Men up (shall I say,) or condemns them to a particular kind of
Life, and the choice of others prevents the liberty of our own; sometimes the
solicitation of Friends carries us against the very bent and inclination of
Nature, and sometimes a lucky and unexpected Providence frees us from the
trouble of perplexed Deliberation, and leads us on in methods which Humane
Prudence could not have contrived; but most commonly of all, we take counsel
from the nature of our state, and the necessities of our Fortune; how much is
to be deferred to each of these, is a matter not easy to be decided; against
Necessity we cannot dispute, against the Invitations of Providence we ought
not, if we have but good proofs of the one or the other: But it is too too often
that weakness of Judgment or Courage makes us call that Necessity which is not,
and the flattery of our Hopes makes us interpret our Dreams or Fancies Divine
Auguries or Presages. As to Friends and Interest, I confess with the Ingenious
Sir Henry Wotton, that an expert Man does more easily get up into the Saddle by
the help of a Stirrup, than a much stronger by mere Force; yet it ought to be
considered, that the Man who is unequal to the Designs of his Friends, renders
their Patronage very difficult, but his own Life more. As to the bent or
inclination of Nature, so mutable are the Tempers, or at least the Fancies of
Mankind, that this is a Discovery not soon to be presumed upon, or else I
should as soon advise to give up ones self to this, as to any other Guide. The
truth is, the truest Measures in this Enquiry are to be taken from a thorough
knowledge of our selves, and of the different Courses of Life about which we
deliberate; but alas! they are but few whom a propitious Providence has left at
liberty to enter into this Deliberation, and fewer that are capable of forming
a true Resolution upon it: I am sure there is no Enquiry of Humane Life wherein
there is more heed of an Infallible Guide, and therefore I would counsel the
young to consult God in the first place, and next the most sage and experienced
they can find out, for they stand in a place where many ways meet, and if they
take the wrong, they will certainly wander far, and it may be never recover the
right. And as to others, who have struggled long against Wind and Tide, who
have floted long upon the Billows of Vulgar Errors of their own private Lusts
and Fancies, they will be happy, I think, if after long Experience of their
Folly, they make with all speed for Land, and take the first Harbor where they
can ride in safety.

CHAP. II.
Of the Civil Life, or the Active Life of a Gentleman.

Sect. 1. The Gentleman's Obligations to an Active Life, from the consideration
of what he owes to God, to his Country, to himself. The Active Life not
injurious to the Gentleman's Pre-eminence, Liberty, pleasure.

Sect. 2. The regulation of the Civil Life, i. e. the Knowledge and Virtues
necessary to this sort of Life. The Constancy required throughout the whole
Course of the Gentleman's Life. Some Vacations from Business necessary, and to
what ends.

BEfore I go about to set down those Rules which may render Men of Rank and
Fortune, beloved, eminent, and happy in their station, I think it necessary to
convince such of the Obligations they lie under to be some way or other useful
and serviceable to the World; for it is in vain to talk of the Knowledge and
Virtue necessary to support and adorn a Civil Life; to such as persuade
themselves that they are born only to follow their own Humor and Fancy; and
that it is the Prerogative of their Birth and Fortune to be idle, ignorant, and
loose.

Sect. 1. This then is the first thing I would fain make Gentlemen sensible of,
that they cannot without impardonable Guilt and Reproach, waste and fool away
their Life and Fortune; and I think this would not be very hard to effect, if
they would please to make but a very slight Reflection upon the Arguments I
here address to them. You owe more to God, and to your Country, not to add to
your selves, tho that be true too in a proper sense, than any others do. To God
-- to his Providence you owe it, that you were born to those Fortunes which
others toil for; that you are the Masters of that Time which others are forced
to devote to their Wants and Necessities, and that you are placed at first in
those advantageous heights which others climb to by slow and tedious steps;
your Guilt therefore is greater than the mean Man is capable of, while you
invade the Honor of that God, from whom alone you derive yours; while you
dethrone Him who has raised you, and employ all your Power and Treasure against
that Being from whom you received them; no Ingratitude, no Treachery or
Baseness like that of a Favorite and Confident. And as you owe to God, so do
you to your Country, more than other Men; you are they who should be the
Support and Ornament of it; you are placed in higher Orbs, not that like
Meteors your ominous blaze should be the gaze and terror of the Multitude, but
that like Stars you might lighten and beautify, animate and impregnate the
inferior World, for you, like them, should have an enlarged Prospect, a swift
and constant Motion, a bountiful and benign Influence: If your Virtues do not
more distinguish you from the Crowd than your Fortunes, you are exposed, not
honored, by the eminence of your Station, and you debauch and betray your poor
Country by your sin and folly, which your Example, your Wisdom, your Courage,
and your Bounty, with all those other great Virtues which Persons of your Rank
should shine with, should protect and enrich, and raise to the highest
Reputation of Virtue and Power. Miserable must that Kingdom be, whose rich and
great Ones are as much more impudently wicked, as they are more fortunate than
other Men; when they, whose Example should awe the Vicious, contribute not a
little to corrupt the Virtuous part of it, and to debauch the very Genius and
Spirit of the Nation: When they, who should be Patriots of their Country,
instead of being Men of Travel and Reading, of Abilities and Experience, of
Honor and Activity, are versed only in Essences and Perukes, Game-houses and
Stews, and have so far lost the Qualities of a Gentleman, that they are meaner,
falser, and cowardlier than the lowest of the People; those must indeed be
strange Courts, Counsels, Parliaments, Armies which are filled and influenced
by such as these, that must be a wretched State where Men make their Court by
Debauchery, and know no other Politics than what an inveterate Aversion to the
National Government and Constitution, or a more inveterate one to Religion and
Virtue suggest.

But if your Country move you not, consider yet what you owe yourselves:
Idleness is both a Reproach and Burden; for what can be more dishonorable,
than to be good for nothing; or more irksome to an active Nature, such as Man's
is, than to have nothing to employ it? What can be more shameful, than for a
wealthy, or well-born Man, to be the pity or sport of his Country, or the
inward scorn even of his Domestics and Neighbors? And what can be a greater
Plague, than for one who is Master of his whole Time, and of an ample Fortune,
not to know how to employ the one or the other, but in such Courses as tend to
the disgrace of his Family, the ruin of his Country, and the damnation of his
Soul? You ought too, to remember that great Fortunes do generally mark Men out
for great Troubles, as well as great Enjoyments; and were there no other Motive
to a vigorous and active Life, but this one, that it did fortify the Courage,
and harden the Temper, this should be sufficient to any Man, who will but
consider to how many Changes and Revolutions, how many Disasters and Mischiefs
a great Fortune renders Men obnoxious, so that when Men had not yet entertained
the Opinion of the unlawfulness of Self-murder, Poison, as appears from Livi's
Reflection on Masanissa's Present to his Mistress, was a part of the Domestic
Provision of the Families of the Great, and a Poison-bearer seems to have been
almost as natural an Office as a Cup Bearer.

The Sum of all is, Gifts of Fortune, like those of Grace or Nature, as they
capacitate and qualify, so do they design and oblige Men to suitable Duties,
and Christianity expects Increase proportionable to Men's Talents. Not Idleness
and Luxury, not Ignorance and Debauchery, but Knowledge and Virtue, and a more
eminent degree of Service to God and Man, ought to be the didistinctive
Character of the Rich and Great, (for how should that be the Privilege of an
illustrious Birth and ample Fortune, which is a Reproach and Dishonor to
Humane Nature?) These are the Abilities that constitute Gentlemen truly great,
that makes them the Props of a sinking State, or the Stars and Glories of a
flourishing one; this is that which the Safety and Glory of your Country, and
your own Happiness and Posterity demand at your Hands; and happy were it if the
Laws and Customs of our Country, as once those of the best constituted Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, did exact Virtue and Industry with the greatest rigor, and
punished Idleness and Riot with Infamy, Banishment, and Death.

Nor has any one reason to complain, that to oblige the Gentleman to an active
and industrious Life, is to debase his Quality, or to invade his Liberty, much
less to rob him of all the Pleasures and Advantages he is born to; on the quite
contrary, an active Virtue is the Honor of a Gentleman; this is the only solid
Foundation the Love and Esteem of his Country can be built on; all other
Advantages of Fortune do but adorn him as a Pageant, to be the sport and gaze
of the Crowd, and all that have sense enough to distinguish between Merit and
Fortune, will inwardly despise the Fool and Sluggard, whatever Courtship and
Complement they may make to the Esquire and Landlord. And as Business can be no
Diminution of his Honor, so neither can it be of his Liberty; for not to
insist upon that great Truth, That the Service of Virtue is the only Freedom or
Liberty of Man; not to mind you that the Business of Men of Wealth and Birth is
always a matter of Choice not Necessity, they being ever in a Condition to
retire when they shall judge their Privacy and Leisure more valuable than their
Employments. This one single Consideration cannot but silence this Suggestion,
That no Man is less Master of himself and Time, than the Man that has an ample
Fortune and no Business; for he is always exposed to the forms and
impertinences, to the humors and sottishness of a number of People as idle and
ignorant as himself; and I think there can be no Servitude so wretched, as that
to Luxury and Vanity, nor any Confinement or Attendance so tedious as a
compliance with the folly, with the trifling and looseness of the World; but
Business is at all times a comely Excuse, and never fails of putting a Man
handsomely in possession of his Liberty, and the disposal of his own Time and
Actions.

But of all the Aspersions with which Addresses of this kind are wont to be
assaulted, there is none more palpably injurious than this, That to condemn a
Gentleman to Business, is to rob him of his Pleasures; for the truth is, it is
Business and Employment that gives gust and relish to Pleasure; it is this that
prevents the Disease of Pleasure, Surfeit and Satiety, and makes Diversion
always new, and Nature always vigorous; it is true indeed, a rational and manly
Employment, so raises and fortifies the Mind, that it is above being a Slave to
Sensual Pleasure, and so entertains it, that it needs not make vicious and
sinful Pleasures a Refuge against the dullness and nauseousness of Life: But
after all, tho all this be true, there is one consideration more important
still, which is, that the Business of a Gentleman, if dischared as it ought to
be, is always attended with Pleasure, and that a more brisk and sensible one
than he can find in any thing else; for whether he Protects the Oppressed, or
Opposes the Violent and the Unjust by his Power, whether he steers the Ignorant
and the Simple to their Harbor, by his Wisdom, or relieve the Necessity of the
Poor by his Wealth? whether he support a sinking Friend, or raise a deserving
Creature? whether he assert the Authority of Laws, and maintain the Rights of
his Country? In a word, whether he assist the public or the private by his
Fortunes, his Abilities, or Virtues, all these Works have something in them so
great, so generous, that I cannot but think the Opportunities and Capacities of
these the highest Privileges and Prerogatives of a Fortunate Birth. It was the
Sabbath, the Rest of God, when he beheld all his Works, that they were
exceeding good; nor can I believe God took more pleasure in the Creation than
he does in the Preservation and Government of the World: How pleasing then must
be the Reflections upon these God-like Works; for though this be not to create a
new World, it is certainly to imbellish, govern, and support the old. There is
little reason to imagine why the Works of Virtue should procure their Authors
less pleasure than those of Fancy, Wit, and Learning do theirs. Why the Poet
should feel a bigger Joy rise from a witty Poem, the Painter from a well
finished Piece, the Architect from a well contrived Building, the Scholar from
a just and regular Discourse, than a Gentleman should from the happy and
honorable Effects of Wisdom, Courage, Bounty, and Magnanimity; these sure are
the greater Excellencies, and as the Original is more noble, so is the Issue
too; for certainly to preserve the Lives and Fortunes of Men, is much more than
to make them seem to live in imagery; to raise a Family, is much more than to
contrive and build a House to feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and actually
disperse the Clouds and Sorrows of the Afflicted, by a present and vigorous
remedy, is much more than to treat the Fancy of the soft and vain; and in one
word, actually to compose the Divisions, allay the Heats, govern the
Impetuosities, and restrain the Exorbitant Passions of Men by the force of
Laws, by the influence of Example, and that Authority and Ascendant which the
Fortunes and Abilities of the great Ones give them over their Inferiors, is in
my Judgment, a much more signal Service to God and Man, than it can ever be to
debate a Controversy with the most distinguishing Judgment, or write an
Exhortation with warmth and briskness.

Having thus demonstrated that Persons of Rank and Fortune lie under many and
strong Obligations to activity in their Sphere, and confuted those Objections
which are commonly opposed against it, I will proceed to lay before them, with
all due respect, such Rules as may guard them against that Envy and Danger,
that Toil and Discontent, which usually accompanies the Notion of the Great, as
Dirt, or Dust, or Heat that of their Chariots, and which on the other side, may
render their activity a great instrument of their Felicity; for I would not
that such as are the common Patrons and Benefactors of Mankind, should meet
with no other recompense but trouble and hazard, as if, like Clouds, they could
not refresh and impregnate the Earth, unless they were themselves dissolved and
wasted into showers: I would have every worthy Action, be an Accession to their
Greatness, and every honorable Performance carry with it a Reward, which
should not depend upon the humor of the Prince, or levity of the People.

Sect. 2.
Rules to be observed by the Gentleman in a public Station, or in order to the
Happiness of a Civil Life.

1. He must be endowed with Knowledge. 2. With Virtues proper and necessary to
his Rank and Station. 3. He ought to be constant, resolved, and vigorous
throughout the whole Conduct and Course of his Life and Affairs. 4. His Time
ought not to be so wholly taken up in Business, as not to leave Vacancies for
Religion, Meditation, Friendship, and Diversion.
First, Of the Gentleman's Knowledge. There is no Fortune that Knowledge better
becomes, or that stands more in need of it, than a Gentleman's; without it an
Estate is rather cumbersome than useful, and the ignorant Owner must be the
Tool or Instrument of another Ambition or Interest, the Prey of a menial
Servant, or the Property of an imperious Wife or wanton Child, or which is
worse, of some crafty Retainer, who grows impudent with the favor, rich with
the Spoils, both of the Honor and Fortune of his Master: The best that can
befall such a one is, if he have the good luck to light into good hands, and
join himself with a right Party, he may be the Apendage of some others Fortune,
the shade and umbria of another, who intercepts the Smiles and Thanks due to
him; he may, in a word, talk and act by the Sense and Reason of his Party. This
is a poor and contemptible Condition to a Man of Birth and Fortune, to be
incapable of employing or improving the Advantages he is born to, and to be
only the Prey or Tool of the Cunning, Avarice, Ambition, and impotent Passions
of others; or at best, the Instrument of a wiser Man; for the Wise is born to
rule the Fool.

Nor is this all, the Gentleman's Ignorance is so much the more worthy of
reproach, because he appears to be born to greater Opportunities of Knowledge,
as he that stands upon a more eminent height does naturally enjoy a more free
and open prospect.

But what is worse than all this, a Patrician Fortune joined with a Plebeian
Understanding, renders a Man not more liable to suffer Mischief, than apt to
commit them; for if the Man have much Passion, and no Understanding, as Wealth
is apt to inspire Men with Pride and Wilfulness, tho it cannot with Wisdom,
what can be expected from such a Person, who has power enough to execute his
Passions, and no reason to restrain them, who looks upon it as a contumely to
be opposed, and tho he has no sense himself, is too big to hear it from
another; what can such a Man be but a Plague to himself and others, and what
can his Wealth and Interest be, but resistless Instruments of Evil. It is then
indispensibly necessary, as well for the avoiding Evil as doing good, that the
great man be endowed with a good understanding.

The first thing he ought to be well acquainted with is Religion, as the only
source of solid Wisdom, and the main ground of a just and lasting Reputation;
nor indeed can I see how a Man can be considerable without it; for tho base
Ends require base Instruments in all other Cases, I see not how either Prince
or People can trust those Men who are false to God and themselves, it is scarce
to be expected, that he who Sacrifices his Religion and his Reason, that is,
himself to any Lust or Passion, should be nice and scrupulous of giving up a
remoter Interest or Obligation to it. But when I say the Gentleman should be
acquainted with Religion, I do not mean that he should perplex or amuse himself
with the Disputes that have debauched, or Subtleties and Niceties which have
dispirited or enervated Christianity, I would have him have so much
illumination as to be able to distinguish between Natural Religion and the
Politics, Revealed Religion and the Phansies and Whimsies of Man: I would have
him thoroughly instructed in the Reasons and Grounds of our common
Christianity, and study and ruminate them till he feel the power of them, and
find himself formed and impressed by them. He understands Religion well, who
learns from it what it is to be just, and derives from it Courage enough to
dare to be so. I should think it a necessary part of this Knowledge, or at
least a good Accomplishment in a Gentleman to be so far acquainted with
Ecclesiastical Story, as not to be ignorant what influence Religion, or the
Pretenses of it has upon the World, and what use cunning Men have ever made of
it, by what Degrees or what Arts the Maxims of the World have been incorporated
into Religion, and the Church has wound and insinuated it self into the State.
Thus you will discern what the true Measures of Religion are, you will have a
just regard for wise Constitutions without bigottry; you will free your selves
from all those Doubts and Scruples which usher in Atheism and Profaneness;
and, in a word, you will find Religion the true Standard of Wisdom and
Discretion, the effectual Instrument of private and public Good, and the
infallible Guide to Honor and Happiness.

Next to the Knowledge of Religion, follows the Knowledge of the World, which
may be divided into the Knowledge of Matters and Men, which is so necessary in
every part, in every act of Life, but especially of a public one, that I
cannot but wonder at the vanity of such as can fancy it possible to maintain a
solid Reputation in their Country, and fill any Station honorably or happily
without it. The confidence of an Emperick, or other such wretched Projectors
and Undertakers, seems to me Modesty and Virtue, compared to the shamelesness
and wickedness of such men as obtrude themselves upon Affairs of a public
Nature, unstudied, unversed, in Things or Men, that is totally unqualified,
which whoever considers the difficulty of managing them well, or the
mischievous consequences of miscarrying in them, must confess. Let the
Gentleman therefore study the Laws and Constitutions of the Realm, its Changes
and Revolutions in their Causes, Progress, and Effects, its Natural and
Political Strengths and Weaknesses, Defects and Excellencies, together with its
Foreign Interests, Relation, and Dependances; nor let him be wholly ignorant of
the Frame and Polity of other Kingdoms, tho he ought to be best versed in our
own; he must travel abroad, but dwell at home; for I would have him have a
Veneration, not Superstition, for the Laws and Customs of his own Country; for
I doubt the Wisdom of our own Nation is not great enough to justify the
neglect, much less contempt of that of Foreign Ones; and because what they call
the Law of Nature is only the Law of right Reason, in those great Precepts of
it, which seem immutable and inviolable, and the same in all Times and Places.
He ought not to be a stranger to this, least being ignorant of the true Grounds
of Humane Society, and of the Nature and Obligation of particular Laws; every
new Emergency, Change, or Deviation from the common Road, discover his
Insufficiency; for it is a miserable thing to see how, through the simplicity
and weakness of some, and the subtlety and cunning of others, Laws which should
be the Fences and Bulwarks of the People, are often made only their Chains and
Fetters; and those public and solemn Ties which were designed to strengthen
and fortify the Constitution, become the most fatal Engines of undermining and
subverting it. I have observed many, who would be excellent Persons in a
regular and calm state of Affairs, that are miserably perplexed, and at a loss,
or wretchedly abused or imposed upon in a disordered and unsettled one; like a
Person of my Acquaintance, who rides well in enclosed and narrow Roads, but her
Brains begin to swim, and her heart to fail her on Downs and Plains.

After all, that I may not seem to be treating rather of Speculation than
Action, and to have proposed such an Extension of Knowledge, as if I were
recommending rather a Life of Study than of Business, I must put you in mind,
that the design of this sort of Learning ought to be to make men Wise, not
Subtle, Judicious, not Disputative. That Curiosity or Diligence in Matters
minute, or subtle, has more in it of amusement than use, and that to lay the
Foundation too deep and broad, does seldom quit the cost; and, in one word, it
seems to me to be in Policy, as in Religion, he is the most prudent who best
understands the particular Laws or Precepts of his particular Station, as he is
the most religious who is best learned, not in the universal Scheme of
Theology, but the regulation of his own Affections, and the conduct of his own
Life.

But in vain does he study Things who knows not Men, for Man is the Instrument
of Power and Policy, and whoever knows how to manage and gain an Ascendant over
him, is the most considerable in his Country, and able to do the greatest
mischief or the greatest good: But when I talk of knowing Men, I mean not only
such a knowledge of particular Persons as may instruct you what to hope, or
what to fear from them, what employments or trusts they are fit or unfit for,
and, in a word, who are proper or improper Instruments in different Affairs,
Times and Circumstances; who are fit to be the Partners of your Pleasures and
Diversions, who of your Confidences and Secrets, and such like; but also the
knowledge of Humane Nature to be thoroughly read in all the Springs and Resorts
of Human Actions, in all the various Passions and Diseases of the mind of Man,
with all their Causes and Cures, and to be able to distinguish the genuine and
natural from the acquired and artificial Person; and because not simple Persons
only, but Times and Ages, Nations, Cities, and lesser Bodies and Societies,
have their particular Temper and Genius, these must not be neglected neither.
This is the Knowledge, which together with a dexterous use and application of
it, is the very life and soul of worldly Prudence, and makes up the beginning,
middle, and end of true Policy; but after all, both with respect to the
Public, and a Man's own Good, that ought to be a Rule for the Man of Business
which St. Paul prescribes for a Bishop, Let him first learn to rule his own
House well. He that will be truly wise, should know himself first, e're he goes
about to know the World, and begin the practice of his Politics in his own
Family, and in the settlement and due administration of his Domestic Affairs,
in which if he cannot succeed, I must confess I cannot see what Encouragement
either Prince or People can have to confide in such a one; for the disorders or
dissipations of a private Fortune are very ominous Presages of a
Mal-administration of public Trust. Nor can I see what can induce such a Man
to undertake it, but the mere hopes of repairing his private Dilapidations with
the Stones and Timber of the public.

But after all, how necessary soever I account Knowledge in a Gentleman engaged
in an Active Station, yet I cannot but observe, that whether we regard the
Public or the Private, Wickedness has ever been more fatal and dishonorable
to both, than Ignorance, and all Trusts have suffered more in the hands of the
false and the base, than of the unfit and unsufficient: Therefore

Secondly, The Gentleman ought to be enriched with Virtues, especially those
which become his Rank and Station. Knowledge is but the Seed of Virtue, and
like that, it only rots and putrifies, if it grow not up into excellent Habits,
and bring not forth the Fruits of virtuous Actions. There is scarce any Station
which does not require a particular Virtue, either to discharge or adorn it;
one Patience, another Courage, a third Vigilance, and so on; there being scarce
any Office or Business which is not liable to some particular Inconveniences
and Temptations: But it being impossible for me to prosecute all these, I will
only insist on two or three which are essential to all true Greatness and
Honor, and if I am not much mistaken, to a happy and prosperous dispatch of
all Affairs, I am sure to the Security and Felicity of the Public and Private,
these are Integrity, Magnanimity, Humanity.

First, Integrity. By Integrity I mean two things, Justice and Truth: The first
to regulate our Actions; the second our Words. Nor do I take Justice in a
beggarly barretting Sense, as if the Gentleman had acquitted himself of a due
well enough, if there were any plausible pretense to excuse a Violation or
Omission of it; as if he were to regard more what the Law could compel, than
what Honor did oblige him to; and by Honor I mean the Testimony of his own
Conscience, both concerning his diligent and impartial Enquiries after the
right and sincerity in pursuing it; for I would not have him appear to do
right, rather out of the fear of Infamy, than love of Virtue. The word of a
Gentleman ought to be fixed and unmovable as Fate, sacred and inviolable as
the Altar. Contracts, and Evidences, and Seals, and Oaths were devised to tie
Fools, and Knaves, and Cowards: Honor and Conscience are the more firm and
sacred ties of Gentlemen. Nor must this Honor extend only to private Dealings,
but much more to public; in which, good God! how comely, how noble is it to
see Integrity triumphing over Interest and Passion? To see a great Man
preferring Truth and Justice to the favor or menaces of Princes, and readily
quitting all Interest and all Parties to support the public Safety and Honor,
or fall with it. But as Heroic as I would have the Gentleman, I would not have
him vain, I would not have him led or imposed upon by empty Noise and Names, I
would have him love a good Name, but much more a good Conscience, for I would
have him as Judicious as Resolved, as Bright and Luminous as Brave and
Inflexible; for I admire not an Integrity that bids defiance to Prudence and
right Reason; I love a steaddy Faith and unmovable Justice, but not Romance
and Fancy; I would have a great Man not insensible of a difference between
Loyalty and Slavery, between Tyranny and Anarchy; and in the same manner he
must be able to distinguish between a Serpentine Subtlety and a stupid
Insufficiency, and want of necessary Address and Dexterity; without such a
competency of Knowledge, all will be but Folly, not Integrity, Vanity, not
Constancy. As there is an Integrity in Action, so is there in Speech to, it
seems to me not to consist in bare Truth only, but also in an ingenious
openness and freedom, cloudiness and ambiguity; seems to me rather fit to
disguise Ignorance or Design, than to pourtray or express the Sentiments of a
wise or an upright Mind, yet in Words, as well as Deeds, there is an Extreme,
tho frankness and openness in Conversation, like a free and generous Air,
become a Gentleman. I would not have Freedom violate Discretion, nor Simplicity
and Openness lessen Greatness; too many and wide Apertures, if they add Beauty,
do certainly diminish the strength of a Building.

Secondly, The next virtue beseeming a Gentleman, is Magnanimity: By which I do
not mean an empty Tumor, but solid Greatness of Mind, which ought to discover
it self in every Instance of his Life; I say in every Instance, for I count it
not enough to bear Disappointments with moderation, unless he bear his Success
so too: I count it not enough to encounter Dangers with Courage, unless he
encounter his Pleasures with as great; and in a word, there ought to be
something even in his Diversions and Entertainments, as well as in his Business
and Employment, that may speak the strength and wealth, and self sufficiency of
his Mind. You Will easily conclude this with me, if you allow these two or three
things to be essential to true Greatness of Mind; an Invincible Courage and
Resolution, a rational and generous Activity, and an enlarged and public
Spirit, which you cannot but allow, unless you think that the Coward and Slave,
the Sluggard or Sott, the Sordid* and Selfish may be reckoned amongst the
Magnanimous. But what Principle, what Foundation is able to support so mighty a
weight? Natural Courage may make a Man brave Danger, or if that will not
Ambition may, while it presents him with a more formidable Evil if he turn his
back upon the other; but what shall make the Man modest and humble in his
Triumphs, who was gallant and daring in Fight? Passion and Revenge may make Men
firm and fierce in their Contests and Oppositions, but what can make a Man
forgive when he is in a Condition to revenge an Injury. The lust of Power and
Honor and Wealth, that is, Self-love may render a Man active and industrious,
but what is it that can prevail with him to Sacrifice his own Interest and his
Families to public Good? Honor has been generally thought the most likely
Principle to do all this, I must confess, a Breast inflamed with love of
Honor, seems to me incapable of any mean or base Impression; but then the
Notion of Honor ought to be justly stated; for if by this we understand the
Smiles and Courtships of the Great, or the Praises and Acclamations of the
People, it had need be in settled Times a wise Court and a modest People: I
doubt there is not Judgment enough in the People, nor Plainness and Simplicity
enough in Courts to give Men and Actions a true value; and therefore, if a Man
would propose Honor as the reward of his Actions, it ought to be that which
consists in the Approbation of such who are able and disinteressed Judges; a
mistake in this point is often of very ill consequence, and perverts the whole
Course of Humane Life, betraying either into factious Opposition, or sordid and
unworthy Compliance. Nor is this the only Inconvenience that the Love of Honor
is obnoxious to, that Men may be misled and abused by false and mistaken
Notions of it, but it also often happens, that Envy and Emulation in particular
Men, or the Violence of a prevailing Faction, or the Iniquity of Times may
stifle and oppress the Merit, or traduce and blast the Integrity of the most
excellent Actions, in which Cases, I doubt, the secret Opinion of two or three
virtuous Men, or an Expectation of greater Justice from future Times, will be
too weak a Cordial to support an injured Virtue, if its only Nourishment and
sustenance be Honor. I think therefore Religion is the only Basis on which
Magnanimity can stand, by which I mean a love of rational and virtuous Actions
upon wise and solid Grounds, a secret Delight and Complacency in the
performance of them, accompanied with the Peace and Serenity of Mind that
springs from Reflection upon them, and the Joy which a firm Persuasion that God
will be our Rewarder breeds in us; this, as it will secure us against the
Errors, so will it against the Inconstancy and Injustice of the World; this
will minister sufficient Motives to generous Actions, when we meet nothing but
Discouragements from all things else; this, if it will not make a public
Employment honorable, will always make it safe; this, if it cannot render
great Places profitable, will ever render Retirement pleasant, and in all the
Changes of Times and Humors, will preserve a Man steady and calm in himself.

But whilst I recommend Magnanimity, I must not forget that there are Follies
and Vices which often are wont to usurp its Name. I never thought that the love
of our Country did imply a neglect, much less a contempt of our private
Fortune: That a vain Confidence or Presumption in provoaking and irritating
Dangers ought to pass for Courage; for this were to make Fortitude and Prudence
incompatible: Nor do I think that a violent Intrusion into Business, or an
indiscreet intangling a Man's self in much, or engaging in any that is foreign
or impertinent, deserves the Name of Industry or Activity, or Pride, Stiffness,
and Savageness, the Name of Firmness and Constancy; for, in a word, I would
have Magnanimity rather lovely than haughty, rather revered than dreaded;
Therefore,

Thirdly, Humanity is the next Virtue to be aimed at. Nothing can be more fitly
joined with Magnanimity than Compassion, with Courage than Tenderness, nor with
the felicity of a great Fortune, than Charity or Bounty. I cannot think that
there is a truer Character of Greatness, than to be a Sanctuary to the Injured,
a Patron to Virtue and Merit, a Counselor to those that Err, and a support to
the Afflicted, the Needy and Defenseless. In these things consist the Life and
Substance of Humanity, the Ornamental part of it is Affability or
Courteousness; the Art of Behavior lies in a narrow Compass, the whole skill
of it consisting in obliging, which he shall never miss, who has once possessed
his Soul with Tenderness and Goodness, for then every Word, every Action,
together with the whole Air of Deportment, will be animated with a resistless
sweetness, and will be nothing else but the Pourtraiture and Expression of
those excellent Dispositions, by this means too the deportment will be Natural,
not Artificial; and tho it be generally kind, it will be more particularly so,
where it meets with a more moving Occasion, to which if it be added, that the
Carriage of a Gentleman ought to be Humble, but not Popular, Courteous, but not
Cheap or Prostitute, you will decline all the considerable Errors to which
Affability is obnoxious.

It was the Custom of the Ancients to deliver their Instruction in short and
plain Sentences, without a labored Exhortation or passionate Enforcement. And
certainly there is such a commanding Authority in the Dictates of Truth and
Wisdom, such a Divinity, Majesty, and Loveliness in solid Virtues, that did the
Simplicity and Probity obtain in these, which is supposed to have done in those
Times, advice of this sort would easily make its way to the Hearts of Men
without the Assistance of any Motives. But I dare not be either so confident of
my own Performance, or of the Times, as not to think it necessary to close the
Advice of these Paragraphs, with some Arguments and Motives to these Virtues.

Shall I make use here of the Topics of Religion? Shall I invite you to
Integrity and Magnanimity from the Consideration of the Omniscience and
Providence of God? Shall I put you in mind how little Sordidness, Falsehood and
Fear; how little Pride and Insolence can become the Principles and Persuasions
of a Christian, concerning the Emptiness and Vanity of this World, or the true
Happiness and lasting Glory of another? Shall I press you to Humanity, to
Meekness and Humility, by calling to your remembrance the Life of Jesus, your
Frailty and Mortality, and what is worse, your Sins and Follies? Shall I show
you how mutable and inconstant your Fortune is; and if it were not, how
accidental fantastic and inconsiderable a distinction this makes between you
and persons of a lower Rank? and that they stand at least upon the same level
with you, with respect to the substantial and solid Interests of Humane Nature,
that is, the favor of God, Virtue, Grace, and Glory? Alas! I am afraid you
have generally but little Relish or Gust of this sort of Arguments.

But have you as little value for your Country as Religion? Are you as little
moved by the Ruin of this, as the Corruption of that? Behold your Country once
formidable abroad, and well compact within; ah! now what Reproach and
Contumelies does it not suffer abroad? what Convulsions at home? Its Wealth has
neither Service nor Defense in it. Its Numbers are without Courage, and its
Forces have nothing of Strength or Terror in them. Why all this, it bleeds in
your Factions and Divisions, it reels and staggers under your Softness and
Luxury; it is betrayed by your Falsehood and Cowardice; Ah! that its Reformation
might begin where its Degeneracy has, and that it might recover by your Virtues
the Honor it has lost and forfeited by your Vices. Pardon me, I do not here
suppose that there are none exempt from this Accusation; that in the Body of
the Nobility and Gentry there are not, even in this degenerate Age, some bright
Instances of a true English Courage and Integrity; I only wish that there were
more, that there were enough to Atone for the rest, and to prop up this
declining State. Nor is it a petulant Humor, but a Zeal for your Honor
particularly, as well as that of the Nations, that now acts me; for give me
leave to put you in mind at length

That your Honor, your Interest, and your Happiness depend upon your
Integrity, Magnanimity and Humanity; nor is it possible that the one should
survive the other. First your Honor. The whole World is possessed in favor of
these Virtues; and however it has fared with some other, these haVe ever been
in vogue, not amongst the best only, but worst of Mankind. I have indeed
understood that there are some who have openly professed and defended
Intemperance and Incontinence, but I think none ever yet have in earnest
undertook the Patronage of Cowardice, Perfidiousness, Inhumanity, or Insolence.
I have never yet met with any, who have not thought it scandalous and
reproachful to find less Faith, less Honor, less Goodness, or if you please
more shifting Cowardice, Falsehood, and Sordidness in his Lordship, or his
Worship, than in a Groom or Lackey. Nor did I ever find, that Lands and
Scutcheons, wealthy Relations and honorable Ancestors, were ever looked upon
as Apologies or Mitigations, but rather Aggravations of such Baseness and
Degeneracy; nor could any Man ever think it a Commendation to be the Sinks and
Sewers of a Noble Family, the Ruins of an ancient, and once stately Pile, or
the Lees and Dreggs of a rich Liquor long since drawn off, and evaporated. Nor
does your Honor only, but Secondly your Interest depend on these Virtues. If
you want these, I see not what you can possess, that can either gain you the
Favor of the Prince, or Esteem of the People: This sure is the Reason why
these Virtues have ever been in such credit in the World, because their
influence is so necessary, so universally serviceable, whether to the Public,
or to Friends and Dependants; now that Integrity which can give others ground
confidently to rely upon you, that Generosity and Magnanimity which raises
their Hopes and Expectations, does naturally give you an Authority and
Ascendant over them, and you become the Masters of their Lives and Fortunes,
whilst they promise themselves the Protection or Improvement of them from your
Virtues: To these then you must owe the Patronage and Confidence of those above
you, the Dependence, Love, and Esteem of those below you, without which, what
can you effect, what can you enjoy truly great or considerable; you are
impotent and Contemptible as Ploughmen and Sailers when solitary and abandoned;
your Retinue and Dependence, your Friends and Admirers make you powerful: In
short, a Man of Birth and Fortune that is perfidious, cowardly, selfish and
proud, has not in my Judgment, or deserves not to have half the Interest an
honest Yeoman or plain-dealing Tradesman has in City or Country; for what
Confidence can be placed in such a one; will he be tender of the Honor of his
Country, or his Friend, who has no sense of his own? or will he ever be either
a good Patron or Friend, who is ready to sacrifice all to his private Avarice?
Nor is it a matter of small importance, that Reputation founded in Virtue
surmounts all sorts of Difficulties, and Crowns all Undertakings with Success,
and since Men are naturally backward when they are jealous and distrustful, but
prompt and forward where they are secure and confident: It has ever been
observed, that Integrity (if not destitute of competent Prudence) has in
dispatch of Affairs ever out-stripped Craft and Subtlety. But the weightiest
Consideration of all is, that these Virtues, if they be not the surest
Foundation of Greatness, are doubtless of Happiness; for they will make a man
find a tranquillity in his Mind, when he cannot in his Fortune: The Conscience
of a Man's own Uprightness will alleviate the toil of Business, and sweeten the
harshness of ill Success and Disappointments, and give him an humble Confidence
before God, when the Ingratitude of Man, or the Iniquity of Times, rob him of
all other Reward.

Having thus given an Account of these two things, wherein consist the
sufficiency of a Man of Business, that is, Knowledge and Virtue, I will proceed
to the consideration of the third Rule.

Thirdly, The Gentleman ought to be Constant, Resolved, and Vigorous in his
Motion. Constancy and Vigor, whether in the acquisition of Knowledge, or
improvement of Virtue, or Management of Affairs are of the greatest moment and
importance. I ever prefer a strong before a fine Edge; Industry and Resolution
before Wit and Parts: He that makes a daily progress, how slow soever it be,
will in time reach its Stage; vast Bodies and mighty Armies, by constant
marches, have traveled through those unknown Regions, which a single Person
would almost despair of compassing in his Lifetime. To what a height does the
Tree raise its Head, tho its Root fix in the heart of the Earth, because tho it
grow slowly, and even imperceptibly, yet it grows constantly, and receives some
accession every moment. This Rule, as I insinuated before, is applicable to
Knowledge, Virtue, and Business. To Knowledge, to what would not an ingenious
Person, furnished with all aids of Science, advance his Prospect, if he used
but moderate industry, and proceeded regularly; What could there be in any
Science, which were either of any use, or any certainty, that could escape him?
and other things ought not to stop him; they may be his diversion, but ought
not to be his study. I believe there are few Natures but are capable, if not of
eminent Accomplishment, yet of such Improvement as may render them considerable
and useful enough, if they would apply themselves to the study of Knowledge
with any tolerable vigor, or exert their vigor with any regularity and
uniformity? It Is owing to lasiness and wantonness, that the slow and heavy
attain not to such Abilities as might suffice to set them off, and to make them
show tolerably well: And it is to the same that the quick and witty owe their
want of all Solidity and Judgment, while they discover only enough to make the
World justly condemn them, as wanting to themselves and their Country, being
bad Stewards of a naturally rich and improvable Estate, careless and ill
Masters of good Parts.

Nor is Constancy less serviceable in the pursuit of Virtue than of Knowledge.
Virtue, when acquired, is confessed by all to be easy and delightful, because
natural and rational; but to acquire it, this is the difficulty; but it is such
a one as Constancy and Courage would easily vanquish: It Is generally thought
there is in most at first some sort of impetus toward good, which if it were
constantly cherished, would soon turn into habit and nature; but fits and heats
of Religion, broken and interrupted Essays and Attempts, do only keep up so
much gust for Virtue, as makes us a little disgust the Enjoyments of Sin, and
preserves so much of Conscience as serves to disturb and perplex us. But be it
how it will, let us suppose Man infected in his Nature, and what is worse,
overrun by vicious habits, yet even then the same care, watchfulness, and
discipline that cures a Chronicle Distemper of the Body, would heal an habitual
Disease of the Mind; and one may reform and enrich a degenerate Mind with as
little pains as it will cost to recover a decayed and ruinated Estate.

But let me return to my main Subject, that is, the Conduct of Civil Business.
Here, I am sure, an uniform constancy and regular vigor is exacted by all; I
have seldom observed Men of great Ability do great things without great
diligence and resolution; I am sure I have seen them miscarry foully, when
Persons of lower Talents have succeeded very well: Nay, the truth is, vigor
and resolution are such noble Characters, that whoever appears endowed with
them, can never himself miscarry, tho his Designs sometimes may; he can never
be a loser in Honor and Reputation, but generally appears a great Man, even in
the most unfortunate Accidents, and makes even ill Success it self attest his
sufficiency. But commonly difficulties give way to the diligence and resolution
of great Men; and if to day will not, to morrow will smile upon their
Enterprises; there are lucky Minutes in Business, when what before had Wind and
Tide against it, moves with the Stream, whether will not he then carry his
point, who never lets slip the lucky Moment thorough Negligence, and never
fails through Cowardice or Lasiness to urge and push on his good Success?

But how much soever Vigor and Constancy be commended, as most serviceable to
Success in Business, as one of the greatest Perfections that Man is capable of,
and the best Instrument of attaining all others, yet we must not forget that
the strength of our Nature is soon broken if it be always strained, and the
finest parts are soon tired and dispirited if they be incessantly employed;
That Man has a design to carry on far nobler and more important than this of
Civil Business, and that so far at least the Pleasures of Life are to be
mingled with its Toils and Troubles, as to enable us the better to undergo
them; Therefore,

Fourthly, The Gentleman's Time ought not to be so wholly taken up in Business,
as not to leave Vacancies for Religion, Meditation, Friendship, and Diversion.
They are two extremes fatal to Happiness, to have no Business at all, or so
much as leaves no room for Books or Friends, for Meditation or necessary
Diversion; for this makes Life very barren and very dull, it makes Business
mere Drudgery, and places the great Man in a more toilsome condition than the
mean One, and makes him wish for the use of his Tenant and Servants. Nor is
this the only Evil of an uninterrupted pursuit of worldly Business, but what is
worse, it extinguishes all gust of Virtue, all relish of heavenly things, and
instead of the Courage and Peace with which Religion inspires Men, it leaves
them without any rational Support or Comfort, either consuming with perplexed
and anxious Thoughts about the event of things, or hardened into a neglect, if
not contempt of Religion, proposing to themselves no other or higher end of
Life than the acquitting themselves well in the station they are, and ascribing
the issue of Affairs to no other Providence than such as they are daily wont to
employ about them, and to such other Accidents as they have observed them ever
and anon subject to.

When I demand a vacant Time for Religion, it must not be supposed that I do
not look upon Religion as the first and greatest Business of Humane Life, it
being in vain to gain the whole World for him who loses his Soul, or to be
intent in preserving or advancing the Peace and Welfare of the Public for him,
whose Mind is filled with Disorder and Guilt; I do therefore suppose all the
Actions of the Day, so conducted, as to become Instances of Christian Virtue, I
suppose Justice and Integrity, Courage and Bounty, Patience and Gentleness,
mingling themselves in the discharge of every Civil Business. And then the
Religion for which I demand some vacant Moments, is that of public and private
Devotion, without which it is impossible for the great Man either to preserve
Reputation without, or Peace within. Public Devotion is not only an Act of
Worship due to God, but in a Gentleman a Testimony of the Honor which he has
for the Community he is of, and an expression of Charity toward those who are
influenced by his Example. Nor is private Devotion less necessary than public,
not only least public without private degenerate into Formality, into a mere
show without the Power of Godliness; nor yet because every Man's Reputation
flows first from his Domestics, who can have no great veneration for him, who
appears to have none for his God, tho even these Reasons ought not to be
contemned, but especially because every Man has particular wants and particular
obligations, and none more than the great One, and therefore must offer up to
God his particular Petitions and Prayers. I cannot therefore tell how to think
that he who does not begin and close the Day with Prayers to God, can believe
there is one; he that does not invoke Providence, seems to defy it; and he who
sacrifices not to God, seems to me to sacrifice only to his own Nets.

As to Meditation, it is so essential a part of Religion, and so indispensible a
preparative for Devotion, that I should not have placed it here by it self, did
I not extend its design something further. Meditation is that Act, which of all
others, does most delight and nourish the Mind, which, of all others, is most
fit to raise and to strengthen it. In other Actions we seem to move
mechanically, in this alone rationally. In all other, our Reason seems confined
and fettered by I know not what Prescriptions, Customs, and Circumstances; in
this alone it seems to enjoy its native freedom and liberty, rambling with an
uncontrouled Impetus, and with delight stretching and delating it self. In all
other things, the Mind seems to be impressed and molded by the Matter and
Business about which it is conversant; but in this it gives what Forms and
Circumstances it pleases to both; in this it has a kind of creative or
productive Power, and I know not what sort of despotick Sovereignty. In a word,
he who is ignorant of the force of Meditation, is a stranger to the truest
Pleasure of Humane Life, to the most useful taking and natural act of the
Humane Soul. But I forget what I mainly intended, which was to tell you that
the use of Meditation consists either in Reflection or Preparation, as
regarding alike yesterday and to morrow; it is highly necessary that he looks
back upon his day past, who lies under so many Temptations to waste it, that he
whose Actions are of so much greater importance than those of private Men, and
fall unavoidably under a more general and severe Censure, do the more carefully
scan them over. Nor is Preparation less necessary than Reflection, for this
gives order to your Affairs, and forms the Mind into a fit and just
Disposition; it prevents surprises, removes difficulties, and gives beauty and
steadiness to your whole Conduct.

As to Friendship and Diversion, I shall treat of them fully in their proper
place, and therefore shall speak but a word of them here. It Is a hard matter,
it may be, for great Men to have sincere Friends, but this being a Purchase of
so great a value, deserves they should lay out all their Art and Interest upon
it; for besides the advantage of Friendship in every Condition that it clears
our Notions, corrects our Errors, confirms our Virtues, enlarges our Joys, and
lessens our Troubles, it is to Men in an eminent station more peculiarly
necessary, both as the Ornament and Support of their Fortune.

As to Diversion, it ever must be such as may consist with the dignity of the
Person, or the urgency of his Employment, such as may not lessen his Character,
or waste his Time; such as may refresh and recruit Nature, and from which he
may return to his Business with new vigor and new appetite; and it were very
well if Diversions were so wisely contrived, that they might at once delight
and improve the Mind: I should therefore think that Physic or Husbandry, the
Principles of any curious Mechanic Performances, Music, Architecture, and
such like, might be proper Entertainments of vacant hours: But if the Health of
the Body, as well as Pleasure of the Mind be aimed at in Diversion, it were
well to have always ready some wise Friends, by whose help and conversation,
the Time you bestow upon the Health of the Body, may not be utterly lost to the
Mind.

I am sensible I have been guilty in this Discourse of the same Fault which
all, who write Morals with any Spirit, do generally fall into, that is,
proposing a greater Perfection than is commonly attainable, and of forming my
Models and Ideas rather by Speculation than the Practice of Mankind; but this
will be easily pardoned by such as remember that the Copy will ever fall short
of the Original, and that men will easily of themselves bend and accommodate
the exactest Rule to the Frailties and Imperfections of Humane Life. Nor do I
again forget, when I press Gentlemen to the noblest heights of Virtue, that
they are exposed to more numerous and more violent solicitations to Vice than
other Men, I know it; but at the same time, I remember too, that they always
pretend to a higher Spirit, and a more refined Education; that their Virtue
always shines with a double luster, its own, and that of their Fortune; so that
moderate Seize in them make a greater show than the more perfect and
accomplished in Men of a lower Sphere; and finally, that those Advantages and
Prerogatives which they enjoy by their Birth and Station, do put them in a
better Condition than other Men, to defend their true Liberty, and to pursue
those Methods which Reason and Virtue dictate.

CHAP. III.
Of the Trading or Negotiating Life.

Sect. 1. Rules relating to Success in Trade. First that the Trader be
Industrious. Secondly, that he be not above his Profession.

Sect. 2. Rules relating to his Religion. First, The Trade must be a lawful
one. Secondly, It must be managed with Justice, Truth, and Charity. Thirdly, It
must not interfere with Religion. Fourthly, The Trader ought to propose to
himself, wise and rational Ends, such are a Competency for himself and Family:
The charitable Assistance of others: A timely Retirement or Retreat from the
bussel and distractions of too much Business.

MY later Years have been spent mostly amongst the Trading part of Mankind, and
I have received many Obligations from them, and I think my self bound to do
them this right, to let the World know, that I have found more Honor and
Gratitude, more Clearness and Integrity amongst this sort of Men, than I ever
could amongst others, whose Quality and Education raised my Expectations
higher, it will be therefore no small satisfaction to me, if any Endeavors of
mine, can render them any considerable Service.

There is no Condition of Life free from Temptations and Difficulties, apt to
embroil our Happiness and infect our Innocence, and therefore neither this of
Traders; the Evils they are subject to may be reduced to two Heads, their
miscarrying in Trade, or in Religion. I will therefore begin with such Rules as
may serve to prevent the former, and then proceed to such as concern the latter.

If we trace the ruin of such as fail or break, back to its Original, we shall
find it generally to be either Idleness or Pride. Idleness, the Parent of all
sottish Vices; Pride the Parent of expensive Follies and ruinous Projects. I
will therefore lay down these two Rules as the Foundations of the Trader's
Secular Prosperity. First, That he must be diligent and Industrious. Secondly,
That he must not be above his Profession.

1. He must be Diligent and Industrious. You seem born for Industry; and tho
some pretend to be sent into the World only to enjoy a Fortune; it is plain you
are first to raise one; and tho there may be some Fortunate men in the World,
that seem to thrive rather by Chance than Virtue, and owe more to the Care of
others than their own, yet I am sure, in the ordinary Methods of Providence,
Diligence and Industry are the Highway to Wealth and Plenty, Virtue and
Sobriety, to wise and secure Enjoyments. And I know not with what confidence
Men can promise themselves the Blessing and Favor of God on any other terms.
He has made nothing on purpose to be idle and useless: The heavenly Bodies
never cease to yield their Light and Influence, nor the Terrestial ones their
Fruit. We our selves do subsist by a continual Motion; and should our Blood and
Spirits grow dull and sluggish, our Life must needs expire with their Activity;
Man is born to labor as the Sparks fly upward; our Capacities and Endowments
destine and urge us to it, the necessities and wants of this needy beggarly
state, in which Nature, how kind soever it was to the golden Age, does not
furnish us with any thing, without Art and Industry exact and demand it, and
the Laws of Humane Society oblige us to it; for it is but fit that every one
should contribute his shot for the Entertainment of the Public, and that he
should nor, like a Droan, be feasted and maintained by the labor and travel of
others. And so far, lastly, is Christianity from abrogating this Law of Nature,
that it earnestly inforces it, Let ours learn to maintain good Works for
necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful; that is, that they be not a shame
and burden to themselves and Families, to the Commonwealth or Christian
Profession. Propose not then, I address my self here to Apprentices and
Beginners; propose not to exempt your selves from that Universal Law of Labor
and Travel to which the whole Creation is subjected; you especially who lie
under more immediate and particular Obligations to it. It Is an unaccountable
folly for one, who is to make his Fortune in the World, to apply himself to
Trade, rather as a Diversion than Business, and to design it only as a Support
and Fund for Sloth and Luxury: It Is madness and frenzy to propose to be
Master of his Time ere he be Master of his Trade, and to indulge his Pleasures
before he has made Provision to defray the Expense of them, and yet this, I
doubt, is too too general a practice; whereas would young men consider the
matter aright, they would find that they do but prevent their Pleasures by
gathering of them before they be ripe, and do but make their Troubles and
Vexations endless, by indulging their Ease and Laziness too soon.
Contradictious Projects! to propose at once to live idly, and yet to thrive! to
live pleasurably, and grow rich! It Is true, there are many Traders, who live in
much Ease and Plenty, and make a very handsome Figure in the World, and it is
but fit there should be such: Trade is the Support and Ornament of Kingdoms,
and no Man of sense will any more envy the Man of Trade his Wealth, than the
Man of the Sword his Honor, or the Man of Letters and Abilities his Places and
Preferments: But if I could, I would have Men grow up to all these by Labor
and Industry, by an Apprentiship of Sobriety and Virtue; I would have Enjoyment
be the Reward of Merit; I would not have Ease and Pleasure be ravished by the
loose and unworthy, but regularly possessed by such as have taken pains to
purchase both, and have Sense, Experience, and Virtue enough to enjoy them.

Secondly, The Trader must not be above his Calling. Pride and Vanity are
generally sworn Enemies, both to the Content and Prosperity of Traders, but
then it must be remembered some are but lightly tinged, others more thoroughly
and deeply died with these Vices; in some they produce only little Comical
Affectations, and almost Innocent Excursions; but in others very fatal
Disorders and Irregularities. There is no gracefulness in any Motion that is
not natural; a Man of low Stature may add something to his Height, but nothing
to his Comeliness, by strutting upon Stilts. Nor is there only an
ungracefulness, but an uneasiness in all affected Motions; we are all a little
purblind and dimsighted in this World, and therefore walk more securely in the
ways we are acquainted with; but for my part, when an Error is only Comical,
and exposes Men no further than to a little Rallary and Censure, it is scarce
worth my while to prescribe to it; and I cannot tell whether it be worth every
Man's while to be at the Charge of Correcting a Humor, which if it do a little
expose him, does yet please him too; the Pride and Ambition which I would
extirpate, is such a one as I have observed fatal to the Trades-man's Fortune
and Repose; such as tempts him to despise and neglect his Trade, or puts him
upon Expenses which it cannot maintain, or ingages him in bold or hazardous
Projects; this is an Error which I would fain reform, and methinks a few sober
Reflections should here prevail: What? Can it be sense to make a show abroad at
the Expense of your Content and Peace at home? What? is it not much better to
be modest, and safe, to be humble and at ease, than to suffer daily anxieties
and perplexities, and to have your Mind always upon the rack, how to answer and
satisfy the Importunities of Pride and Vanity? It Is worse yet, when a short
piece of Pageantry ends in perpetual Infamy, when this impotent Humor is
nourished by Robbery and Injustice, by Fraud and Cheat committed upon Widows
and Orphans, Acquaintance and Friends, and the nearest Relations. I must
confess, I am amazed to think that any ones Pride should be tickled by a false
and fatal Grandeur, upheld only by Wrong and Injustice, and resolving in a
moment into endelible shame and unretrivable ruin. For my part, I should in
this case look upon Bravery, not as the Marks of Greatness, but Ornaments of a
Sacrifice; not as the pomp of a Triumph, but a Funeral; and my luscious
Morsels, how pleasing soever to my Palate, would be ready to rise and recoile
in my Stomach. As to those who seem to scorn their Profession, I have but this
to say, Let them find out a more thriving one before they leave the old one,
before they desert the Profession they were bred to for its meanness, let them
make sure of a more honorable Employment, or else the scorn they load their
Trade with, will be want of sense, not greatness of Spirit; a lazy Pride, not a
generous Ambition; and if so, I am sure there is no Profession so mean as that
of sloth and looseness.

Sect. 2.
The second sort of Rules are such as concern the Religion of the Trader or
Artisan, for it is to little purpose that he thrive in his Secular, if he run
out in his Christian Calling, for this is but to be fortunate, and yet
miserable. Therefore,

First, He must be sure that his Calling be lawful.

Secondly, That it be carried on with Truth, Justice, and Charity.

Thirdly, That his Attendance on the Business of this World, do not extinguish
his Concern for a better, and his Trade devour his Religion, as Pharaoh's lean
Kine did the fat ones.

Fourthly, That he propose to himself proper and rational Ends of Trading.

First, He must be sure that his Calling be lawful; that is, such as is neither
forbidden by any Law of God, or the Magistrate, nor does in its own Nature
minister to Vice. But that I may not perplex Men's Minds with unnecessary
Scruples, and tempt them to doubt of the lawfulness of all Trades, that are any
way made the Instruments of Sin and Folly, you must know some things minister
to sin directly and necessarily, others only accidentally, and not by the
immediate Intention of the Artist or Trader, but the abuse of others. The
former sort of Traders are unlawful in themselves, and no pretense can
sanctify the use of them; he that directly and immediately ministers to a sin,
communicates in the guilt of it, as he that purveys for the Lust of others,
partakes of the sin of the Adulterer and Fornicator; but those which Minister
not purposely and immediately, but accidentally, are yet in themselves lawful;
nor shall the Trader communicate in those Abuses to which the Lusts and
Vanities of others prostitute them: Thus Taverns are not unlawful, because
abused by Intemperance, nor are all Shops of Clothing to be shut, because
thence People furnish themselves with such things as inflame their Immodesty
and Pride; the Reason is plainly this, because the sin may be separated from
the Trade; that Wine, whose full Draughts are by some made use of to the
defacing Reason, and enkindling Lust, may as well refresh the weary and delight
the moderate; those Garments which adorn the Proud and Wanton, may be made use
of to add a Luster to Greatness. The Inconvenience would be insufferable, if
every Profession which did but indirectly and casually administer to Vice, were
therefore sinful, the Courts of Justice must be laid aside, because often times
the Bar and Bench have contributed to oppress, injure, and rob in form of Law.
The Pulpit must be for ever silenced, because Men have sometimes sown the Seeds
of Sedition and Slavery from hence. All the Arts, either of War or Peace, have
sometimes served the Cruelty of the one, and Luxury of the other, and by
consequence would be banished out of all Commonwealths. Yet here it must be
confessed, that the more or less tendency any Trade has to the promoting Vice,
it is in the same proportion the more or less eligible. And that it imports
men, who love their Peace and Happiness more than gain, not to debauch their
Callings themselves, by prostituting them to Extravigances and Exorbitances,
and projecting Profit from the Intemperances and Sins, that is, the Ruin of
others; for it is not sufficient to the Peace and Comfort of a Man's Mind that
his Calling be innocent, if his Conduct of it be not so to.

Secondly, Trade ought to be managed with Truth, Justice, and Charity; for
without these it is only a more cleanly Art of Cheating or Oppression; Sins
which I doubt can receive but little excuse or mitigation from the custom and
practice of them: Without these Trade cannot be regular and easy, nor Gain
comfortable and delightful, since no man can have any Confidence in the
protection of God, when the Methods of his thriving are such as merit
Vengeance, not a Blessing; nor can I see any thing that can betray Men into
Lying and Knavery, but the want of true Sense, as well as true Faith, since tho
many by undue ways have more suddenly enriched themselves, yet it is evident
that the Wealth which is more regularly purchased is more pleasant, durable,
and lasting; and that honest and equitable Dealing is the surest, if not the
speediest way to Wealth. Nor are there, I believe, many Instances of Men, who
if they understood their Business, have ever suffered much by their Uprightness
and Integrity in Dealing, it being very hard to imagine that a Trader should be
a loser by those Virtues which advances Credit and Reputation: But however this
be, I am not now inquiring after Wealth, but Happiness, to the obtainment of
which I am very positive that the observation of these Measures, is
indispensible, since the contrary must needs pervert the Mind, and entangle
Life; and as they extinguish in the Soul all Sparks of Honor and Greatness, so
must they its Courage and Confidence, Tranquillity and Peace, which can result
from nothing but the due Moderation of our Affections, and the Conscience of
our Integrity.

Thirdly, The Traders Attendance on his Calling must not discharge him from his
attendance on Religion, It Is true, it is commonly said and generally admitted,
that the duty of every ones Secular Calling is a part of Religion, but this
ought to be well understood, that so neither a Veneration for Religion breed a
neglect of your Callings, nor an over-fond Opinion of the Merit of Industry in
your Calling, as if all Virtue were comprised in it, breed a Contempt of
Religion; it is fit therefore to put you in mind, that Arts and Trades have not
in themselves any direct or immediate tendency, either to the improvement of
Reason, or the production of Virtue, they minister to the Necessities of this
World, not the Glories of another; nor are they so much the Works of a Rational
and Spiritual, as of a Mortal and Indigent Being; from whence it follows, that
tho they are necessary to the present state of things, yet can they deserve to
employ you no longer than either the public Benefit or private Convenience
require it, and that you are then only wisely taken up about these, when
neither your Endowments nor Fortunes capacitate you for a Life more immediately
and directly serviceable to the purposes of Reason and Revelation; and finally,
that the Works of a Secular Profession are then only acceptable Sacrifices to
God, when consecrated by wise Principles and Virtues cleaving to and mingling
with them. Do not therefore think that a Pretense of Business can Cancel your
Obligations to the Duties of Christianity. If a Man could fancy, which I never
can, Business and Religion incompatible, it is evident which were to be
preferred, since if the will of God were so, it is much better to be starved
than to be damned; But without carrying the matter so far, it is plain that
Virtue and Religion, with a competency, render Men abundantly more happy than
Wealth can do, if attended with the neglect or contempt of either; it is the
riches of the Mind makes men great and happy; the ignorant and irreligious can
never be either. Let no man therefore think that he suffers any Damage, if he
be forced to maintain his Virtue and Religion by the diminution of his Trade,
tho I cannot comprehend that there can be a necessity of this; for I have never
yet observed any Man so oppressed and overcharged with Business, as not to
find time for Pleasure, when he has pretended he could find none for Religion.
In a word, the neglect of Religion is capable of no excuse, not only because
your future, but present happiness depends upon it; Modesty or Moderation to
curb a vain and ambitious thirst of Wealth; Faith or Confidence in the
Providence of God, to restrain you from mean, base, and unlawful Courses;
Self-resignation to prevent anxiety, and those fears to which the
Uncertainties, Changes, and Revolutions of Times and Trades make Men subject,
seem to me as necessary to the Peace and Happiness of a Trader, as a competent
Stock, Industry, or Skill can be to his Worldly Success or Prosperity; and tho
Men, who allow themselves no time, either for Attendance upon Public Religion,
or Private Meditation, may talk finely of these Virtues by way of Notion and
Speculation; It is impossible they should be really possessed of them; How can
he get Wisdom that holds the Plough, and that glories in the goad that
drives Oxen, and is occupied in their Labors, and whose talk is of Bullocks?
which the Author of Ecclesiasticus, by a parity of Reason, extends further to
all Traders and Artisans, who are in like manner wholly taken up in their Art.
I could therefore wish that those words of our Savior, What shall it profit a
man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, were writ in
Capital Letters in the most conspicuous place of the Counting House, and the
Shop, that you might ever and anon be put in mind, that there is one thing more
necessary, even than the diligent and prosperous management of your Trade,
namely Religion; for to what purpose is it that your Books are well kept, that
there is order and regularity in the whole Conduct of your Trades, if at the
same time your neglected Hearts lie like the Field of the Slugga^^ waste and
open, and overgrown with Briers and Thorns and Weeds; or like a confused and
entangled Stock of an ununskilful Trader, which wastes and decays each day? To
what purpose is it that you be punctual Dealers toward Men, if you be
Bankrupts toward God? To what purpose is it that you have Credit and Honor
upon the Change, if you be poor and beggarly, shameful and sneaking in your
selves within, having your Souls destitute of any true Peace, Wealth, or
Courage, and you shift the Accusations and Importunities of Conscience, as much
as a wretched Debtor would a severe and inexorable Creditor? Ah! while you
pursue the World, forget not that there is a Heaven; and while you make
Provision for Time, make some to for Eternity; let your stating your Accounts
with Men, put you in mind of clearing your Accounts with God; and let these two
things never be out of your thoughts, first, That it is God who gives Man power
to get Wealth; and next, That it is not a clear Estate, but a clear Soul that
makes Man happy, I mean a Soul freed from silly and vile Affections, and
enriched with a Knowledge and Love of God and Goodness.

Fourthly, The Trader must propose to himself proper and rational Ends of
Trading. For whoever proposes to himself vain and false ones, will entangle his
Life in manifold Troubles and Temptations, and lose his Reason, Religion, and
Tranquillity in the Windings and Mazes of wretched Fancies, and unaccountable
Projects. These Ends of Trading I take to be these Three: First, A competent
and honest Support of your Selves and Families. Secondly, A charitable Succor
and Relief of others. Thirdly, A timely Retreat from a Secular Calling to a
Contemplative Life.

First, A competent and honest Support of your selves and Families. This end is
pointed out by the Apostle, Titus 3.14. and called necessary uses; i. e. we
must design in Trade the support of the Necessities, not Lusts of Nature. And
were not all Trades over-stocked, and consequently the observation superfluous,
I should tell you that public, as well as private Necessities, were here to be
understood. Nor is your Care here limited to your own Necessities only, but
those also of your Children and Posterity demand their share in it; but then,
least under this pretense you extend your Desires beyond all Bounds, you are to
remember, that in resolving the Measures of this Provision, you are not to take
Counsel of your own Ambition, or the wanton Expectations of your Children, that
Provision for them is wisest which lays a sufficient Foundation for their
Industry to build on, and leaves them under an Obligation to Business and
Employment. And is not this enough? To what purpose should Men toil, cark, and
pinch to make their Families rich and great, that is lazy and wanton, to leave
behind them an Estate which their own Example proves more than necessary, for
most of those that do so, have made little use of it themselves? Mistake me
not, I do not think it unlawful to be rich, or to leave ones Family so; but I
think it foolish and sinful too, to sacrifice the Peace of ones Mind, and the
Ease of ones Life, to the Lust of Riches: I think it silly and vicious to raise
a Family by meanness and sordidness, or to lay the Foundation of Childrens
Greatness in ones own Infamy. In short, it is not Wealth, but an inordinate
Passion for it which I condemn. Prosperity is the Gift of God, a common Reward
of Christian Virtues; for Christianity is said to have the Promises of this
Life, and that which is to come. Wealth then may be received, but it must not
be designed as your first and chief End. Thus Fame, Honor, and Power are great
Blessings and Favors of Heaven, but whoever immoderately thirsts after the one
or the other, is ambitious and vain glorious. You may receive Temporal good
things with Gratitude, and enjoy them with Moderation, but if you dote upon
them, you violate the Vow of your Baptism, and virtually renounce your Faith;
for would not this be to forget that Heaven were your Kingdom and Country, and
Earth the place of your Exile, or at best Pilgrimage? This is a Lesson can
never be too often inculcated, not only on the account of that violent
Opposition it is almost every where encountered with, but also the vast
Importance it is of, to the quiet and contentment of a Trading Life, this one
thing is the Philosophy, the Trader should be ever studying, the Wisdom he
should be daily pursuing, that is, a true and just Moderation of his Desires of
Wealth. Did Man know how to bound his Desires by the Necessities or
Conveniences of Humane Life? Could he regulate his Appetites by the modesty and
moderation of Christianity, not by custom and fancy? I am confident this one
thing alone would rescue him from the far greater part of Evils and
Encumbrances which infest Humane Life, Vanity, and Ambition, Envy and
Emulation, Wantonness and Fancy, create most of these Difficulties and
Necessities which stain the Beauty, disturb the Peace and Order, and destroy
the Pleasure of Life. When Men's Desires and Aims are too big for their
Callings, they are unavoidably plunged into Discontent and doubtful Projects;
and if they sink not finally into Ruin, they cannot be held up but by such an
anxious and restless Prosecution of the World, as looks rather like Hurry or
Distraction, than Trade or Employment. I can therefore never think a Tradesman
happy, till he has modesty enough to find content in the Revenue of a moderate
and easy Trade; till he understands what are the Bounds his Nature and his
Station sets him; and tho he know how to enjoy a great Fortune, does never want
one; has Sense enough to use it, and Virtue enough not to let his Happiness
depend upon it.

Secondly, A charitable Succor and Relief of others. It Is confessed by all,
that Men are born, not for themselves only, but for others too; and God, the
Dispenser of Temporal Wealth, commands such as are rich in this World, to be
rich in good Works too; but it is always to be provided, that Justice do first
take place, and then Charity. This Direction therefore supposes the Traders
Accounts to stand fair, it supposes him to have discharged the Duties which he
owes to his Relatives and Dependants, or else to have none. I will not insist
on the Obligation or Pleasure of Charity; I will not press you to it by the
Interest of your present or future Happiness; for the truth is, to do right to
the Trading World, there is no rank or order of Men in the Kingdom, that is
more sensible of the Duty of Charity, or more inclined and disposed to it, none
that give more eminent Proofs of it while living, or leave more glorious
Monuments of it behind them. One thing only I will take upon me to recommend to
you, that is, the Advice of Solomon; Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it
with thy might: for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in
the Grave whether thou go; that is, what ever Good you design to do, do it
speedily, and as much as in you lies, be your own Executors. How often are
excellent Purposes strangled in the Birth by an unexpected Death? How
frequently are they perverted by the corruption and negligence of those to
whose inspection they are committed? Besides, this way, you shall reap the
Fruit of your own Plantations, you will enjoy the Pleasure and Satisfaction
resulting from the Perfection, Beauty, and good Contrivance of the Foundations
you have laid, or you will be able to supply the Defects, or correct the Errors
of your Model, and prevent those future Miscarriages which such Designs are
liable to. Tho all this be very much, yet it is but the least part of what you
will reap from being your selves the Executors of your own Bounty, you will be
sure that you dedicate it to Charity, not to Vanity, that you are building
Almes-houses for the Living, not Tombs and Pyramids for the Dead; you will
escape that common Cheat and Imposture the Rich put upon themselves, while they
entangled themselves in Covetousness all their Lives, under pretense of
designing mighty things after Death.

Thirdly, The Tradesman ought to propose to himself a timely Retreat, i. e. if
the Necessities of this indigent State will give way to it; which seems to me
natural to finish Business e're we finish Life; to lay down our Burden ere we
tire and fall under the weight of it, and quit troublesome Employments, before
our bungling discharge of them proclaim the decay of our parts and strength,
and the increase of our Avarice and Ambition: Nay, the very continuance of the
same Cares for the World, which looked before like Prudence, will in old Age be
reckoned Sin and Folly: To Trade, is but to make Provision for Life; and
therefore since common Sense will tell us that we must not be always providing
for Life, and never live: It Is plain Men ought, if they may, at length break
off their Trade, or at least so contract it, that it may be rather Diversion
than Travel; as Solomon sends us to the Ants to learn Industry, so might he
learn Wisdom too, the Enjoyment of their Treasure in the Winter being no less
an Instance of the one, than their Labor in laying it up in the Summer of the
other. Besides, in ripe years, the Advice of the Prophet seems to be addressed
to every Man, Set thy House in order, for thou shall surely dye, and not live;
i. e. state your Accounts, settle your Fortune, compose the Differences of your
Family, and fix your Children, so that you may be able to discern what course
they will stear when you are gone, and to correct any Error they are apt to
fall into, while you live, which may otherwise, when you are dead, prove
incorrigible and destructive. If these Motives, taken from Decency, Prudence,
and Mortality, seem too light, there is another of more weight and moment
behind, that is, the consideration of your Eternal Interest. It Is highly
necessary to leave the World before you be torn from it, and to acquaint your
selves more familiarly with another World, before you pass into it to make your
abode in it for ever. Certainly it requires some time to prepare the Soul for
Death and Judgment; and that Man will be very unfit for either, who is carried
from the Counter to the Grave, and from the Intanglements of Secular Cares to
the Tribunal of God. But besides the Benefits which you will find in
Retirement, the Prospect and Proposal of it has many in it; the hopes of a
Sabatick year in Life, will ease the weight and travel of those that precede
it, and a design of of Retreating from Trade and Business will be apt to induce
Men to pass their first years with more Moderation and Abstinence, that they
may the sooner provide the means of an easy or honorable Retirement.

These Rules well observed would free the Negotiating Life from all the great
Evils and Inconveniences it is subject to. Business, as it was in the time of
Innocence, would be, not the Curse, but the Blessing of Mankind; and Trade
would be as easy and innocent, if not as pleasant as Adam's Husbandry in his
Garden; for thus Industry would be without Drudgery, and Care without Anxiety;
Commerce would be carried on without any mean or ill Artifice, without
impatient and tormenting Designs, or tiresome and vexatious Disappoinments.
What need would there be of Shifts and Equivocations, of Fraud and
Circumvention, if a Man had Faith enough to believe that God's Blessing upon
his Industry were the only way to grow truly rich, I mean to get, if not so
much as he would, yet as much as would be good for him? What Temptation would
Man lie under to Bondage and Drudgery, or to Perplexity and Anxiety, if he
could contain his Desires within those narrow Bounds which Nature and his
Station have prescribed him? What Fears could disquiet the Mind, which were
formed into an entire Resignation to and Dependence upon God? Or how could the
World ensnare that Soul which allots a proper time for Public Religion, and
Private Meditation? In one word, these Rules being followed, Men would not only
avoid the common Rocks on which the Happiness and Fortune of the Trader
generally dashes, but also attain the end of this sort of Active Life, they
would get Estates in their younger years, and enjoy them in their riper; nay,
no portion of Life would want its proper and seasonable Enjoyments, they would
in the midst of Business preserve their Innocence, and when they did retire
from it, they would perfect that Religion which they could before but begin,
and enrich and adorn and entertain the Soul, which they could but guard and
defend before, and scarcely maintain in Life, I mean Spiritual Life.

CHAP. IV.
Of a Contemplative Life.

For whom this Chapter is designed; what kind of Life is to be understood by a
Contemplative one.

Sect. 1. The Ends or Reasons warranting the Choice of such a Life; First,
Enjoyment; Secondly, Self-preservation from the Assaults of Temptation;
Thirdly, The better Serving the World; Fourthly, A more entire Dedication of
ones self to God.

Sect. 2. The Conditions, or Qualifications necessary to a Contemplative Life;
First, A Plentiful Fortune; Secondly, A peaceable and humble Disposition;
Thirdly, A good Understanding.

Sect. 3. The Regulation of a Contemplative Life; with respect, First, To Time;
Secondly, To Place; Thirdly, To the Exercise or Employment of a retired Life.
The Conclusion, containing the Pleasure and Happiness of a Contemplative Life.

THE first thing that offered it self to my thoughts, taking a view of this
Subject, was, the Collegiate Life of Scholars in the Universities; but besides
that here they do not so much design to retire from the World, as to prepare
themselves for it; I had reason to think, whatever Service I could propose to
do the Public by any Advice I could here offer, my Zeal would never be able to
atone my Presumption, since these Seminaries of Learning, are under the
Conduct and Direction of the Ablest, not of this Age only, but of those passed:
I do not therefore Calculate this Discourse for these, but for Persons of
another Education, and under no Direction but their own; for such, who make
their retreat from the World, tired, and sated with it; for such, whose
Inclination or Fortune casts them upon a quiet, private, and unactive Life; To
these, I offer my self a Companion; I would enter with them into their
Privaces, and assist them to pass their Hours with true Pleasure and Innocence;
I would inspire them, if I could, with wise and excellent Thoughts; I would
engage them in the most necessary and most delightful Business of Humane Life,
and guard them against those Evils and Follies which are apt to insinuate
themselves into the most Solitary Life.

I must here in the next place repeat an Observation which I think I have some
where before made, That the Life of Man must neither be wholly Contemplative,
nor wholly Active; for as Action and Business, without any Meditation, is apt
to alienate the Mind from God and Virtue, to corrupt all that is great and
generous, and truly wise in it, and wed it wholly to the World; so I doubt a
Life spent wholly in Contemplation, without any mixture of Action, will prove
fruitless and unprofitable; and Men condemned to utter Solitude, like the Trees
and Shrubs of the Wilderness, would grow wild and savage, luxuriant in Leaves,
but their Fruit, if they brought forth any, sower and small. They forget the
Nature and the Duty of Man, and talk not Seraphically, but Fantastically;
whoever persuade him to give up himself entirely to Contemplation; Man is yet a
mixed and compound Being, when he becomes all Spirit, let him be all thought: He
is yet a Citizen of this World, tho he be destined for another; let him not
forget that there are Virtues becoming him as such, let him live by intuition,
when he comes into the perfect Light, and enters into the beatifick Presence,
let him live by Raptures, when he is come into a World where Wants and
Frailties, Pains and Evils cannot enter: In the mean time, let Man content
himself with Humane Virtue, and in this low probationary State, not dream of
the Flights which only Angels take; having thus taken care, first to raise no
expectation in my Reader, which might afterward be frustrated; and next
prevented his being betrayed into any Extravigance by projecting a more
abstracted Life, than the Nature of Man and the World will admit, I will now
proceed to Discourse of these three things: First, The Reasons and Ends of a
Contemplative Life. Secondly, The Necessary Qualifications for it. And,
Thirdly, The due Regulations of it.


First, Of the Reasons, etc. Some propose to themselves Ease and Enjoyment, as
the great end and design of their Retirement; now tho this be a mean and low
Project, little becoming the Excellence of our Christian Profession, yet I
cannot but acknowledge, that it seems to me an absurd and irrational thing, to
wear out Life in a continual hurry or drudgery; and I cannot but think it
reasonable, that Men should one time or other allow ease to the Body, and quiet
to the Mind; should set both free from their Servitude to the World, and enjoy
the Wealth which they have got together, and eat the Fruit of their Travel and
Care: But tho this be true, yet if Men do quit the Business, only to give
themselves up to the Pleasures of the World; if they exchange their Anxiety and
Toil for Luxury and Sensuality, and instead of being industrious, plodding, and
thriving Traders, become idle, or which is worse, loose and riotous Country
Gentlemen; this I must confess is but a miserable Change, this is but to
profane Retirement, abuse Plenty, and waste that precious time which God has
made them Masters of; this, in a word, is not for a Man to quit his slavery,
but to exchange his Masters; for as to the interest of another Life, and the
true end of this, it is much the same thing, whether a Man be a Servant to
Pleasure and Sloth, or to Covetousness and Ambition. The sum of this Matter is
plainly this, it is undoubtedly lawful for such as have been long toiled in the
pursuit of the World, to retire and enjoy themselves and their Friends; nay
further, I count them happy, who seem born not to struggle and contend with the
World, but to enjoy it; but if by Enjoyment be here understood, only the
gratification of the Humor by outward, tho innocent Pleasures, I must affirm,
That this is too mean, too low, to be the chief End, either of the ones
Entrance into the World, or the others Retreat from it: But if, which is worse,
by Enjoyment be here meant growing fat with good Eating and Drinking, or as it
were rank and rotten through Ease and Sloth, I deny this to be the Enjoyment of
a Man, much less of a Philosopher or Christian: The Enjoyment of a private Life
or Philosophical Recess, ought to consist in Peace and Order, in Harmony and
Exaltation, in a holy Calm and Serenity, in which, as in a clear day, from the
top of some advantageous height, we Enjoy an enlarged and delightful Prospect;
when we look backwards, we behold a wide Sea covered with a vast number of all
sorts of Vessels, tossed up and down at the mercy of Winds and Waves, some few
seem to make out with a steady Course, but are immediately encountered with
cross Winds and Storms, a very few indeed to return in triumph homewards, and
of these some miscarrying almost in sight of Port; of all the rest, a great
part, with much toil and difficulty, do scarcely live in stress of Seas and
Weather, but the far greater part do suffer wrack, and scatter their miserable
Ruins on every Coast. But when we look forward, we discover a rich and secure
Country, thinly inhabited indeed, but filled with all the Marks of Joy and
Victory. But whither will my Imagination lead me; the Enjoyment of the retired,
is to consist in the pleasant Reflections they make on their Escape out of a
tempestious World, in the Commerce and Intercourse they maintain with that
above; in a calm and leasurely survey of all the various and wondrous Works of
God, the Worlds of Grace and Nature; and lastly, in a very intimate and
familiar Acquaintance with themselves, and the daily habitual practice of
pleasing and perfect Virtues.

Secondly, One true end of Retirement may be Self-defence, or Preservation. An
Active Life is a state of War, and the World is an Hostile Country, Snares and
Ambushes are laid every where for us, and ever and anon Temptations, worldly
and fleshly Lusts, which St. Peter tells us do war against the Soul, do
endeavor either to court and betray us, or to drive and force us into death
and ruin; therefore, if we be conscious to our selves of our own weakness, we
have reason not to expose our selves to dangers, which we have not courage nor
strength enough to vanquish; and to choose Retirement not as a state of
Perfection, but Safety, the Measures of Grace, the Strengths of Reason, and the
Inclinations of Nature, are very different in different Men; whoever therefore,
upon the best survey he can make of his own Forces, and after some, not
insincere Trials, finds himself no Match for the World, unable to countermine
its Policies, and oppose its Power, such a one, if he can, may, nay, I believe
ought retire from the World, as from the face of a too potent Enemy; for tho
War be fuller of Glory, Peace is of Security; and tho an active and busy Life
be in its self more serviceable to the good of Mankind, and the honor of God,
yet in this case, a poor Christian may prefer a Contemplative one as the
securer; and this is not to decline the Service of God and Man, but Sin and
Danger; it is not to prefer Ease and Security before Spiritual Industry and
Glory, but before a rash Presumption, and a fatal Defeat or Overthrow.

Thirdly, Another End of Retirement may be, to render us more beneficial to the
World. The different Talents of different Persons do seem to mark them out, and
destine them to different sorts of Life; there are, if I may so speak, Active
and Contemplative Gifts, and it is a great Felicity for any one to be able to
know himself so well, as to discern what the God of Nature has designed him
for: Some, who are a disgrace to a public Station, would be an Ornament to a
private one; many who act but awkwardly, think and meditate very wisely and
accurately; and some, who do but expose themselves in Business, would pass very
well in Retirement, and prove excellent Examples of Innocence and Virtue, and
wonderfully obliege by their good Nature, Sweetness, and Charity, all such as
should live within the reach of their Influence. None are wont more earnestly
to covet Retirement, than such who are naturally adicted to Learning; Men too
plain, or too great for a crafty add subtle World, too generous, tender, and
easy for a bustling, vexatious and stingy one; these are the Men, who when
they are Masters of their wishes, seem more particularly obliged to dedicate
themselves to some eminent Service of the Public; these must not bury their
Talents, but righten them in quiet and retirement, like Guardian-Angels, they
should procure the honor and happiness of the Palaces which they seldom or
never appear to, and withdrawing only, not to avoid the Service, but the
Foolery of the World, they must ever maintain an Active Charity and Compassion
for those they leave behind caught and entangled in it, and must out of
gratitude travel to obtain some Blessing or other upon that Government, to
whose Protection they owe the Comforts and Security of their Retreat. But tho
this Direction do more immediately concern such as these, that is, Men of
Parts, yet sure there are none utterly exempt from this Obligation of procuring
the Public Good in their Proportion; who is there so destitute of the Gifts of
Grace, Nature, or Fortune, as to have no Mite to cast into the Public
Treasury? He that dares not pretend to attempt the enlightening or reforming the
World, can yet advise and comfort his ignorant or afflicted Neighbor; he who
cannot give Advice at all, may yet give Alms, which very often is as solid and
substantial a benefit; and he that cannot do this, can yet never be excused
from Offering up daily Prayers for the Peace and Welfare of his Country, for
the Preservation and Edification of the Church, for the Conversion of Sinners,
etc. nay he may proceed to what Particularities he shall see fit or necessary,
both in his Petitions and Thanksgivings, and from these Intercessions both the
Public and Private, may, for ought I know, reap more true and valuable
Benefit, than from the Works and Labors of the Learned, or from the Alms and
Bounty of the Rich. To conclude, he that leads the most private and sequestered
Life, and is too of the poorest Endowments, can yet never be supposed utterly
incapable of rendering any the least Service to others, since the single Example
of Virtue and Integrity, and the warmth of a pious and edifying Conversation is
of the greatest use. Some way or other therefore the most solitary Life ought
to serve the Public, that so Retirement may not minister to Wantonness and
Sloth, but Piety and Virtue, and the World may not lose a Member, but enjoy its
Service in its proper place, and most effectual manner.

Fourthly, The main End of Retirement from the World should be, I think, to
dedicate our selves more entirely to God. The Philosopher thought indeed a
Contemplative Life the most happy one, but thought it too a Blessing too great
for Mortal Man, too high for this frail Nature, and above the state and
condition of this World; he had a great deal of Reason on his side, yet must we
press on toward that perfection which we cannot attain; and it is a sufficient
Reason for our doing so, that we shall thus approach nearer to it; tho
therefore what some Monkish Authors have writ of a Solitary Life, equalling
almost the Duties and Pleasures of it, to those of an Angelical one, tho this,
I say, may seem rather holy Romance and Enthusiasm, than grave and sound
Doctrine, yet sure it cannot be denied, but that the Prophets, the Nazarites,
and the Essens amongst the Jews, and many devout and excellent Persons amongst
the Christians, as well in the purest as corruptest Ages of the Church, have
chose and coveted Solitude and Deserts, I mean not uninhabited Places, for that
if it were so, was an Excess and Extravigance, but calm and silent Retreats
from the noise and impertinance, from the hurry and distraction of much
Business and much Acquaintance; and since they did so, their Examples seems to
teach us, That this State may be made eminently useful to our own good, and
God's glory; here a Man seems to have little else to do, but to praise God and
improve himself, to expiate the Errors of his past Life, and to correct and
subdue whatever he feels amiss in himself at present, to perfect and augment
his Graces, and to dress and adorn his Soul for the Festival Solemnities and
Triumph of another World: Now he seems to have nothing to do but to begin his
Halelujahs, to advance into the Borders and Confines of Heaven by Faith and
Devotion, and from the heights of Meditation, to survey as from the next
advantageous Hill, the Riches and the Pleasures of that Canaan which he shall
in a moment enter into; and by this method, no doubt of it, as he shall enlarge
his Appetite and Capacity of Happiness, so shall he enlarge his share in it; by
this method he shall adorn Religion, and represent it to the World as most
lovely and most useful; he shall experiment it to be unspeakably delightful in
it self; he shall render the World more easy to him, and Heaven more
desirable; and when he comes to the Banks of Jordan, that is, of Death, which
parts this World from the other, he shall find the Streams of it divided to
make him way; that is, the Troubles and Terrors of it dissipated, and he shall
pass through it full of humble Gratitude for the Blessings of this past Life,
and ravishing Hopes and Desires of those of the future.

These are the proper and rational Ends of withdrawing from the World, tho I am
not ignorant that there may be several other Inducements to it; such are the
digesting a Discontent or Disgrace, the curing some Passion which would be
otherwise nourished by conversing with its Object, and the mere escaping from
the Troubles and Noise of the World; and as some Men are forced out of their
Retreats into the World, not without great Service to the Public, so are there
others, who if they had sense enough to know themselves, or modesty enough to
hear the Advice of their Friends, should betake themselves to a private Life,
to prevent the Mischiefs in which they are like to involve themselves and
others in a Public one; such are Men of bold and enterprizing Tempers, without
Sufficiency, Men of Zeal and Activity, without Understanding. But I designed
not here so much to consider what might induce Men to embrace a quiet silent
Life, as what Ends they were to propose to themselves when they were in it,
which having done, I will pass on to the second thing.

Sect. 2.
The Qualifications which fit Men for a Retired Life; and these are, I think,
Three.

First, A plentiful, or at least, competent Fortune. Secondly, A mild and
humble Dispoposition, or at least, a quiet and composed Mind. Thirdly, A good
Understanding.
First, A plentiful Fortune. It Is true, that a Competency is sufficient to
render a retired Life easy, and when any one betakes himself to it as a Refuge
or Sanctuary, against the Hostilities and Persecution of Temptations, this is
abundantly enough; but where a Contemplative Life is a matter of Choice, not
Necessity, a plentiful Fortune is of great use, and a great Ornament; it will
make the Example of a Man's Virtue shine with a clearer Luster and greater
Authority; it will enable him to do many Works of Charity, which shall have
much delight in them, without Toil or Disturbance; it will furnish him with all
useful means of Public and Private Devotion, and with whatever is necessary to
enable him to pass his time both delightfully and rationally. I think I have
expressed my thoughts clearly; but to prevent all mistakes, I will add, by a
plentiful Fortune I do not mean a great one, this is more commonly burdensome,
than useful to a private Life, and more apt to incumber it, than promote the
true Ends of it. In my Retirement, I would have decency and order, but not
state and show; I would have comely Plenty, but not a toilsom Affluence; for
the Business of Solitude is to raise the Mind, not to entangle and enslave it:
But the measures of this Wealth must finally be determined by every Man's own
Bosom; for it ought to be proportioned to the Temper and Genius, to the
Capacities and Abilities of the Person who retires, and to the more immediate
Design and Ends of his Retirement; and after all, there is no greater stress to
be laid upon this Qualification than this, It is convenient, but not essential;
tho a wise Man may make an excellent use of it, it is not so absolutely and
indispensably necessary, but that he may be happy without it, both in Public
and Private. For,

Secondly, The Pleasure and Success of Retirement depends much more upon a
Man's Temper and Genius, that it be calm and quiet, that it be meek and humble;
and if it be not naturally so, it must be made so; for a proud and ambitious, a
restless and turbulent Person, will in vain seek for that rest and repose in
sequestring himself from the World, which is to be found only in the subduing
his Passions, and reforming his Nature: He that is fond of Opinion and Esteem,
he that is at the disposal of Fancy and Humor, and is not able to shake off the
Yoke of Fashions and Customs, will find much to torment him, but nothing to
improve or delight him in his Retirement: But on the other hand, the meek and
humble Man will find his Garden a Paradise, and his Solitude a conversing with
God and Heaven; he will enjoy the present without any further Prospect or
Ambition; Meditate without any Distraction; Worship and Praise God, as if he
had no other Business, or Design, and do all the Good he can in his little
Sphere, as if it were the only Pleasure and Entertainment of the Life he had
chose. It Is one of the great Privileges of Retirement, to be able to neglect
fantastic and imaginary Good, and pursue after that only which is solid and
substantial; to be the Masters of our own Time and Actions, and to model Life
by our own Reason and Inclinations, not the Fancies and Humors of others. It Is
the great Advantage of Retirement, that a Man has all the Pleasure his Soul
desires within his own reach, that all of the World that is grateful to him, is
to be found within the verge of his private Abode; he therefore whose Mind gads
abroad, and hankers after Foreign Pleasures, who is tainted with Envy or
Emulation; who hunts after Esteem, and is discomposed by the Fancy and Censures
of others, muddies the pure Stream, corrupts and adulterates the true taste and
relish of a retired Life; this therefore ought to be the first endeavor of him
who seeks Happiness in a retreat; to free his Mind from all those busy or
ambitious Passions, which will disturb his Repose, and corrupt his Taste, and
to reduce it to its native Purity and Simplicity, in which it will be able to
relish the Blessing of true Liberty, of easy and innocent Pleasures, of true
and artless Friendship, of regular and undisturbed Devotion, and finally, of
calm and elevated Meditation.

Thirdly, A good Understanding is a necessary Qualification for Retirement. It
requires no little Prudence to guard our selves against those Evils or
Impertinences which will be apt to invade, or insinuate themselves into our
Solitude; decently to decline Business, Acquaintance, Ceremonies, Diversions, I
mean superfluous and unnecessary, which will rob us of our Time and Liberty,
and obstruct us in all the wise Ends we propose to our selves, is a matter of
no ordinary dexterity and address. Nor does it require less Understanding to
preserve the Peace and Order of a private Family, and yet it is in vain to shun
the infection that is abroad, if more fatal and stubborn Malledies reign at
home. Nay further, the Family of the Contemplative Man, ought not only to give
him no Disturbances, but if possible, it ought to be molded and composed to
his own Humor, and animated by inclinations somewhat at least a kin to his.
Nay, after all, let us suppose the Man so entirely sequested, as to be utterly
disengaged from all other Interests but his own, to have no dependence upon any
others motion, to have none but himself to regard, no other to please, no other
to improve, even here I cannot tell whether so absolute a Liberty do not need
the greater Wisdom to moderate and govern it, and whether it do not require a
larger Capacity to find a proper and wise Employment, for one whose Fortune has
tied him to none at all; they are no ordinary Endowments which will enable one
loose and free from all Business, to spend his time profitably and pleasantly;
and yet if he do not, he will be liable to the worst of Evils; he will dissolve
and putrify in sloth, or else turn sower and savage, churlish and brutish,
through ignorance, disgust, and discontent; nauseated with a Life that affords
him nothing new, nothing taking: But the Book of Nature lies open to him! it is
true, but he cannot read it; it is not every vulgar eye that discerns the
delicate touches of a skilful Pencil, the curious and subtle mixtures of Light
and Shade in a well drawn Piece; it is not every Spectator can judge of the
beauty, strength, and convenience of a well contrived Building. But his Cabinet
may be well furnished it is true, but if the Man have nothing Bookish in him, if
he have no Genius for Eloquence, no Ear for the Music of Wit and Fancy, no
Judgment for History, no Comprehension for Arts or Sciences, what is a Cabinet
to him, tho furnished ever so well, either for use or rarity, it is only fit to
be shown, or to sleep in, for after all the cost and skill laid out upon it,
the Couch is the best Furniture in it. But there is Friendship! there is; the
Name indeed there is, but the Thing is too Divine; a low and grovelling Soul, a
dull and impenetrable Temper cannot discern the Charms, nor taste the Sweets of
Friendship; what is that Familiarity which is incapable of Tenderness or
Passion? what is that Conversation which is incapable of variety, or depth, of
Wit, or Judgment? But there is Religion, there is Devotion, a boundless Field
of Profit and Delight! it is true; and the Principles of this are plain and
strong, able to move the Man of lowest Capacity to decline Evil, follow his
Calling, and do good in proportion to his Sense and Ability; but as to
Seraphick Contemplative Religion, for this to be the Life and Business of Man,
it requires a vast Capacity, raised and refined Notion, and little less than
real Enthusiasm; I mean a truly Divine Impetus or Ardour impressed or inkindled
in the Soul, by the exuberant influxes of the blessed Spirit. In a word, he who
in his Retreat is entirely Master of himself and Time, had need of Talents to
employ and divert him to find him Business and Pleasure, and to enable him to
reap benefit from the one, and to preserve his Innocence in the other; and
without this degree of Understanding, a solitary Life must be very dull and
barren; nor can I think of any Cure for this, but to increase a Man's Task and
Business, in proportion to the defect of his Understanding, that so Employment
may fill those Vacuities which Contemplation never can. This puts me in mind to
advance on to the third thing proposed.

Sect. 3.
The Regulations of a Contemplative Life, which regards either, First, The
Time; Secondly, The Place; or, Thirdly, The Exercise and Employment of
Retirement.

First, As to Time. Tho Contemplation, more or less, ought to enter into every
part of our Lives, yet the most seasonable time of giving our selves more
entirely up to it, is the Evening of Life, the Declension of our Age; we have
then had our fill of the World, and shall not be like to hanker after it; we
have seen the emptiness of it, and shall be more like to fix upon solid Good;
we shall value our Peace and Calm the more, after we have been long tossed by
Storms; besides, we shall set our selves more seriously to the Meditation of
Death and Judgment, when we are come within Ken of them, and shall be apt to
examine the intrinsic good and evil of things with more impartiality, when the
Heats of Youth, and the Boilings of our Passions are cooled and slak'd: And
finally, this is a seasonable time to correct and repair the Errors of the past
Life, and to state our Accounts for the last Audit. But tho I thus prefer Age,
as most fit for a retired Life, I do not dissuade the younger from it, provided
it be Virtue, not Softness, the love of another World, not a cowardly declining
the Duties of this, which prompts them to it; otherwise, it were sure much
better that the younger sort, through the vigorous season of Life, should be
engaged and taken up by Business; nay, should contend even with the Cares,
Troubles, and Difficulties of the World, rather than make choice of Retirement
to be the Scene of a voluptuous, lazy, and unprofitable Life; for in the one
case something is every day learnt, something done, in the other nothing; in
the one, the Man lives neither dishonorable to himself, nor unuseful to his
Country; but in the other, herots and consumes away ingloriously and
unprofitably.

Secondly, As to Place. Solitude has ever been deemed a Friend to Meditation,
and a Retirement from the World very serviceable to a Conversation with Heaven:
And this Opinion is much strengthened by the practice of the Nazerites,
Prophets, and devout Persons in the best times. It Is remarked of Isaac, that
when he would meditate, he went out into the Field; and when Moses met God, it
was in the Desert. Without question, a private Retreat affords us many
Conveniences and Advantages to a Contemplative Life; leisure and silence settle
and compose the Thoughts, and the Mind augments its strength and vigor by
rest, complacency, and collection within it self; and in this state of Serenity
it is most fit to reflect upon it self, or enter into a survey of the Rest and
Peace of glorified Spirits, and examine the Grounds of its own hopes; by
Retirement we at least in a great measure free and disengage our selves from
those things which are apt either to soften or disturb us, and to breed in us
either Vanity or Vexation. And I cannot tell, but the fineness of Air, the
openness of Prospect, the Regularity and Moderation of Diet, Rest, and
Exercise, may have that influence upon our Bodies, as to dispose and prepare
them to be the fitter Instruments of the Mind; to all this we may add, that the
variety, beauty, and use of all the Works of Nature, do insensibly and almost
unawares raise in us an admiration of the Divine Wisdom, and invite us to adore
his Power and Goodness. But all this notwithstanding, it must ever be
remembered, that Retirement does not so much consist in Solitude of Place, as in
freedom from Secular Business and Troubles, from the Allurements, Distractions,
and Vexations of the World; if if we put these off, we may find Retirement
enough in the most populous City, but if we carry these with us into the
Country, we shall reap little benefit from change of Place or Air; and under
the Name of Retirement, we shall be persecuted with all the Evils and Mischiefs
with which Vanity, Disorder, and Distraction are wont to disquiet an active and
busy Life: This being rightly understood, the Nature of our Circumstances
ought to govern us in choosing the Place of our Retreat, but especially a
regard to such Duties, wherein we propose to spend the bigger portion of our
Time.

Thirdly, The Exercise and Employment of a Contemplative Life is now to be
considered: And here these several things offer themselves immediately to my
Thoughts, Business, Diversion, Friendship, Meditation, as comprizing all the
several Acts of a Contemplative Life, and measuring out the several Periods of
the Ascetick's time.

First, Of Business. I have before said, That a Life of mere Contemplation, is
above the nature and state of Man; and when I consider how few are capable of
any long or regular Contemplations, I am apt to think, that the wisest way for
most is, not to discharge and free themselves from all Temporal Engagements,
but only from such as will disturb the Peace and Order of a retired Life; and
yet I could wish, that their growth and improvement in Knowledge and Goodness,
might be their main Business and Employment. So many indeed are our Errors and
Sins, so frail, tender, and weak our Virtue, that to correct the one, and
confirm the other, is Business enough, and may of it self easily take up the
whole of Life: If we pursue diligently all the Methods of the Improvement and
Advancement of Life, we shall need no other Arts or Employments to spend or
divert our time; he that besides a constant attendance upon Public Devotion,
Sacraments, and Sermons, bestows some time each day on bewailing his Sins, and
blessing God for his Mercies; on examining his present state, and establishing
his future hopes; he that spends each day but a few Thoughts on God and Jesus
Christ his Redeemer, on the vanity and uncertainty of all things in this World,
but Religion and Virtue, or finally on Death and Judgment, and withal on the
various Arts by which Sin and Folly is wont to cheat or surprise him, to tempt
or deceive him, will, I believe, find but few hours to waste; especially when
it is considered how much Time the Necessities of Nature, and the Indispensible
Duties we owe to some Relatives or other, take up. And this calls to my mind
the Vigilance and Industry we owe to the Happiness of others, as well as to our
own: There are a great many Offices of Charity, to which Humanity and our
Christian Profession (if we understand the nature of Church Membership) do
oblige us; the Peace of the Neighborhood, the Preservation of Laws, the
promoting Public Piety, the Instruction of the Ignorant, the Relief of the
Needy, the Comfort of the Afflicted, the Protection of the Injured; these, and
such like Occasions, will never be wanting to rouse our Zeal, and employ our
Charity; and these are Works which will turn to as good, if not a better
account in the Life to come, than Solitary Virtue: And certainly they turn to
excellent account in this; for when the retired Man does cultivate the
Neighborhood, and sow it with his Charity, he seems but to plant and water his
own Garden, or plough and sow his own Fields; and while he renders them more
rich, gay, and fertile, himself reaps the Pleasure and the Profit, enjoys the
Prospect, and feasts on the Fruit: Just so it is in this piece of Spiritual
Husbandry; he who imparts Wisdom and Instruction to another, purifies and
exalts his own Mind; he that scatters the Expressions of his Bounty and
Charity, feels his Soul warm and delighted, and finds his Virtue and his Joy
enlarged; for it is with Grace as it is with Nature, the Exercise of each breeds
both strength and pleasure; to all which you may add, That no Man consults more
effectually the Interest and the Pleasure of his Retirement, than he who most
zealously studies the Support and Improvement of his Neighborhood. Here Is
Business enough, and I could point out to you more.

But why should I take pains to contrive and cut out Work for the Contemplative
Man? Peradventure I should do him more Service, could I teach him an Art to
decline it. Alas! Business will hunt and follow us, it will intrude and press
upon us, whether we will or no; and such is the natural Vanity, such the
Curiosity of our Minds, that we are too often apt to make our selves work, and
to entangle our selves in a thousand Trifles and Impertinences; I doubt
therefore that it is here very needful, to put those I am discoursing to in
mind, to take care, that whilst they shun the Trouble and Business of the
World, they suffer not themselves to be entangled in Impertinences of their own
creating; that they mind and pursue the main End, that is, growth and increase
in Virtue, and be at all times ready to sacrifice Trifles and Matters of less
Moment to this their great Interest, least Fancy and Humor, or something
worse, usurp the place of Reason, as it does too often happen, in a Life of
absolute and uncontrollable Liberty.

Secondly, Diversion. This is not to be excluded from a Solitary Life; they
adulterate Religion, who make it sower or melancholy, it condemns nothing but
what infects the purity, or breaks the force and vigor of the Mind; we are not
immortal and incorruptible Beings, the Soul and Body both (for it were vain to
contradict universal Experience) sink under the weight of constant Labor, it
will be hard, if not impossible, to preserve the vigor of the Mind, if we
destroy the health of the Body. God in another World designs us Spiritual
Bodies, as the most proper Instruments of these active Minds, let us not
therefore make them here crasie and sickly; I would never have my Religion be
the effect of a broken Body, but an enlightened Mind; I would never have it
proceed from discontent conceived against this World, but from the firm belief,
love, and admiration of a better; whatever therefore Diversion recreates my
Mind without ensnaring it, whatever repairs my Body without impairing my
Virtue, I embrace with open Arms, I Will not only taste but drink my fill of
Pleasure, if it exalt not, debase my Nature, I shall never complain that my
Mind is too cheerful, or my Body too vigorous. Let the Priests of Baal cut
themselves with Knives and Lancets, I Will keep my Blood and Spirits if I can, to
support my Zeal, and enrich my Fancy; and in one word, to serve God with Life.
No body can here mistake me, unless they do it wilfully, and therefore it is not
worth the while to anticipate any wild Objections; I patronize not the Lust but
the Vigor of the Body; I invite not to the sensuality of a polluted Fancy, but
to the virtuous recreation of the Mind: And while I think not a dejected and
discontented Mind, and a decayed Body, the most acceptable Sacrifice to God, I
do by no means deny a penitent contrite Spirit, a purified and obsequious Body
to be so.

Thirdly, As to Friendship. The distinction between Acquaintance and Friends is
ever good, but never more proper or necessary than here; for Retirement, as it
signifies sequestring our selves from Company, is to be understood with
discretion; and the plain Rule here, as in all other Cases, is to avoid
Extremes, as a Crowd, so Solitariness seems not to minister, either to the
Virtue or Improvement of the Mind, or to the Peace and Calm of Life; the one
robs us of our Time, the other leaves us so much, that to very many it becomes
burdensome; the one makes us, vain, trifling, or it may be worse sensual, the
other dull and slow, or it may be morose and savage. The skill of a
Contemplative Man, is not to decline all Company, but provide himself of good.
The Prophets themselves had their Colleges; and they in the first Times, who
left the Cities for the Desert, did yet associate themselves with one another.
Indeed, as I take it, in this kind of Life we have the fullest Enjoyment, and
the best Service of our Friends, the purest Delight, and the truest
Edification, being best promoted in the Contemplative Life by Friendship; and
therefore Friendship is no more to be banished from the Gardens and Retirements
of the Contemplative, than from the Tables and Enjoyments of the Active.

Fourthly, Devotion. Participation of the Lord's Supper, and Meditation, are
the remaining parts of the Ascetick Life, and indeed these ought to be his
great Employment. A Life in the World may be a Life of Business, but a retired
one ought to be a Life of Prayer, Eucharist, and Meditation: Nor indeed can it
well be otherwise, unless we have proposed to our selves some false Ends of
Retirement; for these are not only the Duties, but the Pleasures of the
Ascetick Life; in these the Soul's enlightened, enlarged, raised, ravished; in
these it sores up to Heaven, and looks down upon Earth; in these it possesses
Stability and Security, Peace and Rest, in the midst of a frail instable
Nature, and a restless and tumultuous World; in these all the Passions of the
Soul are exercised with a most tender sensible delight, sorrow, fear, or
reverence; Hate and Indignation, do here express themselves to the height, not
only without any disorder or torture, but also with great contentment and
satisfaction of our Nature; Love, Hope, Joy reign here without either Check or
Satiety. But I forget that these Subjects are so rich and inexhaustible, they
would engage me endlesly; I forget that they have been treated of so often and
so excellently; I will therefore contract my Sails, and yet I think I have said
nothing of them, but as they have a particular aspect upon the Subject of this
Chapter, and I cannot pass over Meditation without making some few Reflections
upon it: I know it is a worn Subject, and therefore, that I may the more easily
find Pardon, I Will take care that this superfluous Impertinence, if it be one,
shall be a very short one. I will therefore take the liberty to crowd my
Thoughts without Method together, lest Order and Connection should take up more
Paper than the Things themselves. A good beginning is more than half the Work,
is a Proverb no where truer than here; for Meditation will be like to end very
unprofitably, if we enter not upon it in a good Disposition and devout Frame,
and if we do, it seldom succeeds ill.

The Soul therefore ought to be sedate, calm, untouched by any worldly Concern,
pure and unsullied by any Carnal Image, filled with the desire of Spiritual
Influence, possessed with the awe of the Divine Majesty.

Yet may sudden and extraordinary Acts of Meditation be ingrafted upon the
Stock of our Natural Passions, however first raised: Thus a troubled Mind,
betaking it self to reflect upon the Vanity of the World, or upon the Errors of
Life and Corruption of Nature, may enlarge it self in a great many very fine,
affecting, and edifying Thoughts, till the Storm dissolve into a soft and
fruitful Shower. Thus the Mind, a little gay with satisfaction or joy, will
easily overflow into Halelujahs, if it enter into the Meditation of the Joys of
Heaven, the Love and Beauty of God, the Triumphs of the Resurrection, etc.

In all Meditation we ought to have more regard to Edification than Learning,
to Charity than Knowledge, to devout Passions, than Fancy or Curiosity.

Let none despise pious Heats and Transports, because these short Passions,
often repeated, will grow into habitual Holiness, and steady Devotion.

Those Arguments which we find most effectual to the repressing an inordinate
Affection, or to the cherishing a weak and pining Virtue, are to be often
ruminated; not only that they may be always ready, but also because they are
generally more successful than others, which may yet be in themselves of
greater strength and force; for Sins, like the Slaves in Justin, are often more
easily defeated by Whips and Scourges, than by Swords.

The Principles which do the great Work of Religion, are few, clear and
irresistible, but a vast Body of Sentences, Notions, Arguments, untried,
undigested, are like the Armor of Saul upon David, unmanagable and cumbersome.

Disputable or intricate Points do yield little or no Nourishment; Wit and
Fancy are also for Ornament, not Food.

Yet weak Stomachs must be fed with easy and digestable Diet; and this may be
made too as pleasant and inviting as it can. God in the Works of Nature has
mingled Beauty with Use, Pleasure with Profit, why should we think this
unlawful in the Kingdom of Grace? Variety also may be called in to prevent
languor and drowsiness; nay, if the Genius of the Man be such, that his Mind is
apt to be exalted, and as it were purified by them, I know not why notional and
thin, or mysterious and deep Speculations should be forbidden him; only in
these, and such like Instances, two Errors are to be avoided: First, That we do
not study more for Delight and Entertainment, than for Edification in Faith and
Virtue. Secondly, That we do not obtrude our Fancies as Oracles, our Dreams as
Articles of Faith upon the World. If I cannot indulge or abound in both, give
me the luxury of Love rather than that of Fancy, and let me excel in Humility
and Modesty rather than Knowledge and Notion.

St. Peter, in those few words, 1 Epist. 2.2. As new born Babes, desire the
sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, seems to have excellently
sum'd up the whole Doctrine of Contemplation, comprising at once the Matter,
Design, and End of it, together with the Frame and Disposition of Mind,
qualifying us for it.

Writing may serve to marshal and preserve our Thoughts, and by this means we
may be stocked with Notions which may always be ready Matter and Argument for
us to expatiate on; but we ought to take care, that first or last we be moved
or affected by what we write, or else this will be rather an Exercise of our
Invention than Devotion; and all the Products of it will be rather Essays of
Wit and Fancy than of holy Meditation; and we shall be rather apt to be pleased
with our Parts, than improved by this Practice.

They who are unable to start proper Matter for Contemplation, or to carry it
on regularly and coherently, and by consequence can reap little Fruit by this
kind of Exercise, may supply these Defects by Reading, and such Reflections and
Applications of it as are most easily and obviously made: For Example, Matthew.
5. And seeing the Multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: And when he was set,
his Disciples came unto him. And he opened his Mouth and taught them, saying; O
blessed Jesus! Thou, the true Doctor and Teacher, whose Words are Life and
Light, Spirit and Truth, I will leave the Multitude, I quit the World, and in
the quality of a Disciple I approach near thee, O do thou open thy Mouth and
speak to me; I desire not to hear the Voice of the World, or of the Flesh, or
of the Devil; speak Thou only to me, speak Thou to my Heart and to my
Conscience, and let me hear and feel that Voice that spoke Purity to the
Leprous, and Life to the Dead, Blessed is the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven, this is a blessedness indeed! The
Kingdoms of the Earth dazzle and astonish me, my Fancy cannot comprehend, my
Ambition cannot aspire after their Grandeur and Glory. Ah! what then must the
Kingdom of Heaven be! But, O my Lord, am I of the number of these Poor! If I be
not, make me so; let me be never so contemptible to the World, so I be approved
and acceptable to thee; let me have no ambitious Thoughts but for thy Favor,
and for the Crown of Righteousness; let me covet no Riches, no Honor, no Power
here, if thy Kingdom be but mine in Reversion, it is abundantly enough! Thus
without straining or pumping, Persons of the lowest Talents, if they have any
Tincture of Religion in them, may be easily supplied with variety of Argument,
and with most passionate and piercing Thoughts.

O blessed! O voluptuous Life! wherein sequestered from the World, I enjoy all
that it has in it of pure, of true, or natural. Ah! that I could once break
loose from those Troubles and Obligations that hang upon me, and enter into thy
Peace and Tranquillity, I would plunge my self into all thy rational Delights; I
would lose my self to this contemptible World, and forgetting those Shadows and
Appearances, and at best but faint and weak Reflections of Good, which flutter
here about me; I would abandon my self entirely to the Joys of the Spirit, and
the Elevations of Contemplation: Let others enjoy Honor, and Wealth, and
Power, let me enjoy my self, Truth, and God; let others enjoy the Flatteries of
Sense, and the Cheats of Fancy; give me the health of a spritely Mind, the calm
and serenity of a silent Retreat, with the pleasure and security which the
Divine Presence breeds in it; let others finally depend on Fortune, me only on
my self.

SECT. III.
Of the Right Husbanding or Prolonging Life.

HAving in the two former Sections, first, proved Life to be in its own Nature
a solid Good, a considerable Blessing of Heaven; and next, endeavored to
prevent the Abuses and Mischiefs to which it is liable, by stating the true
Notion of Life; and by prescribing Rules for the right Conduct of the Active,
Trading, and Contemplative Life, the next thing that naturally falls under
Consideration, is, The shortness and uncertainty of this Blessing; this is that
that pussles the Wit, and baffles the Courage of Man, the Rock against which
all the Attempts of Humane Philosophy have dashed and split themselves; for, to
say truth, whatever Complaints Men make against the Troubles, yet have they
ever made more and sharper against the shortness and uncertainty of Life.

It Is true, no Cure has ever yet been found of our Mortality, yet as wise Men
have ever thought it reasonable to make the most of an Enjoyment, tho it would
not come up to all that they could wish or fancy, so were there no other Life,
it would behove us to do with this, to nourish and keep in the flame as long as
we can, tho we know it must go out at last.

Now Life, like Enjoyment, is capable of Accession or Increase two ways, that
is, either in its Continuance or Perfection; either by lengthning its Duration,
or by raising, improving, or as it were ripening the Joys and Fruits of Life,
or Life it self. I will speak first of prolonging Life; and here I will, First,
Demonstrate that Life may be prolonged. Secondly, I will treat of the ways of
prolonging it.

But before I do either, it may be no very wide Digression from my Purpose, to
take notice of the little Artifices and Impostures by which many endeavor to
evade the strokes of Time, and flatter themselves with a sort of imaginary
Immortality.

CHAP. I.
The usual Arts of preventing or retarding the Decays of Nature, and lessenin
the Fears of Death exploded, and better substituted in their room. Physic,
instead of which Courage and Contempt of Death. Paint, etc. instead of which
the Beauties of the Mind. Children, instead of which Good Works, and so forth.
Surviving Honor not wholly rejected, but a true Immortality preferred.

SOme take Sanctuary in Physic, for which they expect at least the
preservation of the health and vigor of Nature, if not the lengthning the Date
of Life: I Will not dispute whether this Art has deserved so well of Mankind, as
to justify the Gentiles in enrolling the first Authors of it amongst the Gods,
or some Christians in attributing its Original to Guardian-Angels: I Will not
examine the possibility of that Elixir by which Artefius is reported by the
Adepts to have lived a Thousand years; nor, what is more to the purpose, who
have lived longest, whether they who have made most, or they who have made
least use of Physic: Or however these Questions be resolved, I am sure our
time is better spent in laboring to contemn, than to prevent Death; and that
those excellent Principles which fortify the Mind, contribute more to the
comfort and pleasure of Humane Life, than the most Sovereign Cordials that
fortify the Spirits.

Some being willing to conceal those Decays which they could not prevent, and
cannot remedy, have devised many ways to counterfeit and supply that Youth and
Beauty which Time and various Accidents have washed and worn away. But alas! to
what purpose is it to deck and varnish withered Nature, and paint the Spring
upon the Face of Winter? What purpose is it, when the Evil is incurable, to
suffer ones self to be flattered and imposed upon, and try in vain to hide a
broaken Fortune, not only from the World, but from ones self? Alas! we must
feel what we will not see; Nature droops and decays as fast within as it does
without; and we lose the life and briskness of our Blood, as fast as we do the
elegancy of Feature, or the floridness of Complexion. In a word, as to this
perishing Body, Physic, Washes, and Fucosis are in vain; you but paint and
patch a ruinous Fabric, which can never be made strong and beautiful till
Death has taken it quite down to the Ground, and a Resurrection build it up
quite a new. If therefore you would take my Advice, you should lay in a stock
of sprightly generous Pleasures, which may be ever ready at hand to entertain
you when youth and strentgth are past; you should take pains to enrich and
adorn the Mind, whose Beauties will more than supply the loss of those of the
Body; Wisdom, Magnanimity, Bounty, Modesty, Sweetness, Humility, are Charms
able to recommend a deformed or a decreped Body, and I am confident may be
purchased at a much cheaper rate, than false or counterfeit Beauties are by
those who are solicitous about them; let then the Morning and Noon of your Life
be spent in acquiring Virtue, Honor, Knowledge, and good Humor, and in your
Evening you will have no reason to complain of the loss of Youth and Beauty; these
will be solid Riches, and most amiable Charms, that will provide you both
delight and support at home, and command both love and reverence abroad; and
Time will do you no other injury than it does a Tree, when it changes its
Blossoms into Fruit; or then it does Statues, Medals and Pictures, whose price
and value is enhanced by their Antiquity.

Convinced that the Decays of Nature cannot be long concealed or propt up, some
please themselves with an Opinion of Surviving in their Posterity; as if Man by
Generation did but multiply himself, and Life did not, like a flame, end with
its fuel, but were conveyed and transmitted from Father to Son, Grandchild, and
so on; like a Stream that is still the same, tho it passed through numerous
Pipes. Well, for my part, I cannot fool my self with a vain gingle of words; I
cannot flatter my self that I shall live in him, who probably will in a little
time forget me, however he owe his Being and Fortune to me; nay, it may be
proud and ungrateful, will wish that others did forget me too; like a Stream
running, as soon as it enlarges it self as far as it can from its little
Fountain, and laboring as it were by its circlings and wanderings, to conceal
the meanness of its rise: I cannot flatter my self, that I can live in them
whose Hopes and Fears, Desires and Joys, will differ it may be no less from
mine, whatever they now be, than the Dead do from the Living: Fools that we
are, to talk so wildly, as if when dead we lived in our Children; do we when
living, share in their distant Joys? or do our Pulses beat by their Passions? I
would not be mistaken, as if I designed to oppose or extinguish Nature; I know
the great Author of it, for wise and excellent purposes, has implanted in us
kind Inclinations toward Posterity, but then these are for the sake of others,
not my self, they ripen into Actions that serve the turn of others, not my own;
I only bear the Fruit which others must gather. And whatever pleasure I may now
feel in a promising Porspect of the Honor and Virtue of my Posterity, it is
such a one as that of Moses beholding Canaan at a distance, but such a distance
that he must never enter into it. To conclude, whatever Men promise themselves,
I think them tolerably fortunate, if instead of reaping any benefit, when dead,
from their Children, their Lives be not stained and disturbed by them;
extremely fortunate if they can make them fit to be their Friends and
Favorites, worthy to share their Pleasures, and able to give them some ease in
their Troubles; tho after all I cannot but think it is infinitely more eligible
to be the Father of many Good Works, than many Children; to have a
Philosophical Friend or two, than a numerous Offspring; and to spend my time
nobly in cultivating my Mind, than in intangling my Life with Cares for those
who often will take none for themselves.

Some have entertained vain Projects of an imaginary Immortality, an
Immortality which they must owe neither to God nor Nature, but to Historians
and Poets, Painters and Statuaries, and to the dying Eccho's of a surviving
Memory; I mean, that which Men seek in Posthumus Fame, in Pictures, and
Statues, and Tombs, and embalming Carkases; all these seem to carry in them
some fading shadows of Being and Existence. But ah! how imaginary a Life is
this; something that does infinitely less resemble Life and Being, than a Dream
does Enjoyment? Ah vain support of Humane Frailty! Ah vain relief of Death! If
there be any thing in Honor, if it be Body or Substance enough to be seen, or
felt, or tasted; if it be Reality enough to be any way enjoyed, let me possess
it while I live; it comes too late, if it serves only to increase the Pomps of
my Funeral, or to dress and set off my Sepulcher, or to silence the Groans, or
to wipe off the Tears of my Orphans, or my Friends, tho this be something: I
cannot feel any pleasure in the foresight of that Glory, which, while I strain
to gaze upon at distance, the Fogs and Mists of Death thicken the Sky; the
Voice that will speak me great, will speak me too, Gone and vanished; the
Statues and Marbles which adorn my Memory, will adorn my Grave too, and while
they express my Image, or my Actions, will proclaim, that all that is now left
of me, is Rottenness and Ashes. All this I talk, abstracting from the
Considerations of a future Life, for how far the Reputation I leave behind, may
concern my Soul in its state of Separation from the Body, whether the Echoes
of those Praises and Honors bestowed upon my Memory here, will reach and
please mine Ears in another World, I know not, nor do I much desire to know;
for supposing such a Life, my Soul must needs have nobler Employment, and
nobler Pleasure than this can ever give it: I must confess, if the Reflections
of my Light, when I am set and gone, would be of any use to direct or inflame
Posterity, I should now take some pleasure in that, which it is hard to persuade
me, I shall take any in hereafter; nor would it be a trifling Satisfaction to
me, while I lived, if I could believe that my Relations, or my Friends, could
receive any Honor or Patronage from me when dead; and since some sort of
Character I must leave behind, since I must in this manner, amongst some at
least, and for a little time survive, I had much rather leave behind me perfume
than stench; I had rather live in Panegyric and Commendations, than in Satyrs
and Invectives. But after all, how lean and miserable a Comfort is this? that
when I am dead, it will be said, I once lived; and a promiscuous Crowd will
talk of me, and of my Actions, what they please; some things good, some things
bad, some things true, some things false; and what is worse yet, I must suffer
all the Revolutions of Humors and Parties in following Ages; these must give my
Abilities and Performances their Character, and the prevailing Faction must
stamp what Estimate they please upon my Memory.

But by all this, I do not mean utterly to condemn the love of Honor, nay,
it is really to be cherished when it operates rightly, and spurs Men on to
generous and handsome Actions: I love a Charity that is universal and boundless,
and extends it self to follwing Ages; and certainly there is not a nobler
Charity, than to furnish the World with an Example that may adorn its own
Times, and enkindle the Emulation of Posterity. Nay further, I am willing to
believe, that a gracious God will sum up amongst the Accounts of my Life, the
influence it has upon the World when I am dead, and to raise the Estimate of my
Virtue, will consider it not simply in it self, but with all the happy Effects
which it may any way be the occasion of in successive Ages; let me then do
good, and if I can great Actions, upon any motive, provided it be just and
allowable, since this will be the blessed Fruit of it: But yet it shall be my
Business to make sure of my own Immortality, if that of my Name will follow,
let it: It shall be my Business to gain the Approbation of God and Angels, and
if the Praises of this lower World join their Harmony and Consent with that
above, this cannot disoblige me; I will with all my power make sure of my
Salvation, and not despise Fame: Great and good men have ever felt some natural
Desires of this sort of Immortality: Since then this seems to be an Inclination
of God's own planting, it is not to be extirpated, but rather carefully
cherished and cultivated, and duly pruned and regulated

Having exploded those mistaken Fancies by which Men support themselves against
the shortness of Life, I will now proceed to treat of the only two ways by
which this Evil may be in some measure remedied, that is, by prolonging the
Date, and by improving and perfecting the Nature and Essence of Life, so that a
Man may live much in a little time.

CHAP. II.
Of Lengthning Life.

Sect. 1. The Fatality of the Period of Life refuted. And Objections from
Scripture, from Astrological Predictions, from Divine Prescience, answered. A
sort of Fate admitted.

Sect. 2. Of the ways of prolonging Life. First, Cheerfulness of Mind.
Secondly, Health of Body. Thirdly, The protection of God and Man.

Sect. 3. Objections against this last Assertion from such Texts as assert the
promiscuous Events of Things, and from the early Death sometimes of the
Righteous, Answered.

UNder this Article I design to prosecute these three Things:

First, To refute the Opinion of a fatal Period of Humane Life. A Fancy which
has possessed the Multitude, and with which the Minds, even of such as would
seem above it, are not seldom assaulted.

Secondly, I will consider what ways the Date of Life may be lengthened.

Thirdly, I will remove those Objections with which this Advice is encountered,
either from the promiscuous Events happening alike to Good or Bad, or from the
early and immature Death of some righteous Persons. To begin with the first of
these:

First, It has been too generally taught and believed, That the Date of Humane
Life cannot be protracted, that every particular Man has a fixed and immutable
Period decreed him, beyond which he cannot go. But this Opinion directly
defeats the force of all Motives and Arguments to Virtue, derived from Temporal
Considerations, and undermines our dependence upon God, and redicules our
Addresses to him, as far as they concern this Life, and the Things of it: And
how plain a step is this to the refutation and overthrow of Judaism, which was
built upon Temporal Promises, and consequently to the overthrow of Christianity
it self, the Authority of the New Testament depending in so great a measure
upon that of the Old, I Will leave every one to guess. And were there no other
Reasons to reject this Opinion, besides these alone, these I should think were
abundantly sufficient, since it is impossible that any thing should be
consonant to Truth, which is so repugnant to the Interest and Authority of
Religion; but there are so many more, that I must be forced to crowd them
together, that I may avoid tediousness and redundancy. This Persuasion then is
repugnant to all the Instincts of our Nature; to what purpose is the Love of
Life implanted in us by our great Creator? why is Self-preservation the first
Dictate and Law of Nature, if all our Care and Diligence can contribute nothing
toward it? Vain and impertinent is that Law, whose observation can procure us
no Good, nor its Violation any Evil. This is a Persuasion that flatly
contradicts the Experience and Observation of Mankind in general; how can the
Period of Life be fixed and unalterable, which we see every day, either
lengthened out by Care and Moderation, or shortened by Excess and Negligence,
unless we can resolve to the utter overthrow of Religion, not only that Life
and Death, but also that Vice and Virtue, Wisdom and Folly, which lead to the
one and the other, are alike predetermined necessary and fatal. Nor is this
Opinion less contrary to the Sense and Reason of the Wise and Prudent, than to
the Experience of the Multitude; Self preservation is the first and chief End
of Civil Societies and Humane Law; but how foppish and ridiculous a thing were
it for the Grave and Sagacious part of Mankind to enter into deep Consultation,
to frame solemn Laws, and devise the strongest Obligations to fence and secure
that Life which can neither be invaded one minute before its fatal hour, nor
prolonged one minute beyond it; nor has Man only, but God himself, endeavored
to secure this Temporal Life by the strictest and most solemn Laws, nor this
only, but he has made Life and Death the Reward of Obedience, and Punishment of
Sin. This Opinion therefore is a manifest Calumny against the Wisdom and
Sincerity of God; against his Wisdom, if he raise up the Pallizado's and
Bulwarks of Laws to guard and defend that Life, which can neither be violated
before, nor extended beyond its minute: His Sincerity, for his Promises would
be ludicrous and insignificant, and so would his Threats too; if neither the
Obedience of the Virtuous could lengthen, nor the disobedience of the Sinner
could shorten Life; and in a word, to what purpose does the Spirit in 1 Pet.
3.10, 11. invite and encourage Men to Religion by the Proposal of Life and
Prosperity, if in the bottom and truth Life and Prosperity depend, not on our
Behavior, but our Fate, and be not dispensed according to the open Proposals,
but the secret and unconditional, the rigid and inflexible Decrees of the
Almighty. I would not stop here, but heap together a multitude of other
Arguments against this Error, did I not remark, that as it has prevailed too
much to be despised, so has it too little to be laboriously refuted, and that
it has so weak a Foundation, that few of those that defend it do believe it, or
at leastwise so heartily, as to suffer it to have any Influence upon their
Counsels or Actions; Turks, Astrologers, and the most superstitious Assertors
of Fate, being no more free from the Fears of Death, or a Concern for Life,
than the rest of Mortals.

The truth of this Proposition being thus made out by unanswerable Reasons, we
are not to suffer our selves to be moved by any superstitious Imaginations, by
any obscure or subtle Objections, or by any mere Colors or Appearances of
Reason, for what is once clear and evident, ought to remain firm and unshaken,
tho we cannot unravel every Objection against it, therefore tho I should not be
able to reconcile this Doctrine with some obscure Texts of Scripture, with a
certainty of God's Prescience, and with some particular Predictions of Men, who
have pretended to read the fatal Periods of Humane Life in the Schemes of
Heaven; yet ought its Authority to be preserved, as built upon plain Texts and
solid Reasons, and attested by the Suffrages of the Prudent and Wise, and by
the daily Observation of the Multitude. But the truth is, there is nothing
objected here, but what is capable of a very easy answer; the Scriptures,
which speak an appointed time for Man upon Earth, are not to be understood of
any particular personal Fate, but of a general Law or Rule of Nature, not of
the extent of every particular persons Life, but of the duration of Man in
general, or of the Mortality of our Frame and Constitution, and the shortness
of Man's residence here upon Earth; and imply no more than that Man, as well as
all other Species of Animals, and indeed of Vegetables, for so far Job extends
the Comparison, has his time appointed the Bounds of his Life or Abode here
set him, beyond which he cannot pass Psalm 90.10. The days of our Age are
threescore years and ten, and tho Men be so strong that they come to fourscore
years, yet is their strength then but labor and sorrow, so soon passes it
away, and we are gone. As to Astrological Predictions, if the Accomplishment of
any of them be attested by unquestionable Authority, and they be not like the
Prophesies of Poets, made of mended after the Event, yet methinks, were not the
Minds of Men very prone to Superstition, a thousand Errors should be sufficient
to discredit and disparage one good Guess, and no Man of Sense should have a
value for a pretended Science, whose Grounds and Principles are evidently
uncertain and precarious; no Man of any Religion should be fond of that, which
to say no worse of it, seems to stand condemned by God in Scripture; for tho I
must not dissemble this Truth, that the Idolatry which was ever blended with
it, seems especially to have drawn down a severe Sentence upon it, yet can it
not be denied, but that Isaiah 47. Jeremiah 10. and other places of holy Writ
seem to look upon it with no very favorable or benign Aspect. As to the
Prescience of God, I see not how the denial of a Fatal Period of Humane Life
clashes with this; on the quite contrary, he seems to me injuriously to limit
and retrain the knowledge of God, who thinks he foreknows nothing, but because
he peremptorily predetermined it; this, if we will speak sense, is to magnify
his Power, but to reduce and confine his Knowledge, or at leastwise to depress
and debase it, for thus it would not be a primary and essential Perfection, but
would result from, or depend upon an Arbitrary Will, an unguided Power; for my
part, I cannot think it necessary, if I could not reconcile God's
foreknowledge with contingency in Events, therefore with the Socinian to deny
the one, or with the Fatalist the other; it is enough to me that I learn from
Scripture, that is, from God who cannot err, that Prescience belongs to the
Creator, and Contingency to the Creature; the measures and bounds of these, if
there be any, let who will seek, it is not my Business now.

But yet, after all this, if any Man will contend for such a kind of Fate as is
not rigid and inflexible, but submits to the interposal of the Divine
Prerogative, and leave sufficient Encouragement for the Labor, Virtue, and
Prayers of Man, I oppose it not, Nature has its Laws, but such as God, whenever
he pleases, overrules; the Government of Man is not without order and method,
much less the Government of God; we are born into the World with different
Constitutions, but yet the unhealthy one may be rectified and mended by Virtue,
the healthy corrupted by Vice and Irreligion; such a sort of Fate or Destiny as
this that is flexible, and accommodated to the Interest of Religion, in which
the Evil may be corrected, or the good perverted; such a Fate as this, tho the
Word be improper, I readily admit, but no other: No other, I say, in the
general; for as to those particular Exceptions and Reservations, which at any
time God may, and often does make, from any general Rule or Law, for causes
always weighty and importent, and generally hidden and inscrutable, these I
meddle not with.

Having thus evinced that the Period of Humane Life is not fatally fixed, that
no peremptory and unconditional Decree, no insuperable Connection or
Concatination of Causes does supersede our Vigilance and Industry for the
preservation of this Blessing: I will now proceed to the second thing proposed,
and consider which way the Date of Life may be lengthened.

Sect. 2.
Of the ways of prolonging Life.

It Is obvious and manifest to every one, that Life depends upon these three
Things: The cheerfulness of the Mind: The health of the Body; And a favorable
Providence of God, by which, as none will deny who admit of Providence, we may
at least be protected from violence and unlucky Accidents, such as Humane
Prudence cannot foresee. And to these three, may, for ought I know, be added,
the good will of Man, whose Ministry and Service is very often of excellent use
to us in this Point.

First, The first thing then I am now to enquire into, is briefly what
Cheerfulness of Mind does contribute to the preservation of Life, and then more
fully, how we may possess our selves of it. It Is true, the morose and sour, the
froward, the passionate, and the sullen, those stains and Blots of Humane
Nature do often prolong their Lives to a great Age, as if Nature were renewed
and repaired by this kind of Fermentation, or the Blood and Spirits kept sweet
like Water by a perpetual Agitation; but it is as true that the loose and
debauched, the intemporate and incontinent do sometimes, tho rarely live long,
and descend into the Grave, rather oppressed by their years than their
Excesses, and if from such extraordinary Instances as these, we shall take the
Liberty to form Rules of Life, and to contradict known and received Truths, we
shall ever live at the mercy of Fancy, and never find any sure and firm footing
to rest upon; I will not therefore doubt, notwithstanding these rare Instances,
but that the cheerfulness of the Mind has a very propitious, its discontent a
very malign influence, upon the Life of Man; the contentment of the Mind
preserves the Balsom of the Blood, and the Pleasure of it enlarges the Heart,
raises the Spirits, actuates and invigorates all our Powers; so that when the
Mind shines serene and bright, it seems to impart a new warmth, and new life to
the Body, a new Spring, and new Verdure to this Earth: On the contrary, a
diseased Mind does, as it were, scatter its Contagion through the Body;
Discontent and Melancholy sours the Blood, and clogs the Spirits, Envy pines
away, and Passion frets and wears out our strength and life. In few words,
there is an intimate conjunction between the Mind and Body; and so close is the
dependence of the latter upon the former, that the face of inferior Nature
does evidently vary, wither or flourish, according to that variety of Weather
it makes in the Sky about it, as the Mind smiles or lowrs upon it; and
accordingly, if we appeal to Experience and Observation, I believe we may
safely pronounce, that generally such live longest, who either think very
little, or whose thoughts are always calm and cheerful; such who are stupid,
and have no Passions, or are wise and good, and have none but such as are
regular and delightful; to this purpose, in part, is that of Solomon, The
Spirit of Man will sustain his Infirmity, but a wounded Spirit who can bear?
All this, I think, is not contested; and all the difficulty lies in possessing
our selves of this satisfaction and contentment of Mind; Men seek it in every
thing, and even those things which are Diometrically opposite to one another,
do each pretend to be infallible Guides to it: Atheism and Religion, Philosophy
and Ignorance, Worldly Prudence or Policy, and an affected contempt of it,
which I know no name for, do all promise to teach us the Art of Satisfaction;
but it will not be a very difficult task, when we have examined the pretenses
of each, to resolve which we are to follow.

Ignorance, Lust, and Fancy are too blind, rash, and violent for us to abandon
our selves to their Conduct; nor are they more giddy and inconstant in
themselves, than weak and subject to all the Changes and odd Accidents of the
World; so that should they lead us on to Pleasure, we have reason to apprehend
Pain the next moment, and at best, they leave us not in a Condition, either
rationally to approve our Enjoyments, or to fortify our selves against the
loss of them.

Worldly Policy is built wholly upon Mistakes, it proposes to us things under
the notion of great and good, which when we have examined, we find not worth
our seeking, and of these it can give us no assurance, whether we respect their
Acquisition or Possession; and the ways it prescribes to put us in possession
of all that satisfaction which results from these things, have something in
them so mean, so laborious, so uncertain, so vexatious, that no Success can
compensate that trouble and shame which the canvassing for them puts us to.

Atheism pretends indeed to extinguish our Guilt and Fears, but it does also
deface all the beauty and loveliness of Humane Actions; it pretends indeed to
let loose the Reins to Pleasure, but withal, it leaves us no support under
Evil; it takes off indeed many Restraints, but withal, it unchains and lets
loose our Passions: In a word, it leaves us nothing truly great or lovely to
enjoy in this World, or hope for in another; and if its Tenets were useful to
us, yet have they no certainty, no foundation; it derives all its credit from
the Confidence, not Reason of Men, who under color of a free and impartial
Philosophy, advance the Interest of those Lusts to which they are entirely
enslaved.

Religion then only remains to be followed; this rectifies our Opinions, and
dispels our Errors, and routs those Armies of imaginary Evils which terrify
and torment the World, much more than Spirits and Ghosts do; this discovers to
us Objects worthy of all the love and admiration of our Souls; this expiates
our Guilt, and extinguishes our Fear; this shows us the happiness of our
present Condition, and opens us a glorious prospect of our future one; this
discovers to us the happy tendancy of Temporal Evils, and the glorious reward
of them; and in one word, teaches us both to enjoy and suffer; it moderates our
desires of things uncertain, and out of our power, and fixes them upon those
things for which we can be responsible; it raises the Mind, clears the Reason,
and finally forms us into such an united settled and compacted state of
strength, that neither the Judgment is easily shaken, nor the Affections
hurried by any violent transport or emotion. But do I not here immitate
Physicians, who attend only to the most dangerous Symptoms, and neglect others?
Whether I do or no, they who read such general Directions, are wont to do so in
their Application of them; and most are apt to look upon Religion as designed
only to redress substantial and formidable Evils. And yet it is with the Mind as
with the Body, tho Fevors, Imposthumes, Defluxions, etc. kill, the anger of a
pustle, the pain of a Tooth, do strangely disorder and disturb; and thus tho
Pain, and Death, and such like Evils, overthrow and overwhelm the Mind, yet are
there a crowd of slight and trifling Evils which disquiet and discompose it;
and this is a Matter not to be contemned, especially by me, in the prosecution
of the Design I am here upon, since I persuade my self that the great and
formidable Evils, Guilt, Pain, Poverty, Sickness, Death, or the Thoughts and
Apprehensions of them, do but very rarely afflict the Life of Man; but there
are other Evils of a slighter Nature, which like Pirates, are perpetually
cruising on our Coasts, and tho they cannot invade and destroy, do much disturb
and annoy us. Nay, what is yet more, it is very usual to see Men acquit
themselves very honorably under true and substantial Evils, who come off very
poorly from the Encounter of slight and despicable ones; how common is it, for
one who maintains bravely his Courage and Judgment amidst Swords and Bullets,
to lose all Patience, Prudence and Government, when attacked by a rude Jest, a
brisk, or it may be a bold and senseless Reflection; to see a Man that hears
very calmly the loss of a Ship, or a considerable Sum of Money, transported
into strange indecency upon the breaking of a Glass, or the spoiling of a Dish
of Meat; and he who sits very tamely and unconcernedly down under a disgraceful
Character, sweats and raves if robbed but of a Cabbage or an Apricock: These,
and such like Remarks, one may make every day, and almost in every Company; and
what is the worst of all, our Fears and Sorrows, our Hate and Anger, are as
violent and uneasy, when they spring from Causes of the least, as of the
highest moment. We bewail fantastic and true Misfortunes with the same sighs
and tears, and resent imaginary and substantial Injuries with the same
disordered Pulse and deformed Looks. When I have reflected on all this, I have
often thought that it was as necessary to the tranquillity of Humane Life, to
guard my self against Dust and Flies, as against Storms and Tempests, to arm my
self against the stings of a swarm of vexatious Accidents, as against
Pestilence, and War, and Poverty, and Blindness, or Deafness. And to this end
these three or four following Rules have often been of great use to me. First,
Of the Evils of Life I never take more to my share than are really my own, I
never travel abroad to find out foreign Mischiefs to torment my self, as if
there were not enough of the Native growth of my Country; my own Mind, my own
Body, my own House are Provinces wide enough for me, and a little too fruitful
too, nay, I am not ashamed to confess, I decline, if I can, an Evil even lying
in my way, as I do a bustle or a fray, by passing on the other side of the
Street. I Will never split upon a Shelf or Rock, if I have Sea-room enough. And
as a little distance of Place, so a little distance of Time, serves my turn to
make me reckon such Evils as none of mine: I Will no more distract or disturb my
self with the Evils that are fancied teeming in the Womb of Time, than with
those that are now in being in Peru or Mexico; this is the very Lecture
Religion reads me, for sure to incorporate distant Evils, or to anticipate
future ones, were far from studying to be quiet, and doing ones own business;
or from thinking with our Savior, Sufficient for the day is the Evil thereof,
and were indeed to suffer as busy bodies, fearful, and unbelievers; If any man
will impute this to me as brutality and uncharitableness, I cannot help it; I
thank God that I have sense enough to Practice Caution without fear, Care
without Anxiety, and Charity without Distress or Agony of Mind. Secondly, As to
those Evils (I speak still of slight and daily ones) which do really fall to my
share, and I cannot avoid; my next care is to weaken their Force, to disarm
them of their Sting, their Teeth and Venom, if they have any; I take from them
all the terror that Fancy and Opinion have given them, and will no more, if I
can help it, suffer my Imagination, than my Taste or Feeling, to be abused or
imposed upon. In the next place, I carefully fortify and strengthen my self,
see that my state be healthy, and my Nature firm, lest I should complain of the
Meat, when the fault is in my Stomach; or think the Bed ill made, when the
cause of my uneasiness is in the Body. And lastly, when I have reduced the Evil
to its own natural size, generally it is of such a Pigmy, Dwarfish growth, that
I can securely slight it, I can master it with very little trouble and
industry, or at worst with a very little patience; and that I may not be
wanting here, I look upon it as a Task I am born to, as an Inconvenience that I
can no more shun, than any natural Defects in my Body, or my Mind, or than I
can the Cares and Fatigues of my Calling. Thirdly, I labor above all things to
fill my Soul with great and ravishing Pleasures, to inflame it with a generous
Ambition, and, in one word, to possess it with that habitual Poverty of Spirit,
Meekness, Purity, Charity, commended to his Disciples by our Lord and Master,
that I am generally above the buz and fluttering of these, rather
Impertinences, than Evils of Humane Life, and do often suffer them without
being sensible of them; but I can never often enough put the World in mind of
the vast difference there is between the fits and habits of these Virtues. What
we could do in a pious humor, that we should always do, were but the weak
Impression once converted into Nature, the short-lived Passion changed into
steady habit; but it is high time to pursue my Design, I am almost afraid, I
dwell so long upon a Head, that the most pertinent Parts of my Discourse may
now and then look like Digression. The next thing to be considered, after the
Cheerfulness of the Mind, is

Secondly, The Health of the Body. Life does so apparently depend on this, that
in the vulgar Notion it signifies much the same thing. It Is notorious, Life
decays and expires with the health and strength of the Body, and when it is
protracted after these are gone, it scarce deserves the Name of Life, any more
than the Noise of an ill-strung and illtuned Instrument does that of Music.
But I need not teach any Body the value of Health, or press them to the
preservation of the Body, I should be sufficiently obliging to the World, if I
could teach it any Art by which they might be restored to that Blessing which
it enjoyed before the Flood, a long Life of many hundreds of years. But I know
no Art that can raise Nature above its own Laws, or retrieve its Youth, if it
be now in its Decrepitude: One thing I know, that we too commonly debauch and
corrupt Nature first, and then load her with our Reproaches and Accusations; we
should undoubtedly live much longer, and this Life would be more healthy and
verdant, that is, more vital than it is, did we but observe the dictates of
Religion, the Laws of Virtue, and not prefer before them those of Lust and
Fancy. How much soever Men complain of the shortness of Life, it is little to be
doubted, but that most Men do notwithstanding, shorten it themselves by some
Crime, or Error or other. If we could consult the sickly crasie part of
Mankind, I mean such as are so in the middle, or almost beginning of their
years, and demand of them what blasted their Beauty, and impaired their
Strength? what thus violated and contaminated their Nature? we should soon be
resolved to what Original their Diseases were owing, if at least their shame
and blushes would give them leave to inform us: And if we should endeavor to
trace the Deaths of most of those who are gone hence before their time, back to
their first Cause, I do not think but that our search would soon end in some
Vice or Folly or other; this Man drank too much, the other too much indulged
his Appetite; one was devoted to his Lust, and another putrified in his Sloth,
all of them, in our common phrase, did live too fast; but in truth and
propriety of Speech, died too fast; for since Life is nothing else but acting
by Reason, every Deviation from it is an Approach toward Death. But to
proceed; It Is not unusual to see Pride kill one, Passion another, Avarice and
Ambition a third, while to gratify these Affections, the Body is either
exposed to dangers, or worn out by labor. Now, if we can generally find the
Causes of most early Deaths in Men's Vices, when so little of other Men's Lives
comes to our knowledge, what think you, should we not be able to discover, if
we could enter into the Retirements, and penetrate all the Secrets of Mankind,
how many hidden Passions do gnaw the Heart? how many secret Sins do waste and
consume the Strength? where, not only Concealment excludes the Eye, but a show
of probity, nay, a real and eminent practice of some particular Virtue excludes
even Suspicion and Jealousy. If then Immorality do often contract the term of
Life, it is evident what is to be prescribed for the prolonging it, Religion or
Virtue is the best Physic: It has often mended an ill Constitution, but never
spoiled a good one. When did ever Chastity impoverish the Body, or deflour the
Face? when did ever Temperance inflame the Blood, or oppress the Spirits? when
did ever Industry or Vigilance four the Humors, and enfeeble the Nerves? No
Crudities, no Plethories, no Obstructions, no Assidities, no Stagnations,
Extravasations, and I know not what hard Names, and harder Things, derive
themselves from Virtue or Religion. It Is true, a Man may be Righteous
overmuch, he may entitle his Folly, his Melancholy, his particular Fancy, or
his particular Completion or Constitution, Religion, and this may prove
mischievous to him, to his health, to his strength, but then this is not the
fault of Religion, but the Man; and to speak properly, this is not
Righteousness nor Religion, tho it be called so, but it is Fancy and Folly, or
an ill Constitution disguised under the garb and the mien of Religion. Virtue
then is the most probable way to a long Life, or if not so, at least to a more
comfortable and honorable Death; for where an early Death is the Result of a
Providence, not a Crime, we must needs meet it with less Amazement our selves,
and our Friends behold it with less Regret and Affliction.

Thirdly, The third way of prolonging Life, is to engage the Providence of God
in its Preservation. If all the Promises God has made the Virtues of a long
Life, did really signify nothing, I cannot see how we could put up any Request
to God, relating to Temporal Protection, with Faith or Fervor, or as much as
Sincerity; but if they signify any thing, then surely they must signify that
his Providence is actively employed for the preservation of virtuous Men? And
how great a Security is this? What can be impossible to him who is the
Governor and Creator of the World, in whose disposal all created Means are,
and in whose Power it is, if these be unsufficient to create new ones? To him
whose unerring Laws can never miss of those ends he aims at, or if they could,
his Power is ever at hand to supply their Defects, and accommodate and attemper
them to particular Emergencies; and his Prerogative is under no ties, no
limitations but those of his Divine Wisdom; well might the Psalmist say, I laid
me down and slept, for it is thou Lord make me dwell in safety. Every good Man
might say the same, as far as he has a Divine Warrant, not in Peace and Health
only, but in Sickness, in a Tempest, whether by Sea or Land, in a Plague, in a
Battle, in a Siege, in a Storm; to believe our selves under the Patronage and
Protection of God, seems to me nothing less than to believe that he will make
those things we are concerned in, flow with a smooth and gentle Stream, that he
will place us in a state or condition of Life, safe and agreeable; or if not,
that in distresses and dangers he will contrive the methods of our Rescue, and
where the ordinary are insufficient, find out extraordinary; that he will
concur and cooperate with the natural course of things, or if he see it fit,
that he will exert a supernatural Force, and vouchsafe an extraordinary
Succor. Plainly thus, tho I know not the unsearchable Methods of Divine
Providence, yet from God's concerning himself for my good, I may boldly infer,
that in my sickness, I may hope for that from God, which I cannot from the
skill of my Physician; that in troublesome Times I may expect that from
Providence which I cannot from the Wisdom, Justice, or Power of the Magistrate;
that in necessitous, involved, and intricate Circumstances, I may promise my
self that Issue from his Favor, which I cannot from the Prudence, Integrity,
or Bounty of my Friends: And in a word, that in all Cases I can hope for that
from my Prayers, which I otherwise could not from Humane Power or Policy. The
sum of all is, all the natural means of our Security and Life are in the hands
of God, and if these should be deficient, nothing can restrain him from
exerting a Supernatural Force and Virtue for our Preservation; his fixed and
universal Laws are infinitely wise; but if at any time our Affairs should
require his immediate interposal, I know not why I should fancy his Prerogative
so bounded, that he cannot, or will not interpose; and tho his Pavilion be
thick Clouds, and he walk upon the Wings of the Wind; though his Providence be a
great Abyss, and the swiftness and secrecy of his actings elude our Search,
and baffle our Inquiries, so that we cannot discern when he Acts by
Prerogative, when by Law, yet I doubt not but that he does frequently exert a
miraculous and extraordinary Power.

This being so, it is plain that our great Business is to engage the Providence
of God on our Behalf, that we may have an unerring Guide of this dubious and
floating Life, a firm support of this mortal corruptible Nature; and I think I
need not prove that Religion is the effectual way to oblige God, if this be the
great Message that we have received of the Son of God, that God is Light, then
St. John's Inference must needs be good, that he only who walks in the Light,
can maintain a Communion with him, that is, be dear and acceptable to him; a
Spiritual and rational Worship must be the only Method to endear our selves to
a God, who is a wise Spirit. Nay, though all the Precepts of Religion should not
be necessarily founded in their consonancy and agreeableness to the Divine
Nature, yet still since they are the Precepts of God, we need search for no
other Reason for the acceptableness of our obedience: It Is true, all the
heights of Purity, to which the Gospel invites us, are not necessary to the
health and strength of the Body, yet are they serviceable to the perfection and
improvement of our Nature; they are not all indispensible to the happy conduct
of our Temporal Affairs, but they are useful to the Felicity and Glory of our
Eternal; and therefore the more Religious we are, the more we shall please God:
But I will insist no longer on so uncontested a Point, Nature it self dictates,
that an imitation of their Virtues is the strongest Obligation we can lay upon
the Wise or Good; and Obedience the most effectual Recommendation of us to the
Sovereign Powers; whether therefore we consider God as the Best, or the
Greatest, the Characters under which the very Light of Nature did ever
represent him, Religion, that is, Imitation and Obedience, are the only ways by
which we may ever come to pretend to his Favor.

Nor is Virtue less apt to procure the Favor and Amity of Man than that of
God; it fences us about with the Arms and Succors of Mankind, if guards us
with all their Eyes, and with all their Prayers; for their Love and Reverence
make them both active and wakeful in our Service.

How directly repugnant to all this are the Effects of Irreligion; it leaves us
no other Safeguard than that of our own Strength and Vigilance; which, to speak
properly, is to deliver us up into the hands of our Folly and Fear, our
Weakness and Cowardice: For alas, what were my single Reason or Force, when I
have neither God nor Man to second me! how much less when the Indignation of
the one, and the secret Aversion or open Enmity of the other, scare and
intimidate me! how can a Man hold out against Dangers, if he be betrayed by his
own Guilt within, and his Reason over-thrown by ominous Fears, do not lessen,
but multiply his Terrors: Hence is that of Solomon, The wicked flee when no Man
pursues, but the Righteous are as bold as a Lion: Abandoned by God and Man, he
seems at last abandoned by himself too.

The sum of what I have said under this Article amounts to this, First, I have
proved that the Date of Humane Life is not fatal and unalterable, from whence I
thought it necessarily followed, that it was capable of being prolonged or
protracted; therefore I proceeded, Secondly, to consider by what means it might
be prolonged: And here, supposing that nothing could be more conducive to this
than a cheerful Mind, a healthful Body, and a propitious Providence, I have
made it evident, that these are to be sought in the practice of Religion and
Virtue, which is nothing else than what inspired Authors have frequently
taught; Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor. Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full Age, like as a shock of Corn
comes in its Season. A blessed and perfect Religion! at once the Guard and Joy
of Life! at once the Support and Delight of Humane Nature!

Sect. 3.
Two Objections against the Design of the former Paragraphs, Answered.

But against this whole Discourse it will be objected, First, How is this that
you contend for? how are those Texts which make length of days the Reward of
Obedience to the Divine Laws, reconcilable with those other, which, as far as
concerns their Temporal Effects, seem to equal Wisdom and Folly, and level
Righteousness with Wickedness, asserting the promiscuousness of all Events to
the Virtuous and Vicious? All things come alike to all: there is one event to
the righteous, and to the wicked, to the good and to the clean, and to the
unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: As is the
good, so is the sinner, and he that swears, as he that fears an Oath,
Eccles. 9.2. And this is extended as far as Death it self; How dies the wise
man? as the fool, Eccles. 2.16. Innumerable are the Answers to this Objection,
but one only fits my purpose, which is plainly this, That these are Rhetorical
Exaggerations of Humane Vanity; Wise and Good Men, as well as others, have
their Natural Passions; and therefore Divine Writings have their Figures, as
well as those that are purely Humane: These therefore, and the like Speeches,
design not to derogate from the Efficacy of Virtue, or weaken the force of the
Divine Promises, but to humble the Vanity of Man, and convert his fondness for
this World into a greater for a better; and are not therefore to be understood
in such a general and unlimited sense, as if there were no difference between
the Righteous and the Wicked, with respect to Temporal Good and Evil, Life and
Death; but only thus, that the Righteous are not so universally exempt from
Temporal Evils, but that some or other of them, in all Ages, are liable to
them, even to an untimely Death it self: But what then, such extraordinary
Instances of an inscrutable Providence, ought no more to derogate from the
Excellence of Wisdom and Virtue, or the Veracity of God, than some few
Shipwracks ought to discredit Navigation, or the failing of some few Traders
disparage Art and Industry; it is enough that the experienced and skilful, the
careful and diligent, do generally Sail and Trade successfully. And this may in
part suffice for an Answer to another Objection of the same Nature with this,
only that this relates to all Events in general, but the Objection following to
a particular one.

If long Life be a great Blessing at present, and recommends Men to greater
afterward, and if Religion and Virtue be on both these Accounts entitled to
it, whence is it that an immature Death snatches away sometimes the best of
Men, that it stops them in the very progress of their Virtue, and in a full
career toward Perfection and Glory? I answer,

1. The Providence of God is a great Deep, His Judgments are unsearchable, and
his ways past finding out.

2. I cannot believe that this early Death, which intercepts the Fruits of a
growing Virtue, shall bereave the Virtues of any degree of that future Glory,
to which such Fruits would have entitled them, I should rather think, with the
Author of the Book of Wisdom, that having completed their Perfection in a
little time, they had in a little time finished their Course, and by what they
did do, gave such plain Proofs of what they would do, that God rewards their
Purposes as he does the Actions of others, and therefore hasteneth to take them
to himself. But however this matter be, I am content to believe,

3. That as God orders all the particular Events of Life to the Good of those
that love him, so much more must he dispose this biggest Event that befalls a
mortal Man, that is, Death, to their Interest and Benefit; and therefore this
immature Death is doubtless, to the Righteous, better than Life, tho we should
not be able to discern why. They dye in their Perfection, their Glory yet
unsullied, their Felicity unstained, no vile Temptation, no Misfortune having
yet triumphed over them, an Advantage which we much admire when we see great
and good Men surprised, or overpowred by Weaknesses and Calamities, for then we
cannot but acknowledge, that if Death had come sooner it had been much kinder,
for they had been gathered into the Storehouse of the Dead, like Corn into the
Granary before unseasonable or immoderate Rain had corrupted it, or any
malignant Vapors blasted it.

Lastly, I know not how Heaven has dealt with these its Favorites,
peradventure it is in the Moral as in the Political World, some are born to that
Greatness which others acquire with labor; he never dies to soon who dies ripe
and perfect; and if these Divine Souls came into the World enriched with more
Light and Beauty, with more impetuous Inclinations to Virtue than those of
others of other Men; if their short Life were so innocent, so bright, that out
of a particular Grace God thought fit to exempt them from the Miseries of this
Life; or that upon the Account of a particular Preeminence, they needed not
pass through the Trial, the Discipline and Purgations of it, on either of these
Supposals we ought not to commiserate, but revere their Fate.

CHAP. III.
Of improving Life, or living much in a little time.

What is to be understood by improving or exalting Life, and the Advantages of
this Notion. Three ways of improving Life.

Sect. 1. By perfecting Nature. Man and Life, mean things till Wisdom and
Virtue stamp a value on them. This particularly exemplified, with respect to
Knowledge, and the due regulation of the Affections.

Sect. 2. By beginning to Live betimes, or at least immediately. No Objection
against becoming presantly wise and happy, but the difficulty of becoming so.
An Exhortation, Addressed, 1. To the Young. 2. To those advanced in Years.
Closed with a Reflection on the Day of Judgment.

Sect. 3. By avoiding all those things that are injurious to Life; as Sloth,
Impertinence, Remissness or Coldness in Religion; Levity and Inconstancy. Some
other Directions deferred to the following Treatises.

TO understand aright what it is I here aim at, what I mean by the Improvement
or Exaltation of Life, it is necessary to call to mind the true Notion of Life
laid down in the beginning, That it is the right use of all our Powers and
Faculties, the rational Exercise, the wise Employment of our whole Nature. Now
if this be so, it is plain that we live just as much as we act and enjoy, I mean
always rationally; that as we advance and grow up toward a Perfection of
Nature, the more is Life also raised and refined: Thus if the Life of the
Understanding be to think, to discover and contemplate Truth and Goodness, then
surely its Life is enlarged with Knowledge; if the Life of the Soul of Man, I
mean his Will and Affections, be to choose and pursue, admire and love true
Good then certainly our Life is perfected with our Virtue, and augmented with
our Religion. In a word, if the Life of Man do not consist in the Motion of
Animal Spirits, but the Exercise of his Rational Powers and Faculties; if the
true Health of Man be not to be judged by the regularity of his Pulse, but the
harmony of his Affections; if finally, the thing called Life be not to be
measured by Hours, and Days, and Months, and Years, but by Activity and
Enjoyment, by the Rational Acts of a Rational Nature; then sure I may boldly
conclude, That the more regularly and constantly we pursue the proper Business
of our Nature, the more actively and vigorously we are carried on toward that
which is our proper Good, so much the more we live, so much the more rich and
racie, the more true, natural, and pure is Life; and all this is no other
Philosophy than what the Wiseman has long ago advanced; For honorable Age is
not that which stands in length of time, nor that is measured by number of
years But Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is old age,
Wisdom 4. 8, 9. This indeed is a Truth of too vast an Importance to be a new
one; for were it but once thoroughly imbibed, it would relieve all the
Pressures, and redress all the Grievances of Humane Life. We complain of Life,
that it is dull and nautious, we impeach it a vanity and vexation of shortness
and uncertainty, how would this one Notion, well pursued, soon silence all
these Complaints; he would never think Life too short, who where ripe for
Death; he would never complain that Life were uncertain, who were always ready
to die; he would not accuse Life of dullness and nauseousness, who were daily
advancing his Discovery of Truth, and enlarging his Possession of Good; nor
would he ever charge it with Vanity and Vexation, were his Actions still wise
and rational; for thus every act of Life would be an act of Fruition too, being
both agreeable to Nature, and attended by a delightful Approbation and
Complacency of Conscience. By this time it is plain what the Design of this
Chapter is, namely, to compensate the shortness by the excellence of Life, and
redress the vanity and vexation of it by its Perfection; a Design, I confess,
worthy of a more comprehensive Mind, and a more elevated Fancy than mine; a
Design, demanding all the Wisdom and Experience of an Active, and all the
Thought and Learning of a Contemplative Life; a Design, in a word, that
requires at once the Prudence of old Age, and the Vigor of blooming Years;
that I am willing to contribute the little I can toward it, proceeds from a
sense of its being a Duty I owe my self and Mankind; let me not therefore be
oppressed by the grandeur of my Subject, and the expectation of my Reader, I
promote the good of Mankind in my way, and as I am able, it were a Crime if I
did not, and it will be Injustice to expect more from me: Besides, I purpose
not here to lay out my whole strength, tho this be little, having destined an
entire Volume to Humane Perfection; and therefore shall here Discourse but very
briefly, and in very general terms, of the Improvement of Life.

All the Advice I shall offer here, may be reduced to these Three Heads.

First, That we endeavor to perfect and exalt our Nature. Secondly, That we
begin to live betimes; or if we cannot now do that, our Years being far spent,
that we begin to live immediately. Thirdly, That we avoid all those things that
are Enemies to our true Life.
Sect. 1.
We must endeavor to perfect and exalt our Nature. The Necessity of this will
be very conspicuous to any one, who shall consider that the Perfection of our
Acts depends upon the Perfection of our Faculties and Powers, just as the
pleasure of Seeing does on the goodness of the Eye, or that of Hearing on the
Perfection of the Ear, so much, and much more, does the Beauty of Humane
Action, and the Gust of all our Enjoyments depend upon the clearness of the
Judgment, the rectitude of the Will, and the vigor of our Passions. To render
this Argument yet more visible and palpable, let us consider how mean a thing
Man were, and how contemptible Life, without Cultivation or Improvement: The
Body is but a heap of Dust, something there needs to stamp a value upon it;
something there must be to give Sweetness to the Eye, Charm to the Tongue, and
Grace to Motion: It Is a mere Machine alike capable of being made the Instrument
of Cruelty or Mercy, of Lust or Chastity, of Avarice or Charity; it is Religion
must purge and sanctify it; it is Wisdom must conduct and guide it, and make it
the happy Instrument of great and glorious Actions. The Spirit within us is a
volatile, mutable, unsteady thing, capable of all sorts of Impressions,
suspended as it were between Heaven and Earth, floating between the different
Shores of Good and Evil: Knowledge and Virtue forms it into Angel, stamps a
sort of Divinity upon it, for we art not born, but made great; it is Wisdom that
imprints it with bright Idea's, that impregnates it with noble Passions, and
determines its tendency toward its true Good and supreme Felicity: Our
Conversation with the World is naturally nothing else but a dull intercourse of
Forms, and Ceremonies, and Civilities, a nauseous Circulation of the same
tastless and superficial Entertainments, a tedious and repeated pursuit of vain
mistaken ends, and often baffled Designs; it is Virtue and Knowledge that gives
gust and relish to our Enjoyments, and Life and Spirit to all our Actions; that
leads us on toward excellent Ends, and inspires us with immortal Hopes; our
Fortune and Condition in the World is naturally a fluctuating unstable
Agitation, made up of a confused and motly variety of Events; Knowledge and
Virtue fix the floating Island, and give Light and Beauty to the Chaos.

I can never carry this Argument too far, and therefore I will yet a little
more particulary consider what Accession or Increase of Life we derive from
perfecting our Natures. Does Life consist in the Exercise of our Faculties?
True Life then is the Portion of the Active and Industrious; the dull and heavy
Motion of the Sluggard is but a faint Imitation or Resemblance of it; it is a
diseased languishing thing, a compound or mixture wherein there seems to be
more of Death than Life. Does Life consist in Fruition? how dark and dismal are
those of the Wicked, compared to the calm and bright days of the Good! for what
can there be like Enjoyment to that Man, who dares make no Reflections on the
past, nor can entertain any just Hopes of the future, and whose Mind concurs
not with his present Passions, and refuses to join in the senseless Designs he
is upon. Does Life lastly consist, as I have proved it does, in the Knowledge
of Truth and Love of Goodness? how scanty, narrow, and beggarly is the Life of
the Fool and Sinner, compared to that of the Wise and Virtuous! Tully said, One
virtuous day was to be preferred before a sinful immortality; this is true in
the present Sense and Notion of Life; Error and Ignorance are as it were a
Disease or State of Insensibleness, and Death to the Understanding; the Mind,
that is utterly ignorant of Objects worthy of it, has nothing to employ it self
upon, or at least nothing that gives it any solid Satisfaction; but the Mind,
which is filled with the Knowledge of excellent things, has a great variety of
Scenes to entertain it, and never wants some fresh Occasion of delight and
wonder. But it will be said, Does not the Fool behold the visible World as well
as the Philosopher? He does; but just as he reads a Poem, without discovering
the Artfulness of its Contrivance, the Richness of the Fancy, or Variety of the
Incidents. The Sinner hears talk too of an invisible World, of Moral
Perfections hear, and of Divine Joys hereafter; but he hears it unmoved,
unaffected, which shows he has no lively Notion, no distinct Perception of any
thing of this kind; the Glass is dulled and sullied; Beauty it self would loose
all Charm, reflected thus. But Humane Perfection consists not in Knowledge
alone, but also in the Purity of the Heart, in the regulation of the
Affections, in Love and true Liberty, that is, the Heart must be set upon
Objects worthy of it, and we must pursue our true Good with vigor and
constancy; and this is that which renders Life truly delightful and uniform;
without Objects to engage our Affections, we can scarcely be said to live, we
shall be becalmed, and scarce be sensible of the breath we draw; and unless
these Objects be worthy and agreeable, all is but Storm and Tempest, Cheat and
Torment, and our Faculties are not rationally employed, but abused, deluded,
depraved, tortured. Could we but comprehend what all this did amount to, or at
least, could we feel and experience it, we should soon discern that the Wise
and Good, and they only, did truly live; for these only know God and
themselves; these only admire, and love, and rejoice, and hope rationally; and
these only are not confined nor limited in their Knowledge or their Affections,
for the Objects of both are infinite; their Minds can never travel so far in
the Contemplation of God and the most important Truths, but that there is still
a new World to be further discovered; nor can their Admiration or Love, their
Joy or Hope, so enlarge themselves, as ever to equal the Objects of these
Passions, and reach the utmost that is in them. But it is probable after all,
the Fool and Sinner will pretend to engross the Goods of the Earth, as if they
alone were to possess and enjoy them, as if they were the Heirs of this World,
the Righteous of the other; but this is a vain fancy, and has been often
baffled. Who can hasten more to enjoy, than he who knows the true value and
right use of all things? And who can enjoy more in any thing, than he who at
once gratifies his Reason and his Appetite, and pleases his Inclination,
without forfeiting his true Liberty? If to be fooled and cheated, if to be
ensnared and tormented, by the things of this World, be a Pleasure, in this the
Christian must indeed give place to the Infidel, the Righteous Man to the
Sinner.

The Sum then of this whole Matter is, Life in the foolish, mean, and vicious
Soul, seems like a little Rill of Water, confined within narrow and scanty
Bounds, or like the Light of a Candle enclosed within the narrow compass of a
Dark-Lanthorn; but in the Wise and Understanding, it is like a mighty Stream
which swells above its Banks, and spreads it self over a vast Plain; or like
Light unconfined, which diffuses and darts it self over all the Face of Nature.
Ah! therefore how much does it import me, to fill my Understanding with bright
and lovely Images, with pleasing and important Notions, with all the Truths
that can serve, either to delight or guide, to nourish or adorn, to support or
fortify me in this World, or advance my Title to the Joys of another? How much
does it import me, to fill my Soul with Love, Love of all that is Good or
Great; Love of all that is Pure or Sacred; Love of all that is Beautiful or
Delightful? and lastly, that my Body may be a fit Instrument of such a Mind, it
does not a little import me, that this be strong and healthy, vigorous and
vivatious.

Sect. 2.
The second way to improve Life, is to begin to Live betimes; or at least, if
our Years be far spent, to begin to Live immediately, which is all we can do.
Life, in my Notion of it, dawns with our Reason, and grows up to ripeness and
perfection with the Virtue, Liberty, and Tranquillity of the Soul. To be Wise,
and to be Religious, this is to Live, for in this consists Fruition and
Enjoyment; in this the Health and Vigor of our Faculties; in this the Harmony
and Beauty of the whole Frame of our Nature; and this, and no other, is a
rational and agreeable Exercise of all our Powers and Capacities. Whoever
therefore will improve Life, ought to begin next moment to assert his Liberty,
and to give up himself to true Philosophy; it is strange to see how Men put off
this, or attempt it only superficially, and by the by; they prefer, I will not
say Trades and Husbandry, and various sorts of Knowledge, foreign and remote
from the Service and Conduct of Humane Life, (ah! that Time were but so well
spent in general;) but they prefer even Dressing, Painting, Drinking, Gaming,
and all, not only the most silly and trifling, but the most vile and infamous
ways of consuming Time, before true Wisdom and Philosophy: Nay, amongst those
that make profession of Wisdom, and pretend to have dedicated themselves to the
Doctrine of Jesus, it is common to see great numbers Hearing, Talking, Reading,
Disputing, without ever making any use of those Truths they study and contend
for, or feeling any warmth or influence of them; like those wise ones in
Temporals, who are laying up Provision and Treasure all their Life long, which
they will never use, never enjoy. Ah wretched Consumption of Life! how soon
will the last Minute expire? And the unhappy Man will not have lived one Year,
one Month, one Day, but will have wasted a precious Treasure of Time, and he
must go immediately and account for it. Well, let the World live after its own
fashion, I plainly see the Point I am to make; no Day, no Hour shall pass me
unimployed, every Moment, if I can, I will grow wiser and better; it is not how
long I last, but how much I live; I will Know, I will Act, I will Enjoy to Day,
and then I am sure I have lived a Day; this most propose to do, some time or
other, but not to Day: And why not to Day? why not presently? is there any Evil
in being immediately wise, immediately free, immediately rational, immediately
happy? It cannot be, if the state I am in be really good; if the Pleasures I
enjoy be really such as my Reason can share in, and my Conscience can approve?
I then indeed live. There Is no need of Change and Reformation, but Continuance
and Perseverance; but it they be not, why will I not exchange? False for true,
and irrational for rational Pleasures: If I am in the right? if my Condition be
truly good and safe, it is well; there is nothing further to be done, but to
maintain my Ground: But if I am in the wrong, if the Foundation be unsound and
rotten, and whilst I dream not of it, my Health and Fortune, I mean my
imaginary Happiness, consume inwardly, waste and decay insensibly, why am I
fond of the Cheat? why am I unwilling to be undeceived and disabused? And why
not presantly? The Reason is plain, they acknowledge the Representation I have
made to them of a virtuous and Rational Life, is very pleasant and taking* but
to be born into this new State, to come forth into this moral Light is as
troublesome, as the Infants being born into the Natural: They love the Ease and
Wealth of a prosperous Trader, but not the Hardships of his Apprentiship the
Thrift and Confinement of his Beginnings. They love Laurels and Triumphal
Arches, the Glory and the Pleasure of Victory, but cannot endure the Toils and
Hazards of War. Or plainly thus, they admire Liberty of Mind, Serenity and
Rational Joy, but it will cost them much Labor and Pains to purchase it. Thus
the wretched Man, fearing the Regiment of Physic, wears out a miserable Life
in the Pains of a Disease, and one that has a Cancer or Gangrene chooses to
waste and rot in Pain by Piecemeal, rather than undergo the short pain of
Amputation or Absition. Nay, what is worse than all this, Men are fond of their
Diseases, love the things that increase and nourish them, as the gross and
corpulent do rest, the Lethargic sleep, and the Hydropick drink.

This is the state, the deplorable state of the far greater part of Mankind, a
state of Disease and Death, a state of Bondage and Captivity, a state of
Infatuation and Enchantment; and I very much fear, that whatever Motives can be
extracted out of the Subject I am now upon, will be too weak and feeble; for
what can all the Discourses in the World about Rational Pleasure and the
Satisfactions of a Regular and Virtuous Life amount to with Men wholly given up
to Sensuality, and incapable of relishing any pure and sacred Delights? If I
have succeeded so far, as to possess them with an Opinion that a Life of Reason
or Religion is a Life of Pleasure, tho they have not any true gust or clear and
lively Notion of this Pleasure, it is the utmost I can hope for; but to persuade
these Men to embrace this Life, there is need of all the Arguments that either
Reason or Religion can administer; and these too pointed with all the Life and
Spirit, with all the Edge and Flame that Wit or Judgment can give them; a Task
too hard for me! O God! thou lover of Mankind, that thou would aid me by thy
Spirit, while I strive to prevail with Young and Old to seek thy Glory and
their own Happiness, to pursue Virtue and true Pleasure. I will first address
my self to the Young, and then to those more advanced in Years.

1. To the Younger. You are now in your Bloom, what glorious Fruit may you
bring forth! what Honor may you do God! what Service may you render your
Relations and your Country! and what Joys and Blessings may you not heap upon
your selves! Time and Tide seem to wait upon you; even the Providence and Grace
of God, with Reverence be it said, seem to attend and court you. But ah!
remember, they will not do so for ever; these Smiles and Invitations of Heaven
and Nature will not last continually; your Infidelity or Ingratitude, your
Folly and Sensuality, will soon blast and wither all these fair Hopes, turn all
your Pleasures into Gall and Wormwood, and all your blessed Advantages into the
Instruments of your Ruin, and Aggravations of it too: Grace will soon retire,
Nature degenerate, Time grow old, the World despise you, the God of it frown
upon you, and Conscience, guilty Conscience will be either stupefied and
benumed, or fester and rage within you, and Death will come, and then Judgment;
and how soon 'twill come, ah! who knows; sudden and early Deaths ought to
convince you on what uncertain Ground you stand; the Scythe of Death stays not
always till the Harvest be ripe, but promiscuously mows down the Young and Old.
Ah! begin, begin then to live; seize upon Pleasure and Happiness while they
stand courting and inviting you; pursue Virtue and Glory immediately, while the
Difficulties are fewer, your Strengths and Aids greater; your Judgments being
not yet corrupted by the Maxims, or rather the Fancies of the World, nor your
Wills yet disabled and enslaved by a Custom of Sin. Ah! venture not to devote
your Youth to Vanity and Folly, on presumption of devoting your Age to
Repentance and Religion: For if this were a Rational and Just Design in it
self, yet is it to you a very unsafe and doubtful one: For which way can you
ensure Life, or on what ground can you confide on the morrow? Boast not of to
morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1.

I know what Opposition will be raised against this kind of Exhortation, and
with what rude Reflections they will be treated: Come, say they, this is our
Springs, let us enjoy our selves whilst we have time and vigor; Religion looks
too grave and formal for these years: we shall have time enough to he dull and
melancholy: Come on then, let us enjoy our selves as becomes our Youth; this is
our Portion, and our Lot is this; and whatever they who have now outlived
themselves, whose Blood is four, and Spirits low, may gravely talk against
these things; they too, when time was, admired what they now would have us
despise as Vanity, and committed themselves, what they now condemn in us. In
Answer to this, let us pass over the briskness and the flourish, and examine
the Sense and Reason of this sort of Talk: The Substance of it may be reduced
to three Heads.

1st, Youth is the Season of Pleasure, i. e. Sin and Folly; Inclination and
Opportunity conspire to invite you to it, therefore you indulge it. What a
strange Argument is this? Is there any Period of our Life, from our Cradle
almost to bur Coffin, I mean from the moment we arrive at the use of Reason to
our Grave, wherein some Sin or other is not in season: May not Manhood defend
Ambition, and old Age Covetousness, by the same Argument by which you do your
sinful Pleasures? If Inclination to a folly would justify our Commission of
it, in what part of Life should we begin to be Wise and Virtuous? 'Twill be
hard to find the time wherein we shall have no Inclination to any Sin or Folly;
or rather, if this be so, who can be Guilty? The Adulterer will impute his
Uncleanness to the impetus of his Lust; the Murderer his Bloodshed to the
violence of his Rage, i. e. each of them their Sins to the strength of their
Inclinations, and if your Argument be good, they will be innocent. But do not
deceive your selves, then is your Obedience, as most acceptable to God, so most
indispensable in it self, when you lie under Temptations to Sin, and Heaven is
proposed as a Reward, not of following, but conquering your Inclinations. The
second part of the Objection is, That Religion does not look very graceful in
young Years. This I could never well understand; if you be so foolish as to
think Religion consists in sour Faces, or an affected Moroseness and
Sullenness, or in Stupidity and Melancholy, I must confess you have little
Reason to be fond of it, for this becomes no Age, and much less the more
verdant one: But if by Religion you understand Devotion toward God, Reverence
toward your Parents and Superiors, Temperance and Chastity in your selves,
and such like Virtues; I must needs say, nothing can appear to me more great
and lovely than Religion in Youth; what can better become those who possess the
Gifts of Nature in their Perfection, than Gratitude to the God of Nature? What
can be a greater Glory to the Young, than Obedience to Parents, and Reverence
to their Elders and Superiors? What does more preserve, or better become
Strength than Sobriety and Temperance? What is a more charming or more lasting
Ornament to Beauty than Modesty and Chastity. After all this, it is a vain thing
to comfort your selves with saying, That the Grave and Wise, when they had the
same Inclinations you now have, did as you do, indulge and gratify them: For
first, this is not generally true; and secondly, the less they did it, the more
were they honored and beloved; but thirdly, if they did, it is certain that
they have bitterly condemned it, and repented of it: And is it not strangely
absurd, that you should propose to your selves nothing in the Lives of the Wise
and Virtuous but their Frailties and Errors for your Example; that you should
pitch upon that only for your Imitation, which all the Wise and Good detest and
bemoan, as their Sin and Shame, and think it their highest Wisdom to do so.

To conclude this Address to the younger sort, unless there be any who are
possessed with a Spirit of Infidelity, against which I will not now enter the
Lists, all the Pretenses you can possibly form for your differring to devote
your selves instantly to Wisdom and Religion, are founded in two Suppositions,
of which the one is false, and the other absurd: The false one is, That Sin is
a State of Pleasure, Virtue of Trouble and Uneasiness; the contrary of which
is, I think, sufficiently demonstrated through this whole Treatise, and would
you but be prevailed with to taste the Pleasures of a sincere Virtue, your
Experience would soon confute this Fancy; what madness then is it to be afraid
of becoming happy too soon? Ah! how differently are we affected under the
Maladies of the Mind and of the Body: Did the Lame or Blind, the Lepers, the
Lunaticks or Demoniacks, ever entreat our Lord to defer their Cure, and give
them leave to enjoy their Miseries, Diseases, and Devils, a little longer. The
other Supposition is absurd, which is, That you will Repent hereafter. Must you
then Repent hereafter? Must this be the Fruit of all your sinful Pleasures,
Guilt and Remorse, Grief and Fear, Distress and Agony of Soul? Do Revelation
and Reason, Death and Judgment; do all your sober and retired Thoughts preach
you this one Lessen Repentance? and yet can you resolve to plunge your selves
in that Filthiness which must be washed off with Tears? Can you resolve to
indulge those cheating and deceitful Lusts which will one day fill your Soul
with shame and sorrow, with distraction, horror and amazement? Ah Infatuation!
ah Bewitchery! that ever a rational Creature should live in such an open
defiance and hostility against his Reason! and yet, if Repentance, after many
years, and innumerable sins, would be more easy? if your Sins would be more
easily conquered, or more easily attoned? this Frenzy would not want some
little color; but how contrary is this to Truth? which puts me in mind of
another sort of Readers, to whom I am now to apply my self, namely,

2ly, To those who are advanced in years. It Is observed of Caesar by Suetonius,
that lighting upon the Statue of Alexander the Great in the Temple of Hercules
at Gades, and reflecting on himself, that he had yet done nothing remarkable at
those years, wherein that (in Caesar's Notion of Gallantry) brave and gallant
Man had overrun all the East, he did sweat and blush under the keen Reproaches
of his own Mind, and groaned under the uneasy Conscience of his Sloth, and
presently desired to be dismissed from his Questorship, that he might pursue
Glory and Immortality, Fame and Dominion. Had you but one spark, I will not say
of the Zeal of a Christian, but of this generosity of a Pagan, you would blush
at the Soul, to think that you have not yet buckled on the Armor of Light, at
an Age in which many others have been covered with Laurels; that you have not
yet started forth at those years, in which some others have finished, tho not
their Race, yet all the Difficulties of it; the miserable account that you will
give of thirty, forty, peradventure of fifty years! I will not say that you
have lived to no purpose, but to the worst imaginable; ignorant, enslaved to
Lust, oppressed by Guilt! all that you have done is, You have treasured up
wrath against the day of wrath: For this to be the product of so many years!
Shame and Confusion! But greater, infinitely greater to go on thus. Sin may to
some seem the Misfortune of Youth, but it is unquestionably the Reproach of Age:
Unhappy Nature, and unhappy Education bear a share of the Imputation in Youth;
but in these years your own Obstinacy and Choice engross the whole Guilt. Young
People are like weak Barks, which in boisterous Seas and Winds carry too much
Sail, and too little Ballast; their Judgment is weak and unresolved, and their
Passions light and violent as Hurricanes; but riper years do, or should, bring
on naturally wiser and stancher thoughts, cooler, sedater tempers; and
therefore certainly Sin in these carries a deeper Guilt and shame in it: The
raw unexperienced Sinner perishes whilst he but tastes and gazes; the Virgin
Soul coming into a strange World, is deflour whilst it gratifies its Curiosity
and Fancy, like Dinah when she went forth only to see the Daughters of the
Land: But the full-grown Sinner sins against, not only me Preachers
Instruction, but his own Experience too; he repeats those Sins which he has
often confessed to be his Folly and his Shame, and returns like foolish
Mariners, to those treacherous Seas where they were Shipwracked but the other
day: If this be not to outrage Conscience, defy Reason, and dare God, what is?
No, you will say, you to do resolve to repent hereafter? Hereafter? how ill does
this word sound in one who does begin to bow already under the weight of years?
Hereafter? how ill does this Language become this decaying mouldring Body? But
suppose the Wheels of Time would stop, tho running now down a headlong
Precipes; suppose your Sun would for a while stand still, yet what a Work have
you to finish! what Guilt to expiate! what Sins to vanquish! and what a Day of
Judgment to prepare for! Are these slight Considerations? will your Sins, think
you, be easily attoned? when their number is swollen, not only by length of
time, but also by an uncontrouled Licenciousness! For Novice in Sin is awed by
Modesty, held in by Scruples, and discouraged by regreat and remorse; but the
Veteran Sinner is carried away by a Torrent of debauched Affections, and
repeats his Follies with a relentless Confidence and unopposed Authority. Will
it be an easy Task to subdue those Sins, which have maintained a long and
undisturbed Dominion, and exercised an Absolute Sovereignty over you? What
shall awaken that Sinner, who, like Solomon's Drunkard, Prove. 23.35. is
insensible of Stripes and Wounds; and alas! when roused out of the Arms of his
Dalilah, his Locks, like Sampson's, are cut off, the Spirits retired, his
Strength impaired, and the Force of his Enemy Augmented; and with what will he
Conquer? Is it, lastly, a trivial thing to appear before the Judgment Seat of
God, that you should think a Moment will serve turn to prepare for it. I will
suppose the Judge of the whole World as merciful as you can desire him, if you
will suppose him too, with Reverence be it spoke, to have so much Sense as not
to be imposed on, so much Integrity as to expect Sincerity, tho not Perfection;
and this alone will make that Judgment formidable. I very much fear that both
Young and Old do entertain too mild and favorable a Notion of that Day, and so
elude and baffle the Force of the most powerful Motive to Virtue and Religion
the Gospel has; I shall not therefore wander far from the purpose of this
Paragraph, if I close this Exhortation to begin to live immediately, with a
short Reflection on that Day.

We must first bid adieu to this World, to every thing in it that is dear to us,
and dye e're we can go and appear before God, what a perfect Mortification of
all our Sensual Appetites is necessary, e're we can calmly part with all here
below! what a long Experience of Love and Duty is necessary to confirm and
assure the Soul against all its Fears and Apprehensions! what a vigorous Faith
to carry us through this dark Passage into another World! when we are got
there, what a strict Trial are we to undergo! There all Disguises will be taken
off, and every thing appear in its naked Nature: There all our Superstructures
of Hay and Stubble will be burnt up, only pure solid Virtue will bear the Test:
There darling Vices will not pass under the Disguise of Sins of Infirmity:
There an honest Sloth and harmless Luxury, will not be thought Innocence enough
to entitle Men to Heaven: There some few good fits will not pass for godly
Sorrow, nor some feeble and short-lived Attempts for Repentance and a Change:
There the Effects of a lucky Constitution, will not be crowned as the Works of
Grace, and Fruits of the Divine Life: There, in a word, talk will not pass for
Action, nor Censure of others, commute for Mortification in our selves:
Finally, nothing shall be rewarded there but a conquering Faith, an active
Charity, an humble, constant Zeal, patient persevering Hopes, spiritual Joys,
and pious Fears. This needs no Application; Begin, begin to live before you
dye, begin to repent and reform before you be judged.

Sect. 3.
A third way of Improving Life is to avoid and cut off all those things that
are injurious to it: Such are Sloth that wastes, and Impertinence that embroils
it: Coldness or Remisness in Religion that dispirits and dilutes, Levity and
Inconstancy that disorder and confound it: And finally, all those Evils that
sour and imbitter it. I am sensible that these Heads occur often, and tho it be
under different Aspects, yet it is possible that I may sometimes light upon the
same Thoughts, nay, peradventure the very same words, it is against my will if I
do; but I want sight to revise my Papers, and am glad to disburden my Memory as
fast as I can, and therefore charge it with nothing that I have once entrusted
to writing; and the toil of recollecting my Thoughts, scattered up and down
like Sybil's Oracles in dispersed Leaves, by a hand which it is impossible for
me to direct or animate, is most intolerable; if therefore I slip into any
Error of this kind, which I shall very unwillingly, I cannot but presume of
Pardon, having so just an Excuse. But I proceed,

First, We must avoid Idleness. Sloth is the Rust of Time; Sleep is an Image of
Death, and Sloth of Sleep: The Life of the sluggish is but a waking Dream, a
Vacation from all Business and true Enjoyment too; a Cessation and Stop, tho
not of Time, which still runs on, yet of the very Powers and Faculties of the
Soul, whereas Life consists in the Exercise of both: How remote then must
Idleness be from improving or exalting Life? it never ploughs nor sows, and
therefore never reaps; it never plants nor sets, and therefore never gathers
any Fruit; nothing great was ever performed by it, nothing great ever enjoyed
by it: And shall the richest Fruit that ever grew upon any of the Trees of
Paradise, Wisdom, and Virtue, i. e. Knowledge and Life be gathered by a
sluggish hand? No, tho no Angel or flaming Sword do stop his way, yet are there
Difficulties in it, too many and too great for this heavy dastardly Animal to
conquer. Plato, as I remember, tells us some where, that a God tied Pain and
Pleasure by the Tails together; there is no coming at the one by him who shuns
the other: So is the World contrived, that even Temporal and seeming Goods
cannot be obtained without the travel of the Mind, and toil of the Body; and
yet what lean, starved, and beggarly Blessings are these, compared to those I
treat of. The rich Man may starve for want of true Pleasure in the midst of his
glittering Heaps: Sorrow may sit heavy on the Heart of the Conqueror; or the
Bride, even on the days of solemn Triumph and Festival noise: The Prince may be
a Slave, an Egyptian Slave, even while he reigns with absolute and uncontrouled
Power: But Life and Pleasure, Content and Happiness, are the inseparable
Companions of Wisdom and Virtue: Let no man therefore flatter himself with the
Hopes of such a Treasure, who lives idly and at his ease; he must pray,
meditate, watch, and exercise himself in Industry, Sobriety, and Purity, who
will overcome the Corruptions of his Nature, and obtain the Tranquillity and
Liberty of a true Christian. Nor let this frighten any Man, for those Duties
which are a little troublesome in the beginning, do soon grow easy and
delightful too. In this sense must we understand that of the Author of
Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 4.17, 18. tho rendered a little harshly: For at the first
she (that is, Wisdom) will walk with him by crooked ways, and bring fear and
dread upon him, and torment him with her Discipline until she may trust his
Soul, and try him by her Laws. Then will she return the straightway unto him,
and comfort him, and show him her secrets.

Secondly, Impertinence, or being busied and employed in Trifles, is indeed as
different from Sloth as Motion from Rest; but yet such a wretched Consumption
of Time cannot deserve the Name of Life; for this is not Activity of Soul, but
a poor and mean debasing of it: Fancy, and that a silly and extravigant one,
may be said to live, but Reason cannot. That Idleness, which consists in heavy
Passive Dullness, is like a state of Sleep without Dream or Fancy; that which
consists in a fluttering and impertinent Activity, is nothing else but a giddy
Ferment of the Spirits, and Agitation of the Fancy, the incoherent disjoynted
Thoughts, the confused and fruitless Projects and Attempts of a Dream, and we
may almost as properly say of him that Dreams, that he Eats and Drinks, Fights
or Travels, or whatever he Fancies himself to do, as we can of this sort of
Sluggard that he lives. It Is true, could a Man be for ever Impertinent, this
sort of Idleness would seem to some Men to have no great Evil in it; but how
could such a Mind bear the shock of Humane Misfortunes? How could such a Soul
discharge the great Duties of Humane Society? How could it entertain it self
with Objects agreeable to a Rational Nature? And if it could do none of these
things, it is impossible to conceive how it could be other than miserable; for
tho we could suppose such a Creature to be so mere a Trifle as never to be
nearly concerned in any Changes of Fortune, nor ever called upon by that
Community he belongs to, that is, I should almost say, never to be regarded or
minded, either by God or Man; yet still such a one did no way live up to the
Excellence of his Nature, his Business and Enjoyment were not Manly and
Rational, and his Childish Life were therefore only pretty and pleasing to him,
because he had a childish and silly Soul.

Nor is the Grave much better than the gay Impertinent; or the Man of Business,
if he neglect the main, the one thing necessary, to be preferred before the Man
of Mode: Sensuality, it is true, softens, and Drudgery hardens the Mind, but
both alike intoxicate it, both wed it to this, and alienate it from the other
World: It imports very little to what Idol one do Sacrifice, whether Ashtaroth,
Molock, or Mammon, if we Sacrifice not to the true God. In vain do they pretend
to any other Art, who are ignorant of the Art of Living, to plod or drudge,
intriegue or trade, canvas and court, it is all but solemn Impertinence, if
Virtue and Religion be neglected: Ah! what Phantoms, and Clouds, and Dreams do
Men pursue and hunt after, instead of Life and Peace, of Rest and Pleasure!

Thirdly, Remisness or Lukewarmness in Religion, a sort of Neutrality between
Vice and Virtue is the next thing to be avoided: We can never truly Live,
unless we be entirely Uniform, unless we be wholly given up, and without
reserve, to the Conduct of Reason: There is little Pleasure in Religion, if
there be no ardour and fervency in it; it is Love makes the Duty easy, and the
Prospect delightful. If there be no Strength in Faith, no Life in Devotion, no
Spirit in Duty, ^o Desire in Hope, this is Religion without a Soul, it is the
Carcas of an unanimated Virtue; what Peace? what Assurance? what Joy? what
Transport can ever be the Portion of such a Christian?

Fourthly, Levity and Inconstancy is the last thing I will now mention, and the
most irreconcilable Enemy to Life. For this does not only interrupt the Course
of Life, or like Sleep or Sloth, make a vast Casm or Gap in it, but puts us
more back than we had advanced forward; an unhappy gust of Wind that throws us
off to Sea again, when we were almost come to Shore; if we will reap the Fruit
of Victory, we must pursue it; if we will find rest, we must be steadfast and
unmovable; if we will enjoy Virtue, we must unite and incorporate it with us;
it is impossible that the unconstant, unstable Proselyte of Virtue should either
have a pleasant Life, or a comfortable Death; for if he build to day what he
pulled down yesterday, if he practice one hour what he condemns another, it is
impossible he should please himself, much less his God.

To shun the Evils, and make the most of the Goods of Life, is none of the
least important Rules conducing to Happiness, and might properly enough be
insisted on here. But I begin to tire; and since this may better be reduced
under the Heads of Indolence and Fruition, I will defer the Consideration of it
till I come to treat of them, which I may one time or other do, if I see Reason
for it, if not, I would not willingly be impertinent; if I cannot serve the
World, I will not trouble it.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 12. read contemptible. p. 68. l. 21. r. single. p. 90. l. 6. r.
ease. p. 134. l. 12. r. ripen. p. 134. l. 15. r. places.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for and and sold by Samuel Smith at the Prince's
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
ENquiry after Happiness. Vol. in Octavo.

The Duty of Servants. Containing first their Preparation for, and Choice of a
Service. Secondly, Their Duty in Service toward God, their Masters, and
themselves: Together with suitable Prayers to each Duty, and some Direction
peculiarly to Servants for the worthy Receiving the Holy Sacrament. Both
written by the Author of Practical Christianity. Octavo.

A Treatise of Self-Examination in order to the worthy Receiving of the Holy
Communion. Twelves. Price 1 s.

A Sermon about frequent Communion, preached before the University of Oxford.
By Tho. Smith D. D. Quarto.

Of the high Veneration Man's Intellect owes to God, peculiarly for his Wisdom
and Power. By the Honorable Robert Boil. Octavo.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Lamb, July 23. 1686. by Rich.
Lucas M. A. Vicar of St. Stephen's Coleman-street. 1686.

The History of the Persecutions of the Protestants by the French King in the
Principality of Orange, from the Year 1660. to the Year 1687. Written by Mr. P.
Chaplain to his Highness the Prince of Orange. In Quarto. 1689. Price 1 s.

A Discourse about Discerning and Trying the Spirits, etc. To which is prefixed
the Life of Saint Mary Magdalen de Pazzi a Carmelite Nun. With a Preface
concerning the Nature, Causes, Concomitants, and Consequences of Ecstasie and
Rapture. Octavo. 1688.

Remarks upon Popery, Represented and Misrepresented, etc. Quarto.

Plain Answer to a Popish Priest, questioning the Orders of the Church of
England, etc. 1689.

Miracles Worlds above, and contrary to Nature; or an Answer to a late
Translation out of Spinoza Tract. Theol. Polit. Mr. Hobb's Leviathan, etc.
Entitled Miracles no Violation of the Laws of Nature. Quarto.

Vanity of all Pretenses for Toleration. Quarto.

The History of the Original and Progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues. By P.
Simon. Octavo.

The State of the Church of Rome when the Reformation began. Quarto.

A Letter of Enquiry to the Reverend Fathers of the Society of Jesus. Quarto.

A Pacifick Discourse of the Causes and Remedies of the Differences about
Religion, which distract the Peace of Christendom. Quarto.

The Visions of Pasquin, or a Character of the Roman Court, Religion and
Practices. With an exact Description of Purgatory and Hell. Quarto. 1689.

The School of the Eucharist, or the Miraculous Acknowledgments which Beasts,
Birds, and Insects have rendered to the Holy Sacrament of the Altar. Octavo.

Art of Divine Converse; A New Years Gift. Twelves. Price 6 d.

Libri Latini.
GErard. Joan. Vossij and Clarorum Virorum ad eum Epistolae. Fol. Londini 1690.

Jacobi Usserij Archiepiscopi Armachani opuscula duo, nunc primum Latin Edita:
quorum alteram est de Episcoporum and Metropolitinarum Origin. Alterum de Asia
Proconsulari, etc. Octavo.

Contra Historiam Aristeae de Septuaginta Interpretibus Disserratio. In qua
probatur illam a Judaeo aliquo confictum fuisse ad Conciliandam Authoritatem
Versioni Graecae. Et quorundam Doct. Viror. Defens. ejusdem examini
subjiciuntur. Per H. Hoddy M. A. etc. Octavo.

Miscellanea, in quibus continentur Defensio Libri de Graecae Ecclesiae statu
contra Objectiones Authoris Hist. Criticae, super Fide and Ritibus Orientalium.
Brevis Narratio de Vita, Studiis, Gestis, and Martyrio D. Cyrillo Lucaris,
Patriarchae Constantinopolitani, etc.

Miscellanea, Pars Secunda. Responsio ad nuperas D. Simonij in Libro super Fide
Graecorum de Dogmata Transubstantiationis Cavillationes. Item Defensio
Superioris Dissertationis contra Exceptions D. Simonij in Critica Hist. Novi
Test. etc. Authore Tho. Smith Eccl. Angl. Presb. 1690.

A Catalogue of Books printed for, and sold by George Pawlet at the Bible in
Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street.
PRactical Christianity, or an Account of the Holiness which the Gospel
enjoins, etc.

An Enquiry after Happiness, Vol. 1. by the Author of Practical Christianity.

Christian Thoughts for every day of the Month, by the same Author.

Episcopacy as established by Law in England, written by the command of K
Charles I. By Robert Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Newly Reprinted.

A Collection of Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and other public Records of the Church of
England; with a learned Preface. By Anthony Sparrow, Lord Bishop of Norwich.

Golden Remains of the ever memorable Mr. John Hales of Eaten-Colledge, etc.
The Third Impression. With Additions from the Authors own Copy, viz. Sermons
and Miscellanies. Also Letters and Expresses concerning the Synod of Dort.

The Works of that Pious and Learned Author of The Whole Duty of Man. Printed
in large Folio.

The Whole Duty of Man, Put into significant Latin for the use of Schools.

The Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety; or an Impartial Survey of the
Ruins of Christian Religion, undermined by unchristian Practice. By the Author
of the Whole Duty of Man.

The Gentleman's Calling. Written by the Author of the whole Duty of Man. Also
the other Works of the same Author.

A Scholastical History of the Canon of the Holy Scripture, or the certain and
indubitable Books thereof, as they are received in the Church of England. By
Dr. Cousin late Bishop of Durham Newly Reprinted.

The Book of Homilies, appointed to be read in Churches in the time of Q
Elizabeth. Newly Reprinted.

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical. Quarto.

Divine Breathings; or, a Pious Soul thirsting after Christ, in an hundred
excellent Meditations.


