A MODEST VINDICATION OF THE HERMIT OF THE Sounding Island: In Requital for
the MODEST VINDICATION OF THE Salamanca Doctor FROM PERJURY.

By Bartholomew Lane Esquire.

LONDON. Printed by T. Snowden for the Author. 1683.

A Modest Vindication, etc.
There Is no body who had never seen it before, that looks upon the outside of
Bedlam, but will say, it is a very line Structure; and take it for some
beautiful College; but when they are once within side of it, and hear the
several sorts of Melody which the various Professors there make in their
particular Apartments; some raving, others tearing; some swearing, others
hollowing; some whooping; it is twenty to one but they will know where they are;
and let the People say what they will, and tell 'em they are sober, yet they
will believe 'em to be what they are, stark mad.

So fares it with Our Modest Vindication of the Salamanca Doctor from Perjury.
A very specious Frontispiece. For who cannot but look upon it as a very good
work, to vindicate a mane from so foul a Crime? It Is a pious, good, honest,
charitable work, and might deserve Remuneration, or Retaliation, if well done;
especially when a man comes so far as Morocco to do it.

To go a little farther, On an Essay to prove him only Forsworn in several
Cirstances. All this is well enough -- For it is common in your great Portals to
have a couple of ugly Satyrs, or a brace of yawning Saracens Heads staring in
your face, to embellish the Workmanship. These things are frequently admitted
in Architecture among the Sober and Judicious.

Nay, he may be allowed a Sentence or two to boot, with half a dozen Verses:
They lie like Marble Steps or Ascents, very graceful and majestic. And when
the People behold these outward Graces, they cry, Who lives here? sure it is
some Lord or Knight -- No, it is only a Master of Arts, and a Priest of the
Church of England.

Certainly cries one -- I cannot believe it -- Why so Sirs? -- Why I ventured
but a little way in -- and there is such raving and tearing, such fuming and
foming, such a noise, such a din, such huffing and dinging, such snarling and
Bowwowing, that it seems rather the Mansion of Scylla and Charybdis: All the
Constables of Faringdon without may be thought few enough to keep the Peace in
it. Sure, added he, the Owner of this Pile is too mad to make a Priest of. Oh
Sir! -- 'Twould make any man mad to be abused as he has been. Don't tell me
that Sir, I am sure Don Quixot, who was a Knight Errant, and so Choleric, that
no Priest ought to pretend to be like Him, was of another mind. For he being
affronted by an Ecclesiastico, took a more serene Method in his Rebuke. You may
find it, in his 32th Chapter of his sixth Book. As for the Verse, you may
digest the Chapter into Verses, and find out the number your self if you
please. This Ecclesiastico had said to this same Knight in the Chapter
foregoing -- Soul of a Pitcher, who has put it into your Noddle that you are a
Cavaliero andante, Kill Giants, and overcome Windmills? A very sharp Rebuke,
and no way befitting an Ecclesiastico. Now what said the meek Knight to him? I
expected, quoth he, from one of your Coat, good Counsel, and private well
intended Reprehensions, not to be so severely reproached in public. For calm
Reproof better befits a man of your Calling, than railing and scolding beyond
all the Limits of Modesty and Civility. Why truly, this was an Affront very
patiently sheathed up, especially by a Knight that would quarrel with a
Windmill, for grinding Corn for the Poor. But our Knight's Tempers, are some of
them more testy than He. Besides, this man was abused after a strange fashion;
He was Mahometanickly abused, Jewishly abused, Jesuitically abused -- Surely
you know nothing of the matter; -- Not I, by my Troth -- I hardly read a
Pamphlet once in a Quarter of a year -- For I look upon all your
Paper-squabbles to be but like the hideous noise, and unpleasing clamours of
those Geese, from whose wings the Quills were pulled. If you have a mind to
hear Scolding, go to Billingsgate; there you may to the full delight your Ears
with such pleasing Dialogues; there they are natural, come free, and unstudy'd
for. But for men to take pains to abuse one another, show 'em to have Brains
more empty than Fishwives. Oh Sir! -- But what think you of Aspersions? --
Would you not have a man vindicate himself from Aspersions? -- You Would as good
say, a man ought not to brush his Cloths when they are dirty? Why look ye Sir;
some men may vindicate themselves from Aspersions, and some may not. For some
men are so inconsiderable in the World, that if you divide the Nation where
they live into twenty parts, nineteen and three quarters, not three quarters of
the fourth quarter ever mind those Aspersions. And what should such a Person
trouble himself about Aspersions. A rude Carman many times all bedashes a
Hidalgo's spick and span new Suit; -- this is a very great Aspersion indeed. --
Upon this the Gentleman in a violent Fury asperses the Carman, and calls him
Son of a Whore. What a pitiful sort of Revenge is this? For still the
Gentleman's all bedaub'd; but the Carman goes away whistling about his
business, not thinking it worth his while to dispute with the Aspersed
Gentleman about his Pedigree. Many a man happens to tear his Clothes with a
Nail or a Tenter-hook in some Post or Bulk against a Stall; and what then? why
then the man looks first upon the Rent in his Garment, and gives the
Tenter-hook a good weighty Curse. But all the while it is his Coat, and not the
Tenterhook receives the damage. And therefore if a man be Aspersed, and no body
takes notice of it, a Vindication is like setting up a Post for his own folly
to shoot at. But then on the other side, suppose there should be grounds and
suspicions for this Aspersion, what signifies a Vindication then? Why then it is
just as if one of the Night-Rommagers of my Nuncles Houses should piss upon his
Embroidered Vestment to make it clean.

But you will say, This fame Salamanca Doctor is a perilous man, a man of note;
one that has more Enemies than a great many; the Papists and all that ad here
to 'ein are his mortal Foes: He Is the only Windmill that provokes all the Don
Quixote's of the Age; money has been got by Lambasting him with Satyrs and
Pasquils; and what more would not the Papishes give? they would even sell their
Madonna di Loretto, and all Mary Magdalen's Wardrobe to see him fairly Dathan'd
and Abiram'd. Had they but known the worth of Mr. A. E. rather than he should
have stayed in Morocco three minutes, they would have exchanged St. James of
Compostella for such a Modest Essayer, to prove their grand Enemy forsworn.

Why say you, that is no such great piece of Business with Them, to exchange a
Rich Saint for a poor Devil upon a good occasion. And you know, if this Poor
Devil do 'em a kindness, they can make him a Rich Saint when they please. And
one Poor Devil sometimes may do 'em more good than twenty Rich Saints. There Is
one Mounsieur Gas-teare is the Devil of a Saint -- Nay, the Devil of a Devil,
but if the Papishes can but fix him, he will make a hard shift but he will do 'em a
kindness.

Mounsieur Gas-teare! -- Who Is he? -- I never heard of him; -- Why Sir, he is a
Grecian by Birth; but the most incomparable fellow under the Sky -- He it was
that invented all the Arts and Sciences in the World; He taught the famous Crow
that saluted all The Roman Senators by their Names, as they entered the Senate
House; He taught the fellow that would take ye all the Grains out of an Ear of
Wheat, and then setting the Ear upright in a piece of soft Wax, would toss the
particular Grains into their particular places again at four yards distance. He
taught great Panurgus before he came to be a Cardinal, those pretty Inventions,
of carrying about him your little short Knives, as sharp as Furriers Needles to
cut Purses; of blowing Lice in the Lade Necks at Church, and fastening the men
and the women together with small Hooks, as they kneeled at Mass; so that the
next thing they did was to tear one another Silks and Sattins when (...)
departed. All which he did as being in fee with the Tailors.

The same Master it was, that instructed this towardly Disciple of his to
provide himself with fine Handkerchiefs, strewn with Powder of Raphorbium, and
then to clap them to the Lady's Noses, to make 'em sneeze four hours together.

Elephants, Lions, Rhinocerosse's, Bears, Horses, Spaniels, sight, shoot off
Pistols, tell money dance, fetch, carry, ill at his command. He invented those
wicked Arts of Printing and Guns; and He it was, this Mounsieur Gas-teare, that
taught our Modest Vindicator or write a Modest Ran-dan, or a Tantivy Essay to
prove the Salamanca Doctor forsworn.

The Modest Vindicator, do you call him, you may give him the Title rather of Don
Bragghibus, the Hermit of the Sounding Island. When you come into his
Introduction, you would think you were in the Ancient Magical Heptaphonus,
loud-resounding, noise rebounding, Ear-confounding, Jone out-thundring Portico
in Olimpia. Dodona's Brazen Caldron, when the Devil and the Wind Rung all in,
to receive the Answers of the Oracle, never made such a Din. Never did the two
Statues erected upon Memnom Tomb in Egyptian Thebes, keep such a roaring: or
Perilous ever bellow so loud in Phalaris's Bull.

So in the Sunny Spring, when Swarms of Bees
In Clusters hang upon the adjoining Trees,
The Country Swains their Brazen Metal bang,
And Copper Corybantick Basins twang,
Till high Olympus with the sound amazed --
Hold Sir, -- The Inference is easy, and it I mistake not, too true for an
Ecclesiastico. And yot Sir, I must needs say this for the Gentleman, that the
Popish Plot is like the Cretan Jove, which the Saturns of the Age would fain
devour. Now, who knows but this same Corybant had a design to Ring it out of
their Reach, as the Cretans cozened Saturn? No, no, Sir, you mistake his
design, he would have the Saturns devour it; and therefore he beats up his
Drums in the Valley of Gehinnom, that the pitiful Cries of the poor Plot,
weltring in the fiery Arms of its own Molechs, should not be Heard. For alas!
the Popish Plot would fain live, only there is at present a necessity to
Sacrifice it to a better Opportunity.

This Plot, Sir, came at first from the Devil, and the Papishes are sending it
as fast as they can to the Devil again; knowing that no body will keep it so
well as he can, or more willingly restore it them when they have occasion. And
therefore this same Eecclesiustico does like a true Conjurer, to raise Storms
and Tempests, and Hurricanes, and Thunder and Lightning for the Devil's more
noble Conveyance; for the Devil always Coaches it in foul Weather. Pray do but
peep through the Modest Essayers Introduction, and tell me whether you do not
see the Popish Plot posting away in an Eggshell upon a Broom-stick? I must
confess the Introduction is very whirlwindy, flustring, blustering, violent,
virulent, ranting, taunting, flaunting, and surely he destroyed a World of
Nettles with his hot Urine, before he could finish that stingy piece of
Divinity -- Had this Mounsieur Bragghibus but considered that pious Sermon
which Gusman makes upon the vanity of Honor, he would never have been so testy
for a small Rent in the Cassock of his petty Reputation. A thing so small, that
had not he sent us his own Magnifying Glass, we could no more have discerned
it, than the Muscles in a Flea's Leg, or the Stepstately's of a Mete in a
Cheese. But your Diverse into Nature's Secrets, called Natural Philosophers,
relate, that there is not a more angry, or more hussie creature in the World
than a Louse: Do but handle him a little roughly in the Microscope, and you
shall see him set up his bristles, and swell at least sour Inches by the
Cloth-yard mensure. And therefore a Don Bragghibus should have considered, that
for a man to be made a Cuckold, is an abuse; and yet it is the general Opinion
of the World, that Cuckolds had better carry their Horns in their Pockets, than
upon their Foreheads.

That Is something you say, Sir; But I must tell ye, he has not only labored,
but he has labored besides the Cushion; he has strayed from his Text like a
lost Sheep from the rest of the Herd. And all at the Instigation of Mounsieur
Gas-teare: So that although he has no more Charity for the Salamanca Doctor
than a Hobnail, yet the Salamanca Doctor has so much Charity for him, as to
believe, that 'twas not a Priest of the Church of England, but Mounsieur
Gas-teare that wrote the Modest Vindication. For look ye, Sir, have you ever
heard of a certain Country Shrove-Tuesday Sport, called, Thrashing the Cock?
Why, Sir, they put this Cock in the Ground, and lay a Turf over him; -- which
done, he that can hit him blindfold, at such a price shall have him. --
Presently in steps Mounsieur Gas-teare, and tempts one or other to undertake
the Adventure. -- I say, Mounsieur Gas-teare, because it is pour la Trippe, in
hopes of the Cock's Fleshiat Night. -- Thereupon the fellow is swathed about
the Eyes with the same impartiality that Love or Justice are said to be
Hoodwinkt; then a Flail is put into his hand, and being turned three or four
times round about, he is left to the conduct of his merciful Fortune. And now
he thrashes on in the dark; whatever lies before him feels his fury; he uses no
Complements, nor, By your Leaves; -- No, -- If his Sweetheart stood in his
way, she might receive as unmerciful a Palt as another; -- Yet all this while,
whatever he belabours, his aim is still at the Cock.

Even so it is with our Don Bragghibus, the Hermit of the Sounding Island; we
know his main Aim is at a Modest Vindication, he levels at the Salamanca
Doctor; but being blinded by Mounsieur Gas-teare, with passion and desire of
Revenge, he storms and fumes at the preservation of his Sovereign; shoots his
Fools bolts against those dreadful Instruments of Murder, Poison, Screwed Guns,
and Consecrated Daggers, with which his Sacred Life was threatened, laughs at
'em as mere Scar-Crows, and by contemptuously denying the possibility of any
such wicked Intendments, seeks to infer an improbability of the General Popish
Plot from a silly, idle, pretended, paltry Disgust of his own against the first
Discoverer. There is a famous Morallist, who tells us a story of a Fool, that
if any person had flung a Stone at him, and hit him a good thump, yet would he
be so far from flinging at any other than those who threw at him, that he would
not throw any other Stone but that individual Stone which was flung at himself.
This Fool was ten times wiser than our wise Mounsieur Bragghibus. He pretends
the Salamanca Doctor has thrown a Stone at him, and cracked that little, brittle
Reputation he had, and therefore he flings at all, pelts the King's
Preservation, slap -- says he, at the Conservation of the Kingdom; Have at the
Discovery of the Popish Plot -- and all this to make the King's Preservation,
the Preservation of the Kingdom, and the Discovery of the Plot stand out of his
way, that he might have the more room to let drive at the Head of his Capital
Enemy, the Salamanca Doctor. Had the Salamanca Doctor disgruntl'd him, yet
there was no reason from thence that therefore such a Muckworm of a Bragghibus
as he should play the Jack-pudding with the Highest Concerns of Three Nations.

Whence perceiving it as plain as a Fly in the Milk, we may conclude in
Frisesomorum, that our Mounsieur Bragghibus, though he pretend himself a Priest
of the Church of England, is not altogether so conversant with the Bible as
many others are; and therefore we would recommend to his consideration (as a
History which perhaps may be more pleasing and delightful to him) the 4th
Chapter of the first Book of Gusman; where he shall find many Excellent Lessons
touching the understanding of Injuries, and how to proceed where Offenses are
taken.

Now, should you demand a Reason of these Hot and Fiery Proceedings, it is
greatly to be feared that Mounsieur Bragghibus would be tunc ut nunc in Huffis
and Puffis -- and -- Lookando over Shouldrum Leftum, would answer proudly,
surlily, haughtily, promiscuously, darkly, obscurely, deeply, profoundly. But
what says St. Ambrose? Qui huffat huffabitur -- and qui look at lookabitur.
Methinks I hear his Reply already. First, That Quinta Essentia suffering a
Coagulation with Democratical Atoms in Genere (...) ralissimo, it is not
Rational that there should be a privation of the Natural Energy of Material
exurgens Catholou Proton. For that Tarabin tarabas being the Hieroglyphical
Construction of the four Elements, of which Choler is a Problematical Mixture,
there can be no Efficient Cause of an Enharmonical Agreement between the Pole
Artick and Antartick.

Fourthly and lastly; Seeing that in Matters of High Concernment there ought
still to be Conumdrum-bombinans in the vacuity of the circumambient Air, which
according to the Author of that Excellent Treatise, called The Master of Arts,
Drenching-Horn is required to dilucidate the Discovery of the Hoti and Dittoti
in causa sine quae non; therefore it is impossible there should be a Coalition
of Intellectuals in eodem Radio Kata Pantos.

These, Sir, if you will be so contented, are true Dodonean, Delphic,
Heraclean, Sybilline, Pythian, Ammonian, high, abstruse, recluse Answers
indeed; Potent Reasons and Justifications of over boiling Choler; and therefore
since we are like to expect no better from the Hermit of the Sounding Island
himself, what think you of propounding the stress of the Hermite's Modest
Vindication to two Learned and Famous Persons that I have in my Eye? -- A very
fair Proposal -- but who are the? -- Two as notable Casuists of my word, as
ever tormented Genus and Species.

The learned Suarez, and most acute Alvarez. -- Agreed -- Why then -- ^renas,
Mannanas, Sennores -- No persons so fit as you to resolve the Doubts and
Questions, we shall propound to ye, as being both Spaniards; and for that the
difference, from whence our Doubts arise concern a Doctor of Salamanca, and the
Hermit of the Sounding Island, who has been a Slave among the Moors, once Lords
of a great part of your Country -- Yet we would not have you favor Salamanca
for Salamanca's sake, nor give a wrong judgment against the Hermit for the
sake of the Moors your Capital Foes.

Suar, Alvar. Sennores no los conocemos uy el un, ny el otro; pero haremos nos
la justitia a todos dos sin alguma parcialidad.


Sennores, No more Spanish -- Only this farther we request, that your replies
may be very short, and that you would, if possible, answer us in Monosylables,
or Dissyllables at most, for we love brevity and Laconicness exceedingly.


Alv. Suar. Proceed.

Do we not find in credible History, mention made of Consecrated Daggers, and
of Poison mixed in the very Host it sell, for the destruction of Princes?


Suar. Alvar. Right.

And is there any impossibility that a serew'd Gun may be made use of for the
same wick'd intendments?


Suar. Alvar. None.

What Members do Men make use of when they give Evidence against Traitor?


Suar. Alvar. Tongues.

Do they breath when they speak?


Suar. Alvar. Breath.

Is it then the breath of the Witness, or the Law, by which the Criminal is
condemned, that is the occasion of the Criminals being hanged?


Suar. Alvar. Law.

What does the Hermit mean by the destruction of several eminent Persons. Does
he not mean those notorious Jesuits, who, if for nothing else, had been justly
executed, only for being found nestling in a forbidden Land?


Suar. Alvar. Doubtless.

What does he mean by Hazarding the lives of a great many more? does he not
mean the Rest, that by reason of our confusions and distractions have hitherto
escaped? And does it not show the true Popish inclinations of a Church of
England Priest?


Suar. Alvar. Plain.

The what does such a profane Libeller, such a froppish Droller upon the
Deliverances of Heaven, and Ridiculer of his Princes and his Countries
Preservation deserve?


Suar. Alvar. Hemp.

What are they that will not believe a Popish Plot, examined by the King and
his Council acknowledged by the Parliament of the Nation, and attested by the
Sentences of the Judges of the Land? Are they a Fools or a Knaves?


Suar. Alvar. Both.

Is not the Hermit of the Sounding Island an impudent Priest of the Church of
England to deride the Salamanca Doctor's Attestation against the worst of
Criminals by the Name of Buke-blawing.


Suar. Alvar. True.

Which of the two, do you think speaks most to the purpose, Guzman or the Hermit?


Suar. Alvar. Gu^* --

He tells ye the Salamanca Doctor was at length put upon it to try an
experiment to fix Property, etc.


Suar. Alvar. Trash.

And don't you verily believe, that Laztrillo de Tormes made as good an excuse
to the Cardinal for stealing his Conserves, as the Hermit has done for
publishing his modest vindication.


Suar. Alvar. Better.

What a Man reports of himself is most properly to be believed, but the Hermit
himself reported of himself, that he was circumcised.


Suar. Alvar. Ergo.

But suppose he had been circumcised a la Moresca, think ye the Ladies would
have thought him a whit the worse for that?


Suar. Alvar. Psawaw.

Had the Salamanca Doctor reported he had been circumciz'd a la Torquesca, the
you would say the Case had been altered, by the total Privation of the Callibister
and couillons couillontes secundum quid.


Suar. Alvar. Vray.

Which nevertheless had it been done effectually, had been no such injury
neither: For thereby had the Hermit been freed from sundry painful diseases, as
Pri^^^^n, the Diabetes, the Stone in the Bladder, etc. Tollantur testiculi,
says St. Origin, ut co intensior sit animus in studiis coelestibus.


Suar. Alvar. Right.

Then if he turn Mohammedan, he might well be excused, Lazarilla de Tormes
Father turned Mohammedan, and so got him a rich Wife. Quandiu Romae vixeris, ut
Romae faciunt, facito, says St. Jerome.


Suar. Alvar. Bon.

Now did you ever know so much of the Hermit of the Sounding Island before in
your lives?


Suar. Alvar. Nonne.

Well but suppose you never had. Do you think it would have been much to the
detriment of Mankind?


Suar. Alvar. Rien de Tout.

Why then what Reason had ha^ to be incensed against the Salamanca Doctor? For
had he been hanged he might have been Sainted ere this.


Suar. Alvar. Most sure.

But he had not the least fondness to be hanged. No more you will say has the
pitifullest Cur, that barks at your heels in the Street.


Suar. Alvar. Credo.

And yet it had been no such disgrace to keep Eminent Persons company.


Suar. Alvar. Nondum venit Hora.

Now you must know, Sirs, that after this the Hermit arrested the Doctor. And
what do ye think he got by it?


Suar. Alvar. Pounds.

How many?


Suar. Alv. Six.

More, Gentlemen; for the Jury were loath to discourage him, for fear of losing
such a precious Priest of the Church of England.


Suar. Alvar. Trop.

Look ye, Gentlemen, there was ten pound for Mahometisme, and ten pound for
Circumcision. A Man would not be really Circumcised perhaps for a hundred
pound, but he may be reported Circumcised for ten. It Is the price current,
Camblo maritimo. And you see he was glad he got that too, for he calls it
foyling the Goliath. Twenty pound might well be thought little enough for a
pretended defamation of this person, when a Jew, a cunning Jew gave six hundred
pieces of Eight for his Body; and now add twenty pound to six hundred pieces of
eight and there is the full value of him, his Reputation, Skin and Bones and
all. However this does not sign^fie that the Salamanca Doctor was in the wrong,
infinitely much less that he was perjured, but only that he could not prove
what he said. For most certainly Gusman was in the right when he told the
Auditor del Torrone, or Chief Justice of Bologna, that Alexander had stolen
his Clothes; but because he could not prove what he said, Alexander was let go,
and Gusman was ^a^d by the Heels.

But a Blots a Blot, and a Tarnish a Tarnish, and therefore it had been better
for the Hermit to have endured the Title of an ill name had he desfie'd to have
it die quickly. For, says the Sententious Gusman in his sixth Chapter of his
first book of his second part. With the more, violence Men s^^k to shake it off
the more it cleaves unto them; Insomuch that it continues sometimes to the
fifth Generation; and then those that succeed them, glory and boast themselves
thereof, and Blazon that for their Arms, which their Ancestors held for an
affront. Hermit of the Sounding Island, take an Especial care of your
Posterity. And indeed it appears that the Hermit was but a pitiful scowrer of
durty Reputations, who thought to wash off the Stains and Blemishes of his own
inconsiderable, Open arid Credit (which was never ripe till now that it
publicly appears to be rotten) by aspersing the most considerate proceedings
of the highest Authorities of the Nation. Alas, the Credit of the Salamanca
Doctors Testimony supported by the Approbation of the three Estates of the
Kingdom is not to be Twenty-pounded out of that esteem which is due to it, by
the little Victory of an Acorn-Divine, in the nice and Ticklish points of Law.
Which walking secundum allegata and probatos proceeds to sentence according to
the Strength or weakness of Probation. Wherein if the Salamanca Doctor failed,
it shows him to be no such Artist at swearing as this same Sally Priest would
make him, while only failing upon the score of his intelligence, he may perhaps
be said to be unwary in his report, but not perjured by any means. Nor is the
Hermit ere' a jot the more unmahomatiz'd or uncircumsised by the kindness of
his verdict, seeing there is no Certificate of able Surgeons, nor return of
grace and experienced Midwifes inspection amiex'd to the Postea. So that how
having ascended the Stage of the World in a case difficult to determine, he is
Mohammedan, circumcised, or Christian as every one pleases, since every man is
left to the freedom of his own Sentiments.

The latter part of his introduction is a mere Declamation against hanging,
against which he seems to have a very great Antipathy. But whether it be out of
any deep sense of his deserts, or whether out of kindness to that manner of
execution, as beleiving his person would be a disgrace to the Gallows, is a
doubt to be added to the rest of Tullies Tusculan questions.

And thus we come to the long, tedious, lamentable, joyful, tragical, mirthful,
doleful, cheerful, dreadful, delectable, miraculous, nonsensical story of the
Hermites Captivity and escape out of the Land of Mussulmania, where he
continued a Slave three hundred sixty five years, three months, three hours,
three half hours, three quarters, three minutes, and three half minutes.


Exeunt Suarez and Alvarez.

Which story tho the Hermit has got by it many a fair repast, and many a
Reckoning paid by telling it over and over again in Hackney Coaches,
Coffee-Houses, Ale Houses, and Taverns, yet he never told right; as appears by
a New Relation of one of his Follow-Slaves, who made his escape much about the
same time, printed in French at Cologn, 1682. and divided into Ch^pters by the
Translator, for the more easy apprehension of the Reader.

The TRUE HISTORY OF THE STRANGE ADVENTURES OF THE Wandering Hermit OF THE
SOVNDING ISLAND, AND Of his being taken by the Moors: His miserable Captivity:
And his Miraculous escape from thence.
CHAP. I. How the Hermit of the Sounding Island desi'd the Salamanca Doctor in
the great City of Eblana in the Kingdom of Ivernia: And how he was made to pay
sauce for his Tongue.
THE Hermit of the Sounding Island having ill spent his time in the famous City
of G^^^^^g^a, so that every one avoided him for certain Lazarillian qualities
incident to Youth, he fell into a brown Study. In this brown Study, quo he most
certain it is, that I am a very great Prophet; for I find I am little esteemed
in my own Country. I will therefore go seek some other place, where there are
not such a multitude of Crape Gown Scavengers to sweep and cleanse the Streets
of a City with their long Gowns, as here in Londinum. And thus determined, he
went and found out the Dwarf Pacolet, carried him to the Alehouse, and drank
him into so good a humor, that he lent him his Horse: Which he immediately
mounted, and rod night and day, till he arrived at the City of Eblana or
Dublinium in the Kingdom of Ivernia. Here he was got into a strange Country,
and therefore it behooved him to show the excellency of his refined Endowments,
after an extraordinary and dazeling manner. How Pacolet came by his Horse again
you shall hear at more leisure, but it fell out pat for the Hermits purpose
that the noise of the Popish Plot, and the Salamanca's Doctors discovery was
got to the City of Eblana before him: Thereupon, that he might show the
sharpness of his understanding, the vivacity of his discerning distinguishing
faculties, and the rareness of his ingenuity, he began to consider, whether it
were possible for a Mortal man to be killed with a screwed Gun, to be poisoned
with Poison, or stabbed with a consecrated Dagger, and not being able to
penetrate the depth of these Mysteries, nor to unfold such unheard of Riddles
as these were; thereupon out of a desire to please the Ivernians, of whom a
very great number are Papists, he openly defied the Salamanca Doctor; and
challenged all the world to discourse with them concerning the Possibility of
this, the Impossibility of that; the Probability of this, and the
Improbability of that; so that the detestable Conspiracy of the Papishes, and
their abominable Plot against their Sovereign Lord the King, was made the
contemptible Subject of his corousing mirth, and rendered to the public as an
Endymion's Dream, a Fantome, a thing in the Clouds, a Chimaera, and a mere Tale
of a roasted Horse. For which the Papists caressed him and fed him with Honey,
Capons, and fat Beef. But the loyal Inhabitants of Eblana, hearing of it
complained to the Governors of the City, who presently sent for the Hermit,
and caused him to be locked up in an Iron Cage, nor would they let him out till
he had paid the ransom of ninety and six thousand of brass Farthings, which
the Papists, as they say, begged for him up and down the Country. And this is
the reason the Hermit has had such a Portal Antipathy against the Plot and the
Salamanca Doctor ever since.

CHAP. II. How the Hermit of the Sounding Island went on Pilgrimage to Rome to
visit the Nymph Ninna Pandolpha: And what there befell him.
THE Hermit of the Sounding Island thus exiled out of Ivernia, returns into the
Realm of Bretannia, but finding there no comfort, and being overgrown with
necessity, like a Muscovites Chin with hairs: He bethought himself how to live
in this World, taking no care for the other. He had heard of St. Francis* St.
Dominick, St. Loyola, and several others who lived well in their times, by
erecting several Fraternities and Religious Orders, of which becoming the Chief
Heads and Governors themselves, they abounded in case and plenty all their
days. And why then, quo' he, should not I be like wise Head of a New Order,
who abound in Wit, Cunning, Sophistry, Learning, Eloquence, and what not? To
this purpose he had heard, that the Assistance of a Woman, who was made to be a
meet Help for Man, would mainly conduce. Thereupon being satisfied of the great
endowments, and rare ingenuity of the Nymph Ninmi Pandolpha, he resolved to
give her a visit, and court her friendship. Puffed up with these thoughts he gets
him a couple of bladders, and knowing that the passage between Dover and Calais
was much nearer, than that over the Lake Cocytus, and in a calm day, imagining
himself to be Leander, crossing the Hellespont to his beloved Hero, committed
himself to the mercy of the Sea, which being Conscious of the precious burden
it carried, bore him safe to the Iccian Haven whence Caesar imbarqued for
England. Being thus got on shore, he bethough himself of Tom Coricis way of
Traveling in Hermits Habit, knowing that Hermits among the Papishes are every
where plentifully and kindly received. But for fear of the worst he took care
to Travel in Autumn, to the end he might Dine and Sup with the Birds, as he
past along, upon Grapes, Pigs, Almonds, Pruens, Damsons, and such other ripe
fruits as the season afforded. It would be tedious to tell ye where he rested
when weary, under what hedges he lay, how the Ravens brought him Victuals as he
labored it up the Alps; It is enough to tell ye, that at length he got to
Rome, and having found out the fair Nymph Ninna Pandolpha, how that having
overgorg'd himself with green fruit upon the Road he delivered her a
Recommendatory Letter from the Angel Gabriel, and three thumping farts
(according to the custom of Ship-Salutation) at the same time. The Nymph was
something coy at first, mis-doubting something of an Imposture, but finding the
Letter so fairly written, that it looked like a Marquesses Patent, she gave him
a kind and graceful welcome. Then, quo' the Hermit, Fair and Beautiful Nymph,
true it is that my outward Garments are but poor and mean, such as becomes a
Hermit to wear, but the parts which they conceal, I doubt not but you will find
upon more intimate Conversation, worth your knowledge. My design is to erect a
New Order of Religious Persons in the World, in regard so many that have gone
before me have so well thrived both in body and Soul by such pious projects.
Reverend and well intending Hermit, quo she, Rome is no place for Invention,
but for Conformation of Orders. Those studies require remote places of
retirement, not Cites full of noise and multitude. I know it well, fair Nymph,
replied the Hermit, and therefore I am ready to attend your Footsteps where
ever any such place may possibly be found. After these and many more discourses
and Complements, at length they bethought themselves of the Rock where Numa
conversed with the Goddess Aegeria, when he Compiled the Roman Laws. To be
short, thither they went, and there they stayed threescore and ten years
devising sundry new, devout, and pious Ordinances for the Regulation of their
intended Society, which they accorded should be called the Fraternity of the
Holy Bottle. First that they who were fuddled over night, should pay a groat
next Morning. That Men should pay Beverage for new Gloves and Shoostrings. That
no Vintner should sell French-wine in Flaskes without a License from the head
of the Society. That all other Men should endeavor to live comfortably in this
World by hook or by Crook. That the Gospels and Epistles belonging to the
Breviare of the Fraternity should be taken out of Guzman, and Don Quixot, with
many others of the same nature. At the threescore and ten years end out they
came, and presented their New Constitutions to Pope Odeschelchi, who believing
such an Order might prove of great Consequence, for the good of the Kingdom,
and the extirpation of Heresy, had like to have confirmed it; but that the
Cardinal Santa Cruce opposed it, telling his Holiness that there were more
Orders than could well live one by another already, and that farther all of the
Orders to this day Erected, were under the same Constitutions already.
Thereupon the Pope gave the Hermit and the Nymph Ninna Pandolpha thanks for
their pains, and five Ducates a piece as a Gratuity. Which so enraged the Nymph
Ninna Pandolpha, that she went home, tore the Angel Gabriles Letter, called the
Hermit fool, and left him to shift for himself.

CHAP. III. How the Hermit was received into the College of Caledonians at
Rome, and there read a Lecture upon Salt-Pork.
THE Hermit being thus defeated in his Grand design, was fore'd to keep Lent in
spite of his Teeth, which was such affliction to his Belly, that he could no
longer endure the continual clamours of his Stomach, that grew to be more
impatient than a Regiment of Switzers for want of their pay. You might have had
his Birthright for a Mess of water-gruol. Ventre diable, quo' he, I was told,
that when a Man was in Rome, he must do as they did in Rome. I wish they would
make their words good. For I find all other people eat and drink in Rome,
unless it be my self. And so saying, he made directly to the College of the
Caledonians without delay. The Gate being shut, he knocked and craved admitance
per Pamor d' Iddio. They told him they knew no such person as Iddio, and bid
him be gone. Pray, good Gentlemen, quo' he, a Man of my Habir, in our Country,
with hardly a tatter to his tale, may have Ten Shillings for a Sermon, and a
Dinner at any time; Sermons, quo' they, we have more then we know what to do
with. Ple read ye a Lecture then quo' he. Lectures! quo they; those were the
cursed things that set us all together by the ears in England. Madre de gli
Apost di! quo he, I never knew the Gates of a Religious House that against a
Hermit before. Those words were like a Charm, and gave him present Entrance,
besides that his grave and venerable aspect gave them hopes of hearing strange
things from him. However there was no reason that their expectations should be
satisfied before his; which being done with a large replenishment of three days
break fast, Dinner and Supper, in which time the Hermit devoured a whole
Wild-Boar, thirty dozen of Pigeons, the Tripes of seven far Oxen, besides Bread
and Sallets; all which he washed down with four large Vessels of Wine without
Water, each containing two hundred and sixteen quarts. Nel noune di tutti gli
Santi, cried one of the Galedonians, who have we got here? Heaven knows cried
another, but he feeds as if he were to be second to Saint Michacl. If he has
not a Budget in his throat cried another, like a Monkey, the Devils in him.
However because they saw him seed so Prodigiously, they believed he would talk
Miracles: And therefore they thought every minute a year, till they might hear
his promised Lecture. Thereupon the Hermit reading their minds in their looks,
when the Table was cleared, called for a Cushion: And where he sat, thus began.

Most kind Brethren quo' he, I have here eaten of your Wild-Boar, but in my
Opinion; con la iostra Licenza, Santissimi Padri, it is nothing so good as our
salt Pork in England. The Jews had not the way of salting it, which abates that
feminifie, and consequently prolifie quality which it has being fresh; and that
was the reason that Swines flesh was for bid to the Jews, a people that needed
no Incentives or Provocatives to Venery. Besides the Salting of Pork, most dear
Brethren, consumes that fleshy Moisture which would otherwise render it more
nauseous, especially to weak Stomachs. Tho for my part Heavens be praised, I
can eat it fresh or salt at any time. However were I put to my choice, I would
rather have salt Pork and Turnips; salt Pork and Pease, then fresh Pork and
Turnips, fresh Pork and Peas^. You Will say perhaps that salting may make it hard.
To that Objection I answer most Reverend Fathers, it behooves ye all to rise
betime in the Morning. First for your Prayers sake: Secondly for the setting on
of the Pot. For the sooner ye rise the quicker will be your Appetite; the
sooner the Pot is on, the sooner the Pork will be in the Pot; the longer it
boyles, the tenderer it will be; the tenderer it is, the more grateful it will
be to the Palate, the less troublesome it will be to the Teeth, and the better
it will nourish your Religious Patron ships; which was the only end, and final
intention of the Founders of eating: For that we do not eat to live, but live
to eat, as having nothing else to do, but to live and eat in this World.

This was the subject of the Hermits Lecture, which tho in it self deserving
the chiefest place of a Booksellers stall among the daily crowd of Wedding,
Funeral, Sunday Sermons, yet being made in the Commendation of Pork, the
Caledomians took it so hainously, that they resolved to have him chased out of
Rome for a Heretic. Tho in so doing they did like a Company of blind bayards*
for that by their Inadvertency the Church of Rome lost the greatest Proselyte,
that ever it had had since the death of Saint Peter.

CHAP. IV. How the Hermit of the Sounding Island made him an Engine, and flew
to Lisbonia in the Realm of Porto Gallia.
THE Hermit of the Sounding Island having thus Pork'd himself out of the City
of Antichristia; where had it not been for this unlucky accident, he had
certainly in a short time ascended to the degree of a Cardinal, began to
bethink himself what a long way he had to foot it back again. And therefore
calling to mind the hardships which he had before endured, he resolved to make
him an Engine to fly. You Will say perhaps he had not wit enough, I do not say he
had; but he got the Sieur Besnier, a French Smith to help him. So they took two
Poles or Rods which at each end of them had a long Chassie of Taffaty, which
Chassies folded from above downwards, as the frame of a folding Window A.
represents the right wing before, B. the left wing behind. C. the left wing
before, and D. the left wing behind. Then he took a small string, and tied it
from the wing B. to the left foot by which it was moved downwards, at the same
time that the wing A. was moved downwards by the right hand. Then he took
another string and fastened it to his right Leg; by which the right wing D.
behind was made to descend at the same time that the left hand drew down C. the
left wing before, which done, the Hermit put and fitted these Poles to each
shoulder, so that two of the Chassies were before him, and the other two behind
him. Now the Chassies or wings which were before him were struck downwards by
the strength of his Arms and hands, by which the hinder wings were lifted up;
and the fore wings were struck downwards by the Legs, which pulled them down
by the two strings which were fastened both to the Legs and hinder wings.

Having thus completed his Engine, after four days practice, he got up stairs
and throwing himself out of a Garret Window away he flew in the Devils name
with a little Compass in his mouth to direct him his right course.

And now he had not flown above a hundred Leagues, but all the Astronomers and
Srar-gazers were got out in the Streets Turrets and Steeples, gaping with their
Astrolabes, Telescopes, and admiring at the strangeness of the sight and some
said he was the Prince of the Airs Ambassador, that was going upon urgent
affairs to the Prince of darkness, others said it was the Tankard bearer broke
loose from the Zodiac, some said it was the Devil himself, and could be
nothing else, for that the motion of his wings was Perfectly Diagenal. In short
the conjectures were many that were made of the sight, and the predictions as
many that were raised from it. Some talked presently of the end of the world.
Others foretold great alterations of the affairs of France and Germany: Others
predicted great scarcity, by reason that he had so fan'd the Air with his
Chassies, that there was not like to be any more Clouds in four thousand years.
And this is certain that the noise of his Chassies flip flop, flip flop as he
flew, caused such a consternation among the fowls of the Air, that they have
not dared to come near the Hedges, Gardens, Orchards, Forests or Woods, over
which he took his flight, never since.

At length after many restings in old Appletrees, Oaks, Elmes, and Barns he
arrived at Lisbon, where he met with a Dancer of the Ropes, who observing that
the Hermits Engine might be very useful to him to conveigh him from line to
line for the sport of the people, gave him a hundred thousand pounds a day for
the use his Engine, which as it proved to the great advantage of the Dancer on
the Ropes, so was it a great support to the Hermit.

CHAP. V. How the Hermit of the sounding Island, met with the famous
Tunbellioso, Prio^ of the Abbey called the Abbey of the Golden Lion, and how
they drink to gether in one of St. Christophers Boots.
ALthough the Hermit were thus in a most fortunate and flourishing Condition,
yet he could not but think it scandalous for one of his Profession to be a
Lover of the World, and consequently a Hoarder of Money. Therefore quoth the
Hermit, one day to the Rope-dancer, should I now with this money build a
religious House, what should I get by it? For there men live lazy, idle and
ungrateful; and to burn so many young Virginities in female Cloisters goes
against my natural Disposition. Nor did I hear of any Hermit yet, that ever
erected a Temple to Bacchus, besides that there are so many advanced to his
Honor already. Come on then, i will tell ye what i will do, i will even spend this
Hundred Thousand Pound a day in Drink, which is more than ever was done in this
World before. But where shall a Man meet with a Firmus or a Barbarus, to keep
one Company? that Firmus was a brave Fellow for he drank Wine, as the Story
says by Pailfuls. Take no care quoth the Rope dancer, here is a Gorbelly'd Prior
of this City, that if the Rivers in this Realm ran Port o Port; would empty them
all in six Weeks, and in the six Weeks more piss 'em full again. Let me never
drink more quoth the Hermit, if I ever close my Eyes before I see this Miracle
of Mankind. By the bones of St. Crispin, i will not change Renown with Hercules
or Bevis of Southampton, if I can but conquer this bold Prior: In the Name of
St. Winefred, quoth the Hermit, how do you call him? Tun-Bell oso, quoth the
Rope dancer, or the Prior of the Abbey of the Golden Lion. It was impossible to
stop the Hermit a minute longer, and so they went to seek out the Prior, and
finding him at his Convent, to rely the Complements that past will take up too
much time. It is enough to tell thee that the Prior and the Hermit understood
one another in a Trice so well, that the Prior called immediately for six
Pailfuls of Port o Port Bouze it away quoth the Hermit, a whole Pailful at a
draught. Not so quoth the Prior, to drink like a Tub-woman -- I have a more
noble quaffing Vessel -- no less than a Relick -- one of the famous St*
Christophers Boots, which he wore when he carried the Apparition over the Red
Sea. What you please replied the Hermit, so we were once at the sport.
Thereupon the Prior began two whole Boots full brimmers to the Hermit. the
Hermit pledged the Prior his two, and wheeled upon him Three. The Prior
pledged him three, and wheeled upon him four. The Hermit pledged the four, and
wheeled upon the Prior five. The Prior took off his five, and wheeled upon the
Hermit fix. The Hermit pledged the six, and wheeled upon his Antagonist
seven. Now quoth the Hermit, methinks we are taking the Pleasures of the
infernal shades, according to that of Erasmus, who being asked by Cardinal
Pole, what they did there? cried out Bibitur in Ocreis, they drink in Boots, --
Bim -- Bom -- Boam -- quoththe Prior, what a Blessing it is that we enjoy this
good Wine! I hare a Flincher as I hate the Devil. We never study in this Abbey
for fear of the Mumps Horsu, then quoth the Hermit Clink -- Clink -- Drink,
never think Calm was the Evening, Haboys Guggle, -- guggle -- Good, good,- good
-- is the true Harmony of the Spears. There Is nothing like drinking with a Hei
pass -- Touch and goes the word -- never fear drowning, Man -- because the water
seems up to your Nose -- You see which way it runs. I have a stomach as hollow
as Polyphemus's Cave -- and then twill stretch like a piece of new broad Cloth
upon the Tenters. The Sun drinks up the Sea -- the Moon and Stars drink up the
Sun -- thus all the World an eternal Health. -- Let it go round quoth the Prior
-- sera est in fundo parcimonia, says the Proverb, and therefore he that sees
not the bottom of his Bowl refuses good Counsel. Brevis Oration penetrat Caelos,
Longa Potatio evacuat schyphos, was the saying of one of my Predecessors, as
Boon a Companion as ever said Mattins.

In this carowsing Posture they continued roaring, prattling and drinking from
the Full of the Moon, to the Full of the Moon again; for they did not measure
Time by Days or Nights, which is the short measure of the Sun, but by the long
measure of the Moon, which never pretends to send men to bed, or to call 'em up
in the morning, as the Sun does. But as the longest Day must have an end, tired
and hotheaded the Prior and the Hermit began to think of taking a little Rest.
Quoth the Prior, I never sleep to my content, but when I sit at a Sermon, or go
about to say my Prayers. And therefore let you and I begin the Office of Beati
Qui, i will warrant you, before we have read one page the Physic will work. This
advice pleased the Hermit extremely, and so the Prior called for his Breviary.
The force of which was such, that e're they had repeated four Verses apiece by
way of San -- san -- san -- san -- they dropped as fast asleep as two old Cats,
and fell a snoaring like two Carriers, and so continued sleeping and snoaring
till the next full of the Moon; for by that time the influence of that Planet
had so well drained their heads and their stomachs, that they both waked at the
same instant: They had no sooner rubbed their Eyes, but the Prior called for
the Boot and six Pailfuls of Wine to settle their Stomachs, which they made no
more of, then Xerxes Army did of the small River Simois by Troy. And they had
certainly had the other Bout, had it not been for an Accident. For it so happened
that two of the greatest Philosophers in Lisbonia could not agree about a
dispute that was between them, and therefore they resolved to refer the nicety
of the matter to the Hermit, whom they could not but think to be a Person of
great Judgment, considering after what a strange manner he came to their City.

CHAP. VI. How the Hermit of the sounding Island determined the Controversy
between Trifle and Toyle-brains two famous Philosophers, concerning the Number
of the Inhabitants of the World; by which a notable Conjecture may be made at
the Number of the Sands of the Sea.
IT was no small honor for the Hermit of the sounding Island to be made the
Umpire between two such famous Philosophers as the profound Trifle and the far
applauded Toyle-braines in a controversy touching the deepest Mysteries that
ever Nature concealed, and therefore he readily undertook so fair a Province,
from whence he hoped the greatest Renown and Profit imaginable.

Now you must understand that the Philosopher Trifle had espied by the help of
his Microscope certain little Animals in the Milt of a Codfish; about which he
was extremely troubled in Conscience. For he thought he had found out the
business; believing that the semen prolificans was a living Body of it self,
composed of several other living Bodies, which Nature and Concupiscence
together throwing into its proper receptacle, formed another single living
Creature of many other living Creatures, thereby intimating that life was
before life; and Democratically concluding that all livving Creatures were
produced by a Conjunction of several living Democratical Atoms.

The Sieur Toyle-brains was monstrously perplexed in mind about the certain
Number of Inhabitants that peopled the World. And these were the two Brain
confounding doubts propounded by the two Philosophers to the Hermit of the
Sounding Island.

It required sometime for the Hermit to resolve these Delphic Questions, so
that while he was inspecting the Milts of Codfish, Eeles, Pikes, Trouts, Dace
and Minows, and surveying the Vasa Deferentia of Cats, Hogs and Dogs, Weezels,
Dormice, dead Friars and departed Nuns, Turkies, Capons, Geese, Sparrows,
Eagles and Titmise, the two Philosophers had time enough to build an
Amphitheater as big as that at the ancient Nicomedia in Bithynia, sufficient to
contain fourscore Thousand Spectators.

Which being finished, and the Hermit having appointed the Day, Heavens! what
a concourse of People was there to admire the Hermites Learning, almost enough
to have satisfied the Sieur Toyle-brains doubt, had they been told.

Silence being commanded, the Hermit first declared what great pains he had
taken, then he told the Assembly, that he had viewed the Milt of a Codfish and
that in the Juice of it he had discovered an infinite Number of live Animals
continually moving to and fro: and that he judged their Number to be about ten
Thousand. That in the semen of a Cock he had discovered about 50000. and that
he heard them crow all at a time; and that in an Eele they wriggl'd very much,
by which he concluded that all these Animals were of the Nature of the Creature
to which they gave life; and that the Testicles of the several Creatures in the
World were made for the production of those Animals, and to keep them till they
were made use of.

Now then quoth the Hermit as to the second doubt, considering that in such a
small, quantity of the juice of the milt of no bigger then a sand Cod-Fish, and
there are more than 10000 small living Creatures, and considering how many such
quantities may be contained in the whole milt, I do positively aver that the
milt of one single Codfish contains more living Animals, then there are living
men a^ one time upon the Face of the Earth.

For look ye, right Noble and right Reverend, a hundred Sands in length will
make an Inch; so then in a cubic Inch you will have a Million of Sands. A milt
of a Codfish is 15 Cubic Inches, containing 15 Millions of Quantities no bigger
then a Sand. Now if there be 10000 in one Quantity, there will be in 15
Quantities 150000000000 to proceed then. The compass of the Earth is 5400 Dutch
Miles, the Superficies 3092072 Miles. Now there are in Holland and
Westfriesland, to my certain knowledge, not one more or less, 1000000 People;
therefore demonstrably the whole surface of the inhabited World contains
13385000000 Millions of People.

When the Assembly heard the great Learning of the Hermit, and how
Geometrically and Arithmetically he had resolved the Philosophers Riddles,
there was such a hideous shout that the very breath of the peoples throats
darkened the Air for ten Hours. And such was the Fame and Renown of the
Hermit, that the two great Philosophers Trifle and Toyle-brains could not
think any recompense high enough for him. However at length they made a shift
to raise as many Thirteen-pence halfpenies, as there were small Animals in the
Milt of a Codfish, which they presented him as a Testimony of their gratitude
for his indefatigable pains.

CHAP. VII. How the Hermit was taken by the Moors, and what befell him
thereupon.
FOrtune as experience tells us, does not always smile; she sometimes frowns,
thus the Hermit being laden with all this Wealth, was now resolved to return
to his Native station. Whether he intended to have made any use of it, or only
to have kept it by him, that after his decease the next finder might take it
for his pains, is uncertain. But fortune at that time somewhat Popishly,
affected, and not thinking it proper for a Hermit to be so worldly-well
accommodated, resolved he should not lie long under such an Opportunity of
Temptation. After many Consultations with the superior Faculties of his Soul,
the Hermit at length concluded to swallow his Treasure, then to wrap himself
up like Ixion in a Cloud, and so to sail home in a Coco Nut. But unfortunately
it fell out, that as he was driving with the Tide by a Moors man of War, one
of the Seamen putting forth a Bucket at the end of a Pole to take up some
water, took up the Coco Nut, Hermit hand all; this fatal accident dissolved
the charm, so that immediately the Hermit appeared upon the Deck among the
Moors, as visible as the Peeke of Tenareff. Any Men but Seamen would have
been afraid, but Seamen, especially Moors, fear neither God nor the Devil,
and which was worse, a Ragamuffin of a Moore, having taken some distaste at the
Hermit, struck him so hard upon his stomach; that he made it chink like a
Church Wardens Basin. Thereupon the Captain ordered him such a dose of
Coloquintida as scowred his Colon in less then two hours, as clean as an
Artillery man's Musket. And now you may, if you please, suppose him, (son you
are constrained to nothing,) stripped naked, penyless, friendless, exposed to
sale in the Slavemarket. at Sally.

But the poor Hermit looks so like a red Herring, which being long driven in
the parching Sun, and so thin bellied by reason of his late purge, that no body
would bid the price of a meazled Hogg for him. Till at length a certain Jew
making strict enquiry after him and understanding from one of his keepers, how
he had been strangely taken up in a Coco Nut, and how he had been for some time
invisible, till Mahomet discovered him, and how that he might be some Christian
Conjurer. Nay quoth the Jew, if he be a Conjurer, I Will make him pay trebble,
his Ransom, for then he must be acquainted with the Devil, and the Devil's,
never without money, therefore the Jew paid down six Thousand pieces of Eight
for him and carried him home, resolving the Devil should pay sauce for him,
when ever he came to pay his Redemption. But the Jew had better have been
without him; for there was not a day past wherein the Hermit did not play his
Patron one Dog trick or other. Among the rest one day he put Cowitch in his
Sherbet, which put his Patron into such a fit of farting and laughing, that he
had like to have spit out his Lungs. Another time he laid such an unsavory
Dose under his Patrons pillow, that had almost poisoned him. His master being
in the dark, threw away the Pillow, believing that had offended him. But then
going to lie down again, he laid his Nose full in the midst on it: Which caused
such a Relaxation of the Ventricles of his Stomach as had like to have cost him
his life; another time he went and begged a parcel of Syracuse Wine of the
French Consul, and set it in his Patrons way. His Patron tasting it, never left
tasting and sipping, till he had sipped himself dead drunk. Which the Hermit
perceiving, made bold with his Scimatar, and a good parcel of his Patrons
Spainish pieces, with an intention to have showed him a fair pair of Heels.

But being apprehended and brought back again to his Patron, the Jew was so
incensed against him, that he resolved to roast him alive.

In short he made him fast to a Spit, as they do spit Cock Eeles, having first
larded him all over with a Larding needle: Then he brought him into the Sun,
setting another Slave to turn him; and after he had well basted him with Honey,
left him till he thought he might be enough. The Hermit in this Condition,
fell to what he had seldom made use of before, his Devotions more especially to
St. Lawrence; and after he had made his Petitions to Heaven, he applied himself
to the Turnspit, with such mollifying and softning Language, that as his Body
dript, the Turnspits heart melted; and pity (no doubt the St. had a Finger in
the pie) so overcame him, that he unloosed the Hermit from the Spit, when the
Hermit was loose, he went in that heat to seek out his Patron who was coming
forth to see whither he were enough or no. But ^eeing his Slave in that
pollute, retreated. The Hermit followed him, spirted him through the thud
Lappet of the Liver, and so penetrating the Diaphragma, past by the
Pericardium, and out under his left Armpit. (For had he touched the Pericardium
the wound had been mortal,) and then cut off his Head. Having thus secured his
Patron he stayed till Midnight, then he took off his Patrons what he thought
convenient; then he leapt into the Street; then he met no body, (for the Devil
had lulled 'em asleep) then he got to a River; then he swam a little way; then
he swam back again; then he swam quite over the River; then he got upon dry
Land; then he ran; then he walked; then he ran again; sometimes to the left,
sometimes to the right hand; and then -- and what then? stop a little -- you
shall hear that in the next Chapter.

CHAP. 8. How the Hermit met with a Lion that swallowed him whole, and what
befell him then.
NOW as the Hermit was wandering over Hill and Dale, us Hermites and Slaves
escaped use to do, winding and turning, and running and doubling like Puss
before the Hounds, while he sought to avoid devouring and cruel Man, he met
with a cruel devouring Beast. 'Twas confounded ill fortune; and yet no such
confounded ill fortune neither, considering what happened. For the Hermit was
now within twice Musket Shot of Marmora, the Place of Refuge, which he sought
(for so far he had either smelt the way, or else some Angel led him in a
Halter, being a stranger) when lo a mighty hugeous great roaring bully-Rock
Lion came out of a Wood, and immediately leaping upon his shoulders, swallowed
him whole; for his head went in first, his shoulders next, and the rest of his
body after, so there was no harm done; for the Bacon had made his body so
slippery, that the Lion felt no obstructions in his throat. But hold, Mr. Lion,
you are not to march off thus with our Hermit. For the Hermit finding himself
in a filthy dark stinking hole, but very warm, fell a scrabling among the Lions
small Guts, that the poor tormented Beast finding himself so suddenly assailed
with a most tormenting pain, stood still, thinking to ease himself right
against one of the Bulwarks of Marmora. The Soldiers seeing the Lion,
presently let sly one of the great Guns from the Fort so exactly at him, that
the Bullet shaved off his head, as if it had been done with a Razor. All this
while no harm to the Hermit, only a little close Imprisonment. The Soldiers
seeing the Lion fall, came first for his Skin; so that when they came to to rip
open the Lion's Belly, up started the Hermit, and besought the Soldiers to
take pity of a Christian newly escaped out of the hands of the Moors. A
Christian, quo the Soldiers, never was there such a shitten, stinking
Christian seen, quo they. However, as thou art a Christian, we are bound to
pity thee. Christians and Money are scarce in this Country; bett^^ have 'em in
a shitten clout, than not at all. With that the Soldiers conveyed the Hermit
in a Wheel-barrow to Marmora, where after they had well washed and cleans'd
him, they carried him to the Governor, to whom the Hermit related the
lamentable Story of his Misfortunes, who presently thereupon caused four and
twenty Sheep to be presently killed, and the Cauls of them to be plastered all
over his body. For you must understand, that though the holes of the Larding
Needle remained, yet the Lard if self was all melted away in the Lion's belly.
And indeed he may thank his kind Stars for the accident of the Lion; for
nothing could have proved so sovereign to him, as the natural warmth of the
Lion after an unnatural Roasting; as Caesar Borgia wrapped himself in the bellies
of new killed Sheep after he had drank the fatal Poison prepared for his kind
friend. Only the Lard indeed left a scurvey, salt, scorbutic humor behind,
which will never be removed by all the Pharmacopoea's in Christendom. And thus
the Hermit made a clever, ingenious and miraculous Escape.

CHAP. 9. How the Jew had his Head fixed upon his shoulders, and was restored
to life again.
When it came to be known that the Hermit had cut off the Jew's Head, and and
was escaped, there was a great Hubbub in the City; for that the Jew was a
Person of note, and greatly beloved. When they came to his House, they found
Lucas Hamet (for so was the Jew's name) walking about the Room, and looking for
his Head. By the Belly of Mahomet, cried one, there is hope as long as there is
life. Thereupon they sent away Post immediately for the Grandchild's
Grandchild's Son's Son's Grandchild of Avenroes, one of the most famous Artists
in all Africa; who presently came, and finding the Head warm, caused a Moresca
Damsel to clap it to her warmer Belly, while he washed the Jews Neck with a
sine Sponge dipped in Syracuse Wine; then he took the Head and washed the wounded
part of that, and sinapiz'd the opposite part with a Powder of Pilgrim's Salve,
ointing them after with Oil of St. John's wort. Which done he placed the Head
upon the Neck, vein against vein, nerve against nerve, joint against joint,
bone against bone, and then set three or four Stitches in the Skin to keep it
fast, and lastly, anointed the seam round with another Ointment, of which he
would never tell the name.

Presently the Jew began to breath, then to open his Eyes, then to color, then
to sneeze, and lastly, to break wind backward, which he did so sonorously, that
all men judged it a Thorough Cure. However, they thought it not amiss to give
him as a Cordial a Rummer of Syracuse Wine with Nutmeg and Sugar, to fortify
his Spirits. And thus was Lucas Hamet miraculously brought to Life again. After
he had drank, he called for his Bard to pursue the Hermit. But they told him,
the shogging of the Horse would endanger the wrying of his Neck, if not the
shaking it quite off again. Well then, quo he, since it must be so, Farewell the
Devil and six thousand pieces of Eight.

You Will say, this Story seems somewhat improbable. Oh Sir! so do the Fables of
the Poets, and the Apologues of Esope seem to be improbable Stories, but the
Sense and Morals of them are true. However, you may assure your self this Story
is as true, and as much to be believed as the vain Comment, and idle and
malicious Reflections which the Hermit makes upon the Salamanca Doctor.

It Is true, the ground of this Story, which has so much obliged the World, and
the occasion of all the Noise which the Hermit has made, is only because he
would not be accounted either a Mohammedan, or a Jesuit, or Circumcised. Why --
it is Cockpit Lay, that he is neither the one nor the other. But yet there are
thousands in the Nation will sooner believe all Three of Him, and upon juster
grounds, than they will unbelieve the Truth of the Popish Plot, or the Verity
of the Salamanca Doctor's Discovery and Evidence. For that the belief of the
former is not of equal weight with the belief of the latter. For it is of
public concernment to the whole Nation, whether there were, or be still a
Popish Plot or no; but it is not a Straw matter to the whole Nation, whether
the Hermit be This or That. For my part I believe he is neither, however in
friendly manner it may be thought he has more embroiled his own Credit, than
the Salamanca Doctor's Reputation, which they only strive to blast* who too
unwarily cute not what becomes of Prince of Country.

FINIS.

