A VINDICATION Of the DIVINE AUTHORITY and INSPIRATION of the Writings Of the
OLD and NEW TESTAMENT.

In Answer to a Treatise lately Translated out of French, Entitled, Five
Letters concerning the INSPIRATION of the Holy SCRIPTURES.

By William Lowth, B. D. Fellow of St. John's College in Oxford.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. And are to be sold by John Wilmot Bookseller.
An. Dom. 1692.

Imprimatur,

JONATH. EDWARDS. Vice-Can. OXON.
June 13. 1692.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, PETER, Lord BISHOP of WINCHESTER: AND
PRELATE of the Most Noble ORDER of THE GARTER.
May it Please Your Lordship,
IT is the Misfortune of our times to have Religion at once assaulted by a Rude
and Ignorant Profaneness, by a Confident pretense to reason, and by Skeptical
Sophistry. Its Foundations are attacked by the Professed Enemies of God and
Goodness: Its Mysteries are Ridiculed by Heretics, as if they intended to
invite Atheists to their Assistance, to join a Helping Hand to the Carrying on
so Good a Work, as the Exposing Religion, and making it appear Absurd and
Contemptible. And as if it were not Task enough to Encounter Open Enemies, it
has the Hard Fate of it is Blessed Author to be Wounded in the House of it is
Friends: whilst many of those who seem to Embrace it, are much more
Industrious to Raise Doubts and Scruples about it, than to Establish the
Fundamental Truths of it; or else lay down such Loose Principles, that Wicked
Men may deduce their own Conclusions from them, and cannot but please themselves
to see their Work done to their Hands, and Christianity Undermined by the
Imprudence or Treachery of it is own Votaries. Thus by Degrees Men have
proceeded from Arguing about Obscure and Nice Matters to question Known and
Certain Truths; and from Disputing about the Points and Tittles of the Law, to
Reject the Divine Authority of the whole: from thence to Decry all Revelation,
because they cannot exactly Comprehend how God's Spirit Influences and
Cooperates with Man's Understanding: and at last to cast off Religion in
General. So True is that which a Great Man has Observed, That the Disesteem of
the Scriptures is the Decay of Religion, and through many Turnings and Windings
at last leads Men into the very Depth of Atheism.

My LORD, The Design of the Letters which I have Undertaken to Answer, is to
Perplex Men's minds with Difficulties about the Nature of Inspiration, and
thereby render the Divine Authority of those Writings suspected, which the
Church has always looked upon as the Sacred Depositum of Divine Truth, which God
has committed to it is Trust, and Designed for it is Guide and Oracle. When first
I saw this Treatise turned into English, I was in Hopes that some of our
Eminent Divines, whose Writings are so Deservedly Admired for their Strength
and Clearness, would have Vindicated the Authority of the Scriptures, and
Cleared their Title to Inspiration from those Difficulties with which Men that
are Better at Pulling down than Building up, have perplexed it. The Subject has
never yet been thoroughly Handled, and is Worthy the Thoughts of those Great
Masters of Learning, Reason and Judgment. But after I had waited some time,
and could not hear that any Abler Person Intended to take this Work in hand, I
resolved to do my Best Endeavor toward the Defense of so Good a Cause, and
give a Check to those Opinions which tend to Undermine all Revelation. And when
I had finished my Design, there were many Considerations moved me to present it
to your Lordship: not doubting but your Known Candor and Goodness would pardon
the Confidence of this Address. Your Eminent Dignity in the Church makes You
deservedly Esteemed a Pillar of Religion and Truth; Your Constant Residence in
Your Diocese, and Your Care and Vigilance to keep up the Good Orders and
Discipline of the Church there, preserve the Purity of it is Doctrine, and give
a Due Luster to it is Constitution; and your Generous and Obliging Temper Charms
Men into a Compliance with your Good Counsel and their own Duty. And as these
Considerations Emboldened me to Present this Treatise to your Lordship, which
is writ in Vindication of those Sacred Truths, for the Defense and Confirmation
of which your Lordship is Placed in that High Station; so Your Signal Courage
in Opposing the Enthusiasts of the Late Times, whose Vile Hypocrisy, and Lewd
Pretenses to Inspiration have made way for Open Profaneness and Contempt of all
Revel'd Religion, Encourages me to hope that your Lordship will favorably
accept this Work, how mean soever, whose Design it is to put some stop to those
Lasting Ill-Effects which have proceeded from such Pernicious Principles. And
beside these Public Considerations, this Work does Implore your Lordship's
Protection as being Visitor and Patron to the College of which the Author is a
Member: who readily Embraces this Opportunity of Declaring to the World how
Happy that Society esteems it Self in having the Honor of your Lordships
Patronage, whose Government they formerly found to be so Great a Blessing; and
withal is glad of so good an Occasion of making this Public and Grateful
Acknowledgement of those Favors wherewith your Lordship has been pleased to
Oblige,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Dutiful Servant, WILLIAM LOWTH.

THE PREFACE.
THE Age we live in deservedly bears the Character of a Curious and Inquisitive
Age, which does not love to take things upon Trust, or blindly follow the
Determinations of others. And I must profess for my own part, that I reckon a
free use of Reasoning and Judging, as Valuable a Blessing as the Enjoyment of
our Civil Liberties, and look upon no sort of Tyranny so grievous as that of
forcing Persons of Ingenuous and Inquisitive Tempers, exactly to square their
Sentiments of things to other men's Opinions. But as the Best things are liable
to be abused, so this Freedom of Enquiry has been made use of to Ill Purposes,
and has Accidentally produced very bad Effects. For men have been so Fond of
this Liberty, as to think no Bounds or Limits ought to be set to it, and at
last to believe the Submitting to the Authority of God himself to be an undue
Restraint upon the Use of Humane Reason: and the very pretending to such an
Authority to be one of the Arts of Designing Priests, who by this Device
endeavor to Enslave the rest of the World, and make them Think and Act just as
they would have them. Thus many men have Reasoned themselves first into
Socinianism, and then, which is but one Remove from the former, into Deism, or
at least into a Coldness and Indifferency to all Revealed Religion. They think
it is to Impose upon them to Oblige them to Believe or Practice any thing,
unless they can see a Reason why it should be so: and cannot be persuaded that
they owe God so much service, as to submit to those Laws which seem to them to
have no other ground but his Arbitrary Will and Pleasure. Upon this account
they reject the Use of the Sacraments, the Order of Ministers and
Church Governors who have the Power of Dispensing them: the Necessity of being
Incorporated into the Church, as a Society Founded upon a Divine Charter, and
to whose Members alone belong the Privileges of the New Covenant: the
Meritorious Efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice and Intercession toward the
Procuring men's Salvation: these Doctrines, I say, they will by no means admit
to be True, because as they pretend, they cannot see what Natural Force there
is in these things toward their producing their intended Effects. And when they
have deprived Christ of his Titles of Savior and High Priest, tho perhaps they
may still be contented to acknowledge him a Prophet and a Teacher come from
God, yet they look upon his Coming into the World as a matter of no Great
Consequence, and which men do well to believe, if they see good Reason for it:
or if after having used Reasonable Diligence they are not convinced that it is
True, there is no great Harm done; since he came only to Reinforce the
Principles and Duties of Natural Religion, which men's Reason will sufficiently
instruct them in: and if they do but live up to its Directions, and lead good
Moral Lives they may be saved, whatever their Opinions are as to what they call
the Speculative Points of Religion. These Opinions every body is sensible are
very much in Vogue, especially among those who value themselves for being Free
Thinkers and Reasoners. It Is evident likewise that men of these Principles are
apt to look upon the Bible as a Book of no great Value, and which the World
might very well be without: and are ready to declare that the Disputes it has
occasioned have done more harm than the Book has done good: and so from
Undervaluing its Worth they come to question its Authority.

From what has been said it appears very probable, that the Prevailing of these
Loose Notions concerning a Church State and Revealed Religion, at first gave
Rise, or at least has since given Continuance to those Controversies, that
have been so much Debated of late concerning the Integrity and Authority of the
Scriptures. And the Atheistical Party have been Industrious to keep alive this
Dispute, as well knowing that it is doing no small piece of Service to their
Cause, to weaken the Authority of the Holy Writings. Mr. Hobbs and the Author
of Theologo-Politicus are the Chief of that Party who have engaged in this
Controversy: tho indeed they ought to pass but for one Writer, since the
latter has taken the Substance of what he says from the former, and seems to
have little of his own Invention; unless it be the Quoting of a Text now and
then in Hebrew, which he does, I suppose, to raise in his Unlearned Readers an
Admiration of his Profound Reading and Schollarship. And this Design of his has
in some measure taken Effect, for his Atheistical Admirers are generally
Ignorant enough to take him for a Writer of Sense and Learning.

But to pass by these Professed Advocates of Atheism and Irreligion: the most
considerable Writers that have been concerned in the Controversy about the
Integrity and Authority of the Holy Writings are Mr. Simon and his Adversaries.
Whose Learning as I do not intend to disparage, so neither will I take upon me
to judge of their Secret Intention in the Management of this Dispute. I
acknowledge them to be men of Learning, and as to their Design I am willing to
think as Charitably as I can. But yet I cannot forbear saying, that tho they
differ very much in their Notions as to other Matters, yet they seem to agree
in speaking slightly and irreverently of the Holy Writers: they readily lay
hold of any Difficulties which tend to weaken their Credit, and do not take
half so much pains to Improve any of the Arguments that may be produced for
them, as they do to Urge Objections against them. But however, I must say thus
much in behalf of Mr. Simon, that many, to show their good Will to the Bible,
make him say much Worse things than he really does, and such as they would fain
have him say, and would be glad if they could Vouch his Authority for. They are
Industrious to make the world believe, that if we will take his Judgment, there
have been so many Corruptions and Alterations made in the Text of the Bible,
that it is impossible to tell which is the True and which is the False Reading.
Mr. Dryden particularly in his Religio Laici, makes this Comment upon Mr.
Simon's Critic, and tells us, as delivering that Author's sense, that the Jews
have Let in Gross Errors to corrupt the Text,
Omitted Paragrahs, -- and
With vain Traditions stopped the Gaping Fence.
Now one would think by this Account of his Work, that Mr. Simon had expressly
asserted that the Jews had Wilfully and Designedly Corrupted the Original, by
Adding to and Taking away from it as they thought fit. But in my Opinion it is
taking a greater Liberty than Poetry it self will allow, to make a man speak
quite contrary to his Sense and Meaning. For Mr. Simon makes it his Business to
prove in several places of his Book Critique upon the O. T. l. 1. chapter 17, 18,
19 l. 2. c. 4.
, that the Jews have not corrupted the Hebrew Text, and answers the Arguments
that are usually brought for that Opinion. All that he affirms as to this
matter is, that the Bible has been obnoxious to the same Corruptions that other
Books are, through the Ignorance or Negligence of Transcribers; and that such
kind of Faults crept into the Text in those Ages chiefly that did not mind the
Niceties of Criticism: and therefore the proper way to Reform those Errors is
by Correcting the Suspected Places according to the Rules of that Art, and by
diligent Comparing of Copies, as Critics correct other Books, and the
Massorets have already the Hebrew Text. And as for the Additions which are
supposed by many to have been made to the Original Text, he supposes them
inserted by Prophets, whereof there was a constant Succession, whose Business
'twas to take Care of the Public Records. How true this Hypothesis is, it is
not my Business to examine, it is sufficient to my present Purpose, that Mr.
Simon does not represent these Additions as so many Corruptions of the Text. So
that in this Case Mr. D. has Misrepresented Mr. Simon's Text, as well as that of
the Bible: and put such a Gloss upon it, as it does not appear that he ever
intended, as far as can be gathered from his Words. But I shall pursue this
Matter no further, because Mr. D. may think it hard measure to urge any thing
said in his Religio Laici against him at this time of day, when he has altered
his Mind in so many Particulars since the Writing of that Poem, and has made
Amends for his Former Incredulity by turning Advocate for Implicit Faith.

One of Mr. Simon's Antagonists, whom he and the rest of the World take to be
Mr. Le Clerc, published those Letters which I have undertaken to answer: the
Two First of them in his Sentimens de Theologiens de Hollande sur l' Histoire
Critique, etc. the Rest in the Defense of the Sentiments. Who is the Author of
these Letters, whether Mr. Le Clerc himself, or as he pretends, a Friend of his
whom he calls Mr. N. signifies little to the Controversy it self, and
therefore I do not think it worth while to enquire. And as to the Author's
Design in writing these Tracts, whether they were writ by way of Enquiry only,
or out of a Design to undermine the Authority of the Scriptures, I shall not
take upon me to Determine, but shall leave that to the Searcher of Hearts.
Charity that believes all things, prompts me to believe the Author's solemn
Protestation which he makes Eng. Ed. p. 38. French p. 229.
, that he disowns the ill Consequences which some have drawn from his
Principles: and his Arguments for the Christian Religion which are contained in
the Last Letter, encourage me to persist in that Christian Persuasion. However
when I found the Author earnestly desirous Fr. p. 245. Eng. p. 51.
that some body would fairly answer him, and endeavor to give further Light to
this Matter: and withal was sensible that he has laid down several Assertions,
which tend to lessen the Authority and Credit of the Sacred Writers, and that
Ill men have made use of them to this purpose, as it is their constant Method to
run away with any thing that seems to favor their side, but to overlook what
makes against them: all these Considerations persuaded me to Undertake a
particular Examination of all those Passages in these Letters, that reflect
upon the Holy Penmen or their Writings.

I know Mr. Simon has made a brief Answer to all the Material Objections of
this Author: the Substance of which is inserted in the Fourth Letter together
with Mr. N's Reply. But I must freely profess, I am not at all satisfied with
Mr. Simon's Performance, and his Answers seem to have been drawn up in Have,
without a through Examination of the Force of the Objections. Perhaps Mr. Simon
is not so well versed in the Subtilties of Reasoning, as he is in the Nicities
of Criticism. And indeed Both his Answers to Mr. Le Clerc discover as much:
where he spends most of his time in Railing against the Protestants, which
might much better have been employed in Vindicacating his own Principles from
his Adversaries Objections, or Defending those Common Truths in which the
Generality both of Protestants and Papists agree, tho neither he nor his
Adversaries seem to have any great regard for them. But this is the usual Fault
of such Zealots, as Mr. Simon has of late discovered himself to be, that they
are more concerned for the particular Opinions of their own Party, than for the
Fundamental Articles of our Common Christianity: and therefore they very often
advance such Arguments in Defense of their own particular Doctrines, which if
they are pursued further, undermine the Foundation of Christianity it self, or
it may be of Religion in General. Of which Mr. Simon himself is an Instance,
who has taken a great deal of Pains to weaken the Authority of the Scripture
Text, on purpose to set up the Certainty of Tradition in its place. But I
believe another Reason may be assigned of Mr. Simon's Fierceness against the
Protestants; and that is, because he lives in a Country where Heresy now-adays
is reckoned a greater Crime than Infidelity, and it is less dangerous to be
thought no Christian than no Catholic. And consequently it more nearly
concerned Mr. Simon, to clear himself from the Suspicion of Heresy, than to
prove himself a good Christian: tho perhaps in the Judgment of the World, he
stands in need of an Apology in that respect, as much as in the other. And
perhaps he could not take a better Method, to atone for his Disrespect toward
the Scriptures, and to regain the Favor of his Superiors whose Displeasure he
has felt upon that Account, than by crying up in Opposition to them, the
Infallibility of Tradition and the Authority of the Church, and Inveighing
against the Protestants with a great deal of Bitterness and Virulency.

And since Mr. Simon's Answer gives so little satisfaction to the Difficulties
which this Author has started concerning the Inspiration of the Scriptures, I
thought it might be an useful thing to examine the Substance of these Letters
over again, and Vindicate the holy Writings from this Author's Objections. I
must leave it to the Reader to judge of the Performance. All I shall say for my
self is, That I have managed the Dispute with all the Calmness, and Freedom
from Passion, which becomes an Impartial Searcher after Truth: and in that
respect I hope I have fully satisfied the Desire of my Antagonist Fr. p. 245.
Eng. p. 51.
.

I have kept my self close to his main Design: which is not to question the
Veracity of the Holy Writers, or the Truth of the Doctrine or Matters of Fact
which they deliver, but only to propose some Doubts and Questions, How far they
were Inspired either with the Matter or Words which they writ. So that in this
Discourse men must not expect I should handle all the Arguments for the Truth
of the Scriptures and the Christian Religion, which are proper to be alleged
a-against Atheists and Infidels. This as it is foreign to the present Design,
so it has been done so Often and so Fully by several Learned men, and amongst
others by this very Author in his Fifth Letter, that nothing more need or can
be said upon this Subject. And if men will still shut their eyes against all
Conviction, we must even despair of doing any good upon them, and can only say
to them in the words of the Apostle, He that is ignorant, let him be ignorant:
and If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, whose minds the God
of this world has blinded. However to do what Service I am able to the Cause
of Religion, and to make this Discourse as useful as I can, I have ventured to
go a little beyond the Bounds which my Adversary has set me, and have
endeavored briefly to explain the Nature and Design of the Prophetical
Writings: where I have discoursed upon some things not commonly treated of, the
Explaining of which I hope may tend to Illustrate that noble part of the
Scripture, and remove some Prejudices against the Authority of the Prophets,
which have been greedily entertained by such persons as are apt to be
unreasonably Suspicious and Jealous of being Imposed upon, and because there
have been False Prophets, think it is impossible there should be True ones.

If I have been guilty of any Mistakes, I hope the Reader will the more easily
pardon them, when he considers the Niceness of the Subject, and that it has
never yet been purposely treated of by any Writer that I know, as our Author
himself observes Ubi sup.
: so that, as he truly adds, A man must fetch all out of his own Stock that
intends to Answer him. However if this Discourse do not prove satisfactory, I
hope 'twill be the occasion of Engaging some Abler Pen in this Cause, and if
that be the only Good it does, it will not be altogether Unserviceable.

In the last place, I must desire of those who think I have not carried the
Inspiration of the Scriptures so high as I ought, not to be Angry with me, or
uncharitably Censure me, as if I designed to Betray the Cause which I pretend
to maintain: but if they are not satisfied with my Performance, to Undertake
the Argument themselves, and do Justice to so Good a Causa. I assure them I
shall heartily wish them Success in their Undertaking, and shall be glad if my
Arguments appear weak because theirs are stronger; for I can do nothing against
the Truth, but for the Truth.

The Contents.
CHAP I. General Considerations concerning the Inspiration of the writings of
the New Testament.
THe Method of the whole Treatise proposed. Page 1 The Proof of the Inspiration
of the New Testament Writings contained in Six Propositions. p. 3 I.
Proposition, God designed to provide a means for Preserving the Doctrine of
Christianity to the End of the World. p. 5 II. Prop. The best means of
preserving Christianity, in an Ordinary way, was by conveying the Doctrine of
it to after Ages by Writing. p. 6 III. Prop. It Is reasonable to think that God
would deliver the Christian Doctrine in Writing, because he used the same means
formerly for the Instruction of the Jewish Church. p. 10 The Reasons which
enduced St. Matthew and St. Mark to write their Gospels, as they are related by
the Ancient Church-Writers. p. 12 IV. Prop. God has actually made use of no
other way for the Conveying the Doctrine of Christianity, but the Writings of
the New Testament. p. 13 V. Prop. The Apostles themselves designed their
Writings for the Perpetual Use of the Church, and looked upon them to be of
equal Authority with the Divine Writings of the Old Testament. p. 15 The
Reasons which moved St. Luke and St. John to write their Gospels. p. 16 The
Apostolical Epistles were designed for General Use, tho many of them writ upon
Particular Occasions. p. 17 Reflections upon the Style and way of writing used
by St. Paul. p. 18 Concerning the General Epistles. p. 21 VI. Prop. The Age
immediately following that of the Apostles, looked upon their Writings as the
Standing Rule of Christian Faith. p. 22 Reflections upon a Passage in Mr.
Hobs's Leviathan, concerning the Date of the New Testament Canon. p. 26 An
Answer to Mr. N.'s Objection, That some Books are received into the New
Testament Canon whose Authors are not known. p. 28 Four Corollaries or
Inferences drawn from the whole. 1 Inference. That the Holy Ghost Assisted the
Apostles as fully when they Writ as when they Preached. p. 29 2 Inference. The
Holy Ghost in several Cases Dictated to the Apostles the Words and Style they
should Use, and in all Cases preserved them from using such Expressions as
would naturally lead men into Error. p. 31 What Cautions are to be observed in
Interpreting the Style of the Apostles, and arguing from the Terms they use. p.
35 3 Inference. Since the Writing of the New Testament is owing to God's
Providence and Care of his Church, the Composing the several parts of it, does
not exclude the Use of Natural Means, no more than other Acts of Providence do.
p. 37 4 Inference. It Is no Argument against a Book's being designed by God for
the Perpetual Use of the Church, that 'twas at first Written upon a particular
Exigency, and with respect to the Circumstances which were peculiar to that
time. p. 40
CHAP. II.
A More Particular Enquiry into the Nature of the Apostolical Gifts and
Inspiration. p. 42 The General Heads treated of in this Chapter. p. 44 In what
Cases the Apostles delivered their Judgments as Men, and did not speak by
Inspiration. Three Instances of this Nature proposed. p. 45 1 Cor. 7.12. at
large Explained. p. 46 To grant that the Apostles spoke some things without
Inspiration, does not prejudice their Authority as to others. p. 53 In all
other Cases, beside those before Excepted, the Apostles Preached and Writ by
the particular Direction and Assistance of the Spirit. p. 55 The Scripture
Notion of an Apostle. p. 57 1 Cor. 2.10, etc. and 1 These. 4.8. considered. p.
58 The Assistance which the Spirit gave the Apostles did not consist only in
bringing to their remembrance what Christ had said to them. p. 62 This proved,
1. From those Discourses of our Savior's concerning the Kingdom of Heaven,
where he represents it as a Temporal State, in Compliance with the prejudices
of his Disciples. p. 63 2 From his Parables concerning the Future State of the
Gospel. p. 65 3 From the Gift which the Apostles had of Explaining the Types
and Prophecies of the Old Testament. p. 68 The Apostles had an Extraordinary
Assistance when they were summoned to appear before Magistrates upon the
account of their Religion. p. 73 S. Matt. 10.20. Vindicated from the Gloss of
Mr. N. p. 74 Several Instances given of his and other Modern Writers Arts to
Evade the true force of Scripture Expressions. Ibid. Mr. N.'s Unsincerity, in
passing by the plain Instances which are in Scripture of the Boldness and
Courage of the Apostles. p. 78 St. Paul's Behavior before the Council, Acts
23. Cleared from Mr. N.'s Aspersions. p. 80 St. Stephen's Behavior Acts 7.
Vindicated. p. 84 Mr. N.'s Objections against the Inspiration of the Apostles
particularly Answered. 1 Objection. That the Apostles Disputed and Conferred
with each other, Answered. p. 88 2 Objection. That St. Peter after the Descent
of the Holy Ghost had need of a Vision to instruct him: Answered. p 95 3
Objection. That St. Paul and St. Barnabas were forced to go to Jerusalem to
have that Controversy decided, Whether the Gentile Converts were bound to
observe the Law? Answered. p. 97 4 Objection. St. Peter's Dissimulation at
Antioch, Answered. p. 104 5 Objection. That the Spirit of Prophecy mentioned in
the New Testament, was only a Disposition of Mind which made men fit to
Instruct, Answered. p. 104 1 Timothy 4.13, 14. Cleared. p. 106 Why St. Paul gave
Directions to the Prophets and Inspired Persons at Corinth. p. 110 A brief
Answer to some Lesser Cavils. p. 112
CHAP. III.
Concerning the Inspiration of the Prophets. p. 115 The Personal Qualifications
of the Prophets considered, both as to their Intellectual Accomplishments. p.
116 -- and their Moral Ones. p. 121 The Original design of God's sending
Prophets to the Jews, was to hinder them from having recourse to Heathen
Oracles and Divinations p. 126 The Prophetical Office designed for Greater
Purposes. p. 129 1 To admonish the People of their Duty. p. 130 2 To keep up a
sense of God's Providence in their Minds. p. 133 3 To foretell the times of the
Messiah. p. 136 Why his Coming revealed so often and so particularly. p. 137 By
what Steps and Degrees God revel'd this Mystery. p. 141 Some Prophecies more
directly pointing to the Messiah than others. p. 145 Concerning the Literal and
Mystical sense of Prophecies: how reasonable to allow this Double Sense. p. 146
An Instance of both these Senses in that Famous Prophecy, Is. 7.10, etc. which
is at large Exlain'd. p. 149 The same proved by other Instances. p. 151 There
are Evident Marks whereby to discover a Mystical Sense, wherever it is involved
under a Literal One. p. 152 The reasons why Prophecies are written in such a
Style, as contains a Mystical Sense under a Literal One. p. 155 Two Rules laid
down as the Foundation of Mystical Interpretations. p. 161 A Recapitulation of
what has been said in this Chapter. p. 163
CHAP. IV.
Wherein some Difficulties are Resolved relating to the Prophets themselves, or
their Writings. p. 167 Two Difficulties proposed; the First concerning the
Obscurity of Prophecies: the Second concerning the Marks whereby to distinguish
True Prophets from False. Ibid The First Answered by proving these two things.
1 That the Prophecies were not so much designed to gratify Men's Curiosity in
discovering to them what should come to pass hereafter, as to Convince them
when the things foretold were come to pass, that 'twas the Lord's doing. p. 170
Dan. 12.4. and Revelat. 22.10. Explained. p. 171 2 Assertion, The fulfilling of
Prophecies, if delivered plainly, inconsistent with the Freedom of Humane
Actions. p. 174 Three Rules laid down for the Clearing of Second Difficulty. 1
Rule. A Prophets endeavoring to Seduce Men to Idolatry, a certain Sign of a
False Prophet. p. 183 2 Rule. The Prophets usually when they first entered upon
their Office, gave such a Sign of their Mission, that a little time would
discover whether they were sent from God or not: the fulfilling of which Sign
established their Authority for the Future. p. 185 3 Rule. Three Criteria made
use of to judge of a Prophet if he gave no Sign: viz. Purity of Doctrine,
Holiness of Life, and Agreement with other Prophets. p. 188
CHAP. V.
Concerning the Inspiration of the Canonical Books of the Old Testament in
General, and of the Historical and Poetical Books in Particular. p. 139 Mr.
N.'s Objections Proposed. p. 194 Concerning the time when the Canon of the Old
Testament was Compiled. Several Reasons assigned why it must have been Compiled
in Ezra's time, or not long after. p. 195 To suppose it Compiled so Early, adds
great weight to it is Authority. p. 199 The Canon does not consist of all the
Fragments of the Ancient Jewish Books, which were Extant when that was made, as
Mr. N. supposes. p. 201 Our Savior approved the Canon of the Old Testament, as
it stood and was received by the Jews in his time. p. 205 So did the Apostles.
2. Tim. 3.16. Vindicated from the Gloss which Grotius and Mr. N. put upon it.
p. 209 The Jewish Division of the Old Testament into the Law, Prophets and
Chetubim does not favor Mr. N. p. 214 That Division proved not to be Ancient.
p. 216 Grotius's Authority in this Controversy considered. p. 211 Concerning
the Authority of the Historical Writings of the Old Testament. It Is probable
they were Composed by Prophets. p. 220 A passage in Josephus to that purpose,
cleared from the Exceptions of Monsieur Huetius. p. 223 The Book of Esther
Vindicated from Mr. N.'s. Objections. p. 226 A Vindication of the Book of Job.
Why writ with so much Elegancy. p. 228 An account of those passages in it which
savor of Impatience. p. 230 What Opinion Job maintained in the Dispute betwixt
him and his Friends. p. 233 In what sense this Book is Inspired. p. 236 What
excellent Uses may be made of this Book. p. 239 The Divine Authority of the
Book of Psalms proved. p. 240 They made up the greatest part of the Public
Service first of the Jewish, and afterward of the Christian Church in the
Primitive times. p. 242 An Answer to the Grand Objection, taken from the
Imprecations which are to be found in several of the Psalms: consisting of
Three Particulars; viz. 1 Several of those Expressions do not really import so
much as they seem to do. p. 246 2 Most of them are rather Predictions than
Imprecations. p. 247 3 It Is lawful in several Cases to Pray against our
Enemies. This proved in four Instances. p. 250
A Caution against Misunderstanding some Expressions in the Psalms. p. 260 The
Divine Authority of the Book of Proverbs asserted. p. 261 M. N. guilty of a
manifest Error. p. 262 The Proverbs being Moral Instructions no Argument that
they are not Inspired. p. 264 In what respect this Book exeeeds the Moral
Writings of the Heathen Philosophers. p. 267 Mr. N's Objections against some
particular Passages in this Book, Answered. p. 269 Concerning the Collection of
Proverbs ascribed to Agur: and an Answer to Mr. N's. Objections against them.
p. 271 The Design of Ecclesiastes and of the Canticles explained and Vindicated
from Mr. N's. Objections. p. 279 The CONCLUSION. p. 281
ERRATA.
THat which most disturbs the sense is page 48. lin. 20. where in stead of, do
not reach this Case by the Laws of Christ, read, the Laws of Christ do not
reach this Case. P. 26. in the Mar. for p. 11. 12. r. p. 17. p. 50. in the Mar.
for (...) r. (...). p. 121. l. 26. for ther'es r. there is. p. 123. l. 26. for
(...) r. (...). p. 145. Marg. for v. Cells. r. c. Cells. p. 160. l. 20. del.
likewise. p. 212. Mar. put a comma after citatur. p. 250. l. 18. for of r of.
p. 259. l. 20. for of notorious r. of his notorious. p. 262 l. 23. for sebject
r. subject.

CHAPTER I. General Considerations concerning the Inspiration of the Writings
of the New Testament.
I Do not dislike our Author's French Edit. p. 222. English, p. 13
Division of the Scripture-Writings into Prophecies, Histories and Doctrines:
and I do so far agree with him, as to grant that all the Holy Books have not an
equal degree of Inspiration, but have more or less of it, according as the
matters they contain are more or less Adequate to the Writers Understanding and
Capacities. For I cannot but think that God made use of their Natural Talents
as far as they could be subservient to his designs, the Reasons of which
Opinion I shall have occasion hereafter to mention. But yet, notwithstanding my
agreement with him thus far, I must desire leave not to follow his Method,
because I think 'twill contribute much to the Clearness and Strength of the
following Discourse, if I treat of the Inspiration of the
New-Testament-Writings in General, in the first place. For in this Method we
begin with what is most Known and Certain, and from thence proceed to explain
what is more Doubtful and Obscure. And if the Divine Authority of the Writings
of the New Testament be once proved, that of the Old must follow as a necessary
Consequence; because the former gives Testimony to the latter, and most of the
Arguments which prove the one, may be easily applied to the other.

Mr. N. allows the Histories of the N. Testament to be exact and true
Relations of the matter of Fact, but supposes that there is no need of
Inspiration to Write a true History Fr. p. 231, etc. Engl. p. 28. etc.
. He grants likewise that the Apostolical Epistles contain nothing but what is
conformable to the Doctrine of Christ; but yet that the Apostles had no need of
an extraordinary Inspiration for Writing their Epistles Fr. p. 282, 283. Eng.
p. 112, 113.
. But all this while he takes no notice that these Writings were designed by
God for the Perpetual Use and Instruction of the Church, and to be a Rule of
Christian Faith to all Ages. Which one thing if it be made out, will prove
their Divine Original, and sufficiently distinguish them from all other
Writings, purely Humane, where Providence cannot be supposed to have had such
an extraordinary Hand in the Composure: since it neither can be pretended that
the Authors were the Immediate Instruments of God in publishing his Will, nor
that their Works were designed for so general a Use, as the Instruction of the
Universal Church.

I shall therefore in the first place give a definition of an Inspired Writing,
and then prove that the Writings of the New Testament are truly such. An
Inspired Writing I take to be a Book that is writ by the Incitation, Direction
and Assistance of God, and designed by him for the Perpetual use of the Church.

The Proof of the Inspiration of the New-Testament-Writings, I shall comprise
in these following Propositions.

I. God designed to provide a means for the preserving the Doctrine of Christ
to the end of the World. II. This could not be done so well in any Ordinary way
or Humane means, as by committing this Doctrine to Writing. III. It Is more
reasonable to suppose that God would make use of this way than any other,
because he made use of the same means before, for the Instruction of the Jewish
Church. IV. He has actually made use of no other way for the conveying down the
Christian Doctrine, that can be assigned. V. The Apostles themselves designed
their Writings for the Perpetual use of the Church, and looked upon them of
equal Authority in the Christian Church, as the Writings of the Old Testament
were in the Jewish. VI. The Age immediately after the Apostles looked upon the
Writings of the New Testament, as the standing Rule of Faith to the Christian
Church.
I think the making out these Propositions, (some of which need very little
proof) will fully prove the Divine Authority of the Books contained in the
Canon of the New Testament: and when they are made out, such Consequences may
be drawn from them, as will silence most of the Cavils and Objections, which
the Author of these Letters and some others have raised against the Inspiration
of the Scripture.

I. The first Proposition to be proved is this: God designed to provide a means
for the preserving the Doctrine of Christ, to the end of the World.

This Proposition I think any Christian will take for granted: and my design at
present is not to dispute with Infidels, but to lay down those Principles upon
which the Divine Authority of the Scriptures is built, the truth of
Christianity being presupposed: because the Author I am to deal with professes
the Belief of Christianity, and yet has raised Objections against a great many
of those Writings, which Christians have all along looked upon to be of Divine
Authority. I say therefore that no Christian can doubt of the truth of this
Proposition: for every Christian believes the Gospel to be the last and most
perfect Revelation of the Will of God which he intends to afford to the World:
he believes that Christ will be with his Church to the end of the World, Mat.
28.20 -- 16.18.
and that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: i. e. it shall never
be so far weakened, as that the Profession of Christianity should cease, or the
Church be perfectly deprived of the Knowledge of saving Truth. Nothing further
being needful for the illustrating this Proposition, I proceed to the

II. Proposition. God could not preserve the Knowledge of Christianity in an
Ordinary way, or by any Humane means so well, as by conveying the Doctrine of
it to after Ages by Writing.

I do not pretend to prescribe to God Almighty what method he shall use to
discover his Will to the World, or confine him to any one way of doing it: but
thus much I think I may safely say, that a standing Rule of Faith committed to
Writing is liable to less inconveniences and difficulties, than any other way
of conveying down Divine Truth. Whereas all other ways that can be assigned of
transmitting Divine Revelation are encumbered with so many difficulties, that
without a constant series of Miracles, they can never attain their end. And
therefore we cannot reasonably suppose that God will make choice of any such
methods to Reveal his Will by. For this is to be laid down for a certain truth,
that God never works more Miracles than needs must, nor ever suspends or
overbears the force of natural Agents without evident necessity, but allways
uses second Causes and Humane means as far as they will go. And therefore that
method which offers least violence to Nature, is more likely to be made choice
of by God. Some Men indeed are apt to think that the Hand of God cannot show it
self without a constant series of Miracles: but they that consider things more
exactly, rather judge that a continued succession of Miracles would really be a
reproach to God's Ordinary Providence: for often to interrupt the course of
Nature, must needs be a reflection upon the Wisdom that first contrived it. We
can imagine but two ways of God's Communicating his Will to several successive
Ages without the help of Writing; either Oral Tradition, or making a Particular
Revelation to every single Person, or at least to all those whose business it is
to teach and instruct others in their Duty. Now both these ways are liable to
such difficulties, and do suppose so many immediate interpositions of God's
Power to prevent those errors which must of necessity attend them, (considering
the present state of Humane Nature) as are not suitable to the methods which
God uses in Governing the World. I shall not pursue this matter any further,
nor give a particular account of the inconveniences to which both these
Methods are obnoxious, and to correct which a constant Interposition of
Miracles will be necessary. The Absurdity of the former has bin abundantly
demonstrated by the Dr. Tillotson's Rule of Faith. Dr. Stillingfl. Defense of
A. B. Laud. Dr. Sherlocks Protestant Resolution of Faith.
Learned Defenders of the Protestant Resolution of Faith, against those Popish
Writers that set up Tradition in Opposition to it: and the Absurdity of the
latter is evident at first sight, and none but mere Enthusiasts ever made any
Pretense to it. But on the other side, for God to communicate his Will by
Writing, implies nothing in it but what is Natural and Easy: there is nothing
requisite to continue this to Posterity, but God's preserving the Writings
themselves by the ordinary Methods of Providence: and then men may as well
learn his Will from thence, as they can know the Histories of former Ages, the
Opinions of Philosophers, the Laws of their own and other Countries, from the
Writings which record each of these particulars: unless we will say, that God
cannot order a Book to be writ in as Intelligible a manner, as men can indite
it when they are left to themselves.

But 'twill further appear that it is more reasonable to suppose that God should
preserve the Knowledge of Christianity by appointing a written Rule of Faith,
than by any other means, if we consider,

III. That he made use of the same means formerly for the Instruction of the
Jewish Church.

With God is no variableness, and what he once approves of, he does not
afterward lay aside, but upon some great reason. Moses wrote his Law in a book
by God's direction Exodus 34.27.
: the Prophets appeal to the Law and to the Testimony Is. 8.20.
, as the only safe Guide, and by which men must judge whether a Doctrine come
from God, or not. Our Savior bids the Jews Joh. 5.39.
search the Scriptures, for in them they were persuaded, and so far they were
in the right, was contained the way to Eternal Life: and in all his Contests
with the Jews, he desired no other Vouchers for the Truth of what he said but
Moses and the Prophets. And 'twill appear very reasonable to believe that God
should use the same Method to instruct the Christian Church which he did the
Jewish, if we consider that our Savior and his Apostles conformed the External
parts of their Religion, to the Customs received among the Jews as much as they
could, being resolved to give no offense by studiously affecting Novelties. The
Two Sacraments were taken from Jewish Rites: the Government of the Christian
Church was framed after the Pattern of the Jewish Hierarchy: the Apostles, as
it is natural for all men to do, being willing to retain the Customs they had
been bred up in, wherever the Nature of Christiany did not oblige them to the
contrary. From whence it is natural to suppose that the Apostles should take
care before they left the world, to provide some certain means of Instruction
for the Christian Church, in Conformity to the Jewish, which might supply their
place when they were dead and gone: or else they would not have been so
faithful in their office as Moses was, who delivered the Book of the Law to the
Priests before his Decease Deuteronomy. 31 9, 26.
. And it is likely the Christians themselves would expect to be provided with as
good and sufficient means of knowing their duty, as the Jews enjoyed, or else
they would have had just cause to complain that they came behind them in the
Advantages of Knowledge and Instruction. And that this is not a mere
Conjecture, but the real Sense of the first Christians, is plain from the
Account which the Ancient Writers give us of the occasion of St. Matthew and S.
Mark's writing their Gospels. Eusebius tells us, H. E. l. 3. c. 24.
that St. Matthew wrote his Gospel particularly for the use of the Jews to whom
he had preached, because going into other parts he would supply the Want of his
Presence by Writing. Clemens Alexandrinus says, Ap Eus. H. E. l. 2. c. 15.
That St. Mark wrote his Gospel at the Request of the Christians at Rome, who
were not satisfied with an unwritten Tradition of the Word, and therefore
desired him to commit it to Writing. Which St. Peter coming to understand,
approved and confirmed this Gospel for the use of the Church. And when these
and the other Apostolical Writings came into the hands of Christians, there was
no need of a particular Command from God to make them be received as the Rule
of the Christian Faith. For the Character of the Persons who wrote them, the
Example of the Jewish Church, and the Parity of Reason why these Writings
should be of equal Authority among Christians, as the Writings of the Old
Testament were among the Jews: and lastly the Necessity of having some Standing
and Settled Rule of Faith: these were all sufficient Inducements to Christians
to look upon the Apostolical Writings as ordained by God, for the Perpetual Use
and Instruction of the Church. And this will further appear if we consider,

IV. That God has actually made use of no other way for the conveying down the
Doctrine of Christianity, that can be assigned, but the Writings of the N.
Testament.

It Is a very weak Argument to infer that things must be so, because we think it
Convenient they should be so. This is indeed to prescribe to God Almighty, and
tell him he ought to have asked our Advice in the Managing of things. And
therefore, tho the Arguments for the Infallibility of Tradition, for an
Infallible Judge of Controversies, or whatever other Guide men have set up in
opposition to the Scriptures, were never so plausible, and were as real
Demonstrations as the Authors of them fancy them to be, yet as long as it is
plain by Experience that Tradition is not Infallible, and that there is no
Infallible Judge of Controversies, all these Pretenses to Demonstration signify
nothing, for a man may demonstrate his heart out, before he will be able to
confute Experience. And that neither the Authority of the Church
Representative, nor the Tradition of the Church Diffusive, neither Pope nor
Council, jointly or separately, are Infallible Guides to Christians, or
equivalent to the Scriptures, has been made out with such admirable Clearness,
and unanswerable Strength of Reason, by the Learned Defenders of the Protestant
Cause against Popery, that without further insisting upon this Point, I shall
refer to them for further Satisfaction, and proceed to the

V. Proposition. That the Apostles themselves designed their Writings for the
Perpetual Use of the Church, and looked upon them of Equal Authority with the
Writings of the Old Testament.

The Supernatural Assistance which attended the Apostles in every thing of
Moment, and tending to the Edification of the Church, was so Extraordinary: and
even their Private Judgment as men, was so Upright and void of all
Self-interest and Corruption, that 'twill very much illustrate this matter, to
consider what Judgment and Opinion they themselves had of their own Writings.

The very Design of the Gospels shows that they were writ for the General Use
of the Church, to Record the Doctrine and Miracles of our Savior, the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, whom all are to hear and obey. And tho it were some
particular Emergency that might induce the Evangelists to set about this Work,
which yet is to be looked upon as a Providential Motion, yet the Gospels
themselves not only answer that particular End which was the first Occasion of
their being writ, but are of General Use, and fitted to all Ages and times. We
have already mentioned the Occasion of St. Matthew and St. Mark's writing their
Gospels. St. Luke gives an Luke 1.1.
Account of his Undertaking himself, the substance of which is, That since many
had written an History of our Savior's Life and Actions, who wanted some
Advantages of knowing the Particulars which he had, he himself being exactly
informed by those who were Eyewitnesses and Parties concerned, set about a
more accurate account of these Matters, to the end that every Christian who
will be at the pains to read it, might know the Certainty of those things
wherein he has been instructed. It seems from hence that committing things to
Writing, was in St. Lukes judgment the most certain means of Conveying the
Knowledge of them to others.

As for St. John, it is plain by comparing his Gospel with the other Three, that
he had seen the Rest and approved them, V. Eus. H. E. l. 3. c. 24
and therefore supplied what he thought fit, which the former Evangelists had
omitted: that so all of them together might be a Complete Account of all that
Jesus did and taught. And he (...) himself tells us that his Design in writing
his Gospel was, Joh. 20.31.
That men might believe that Jesus is Christ, and that believing they might
have life through his Name.

To proceed to the Epistles of the Apostles: it must be confessed that many of
St. Paul's were written upon the particular Exigencies of the Churches to which
they are directed, and were occasioned by some Disputes that were proper to
those times: which may be thought an Argument that they were not designed for
the General Use of the Church. But yet if we consider that the Fundamental
Doctrines of Christianity are admirably illustrated by them, and many of the
more Mysterious parts of the Gospel Dispensation more fully treated of in them,
than by Christ himself, because there were many things which the Apostles were
not able to bear Joh. 16.12.
while he was with them, and therefore they were referred to the Teaching of
the Holy Ghost, for fuller Instruction in such matters: I say if we lay these
things together, we must acknowledge it necessary to add the Apostolical
Epistles to the Gospels, in order to the making up a Complete Rule of Christian
Faith: or else we shall be much to seek for an Authentic Explication of
several Important Points of Christianity. But of this I shall discourse more
largely in the next Chapter. To return to S. Paul's Epistles: I cannot but
observe how the Wisdom of God has made St. Paul's Style and way of Writing, to
be admirably serviceable to the Edification of the Church, which yet if we
examine it by the Rules of Criticism, is far from being Regular and Exact. But
his free use of Digressions, and those long ones too sometimes, opens him a way
into a larger Subject and of more General Use, and does not suffer him to
confine himself to that one particular Point, which 'twas his main Design to
treat of. And when we find him take occasion from every hint to explain the
Mysteries of the Gospel, to set forth the Excellency of it, and to persuade men
to live up to the Height of its Precepts, this is not only a sign that his holy
Soul was full of this noble Subject, but is likewise an argument that the Holy
Spirit Influenced his Pen, and made him enlarge himself upon those Points which
were of Universal Concern, and would be for the Perpetual Benefit of the Church
in all succeeding Ages. A signal Instance of this you may see in that large
Digression in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, which reaches from the 13.
verse of the Second Chapter, to the 5. verse of the Seventh. Where he
discourses of some of the Fundamentals of Christianity, with such a true Spirit
of Piety, and with such a powerful Force of Natural Eloquence, that if we may
prefer one part of that Inspired Teacher's Writings before another, we might
call this one of the most Elevated Discourses in all St. Paul's Epistles. And
as both the Matter of his Epistles, and the Manner how they are writ, discover
to us that they were designed for the Perpetual Use of Christians, so we shall
find St. Peter to have been of the same mind, whose words justify all that I
have said. For he places St. Paul's Epistles in an equal Rank with those holy
Writings, which were on all hands agreed upon to be the Word of God. Thus much
his words import, II. Pet. 3.15, 16. where speaking of St. Paul's Epistles that
there were some things in them hard to be understood, which ignorant and
unstable men wrested and applied to ill purposes, to establish corrupt
Doctrines: he adds, As they do also the OTHER SCRIPTURES to their own
destruction: which Expression of [other Scriptures] plainly implies that St.
Peter looked upon St. Paul's Epistles as part of the Canon of Scripture, and
ranked them among those Divine Writings which were designed for our Edification
and Instruction in Righteousness, and which 'twas dangerous to pervert to a
contrary Purpose.

And if St. Paul's Epistles, which were writ upon the Exigencies and with
Regard to the State of Particular Churches, were yet still designed to be of
general Use; the same may be said with much greater reason concerning the
Epistles of the rest of the Apostles, with aim only at this General Design, to
confirm those in the Faith to whom they were directed, to exhort and testify
that this is the true Grace of God wherein they stood 1 Pet 5.12.
, and to keep up the Remembrance of the Apostles Doctrine after their decease 2
Pet. 1.15.
, as St. Peter speaks concerning the Intent of his two Epistles. And we find
St. John addresses himself to all Christians, without Restriction, and even to
all Ranks and Degrees of them, whom he divides into Children, Young men, and
Fathers 1 John 2.12, 13.
.

Thus much I think sufficient to prove that the Apostles themselves designed
their Writings for the Perpetual Use of the Church, and looked upon them as of
Equal Authority with the Inspired Books of the Old Testament. I proceed to the

VI. and last Proposition, viz. The Age immediately following that of the
Apostles, looked upon their Writings as the Standing Rule of Faith to the
Christian Church.

Certainly next to the Apostles themselves, the Age immediately following was
best able to know what the Apostles thought of their own Writings, and what
Authority they challenged as due to them. Irenaeus, one of the Greatest men of
the Church in that Age, sufficiently shows the Sense of the Christians of his
own time concerning the Authority of these Writings. The Heretics against whom
he writes, pretended that their Opinions came originally from the Apostles, and
that, whatever the Apostles might say to the contrary in their Writings, yet
they taught those very things by word of mouth, which these Heretics since
maintained. In answer to this, Irenaeus does not only confute their Pretenses,
by showing that there was Clear and Undoubted Tradition for the Catholic
Faith, which in those early Times could easily be traced up to the very
Apostles Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
: but likewise proves that it is in vain to set up Oral Tradition in Opposition
to the Writings of the Apostles, Ibid. l. 3. c. 1.
because the very same Gospel which they at first preached, they afterward by
the Will of God committed to Writing, to be the Foundation and Pillar of our
Faith. In pursuance of which Testimony we may further observe, that the very
Arts which those Heretics used either to Undermine, or Evade the Authority of
the Apostolical Writings, plainly show their Authority was looked upon as
Sacred and Decisive in the Christian Church.

The Writers of the same Age do fully bear witness to the Canon of the New
Testament. The Learned Mr. Dodwell has observed Dissert. in Irenaeum l. n. 40,
41.
that St. Paul's Epistles were generally known and received in the Church
soonest of any of the New Testament Writings: and accordingly, besides the
Testimony which St. Peter gives them, which we have already mentioned, we we
may observe, that Ignatius the earliest Writer of the second Age, is very
industrious in imitating St. Paul's Style, and using his Expressions, as if he
had a mind his Readers should take notice that he had studied his Epistles. The
Authority indeed of the Epistle to the Hebrews has been called in question,
because the Author's not having set his Name to it, has given occasion to doubt
whether it were S. Paul's or not. But as this Epistle must be of Apostolical
Authority, being older than Clemens Romanus, who plainly alludes to it in two
places of his Epistle to the Corinthians N. 17, and 36.
; so the style, the way of Arguing, and the Genius of the work discover it to
be S. Paul's: but S. Peter puts an end to the dispute; for the saying which he
quotes in his second Epistle as S. Paul's, is certainly taken out of the
Epistle to the Hebrews 2 Pet. 3.15. compared with Hebr. 10.37.
. The first Epistle of S. Peter is quoted by S. Polycarp, who writ just after
Ignatius's death. About the same time certain Pious Men Traveled from place to
place, on purpose to communicate the Writings of the Gospels, as Eusebius
informs us (...). H. E. l. 3. c. 37.
: which he to be sure understood of the Four Gospels now extant, which only
were reckoned Authentic in his time. And it is plain they were esteemed so in
the Middle of the Second Age, because Justin Martyr quotes them generally,
whenever he has occasion to mention any thing belonging to the History of our
Savior. But in Irenaeus's time their Authority was settled beyond all dispute:
for he says positively, Iren. l. 3. c. 11.
that there are Four Gospels, neither more nor less. And indeed the
Authenticalness of Four Gospels seems to be owing to St. John himself, who made
them into one Complete Code, as I observed before. p. 11. 12.
. The same Iraeneus gives a large Testimony to the Revelations, and often
quotes the first Epistle of S. John ap. Eusebius. H. E. l. 3. c. 18. and l. 5. c.
8.
.

I thought it not improper to give this brief Account of the Testimonies which
are given by the earliest Christian Writers, to the most considerable Books of
the New Testament, to show how good a Foundation there is for the Authority of
the New Testament Canon: and how little ground there is for Mr. Hobb's
Insinuation to the contrary, who tell us, Leviathan part 3. c. 33.
that the Writings of the Apostles were not received nor acknowledged as such
by the Church, till the Council of Laodicca, which was held in the Year 364.
recommended them to Christians. As if all Christians did not agree in
acknowledging such particular Books for the Writings of the Apostles, till they
were Recommended to them, as he speaks, and Enumerated by a Council. Which has
as little truth in it, as what he says just afterward, that at the time of this
Council, all the Copies of the New Testament were in the hands of
Ecclesiastics, which if it be not a downright and wilful falsity in him, is
such a piece of ignorance, as a grosser cannot be found in all the Kingdom of
Darkness which he has described. I find Men generally agree in believing Mr.
Hobbs to be the Author of the Leviathan and several other ill Books, and I fear
too many have a great deference for their Authority, tho the Parliament (which
according to him has a juster right to declare what Books or Doctrines are to
be received, than a Council) has not yet given us a Catalogue of his Writings
or Recommended them to the World: neither of which could be true, if this
Argument of his be good. But to return; I don't pretend to have Collected all
that can be alleged to prove the Antiquity of the New-Testament-Canon, nor
will I go farther upon a Subject that is already undertaken by that Learned
Person who will shortly Publish an Elaborate Collection of all the Various
Readings of the New Testament, from whom the World may expect full satisfaction
as to this matter.

However I cannot but just take notice, that it is no prejudice to the Divine
Authority of the N. Testament, as our Author intimates Fr. p. 266. Eng. p. 85.
, that some Books are received into it whose Authors are not certainly known,
and therefore, as he argues, of whose Inspiration we cannot be certain. He
instances in the Epistle to the Hebrews. But there is sufficient proof that S.
Paul was the Author of that Epistle, as I have showed already. And as to the
whole New Testament Canon, 'twas certainly the design of those that Compiled
it, only to gather together the Writings of the Apostles, or of such as writ by
their direction, as the Ancients tell us S. Mark did by S. Peter's Clem. Alex.
ap. Eus. H.E. l. 2. c. 15.
, and S. Luke by S. Paul's Iren ap. eund. l. 5. c. 8. Grot. in Luc. 21.34. and
1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. compar^d with Luke 22.19, 20.
. So that the only reason why some Books were doubted of, was because it did
not clearly appear whether they were Writ by Apostles or not, and as soon as
that point was cleared, their Authority was immediately Established. And so much
for the proving the Sixth Proposition.

And I think supposing these Six Propositions proved, this Conclusion will
plainly follow from what has been said, that the Books of the New Testament
were Written by God's Direction, and designed by Him for the Perpetual use and
Instruction of the Church, and are the only Fixed Rule which he has appointed
for this purpose.

I shall draw some Conclusions from these Premises, which will tend to
illustrate and explain the Divine Inspiration of the Holy Writings.

1. It follows from hence that the Holy Ghost assisted the Apostles as fully
when they Writ, as when they Preached. How far this assistance extended, and
wherein it consisted, I shall examine particularly in the next Chapter: at
present I intend only to show that we may presume there is as great a degree of
Inspiration to be found in their Writings, as was in their Preaching. For since
the reason why this Assistance accompanied them in their Preaching, was the
benefit of the Church, that they might Guide it into all Truth, without any
danger of mixing error with it: the same reason holds much stronger for their
Writings, which do not serve for the Instruction of One Age only, as their
Preaching did, but of Many. And therefore tho we should suppose that they use
Arguments ad Hominem sometimes, and proceed upon such Principles as were
generally admitted in the Age they lived, without nicely examining whether they
were true or not; yet this only shows that they thought fit to explain Divine
Truths in such a manner as was most suitable to the Capacity of the persons
they were immediately to Instruct. And as we must grant that tho the New
Testament was designed for the use of future Ages, yet the Phrase and Style and
Argumentation used in it is wholly accommodated to the Sentiments and Usage of
that Age in which 'twas writ: so S. Paul himself does plainly imply that he
does not always use the Best Arguments, but sometimes such as are best fitted
to the Capacities and Notions of those he Writes to. For thus we find him
express himself by way of excuse for the Argument he makes use of, Romans 6.19.
I speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh: which
is as much as if he had said, I could bring a better argument to prove what I
say, but this which I make use of is more suitable to your Capacities, and may
perhaps more effectually convince you, than a better.

2. It follows secondly, that since the Books of the New Testament, (and the
same reason holds as to any other Writings of the same rank and use) were
designed to be a standing rule of Faith to Christians, the Holy Ghost, tho he
did not generally Dictate the words which the holy Writers used, yet directed
them to express their minds in such a manner, that those who have a regard to
the Dialect and way of speaking in which they write, might rightly understand
them; or at least the Holy Spirit prevented their giving just occasion for
Men's errors and mistakes in matters of Consequence, by their Phrases and
Expressions. And such a degree of assistance is absolutely necessary to make
these Books a standing Rule of Faith. For tho we suppose the Holy Writers used
a Popular style, and consequently made use of such Hyperboles and Metaphors and
other Improprieties of Speech, which common practice allows of in all
Languages, (especially where they occasionally speak of Philosophical matters,
and things not immediately relating to Religion:) yet unless we suppose them to
speak properly in those Terms of Art which are of fundamental use in the
explaining the Doctrines of Christianity, and upon the sense of which whole
Controversies turn, and as they are differently taken they alter the very face
of the Christian Religion; I say, except we suppose the Apostles to speak
properly, i. e. agreeably to their own Simplicity and Plainness of Speech, and
in such a manner as was most likely to be understood by those they writ to,
when they treat of matters of great Importance, and such as are justly to be
reckoned Fundamental Doctrines, the New Testament will not answer the ends of a
Rule of Faith. For a Book is of no use to explain or decide any Controversy, if
we can have no sixth rule whereby to judge of its style, so as to be in some
measure certain what is its true sense. And it is very strange if a Book writ by
persons who had an extraordinary assistance from God, and which was designed
for Universal use, should not be worded with that care which Humane Industry
uses in matters of Importance. And therefore we have reason to rely upon the
assistance of the Holy Spirit, even with relation to the Phrase and Letter of
the Scripture, and to believe that he has so far directed the holy Penmen,
that their Phrases and Expressions should not lead Men into error in matters of
Consequence; but may be rightly understood by those that acquaint themselves
with the Dialect in which they writ, and consult the Ages nearest the Apostles,
who must needs be, next to their own style, the best Judges of their sense. If
indeed the Socinian Doctrines concerning the Nature and Satisfaction of Christ
were true, it must be confessed there would be little reason to believe that
the Holy Ghost had a hand in wording the Scriptures: nay then the Scriptures
will appear to be written in such a style, as if the Writers designed to lead
Men into error. And the Socinians themselves, when they make Reason the sole
Judge of Sripture, and tell us they will not believe any thing contrary to
Reason, tho it were never so plainly asserted in Scripture, do in effect
confess that the expressions of Scripture, taken in their natural and most
obvious sense, do not at all favor their Opinions Socin. de Christ. Servat. l.
3. c. 6.
. And therefore it is no wonder to find these Gentlemen warn their Readers so
often not to make Inferences from the Phrases of Scripture, as if they were
used strictly and properly: that they so often tell us of the Improprieties and
Metaphors which the Eastern Writers, and those who imitate them, abound with:
that the Apostles play with Words as Socinus with Reverence speaks Amavit
Paulus in Execrationis verbo esse argutus Socm. de Chr Ser^ l. 2. c. 1
, and take them sometimes in one sense and sometimes in another. Our Author
follows them in this, as well as in some other things v Fr. p 234. Eng p. 146.
, and often cautions Eng. p 107, 111. Fr. p. 280, 281. En. p. 11^. Fr. p. 285.
Eng. p. 145, 146. Fr. p. 233, 234.
us not to subtilize about the expressions, nor stick too close to the Letter
of the Scripture, since the style of Scripture is so far from being exact, that
it is very careless: and tells us, Eng. p. 107, 116. Fr. p. 280, 285.
that laying too great stress upon Words, has bin the occasion of most of the
Disputes among Christians. I readily grant it has; but then the fault has bin
that Men have either Interpreted Scripture-Expressions by notions of
Philosophy, which the Holy Writers never heard of, or else they have not
inquired into the Sentiments of those times in which these Books were writ, but
have judged of their sense by the Schemes, and applied them to the Disputes of
Modern Ages, as if they were writ only with a regard to the Controversies that
should arise in Aftertimes, without any respect to the Sentiments and
Exigencies of the Age wherein they were written. But if we have a regard only
to the Genius of the Language which the Holy Writers used, and judge of their
Sentiments by the State of the Church in their time, and by such Ancient
Authors as were most likely to be acquainted with the Notions which were then
generally received; I don't think laying stress upon the Phrases of the
Scriptures can lead us into such gross errors as Mr. N. imagines Eng. p. 146.
Fr p. 234.
. And without supposing this, we can scarce deduce any Inferences from
Scripture Texts, and yet this is practiced by the Apostles themselves, who
sometimes argue from Words, and those too taken in their nicest signification.
A remarkable example of which is that Inference of S. Paul's, Gal. 3.16.
To Abraham and to his seed were the Promises made: he says not, And to seeds,
as of many, but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.

3. Since God in his Providence took care that these Books should be Writ for
the use of his Church, and therefore gave Providential occasions for their
being Written, it follows that they are Composed in such a manner as not to
exclude the use of the Natural Reason and Meditation of the Writers who
Composed them.

Works of Providence are not supposed to exclude Humane means, and we believe
many things to be brought to pass by the determinate Counsel and Power of God,
tho they are not purely Miraculous and and merely God's own Act and Deed, but
are brought to pass by second Causes as his Instruments. And why then cannot he
give Men a Rule of Faith and Manners, except the Writing be with the immediate
Finger of God, as the Two Tables were? It Is certain that the ordinary
Operations of the Spirit do only excite and assist our natural Faculties, not
supersede or render them useless. And even the extraordinary ones do very often
influence Men's minds after the same manner, as appears by S. Paul's advice to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.14.
Give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine, neglect not the gift
which is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy. And to the same purpose he
speaks in the second Epistle 2 Timothy 1.6.
. And therefore tho we suppose the Authors of the Scriptures to have been
Inspired, and to have had the extraordinary Assistances of God's Spirit, yet
this will not exclude the use of their Natural Talents, but that the Writers
made use of them as far as they could be serviceable to their purpose, and God
supplied their defects. From hence appears the weakness of that Argument which
is urged by our Author and by some others, against the Inspiration of the
Poetical Books Fr. p. 230. En. p. 27.
of the Old Testament, because they seem to be the effects of Study and
Meditation: and against that of the Historical Books of the Scripture, Grot.
votum pro pace, p. 672. Refutat. Apologet. p. 722.
because the things contained in them are either of the Writers own Knowledge,
or else taken from Ancient Memoirs, or the Relation of others. To the same
purpose it is urged against the Divine Authority of S. Paul's Epistles by
Spinoza, Theol. Polit. c. 11
that they are full of Argumentation, which he thinks must be the effect of S.
Paul's own reason. As if a Man that had a perfect Systeme of the Christian
Religion infused into his mind by Revelation, as we suppose S. Paul to have
had, did not apprehend it after a Rational manner, and see the whole Series and
Chain of its Principles, by the help of which he could infer one thing from
another. But is it not a pleasant Argument against the Inspiration of a Book,
that it is writ in a Rational and Argumentative way? which must either suppose
that it is below God Almighty to give a reason for his Institutions: or else
that 'twas not proper for the Apostles, to show their Disciples that the
Doctrines they taught them were such as might be Rationally deduced from
certain Principles, and to confute their Adversaries the same way, who would
not submit to their bare Authority, nor believe a thing to be true, merely
because they said so.

4. It follows from what has bin said, that it is no Argument against a Book's
being designed by God for the perpetual use of the Church, that 'twas at first
writ upon some particular Exigency, and with relation to the peculiar
Circumstances of the persons to whom it is directed.

For some of those Books of the Old Testament which were certainly designed for
the public benefit of the Church, as it is granted by all that acknowledge any
such thing as Inspiration, (and I don't at present concern my self with any
others) I say some of the Undoubtedly Inspired Writings were occasioned by the
particular Exigences of those times in which their Authors lived. I mean the
Books of the Prophets, who were all sent by God to testify against the sins
which were committed in their own times. And if God so ordered it, that these
Prophecies should be of perpetual use to the Church, why may not the other
Occasional Writings of the Scripture, if I may so term them, have been composed
with the same Design? I have already showed P. 19.
that the manner of St. Paul's Writing does excellently answer this Intent.
From hence it appears that the Argument used by some Popish Writers why the New
Testament cannot be a perfect Rule of the Christian Faith, because several
parts of it were writ only with Relation to particular Exigencies of some one
Church, holds as well against the Old Testament being a Rule to the Jews,
because a great part of of it, viz. the Prophecies, were occasioned by the
particular Circumstances of those Times in which the Prophets lived.

CHAP. II. A more particular Inquiry into the nature of the Apostolical Gifts
and Inspiration.
HAving said thus much in general concerning the Divine Authority and
Inspiration of the Apostolical Writings, I proceed to examine more distinly the
Assertions which the Author of the Letters has laid down concerning the
Inspiration of the Apostles and of their Writings: and in order to that shall
consider particularly, both as to their Nature and Extent, some of the most
remarkable Gifts, with which the Holy Spirit endowed the Apostles. I find our
Author is very industrious to lessen the Apostolical Gifts, as much as he can,
and to represent them very little above their natural Faculties. He endeavors
to show, That the Operation of the Holy Spirit upon their Minds, consisted
chiefly in refreshing their Memories, Fr. p. 254, 257. En. p. 66. 70.
and bringing to their Remembrance what Christ had said unto them. He does
indeed say, Fr. 255. En. p. 67.
That sometimes the Holy Spirit made them understand by extraordinary
Revelations, that which Christ had said unto them whilst he was with them, but
which they then understood not. And that they had many immediate Revelations
and diverse heavenly Visions Fr. p. 252. Eng. 62.
. And in another place, Fr. 257. Eng. p. 70.
That perhaps the Spirit opened their Minds after a manner we comprehend not.
But while he sets out the Objections against the Inspiration of the Apostles in
the best Light, and with the greatest Force he can, he passes over the
Evidences for it very slightly, and looks upon their Immemediate Inspirations
to have been so extraordinary, and to have happened so seldom, that he does not
stick roundly to declare, Ubi sup.
That their Infallibility consisted in relating faithfully what they had seen
and heard. He likewise endeavors to show, Fr. p. 240. etc. Eng. p. 42, etc.
That they had not an extraordinary Assistance, when they were summoned before
the Secular Powers, upon the account of their Religion. And he makes this
another argument against the Inspiration of the Apostles, and other persons in
those times whom the Scripture speaks of as inspired, Fr. p. 248, 249. 259.
Eng. p. 57. 74.
that they conferred with one another, and submitted to one another's Judgments,
and did not come to a Conclusion concerning any matter in questino, till after
long Deliberation, and Consultation with each other: with many other Cavils of
less weight. In Answer to which, and for the Clearing of this Matter I shall
show, I. How far we may allow what he says to be true, and in what Cases the
Apostles did not speak or act by Inspiration. II. I shall show that excepting
those Cases, the Apostles writ and spoke by the particular Assistance and
Direction of the Spirit. III. I shall show that the Assistance of the Holy
Spirit did not consist only or chiefly in Improving their Natural Faculties, or
Strengthening and Refreshing their Memories. IV. I shall show that they had an
extraordinary Assistance, when they were summoned before Magistrates upon the
Account of their Religion: and vindicate their Behavior under those
Circumstances, from the unbecoming Reflections which Mr. N. has made upon it.
V. I shall vindicate the Inspiration of the Apostles and other inspired persons
from the rest of the Objections which he advances against it.


I. As to the first of these Inquiries, What were the Cases wherein the
Apostles did not act or speak by Inspiration, I conceive we may allow them to
be these following.

1. Where they treat of the common Occurrences of Life, and such things as have
no Relation at all to Divine Truths. As when St. Paul speaks of his design to
take Rome Romans 15.24.
in his way to Spain, and to call at 2 Cor. 1.16.
Corinth as he went into Macedonia: but yet it appears he was uncertain as to
that Resolution, v. 1 Cor. 16.7.
and did not actually v. 2 Cor. 17.
make it good. Many Instances of the like nature might be alleged v. 1 Cor.
1.16. r. Joh. 6.19. Act. 19
. Hitherto we may refer Slips of memory in matters of no consequence, some
Examples of which there are to be found in in the N. Testament v. Mat. 27.9.
Act. 7.16.
.

2. Such things as were matters only of Humane Prudence, being of an
Indifferent nature in themselves, and consequently not the proper Subjects of a
Divine Revelation. For matters of Prudence, i. e. Where God has given men no
fixed rule, but left them at liberty to determine for themselves according as
their circumstances shall direct, as they are not the proper Subjects of a
Divine Law, so neither are they of a Divine Revelation. Such is the Case of
married persons where one party is an Unbeliever, which St. Paul considers, 1
Cor. 7.12.
and resolves by the Rules of humane Prudence, (and therefore tells us before
hand, that it is He that speaks, not the Lord) taking his measures from the
general Law of Christian Charity. For as to this Case I look upon Mr.
Thorndike's Laws of the Church, p. 117.
Opinion as the most probable, which is, That the Apostle looked upon Marriage
made by persons before they were Christians, to lay no stricter Obligation upon
the Parties, than the Laws which they were under when the Marriage was
contracted, designed to lay upon them. So that if two persons who were under
the Laws of the Roman Empire married, and afterward one of them turned
Christian, this did not at all alter the Conditions of the Marriage, in respect
of the Converted Party, from what they were before: nor in a Marriage
contracted by Subjects of the Roman Empire, under the state of Heathenism, is
the Converted Party by virtue of his embracing Christianity afterward, obliged
anew by the stricter Ties of the Christian Law concerning Marriage, but only by
those which the Roman Laws required, upon which Terms the Marriage was made at
first: and so might upon just occasion, take Advantage of the Privilege which
the Roman Laws permitted, of being Divorced for other Causes besides that which
was allowed by our Savior. Now the reason why the Laws of Christianity do not
extend to a Marriage contracted under a state of Heathenism I conceive to be
this, because Heathen Marriages being not in their own nature Indissoluble, as
Christian Marriages are, but the Parties having reserved to themselves a
liberty to part from each other, in such Cases as the Laws of each Country
allowed, the nature of the Marriage-contract still continues the same, after
the Conversion of either Party which it did before, i.e. Dissoluble, unless the
Believing Party can persuade the Unbelieving, to oblige himself to the
Observation of those stricter Laws of Matrimony, which are enjoined by Christ.
Without which mutual Consent the Marriage continues the same it was before,
while both Parties were Unbelievers: and consequently the Laws of Christ do not
reach this Case, being applicable only to those Marriages which are made in the
Christian Church, or at least which are made Christian by an After-act, and
mutual Consent of the Parties to submit to the Christian Law in this
particular. This Opinion seems to be countenanced by the Apostle in the 15.
verse of that Chapter. 1 Cor. 7.15.
If the Unbeliever depart, a Brother or Sister is not under Bondage in such
Cases: the most natural Sense of which Words is, If the Marriage Contract be
broke on the Unbelievers side, the Believer is no longer tied (...). V. ver.
39. and Romans 7.1, 2, 3.
by it. Which is not true of a Marriage where the Laws of Christianity take
place, for there the Breach of the Marriage Covenant on one side, does not
dissolve the Bond, nor release the other party from the Obligation of it,
except in the Case of Adultery, which St. Paul does not here suppose. Which
seems to me plainly to prove that St. Paul did not think the Laws of
Christianity were to be extended to such Marriages as these. This seems too to
have been the sense of the Primitive Christians, by the Story which gave
occasion to Justin Martyrs first Apology, (as it is usually reckoned) concerning
a Woman Apol. 1. init.
that being Converted to Christianity, after having used many endeavors to
reclaim her Husband from his vicious course of Life, when they all proved
ineffectual, sent him a Divorce drawn up according to the form prescribed by
the Roman Laws (...). Ibid.
. This action of hers is commended by Justin Martyr; which I suppose he would
not have done, if he had thought the Laws of the Gospel took place in such a
Marriage as this, which was contracted in a state of Heathenism. For certainly
Christianity does not allow the Wife to put away her Husband upon any account
whatsoever: since that was never allowed by Moses's Law, nor ever practiced
among the Jews till Herod's time, when Salome sent a Bill of Divorce to her
Husband, which was done contrary to the Jewish Laws, as Josephus Antiq. l. 15.
c. 9. p. 532. B.
, who relates it, observes. And if this be the true state of the case
concerning Marriage, where one party is a Convert to Christianity, and the true
ground of S. Paul's resolving the question proposed to him concerning this
matter; the reason is plain why he introduces his answer with this Preface, I,
not the Lord 1 Cor. 7.12.
; for this case is of the same nature with the other Indifferent things S. Paul
discourses of in the same Chapter, where he gives his judgment about the state
of Virginity and Widowhood. The doubts concerning which matters he resolves by
the Rules of Prudence, and with respect to the present Distress 1 Cor. 7.26.
, and the difficulties which attended the Profession of Christianity. The
Apostle indeed says, I give my Opinion about these questions, as one that has
obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful 1 Cor. 7.25.
, and again, After my judgment, and I think that I also have the Spirit of God
ver. 40.
. But this is not spoke with the Authority of an Apostle or Teacher sent by
God, but in such a style as implies only an ordinary Assistance, such as any
Pious skilful Pastor may still expect: for it is as if he had said, I do
sincerely give you the best Advice I can, my judgment is not biased by any
corrupt end, I have no other design but to promote God's Glory and your good,
and therefore I may be pretty confident that the Spirit of God whose influences
I have often felt, has now so far Assisted me, that I have advised you for the
best.

3. Another Instance wherein we may reasonably suppose the Apostles spoke
without Inspiration, is when they discourse of such things as our Savior told
them they must be content to be ignorant of. Such as was the time when the Day
of Judgment should come, which was a secret God had reserved Matt. 24.36.
to himself: and of Restoring the Kingdom to Israel Act. 1.6.
. As to the former of these, it is plain the Apostles thought the Day of
Judgment would come in their own time, or within a very little while afterward
See 1 These. 4.14. 2 These. 2.2. 1 Cor. 10, 11. -- 15.52. 2 Cor. 5.3. 2 Pet. 3.4.
1 Pet. 4.7. Heb. 9.26.
. But this they only gathered by Humane Reasoning, and conjectures drawn from
some Expressions found in the Old Testament, or used by our Savior, such as
the Calling the times of the Gospel the Latter Days, an Expression often used
by the Prophets, and our Savior's joining together the Destruction of
Jerurusalem, and the End of the World in S. Matthew the 24th. And as the event
has proved that they were mistaken, so they themselves did not pretend to
Revelation for what they said in this case, but spoke of it in doubtful terms,
as may be seen in the place above cited 2 Cor. 5.3. (...).
, If so be we shall be found Clothed, not naked, for so the Words should be
Translated.

In these cases I think 'twill be no prejudice to the Divine Inspiration of the
Apostles, to allow them to have spoke like Men. And it is unreasonable for any
to pretend, that if we grant thus much, we do in effect give up the Cause, and
that then 'twill be impossible to distinguish what the Apostles say by the
Spirit, and what they speak of themselves. For sure Men may distinguish if they
please, the Mysteries of Faith, and the Rules of Practice, from a Cloak and
Parchments, or a Journey to Corinth: which belong to the first excepted Case.
And in the second, we have the Apostle himself plainly distinguishing this from
his usual way of Writing, and telling us that it is he speaks, not the Lord 1
Cor. 7.12. V. 2 Cor. 11.17.
, and that he had no Commandment from the Lord, but only gave his Judgment 1
Cor. 7.25.
. The same Expression we find elsewhere in a like case 2 Cor. 8.8, 10.
, viz. concerning the measures of Charity, which are to be settled by the Rules
of Prudence, and don't fall under a Divine Command. Now if an Exception
confirms a Rule in Cases not Excepted, we may justly infer from the Apostles
setting a mark upon these Discourses to distinguish them from Divine Commands,
that where there is no such distinguishing mark, we must suppose him to deliver
what he says under the Character of an Apostle and a Messenger of God, unless
the nature of the Discourse do plainly imply the contrary, and be such as
properly belongs to the two other Heads of excepted Cases. As to the third
Instance of Excepted Cases, the Evangelists have sufficiently forewarned us not
to look upon any Man's Judgment as Infallible in this matter, since they have
Recorded Matt. 24.36. Mark 13.32.
those words of our Savior, where he tells his Disciples, that the Day and
Hour of the General Judgment was a secret God has reserved to himself, and has
not thought fit to reveal it to any Creature of what Rank or Degree soever; no
not to the Son himself: and tho he were the great Prophet of the Church, yet
'twas no part of his Commission to reveal the Counsel of God in this matter:
and therefore to be sure his Disciples would never pretend to know more then
their Master.

Having thus considered the Cases in which the Apostles spoke or writ without
Inspiration, I proceed in the

II. Place to show, that Excepting those Cases, the Apostles writ and spoke by
the particular Assistance and Direction of the Spirit.

Our Author confines the Infallibility of their Preaching and Writing to those
things which they Learned from Christ, or related as spoken by him Fr. p. 256,
257. Eng. p. 69, 70.
. But as to the Arguments which they framed upon those Principles, and the
Consequences they deduced from the Old Testament, here he supposes them to have
used only their own Memory and Judgment, tho he grants these Discourses of
theirs are to be received, because there is nothing in them but what is
conformable to the Doctrine of Christ and to right Reason, and nothing that can
lead us into the Belief of what is false or contrary to Piety En. p. 112, 131,
135. Fr. p. 282, 283. 224, 227.
. This, as exactly as I can gather, is all the Authority he allows the Sermons
and Writings of the Apostles: and this indeed is as much Authority as can be
given to any Humane Discourse, and tho it does not exclude all possibility, yet
it excludes all likelihood of error. But as we look upon the Apostles to have
been somewhat more than Sound Divines, or Men that very well understood the
Doctrine which they were to teach others: so their Discourses and Writings have
been always esteemed of an higher Rank than any Religious Treatises purely
Humane, which however solid and true they may be, are to be judged of by these
Writings, and are no further true than they agree with them. The Scripture
makes this the Characteristick of an Apostle, whereby he was distinguished from
the other Inspired persons who were then in the Church, viz. that he did not
learn the Gospel in an Humane way (...). Gal. 1.11. compar. with ver. 12. and
1. v. 1 Cor. 2.10.
, but purely by Revelation. S. Paul might have been sufficiently instructed in
the Gospel, by those who were Pillars in the Church v. Gal. 2.6, 9.
, so as to have been out of all likelihood either of mistaking any part of it
himself, or leading others into error: but we see this way of Instruction was
not sufficient to advance him to the Dignity of the Apostolate, and therefore
Christ himself made a particular Revelation of the whole Gospel to him v. Ubi
supr. and 1 Cor. 11.23. Ephesians. 3.3, 4.
, that he might not be Inferior in any respect to the chiefest Apostles. And
since the Gospel was communicated to him and the rest of the Apostles by Divine
Revelation, only that they might teach it to others, whether by Word or
Writing, with the greater assurance and certainty, and without any danger of
error, their Discourses which were designed for the Instruction of the Church,
must be the effects of this supernatural habit of Christian Knowledge, which
God infused into their minds. I have showed in the former Chapter P. 29.
, that the same Assistance accompanied the Apostles in their Writing which did
in their Preaching, and therefore shall now speak of these two indifferently,
and show what kind of Authority the Apostles claimed in either of them. S. Paul
says 1 Cor. 2.10.
that God has revealed the deep things, and the Mysteries of the Gospel to the
Apostles by the Spirit: which probably were the same things Christ told his
Disciples, they were not able to bear while he was with them John 16.12.
. Such was particularly the Doctrine of the Cross, which S. Paul's Discourse
chiefly relates to in that place 1 Cor. 1.18, etc etc. 2.2
. These things S. Paul says Ib. ver. 13.
they spoke and taught others, and that too in the Words which the Holy Ghost
taught them. Where the word (...) comprehends their style Ver. 1. and 4.
as well as their Arguments, and shows there is a greater regard to be had to
the style of the Apostles, than our Author v. loc. supr. citat. p. 35.
is willing to allow, and even for that very Reason which he alleges as an
Argument, why it is not dictated by the Spirit, viz. because it is plain and
without any Affectation of Wit or Learning, and conformed to the style of the
Old Testament. For this style however Negligent and Careless our Author may
think it Fr. p. 233. En. p. 145.
, the Apostles used by the direction of the Holy Ghost, as appears from this
place. It follows immediately, Comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, where
the word (...) may signify Explaining, Illustrating v. Grot. in locum.
, i. e. proving one Divine Revelation by another, the Revelations of the New
Testament by those of the Old. At last the Apostle concludes, Ib. ver. 16.
We have the mind of the Christ, and therefore ye are to hearken to us, and
receive what we say, tho in many things not agreeing with the Principles of
Philosophy, or Worldly Wisdom, which the Apostle in the Verses before 1 Cor.
1.20, etc. c. 2.1, etc.
had undervalued, in comparison of the Gospel. In all which Discourse S. Paul
plainly ascribes his and the rest of the Apostles Preaching to the Instructions
the Holy Ghost gave them, without making any restrictions, and particularly
that part of it which consisted in drawing Consequences, and bringing Proofs
from the Old Testament.

Again we find the same Apostle threatening those that despise his Advice, as
not despising man but God, who gave the Apostles his holy Spirit 1 These. 4.8.
, that they might teach with uncontrollable Authority. And I think we may
fairly conclude from hence, that St. Paul expected all his Precepts and
Instructions should be submitted to, not merely as coming from one of the
Governors of the Church, but as having something more then Humane Authority,
and being derived from the Spirit of God. For what he says in this place, tho
it immediately respect only those Advices which are contained in the foregoing
part of the Chapter, may by parity of Reason be applied to all other
Apostolical injunctions: for as the words are general, and do not specify that
the Apostle delivered these particular Rules by an extraordinary Revelation,
more than any others which he elsewhere gives, so neither are the Advices such
in their own Nature, as require a greater degree of Inspiration to deliver
them, than the other Exhortations and Commands which are every where to be
found in the Apostolical Writings. From whence I conclude, we ought to look
upon those Writings as a Divine Rule of Faith and Practice, and that he who
despises or undervalues them, despises not man, but God, who gave his holy
Spirit to the Authors of them. And how far our Author may be guilty of this
fault, I leave it to God and his own Conscience to Judge. I proceed to show

III. That the Assistance which the Holy Spirit gave to the Apostles did not
consist only in refreshing their Memories, or Improving their Natural
Faculties, but was in several respects a new degree of supernatural Knowledge.

Our Author is willing to believe, as appears by the places Fr. p. 254.-257.
Eng. p. 66. -- 70.
I have before cited, that the Assistance the Holy Ghost gave to the Apostles,
did chiefly, and in a manner only consist in refreshing their memory, and
recalling to their mind what our Savior had taught them. And agreeably to this
opinion he tells us Fr. p. 255. En. p. 67.
, that when our Savior promises his Disciples John 15.26.
, That the Holy Ghost shall teach them all things, and bring all things to
their remembrance, these latter words apparently explain the foregoing, as if
the Holy Ghost's teaching them was nothing else but bringing to their
remembrance what Christ had taught them before. Now I deny not but that our
Savior declared to his Disciples the whole Counsel of God, and therefore when
he gave them Commission to go and teach all Nations, he makes this the Rule
they were to go by in Preaching, viz. to teach whatever he had commanded them
Matt. 28.20.
, as containing the whole Doctrine of Christianity: but granting all this, yet
'twill appear from several instances, that the Assistance of the Spirit was
something more than bringing to their remembrance what Christ had said unto
them. For

1. Some things our Savior did not only not explain to them fully, but
likewise made use of such Expressions when he spoke of them, as were
accommodated to the Notions the Apostles were prepossessed with. Thus when He
discoursed to them of the Nature of his Kingdom, he made use of such
Expressions as in their most natural and obvious Sense did imply, that 'twas to
be a Temporal One: for he described the happiness which his Disciples were to
enjoy in it, by eating and drinking at his Table, and sitting upon twelve
Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel Luke 22.30. Matt. 19.28.
. Which Expressions did tend directly to confirm them in their prejudices
concerning the Worldly Grandeur of Christ's kingdom: our Savior not thinking
it a proper season as yet to wean them from these Opinions, which had taken
such deep root in their minds, that they could not be extirpated all of a
sudden, but must be removed by gentle and easy degrees. Now to give the
Apostles a right understanding as to this matter, 'twas not sufficient the holy
Spirit should recall to their memory the words which our Savior had used upon
this subject, for those alone would rather confirm them in the false Notions
they had entertained concerning these things, than instruct them in the true
one: but 'twas further requisite, that the Spirit should give them a clear and
distinct apprehension of the Spiritual Nature of Christ's Kingdom, and wherein
the Glory and Happiness it promises, consists: and should further inform them
for what Reasons our Savior chose, in compliance with their apprehensions, and
in conformity to the Style of the Old Testament, to wrap up these things in
Obscurity, and discourse of them under the vail of Types and Figures. And I
think this was to inlighten their minds with a new degree of Supernatural
Knowledge.

2. But besides those things which our Savior concealed under Types and
Figures, There were others he obscurely Expressed in Parables. As the Calling
of the Gentiles in the Parable Matt. 20.5, 6.
of the Householder that went out at the latter end of the Day to hire Laborers
into his Vineyard. The rejection of the Jews under the Parable Matt. 22.1.
of the persons invited to a Marriage Feast, who would not come. Several other
instances of the same kind might be given. Now to understand these things
perfectly, something more was requisite than just to remember our Savior's
words: as is plain by the Disciples asking our Savior the meaning of another
Parable of his, viz. That of the tares of the Field Matt. 13.36. v. c. 15.15.
. The words they remembered perfectly well, but were at a loss for the meaning
and design of them, and therefore desired him to explain it to them. And by the
same Reason there was need of a greater degree of Illumination, to certify them
that the Gentiles were to be Fellow-heirs, and partakers of the Promises of
Christ, than the bare putting them in mind of those short hints our Savior had
given them concerning this matter, would amount to. And accordingly we find
that St. Peter had need of a Vision Act. 10.
to instruct him in this matter: and even that extraordinary Revelation seemed
scarce sufficient to convince him of this truth. For afterward, notwithstanding
the Vision he had formerly seen, he relapsed again into his old notions, and
separated himself from the Gentile-Converts at Antioch Gal. 2.11.
. Which is a pregnant instance how much need the Apostles had of an
extraordinary degree of Clearness and Evidence, fully to instruct and convince
them in those points of Christianity that were opposite to the Opinions they
had formerly embraced: and that something more was requisite to that purpose,
than just to remember what our Savior had said upon this Subject. For even
that Vision it self did not fully explain to St. Peter God's Counsel and
purpose, and it is likely he thought there was no more implied by it, than that
he should receive those Gentiles, who voluntarily offered themselves. The first
that were sent to Preach the Gospel to the Gentiles were S. Paul and S.
Barnabas, when the Holy Ghost separated them for this purpose Acts 13.2. comp.
with ver. 46.
. And it is upon this Account that St. Paul calls himself Romans 11.13. Gal. 2.9
Ephesians. 3.1. 1 Timothy 2.7.
the Apostle of the Gentiles: and says in express terms that the Salvation of
the Gentiles, by their being Incorporated into the Church, and making one Body
with the Jews, was a Doctrine which was but then newly Ephesians. 3.5, 6.
REVEALED to the Apostles and Prophets by the SPIRIT. And we may observe that
the same S. Paul sometimes expresses the Knowledge of the Gospel, with which
the holy Spirit furnished the Apostles, and Inspired persons of those times, by
the word 1 Cor. 14.6, 26, 30. -- 2.10. Ephesians. 1.17. -- 3.5.
(...), to imply that in several respects, it was not so much a Revival of what
our Savior taught them while he was upon Earth, as a piece of Knowledge
entirely new, and a distinct Revelation.

3. We may instance in another sort of true and proper Inspiration which
belonged to the Apostles, and that is, The gift of Prophecy it self, and of
applying the Prophecies of the Old Testament to the times of the Gospel, and
showing that they are truly fulfilled in Christ and his Church.

Our Author grants Fr. p. 283. En. p. 113.
that God immediately imparted to the Apostles those Prophecies which are to be
found in their Writings, so that this point need not to be further Insisted
upon. I proceed therefore to consider their gift of Explaining the Prophecies
of the Old Testament, and applying them to the times of the Gospel. And here
it is to be considered, that tho our Savior did explain many Prophecies to his
Disciples after his Resurrection, concerning his own Sufferings and Exaltation,
and the Preaching of the Gospel to all Nations Luke 24.27, 45, 46, 47.
, yet there were several other Prophecies which they could not understand, till
they were endued with Power from on High, and thereby enabled to comprehend the
great Mysteries of God's Economy, as in several other Instances, so
particularly in the Rejecting of the Jews and Calling of the Gentiles. And
therefore those Dispensations of the Old Testament which the Apostles apply to
these purposes, viz. the Allegory of Ismael and Isaac Romans 9.7. Gal. 4.24.
, of Jacob and Esau Romans 9.10. etc.
, by which S. Paul illustrates this matter: the words of Moses in his Song
Deuteronomy. 32.21.
, which he applies to the same purpose Romans 10.19.
: as also the words of Habakkuk Acts 13.41.
: I say the explaining the Mystical Sense and Design of these, and such like
Occurrences and Prophecies of the Old Testament, is to be reckoned a peculiar
gift bestowed upon the Apostles by the holy Spirit. 1. Because they themselves
look upon it as such, as appears by St. Paul's reckoning (...) among the (...)
1 Cor. 12.8.
, which word certainly signifies the gift of Interpreting the Mysteries of the
Old Testament and applying them to the State of things under the New. 2.
Because those Providential Occurrences had a secret and hidden design in them,
which could be discovered by none but God that ordered them: who as he
comprehends the most distant Ages in one single view, so in his disposing and
ordering the more Remarkable Events under the Old Testament, had all along an
Eye to the times under the New. 3. As to the Prophecies, it is not likely that
any persons without a Supernatural Illumination, could look to the end and
utmost Completion of them, since the Prophets themselves had not this
privilege granted them, as appears from those places Romans 16.25. 1 Cor. 2.7.
Ephesians. 3.9. Colos. 1.26.
where the Gospel is called a Mystery kept secret since the World began: a
hidden Mystery, and hid from Ages and Generations: And especially from those
remarkable words of St. Peter 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12.
, Of which Salvation [by Christ] the Prophets have inquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you, searching
what and what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify, when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory
that should follow: To whom it was revealed that not to themselves, but to us
they did Minister these things. From whence it appears, that tho the Prophets
were very Inquisitive after the Manner how, and the Time when their Prophecies
should be fulfilled, yet they had only this general Satisfaction, that they
should not be fulfilled in their own time. And I think we may infer from
thence, that the perfect understanding them was reserved to the times of the
Messiah. And tho the event would sufficiently Interpret the meaning of several
of them, yet there were some that needed a greater Light than that to
understand them, and apply them aright. To which we may add, that the manner of
Interpreting the Prophecies of the Old Testament which the Apostles used, is a
Rule to after Ages how they are to Interpret the Prophetical Writings, and
prove the Truth of the Gospel by them: and therefore the same reasons which
prove the Writings of the Apostles in general Divinely Inspired, because they
are a standing Rule of Christian Faith, may be applied to that part of them
which consists in explaining the Mystical Sense of the Old Testament Writings.
But concerning the Mystical Sense of the Prophets, I shall have an opportunity
to speak more fully in the next Chapter. And so much may suffice for the proof
of the third general Head, viz. That the Assistance which the holy Spirit gave
the Apostles was something more than refreshing their Memories, and recalling
to their minds what our Savior had said unto them. I proceed to show

IV. That the Apostles had an extraordinary Assistance when they were summoned
before Magistrates upon the account of their Religion: and to vindicate their
Behavior at that time, from the unbecoming and Irreverent Reflections of this
Author.

One would think the words of our Savior were plain enough in this point Matt.
10.19, 20. Mark 13.11.
: Take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in
the same hour what ye ought to say: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy
Ghost, says S. Mark, the Spirit of your Father, says S. Matthew, speaks in
you. If this had been only a Spirit of Courage and Holiness arising from the
Belief of the Gospel, as Mr. N. pretends Fr. p. 241. Eng. p. 44.
, 'twould have required a great deal of Care, Consideration and Reflection, to
keep it warm upon their Hearts, that it might not cool when danger approached.
And our Savior's precluding the use of Humane means, proves that it was
something more than an ordinary Grace, which always requires the Cooperation of
our Natural Faculties: and shows that 'twas as much a new Impulse which the
Apostles were to feel upon their minds on such occasions, as any Prophetic
Inspiration whatsoever. But notwithstanding the plain import of the words,
rather than own an extraordinary Inspiration, the natural force of the words
must be dwindled away into nothing, under the pretense of their being only a
Hebrew way of speaking Fr. p. 244 Eng. p. 49.
, like The Spirit of jealousy, of slumber, etc. which are found in the Old
Testament. As if there was no difference in the nature of the Expression
between the Holy Ghost, or the Spirit of the Father, and the spirit of
jealousy or stupidity. But this is the constant method of our New Interpreters
of Scripture, that don't care to believe any thing to be there, but what
Natural Powers can effect, and Intellectual ones comprehend. When they are
pressed with plain words of Scripture, they will not out of Good Manners, in
downright terms deny their Authority, but think it more decent to evade it, by
explaining away all the force of them, and alleging the Metaphorical and
Pompous way of speaking, which the Eastern Languages use, which seems to imply
a great deal more in it, than the Writer really designed. Thus Spinoza tells us
Theol. Polit. c. 6.
, that tho there are wonderful stories told in the old Testament, yet that is
no proof that the things themselves were Miraculous, or such as exceeded the
power of Natural Agents, for the Jews loved to talk big, and make a great deal
more of a story by their way of telling it, than the matter of Fact really was.
Just so the Socinians when they are pressed with plain Texts of Scripture for
the Divinity or Satisfaction of Christ, make this their constant Refuge, that
the Hebrew Language is full of Metaphors, and the Writers don't mean half so
much as they say. Now this is an excellent device to render the Scriptures an
insignificant Book, or which is much the same, make it say whatever these New
Expositors please. But before this trick will pass, these Gentlemen should
convince us, that since it is impossible to know the meaning of the Scripture by
the words, it is they only have the secret of telling us its true Sense, and the
Key to these Mystical Characters.

And here I shall take occasion to reflect upon another passage in these
Letters, which indeed belongs to the Subject treated of in the former part of
this Chapter, viz. Concerning the Assistance of the Holy Ghost which our
Savior promised his Disciples: but being another Essay of our Author's
dexterity in this new way of Interpreting Scripture, I chose to make my remarks
upon it in this place. It Is his gloss upon that place of St. John Joh. 16.13,
14, 15.
, He shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he
speak, etc. He observes Fr. p. 254. En. p. 66.
that these words must be extremely figurative, because the Holy Ghost properly
speaking, did not hear from God or Jesus Christ, that which he was to Inspire
the Apostles with. From whence it must follow, (or else this Observation of his
is Impertinent) that the words immediately foregoing John 16.13.
, When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth, must be
very Figurative too, and not imply that the Spirit really taught the Apostles
any thing in a proper Sense. Now to pass by this Consequence of his, viz. that
plain words are to be understood Metaphorically, because they are joined with
words that have a Metaphor in them, I cannot but observe thus much for the
clearing the sense of this Text, that our Savior uses no other expressions
concerning the Holy Spirit here, than what he had often used before of himself,
when he so often says, that what he taught he had heard and received from the
Father John 5.30. c. 8.26.40 c. 15.15.
. And I hope 'twill be granted that our Savior taught his Disciples in a
proper Sense, without a Metaphor: and why then must it follow from this way of
speaking, that the Holy Ghost did not?

But to return to our present subject. " That he says, Fr. p. 241. En. p. 44.
which inclines him to believe that the forementioned Promise of our Savior,
the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of the Father, shall teach you in that hour what ye
ought to say, means no more then this, viz. The Spirit of Courage and Holiness
which the Gospel produces in your hearts, will teach you what ye ought to say,
is, That in comparing this Promise with the Event, it seems not to have been
performed in any other sense than what he has now given. But has he indeed
compared it with all the Events mentioned in the History of the Acts? Not at
all: only has picked out two Instances, which he thought he could make
Exceptions against. Sure if he had dealt fairly and impartially in this matter,
he would not have passed by the Boldness of Peter and John Act. 4.13.
, which was so Extraordinary it made the. Sanhedrim wonder: nor the Courageous
Behavior of all the Apostles Act. 5.29.
: in both which Cases the Apostles told the Sanhedrim to their faces, of their
Horrid Sin in Murdering the Messiah, and that there was no way to Salvation,
but by Believing in him whom they had Crucified. The Event in both these Cases
seems to come up to the highest Sense of our Savior's Words: and if we had an
exact History of the Sufferings of the Apostles, I do not question but we
should find many more Proofs of the Accomplishment of this Promise. Since in
those few Remains that we have of the Genuine Acts of the Martyrs, there are
eminent Instances of their Courage in Professing the Truth, v Acta Ignat. per
Usserium Edit. Martyr. Polycarpi ap. Eusebius. H. E. l. 4 c. 15. Acta Martyr.
Lugd. and Vienn. Ibid. l. 5. c. 1. Cypriani Passio, operibut ejus prefix.
which at First Sight discover something more than Humane, and may justly be
looked upon as one of the greatest and most convincing Arguments of the Truth
of Christianity, and the Divine Power which accompanied its True Professors. I
am sure Justin Martyr confesses that this very Argument prevailed with him to
embrace the Christian Religion. Apol. 1.
And if the Behavior of the Martyrs in aftertimes was so Extraordinary, we
cannot think that the Apostles were in this respect Inferior to their
Disciples. Now a man that had a real Concern for the honor of our Savior and
his Apostles, and was desirous to magnify the Power of God's Grace, and set it
in the best Light he could, would not have passed over all the Evidences for
it, and only insisted upon those Instances, which he thought would lessen and
obscure it.

But let us see whether the Instances he brings, do really so much lessen the
Promise of our Savior as he imagines. As for St. Paul's Behavior to the High
Priest Act. 23.3.
, which is our Author's first Instance Fr. p. 241. Eng. p. 45.
, he cannot be ignorant that some Expositors of the best Note Grot. Estius.
Beza.
, as well as his Adversary Mr. Simon Eng. p. 178. Fr. p. 259.
, understand those words of his, God shall smite thee thou whited wall, as
spoken by the Authority and in the Style of a Prophet, as our Savior called
Herod Fox Luke 13.32.
, and St. Paul called Nero Lion 2 Timothy 4.17.
. And they that maintain this Opinion, do not suppose that St. Paul in the next
words begged Pardon, and confessed that he was to blame for what he said, as our
Author takes for granted that he did Ubi sup.
. But they take this to be the real Sense of the 5th v. tho purposely concealed
under ambiguous Terms, I cannot believe or own such a man to be High Priest,
who came into his Place by those ill Acts as Ananias did, for if I had looked
upon him as High Priest, I should not have transgressed the Law, in giving him
such disrespectful Language. But if we understand the Place in the same Sense
which Mr. N. does, and own the Apostle to have been surpised by Passion, yet
still there will appear evident Tokens of a Divine Assistance accompanying him,
if we take an entire View of the whole history of his Sufferings at Jerusalem:
With what an Undaunted Resolution he went thither, when he knew beforehand,
That Bonds and Afflictions did abide him, and did not value his Life, so he
might finish his Course with joy Acc. 20.23, 24.
How he persisted in the same Resolution, notwithstanding all the Importunities
and Tears of his Friends, being ready not only to be bound at Jerusalem, but
also to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus: Act. 21.14.
with what Courage he sets forth the Grounds of his Conversion before the
enraged Multitude Act. 22.
: with what Authority he Preached concerning the Faith in Christ, and the
Fundamentals of Christianity to Felix, and laid his Sins so home to him that he
made him tremble Act. 24.25.
: How powerfully he pleaded for himself and his Religion before Agrippa Act. 26.
, so as to make Impression upon the King himself, and almost persuade him to be
a Christian. He that shall lay all these things together, will see Reason to
admire the Power of God's Grace in St. Paul's Behavior at Jerusalem: and will
not think that that one Slip, if it were one, is able to obscure the Glory of
all the other parts of it.

And as for that Prudential Act of St. Paul, which our Author says Fr. p. 242.
Eng. p. 46.
has nothing of Inspiration in it, viz. his dividing the Council Act. 23.6.
, and thereby making one half of them his Friends; 'twas exactly agreeable to
our Savior's Advice to the Apostles Matthew. 10.16.
, To use all Prudence that was consistent with Innocence, as this certainly
was. But besides, it implied an excellent Argument ad homines, viz. to Jews, in
behalf of Christianity, namely, that it was unreasonable for them to reject
that Religion, or persecute the Abetters of it, whose great Design it is to
establish the Doctrine of the Resurrection, the Belief of which Point, the
chiefest of their own Sects for Reputation looked upon as one of the principal
Articles of their Faith. And therefore we find St. Paul, knowing what force
there was in it, insist again and again upon the very same Apology for himself
Act. 24.15. -c. 26.6, 7. -c. 28.20.
. Nay God himself approved of it, as appears by the Vision which St. Paul had
to encourage him the very next night after his Appearance before the Council,
by which our Lord himself gave Testimony to him, that he had witnessed a good
Confession Act. 23.11.
.

But it is a wonder to me that our Fr. p. 243. Eng. p. 48.49.
Author should think St. Stephen's Behavior and Harangue Act. 7
a proper Instance, to show that the Apostles and primitive Confessors had no
immediate Assistance of the Holy Ghost, when they appeared before secular
Magistrates. For if Courage to speak the Truth, and to back it with
unanswerable Arguments, be a sign of an Extraordinary Assistance, certainly no
person ever gave greater Evidence of it than St. Stephen. To declare publicly
that the Temple and its Worship should shortly be destroyed Act. 6.14.
was such an Invidious Truth, that the Apostles themselves did not think fit at
first to speak it openly, but showed a great respect to the established
Worship, by constantly attending upon it Act. 3.1.-18.21.-20 16.-21 26.
. The Dissolution of the Mosaical Economy, being a Truth that the new Converts
from Judaism were not yet able to bear. But even this Truth St. Stephen had the
Boldness to profess, and maintained it too by a continued series of Argument,
from Abraham whom the Jews boasted to be their Father, down to the building of
the Temple. Wherein he shows that the Patriarchs and Founders of the Jewish
Nation, were accepted by God before the Temple or its Service had a Beginning:
nay that Moses himself the Institutor of this Worship, prophesied of Christ
Acts 7.37.
, and designed the Tabernacle only for a Pattern of Heavenly things Ibid ver.
44.
. Besides this St. Stephen all along made Reflections upon the stubborn and
refractory Temper of the Jews from the beginning, and told them that their
Rejecting and Murdering of Christ when he came, was but agreeable to their
usage of the Prophets who foretold him Ib. ver. 52.
. I think he that said these things had the Gift of (...), which the Apostles
prayed for Acts 4.29.
, in a great measure. And tho our Author is pleased to say, Ubi supr.
that St. Stephen mentions diverse Circumstances of History which were nothing
to the purpose, yet for my part I must declare I see none but what are
necessary to make it a full and Complete Narrative, or else serve to set forth
the ill manners of the Jews under the several Dispensations of Providence. And
I am apt to think St. Luke was of the same mind: for abstracting from his
Divine Character, he was too Judicious a man to trouble himself or his Reader,
with a Rehearsal of impertinent Circumstances. I am sure there are several
particulars which are of great use to explain the Writings of Moses Acts 7.20,
-- 26.
, which we could never have known, if this Discourse had not been preserved.
This Gentleman may call these Impertinencies if he pleases, but I believe few
will follow him in this bold and Unscholar-like Censure, and it is well St: Luke
was of another mind, for we should have had a great Loss, if he had not
preserved them. And as for those particulars which he says Ubi supr.
cannot be reconciled with the History of the Old Testament Acts 7.16.
, if S. Luke made these Mistakes, they have been accounted for above: Supr. p.
45, 46.
if St. Stephen himself did, I suppose the same Defense that is made for a
Writer, will hold more strongly for a Speaker. And tho we suppose St. Stephen
to have been full of the Holy Ghost when he spoke Acts 6.10.-7.55.
, yet there is no reason the Spirit should dictate a History to him, which he
was before so well acquainted with. And why may we not say, that although the
Holy Spirit were so remarkably present with him at this time, that the Glories
which were shed forth upon his Soul, shined through his Body, and made his face
look like the face of an Angel Acts 6.15.
, yet the Holy Ghost thought fit not to supply the Defect of his Memory in one
or two particulars, to show that Inspired persons, even in their Brightest
Minutes, are still but men, and that the Excellency might appear to be of God,
and not of themselves?

What has been said is sufficient to show what little ground there is for this
Author's unworthy Reflections, upon the Behavior of the First Christians
before the Heathen Tribunals, wherein he seems not only to attack two or three
Passages of Scripture, but to endeavor to overthrow one of the principal
Arguments for the Truth of Christianity: for certainly never was there greater
Evidence of a Divine Power present with its Professors, than when they were
summoned before the Magistrates, to give a reason of the Hope that was in them.
I proceed in the

Vth. place, to Answer the Objections which he has advanced against the
Inspiration of the Apostles.

1. The first which I shall take notice of is, The Apostles Disputing and
Conferring with each other, before they came to a Resolution at the Synod of
Jerusalem Fr. p. 248, 249. Eng. p. 57.
: which he thinks was needless among persons Inspired. As likewise that
Prophets should submit what they say, to the Judgment of other Prophets,
according to St. Paul's order 1 Cor. 14.29.
.

But the force of this Objection will be taken away, if we consider that God
distributed his Gifts to each person severally as he thought fit 1 Cor. 12 11.
: so that even the greatest Apostles might think it necessary to advise with
their Brethren in matters of Consequence, where the Edification and Peace of
the whole Church was nearly concerned. And indeed one reason why God gave his
Spirit by Measure to them seems to be this, that he designed to engage all the
Members of the Church into a strict Union and Alliance with each other by this
means, because they stood in need of one another's help and direction: and the
eye could not say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head to the
feet, I have no need of you Ibid. v. 21.
: i. e. the more Eminent Members of the Church very often stood in need of the
Assistance and Direction of the Inferior and less considerable ones. And
accordingly we find the Apostles and Heads of the Church were informed by the
Inferior and more ordinary Members of it, of several particulars they were
ignorant of before: so Agabus informed St. Paul of his sufferings at Jerusalem
Act. 21.11.
, and the Holy Ghost witnessed the same in every City Act. 20.23.
, no doubt by persons of a much Inferior station in the Church than St. Paul
himself. Thus the distribution of Spiritual Gifts in different Measures and
Degrees, was very effectual to prevent Schism in the Body 1 Cor. 12.25.
of the Church, and to oblige the Members to have the same care one for
another. And we may observe to this purpose, that our Savior made an especial
promise of his presence among his Disciples, where two or three are gathered
together Matthew. 18.2^.
, to engage them thereby to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, and not to forsake the Assembling themselves together. And as by their
exercising their gifts in the public Assemblies, each Man's private gifts were
produced in Common, and made serviceable to the Church in general: so this
prevented False Prophets creeping in among them, because they would presently
be detected. Whereas if private Prophesying had been in use, an Impostor might
have took his opportunity, and by imposing upon the weaker sort, have got such
a reputation, before the Cheat could have been discovered, that it would have
been difficult afterward to have convinced Men of the Imposture. But by making
every one that pretended to Inspiration undergo a public Trial, a false
Prophet could not hope to escape long without being convinced by all and Judged
by all. And this shows the reasonableness of that Command of St. Paul's, that
the Prophets should submit what they say to the judgment of their Brethren 1
Cor. 14.29.
: for since from the very beginning there were False Prophets and deceitful
Workers, who endeavored to transform themselves into the true Apostles and
Messengers of Christ 2 Cor. 11.13.
; the Apostles thought fit to lay down Rules for the Trying of spirits 1 Cor.
12.3. 1 John 4 1, etc.
: and the discerning of spirits was a particular Gift designed for this purpose
1 Cor. 12 10.
. Now the fittest way of doing this, was by the joint advice of the Governors
of the Church assembled together, as we find the Bishops of Asia meeting
together, discovered the falseness of Montanus and his Followers pretenses to
Prophecy v. Eusebius. II. E. l. 5. c 16.19.
. To all which we may add, that besides the usefulness of this method to secure
the Church against Impostures, it has this further advantage in it, that what
several Inspired persons did agree in, brought along with it greater evidence
of its coming from God, than if it had been delivered only by one. For tho
every thing which comes from God, deserves equal Credit in It self, yet there
may be greater evidence to Us of the Divine Original of one Doctrine, than of
another v. Cl. Dodwell. Prolegom in Dissert. Iren. n. 6-9. and Dissert 2. in
Iren. n. 26.
. And as there were greater and more evident proofs of the Divine Mission of
the Apostles, than of the Prophets in the Christian Church, and therefore the
Apostles had the Precedence of the Prophets 1 Cor 12.28
, and the Prophets were to submit to their Orders, and Regulate their Gifts by
their Injunctions 1 Cor. 14.3^.
, tho what a true Prophet spoke was as much the word of God as what an Apostle
did: so in like manner, that which was confirmed by the concurring Testimony of
Two or Three Inspired Witnesses, brought greater evidence of its Divine
Authority, than that which relied wholly upon the Credit and Integrity of One,
because two or three were less liable to mistake than one. And therefore we
find our Savior himself argues from the common Sentiments of Men, and appeals
to the concurring Testimony of John Joh. 5.33.
as a Corroborating Evidence, tho his Miracles sufficiently proved the truth of
his Mission: nay he reckons that the joint Testimony of his Father and himself
is more credible, (Humanely speaking) than either of them singly Joh 8 17, 18.
.

And what has been said concerning Inspired persons of an Inferior Rank, holds
true of the Apostles themselves: for tho I make no question, but the Holy Ghost
was always so far present with them, as to guide and direct them in all matters
that were of Consequence, such as that was which gave occasion to the Synod at
Jerusalem: yet to make them capable of this Assistance, we must suppose that
they observed those Rules of our Savior, which were necessary Conditions in
order to the procuring this Assistance, one of which, as I have observed
already, was their Assembling together when they had opportunity, and where the
Case concerned the whole Church in general. And since the Apostles themselves
did but know in part, and prophecy in part 1 Cor. 13.9.
, and consequently might receive further Light from others, what the whole
College of Apostles agreed in, came with greater Authority and Evidence of it is
being God's Will, than what was delivered by one Apostle only. Just as we are
more assured of the Truth of those Doctrines which are often repeated by
different Writers in the Holy Scripture, than of those which are only mentioned
by one: because the Authority of several Writers adds weight to the matter it
self, and the comparing them together prevents our mistaking the sense of the
Scripture concerning it; whereas what is but once mentioned is more liable to
Ambiguities, and the Sense of it more easily mistaken. From what has been said,
I hope it appears that there is sufficient reason why Inspired persons should
consult each other; and that this is no prejudice to their Inspiration.

2. The second Objection is, Fr p. 249. Eng p 58.
That the Holy Ghost which the Apostles received on the day of Pentecost had
not taught them all they ought to know, so far was it from rendering them at
first dash Infallibe, so that St. Peter needed a Vision to learn that he ought
not to scruple Preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles.

I do not know any body that ever yet maintained that the Spirit once for all
instructed the Apostles in all things that were needful for the Discharge of
their Office. It Is certain several things were revealed to them by Degrees, and
in proportion to the Exigences of the Church: and this Author himself owns as
much, when he tells us, Fr. p. 252. Eng. p. 62.
That the Apostles had MANY Immediate Revelations and DIVERSE Heavenly Visions.
And as for the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, in a visible manner on the
day of Pentecost, the chief Design of that was publicly to Authorize them to
preach the Gospel, and to Initiate them into the Body of Christ's Church, which
was then founded, and to do this by more solemn Tokens of the Divine Presence
among the first Professors, than any other Institution could ever pretend to:
according to what the Baptist foretold Matthew. 3.11.
, and our Savior promised Act. 1.5.
, that John indeed baptized, or admitted Proselytes with the bare Ceremony of
Water, (which had been a Rite made use of by the Jews long before upon such
occasions) but the Apostles should be Baptized or admitted into the Church with
the Holy Ghost and with fire.

3. The third Objection is, that Fr. p. 248. Eng. p. 57.
When the Dispute arose whether the Gentiles that were Converted were to be
Circumcised or not, tho St. Paul and St. Barnabas were against this, yet their
Authority was not sufficient to put to silence the Judaizing Christians, which
was a sign they did not look upon them as Infallible. To the same purpose he
urges, Fr. p. 249. Eng. p. 58.
The Believers that were of the Circumcision contending with St. Peter for
going to men uncircumcised and conversing with them Act. 11 2, 3.
.

To begin with the latter part of the Objection: to the instance of St. Peter I
answer, that the Converts of the Circumcision were thoroughly persuaded, that
the Laws and Institutions of Moses were of perpetual Obligation, and therefore
it is no wonder if at first they were surpised to see any of them laid aside,
and a door opened to let in the Gentiles to the same Privileges with the Jews,
and to take away that Discrimination which the Law makes between the Jews and
the rest of the world Exodus 19.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
. And since this Action of St. Peter's touched them so nearly in their
Privileges and Prerogative, or at least was contrary to the Traditions they had
received from their Teachers, and held as sacred as the Law it self Matt. 15.2.
Mat. 7.3. Joh. 18.28.
, it is no wonder they were not easily satisfied about it, till they examined
the reasons upon which St. Peter acted in this matter. And the Apostles never
laid so much stress upon their Infallibility, as to require their Disciples to
believe them upon their own word, as Mr. N. himself Fr. p. 283. Eng. p. 112.
observes: or without demanding a reason why they did so. But if we should
grant all this Objection contends for, certainly it is but a weak Argument that
the Apostles were not Infallible, because some new Converts See Mr. Dodwel of
Schism chapter 19. sect. 18, 19.
did not think so, who it is plain did not well understand the Principles of
their own Religion, and had not as yet entirely submitted to the Authority of
the Apostles. And by the same reason we may argue that our Savior was not
Infallible, (which yet Mr. N. himself looks upon Fr. p. 257, 260, 281. Eng. p.
70, 75, 109.
as a certain Truth) because his Disciples seem not to be satisfied sometimes
of the Truth of what he says Matthew. 16.22.
, and demand of him a reason Matthew 15.15.
of those Doctrines of his that looked like Paradoxes to them.

A great deal of what has been said will hold much stronger in the case of St.
Paul and Barnabas Act 15.
: for the admitting the Gentiles into the Church without Circumcision, must
needs be thought a great Violation of the Law of Moses, by those that looked
upon it to be of perpetual Obligation in the Church of God. To which may be
added, that St. Paul and Barnabas had not so clear and indisputable an
Authority as the rest of the Apostles: not being of the number of the Twelve,
whose Commission was so solemnly sealed and ratified on the day of Pentecost.
And they who were of a different Persuasion from them, would in all likelihood
lay hold of this Objection against their Authority, as Men are willing to take
advantage of any Exception to an Authority that is against them. And
accordingly we find in after times, when the Judaizing Christians found St.
Paul zealous in asserting the Liberties of the Gentile Converts, and teaching
men every where to Apostatize from Moses, as they termed it (...). Act. 21.21.
, that they did what they could to lessen his Authority, and represented him as
far Inferior to the rest of the Apostles, and therefore that no great stress
was to be laid upon his Doctrine, which forced him to vindicate himself and his
Apostleship at large, Galat. 1. and 2. Chapters.

4. The fourth Objection is, Fr. p. 250. Eng. p. 60.
St. Peter's Dissimulation at Antioch, for which St. Paul reproved him, as he
tells us Gal. 2.11.
.

And here I agree with our Author, that St. Peter acted contrary to his
Judgment, and dissembled his Opinion: for he that had been warned by a Vision
Act. 10.28.
, that he should not call any man common or unclean, and but just before had a
great hand in making the Decree at the Synod of Jerusalem Act. 15 7.
, whereby the Gentiles were made Members of the Church upon even terms with the
Jews, without taking the Yoke of the Law upon them: he after all this could not
be really persuaded in his judgment, that he ought not to keep company with the
Gentile Converts: tho his former prejudices might put some weight into the
opposite Scale, and make him doubtful and wavering. Which might make his fear
of displeasing the Jewish Christians, and giving them offense, work more
powerfully upon him, and prevail with him to comply with them in this matter:
and St. Paul expressly assigns his fearing [to offend] them of the Circumcision
Gal. 2 12.
, as the cause of this his Behavior. But tho this be not a sufficient Reason
why any man should dissemble the Truth, yet we may observe from St. James's
Advice to St. Paul, Act. 21.20.
that the Apostles were very tender of giving any offense to the Jewish
Converts, who were very (...). Act. 21 20.
numerous, and whom they justly looked upon as the most considerable part of
the Church, and as it were the Elder Brethren, having a precedent Right to the
Promises before the Gentiles Act. 3.26. Romans 15.27.
. This may be pleaded for an Excuse in behalf of St. Peter, tho still we must
confess as St. Paul tells us Gal. 2.14.
, that he did not walk uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, in this
matter. And neither the Apostles themselves, nor any in their behalf, ever
pretended that they were exempt from sin: but on the contrary, we find them
freely own themselves to be men of like Passions with others Act. 14 15. Jam.
5.17.
: and that they had this Treasure [of the Gospel] in earthen vessels 2 Cor. 4.7.
, and were of the same make with other men. And therefore, since as our Author
truly says Fr. p. 260. Eng. p. 75.
, He alone is endowed with an absolute Infallibility, who is incapable of
sinning, I do freely grant that we are no further assured that the Apostles
were free from Error, than we find them free from Sin, which naturally leads
men into it. I own likewise that this Instance of St. Peter, is a good Argument
against the perpetual Inspiration or Infallibility of the Apostles, if we mean
any more by it, than a habitual Knowledge of Divine Truth: for I cannot think
S. Peter was under the immediate Conduct of the Holy Spirit, when he was guilty
of this Behavior. But I suppose the Apostles might have such an Assistance as
was abundantly sufficient to answer all the Necessities of the Church, without
being always under the immediate Influence of the Holy Ghost, which must make
them Impeccable as as well as Infallible. And even in this case we have reason
to admire God's Providence and Care over his Church, for so ordering it, that
St. Paul should be upon the place to interpose and put a stop to this ill
Conduct, that might else have been of dangerous Consequence, and made a Breach
in the Church that would not easily have been made up. And humanely speaking,
it is not likely that St. Peter who had such a Preeminence in the Church, would
have yielded to a less Authority than that of St. Paul's. From whence too may
further appear of what use 'twas even for Inspired persons to consult with each
other, and act by common Advice: which Point I have explained and proved at
large above P. 88.
.

5. The next Exception I shall take notice of is this: Mr. N. tells us Fr. p.
258, 259. Eng. p. 72, 73, 74.
, that the Gift of Wisdom and Knowledge, or the Gift of Prophesying, which he
makes all one with the two former, was a Disposition of mind which God
sometimes infused into those on whom he bestowed it: whereby they became fit to
instruct, and that it did not consist in an immediate Inspiration of what they
were to say. His reasons for this are two: 1. Because this Gift might be
improved by Study and Reading, as he proves from 1. Tim. 4.13, 14. 2. Because
the Apostle gave directions to the Prophets, and ordered them to exercise their
Gifts by turns, to prevent that Confusion which the disorderly Use of their
Gifts had brought into the Church 1 Cor. 14.
. Now he thinks that if the Spirit had Inspired them with what to say, he would
likewise have given them directions as to the time and place.

Now methinks he that can confound the Gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge and Prophecy,
which any Man that consults the place where St. Paul reckons up the several
Gifts of the Spirit 1 Cor. 8, 9.
will see are distinct, and takes no notice of the Ambiguity of the word
Prophecy, which is taken in several Senses in Scripture: I say he that
confounds things, that any one who has studied the places of Scripture which
treat of the Gifts of the Spirit, must needs know to be very different, need
not have been so nice as to distinguish between a Disposition of mind infused
into those upon whom God bestowed it, whereby they became fit to Instruct, and
an Inspiring them with what to say. For certainly this Disposition infused into
the mind, if it mean any thing, must mean God's giving Men a clear and distinct
apprehension of what they were to teach others; and I think this is much the
same as Inspiring them with what to say, since out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks, and words are only the Expressions of our thoughts:
unless our Author supposes, that when God Inspires a Man with what to say, he
only puts so many words into his mouth, without conveying any Idea of the
things themselves to his mind. But let us proceed to examine his reasons.

As to the First, I see no inconvenience in asserting, that God very often
increased or withheld his Extraordinary Gifts, in proportion to the Industry of
the Possessors. For since the Extraordinary and Ordinary Gifts agree in this,
that they are both designed to assist our Natural Faculties, not to supersede
them, and to encourage our Industry, not to slacken it, I cannot see why that
Rule of our Savior's, To him that has shall be given, and from him that has
not, i. e. does not improve and make a good use of what he has, shall be taken
way Matthew. 13.12.
, may not be applied to the Extraordinary Gifts as well as to the Ordinary: and
why Men might not hope God would bestow these Gifts upon them in a greater
degree, as a reward of their Industry; and might not have reason to fear he
should withdraw them, if they took advantage from thence to be negligent. And
thus much seems to be implied in that advice of St. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
, Not to quench the Spirit, viz. that God may be provoked to take away these
Gifts, when he sees them abused: or Men's sins may render them Unworthy to be
the Instruments of the holy Spirit. The story of the Ethiopian Eunuch who was
Reading the Prophet Isaiah Act. 8.
, and to whom God sent Philip to instruct him, may not unfitly illustrate this
matter. Perhaps the utmost diligence the Ethiopian could use, would never have
given him a clear Understanding of that place of the Prophet: but God to reward
his Industry, sent him an Inspired Interpreter to instruct him in the meaning
of it. And in like manner God may reward Men's Natural endeavors to find out
the truth, with such degrees of Knowledge as are Supernatural. Nor does his
instance of the Miraculous Gift of curing Diseases, which he says Ubi sup.
, cannot be increased by Application of Mind, come up to our case. For curing
Diseases after the manner the Apostles did, is a Power perfectly beyond the
Sphere of Humane ability: whereas the Gifts we speak of, being of an
Intellectual Nature, are most of them in some measure adequate to the Faculties
of the Soul, and in some degree attainable by Industry; so that in this case
what is Miraculous in one Man, may be Natural in another. For example, the Gift
of speaking in a strange Language was Miraculous in the Apostles, but would not
be so in a Man that should get the perfect command of the same Language by
industry. For the illustration of this point, I will put this case, viz. of two
men, one of them arrived to a good degree of Learning by study, and the other
Illiterate: supposing these two to have equal skill in expounding Scripture;
this gift would be thought to proceed from Natural causes in the Former, but
would be miraculous in the Latter: now putting this Case, it is no Incongruity
to suppose that God should reward the Industry of the Former with a degree of
Infused Knowledge, as much above the Supernatural Indowments of the Latter, as
his Natural Talents and acquired Knowledge are above the others. For my part I
can see no absurdity in supposing, that God may encourage Men to improve their
Natural Talents as much as they can, by promising them a proportionable
increase of Supernatural Knowledge. For this, as has been observed before Supr.
p. 37, 38.
, is God's constant method, to make use of Natural means as far as they will
go, and than to supply as much as he thinks fit over and above.

2. As to his Second Reason, which is taken from the Directions the Apostle
gives to Spiritual persons, 1. Cor. 14. it is plain by that very Chapter, that
the Spirit usually left Gifted Men to themselves, to exercise their Gifts as
they thought fit: for the Apostle tells them 1 Cor. 14.32.
, that the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: and from
several places of the same Chapter Verse. 5. 12, 13, etc.
it appears, that Men spoke in Unknown Tongues in their Assemblies, when there
was no body present that understood the Language they spoke in. Which certainly
they would never have done, if they had been under the immediate direction of
the Spirit as to the use of their Gifts. And the speaking with Tongues Mr. N.
himself owns to be a proper kind of Inspiration, but says Fr. p. 267. Eng. p.
87.
that when they thus abused their Gifts they did not speak by immediate
Inspiration, but had the same command of those Languages, as if they had
Learned them from their Infancy: as if a Supernatural Habit were not as much a
Gift, as a single Act. And this likewise shows that the Inspiration of the
Gifted Men in the Primitive Church, consisted rather in a constant and
permanent Faculty, habitually residing in their mind, and exerting it self,
either as they were moved by the Holy Ghost Act. 4. 8, 31.
, or as they themselves thought fit Act. 17. 16.-18.5.
, than in such a kind of Inspiration as the Prophets had, which was often
discontinued and interrupted: which was the reason the Latter never spoke till
they felt a New Impulse, and therefore ushered in what they were about to say,
with Thus says the Lord, and left off when that Impulse ceased. And this
difference between the Prophetical Inspiration of the Old Testament, and the
Apostolical of the New, is a sufficient reason why the Apostles never begin
their Exhortations or Instructions, with Thus says the Lord, which yet is
thought a good Argument by Spinoza Theol. Polit. c. 11.
against the Inspiration of the Apostolical Writings: tho I think it is a very
weak one; for the prefixing their Names before their Epistles, gives them
sufficient Authority, and a just Title to Inspiration.

And now I have run through the most considerable Objections which this Author
has raised against the Inspiration of the Apostles. I think it is hardly worth
while to spend time in Refuting other little Cavils, as Fr. p. 251, 252. Eng.
p. 61, 62.
that the Apostles never speak with the same Authority as Christ did, but
declare they say nothing of themselves, and refer all to Christ: for sure it is
enough for Disciples to speak in the Name of their Master, and it is equivalent
to the Phrase of the Prophets, Thus says the Lord. And the same Argument if it
prove any thing, will hold against the Inspiration of Christ himself, because
he says, John 7.16.
My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: and -- 12. 49, 50.
As the Father gave me Commandment, so I speak.

Mr. N. multiplies Cavils about the Synod of Jerusalem Fr. p. 252, 253. Eng. p.
63, 64.
, some of which I have answered already, and have showed P. 89, etc.
that there were several reasons why the Apostles should meet together about
this weighty affair. To which I shall here add one more, viz. that they met
thus, to give a President and be an Example to Future Ages, of settling Church
Affairs by the Common advice of Councils and Synods.

I shall not pursue all the Critical Remarks he makes Ubi sup.
upon the style of their Synodical Letter: for if their own express words, [It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us] will not persuade him that the
Apostles thought themselves Assisted with the immediate direction of the Holy
Ghost in that affair, I I despair of convincing him by any thing I can say. Nor
does it follow from hence, that all the persons present were inspired: for
since the Apostles presided over the Assembly, and the Determination was wholly
left to them, if they were Inspired, it was sufficient to stamp a Divine
Authority upon the Determination it self, tho it were published in the name of
the whole Assembly. But it is pity the Apostles had not had some such able
Critic as our Author among them, to direct them how to word their Epistle, and
if Mr. N. had been Secretary to the Council, no doubt 'twould have been drawn
up with much more Exactness: tho as great a Critic as himself Casaub. ad Act.
10.33.
, is of Opinion that (...) in the Conclusion of the Letter, which he finds so
much fault with, is for all that a very elegant Expression. He has printed the
Close of this Synodical Epistle in great Letters, as if it had something more
than ordinary in it, and were a manifest argument of his side; but as Big as
the words look, whoever considers them will find there is very little sense in
his Application of them.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Inspiration of the PROPHETS.
I Do not see much in our Author that reflects upon the Authority or
Inspiration of the Prophets: But since I am engaged in the Subject of
Inspiration, and those persons who have no great esteem for the Sacred Books,
fancy there are many things relating to the Prophets liable to Exception, I
think it will not be altogether impertinent or beside my main Design, which is
to Vindicate the Authority of the Holy Writings, if I take a short View of
those Considerations which tend to establish the Authority of the Prophets, and
to answer some of the most Popular Objections against them. I shall therefore
I. Consider the Personal Qualifications of the Prophets. II. I shall consider
the chief Design of their Prophecies. III. I shall resolve some Difficulties
which relate to the Prophets themselves, or their manner of Writing.


I. As to the first: 'twould in a great measure take off men's Prejudices
against the prophetical Writings, if they would but consider what manner of men
the Prophets were, and what excellent Qualifications they were endowed with.
Men that are glad of any Argument that makes Religion look like a Cheat, think
they have a great Advantage against all sorts of Prophecy, because there have
been so many Cheats of this kind: and they find that usually the persons that
pretend to a prophetic Spirit, are in all other respects of such shallow
Intellectuals, and such mean Qualifications, that no wise man would take their
Advice in any thing of ordinary concern, and therefore it is very unlikely God
should make choice of such persons, to be his Messengers and the Conveyers of
his Will to men. But if they would likewise consider how unlike the Prophets of
the Old Testament were to these Pretenders, both as to their Intellectuals, and
their Morals, 'twould go a great way to discover how vastly different they are
from each other, and the Truth and Excellency of the one would more evidently
appear, by comparing it with the evident marks of Imposture and Meanness, which
are found in the other.

As to the Intellectual Accomplishments of the true Prophets, they had usually
an Ingenuous and liberal Education, as appears by the Institution of the
Schools of the Prophets, so often mentioned in the History of the Kings. And we
find 'twas reckoned a wonder that Saul should be among the Prophets 1 Samuel 10,
11.-19.24.
, because he had not been Educated suitably to that Profession. So God's
calling Amos to this Office from being a Herds-man, was extraordinary and
unusual, as he himself intimates Amos 8.14.
. And indeed the style of the Prophets plainly discovers them to have been Men
of a good Education, and therefore the Critics have all observed what great
difference there is between Amos's style and that of the other Prophets, which
they justly impute to their different Education. Isaiah's style is Elegant
Isaiae dictio purissima^ntor omnes qui post Mosen scripserunt, and ejus (...)
pulcherrimae. Grot. in Is. 50 4.
and Lofty: Jeremy's shows him to have been a great Master of Rhetoric Mirus
in affectibus concitandis Jeremias. Idem.
: Ezekiel plainly discovers in his way of writing, great skill in Architecture
and Geography: Daniel's Wisdom was so famous even when he was young, that it
became a Proverb among the Chaldeans to say, Art thou wiser than Daniel Ezekiel.
28.3.
? And not to descend to any more particulars, we find that all their writings
are full of Powerful Exhortations to Virtue, of weighty and Pathetick
Representations of the heinousness of those Vices which were then prevailing,
and the miseries which would attend them. We find they set forth the absurdity
of Pagan Idolatry Is. 40.18, etc. 44.9, etc
with great strength and smartness of Argument: and endeavor to give Men clear
and distinct Notions of Gods Spirituality Is. 40.12. etc.
, Unity Jer. 10.11, 12. Is. 44.6.
, Omnipresence Jer. 23.23, 24. Is. 66.1.
, Universal Providence, (of which the foretelling how Free Agents will
determine themselves, is a signal instance) and Justice in rewarding Men
according to their works Jer. 18.7. etc. Ezekiel. 18.
. They unfold the methods of Providence in disposing of Kingdoms Jer. 25.
, and making use of wicked Princes, and Nations to be the Instruments of God's
Justice in punishing the sins of others Is. 10.6. etc. Ezekiel. 29.18, 19.
. Such discourses don't look like the idle dreams of a Melancholy and disturbed
fancy, but do indeed answer the Character they pretend to. And those Men who
will not believe them to be of Divine Original, ought in reason to allow them
to be the Product of a settled Judgment: and cannot in Justice but grant, that
if the Prophets did not foresee what was to come by a Prophetical Spirit, yet
they made very probable Conjectures by a Natural Sagacity; since the event has
so plainly justified a great part of their Predictions. And if they will not be
persuaded that God enlightened the minds of the Prophets by an extraordinary
Revelation, yet they cannot in Justice deny, but that they discourse of the
Nature of God and of his Providence, and of the Obedience which he requires,
with as great a degree of clearness and certainty, as Men's Natural Faculties
can arrive to. And therefore it is not without reason that Origin does often in
his Books against Celsus P. 18.-177.-260.-359. Ed. Cant.
insist upon this, That Moses and the Prophets instructed Men in the nature of
God and of their duty, much better than the acutest Philosophers among the
Heathens. So malicious and groundless is that pretense of Spinoza, where he
tells us Theol. Polit. c. 1. p.m. 21.
, that the Prophets did not agree in their Notions about the Nature of God,
because forsooth, different Prophets saw different Signs of the Divine
Presence. As if they could not distinguish between a Symbol of God's Presence,
and the Divine Nature it self. And he may as well say, that Moses took the
Cloudy Pillar to be God himself: and by the same reason he must conclude, that
Moses thought the Cherubims and the Cloud upon the Mercy-seat, which he himself
ordered to be made, to be God, or at least to resemble his Essence, and then I
think he would have been guilty of greater Idolatry than Aaron was in making
the Golden Calf.

2. If we consider the Moral Indowments of the Prophets, we shall find their
Virtues so extraordinary, that none of the Whifling Pretenders to Prophecy, can
in the least compare with them. With what undaunted Courage and Constancy did
they reprove the Popular Vices of the times they lived in? Not sparing the
Greatest Persons either out of fear or flattery. And if we suppose them to have
acted like Men in their Wits, (and ther'es no tolerable reason to suspect the
contrary,) we must conclude that nothing but a Sense of their Duty, could
prompt them to do this: for they could propose no advantage to themselves by
it, but on the contrary were to expect all the scorn and misery which the Angry
and Revengeful Temper of wicked Men in Power whom they had offended, could
bring upon them. And it could certainly be no pleasure to be continually
reproving Men, when there was little or no hopes of reclaiming them: nay when
they had not so much Civility as to thank them for their good Intentions, and
take the good Advice which they offered, kindly at their hands. If it had not
been purely out of a principle of Conscience, and that they were persuaded of
the truth and great Concern of these things, and therefore spoke, they might
with much more advantage to themselves, have let Men be quiet and go on
securely in their sins. Many of their Troubles and Sufferings we find Recorded
in their own Books Jer. 15.10, etc. -c. 18 18.-20. 1. etc. -26.8, etc. -36
26.-37. 15.-38 6. Dan. 6. Amos 7.10.
, but several other Scripture-Writers Matt. 5.12.-2^.37. Acts 7.52. Heb. 11.36,
37, 38. v^ etiam 1 Kings 19.10. Nehem. 9.26
assure us, that they were generally Martyrs for the truth's sake, and yet none
of these Sufferings could prevail with them to retract any thing they had said,
or to confess that they had been deluded themselves, or imposed upon others,
and said, The Lord says, tho he had not spoken. Origin has an excellent
passage to our present purpose, which I shall here set down at length c. Celsum
l. 7. p. 336. Ed. Cant.
. He was speaking just before concerning the Heathen Prophets and Priests, that
uttered the Oracles, and then he adds these remarkable words: (...) deest vox,
f. supplend. (...). vel legend. (...)
(...) etc. ex Hebr. 11.37, 38. (...). " But as for the Jewish Prophets, some
of them were honored with Divine Inspiration, as being eminent for Wisdom
before, and some of them having their minds enlightened by the very Gift of
Prophecy became Wise, being made choice of by Providence, as persons fit to be
entrusted with the Divine Spirit and the Dictates of it, by reason of the
Inimitable perfections of their Lives, their Boldness, Impartiality, and
Courage that could not be daunted by Death or Danger. For reason tells us, that
'twas fit the Prophets of God should be such Men, for Courage and Constancy of
mind, that if we should compare the Fortitude of Antisthenes, Crates or
Diogenes with theirs, this would look but like Childrens-play to that. And
therefore because they spoke the truth, and rebuked Sinners with a great deal
of freedom; Heb. 11.37, 38.
they were stoned, sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the Sword, they
wandered about in sheepskins and goats-skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented: they wandered in deserts, in mountains, in dens and caves of the
earth, of whom the world was not worthy: Having their minds always fixed upon
God, and upon the invisible things which are with him, which cannot be
discerned by Sense and therefore are Eternal.

A little after the same Author has these words to the same purpose, (...). We,
says he, do not value the Pythian or any other of the famed Heathen Oracles,
yet we reverence the Prophets that were amongst the Jews, because we see that
the unshaken Courage and Constancy of their Lives, made them worthy to receive
the Spirit of God, that prophesied quite another way, and had nothing in it
like the Oracles which the Devils uttered.

From what has been said we may conclude, That if we consider the Prophets with
relation to their personal Qualifications only, they will appear to be persons
of unquestionable Credit, since their Intellectual Accomplishments were such,
that they could not probably be deceived themselves, and the Integrity of their
Lives was so great, that we cannot suppose they had any Design to impose upon
others. I proceed in the

II. Place to consider the chief Aim and Design of God's sending Prophets to
the Jews, and what was the principal End of their Office.

I confess I am apt to believe that the occasion of Gods promising to send a
succession of Prophets to the Jews, (as many Learned men understand that place
Deuteronomy. 18.15.
of Deuteronomy) was, That they might have no Temptation to have recourse to
the Heathen Oracles and Soothsayers, to know what should come to pass, for want
of Prophets of their own. Thus much the words of Moses seem to imply, Ibid. a
v. 10 ad v. 15.
There shall not be any among you that uses Divination, or an Observer of
times, or an Enchanter; -- for these nations whom thou shall possess hearkened
to Observers of times and to Diviners, but as for thee the Lord thy God has
not suffered thee so to do. The Lord thy God shall raise thee up a Prophet of
thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken. The promise of a
Prophet, which tho it eminently relate to the Messiah, yet the Context shows it
was primarily and immediately meant of an order of Prophets that should succeed
Moses: this promise I say, was given to the Jews, as appears from this place,
to prevent their applying themselves to the Heathen pretenders to Prophecy.
This is Origen's Observation upon this place, L. 1. c. Celsum. p. 28. Ed. Cant.
and he adds this judicious remark. Therefore, says he, when the nations round
about the Jews had their Oracles and several ways of Divination, all which were
strictly prohibited among the Jews, if they had not had the satisfaction of
foreknowing things to come some way or other, it had been almost impossible,
considering the great Curiosity of humane nature, to have kept them from
despising the Law of Moses, as having no mark of Divinity upon it, or rejecting
the Prophets who succeeded him, and taking no care to preserve their
Discourses; or else apostatizing to the Heathen Oracles, or setting up
something like them among themselves. Therefore it is no wonder that the
Prophets now and then gave answers to those that inquired of them about
ordinary Accidents, as Samuel 1 Samuel 10.2.
told Saul that his asses were found, and Ahijah the Prophet 1 King. 14.12.
foretold the death of Jeroboam's son. Or else how could they that stood up for
the Law of Moses reprove them that went to consult Idols, as we find Elias 2
King. 1.3.
reproved Ahaziah, saying, Is it because there is not a God in Israel, that ye
go to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? Thus far that excellent Writer.
Which words of his as they give us a very good account of the original
Institution of Prophets among the Jews, and likewise furnish us with a very
satisfactory Reason, why the Prophets condescended now and then to satisfy
people's demands about private and trivial Concerns, which seem to be below the
Dignity of God's Prophets to meddle with: so I don't question, but God had some
further design in Instituting a Succession of Prophets, and charging the people
to have a regard to what they should deliver, than merely to satisfy the Jews
Curiosity, or prevent their seeking to Idols for the Knowledge of Futurities.
And I suppose that the Institution of Prophets was designed chiefly for these
Three ends.

1. To admonish the people of their Duty, and press them to practice it, by
proposing God's Mercies and Judgments, according as they have behaved
themselves. 2. To keep up a Sense of God's Providence in their minds. 3. To
foretell the times of the Messiah, and prepare Men's minds for the Reception of
Him.
1. The first part of the Prophetical Office was to admonish the people of
their Duty, and persuade them to practice it, by setting before them God's
Mercies or Judgments, which they would suddenly feel, according as they
behaved themselves.

The Prophets were principally intended to be Preachers of Righteousness, and
generally speaking, foretold future events only in order to make their
Exhortations successful. And with respect to this part of the Prophetical
Office, we find the words Prophet and Prophecy used in the New Testament for
instructing Men in their Duty Acts 15.31. Romans 12. 1 Cor. 6.14.1, etc.
. Without question 'twas properly the Priests business to instruct the people
in their Duty, and they were to seek the Law at their mouths Malac. 2.7.
: but the refractory temper of the Jews, made them despise the ordinary Methods
of Reproof and Correction, and their dullness withal made it necessary for God
to awaken them out of their sins, sometimes by an Extraordinary Call from
Heaven: by sending persons upon a particular Message to them, and giving
Testimony to their Divine Mission by some Sign or Wonder: (which I suppose was
generally the (...) or Trial of a true Prophet, of which more hereafter) and
all this to reinforce the Promises and Threatenings contained in the Law of
Moses, and assure the Jews he would be as good as his word, and they should
quickly find, that as if they would amend their ways, there should not fail one
word of all his good Promises, so if they persisted in their ill courses, all
the Evils that were written in the Law of Moses, should suddenly come upon them
and overtake them. And in this respect, the Prophecies of the Old Testament
differ very much from all the False Pretenses to Prophecy, that in the Former,
future Events are not foretold merely to please Men's Curiosity, but only in
order to the making them better; whereas the Latter do not make it any part of
their concern to awaken Men to a sense of God's Overruling Providence and
Justice, or of the ill Consequences that attend Vice when it grows Predominant:
and have no other design but merely to gratify that Itching desire Men have to
be prying into the secrets of Futurity: which is a piece of Knowledge that of
it self will do Men more harm than good, and which God upon that account
Conceals for the most part from Men, or if he Reveals it, yet he does it by
dark and Imperfect Hints on purpose: the reasons of which we shall discourse of
more at large in the next Chapter. Now as God made the promoting of Virtue and
Holiness the principal design of his sending the Prophets; with respect to
those particular persons to whom he sent them: so we find accordingly, that
they bestowed their pains and labor chiefly upon this Subject, to persuade Men
to break off their sins by Repentance, and to cease to do evil and learn to do
well. Witness those Pathetick Disswasives from Sin, and Exhortations to Virtue,
which make up far the greater part of their Writings: in which they discover
such a Spirit of Piety and Holiness, as is far above the Rudiments of the Law,
and approaches very near to the perfection of the Gospel. But of this more by
and by.

2. The second design of God's Instituting the Prophetical Office, was to keep
up a sense of God's Providence in Men's minds.

The Jews were none of the Acutest or best Tempered people in the World, and
perhaps the greatest Wisdom and Integrity would have been little enough to make
them keep firm to the belief of the True God, the sole Creator and Governor of
all things, when the whole World beside was given up to Idolatry. For as strong
and prevalent as Truth is, yet it is in danger of being overpowered by
Multitude; nay, Singularity makes Truth it self look Suspicious, and Men are
apt to think it is more likely a Few should be mistaken than a great Many. Upon
this account 'twas necessary, that God should sometimes Reinforce the Doctrine
of his Universal Providence and Government upon the minds of the Jews, by an
Extraordinary Method: and by laying open the secrets of his Providence, and
showing them first what should befall themselves, if they did not repent, and
then their Neighbors; convince them that he was the Supreme Lord and Governor
of the World, and the Kingdoms of it were at his disposal. It Is further to be
considered, that when the Jews saw how much greater and more flourishing the
Neighboring Kingdoms of Assyria and Egypt were, than their own, this was a
likely Argument to make an Impression upon them, that judged of God's Love or
Hatred by what they saw before them; this might make them imagine, that some
other Being had a great share in managing Affairs below beside their God, and
tempt them to conclude, that since the God whom they Worshipped was not so kind
to his servants, as the Heathen God's were to their Votaries, either he was not
so able, or not so willing to reward his Worshippers, as the Deities of their
Neighboring Countries were. And it is probable that in the Latter times of the
Jewish Kingdom, when their Enemies made frequent Incursions into their Country,
and threatened entirely to subdue it, and at length did so, 'twas a temptation
to many of the Jews to forsake the True God, and turn to Idols, because they
saw 'twas better with their Worshippers than with those of True God see Jer.
44.17, 18.
. For these reasons 'twas fit that God should often give this Dull and
Unthinking people fresh Assurances that all things were at his disposal, that
'twas in his power to make them Happy or Miserable, and that they must expect
to be one or the other, according as they observed or neglected his Commands. And
tho it might be sufficient for this design, to have given them the Predictions
of such things only as were to come to pass in their own times; yet God was
pleased to discover to his Prophets what should come to pass in the Latter
days: both to honor them with the prospect of that glorious Scene of things,
which he had reserved till the Fullness of time should come, and give them a
foretaste of the Joys they were to expect in the Messias's Heavenly kingdom, by
discovering to them some part of the Happiness of his Earthly one: and likewise
to give a convincing Proof to all Ages, that he was the First and the Last, the
sole Orderer and Disposer of all things, that when the things themselves should
come to pass, men might say, This has God done, and might perceive that it is
his work. And this leads me to consider the

3. The third thing which God intended in the Institution of the Prophetical
Office, which was to foretell the times of the Messiah, and to prepare men's
minds for the Reception of him.

And indeed to give men notice of these things, was God's principal design in
sending the Prophets, and the coming of the Messiah was what God spoke by the
mouth of his holy Prophets ever since the world began. And since God seems to
have made this the principal part of the Prophetical Office, I shall consider
it as carefully as I can, and shall inquire, 1. First, For what Reasons God
thought fit to reveal this so often and so particularly. 2. I shall consider
the manner how the Prophets delivered this Prophecy.


1. As to the first, we may assign two reasons why God revealed this so often
and so particularly.

1. To show that this was the Masterpiece of his Providence, if I may so
speak, what he had an eye upon in all his particular dispensations toward the
Jews, and what he designed as the ultimate End and Completion of them all.

2. To wean the Jews by degrees from the Carnal Institutions of the Law, and by
discovering to them a Better State than that they were under, to raise their
minds to Spiritual and Heavenly things, and thereby prepare them for the
reception of the Messiah.

1. As for the first of these Reasons; it seems as if God designed to raise
men's Expectations, and make them look upon this as the great Masterpiece of
his Power and Wisdom, when he made the coming of the Messiah the common Theme
of all the Prophets, Mystically impli'd it in all the Promises, and Typically
represented it not only in the Ceremonies of the Law, but also in the Lives and
Actions of the Eminent Persons among the Jews in all Ages. What God himself
lays so much Stress upon, men ought to regard as something more than an
ordinary work of Providence: and surely the Prophets had Great and Noble Ideas
of it, since they seem to Vye with each other, who shall excel the rest in
setting forth its Glories to the best Advantage, and by the most Emphatical and
Lively Representations, with respect to the Capacity of the People to whom they
were to publish those glad Tidings. If the Messiah had come into the World
without any Notice given of it before hand, the Unexpectedness of it would
indeed have caused Surprise and Wonder, but it would not have been looked upon
as an effect of the determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, and of that
(...) which foreordain'd this before the Foundation of the world, Ephesians. 3.10. v.
Grot. in locum.
and made all the lesser Dispensations of Providence subservient to this great
End, and by Various methods and Different measures pursued the same Uniform
Design.

2. The second Reason I assigned why the coming of the Messiah did bear so
great a part in the Prophetical Predictions, was to wean the Jews by degrees
from the Legal Ceremonies and Institutions: and by discovering to them a Better
Covenant than that they were under, to raise their Minds to Spiritual and
Heavenly things, and thereby prepare them for the Reception of the Messiah.

I look upon it as a certain Truth, that God instituted a great part of the
Ceremonial Law with respect to the Opinions that were generally received at the
time when it was enacted, and in compliance with the Rites that the Nations of
the World used in the Worship of their Gods v. Maimonid. More Nevoch. Par. 3.
c. 32. p. 432.
: that so by this Condescension, he might check that hankering after the
Religious Rites of the Nations round about them, which the Jews upon all
occasions discovered to be in their Temper. It Is upon this account, that St.
Paul calls the Ceremonial Law the Elements of the world Gal. 4.3.
, and weak and beggarly Elements Ib. v. 9.
. But it is true withal, that God in his Wisdom so contrived it, that these
Rudiments which were taken from the Rites and Usages of the Heathen world, were
to the Jews the Rudiments or first Beginnings of Christianity, according to
what the same Apostle says, that the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ Gal. 3.24.
. It was indeed like the first Rudiments of Learning, which young Beginners at
first do not know the use of, but when they are gone on a pretty way, then they
find those Beginnings made the way easier for that which comes after. And in
like manner, tho the Jews understood not at first God's Design in prescribing
so many several kinds of Expiation for sin, yet when the way to the Holiest by
the Blood of Christ was laid open, then they might easily discover, that all
those different Rites were designed to represent that one Sacrifice of the Lamb
of God which was offered for the Sins of the World. And as God thus complied
with the Ignorance of the Jews in that state of Nonage, and fed them like
Children, with milk and not with meat, with such Instructions as were suitable
to their Capacities: so he revealed this Great and Ultimate End of the Law, by
gentle and easy degrees, as they were able to Bear it. He first discovered it
faintly under the shadows of the Law, which seemed by their own Weakness and
Imperfection to aim at something more perfect than themselves. But then by the
Prophets God manifested this grand Intention of his more clearly: by them he
gave large and distinct Predictions of a New and Better State of things to
come, of a New Covenant, established upon Better Promises, and consisting of
more Excellent Precepts Jer. 31.31.
: that God's Kingdom should be enlarged, and all Nations should flow unto it
Is. 2.2.
: than he would take Priests and Levites out of other Nations -66.21.
, and in Mal. 1.11.
every place Incense should be offered to him and a pure Offering. And in order
to prepare men's minds for this New State, the Prophets often speak after a
slighting manner of the Levitical Rites and Ceremonies Is. 1.11. etc. -66.3.
Jer. 7.22, 23. Hos. 6.6. Amos 5.21-24. Micah 6.6, 7, 8.
, and press men to the Practice of the Weightier matters of the Law, Judgment,
Mercy and the Love of God: and require inward Purity of heart Ezekiel. 18.31.
, instead of outward Ceremonial Worship. Which is such a pitch of Perfection in
obedience, as Moses's Law seldom recommends: for indeed that was chiefly
designed to be a Political Law, instituted for the Government of the Jewish
Commonwealth, and therefore as all Political Laws are, it is more careful to
restrain Men from the Overt-Acts of Sin, than to make them sincerly and
Inwardly Good. In which respect St. Paul says 1 Timothy 1.9.
that the Law was not made for a Rule to the Righteous, but for a Restraint to
the Lawless and Disobedient. And therefore the Prophets by refining upon the
Law, and exhorting Men to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, by walking not
after the Flesh but after the Spirit, did contribute very much toward the
preparing Men's minds for the times of the Messiah Prophetae omnes Egregii ad
Evangelium Duces. Grot. in Jer. 7.9.
, as they weaned them from the overfondness they had to the Levitical Rites, by
showing them a more excellent way to please God: and as they gave them to
understand, that God did not design the Mosaical Covenant to be Perpetual, but
that that it should at last give way to a Better. And these discourses which
the Prophets made to the Jews, together with the several Afflictions God
brought upon them, both in the Captivity and afterward, on purpose to take off
their minds from the Temporal Promises, and make them look up to Spiritual and
Heavenly Ones, had so great an effect upon the generality of that People, that
in the latter times we find their Writers discourse of the Nature of Religion
in a style much more agreeable to the Spirit of the Gospel, than they used
formerly, as appears by the Book of Ecclesiasticus: and speak of a Future State
with much greater Clearness and Assurance, as may be seen in the Dying Speeches
of the Maccabees 2 Macc. 7.
, and in several other parts of the Apocryphal Writings Wisd. 3. etc. 5. Tob.
3.6.
. And all this contributed very much to raise in the minds of the Jews that
Expectation of the Messiah, which we find the generality of them had at the
time of our Savior's Coming John 1.20, 21.-7.40, 41. Luke 2.38.-3.15.
. I proceed to consider

2. The manner how the Prophets delivered this Prophecy, and that was Twofold,

1. There were some Prophecies which in the Proper, Literal and Primary meaning
related to Christ, and cannot in any Tolerable Sense be applied to any other.

2. Others, tho in their Literal and Direct sense, they foretold some other
Event which was nearer at hand, yet had a further and Mystical sense contained
in them, which related to Christ and his Kingdom.

1. Concerning the First sort, I need not say much, for they are but few in
Comparison with those of the Second, but are withal so plain, that all the Art
of the Adversaries of Christianity has not been able to avoid the force of
them, or wrest them to any other sense, but what the Christians give of them.
Origin is very copious upon this Subject v. Cells. l. 1. p. 39, etc.
, and proves at large that several Texts of Scripture, never were fulfilled in
any person but our Savior. The Instances he gives are Genesis 49.10. Mich. 5.2.
Isaiah c. 52. and 53. Psalm 45. To which we may add, Dan. 9.24, etc. Psalm 110.
Psalm 22.16, 18. -- 69.21. The greatest difficulties concern the Second sort of
Prophecies, which have a double sense, Literal and Mystical, for the explaining
of which I shall lay down these following Observations.

1. That most of the Prophecies concerning Christ have a double sense, Literal
and Mystical.

2. That those Prophecies concerning Christ, which do Directly point at
something which happened before the time of our Savior, yet have some evident
Marks in them, which show that they have some Further meaning than that which
was first intended.

3. That there are several very good Reasons upon which this Opinion of a
Double sense in the Prophets, Literal and Mystical is grounded.

1. The First Observation I lay down is, That most of the Prophecies concerning
Christ have a Double sense, Literal and Mystical.

Now to avoid all Cavilling about words, I shall first premise that by the
Literal sense, I mean that which the Prophet more immediately intended, and
which pointed at some Event that was nearer the Prophets own time, than the
Mystical Completion was: and by the Mystical sense I understand, that which had
a respect to the times of the Gospel, tho sometimes this Latter sense is more
properly expressed by the words, and more agreeable to their Natural Import
than the former, as we shall see presently. Having premised this, I proceed to
show that there is a Literal as well a Mystical sense in most of the Prophecies
relating to Christ.

Without allowing this we shall make great Confusion and Disorder in the
Prophetical Writings, if we suppose them to break off Abruptly from the matter
in hand, and without any visible Transition go to a quite different Subject.
And this is, to speak more particularly, very unreasonable to suppose in the
Prophet Isaiah, who as he is most eminent for the clearness of his Prophecies
concerning the Messiah, so he is as remarkable for the Regular Order and
Contexture of his Prophecies, and their Coherence one with another. And the
Historical Relations which he intersperses in his Writings Chap. 7. c.
36-37.-39.
, serve as a Key to open the Primary and Literal Intention of his whole
Prophecy. But the Beauty of it taken all together, will be quite spoiled,
except we suppose him in most Cases to have some regard to the Subject he is
upon, and rather to take Hints from thence to discourse concerning the state of
the Gospel, than to fly out into a Foreign Subject without any Respect to
Order or Coherence. The wonderful Restoration of the Jewish Nation and
Deliverance out of their Captivity, gave a very fit occasion to the Prophet to
foretell at the same time, that Great Salvation which Christ the Redeemer of
Israel should Accomplish, and was a proper Representation of our Savior's
giving Light to the Gentiles who sat in darkness, and Isaiah 61.1.
proclaiming liberty to the Captives of Sin and Satan. And accordingly the
Prophet pursues this with a pompous Eloquence from the 40th. Chapter, almost to
the end of his Prophecy. But yet there is no reason to think, that he was so
intent upon this Latter Subject, as quite to forget the Former: for he was not
only an Evangelical Prophet, but likewise knew how to speak a word in season to
him that was weary Isaiah 50.4.
under oppression and exile, and preach deliverance to the Captives of Israel.
But I shall give a more evident Instance of this, in that Famous Prophecy of
his, Isaiah 7.14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive, etc. It appears by the beginning of the
Chapter, that the occasion of this Prophecy was Ahaz's fear of the Kings of
Syria and Israel, and his distrust of God's delivering him out of that
distress. Upon which the Prophet gives the King his choice of asking any sign
of God Ibid ver. 11.
as a pledge of his Deliverance: and upon his refusing to name any, which he
did rather out of Despair ver. 13.
, than a modest Unwillingness to prescribe to God; the Prophet by God's order
gives him this Sign, A virgin shall conceive, etc. Now it is plain both by the
Occasion and the Intent of God's giving this Sign, that the words must in their
primary and Immediate sense, relate to something which should come to pass very
Shortly, or else how could it be an assurance to Ahaz of a speedy Deliverance?
For I pray, what sense would there be in such words as these, I assure you of a
speedy Deliverance, by the same Token that above 700. years hence the Messiah
shall be born of a Virgin? The use of a Sign is to go before the thing
signified, not to come after it, at least not to keep such a distance behind
it. Whereas if we suppose the First intended sense of this Prophecy to be this,
that before one who is now a Virgin can bear a Son, and that child come to some
degrees of Understanding, and know how to refuse the evil and choose the good
Ib. v. 16.
, God will deliver Ahaz: the intent and meaning of the Prophecy perfectly
answers the occasion of it, and exactly agrees with the scope of the Context
from the 16th verse of this, to the latter end of the next Chapter. This
Prophecy I thought fit to treat of at large, because it makes out the Double
sense of Prophecies which I contend for so clearly: for there are as evident
Marks of its being intended further than its Primary sense and design, as there
are of the Primary sense it self, as I shall show by and by.

I shall only just mention two or three Prophecies more, which plainly and at
first sight, imply a Literal sense distinct from the Mystical. The first shall
be that of Hosea, Hos. 11.1.
Out of Egypt have I called my Son, which was certainly first meant of God's
delivering the Israelites out of the Egyptian See Exodus 4.22, 23.
Bondage. Another instance is that of Jeremy, Jer 31 15.
In Ramah was there a voice heard, Rachel weeping for her children, etc. which
without question was first spoken of the Captivity of Benjamin by
Nebuchadnezer. The last I shall mention is that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 41.9.
He that eats of my bread has magnified himself against me, which was
originally spoken by David concerning some of his own servants, who combined
against him in Absalom's Conspiracy. Many others of the same nature might be
alleged 2 Samuel 7.14. Psalm. 72.-129.
.

2. My second Observation is, That the Prophecies which have a Literal sense
beside the Mystical, yet have evident Marks that something further is designed
by them than what is contained in the Literal sense.

Tho we allow that many of those Prophecies which the Writers of the New
Testament quote as irrefragable Proofs of Christianity, pointed Directly and
Immediately at some thing that came to pass before: yet if we examine them
thoroughly, we shall find that generally speaking, the Primary and Literal sense
does not come up to the full Force and Import of the Words, but that they imply
much more than can be true of the things or persons which were first intended:
from whence we may conclude that they have a Regard to something further, in
which they are properly Verified and Fulfilled. As to instance in the Prophecy
before mentioned, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son: who does not
see that the first Sense and Completion, viz. One that is now a Virgin shall
marry and bear a Son, comes infinitely short of the full Force and true Meaning
of the words? and therefore they certainly look further than their first
intended Sense. So there are several Prophecies in which some of the most
Remarkable Passages were never fulfilled in the Persons of those concerning
whom they were first spoken: as those Passages in David's Psalms, Psalm. 22.18,
19.
They pierced my hands and my feet, they parted my garments, and cast lots upon
my vesture. Is. 69.21.
They gave me gall to eat, and vinegar to drink, were never, that we can find,
literally true of David, tho it is likely Both those Psalms were at first penned
by him with regard to his own Circumstances. In short, let any man compare the
Literal Sense of the Prophecies relating to Christ, as it is Explained by
Grotius, (who has took more pains to Clear this Matter than any other
Expositor) with the Mystical, and he will find that generally speaking, the
Primary or Literal Sense does not come up to the full Import and Meaning of the
Words: but looks Narrow and Forced in many places, in comparison of the
Mystical. From whence 'twill appear that the Prophecies which are applied by
the Apostles to Christ and the Gospel, are not wrested from their Natural
Sense, nor applied only by way of Accommodation, (as some men love to speak,
and Mr. N. Fr. p. 227. Eng. p. 22, 23.
seems to be of the same mind) just as men apply the Sentences of an Author to
quite different purposes from what he at first intended by it, and as Homer's
and Virgil's Verses have been made use of to express such things as never came
into their thoughts.

3. The third Observation I lay down is, That there are several good Reasons
upon which this Opinion of a Literal and Mystical Sense in Prophecies is
grounded.

1. To suppose a Double Sense in the Prophetical Writings, is to suppose them
writ in a style agreeable to that of the Law, and suitable to the Rude and
Carnal apprehensions of Religion which prevailed among the Jews. They always
looked upon the Law as containing something Mysterious and Divine, under the
Obvious and common Sense of it. This the Psalmist acknowledged, when he prayed
that God would Open his eyes, that he might behold wondrous things out of his
Law Psalm. 119.18.
: and St. Paul when he calls the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, the Shadows
and patterns of Heavenly things Hebr. 8.5.-9.23, 24.
, a Figure or Parable (...). Heb. 9.9.
for the time then present, and the shadow of good things to come Heb. 10.1.
. This Mystical way of expressing and representing things was in Vogue among
the Wise Men of the First Ages in the World, and received in the Religious
Rites and Mysteries of all the Ancient, especially the Eastern Nations V. Clem.
Aleuand. Strom. l. 5. per tot.
. And therefore God, who, as has been observed already P. 140.
, adapted the Mosaical Institutions to the Opinions and Customs already
received in the world, thought fit so to contrive the Ceremonial part of the
Law, that the more remarkable Rites and Usages of it should be a shadow of
Spiritual and Heavenly things: and by this means suited it both to the Greatest
and Meanest Capacities; retaining the latter in a sense of their Duty, by the
Gaudiness and External Pomp of his Service, which struck and affected their
Senses; and employing the Inquisitive in the search of those Spiritual and
Heavenly things, which were wrapped up in Figures and Shadows, and were the
Wisdom of God hid in a Mystery. And as the Diligence of Industrious persons,
and those who were Lovers of Truth, was sufficiently rewarded with the finding
out of these Deep things of God which were hid under a Vail, so the
Slothfulness of Carnal and Worldly Men and their Contempt of Divine Truths, was
punished by leaving them in Ignorance, with the Veil still drawn over the Rites
and Institutions of the Law, so that they could not look to the Ultimate End
and Design of it. Which is the very Reason our Savior gives, why he spoke to
the multitude in Parables, Matthew. 13.11, etc. where he tells his Disciples,
that they who would not be at any pains in the search of the Truth, when it
concerns their Souls, do not deserve to know it: whereas the Disciples that
were careful Hearers of what Christ said unto them, were Rewarded with the
Knowledge of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven.

But to return: Since the Law had its double Meaning and Aspect, 'twas
reasonable that the Prophets should have so too. The Jews having been used to
this way of Instruction would expect it: the Reasons why God used it before,
were the same still; for the Jewish Nation, to whom the Prophets were sent, was
the same Carnally minded people they ever were, their Thoughts were not much
affected with any thing but Temporal Blessings, and therefore 'twas necessary
to set forth the Glories of the Messiah's Kingdom, by the splendid
Representations of Worldly Grandeur, which being a Happiness that they
understood and valued, might serve to raise in their dull and earthly Minds,
some Desire and Expectation of his Coming. Whereas if the nature of his Kingdom
had been set forth plainly as it was in it self, the Spiritual Glories of it
were too Refined for them to understand, they would have been far above out of
their sight, and if they had seen some Glimpse of them, yet they would have
discovered no Beauty in them that they should desire them. It Is for this Reason
the Prophets set forth the State of the Gospel, by the Representation of such
things as were in Use among the Jews, and were most Glorious and Excellent in
their Eyes to whom they wrote. So Isaiah expresses the Conspicuousness of
Christ's Kingdom, and the Figure it was to make in the World, by saying that
the Mount of the Lord's House shall be established upon the top of the
mountains Is. 2.1.
. And both he and the Prophet Zachary describe the Conversion of the Gentiles,
by the Nations going up to Jerusalem to worship there, and keep the solemn
Feasts appointed by the Law Is. 66.20.23. Zech. 14.16.
, because Worshipping at Jerusalem, was the highest Notion of Religious Worship
which the Jews could apprehend. For the same Reason 'twas necessary, that the
Temporal Deliverances which were wrought by those persons, whom God raised up
to be Saviors to the Jews in their Distress, should be the Types and Figures
of that great Salvation which the Messiah was to purchase: and therefore 'twas
fit that the Prophets should join both together in their Writings, and make use
of the Former to Illustrate the Latter by.

2. God's making the Great Persons and remarkable Actions of Former Ages, the
Types and Figures of what should come to pass in the Latter days, the times of
the Messiah, is as I observed before P. 138, 139.
, an Argument that God made all his Dispensations subservient to this one Great
Design, and made all the different Lines of his Providence meet in this one
Center. Which shows that the Coming of Christ was the End of the Law and the
Prophets, and the Eternal Purpose which God purposed with himself before the
World began. And accordingly St. Paul says 1 Cor. 10.11.
, that all things happened to the Jews as Types (...).
of what should come to pass under the Gospel. And therefore he 1 Cor. 10.2.
and likewise St. Peter 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.
, speak of the Deluge and the Israelites passing through the Red Sea, as Types of
Baptism: he argues from Jacob and Esau, Isaac and Ishmael Romans 9.6, etc. Gal.
4.21, etc.
, as Prefigurations of the Rejection of the Jews and the Calling of the
Gentiles. And several other Allegorical Applications of the Rites and Histories
of the Old Testament, to the times of the New, are to be found in the
Apostolical Writings. Which kind of Interpretations are not so Precarious as
some are apt to imagine, since besides that the Divine Assistance did certainly
accompany these Expositors, and that this way of Interpreting Scripture was
allowed by the Jews, for whose use the Writings of the Apostles were
immediately and principally designed: I say besides these Considerations, the
Expositions themselves of this kind may be reduced to Fixed Rules and
Principles, the chief of which are these two: the First, that which I mentioned
just now out of St. Paul 1 Cor. 10.11.
: the Second is this, viz. Whatever Privileges belonged to the Jews as the
Segullah or Peculiar People of God, do in a more Eminent manner belong to the
Christian Church, which is the Mystical Israel See 1 Pet. 2.9. compar. with
Exodus 19.5.6. and Deuteronomy. 7.6. 1 Cor. 9.13.14.
. Which Rules if Men would have a regard to, and take Directions from the
Mystical Interpretations of the Old Testament which are to be found in the
Writings of the Apostles, 'twould keep them from indulging their Fancies too
much in these Expositions, and thereby making the Sense of Scripture
Precarious, which are the usual Objections against this way of Expounding it,
and to which many Men's Expositions of this kind are liable.

3. A third Reason why the Prophecies should have a Mystical Sense as well as a
Literal, may be taken from the Nature and Use of Prophecy in general, which
makes it requisite that Prophecies should be delivered with some degree of
Obscurity: and therefore the Involving a Mystical sense within a Literal One,
is a proper Style for a Prophetical Writing, where the matters spoken of ought
not to be expressed in too plain words. I deny not but there are some plain
Prophecies in Scripture, but as much the greater part of them have something of
Obscurity, so I doubt not but to make it appear, that the Obscurity of the
Prophecies is so far from being an Objection against them, as some pretend,
that on the contrary, it is absolutely requisite that most Prophecies should be
Obscure, or else they would not answer the Designs for which they were given,
nor be Accomplished in a way agreeable to the Methods of Providence. But of
this in the next Chapter.

The Sum of what I have hitherto said concerning the Authority of the
Prophetical Writings is this; That if we consider the Prophets only as men,
that were the Teachers of Virtue and Religion, the least that can be said of
them is, That in respect of their great Improvements in the several parts of
Knowledge, the Excellency of their Precepts, the Integrity of their Lives,
their Contempt of the World, and constant Adhering to their Principles, they
were equal to the greatest Philosophers: but if we consider them as Enlightened
from above, and the Messengers of God to the world, they discover to us the
Various Methods of the Divine Government, they unravel the Intricate Turnings
and Windings of that Dark Labyrinth, they display the Scene of Providence, from
the Beginning of this World to the End, and then give us a Prospect of Another
to come: the Signal Accomplishment of their Predictions already fulfilled,
confirms our Belief in Providence, and incourages us to trust in God, and in
the Words of his Prophets for the Future. They do not open the Scene of things
to come, only to gratify a Vain Curiosity, or with a Design to encourage the
Belief of a Fatal Necessity, but to assure us that God interests himself in the
Government of the World, that all things are Guided by his Unerring Hand, and
that the Changes which come to pass in the World, are not the Effects of Blind
Chance or Surly Fate, but the Results of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, which is
able to bring Good out of Evil, and make the Rage and Fierceness, the Folly and
Madness of man turn to God's Praise, and be Instrumental in bringing about his
Great Purposes and Designs. Thus the Holy Prophets teach us to depend upon God,
and acknowledge that our Sufficiency is of him, and yet withal to believe that
it is in our own Power in a great measure, whether we will be Happy or
Miserable. Thus their Doctrine promotes God's Honor, without superseding men's
Diligence and Endeavors, and instructs us to give him the Glory when we do
well, and not to charge him foolishly, when we do amiss.

And as to their way of Writing, which includes a Hidden and Mysterious Sense
under a Literal and Obvious one, this was agreeable to the Method of
Instruction which the great Sages of the world practiced in those early Ages:
'twas what the Jews had been accustomed to, what they always believed to be the
Style of Scripture, and do so still, tho it make against them; it tends to
discover the Chain of Providence, and the Dependence which by the Appointment
of the Divine Wisdom, the Occurrences of one Age have upon those of another
which is at a great distance. The Prophets themselves have in most Cases, left
us Certain Marks to know where we are to seek for Mysteries, and a Key to
unlock their true Meaning: and where such an Indication is wanting, we have the
Apostles to direct us, who have given abundant Evidence of their Divine
Credentials, that they were appointed by God to be the Interpreters of his
Oracles, and Publishers of his Will.

CHAP. IV. Wherein some Difficulties are Resolved relating to the PROPHETS
themselves, or their manner of Writing.
III. I Proceed to discourse concerning the Third General Head, I proposed at
the Beginning of the last Chapter to be considered, in relation to the
Prophets: which is to Resolve some Difficulties concerning the Prophets
themselves or their Prophecies. And here it is not my Design to give a
particular Answer, to all the Objections that have been raised against the
Prophetical Writings: most of which have been fully answered by several
Excellent Writers of late Bp Stillingfleet, Orig. Sac. Letter to a Deist.
Huetii demonst. Evangel. M. Smith of Prophecy. Dr. Spencers Vanity of Vulgar
Prophecies.
, not to mention the Ancients: I intend only in this Chapter to consider Two
Difficulties, one relating to the Prophets themselves, and the other to their
manner of Writing, which have not yet, that I know of, been thoroughly Explained
by any Writer: the First is, The Obscurity of the Prophetical Writings, the
other, Concerning the Marks and Signs whereby True Prophets were distinguished
from False. The latter of these Inquiries is Embarass'd with Great
Difficulties, for the Scripture gives us very little Light in this matter,
insomuch that one would wonder, since there are so many Contests between the
True and False Prophets related in Scripture, and so many Cautions given
against hearkening to False Prophets and Seducers, that there should be so
little said concerning the Marks whereby they might be distinguished from the
True ones.

I. I begin with the former Difficulty, viz. The Obscurity of the Prophecies.
But here I shall first Premise that Obscurity is not Inseparable from Prophecy,
for there are some very plain Prophecies in Scripture: as the Foretelling the
70. years Captivity of the Jews, and that Cyrus, after that time was expired,
should Restore them to their Land and Rebuild Jerusalem Jer. 25.11, 12.-29.10.
Is. 44.28.
, the Succession of the Monarchies in Daniel Dan. 2. c. 7. c. 8.
, and those Prophecies concerning the Messiah, which foretell his Coming, while
the Second Temple was standing, and before the Destruction of the Jewish
Commonwealth Dan. 9.25, etc. Hagg. 2. 6.-9. Malac. 3.1.-4.1.
. But notwithstanding some few Exceptions, generally speaking, there is
something of Obscurity in the Delivery of Prophecies. Now beside the Causes of
this which arise from the Prophetical Style, which is full of Metaphors, and of
lofty Expressions, such as naturally flow from a Heat of Fancy, where Great and
Surprising Ideas have made a deep Impression, besides this there are other
Reasons to be assigned for this Obscurity, which are taken from the very Nature
and Design of Prophecies, and the manner how they are Fulfilled.

1. With Respect to the first of these, viz. the Design of Prophecies, I lay
down this Rule,

That Prophecies are not so much designed by God to give men the Knowledge of
things beforehand, as to confirm men's Faith after they are come to pass, and
convince them that this was God's Work.

I willingly grant, that God did Reveal things to come to his Prophets, both to
do them a particular Honor Genesis 18.17.
, by making them Privy to his secret Counsels and Designs, and likewise to
prepare and fit men for the Blessings foretold, of which I have discoursed in
the last Chapter P. 139. etc.
: but yet I think the Use of Prophecies chiefly consists in the Comparing the
Event with the Prophecy, which when they are found perfectly to agree, it is a
great Evidence of God's Providence in General, and that this particular Event
which the Prophecy relates to, was an Effect of his Overruling Power. There are
several passages in the Prophets that plainly show, this was the Intent of many
of their Prophecies. God himself gives this Reason why he foretold the
Restoration of the Jewish Captivity Is. 48.5.
, I have even from the beginning declared it to thee, before it came to pass I
showed it thee, lest thou should say, My Idol has done them, and my Graven
Image, and my Molten Image has commanded them. And such Events as the Jews
were ready to ascribe to their Idols, if God had not prevented it, many others
would willingly ascribe to Fate or Chance, and not acknowledge the hand of God
in them. And therefore God to vindicate his Providence, and show that he
Interests himself in the Government of the world, and more especially in such
Cases where his Church is concerned, has been pleased to Foretell several
Future Events, that when they came to pass, men might be convinced that they
were the Lord's doing. The same thing is intimated in those Remarkable Passages
of Daniel. Dan. 12.4. See ver. 9, 10.
Thou O Daniel, shut up the words and seal the Book even to the time of the
End: Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. And to the
same purpose, c. 8.26. Shut thou up the Vision, for yet it shall be for many
days. The meaning of which places is, Lay this Prophecy up safe till after
times, for it cannot be understood See Is. 29.11. Rev. 52.
as yet; but when the things themselves are near, and ready to be brought to
pass, then men shall begin to understand it: the Gradual Completion of the
Prophecies shall open their Understandings, and the comparing those parts of
the Prophecy which are already fulfilled with the event, shall give light into,
and direct Men to Judge of those particulars which are yet to be fulfilled. We
find St. John Rev. 22.10.
receives a Command quite contrary to this which was given to Daniel, grounded
upon the contrary Reason, Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book,
for the time is at hand. It Is indeed very probable that a great part of the
Revelations is not yet fulfilled, and therefore one would think that this
Prophecy might have been Ordered to be Sealed up at the first Delivery of it as
well as Daniel's But the difference between these two Prophecies seems to lie
here, that tho some parts of the Revelations belong to the Latter times of the
Church, yet others relate to the First Ages of it, and upon that account 'twas
fit that it should not be Sealed up, but laid open to be Read Rev. 1.3.
and Considered, from the very time when it was delivered, because the
Accomplishment of some parts of it Commenced very early: and therefore the
things contained in it, are said to be such as must shortly come to pass Rev.
1.1.
. Whereas that Prophecy of Daniel's which relates to Antichrist, (and I suppose
the Command of Sealing up the Book belongs only to that particular Prophecy, as
will appear by comparing the Context of the two forementioned passages Dan.
11.36, etc. to c. 12.5-8 13, to 26.
together) I say, the coming of Antichrist foretold by Daniel, was a great way
off of Daniels own time, and no part of the Prophecy relating to it, shortly to
be accomplished.

I think from these places it is evident, that the Use of several Prophecies
according to God's own Intention, did chiefly consist in Comparing them with
the Event, after they were fulfilled: and that they were in a manner useless,
as a Book that is Sealed up, till the things themselves appeared. Now if
Prophecies were designed to be Explained by the Event, this supposes that the
words in which they are delivered, are not to be plain of themselves. But there
is another Reason why God should not give Men a Clear and Distinct Knowledge of
what is to come, and that is, because

2. The fulfilling of Prophecies, if the things are distinctly Revealed, is
Inconsistent with the Freedom of Humane Actions, and the Manner how Providence
brings the things Foretold to pass: which is a Second Reason why Prophecies
should be Obscure.

God always makes use of Men to be the Instruments of his Providence, but if
they certainly knew what was to come to pass, and how it was to be brought to
pass, they could not be Instrumental in bringing it to pass in a Rational and
Free way of Acting; because it would not leave them wholly to themselves, to
have a full Power over, and a free Determination of their own Actions. And that
whether the thing foreknown be Good or Bad: if it be Good, it tempts Men to
Carelessness, and to presume too much upon God's promise, for then Men are apt
to argue thus, What need we trouble our selves with helping to fulfill God's
promises, as if he were not able to bring about his Designs without our
Assistance? God is obliged in Honor to see his Words made good, and we need
not fear but he will take care that they be performed. On the other side, if
the Prophecy foretell some Sinful Action to be committed, such a Prophecy would
Humanely speaking, very often destroy it self, and the very foretelling it
plainly, would hinder the thing foretold from coming to pass. For if such
Prophecies were so plain that every body at first sight could see the whole
Contrivance, and look through all the Scenes of the Action, they could not be
brought to pass without offering violence to Men's Voluntary Determinations,
and making them purely Passive in producing the foretold Events, and mere Tools
in the Hand of God Almighty. For Instance, if our Saviors Crucifixion had been
foretold with all the particular Circumstances, the Manner how, and the precise
Time when it was to be brought to pass, and the Persons that were to be
concerned in it, we cannot imagine so many of the Chief and Principal Men among
the Jews would have had a Hand in it, without being perfectly carried on to it
by an Overruling Power against their own Inclinations: which besides its
thwarting the Principles of Humane Nature, must make God the Author of Sin. But
since the Prophecies concerning the Messiah and his Sufferings, were delivered
with such a mixture of Obscurity, as never to be fully understood till after
the Event, this gave Room for the Jews Malice to concur with God's Providence
in bringing this to pass, and so as St. Paul tells them, Acts 13.27.
Because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets, they fulfilled
them in condemning him.

Again, as plainly foretelling who are to be Actors in Wickedness, would,
without supposing manifest Violence offered to Men's Inclinations, in many
Cases hinder some of them from being Instrumental in bringing about God's
Designs, so perhaps it would be a new Temptation to others, and make them more
furiously bent upon Evil: just as the mentioning wickedness stirs up some Men's
Ill Inclinations, and makes them eager to commit it. Especially since the
foretelling it as certainly to come to pass, affords a Plea for Men's
Wickedness: for Men that are bent upon Evil, and are glad of any Color to
justify their Sin, will conclude from thence, that it can be no Sin to be
subservient to God's Providence, and Assisting in the Accomplishment of his
Will and Purpose; or if it be a Sin, it must lie at his door. So that if
Prophecies were too plainly delivered, this would often be the consequence,
that the bringing the Event to pass would be wholly imputed to the Clearness of
the Prediction: just as Public Commotions do often take their Rise from the
spreading about of Prophecies concerning the Death of the Prince or the Change
of the Government. Now this is contrary to God's method of dealing with Men:
for tho we cannot comprehend after what manner he foresees how Free Agents will
Determine themselves, yet we have all the Reason in the World to believe, that
Gods Prescience does not Interfere with men's Free Will. And therefore as we
believe that things do not come to pass merely because God Foresees them, but
rather that he Foresees them because their own proper Causes will bring them to
pass: so it is agreeable to the methods of Providence, that Prophecies should be
so worded, as not to have any Influence upon the parties concerned in bringing
them about; that it might not be said, The thing came to pass because it was
Foretold, but it was foretold because it would come to pass, as an Ordinary
effect of a Natural Cause. It Is true indeed, we may observe that some Scripture
Prophecies by being too plainly delivered, have made the Hearts of Wicked Men
wholly set in them, to bring to pass the Evil foretold See 1 King. 11.31, 32. 2
King. 8.12, 13, 15 -- 10.10.
. But perhaps God might do this on purpose to take off the minds of the Jews
from that greedy desire they had to search into Futurity, when they saw what
Ill Consequences did sometimes attend that Knowledge. The Sum of the Argument
is this: that the Evil which if Foretold Darkly and Obscurely, needed nothing
to bring it to pass, but only God's suffering Men's Wickedness to break out,
and permitting them to act according as their Ill Inclinations prompt them: if
it were foretold Plainly and Clearly, could not be effected without supposing
him to offer Violence to Humane Nature, and making him a Party concerned, and a
Tempter of men to Wickedness.

From all that has been said upon this head it appears, that whether the thing
foretold be Good or Evil, the foretelling it too Punctually and Distinctly,
would make Prophecy a Felo de se, and be an effectual way to defeat its
Accomplishment, for then it could not be brought to pass in a way that is
suitable to the Divine Purity and Wisdom. For this is one of the Masterpieces
of the Divine Wisdom, to bring about its Designs in such a manner, as never to
put any Force upon the Freedom of man's Will, so that the Events may rather
seem the Natural Effects of Free Agents, than the Works of an Overruling
Providence. To this purpose speaks the Author of the Book of Wisdom Wisd. 8.1.
, Thy Wisdom, O Lord, reaches from one end to another Mightily, and Sweetly
does she order all things. God sees every Link of that Vast Chain of Causes,
and knows how they depend upon each other: what Force each Circumstance has in
determining men's Resolutions, and what it is that turns the Balance of the Mind
one way or the other: and therefore tho he brings to pass all his Purposes in an
Irresistible manner, yet he does it withal in so Easy and Gentle a one, that
the Events look like the Result of men's own Free Determinations, and one would
think that the Natural Agents, let alone to themselves would have produced the
same Effect.

These two Reasons fully justify the Obscurity of Prophecies, and show us the
Use of them, that we are not to look upon them as delivered merely to gratify
the Curiosity men have to pry into what is Future, but to be an Argument to us
of Gods Overruling Providence, which extends it self to the most Minute
Actions, and very often makes such Accidents, as seem to us to be Trivial and
Insignificant, Instrumental in bringing to pass the Greatest and most
Surprising Events: and especially to show us, That nothing befalls his Church
but by his determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge.

I will conclude this Head with a Brief Caution to those, who do not think the
Prophecies concerning Christ and the Gospel Clear enough to be an Argument for
our Belief: and that is this, That they ought not to expect that the Prophecies
should give as distinct an Account of Christ as the Gospels do, nor because
they do not, should they slight them as Insignificant: but they should first of
all consider the Evidence of Truth, which the Gospel brings along with it, and
then Compare it with the Prophecies. And thus, tho the Prophecies be Obscure in
themselves, yet when they are compared with the Event, as they will receive
Light from it, so they will add Light to it. Just as that Obscure Saying of our
Savior's, Joh. 2.19.
Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up, was not understood
by his Disciples when he spoke it, but afterward when they Compared it with the
Event which it foretold, it was a new Argument to them that he came forth from
God Ver. 22.
.

II. Another Difficulty concerning Prophecy, the Resolving of which will tend
to Establish the Authority of the Prophets, is, Concerning the Signs whereby
True Prophets were distinguished from False ones. It Is plain by the Prophetic
Writings, that there were False Prophets that opposed themselves to the True
ones, and uttered quite contrary Prophecies to theirs. But tho the True
Prophets warn the People often not to be seduced by these False pretenders, yet
we can discover but little out of their Writings, concerning the Marks whereby
the True Prophets were to be distinguished from the False ones. Those which I
can gather from the Holy Writings are these following.

1. If a Prophet endeavored to persuade the people to Idolatry, this was a
certain Mark that he was a False Prophet, tho he should confirm what he said by
a Sign. This Rule is laid down by Moses Deuteronomy. 13.1.
, and is grounded upon very good reason: For since God had manifested his Power
to the Israelites by so many Undeniable Miracles and Proofs, 'twas not
reasonable that working a single Wonder, or foretelling one Event which might
come to pass by mere Chance, should overthrow the Authority of so many more and
greater Works. For tho God does suffer Impostors to work Strange Feats
sometimes for the Trial of his people Deuteronomy. 13.3. Matthew, 24.24.
, yet I doubt not but he always takes care that his own Works shall visibly
exceed theirs, both in Power, in Gravity, and in Usefulness: so that their
Tricks shall appear as just nothing when compared with his Miracles, as Aaron's
Rod swallowed up those of the Magicians Exodus 8.12.
. Or else God would allow too great an Authority to Impostors, and make
Miracles by themselves no Evidence of a Divine Mission, since 'twould be in
some Cases impossible to distinguish True ones from Counterfeit. And this I
take to be a satisfactory Answer to that Question, Whether God's permitting
Evil Spirits and Seducers to show Signs and Wonders, does not evacuate the
Authority of Miracles in general: tho I grant there are other Marks V. Orig. c.
Cells. l. 1. p. 53. l. 2. p. 90, 91. Ed. Cant. Bp. Stillingfl. Orig. sacr. l. 2.
c. 10.
whereby to distinguish True Miracles from False, which it is not my Business at
present to discourse of.

2. It Is reasonable to think that the Prophets, when they first entered upon
their Prophetic Office, gave some Sign of their Mission, either by working a
Miracle, or by revealing some Secret, Remote or Future thing, which was not
within the Compass of Humane Knowledge, and the Nature of which was such, that
a little time would quickly discover, whether the Prophet spoke True or not. We
may find footsteps in Scripture of these several ways being accounted the Marks
of a Prophet. We find the Pharisees demand a sign from Heaven Matthew. 16.1. Joh.
6.30. Matthew. 12.38.
of our Savior, such as Joshua Jos. 10.12.
, Samuel 1 Samuel 12.18.
, Isaiah Is. 38.8.
, and Elias 2 King. 1.10.
had wrought. And the Samaritan Woman judged our Savior to be the Christ,
because he told her all things that ever she did John 4.29.
. This shows that in the common Opinion, the Discovering of some Hidden thing,
and out of the ordinary reach of Humane Knowledge, was esteemed the Mark of a
Prophet: and the Messiah being the Prophet the Jews at that time Expected, the
Woman concludes from thence that he who knew such Secrets must be the Messiah.
And perhaps for this Reason the Jews who looked upon our Savior as a Pretender
only to Prophecy, demand of him the Discovery of a Mock-secret Matthew. 26.68.
, viz. Who it was that smote him when he was Blindfolded.

It appears from other places, that the Prophets did commonly foretell
something which should Shortly come to pass, and the Accomplishment of this
their Predidiction did establish their Authority for the Future, and gave
Credibility to those Prophecies of theirs, whose Accomplishment was at a
greater distance. So the Man of God that Prophesied against the altar of Bethel
1 Kings 13.1, 2.
, beside his foretelling above 300. years before the Birth of that Prince, that
one of David's Family Josiah by name, should Defile that Altar; at the same
time gave another Sign of his Mission that was presently to come to pass, viz.
that the Altar should be rent, and the Ashes of it poured out Ib. v. 3.
. The fulfilling of which was an Argument of his Veracity as to the other part
of his Prophecy; where the Event was at such a Distance, that tho it should not
Correspond with the Prophecy, it could not at present be Disproved, and
therefore the bare Foretelling it did not bring along with it sufficient
Evidence that the Prophet who spoke it, was really sent from God. In like
manner it is said of Samuel 1 Samuel 3.19, 20. -c. 9.6.
, that all Israel knew him to be an Established Prophet of the Lord's, when they
saw that none of his Prophetic words fell to the ground. So Ezekiel having
delivered a Prediction, adds, Ezekiel. 33.33.
When this shall come to pass, then they shall know that a Prophet has been
among them: as if he had said, However Men may slight my Words now, and value
them no more than a Song ver. 32.
which Men hearken to only to pass away the time, yet the fulfilling of what I
say will establish my Authority beyond Contradiction. Which is an Argument that
Men commonly suspended their Judgment concerning the Authority of a Prophet,
till they had Tried his Veracity, by seeing whether some one Prophecy of his,
which he delivered as a Test of his Mission, came to pass or no.

3. Tho Prophets usually gave a Sign in Testimony of their Mission, yet Some
Prophets did not, who were therefore to be Tried by other Rules.

It Is Recorded particularly of John Baptist, that he did no Miracle John 10.41.
, and yet the people counted him a Prophet Matthew. 21.26.
, which they would not have done, if a Prophet had always given a Sign, before
he was accounted so: and we see that even the Priests and Elders could not find
any thing to Object against his Authority Ibid ver. 25.
. Now in such a Case, I suppose they judged of a Prophet's Pretenses by some of
these following Tokens, by the Holiness of his Life and Doctrine, by the
Agreement of what he said with the Predictions or discourses of other Prophets,
and especially if another Prophet of undoubted Authority bare witness to him:
according to that Maxim of the Jewish Masters Maimonid. Fundam. Legis. c. 10.
Sect. 9.
, The Prophet, of whom some other Undoubted Prophet witnesses that he is a
Prophet, is assuredly such. All these Marks concurred in John Baptist; his
Office was plainly described by Isaiah Is. 40.3.
, and both that and his Person by Malachi Mal. 3.1. -- 4.5.
: his Doctrine was Holy, and his Life an exact Copy of what he taught; so here
was no room to suspect him a Counterfeit, tho he gave no Sign to attest his
Mission.

We may farther observe, that the Prophets of the Old Testament insist upon
these three things, viz. Purity of Doctrine, Holiness of Life, and Agreement
with other Prophets, as the Tokens whereby they distinguished themselves from
the False Prophets. They tell us, there is as plain a difference between the
Visions of True Prophets and the Dreams of False Ones, as betwixt Chaff and
Wheat Jer. 23.28.
: which must be upon this account, that the one sort tends to discourage Sin,
and set forth the terrible Consequences of it Ibid. ver. 29.
, whereas the other designs to sooth Men up in their Vices, by Healing the
Wounds of the Conscience Slightly, saying, Peace, Peace Jer. 6.14.
, and promising Men Prosperity without their Repentance and Amendment of Life.
To the same purpose Ezekiel says of the False Prophets, that they Sow pillows
to men's elbows Ezekiel. 13.18.
, that they may sleep on securely in their Sins. The True Prophets accuse the
False Ones of several Vices in their Conversation and Manner of Living: of
making Jer. 6.13. Ezekiel. 13.19. Mich. 3.5, 11. This was one of the Arguments
made use of to prove Montanus his followers False Prophets, because they took
Money for Prophesying: beside that they were guilty of Theft and other Crimes.
v. Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c. 18.
a gain of their Profession, and speaking smooth things for advantage Is. 30.10.
: of Adultery Jer. 23.14.-29.23.
and Riot Is. 28.7. Mic. 2.11.
, of being Fearless and Unconcerned at God's Judgments, and not endeavoring
by Prayers or other eminent Acts of Piety to avert them Ezekiel. 13.5. Jer. 27.18.
. And as to the other Mark of True Prophets, viz. their Agreement with other
Prophets, we find Jeremy Appealing to it, in the Contest between him and
Hananiah, who Prophesied Jer. 28 3, 4.
of the return of Jechoniah's Captivity, contrary to what Jeremy had foretold.
Upon which Jeremy tells him Ib. ver 8, 9.
, The Prophets that were before me and before thee of old, prophesied of War
and Evil and Pestilence, the Prophet that prophesies of Peace, when the word
of the Prophet shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known that the
Lord has sent him. Where Jeremy argues against the Truth of Hananiah's
Prophecy, and proves that what himself had prophesied was much more Credible of
the two, because many other Prophets agreed with him in prophesying evil
against the Jews, and several other Countries, whereas he being single in his
Prophecy concerning Peace, nothing but the Punctual Answering of the Event,
could give him the Authority of a Prophet: and people must Suspend their
judgments till Time shouuld discover whether he were in the Right or no. Which
place seems likewise to imply, that Hananiah had never before given a Sign to
attest his Mission, and therefore his Credit would justly be questionable, till
men could see whether his Sign came to pass or not.

From what has been said, we may conclude it probable, that where a Prophet
gave no Sign whereby men might make Trial of the Reality of his Pretensions,
they made a judgment of it by considering his Education, whether he had been
brought up in the Schools of the Prophets, which were the Seminaries of
Inspired persons; by examining his Manner of Life, his Doctrine, and his
Agreement with other Prophets: and the more any of these was liable to
Exceptions, the more need was there that he should give a Sign to attest his
Mission. So for Example, 'twas more requisite that Amos should give a Sign who
was no Prophet by Education or Prophets Son, but a Herdman Amos 8.14.
by Profession, than any of those Prophets who were of the Priestly Order, or
brought up among the Sons of the Prophets.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Inspiration of the Canonical Books of the Old
Testament in General, and of the Historical and Poetical Books in Particular.
THe Two Preceding Chapters concerning Prophecy being a Digression with respect
to the Book which I undertook to Answer, tho not with Respect to the General
Design of this Treatise, which is to Vindicate the Authority of the Scriptures:
I return to Mr. N's Memorial, as it is Communicated by the Author of the
Letters, and shall Examine in this Chapter the Exceptions which he makes
against the Authority of the Old Testament Writings. Which are of two sorts,
General and Particular: The General Exceptions are levelled against the
Authority of the Old Testament Canon, which this Author supposes Fr. p. 279.
En. p 106.
to consist of all the Ancient Writings, whether Perfect or Imperfect, whether
Inspired or not, which were remaining among the Jews at the time when this
Collection was made. The Particular Exceptions relate to Particular Books,
which he supposes not to be Inspired, either because the matter of them is such
as Men may know and faithfully relate without Inspiration, such as are the
Historical Books Fr. p. 233. En. p. 31.
: or else because they contain something in them which is Unworthy of God being
its Author, which Exception he advances against several Passages in the Psalms
and the Proverbs, and against the Entire Books of Job, Ecclesiastes, and the
Song of Solomon Fr. p. 271, etc Eng. p. 93, etc.
.

In Answer to these Twofold Exceptions, I shall I. Say something concerning the
Authority and Inspiration of the Old Testament Canon in General. II. I shall
make a Reply to his Objections against the Particular Books which are part of
this Canon.


1. As to the First, it must be confessed that we cannot give an Exact Account,
by whose Authority the Canon of the Old Testament was settled, for we have no
Writings extant that give us a History of that Affair. But it is very probable
the Collection of the Canonical Books, was made in Ezra's time, or not long
after: 1. Because the Scripture-History ends about that time. I know nothing of
later date in it, than the mention of Jaddus by Nehemiah Neh. 12.10, 22.
who was Contemporary with Ezra, which Jaddus was High Priest at the Beginning
of Alexander the Great's Reign. And whatever others may have objected to the
contrary, the mentioning of this Jaddus, is very reconcilable with the time
when Nehemiah writ, as a Great Prelate has lately made out with Incomparable
Learning and Clearness Letter to Dr. Sherlock about a passage in Josephus, etc.
. 2. Because Malachi the Prophet, that lived much about the same time, seems to
Seal up the Vision and Prophecy among the Jews, by referring them to the Law of
Moses as their standing Instructor, till the Gospel should be revealed: and
pointing out to Elias the Forerunner of the Messiah, as the next great Prophet
that was to be revealed Mal. 4.4, 5.
. And indeed his Prophecy looks as if it were designed to Connect the Old and
New Testament together, by putting a period to the Old Testament Revelation,
and directing men to the New for further Instruction. This Argument will appear
more probable, if we consider 3ly, That under the Maccabees, the Jews looked
upon the Gift of Prophecy as wholly ceased, and were of Opinion it had been so
for a considerable time See 1 Macc. 4.46.-9.27.-14.41.
. The same Opinion is confirmed not long after by the Author of Ecclesiasticus
Ecclus. 36.14, 15, 16.
. 4. If we suppose the LXX. Interpreters Translated all the Old Testament,
which is an Opinion that Learned men Walton. Prolegom. 9. in Bibl. Polygl. n.
11. Vales. in Eus. H.E. l. 5. c. 8.
have brought good Reasons for, then it is plain the Canon must have been
settled before the time when that Version was made, which was done under
Ptolomee Philadelphus, and as it is very probable, at the Beginning of his Reign
Vales. ibid.
. 5. However that be, yet it is certain that when the Book of Ecclesiasticus was
writ, the Canon of the Old Testament was settled: for he makes mention of the
Twelve Prophets altogether Ecclus. 49.10.
, which is an Argument that the Smaller Prophets were then Collected, and
Compiled into one Book, which Book was afterward called the Book of the
Prophets See Act. 7.42. Justin M. c. Tryph. p. 45.50.57. (Ed. Steph.) Cyprian.
Epist. 59. Ed. Oxon.
. Nay further, the Author of the Prologue to that Book, speaks of the Law,
Prophets and other Books of Scripture, as then Translated into Greek, which is
an Undeniable Argument that the Canon was then Completed. And tho we suppose
that Prologue to be made by the Grandchild of the principal Author Jesus the
son of Syrach, which Younger Syracides lived in the time of Euergetes II.
commonly called Ptolomee Physcon: yet it appears by the Beginning of that
Prologue, that his Grandfather studied the same Holy Books, which he afterward
says were turned into Greek. And this Elder Siracides speaks of Simon the son
of Onias the High Priest, as one whom he very well remembered c. 50. 1, etc.
: now that Simon was High Priest in the Beginning of Philopator's Reign See 3
Macc. 2.1. com. with c. 1.1.
, who was next in Succession but one to Philadelphus. So that the Canon of
Scripture will appear to be as old as Philadelphus's time, because it is evident
from hence that 'twas Translated all into Greek in a little time after, tho we
should not suppose the whole work performed by the LXX. Lastly, to these
Considerations we may add the Concurring Testimony of all the Ancient Writers,
both Jewish and Christian, who agree in supposing the Canon of the Old
Testament, to have been Compiled in or about Ezra's time, and who probably had
the Authority of some Ancient Writers for what they say, which now are lost.
And if these Considerations taken all together, have any Force in them to prove
the Canon of the Old Testament, to have been settled in Ezra's time, or in the
next Age; I say if it were settled so early, this very thing will add great
Weight to its Authority.

For 1. it is agreed on all hands that Ezra, who calls himself a Ready Scribe in
the Law of Moses Ezr 7.6.
, Revised the Holy Writings, Retrieved them from the Corruptions, which the
Scarcity of Copies, and the Disuse of the Hebrew Language during the Captity,
had brought into them: supplied and completed many of them, and put them into
Order and Method: And when a man of so great Authority as Ezra was, had done
all this so lately, it cannot be imagined but that the Compilers of the Canon,
must have had a particular Regard to his Judgment, and admitted no Books into
their Collection, but what were allowed of by Ezra: or if they were of Later
date than his time, the Writing of them must have been within the Memory of
these Compilers, so that they were proper Judges, whether a Book deserved to be
esteemed Sacred or not. So that from hence 'twill follow, that the Authority of
the main Body of the Canon, bottoms upon the Judgment and Authority of Ezra:
whom if we should grant to have been no Prophet, yet we cannot think, but in a
matter of such Moment, as the Revising and putting in order the Holy Writings,
he would not only use the best Skill he had himself, but likewise consult with
Haggai, Zechary or Malachi; (the last of which must needs have been alive in
his time, and possibly the other Two also) and do nothing without their Advice.
For we find that at the first Return from the Captivity, in a matter of much
less moment, viz. where some that pretended to the Priesthood could not prove
their Pedigree, the Governor would determine nothing, but left the matter
undecided, till a Priest should arise who had Vrim and Thummim Ezr. 2.62, 63.
. And if any such Priest did arise afterward, as, if we believe Josephus, there
did; for he tell us that that Oracle ceased but 200. years before his time
Antiq. Jud. l. 3. c. 9. p. 90. C. Ed. Genesis
, it is very probable that the Judgment of the Canonical Books was left to him,
to determine which were such, as the Learned Mr. Dodwell has made appear in the
Appendix Sect. 9.
to his Lectures, now in the Press.

2. This Early date of the Canon of the Old Testament, quite destroys that
Fancy of our Authors Fr. p. 279. Eng p. 106.
, that the Jews put together all the Fragments that remained of their Ancient
Books, so that the Canon of Scripture was their whole Library. For in the First
place it is plain, that the Chronicles are Extracts out of larger Records, which
they often Refer to, and yet these Books were Compiled after the Captivity, as
appears by several passages 1 Chr. 3.17. (...) etc.
in them: and it is not likely that the Originals which escaped the Destruction
of Records, occasioned by the Ruin of the Commonwealth and the Captivity which
ensued, should be lost in so little a time as was between the Compiling the
Chronicles, and making the Canon. Especially since Josephus L. 1. c. App. p.
136. D.
tells us, that the Genealogies of the Highpriests and their Succession, for
above Two Thousand years past, were preserved in the Public Records, and
remained to his own time.

Again, several Books which never were in the Canon, were Extant when the New
Testament was writ, and are Cited there as Writings of Credit and Antiquity;
such as are the Prophecy of Enoch, and the Assumption of Moses, both referred
to by St. Jude Jude (...) and 14.
: as also several other Ancient Books, from whence both Christ and his Apostles
take many Passages concerning Historical Matters, which are not Extant in the
Canonical Writers ^ee Matthew. 23.3^. Luke 4.25. Jam. 5.17. Act. 7.22, 52. Heb.
11.37.-12.21. 2 Timothy 3.8. V. Orig. Epist and African.
. And 'twas from such Ancient Writings probably, that Josephus took some
Stories which he relates of Moses Antiq. l. 2. c. 5.
, and of other Persons. Besides we find Apocryphals quoted by Barnabas in every
Page of his Epistle almost; by Clemens Alexandrinus and other Ancient Writers
in several places, many of which it is likely, were Written Originally in
Hebrew, since by the Matters they Treat of, we may reasonably judge them to be
as old as the Collection of the Canon: and were certainly looked upon as Books
of great Antiquity, or else they would not have been Cited by these Authors
under the Venerable name of Scripture. From all which it appears, that the
Compilers of the Canon did not take in Promiscuously whatever Hebrew Writings
they could find; but used all possible diligence to distinguish Sacred
Writings, and such as were designed by God for the Use of the Church, from
those which were not so. The Reasons which Confute this Opinion of our Author,
concerning the Collection of the Canon of the Old Testament, I thought fit to
represent all together, when I was upon this Subject, tho I am sensible that
it is only the first of these Considerations, which can be inferred as a
Corollary from what has been said concerning the Early Date of the Old
Testament Canon.

What I have hitherto said concerning the Authority and Antiquity of the Old
Testament Canon, I cannot call Absolutely Certain or Demonstrative; but I may
safely say thus much, that it carries in it a greater Degree of Probability,
than any thing the Adversaries of the Canon have advanced to the Contrary. So
that tho we should grant what our Author says Fr. p. 276. Eng. p. 102.
, That there is no proof at all that Esdras and the Great Sanhedrim of that
time, among whom were Haggai, Zachary and Malachi, Compiled the Canon; yet
still it is probable 'twas made by those that were so near their time, that they
knew what their Sentiments were in this Matter, and made this Collection
accordingly.

But if this Proof be not thought Satisfactory, I should think any Christian
ought to acquiesce in the Judgment of our Savior: and it is plain he looked
upon the Jewish Canon, which was Undoubtedly the same in his time, which is now
received in the Protestant Churches: I say, he looked upon it as a Collection of
Holy Writings designed by God for the Instruction of his Church, and the Rule
the Jews were to have recourse to, when they would inform themselves what was
the Will of God. He bids them J^h. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, without distinguishing as our Author does Fr. p. 277,
279, 285. Eng p. 10^, 106, 116.
, the Truly Inspired Books, from those which are not so: for in them, says he,
ye think, and so far ye are in the right, that ye have Eternal Life. It Is
strange our Savior should not correct this Mistake of theirs, if some of the
Books they had such a great Veneration for, favored such Dangerous Doctrines
as our Author thinks the Book of Ecclesiastes does Fr. p. 272. Eng. p. 96.
, and contained Expressions very like Blasphemies, as he is pleased to speak
concerning the Book of Job Fr. p. 275. Eng. p. 101.
. For if this were true, 'twas certainly very dangerous for Men to Search, or
be too much Conversant in these Books, especially since they came Recommended
under the Character of a Divine Inspiration. It Is strange our Savior Luke
24.44.
should prove the Passion and Resurrection of the Messiah, not only out of
Moses and the Prophets, but also out of the Psalms; by which our Author Fr. p.
277. Eng. p. 123.
understands those Writings which the Jews call Chetubim, if these Books be of
so little Authority, as he would persuade us they are, Mr. N. would fain Evade
the Force of this Argument taken from our Saviors Authority, by telling us Fr.
p. 278. Eng. p. 104, 105.
, that Christ never designed to Criticize upon the Sacred Books, or to Correct
those Errors of the Jews, which were of small Importance. But since our Savior
Criticiz'd so far upon the Sacred Books, as to Confute the false Glosses Matt.
5. c. 23.
which the Scribes and Pharisees had made upon them, and to Reject the
Traditions c. 15.1.
which they had Equaled to the Word of God, and in some Cases Preferred before
it: it seems as necessary for him to have distinguished between the True
Scriptures, and those Books which were Undeservedly esteemed such. Especially
if these Latter advance Doctrines, that do not well agree with the Former, as
our Author Fr. p. 272, etc. Eng p. 95, etc.
endeavors to prove, concerning several places of the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes
and Job: for then the Admitting the Authority of such Writings, is of as Ill
Consequence as the Receiving the Traditions of the Pharisees could be. Nay with
his leave, I think it an Error of more dangerous Consequence, to Equal a Book
that is not Inspired when it contains False Doctrine, with one that is truly
Divine, than to Equal such Traditions as the Pharisees held, with an Inspired
Writing. Because a Tradition will probably in time be forgotten, and so lose
all its Authority, which we see has been the Fate of most of the Pharisaical
Traditions; whereas a Book that has once been generally Reputed of Divine
Authority, it is likely will maintain that Character for ever. For its very
Character will make Men careful to preserve it, and the Older it grows, the
Stronger will the Plea of Prescription be for its Divine Original: and
Consequently the More will be Imposed upon by it, as we see has Actually
happened in the Case we are now speaking of, if our Author's Opinion be true.
For the whole Christian and Jewish Church has time out of mind, looked upon the
Books contained in the Jewish Canon to be Inspired, and have upon all Occasions
appealed to their Authority as such. From whence it appears, that our Saviors
taking notice of this Error, if it had been one, would have been much more
beneficial to after Ages, than his Confuting an Unwritten Tradition could be.

But further, we find the Apostles Judgment does evidently concur with our
Saviors in this matter. St. Paul says Romans 3.2.
, that the Jews were entrusted (...).
with the Oracles of God: but surely he would have told us that they were not
True to their Trust, if he had thought they had mixed Profane Books with the
Sacred ones. But that Text of the same Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.16.
All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, is so clear a Proof of the
Apostles Judgment in this matter, that 'twill admit of no Evasion. For the
Apostle tells Timothy in the foregoing Verse, that from a child he had known
the Scriptures, by which he must mean the Body of Writings which the Jews
looked upon as such, for in that Religion he had been Educated by the Care of
his mother, who was a Jewess Act. 16.1.
. Then it follows in this verse, All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God:
where the Apostle certainly understands the word Scripture in the same sense
which he took it in the Verse before, viz. for that Collection of Writings
which the Jews received as the Word of God. But pray let us hear our Authors
Paraphrase Eng. p. 192. Fr. p. 270.
upon these two Verses, It is as if he had said to Timothy, that he ought to
keep close as he had done hitherto, to the Study of the Old Testament, which
would instruct him sufficiently in the way of Salvation, by joining thereunto
Faith in Christ Jesus: because all Scripture Inspired, AS IS A GREAT PART OF
THE OLD TESTAMENT, Is profitable for Instruction. I think I may appeal to any
Indifferent Man, whether those words of this Paraphrase, [As is a great part of
the Old Testament] be not added merely to serve the present Turn, without the
least Intimation of such a Restriction from the Text it self: and whether the
Coherence of these two Verses be not plainly this, Continue in the Study of the
Old Testament, because all the Books which that consists of are Divinely
Inspired. But I supposes he grounds this Interpretation of his upon that
Reading of the Text, for which Grotius In locum. and contr. Rivetum.
vouches the Syriack and Vulgar Translations, Omms Scriptura Divinitus
Inspirata utilis est. But if we should admit of this Reading, still the Sense
will come all to one, and the Words as they lie then, tho they do not in
Express terms assert, that all the Old Testament Writings are Divinely
Inspired, yet they Imply it and take it for granted. For if we read the Greek
thus, (...), the word (...) will be an Explicative Epithet to (...), just as if
we add the Epithet Rationalis to Homo in such a Proposition as this, Homo
Rationalis creatus est ad colendum Deum. In which Proposition tho it be not
expressly asserted that Homo is Rationalis, yet so much is Implied, and if it
were not true, 'twould make the whole Proposition false, as Monsieur Nicol has
observed in his Ars Cogitandi Pars 2. c. 5.
. And just so in the Proposition we speak of, (...) signifies the Scriptures of
the Old Testament, in which sense the word is always taken in the New
Testament, and (...) is added for a fuller Explication of that term. I know
Grotius Votum pro Pace, prout citatur. Fr. p. 270. Fn. p. 193.
will needs have the word (...) taken here in its General Sense, and signify
simply a Book or Writing. But I cannot forbear saying, that this gloss is
Unworthy of Grotius, and it is a sign of a Bad Cause, when so Great a Man is
fain to betake himself to such Pitiful Sophistry, as is to be seen in the
forecited Place. For he cannot produce one Instance in all the New Testament,
where the word is used in that Sense: and if he could, yet (...) added to
(...), sufficiently Restrains the General sense of it, and makes one Complex
Term, which must signify the same with (...) in the Verse before, both which
Expressions signify the Old Testament, because it is a Collection of Inspired
Writings: and consequently the Phrase it self asserts so much by way of
Implication, or else it would be an Improper Expression.

I think it appears from what has been said, what was the Judgment of Christ
and his Apostles concerning the Canon of the Old Testament: and since it is
certain that they approved the Canon of the Old Testament, as it was received
by the Jewish Church of their own time, I cannot guess what evidence of Reason
can be sufficient to persuade a Christian to Oppose such an Authority. And
therefore I cannot be of our Author's mind, when he tell us Eng. p. 188. Fr. p.
267.
, He knows not why we may not doubt of the Books of the Old Testament, as well
as of some of the New, the Authority of several of the Latter having been
questioned. But there is a visible Difference between the Authorities that
confirm the Old Testament Canon, and those which give Testimony to the New. To
the Former Christ and his Apostles bear Witness, whereas the Credit of the
Latter depends upon the Consent and Testimony of much the Greater part of the
Church in the Ages succeeding that of the Apostles: which tho it be sufficient
for any Wise and Unprejudiced Man to ground his assent upon, yet it has not
that Sacredness and Infallibility in it which the other has. For those Ages
made use only of Humane Means for settling the New Testament Canon, which was
sufficient for that purpose, considering the Nearness of those times to the
Writing of the Books to which they give Testimony.

Nor does the name of Chetubim, which the Jews give to those Writings of the
Old Testament, which Mr. N. calls in question, at all justify his Opinion. He
fancies Fr. p. 276. En. p. 102.
they were called Chetubim, i. e. Simply Writings, as he Interprets it, to
signify that they were like other Humane Writings, and had nothing at all of
Inspiration in them. But the Jewish Writers say not one Syllable to confirm
this Opinion, that I can find. On the contrary, by their placing Daniel among
the Chetubim, it appears that they look upon the Writers of that Class to have
been Inspired, for the Jews all agree that Daniel had really the Gift of
Prophecy, tho they fancy it to be in a lower Degree. Further Maimonides says
expressly More Nevoch. p. 2. c. 45.
that they are called Chetubim, quia scripta sunt per Spiritum Sanctum. And tho
he reckons that Impulse which he calls Spiritus Sanctus, inferior to the
Degree of Inspiration which Isaiah and the other Prophets properly so called,
had: yet it is plain that he looks upon it as a proper kind of Inspiration, for
the instances he gives of it are, by his own Confession, real Inspirations See
Mr. Smiths Discourse of Prophecy. c. 7.
. So that I do not see how Maimonides, take his Explication altogether, gives
any Advantage to this Opinion, tho Grotius Votum pro pace, prout citatur, Fr.
p. 231. Eng. p. 141.
quote him for it. The Jews do indeed acknowledge a Difference between the
Inspiration of the Hagiographa and the Prophetical Writings, but this does not
prove them to be no part of the Scripture: for I think there is no body that
considers the manner of the Spirit's Operation upon the Minds of Inspired
Persons, but will readily acknowledge that there is no need of the same Degree
of Inspiration, to write a History or a Book of Morality, as is requisite to
make a Prophet. But concerning the different Degrees of Inspiration, I have
discoursed already in several places of this Treatise, and shall have Occasion
to speak of it hereafter.

But if the Jewish Division of the Old Testament favored Mr. N's Opinion never
so much, I do not see any Force at all in the Argument taken from thence: for
that Division is not of so early a Date, as to be able to vye with the much
Ancienter Opinion concerning the Inspiration of the whole Jewish Canon. St.
Jerome is the first that I find takes notice of this Division Prolog. Galeat.
Praef. in Daniel.
: the placing the Prophet Daniel among the Chetubim in this Division, besides
that there is no shadow of Reason for it, except it be that the Jews bear him a
Spite for Prophesying so plainly of our Savior, discovers that it is of no
long standing, since it is contrary to the Sense of the Ancient Jews. For
Josephus often calls Daniel a Prophet Antiq. l. 10. c. 12.
, nay one of the greatest Ib. p. 353. G. Ed. Genev.
Prophets. And agreeably to the Received Opinion, our Savior gives him the
same Title Matthew. 24.15.
. But further, the same Josephus L. 1. c. App. p. 1036. G.
makes use of another Division of the Old Testament Writings, viz. into the
Books of Moses, the Prophetical, (under which he comprehends the Historical,
because they were writ by Prophets, as he with very good Reason supposes) and
the Poetical Books, as they are commonly called, or those which contain Hymns
to God, and Precepts of good Life. Which Division agrees much better with that
mentioned by our Savior Luke 24.44.
, viz. into the Books of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, than the other
which the Jews have since that time Invented.

Thus far I have showed that Mr. N. by rejecting some of the Received Books of
the Jewish Canon, rejects the Authority of the whole Jewish and Christian
Church, nay and of Christ and his Apostles too. What Reasons he has for this we
shall see by and by, but at present let us examine what Authority he has to
oppose to such a Powerful one, as all these joined together amount to. And I
can find no body that stands by him in this Opinion but Grotius, and him he
calls in to his Assistance at every Turn. But tho I have a great value for
Grotius's Judgment, yet I think if it be laid in the Balance to counterpoise
that of Christ and his Apostles, 'twill be found too Light. That Great man's
Extraordinary Learning and Merits, and particularly his having so well deserved
of several Parts of Scripture, and given such Light into their true Sense and
Design, makes me willing to pass over his Failures, and not be severe upon his
Memory for those False Glosses, and some of them deserve a Harder Name, which
he has made upon other Books of it. Only I cannot but observe, that this Opinion
of his, concerning the Old Testament Canon, is very Inconsistent with the Main
Design of his Votum pro Pace, and those other Treatises where he has asserted
it. For the Great Design of those Projects for Peace, is to magnify Antiquity,
Tradition, and the Authority of the Church, and to show that Catholic Unity is
never to be restored, but by submitting all Controversies to the Decision of
these three, as so many Arbitrators or Umpires between the different Parties.
And yet at the same time when he Pleads for the Authority of the Church, of
Antiquity and Tradition, he Rejects those Books which have all the Authority
that the Universal Church, Uninterrupted Tradition, and the Consent of all the
Ancients, both Jews and Christians can give them.

II. I come now in the Second Place to consider the Exceptions which our Author
makes, against Particular Books of the Old Testament: and the Books he Excepts
against are either Historical, or those they commonly call Poetical.

As to the Historical Writings I agree with him thus far, that the Sacred
Historians were not usually Inspired with the things themselves which they
relate, nor with the Words by which they Express the things. But I think I have
proved in the First Chapter P. 37.
of this Treatise, that a Book may be written by God's Direction, and yet not
without the Use of Humane means. And as there is no Reason to think, that God
Inspired the Evangelists with the Knowledge of those Passages of our Savior's
Life, which they themselves were Eyewitnesses of, or might easily learn from
those that were so: so it is every whit as groundless to suppose, that God
Revealed those Particulars to the Writers of the Old Testament History, which
they could come to the Knowledge of by Consulting the Records and Ancient
Monuments, in which these Matters were related. But notwithstanding this,
'twill appear that these Books were writ by God's Direction, and Designed by
him for the Use of the Church, if we consider what Mr. N. himself grants Fr. p.
231. En. p. 28.
, That they were not writ merely to satisfy our Curiosity, but to be a standing
proof of a Providence to after Ages, to show us the Care that God always takes
of Good People, and the Punishments he inflicts upon the Wicked: to give us
Examples of Piety and Virtue, and lastly to inform us of several Matters of
Fact, which tend very much to confirm our Faith, as containing many Types and
Predictions of our Savior. To which we may add, that setting aside the
Squabbles between F. Simon and his Adversaries, about the Scribes and Keepers
of the Public Registers of the Jews, it is highly probable, that the Prophets
usually writ the Histories of their Kings, and those Books which are so often
quoted under the name of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel, and
were Annals from whence the Substance of the Books of Kings and Chronicles are
taken. For we find a Considerable part of the History of Hezekiah Incorporated
into Isaiah's Prophecy Is. c. 36, 37, 38, 39.
, which is a Strong Presumption that the whole History of that King's Reign,
was Recorded by the same Hand. And indeed so much is expressly asserted 2 Chronicles.
32.32. So the Acts of David were Recorded by Samuel the Seer, by Nathan the
Prophet, and by Gad the Seer 1 Chr. 29.29.
. The Acts of Solomon were written in the Book of Nathan the Prophet, in the
Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the Visions of Iddo the Seer 2 Chr.
9.29.
. The History of Rehoboam's Reign was written by Shemaiah the Prophet, and by
Iddo the Seer in his Genealogies 2 Chr. 12.15.
: the last of these Recorded likewise the Acts of Abijah Rehoboam's Son Chap.
13.22.
. Jehu the Son of Hanani who was a Prophet 1 King. 16.1. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
, writ the History of Jehoshaphat 2 Chr. 20.34.
. The Acts of Vzziah were Recorded by the Prophet Isaiah Chapter 26.22.
: and those of Manasses among the sayings of the Seers Chapter 33.19.
. To the same purpose I think we may most probably Interpret those words of
Josephus Joseph. c. Appion. l. 1. p. 1036. Ed. Genev.
, which have been so often quoted of late upon this Subject, where he tells us,
that the Histories of the Jewish Nation were writ only by Prophets, and
therefore they look upon none of them as Authentic, which were writ after
Artaxerxe's time, because there was no Clear and Undoubted Succession of
Prophets in the following Ages. Nor is Huetius's Objection Demon. Evangel. p.
161.
against this Passage of Josephus of any Weight, who affirms that Josephus
Contradicts what he had said but just before, viz. That the Chief Priests as
well as the Prophets, had the Care of Writing the Public Histories committed
to them. But that Learned Man seems not to have attended to the whole Scope and
Design of Josephus in that place. For that Historian does not say, that the
Writing of the Public Histories, was committed to the Chief Priests as well as
the Prophets, but that the Care of the Public Records was committed to them
(...).
. And if we take an Entire view of that Section, we shall find that Josephus
speaks, not only of the manner how the Histories of Former times were written,
but likewise how they were Preserved after they are writ. The Care of writing
them was committed to the Prophets, as the other Passage assures us, not
Excluding those Priests who had the Gift of Prophecy: the Preserving them he
here tells us, was particularly the Business of the Priests, who likewise
exactly Preserved the Genealogies of their Nation, and renewed them when the
Copies were Impaired, and in danger to be all lost by Wars and other Accidents,
and therefore were looked upon as the Keepers of the Public Records. Whence is
it that the same Author usually calls the Holy Writings, (...) Antiq. p. 73. G.
p. 140. A. p. 176. G.
, The Books laid up in the Temple under the Custody of the Priests. Which was
agreeable to the Customs of the Neighboring Countries: for so Philo Byblius
Ap. Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 1
says of Sanchuniathon, that he Collected the Phenician Antiquities, (...), out
of the Records laid up in their Temples.

But to return to our Subject, From those many Instances I have given, which
show 'twas a Custom among the Jews for the Prophets to be their Historians, we
may conclude that the Historical Books of the Old Testament were writ by Men
who had the Gift of Prophecy and Inspiration: and tho we suppose them to be but
Abridgements of the larger Commentaries of the Prophets, yet they are really of
as much Authority as those very Annals would be which were writ by the Prophets
themselves, if they were extant. For if an Epitome be faithfully made (and I
suppose Mr. N. does not question the Fidelity of the Sacred Historians)
whatever is contained in it, has the same Authority and Credibility with the
Original Writing. So that if we lay all these things together, the Character of
the Compilers of these Historical Books, the Matter and Design of them, the
Authority of the Jewish Canon, and above all that of Christ and his Apostles,
these are sufficient Inducements to believe these Books to be Written by God's
Direction for the Benefit of the Church. And this I think is enough to give
Divine Authority to an Historical Book, tho neither the Matter nor Words of it
be indicted by Inspiration.

As for the History of Esther Mr. N. has taken much pains Fr. p. 164, etc. Eng.
p. 249.
, and showed a great deal of Skill in the Rules of Dramatick Poesy, and all to
prove that this Book looks like a Fiction and a piece of Tragi-Comedy. He
indeed tells us, that he affirms nothing in this matter, and does not intend to
make himself a Party in the Dispute. But a man would hardly take so much pains
to make another Opinion look probable, if he did not think it so himself. But
whatever his own Sentiments be, to show himself Impartial, and that he is
resolved not to conceal any thing that may be said on the other side, he
Critically remarks Eng. p. 169. Fr. p. 252.
that one Condition, necessary to be observed in Dramatick Writings, is
wanting, viz. Unity of Time and Place, which must needs seem a considerable
Objection to so nice a Judge. But besides this, there is another Objection which
I confess has more Weight with me, and seems quite to turn the Scales, and make
his Remarks appear mere Fancy and Fiction, viz. that the Feast of Purim was
really observed by the Jews, in memory of the Deliverance recorded in this
Book. And 'twill be a hard matter to make me believe that a whole Nation should
keep an Anniversary Feast, as it is certain they did 2 Mac^ 15.36.
, without some real Ground for it. And if this was not the true Occasion of it,
as he seems to insinuate Eng. p 170. Fr. p. 253.
, I desire either he would prove the Feast to be as very a Fiction, as he
supposes the History is, or else inform us how the whole Nation of the Jews
came to be so far imposed upon, as to observe it: for till he does one of these
two things, I shall still be of opinion, that the one was a Real Feast, and the
other a True History.

But tho this Play does not succeed, he is resolved not to give over, but try
his Skill upon another Subject, and turn the Book of Job into a Tragi-Comedy
Fr. p. ^^4. Eng. p. 99.
. And I confess this Book is made according to the Rules of Poetry, and with
all the Beauties of it too, as an Ordinary Reader may easily discover under all
the Disadvantages of a Translation. And therefore methinks our Author, who
understands the Rules and Decorums of Poetry so well, should not be offended
with those Pathetic Strains, that are in the third Chapter, and some other
places of that Book: for tho we should grant that they would not become a grave
Philosophical Discourse, yet I believe he might have found several Speeches in
the Old Tragedies written with as much Vehemence and Warmth. And yet the
severest Philosophers commended those Writings, and looked upon them as
containing very useful Instructions of Life. And I see no Reason why God might
not in this as well as other things, suffer the Holy Writers to comply so far
with their own Genius, and the Humor which then prevailed among the grave
Sages of the World, as to deliver Great and Weighty Truths in Poetical numbers
and Expressions, both to recommend them to the more Curious and Nice Readers,
and to convince the Wise men of the World, who are apt to despise the Plainness
of the Scriptures, that there are to be found as Elevated Thoughts, and as
Noble Expressions in the Holy Writings, as any Greece or Rome can boast of: and
therefore when they use a plain popular Style, it is not out of Necessity but
Choice, and because they rather aim at the Instruction of the ignorant, than to
gain Applause from the Learned V. Orig. c. Cells. p. 275, 371, 372. Ed. Cant.
. But still men perhaps will be ready to say, that these Expressions may do
well in a Profane Poem, but are not so proper for a Sacred one, and do not
become the mouth of a Person eminent for Piety and Patience. In answer to
which, I would desire the Objectors in the first place to consider that the
Substance of the 3d Chapter of this Book, which so much offends Mr. N. Fr. p.
275. Eng. p. 100
when it is taken in its Plain Sense, without those Strokes of Passion which are
merely Poetical Ornaments, is no more but this, That it is better never to have
been Born than to live in a great deal of Misery, and that there is this
Benefit in Death, that it puts an End to the Troubles which are incident to
Humane Life. And this seems not unfit to be spoken by a Wise and Good man. In
the next place I would desire them to reflect upon those many Excellent Sayings
in this Book, which are most Devout Expressions of Jobs Patience, Submission,
and Resignation to the Will of God Job. 1.21.-2.10. c. 9.2, 3, 15. c. 40.4, 5.
c. 42.3, etc.
, and of his Trust and Confidence in him Ib. c. 13. 15. -14. 13, 14, 15, -19.
25, 26, 27.
in the midst of Afflictions, grounded upon the Testimony of a Good Conscience
and the Sense of his own Integrity c 23. 3, etc. c. 29. 31. per tot. -27. 3,
etc.
. And if they readily acknowledge that upon these Accounts Job's Behavior is
worthy to be recorded for an Example of Integrity, of Sufferings, and of
Patience, let them withal consider that the other parts of the Book which seem
more liable to Exception, are of use to teach us, that the best of men are
subject to the Passions and Infirmities to which Humane Nature is obnoxious,
and are not able to bear up against the First Assaults of Afflictions, and the
sudden and sharp Twinges of Pain, till they have recollected their Strength,
armed themselves with new Vigor and Resolution, and have encouraged themselves
in God, and called in the Divine Assistance. Thus we find the Spirit of the
Psalmist stirred in him at the Consideration of the Prosperity of the Wicked Ps.
73.2, 3.
, and tempted to that Degree of Impatience, as to begin to say, 'Twas in vain
to serve God Ib v. 13. 14.
: but he presently checks such thoughts as unbecoming a Religious man Ib. v. 15.
. And I question not but God was pleased that those Expressions of Job in which
he seems to forget his Character, should be Recorded as well as the Infirmities
of other his eminent Servants, on purpose to show us that they had the Heavenly
Treasure of Grace in Earthen Vessels, and thereby teach us to cease from
valuing Man, for wherein is he to be accounted of? and to give God the Glory,
and Magnify the Power of his Grace, whose Strength is made perfect in Weakness,
and more eminently seen in the midst of Humane Infirmities.

And notwithstanding these Expressions, it is no such unaccountable thing as our
Author supposes Fr. p. ^75. En. p. 161.
, that the Writer of this Book should bring in God Almighty approving what Job
had said, and condemning the Assertions of his Friends Job 42.7.
. For we find that just before Ib ver. 3, 6.
Job had begged Pardon for his Rash Speeches in a most Submissive manner. And
as to the main of the Dispute, Job certainly was in the Right: for the Design
of the Book, as our Author Fr. p. 275. Eng. p. 100.
himself confesses, is to show by Job's Example, that God oftentimes Afflicts
Good People, not to punish them for any particular Sin, as if they had deserved
Afflictions more than others; but simply to try them, and give them Occasion to
show their Virtue. And this is what Job maintains throughout the Dispute, and
wherein he perfectly agrees with what our Savior says, on purpose to check
Men's Rashness in taking upon them to Interpret God's Judgments, Luke 13.2.
Suppose ye that these Galileans, whose Blood Pilate mingled with their
Sacrifices, were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered these
things? I tell you Nay. Whereas Job's Friends all along go upon this Principle,
that Good Men are always Prosperous, and none are Miserable but the Wicked: and
to prove this they Appeal to Experience, the Histories of Former Ages Job 8.8.
c. 15.10, 18.-20.4, etc. -- 22.15, 16.
, and the Examples which their own Times furnished them with c. 4.7, 8, 9, 10,
11.
. From all which they don't only conclude, as our Author Imperfectly Represents
it, Fr. p. 275. En. p. 101.
that Job was afflicted for his sins, for if this had been all they had
maintained, Job would never have contested the matter with them, for he freely
acknowledges his sins, and owns that they deserve Punishment Job 7.2^,
21.-9.14, 15.
. But that which they contend for is, that Job must needs be a Grievous Sinner,
and Greater than other Men, however he had made a Shift to conceal his
Wickedness from the Eyes of the World, or else he had never been so terribly
Afflicted. Nay, Eliphaz is so confident that it must be some Extraordinary
Wickedness that had brought down these heavy Judgments upon him, that at last
he ventures to give a Catalogue of Job's Sins Job 22.5, etc.
, for which God had thus Afflicted him. 'Twas this Uncharitable Behavior of
theirs provoked Job to Impatience, more than all the rest of his Afflictions:
'twas upon this account he tells them, that they had Reproached him ten times,
had vexed his soul, and broke him in pieces with words Job 19.2, 3.
: this makes him so often protest his Innocence, and appeal to God to Judge
him, according to the Integrity that was in him c. 16.17, 21. c. 27.5, 6. c.
31. per tot. c. 23.3, etc.
. And here I think Job's Friends were very faulty, not only in pronouncing so
rashly concerning the Reasons of Providence and of God's Judgments, but
likewise in passing such Unkind and Uncharitable Censures upon their Friend,
whereas they ought to have had pity upon him, as he tells them c. 19.21, 22.
, since the Hand of God had touched him, and not persecute him as God, and add
Affliction to the Afflicted. And this their Confidence in taking upon them to
be Interpreters of God's Judgments, together with their Uncharitable and
Inhumane Behavior toward a Man in Affliction, might justly provoke God's Wrath
against them for what they had said, when at the same time he pardoned the
Impatient and Undecent Expressions of Job, because he could plead the Infirmity
of Humane Nature in his own behalf, which is easily provoked to be Impatient
under violent Afflictions, especially where Men persecute those whom God has
smitten: whereas Job's Friends had no such excuse to allege for themselves.

But still it may be Demanded, Upon what account we Reckon this Book to be
Inspired? In Answer to which Question, I shall crave leave to deliver my
Opinion Freely, but with all due Submission to Better Judgments. I suppose
therefore that this Book is not to be reckoned Inspired, upon the account of
the Persons who maintain the Dispute in it: and tho I question not, but that
they were Extraordinary Men for Piety and Virtue, yet I see no Reason to
believe that either Job or his Friends spoke every thing which they say, by
Inspiration. As to the Latter, the Case is plain, for God himself says, that
they had not spoken of him the thing that is right Job 42.8.
. And even Job himself, tho he maintained the Right side in the Controversy,
yet now and then is guilty of too vehement Expostulations c. 7.11, etc. -10.2.
with God Almighty, he stands too much upon his own Justification, c.
9.17.-10.7.-16.17.-13.23. See c. 33.9, 10, 11.-34.5, 6.
and Vindication of his Innocence, and takes upon him to Censure the Methods of
Providence too freely c. 9.22, 23.-19.7.-23.13.
; for which Faults we find afterward he earnestly begs God's Pardon, and c.
42.3, etc.
Repents of them in Dust and Ashes. I willingly acknowledge what the Jews
themselves allow See Bp. Patrick's Appendix to his Paraphrase.
, (tho they are very Jealous of giving this Honor to any that are not of their
own Nation) that Job and his Friends were Prophets among the Gentiles. And
indeed there is reason to grant this: for we find Eliphaz himself professes,
that he had a Night-vision Job 4.13.
, which was not altogether See c. 33.15, 16.
unusual in those days. But Job had the Gift of Prophecy in a more Eminent
manner, as appears, not only from that Famous Passage of his Job 19.25, 26, 27
, I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. which St. Jerome In locum.
justly calls, a Prophecy of the Resurrection; but also because God spoke Job
31.8.
to him by a Voice from Heaven, and it is probable he saw a Shekinah c. 42.5.
, or Visible Appearance of the Divine Glory. But allowing all this, I see no
proof that the Discourses set down in this Book, ought to be looked upon as
spoken by the Spirit of Prophecy: and therefore the Inspiration of the Book it
self, seems to me to consist in this, viz. As it is an Historical account of
Job's Behavior before, and under his Afflictions, and of his happy Issue out
of them all, together with his reflections and the discourses he had with his
Friends upon that Occasion, written by God's Direction for the Use of his
Church, to be an Example of Patience under Sufferings, and a Vindication of
God's Providence in permitting the Righteous to be Afflicted. And since by
Reason of the Antiquity of the Book, the Author is not certainly known, and
Consequently we cannot Argue that it is Inspired, from the Character of its
Author; the Evidence for its being Inspired, or Written by God's Direction for
the Use of the Church, must be Resolved into the Authority of the Jewish Canon,
as that is confirmed to us by Christ and his Apostles, and this Book
particularly Recommended by St. James James 5.11.
, to the Use of Christians: especially since the Design of it does exactly
Answer the Character which St. Paul Romans 15.4.
gives of the Old Testament Writings in General, viz. That they were written
for our Instruction, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures might
have Hope.

And thus much I think may suffice, in Answer to Mr. N's Objections against the
Book of Job. I shall only add, that besides the Powerful Comforts this Book
affords to the Afflicted, and the submission it teaches us to yield to God's
Will, and to Adore the Unsearchableness of his Judgments, which are the
principal and obvious Designs of this Book, it is likewise of excellent Use upon
another account, viz. as it gives us a True Idea of Natural Religion See c. 31.
, when it was in its Prime, and as it was practiced in those early Ages, before
the Tradition of the Creation was lost, or the World quite overrun with
Idolatry.

I proceed in the next place to consider what our Author alleges against the
Book of Psalms: His Opinion concerning these in general is, Fr. p. 230. Eng. p.
27.
That there was no need of Inspiration, but only of Piety and Zeal for the
composing them: and he further says, That any Devout man may easily nowadays
praise God in that manner. But all the Pious men that ever were in the
Christian Church have been of another mind, and never looked upon their own
Composures as Equal to the Psalms: whereas if the Authors of the Psalms were
assisted only with an Ordinary Degree of Piety and Devotion, I can not see why
the members of the Christian Church should not think themselves as well
qualified to make Hymns to God, as any of the Jewish that were no more than
Pious and Devout men. But says Mr. N. Ubi sup. and Fr. p. 277. Eng. p. 104.
David never says, Thus says the Lord, as the Prophets who speak by God's
Authority use to do. Now tho it be false that David never uses this Expression,
for in several places he uses those very Words, or such as are Equivalent 1 Samuel 23.2. Psalm. 2.7.110.1.
: yet if 'twere true, I do not see what Service 'twould do Mr. N. unless he can
prove that Praising God by Inspiration, is the same as Delivering a Message
from him and Instructing the people in his Name, which is the only proper
occasion to usher in what is said with, Thus says the Lord see Mr. Smith of
Prophecy, c. 7.
. Sure Mr. N. thinks that because we grant Prophecy to be the Highest Degree of
Inspiration, therefore there can be really no other sort. But I am much
mistaken if St. Paul was not of another mind, when he said with Relation to the
Diversity of Spiritual Gifts, Are all Apostles, are all Prophets 1 Cor. 12.29.
? And If the foot shall say, because I am not the hand I am not of the body, is
it therefore not of the body Ib. v. 15.
? And we may easily apply the Apostles Reasoning to our present Case on this
manner, If Mr. N. shall say, Because Composing of Psalms and Hymns is not
Prophesying, nor bringing a Message from God it is not Inspiration, is it
therefore not Inspiration? On the contrary it is plain that the Holy Writers
looked upon Praising God by Spiritual Songs, when 'twas performed by Gifted
Persons as a Real and Distinct sort of Inspiration, and therefore called it
Prophesying 1 Samuel 10.5. 1 Chr. 25.1. 1 Cor. 11.5. Exodus 15.20. See Mr. Smith
of Prophecy, chapter 7. and 8 And Dr. Hammond up on St. Luke 1.67.
, as that word is taken in a large Sense for Inspiration in General.

And methinks without Descanting so Nicely upon the several Degrees of Divine
Inspiration, and Weighing God's Gifts in a Balance, to try it they can be found
Wanting, as our Author does; this might be sufficient to convince Men, that God
Designed the Book of Psalms for the Perpetual Use of the Church, viz. That the
Psalms have been one of the most considerable parts of the Public Worship,
both in the Jewish and Christian Church ever since they were made See 1 Chr.
6.31.
: they were always used at the time of offering the Sacrifices, which was the
most solemn part of the Jewish Worship 1 Chr. 16.40, 41. Ecclus. 50.16, 17, 18.
. Ezra restored this Service as soon as the Foundation of the Second Temple was
laid Ezr. 3.11.
. The Evangelists tell us Matt. 26.30. Mark 14.26.
, that our Savior and his Disciples Sung a Hymn after the Paschal Supper,
which Learned Men suppose to have been the same Collection of Psalms, which the
Jews used upon that Solemnity. St. Paul Exhorts the Colossians that the Word of
God should dwell richly in them, and especially recommends the Psalms to their
use Coloss. 3.16.
. The Visions in the Revelations, where Saints and Angels are represented
Worshipping and Praising God, do certainly in many things allude to the Customs
See Rev. 4. ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. -c. 5, 8.-8.1.-11. 19
which the Jewish and Christian Church at that time used in their Public
Service; which two Churches then differed very little in the manner of their
External Worship. And in these we find the Heavenly Devotions consist
altogether of Hymns, and Songs of Praise Rev. 5.9.-14.3.-15.3.
, which is a good Argument to prove, that the Singing of Psalms was the most
considerable part of the Christian Worship in that Early Age V. Cl. Dodwel. c.
Grot. c. 4.
, as it had formerly been of the Jewish. I deny not but in that Inspired Age
they used several Hymns of their own Composing 1 Cor. 14.26. Eusebius. H.E. l. 5.
c. 28. and l. 7. c. 30.
; yet it is certain from the Testimony of many Ancient Writers See Dr. Hamm.
Preface to his Paraphr. upon the Psalms.
, that David's Psalms still were most in use, and in highest esteem. And this
is one Argument of it, viz. because all the Hymns Composed by the Ancient
Christians have been lost time out of mind, except very few, which can be
attributed to nothing so probably, as to the Difuse of them, by reason of the
more Frequent and Constant Use of the Book of Psalms. And it is not likely the
Christian Church would have been beholding to the Jewish Temple for their Forms
of Worship, (especially when we consider how much more Noble a Subject for
Praises and Hymns the Christians had, by the Clear Revelation of the Gospel) if
they had not been persuaded that God designed the Book of Psalms for the
perpetual Use of the Church, to be both a Pattern and Treasure of Devotions, at
once to Enlighten our Minds, and Warm our Affections, and teach us to Pray and
Praise God with the Spirit, and with the understanding also. And if what I have
said, prove that this was God's Intent in stirring up Holy Men to make these
Excellent Pieces of Devotion, I think 'twill be sufficient to satisfy any
Reasonable Man, that the Book of Psalms deserves a place among the Inspired
Writers, without Nicely determining how great a share the Holy Spirit had in
making these Composures, and how much is to be ascribed to the Authors own
Study and Meditation. Since it is very hard in any Case, to Define the manner
how God's Grace does Cooperate with Man's Endeavors, and the Spirit, like the
Wind to which our Savior compares it John 3.8.
, does sufficiently discover it self by its effects, tho we cannot Comprehend
the Manner of its Operation. And it is no wonder that should not be easily
Intelligible by us, who are Ignorant how our own Soul acts within us, and after
what manner Outward Objects make an Impression upon it.

But says Mr. N. Fr. p. 228. En. p. 23.
the Imprecations which are found in many of the Psalms, cannot proceed from the
Good and Merciful Spirit of God, and consequently the Authors of those Psalms
could not be Inspired.

This being the only Considerable Objection against the Psalms, to take off all
Prejudice against the Use of so Excellent a Book, I shall endeavor to give a
distinct Answer to it, in these Three particulars.

1. In the First place therefore, I desire it may be Observed, that many of
those Expressions which seems at first Sight to import Wishing Mischief and
Destruction to others, do really wish no more harm to them, than that they may
be Disappointed in their Enterprises and Undertakings. For example, that
Expression Psalm. 70.2.
, Let them be (...)
Ashamed [or Blush] and (...) which is Synonymous with the Former, and rendered
by the LXX. (...). etc. all which words signify Shame
Confounded, that seek after my Soul, means no more but this, Let them be
filled with that shame and Confusion of Face which follows a Disappointment.
Now since it is lawful to Oppose the Designs of our Enemies, and to use all
honest means to prevent their bringing them to pass; it can be no harm to wish
and pray that they may be Unsuccessful in their Attempts against us. And in
this Sense are all those Imprecations in the 35th. Psalm to be understood.

2. Secondly, let it be considered, that all those Expressions which are
commonly Translated by way of Imprecation, may be as fitly rendered by way of
Prediction: and we may Read, They shall be Ashamed, instead of Let them be
Ashamed. Nay this way of Interpretation is more agreeable to the Letter of the
Hebrew, where the words are not in the Imperative but in the Future. And if we
take these Expressions in this Sense, then they imply no more than a Denouncing
God's Judgments against Wicked Men, if they still persist in their Wickedness.
And thus to Denounce the Terrors of the Lord against Sinners, is so far from
being a piece of Uncharitableness, that it is the highest Act of Charity we can
show to them, and the most effectual means to awaken them to a sense of their
Condition, and what they are to Expect except they Repent. And if this
Interpretation be true, as nothing hinders but it may, then all Mr. N's
Objections Ub. supr.
against the 109th. Psalm vanish immediately; for according to this
Interpretation, it only contains a Prediction of the Miseries that were to
befall the Person, whoever he was, under whom Judas was Represented. And the
Denunciation of the Psalmist against his Family, will be liable to no other
Exceptions than that Prophecy of Isaiah against Babylon, Isaiah 13.16.
Their children shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes, their houses shall
be spoiled, and their wives ravished. And St. Peter himself seems to have
understood this Psalm in no other sense, for he tells us Acts 1.16.
that the Holy Ghost [in this Psalm] spoke before or PROPHESIED (...).
by the mouth of David concerning Judas. But besides this, it was an Usual way
of Speech among the Jews, to threaten or denounce Evils in the form of
Imprecation. So the Comminations against those that broke the Law, were uttered
by way of Imprecation, Cursed be he that Deuteronomy. 27.
, etc. In like manner Excommunication was denounced in the Form of Imprecation,
(...): from whence the Apostle took that Expression, Let him be Anathema Gal.
1.8. 1. Cor. 16.20.
. In the same sense we are to understand that Expression of St. Paul's
concerning Alexander the Coppersmith, 2 Timothy 4.14.
The Lord reward him according to his works. The Reason of all which
Expressions is to be taken from the promiscuous use of the Imperative and
Future in the Hebrew, and a very little Acquaintance with that Language, will
furnish a man with several Examples of this kind.

3. But Thirdly, if we understand these Expressions according to their common
Acceptance and the Sense that is usually given of them, and suppose them to
imply Wishing evil to the Persons of whom they are spoken, I cannot see but
it is Lawful, nay our Duty in several Cases to pray to God against our Enemies,
and desire him to execute his Vengeance upon them: the Lawfulness of this I
shall prove in these following Instances.

1. Where it is not a Private Quarrel, but one of a Public Nature, between two
different Nations, whether upon a Civil or Religious Account. For in this Case,
as it is lawful for the Injured Party to endeavor to Right themselves by War,
so they may certainly Pray to God that he would give them Success, and
overthrow their Enemies: especially if their Attempts be levelled against the
True Religion, for then beside the Reasonableness of Praying to God to maintain
his own Cause, we may Pray that the Enemies of it may meet with a Remarkable
Disappointment, upon another Account too: because it will be a powerful
Argument for their Conversion, and to bring them to the Acknowledgment of the
Truth. To which purpose the Psalmist prays, Psalm. 83.16.
Fill their faces with shame, O Lord, that they may seek thy Name. And
accordingly those Psalms which were composed against the Enemies of the Jewish
Church and Nation, may now lawfully be used against the Enemies of the True
Religion, and of those that profess it: and we find they have all along been
applied so in the Christian Church.

2. It Is lawful to pray against our Enemies, when they are the Disturbers of
the Public Peace. For certainly the Charity which we owe to the Community lays
upon us a Precedent and a higher Oligation than that which we owe to Private
Persons, and therefore where these two interfere, the First Obligation must
take place, and it is not only lawful but our Duty to show no Kindness to
Particular persons, where we cannot do it without Prejudice to the Public. Or
else I do not see how it would be consistent with Christian Charity to punish
Malefactors: and sure Wishing Evil is not more contrary to the Rules of Charity
than Inflicting it. Now many of the Imprecations which we find in the Psalms,
are against the Disturbers of the Public Peace, for they were not the Enemies
of a Private man, but of David a King, and one of God's own Appointment too.
And certainly in such Cases where men are bound to the utmost of their Ability,
to bring Offenders to Condign Punishment, they may every whit as lawfully leave
them to God's Judgment, and desire him to take the matter into his own Hand,
and Reward them according to their Works. Especially if we consider that in
David's Case, where a Sovereign Authority was Oppressed and Injured by Wicked
men, there no Court upon Earth could do him Right, for he that was appointed by
God to be an Avenger and to execute Wrath upon them that do Evil, had this
Power taken from him: so that in this Case 'twas very fit and just for him to
Appeal to God, and desire that he would execute Judgment upon obstinate
Offenders, who else would escape the Hand of Justice.

3. It Is lawful to pray to God to send down Judgments upon our Enemies, when
it is not likely they will be Reformed by Gentler Methods. Sinners often despise
the Patience and Long-suffering of God, and take Encouragement from his
Forbearance to go on in their Sins: and when nothing will work upon them but
Judgment and Fiery Indignation, it is a piece of Charity to pray to God to
correct them and bring them under the Rod, till they know that the most High
rules over the Children of men. Thus the Psalmist prays to God against Hardened
Sinners, Psalm. 59.13.
Consume them in thy wrath that they may not be: and let them know that God
rules in Jacob, and unto the Ends of the Earth. This severe dealing with such
persons will force them at last to Glorify God, and others warned by their
Examples, will be the more careful not to offend in such a manner.

And this leads me to the 4th and Last Instance I shall mention, wherein it is
lawful to pray against our Enemies, and that is, When Offenders are in all
appearance Incorrigible and past Repentance. When men have made themselves
Incapable of God's Mercy, it is fit that God should be Glorified in them by
making them Remarkable Instances of his Justice: and it is the Duty of every one
that is Zealous of God's Glory, to desire and pray that he may get Honor by
the Destruction of Hardened and Incorrigible Sinners, as he did by the Overthrow
of Pharaoh Exodus 14.17.
: and likewise they ought to Rejoice when they see it accomplished, And surely
when Charity has done her work, when Patience and Kindness cannot soften our
Enemies, nor Prayers for their Conversion do any Good upon them, it seems very
agreeable to the Doctrine of the Scriptures, that then we may pray God to
execute his Vengeance upon them: as some of the Christians when they saw Julian
the Apostate's Implacable Rage and Inveterate Malice against the Christian
Religion, believing him to have Sinned the Sin unto Death, prayed to God for
his Destruction, that all the Kingdoms of the Earth might know that Jesus whom
Julian had reproched, was Lord and Christ Greg. Naz. 2. Invect. in Jul. p. 123,
124. and Orat. Funebr. in Patr. p. 308.
. For the Scriptures when they teach us to be Patient and Forgive those that
injure us, enforce this Duty upon us by this Argument, that Vengeance belongs
to God, and he will repay Romans 12.19.
in due time, and do us Justice. Which shows that after we have done what we
can to reclaim our Enemies, and have endeavored to win them by Kindness, if
they still continue Implacable, we may lawfully expect Tertul. c. Marcion. l.
4. c. 16. Cum dicit, Mihi vindictam, and ego vindicabo, Patientiam docet
Vindictae expectatricem. -Ultionem mihi permisisse debuerat, si ipse non
praestat, aut si mihi non permittebat, ipse praestaret. Quonium and disciplinae
interest injuriam vindicari: metu enim Ultionis omnis iniquitas refraenatur.
that God will plead our Cause, and tho we may not Right our selves, yet we may
2 Chronicles. 24.22.
desire him to Interpose, and put a stop to the Successes of Wicked men, who
grow outrageous and intolerable by Impunity: and we ought to commit our Cause
to him, and rest satisfied with this Consideration, That God will in his due
time judge us according to our Righteousness (...). Secundi Presbyteri jam
morituri verba ap. Athanas. Epist. ad Solitar. p. 660.
. And that passage, which the Apostle in the place abovementioned quotes out
of the Proverbs as a proof of what he says, does imply as much, Prove. 25.21, 22.
If thine Enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink, for in so doing
thou shall heap Coals of Fire upon his head: i. e. If thy Kindness does not
reclaim him and make him thy Friend, but he still persist in his Enmity, God
himself will avenge thy quarrel, and punish him so much the more severely. This
is the sense of that place, as appears by comparing the Expression of Coals of
Fire, with the sense of it in other places of Scripture, where it always
signifies God's Vengeance See Ps. 18.8, 13.-120.4.-140.11.
. It Is the voice of Nature, that Sin ought to be punished, and they who do evil
should suffer evil. Nay it is the Voice of God himself, whom our Savior
proposes to us as the Pattern of Love and Kindness which we ought to imitate
Matthew 5.45
: and yet the Scripture often represents him as taking Pleasure and
Satisfaction in the Destruction of Incorrigible Sinners, and rejoicing at their
Calamities Deuteronomy. 28.63. Pro. 1.26. Is. 1.24. Ezekiel 5.13.
. In Imitation of which Example the Righteous are said to Rejoice when they see
God's Vengeance upon Sinners, and wash their Feet in the Blood of the Ungodly,
[as it were trampling upon their Carcases in a Triumphant manner] and to
glorify God upon such occasions, saying, Verily there is a Reward for the
Righteous, doubtless there is a God that judges in the Earth Ps. 58.10, 11.
. In like manner, when the Enemies of God's people have filled up the measure
of their Iniquities, and sinned beyond a possibility of obtaining Pardon, the
Prophets denounce God's Judgments against them in a triumphant Style, and at
the same time exhort all his Servants to rejoice and praise God for making his
Justice manifest. So we find the Prophet Isaiah breaking forth into Joy upon
such an occasion, Is. 25.1, 2.
O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee, I will praise thy Name. -- For
thou have made of a City a Heap, etc. And to the same purpose he speaks a
little after Is. 26.5, 6, 11.
. So Jeremy when he foretells the Destruction of Babylon, says, Jer. 51.48.
The Heavens and Earth and all that is therein shall sing for joy: and exhorts
God's people particularly, to declare in Zion the works of the Lord their God
Ver. 10.
. And when Mystical Babylon falls in the Revelations, the Apostles and Prophets
are exhorted to Rejoice over her Rev. 18.20.
: and the heavenly Host are represented as giving Solemn Thanks and Praise to
God for Executing his Judgments upon her Rev. 19.1, etc. See c. 11.16, 17,
18.-15. 2, 3, 4.-16.5,
. And although in such general Judgments, Children which are Innocent usually
suffer as well as the Guilty, yet since God has a Right to take away their
Lives when and in what manner he thinks fit, without the Imputation of
Injustice or Cruelty; and the involving Great and Small, Old and Young in the
same common Destruction, adds much to the Dreadfulness and Severity of the
Judgment, and consequently makes it more Exemplary, upon this account it is
lawful to wish with the Psalmist Ps. 109. 9, etc. -137.9.
, that God's Judgments may come upon the Children of Notorious and Implacable
Enemies: and this not out of a principle of Hatred and Revenge, but only out of
a Desire to see his Judgments made more manifest hereby to the World. And as
for the Psalmists pronouncing the Executioners of this Decree of God's Blessed
Ps. 137.9.
, at which Mr. N. is so much offended Fr. p. 229. Eng. p. 25.
, there are many Expressions like this in the Prophets: where they encourage
and commend, and promise a Reward to those men who are to be Executioners of
God's Judgments Jer. 25.9.-27.6, 7.8.-43.10.-50.14, 21, 26, 29. Ezekiel. 29.19.
, and pronounce a Curse Jer. 48.10.
upon those who will not join in bringing his Will and Purposes to pass. And
where the Prophets exhort and encourage men to fulfill God's Judgments, the
Design of such Expressions is only to set forth in a Pathetical and Vehement
manner, how desirous the Holy Writers are that such a Work should be
accomplished, that will so much tend to the Illustrating God's Glory.

I think there is no sort of Imprecations used in the Psalms, but something
which has been offered in these Three Considerations will reach to, and will be
a sufficient Defense and Justification of. Only I will add one brief Remark,
for the sake of those who do not converse with the Originals or the Ancient
Versions of the Bible, and that is this; That the word (...).
which is sometimes Translated Hell in the Psalms, and in several other places
of the Old Testament, signifies only the Grave, and ought to have been always
Translated so, to prevent the Misunderstanding of these places. So that when
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 55.15.
Let Death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into Hell, the
Expression sounds harsh to a Vulgar ear, and taking it in the most obvious
sense of the words can hardly be defended, but it really means no more but
this, Let them suddenly go down into the Grave, before they have time to
accomplish their Wicked Designs: the later words being the same sense with the
former, only differently expressed.

Next in order to the Psalms are the Proverbs, and therefore I shall in the
next place consider the Objections which our Author advances against them. One
would think that the Character which the Sacred History 1 Kin. 3.12.
and all ages have given to Solomon, of being endowed by God with an
Extraordinary Degree of Wisdom above all other men: together with what he says
of himself, that he employed this Talent to the Instruction of the people, and
gathered together many Proverbs Eccles. 12.9.
to that end: and besides all this, the Authority of the Jewish Canon,
especially when it is confirmed by a Greater than Solomon, our Savior CHRIST,
and several Passages of this very Book directly quoted by his Apostles Romans
12.20. Hebr. 12.5, 6. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
, and other places plainly alluded 2 Cor. 8.21. 1 Pet. 4.18.
to by them: I say, one would be apt to conclude that all these Considerations
added to the Intrinsecal Worth of the Book it self, might be a sufficient
Inducement to look upon it as a Book composed by God's Appointment for the
Benefit of the Church.

But before I proceed any further upon this Sebject, I cannot but reflect by
the way upon a Passage of our Author, which the observing that this Book is
quoted by the Apostles puts me in mind of, and that is this: He tells us Fr. p.
278. Eng. p. 105
That the Apostles never cite the works of Solomon or the Book of Job. What he
says touching the former, I have just now showed to be manifestly False, and
there is as little truth in the later part of his words: for the Book of Job is
as formally quoted by St. Paul 1 Cor. 3.19.
, as any Book of the Old Testament, The Wisdom of the world is Foolishness with
God, FOR IT IS WRITTEN, He takes the Wise in their own Craftiness. Which
Citation, as it is certainly taken out of Job c. 5. 13.
, so it shows withal a great Deference given by the Apostle to the Authority of
the Book from whence it is taken. I thought fit just to observe this Mistake of
Mr. N.'s, tho it be of no great consequence, on purpose to take down the
Confidence of this Gentleman a little, and show him that he is not so exactly
versed in the Scripture, as a man that undertakes to Criticize upon it with so
much Capriciousness, and so little Reverence and Regard to its Authority, ought
to be.

But to return to the Matter in hand. The Sum of the General Charge which our
Author has advanced against the Divine Authority of the Book of Proverbs is Fr.
p. 271. En. p. 94.
, That they are Moral Sentences which a Good Man may pronounce without
Inspiration. As if no Book could be writ by God's Direction, but where the
matter is such as exceeds the reach of Humane Invention, and cannot be the
Product of our Rational Faculties. And then by the same Reason no work must be
ascribed to God, but what exceeds the Power of Natural Agents; and so God must
be accounted the Author of nothing that happens in the World, but what is
purely Miraculous. Now this Argument if it prove any thing at all, it proves
not only that this Book is not written by Divine Inspiration, but farther, that
no Book of Moral Instructions can be. For Morality is nothing but the Law of
Right Reason, instructing us how to govern our Actions; and I suppose the Law
of Reason contains nothing in it above Reason, and Consequently nothing which
is above the Capacity of a Wise and Good Man to think or speak: from all which
it will follow, by our Authors Principles, that whatever Book contains nothing
in it but what is deducible from the Principles of mere Reason, must be purely
Humane, and can have nothing Divine, or of the Hand of God in it. But is not
Mr. N. sensible that the Corruption of Humane Nature, the Degeneracy of the
World, the Uncertainty of Humane Reasoning, and especially the Imperfect
Knowledge we have of the Nature of God and our own Souls, have so far Obscured
a great many branches of this Law of Nature or Reason, that there was need of a
more than Ordinary Illumination, to recover some Truths which were in a manner
lost to the World, and to set them in a True Light, so as to Convince others of
their Certainty and Excellency? Sure our Author will grant, that the Unity of
the Godhead is a Truth that is Adequate to Humane Reason, nay a Truth so
Evident, that one would wonder that Men of Searching Heads could miss of it;
and yet we find there were very few among the Heathens that had their Reason so
thoroughly purged from the prejudices which Education and the Established
Religion of the World had infected it with, as to assent to this Truth. And I
think this is a sufficient Proof that Men may stand in need of a Teacher
Divinely Enlightened to Discover such Truths to them, as may indeed be deduced
from the Principles of Reason when it is in its true perfection, but yet are
such as few Men's Reason has arrived to, because of the Degeneracy and
corruption to which it is obnoxious. And many such Truths are to be found in
this Book, which tho they are so reasonable that Men cannot but assent to them
as soon as they hear them, yet it is in vain to search for them in the Writings
of the Best and Acutest Philosophers. For Instance, we may challenge them to
show such a Wise Instruction in any of their Books as Solomon lays down for the
foundation of Morality, Prove. 1.7.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom: or this, Prove. 3.5, 6
Trust in the Lord with all thy Heart and lean not to thy own Understanding, In
all thy ways acknowledge him. And indeed through the whole Book the Duties of
Morality are enforced upon Men from Religious Considerations, and by Arguments
taken from the Duty we owe to God, and the Rewards and Punishments we must
expect from him, according as we behave our selves. Which makes this Book
differ very much from the Moral Writings of the Philosophers, where we shall
find little or nothing said concerning our Duty to God, his Authority over us,
our Dependence upon him, and the Submission we owe to him, the Methods of
Providence, and the Rewards or Punishments of another Life, all which are often
insisted upon in this Book. For this is a visible Defect in the Writings of the
Philosophers, that as they never enforce our Duty by Arguments which are taken
from the Principles of Religion: so their disswasives from Vice are taken from
these Topics, viz. That it is below the Dignity of Humane Nature, and a
Contradiction to Reason, rather than from this Consideration, That it is
displeasing to God, a Breach of his Law, and an Act of Disobedience which he
will Punish. I Confess some Philosophers that lived since the Appearance of
Christianity, especially the Emperor Antoninus, have very Excellent Sayings
concerning God's Providence, and the Submission we owe to him. But I am apt to
think, that as the Light of the Gospel Diffused it self over the World, it in
some measure Enlightened the minds even of those who Refused to embrace it, as
the Sun gives Light before it reaches our Hemisphere. My meaning is, that the
very Account which Inquisitive Men received of the Principles of Christianity
helped to Clear up their minds, and gave them more distinct Apprehensions of
the Principles of Natural Religon than they had before.

But to return; Beside the Precepts I have already mentioned, there are many
Excellent Advices given in the Proverbs to all sorts and Degrees of Men, from
Princes and Magistrates to the meanest of their Subjects. And it is mere
Cavilling in this Author to say Ubi supr.
, That the Directions about Good Husbandry and Housekeeping, Country People
know without Inspiration: as if it were below the Wisdom of an Inspired
Teacher, to admonish the meanest of their Duty; (as certainly it is every Man's
to be Diligent in his Calling) and encourage them to attend upon it See Tit.
3.14. where the Apostle gives the same sort of Advice:
: or as if People had not need to be put in mind of their Duty, although they knew
it before. As little weight is there in what he says Ubi sup.
concerning the Caution which this Book so often gives Men against Suretiship,
or being Bound for others, as if it amounted to a total forbidding Men the
Exercise of this sort of Charity. I grant him this may be in some Cases a very
good Act of Charity; but if we consider it as it is generally practiced, (and
Proverbial Sayings are to be understood only to hold true in Most cases) we
shall find such ill Effects of it, that it is not only Wise but Religious Advice
to warn men against it. Experience tells us that men are often Bound for more
than they are able to pay, which is the very Case Solomon speaks of Prove.
22.26, 27.
in some of those places Mr. N. refers to, and so injure the Creditor as well
as undo themselves and intail Misery upon their Families, which a man is bound
in Justice as well as Charity to provide for in the first place. And Suretiship
when it brings men to Beggary, at the same time exposes them to those dangerous
Temptations to sin, which always accompany extreme Want. Upon these accounts
Suretiship is oftener the occasion of a great deal of Injustice and other
Wickedness, than the Exercise of Charity. And since these are the usual
Consequences of it, it is very good Advice to warn men against it, and as proper
for this Book as any whatsoever, since the Rules of it, as I observed just now,
are designed only for Wise Observations grounded upon Experience, which are
generally True, but are not to be taken so strictly and rigorously as if they
never failed in any one Instance v. Grot. in Matthew. 12.30.
.

As to what Mr. N. objects Ubi supra.
against the Collection of Proverbs ascribed to Agur Prove. 30.
, if I should grant him that they have nothing of Inspiration in them, I do not
see how it prejudices the Authority of Solomon's Proverbs at all. For Solomon's
Character will go a great way to Entitle his Proverbs to Inspiration, whereas
these are the Sayings of an Unknown Author, who does not pretend to have been
bred up in the Schools of the Prophets See Bp. Patrick's Paraph. upon Pro. 30.3.
, which were looked upon as the Nurseries of Inspired Writers. I know some
Learned Men fancy both this and the 31st. Chapter to be Sayings of Solomon, as
well as the foregoing; but as they bring no Proof for what they say, so it is
altogether unaccountable why Solomon should disgiuse himself under two such
different Names, neither of which have the least Affinity with his own. Now
supposing the two last Chapters of the Proverbs to have been writ by Uncertain
Authors, and added to Solomon's by some Private hand, and afterward to have
been continued by those that Copied the Holy Writings, as we see Additions have
been made to Daniel and Esther in the Greek Bibles, and as it is probable the
Hellenists joined these and the other Apocryphal Writings with the Canonical as
early as our Savior's time: upon this Hypothesis, Mr. N.'s Objections against
this part of the Proverbs fall short of the Mark, and do not prejudice the
Authority of Solomon's Proverbs at all. And this Supposition I think has
nothing of Absurdity in it, nor can any Consequences be drawn from hence to
weaken the Authority of the Jewish Canon. For if we should suppose these two
Chapters to be Apocryphal, it will neither follow that we cannot tell what is
Canonical and what not, nor that there may have been Additions made to Books
which are all of a piece and go all under one and the same Author's name. We
can conclude nothing from hence but this, that wherever we find a Writing,
bearing the name of an Unknown Author added to a Book whose Author is known,
without any necessary Dependence upon, or Connection with the Book that goes
before or that comes after, in such a Case only, 'twill follow from this
Hypothesis, that we have no Reason to think both those Writings to be of an
Equal Authority. And since this is the only Instance that can be given in all
the Old Testament, of a small Writing made an Appendix to a greater merely
because of the Affinity of the Subject, whatever Hypothesis we admit concerning
these Two Chapters, it can be no Prejudice to any other part of the Old
Testament Canon, because there is no Instance can be given of a like nature.

But whatever I have said upon this Point, I propose only by way of
Supposition, and merely out of a Design to show that whatever Objections Mr. N.
thinks he can make against these Additions to the Proverbs, they do not at all
diminish the Authority of Solomon's Writings. For indeed the Authority of the
Jewish Canon weighs so much with me, and the Jews seem to have been so
scrupulous of admitting any Writing into their Canon, without due Examining
whether it deserved to be received into it or not, that I must confess I cannot
easily bring my self to think there are any Apocryphals among the Hebrew
Writings of the Old Testament. As for the Greek Writings and Translations, we
know that the Hellenists were much more Easy and Remiss as to this matter, and
allowed great Liberty to Transcribers and Commentators to make such Additions
to the Text, which in their Opinion did tend to Illustrate it. But the Jews
being Scrupulous of Adding to, or Diminishing from the Text, even to
Superstition, I think it Unjust to conclude that any part of their Canon is of
doubtful Authority, from one single Instance which some may fancy looks
suspicious. And therefore taking this Prophecy or Collection (...)
of Agur's to have the same External Authority with the rest of the Jewish
Canon, I cannot see that the Internal Matter of it affords any Reason to the
Contrary. For there are many wise Observations and a great deal of good Advice
contained in it, and his Prayer to God for a Competency Prove 3.^.8, 9.
is a very Excellent one, and is so much the more to be valued, because all the
Heathen Philosophers were puzzled how to advise others about the matter of
their Prayers See Platon. Alcibiad. 2. Juvenal. Sat. 10.
, what Blessings 'twas proper to ask of God, and the Vulgar put up very Absurd
and Ridiculous Petions to their Gods Pers. Sat. 2. Horat. l. 2. Sat. 3. Epist
16. l. 1.
. And for those places of this Chapter which are more liable to Exception, if
Mr. N. would have consulted what Learned Commentators have said upon them, he
would not have thought them so Useless and Trifling as he pretends. But our
Author himself seems to be at a loss for Objections, since he is willing to
take Advantage of Agur's modest Confession of his own Ignorance Prove. 30.2.
. and concludes from thence that he can be a man of no Authority. But I believe
Mr. N. is the first that ever thought a man's Modesty a sign that he wanted
Wisdom, or that Humility made a man Unqualified for Receiving the Influences of
God's Spirit.

Our Author objects nothing against Ecclesiastes and the Canticles, but what
has been Objected several times before, and as often Answered: for which reason
I shall be more Brief in Refuting him.

It Is certain that the Design of Ecclesiastes is to set forth the Vanity of
Humane Life, which Solomon does by showing how Empty and Unsatisfactory all
those Ends are which men usually propose to themselves, as the greatest
Happiness this World can afford: such as are Knowledge Eccles. 1.
, Pleasure Chapter 2.
, Honor and Authority Chapter 3. and 4.
, and lastly Riches Chapter 5. and 6.
. Further, he takes notice how men's Ignorance, and the Obscurity in which the
Great and Weighty Points concerning the Immortality of the Soul, a Future
State, and the Methods of Providence are Involved, do occasion a great deal of
Misery and Trouble to Mankind. Whilst Ill men take advantage of the
Difficulties which may be objected against these Truths, and from thence
conclude that there is no Providence nor Future Judgment, and thereby harden
themselves in Chapter 8. 11, 14. chapter 9. 3.
Wickedness, or give themselves up to Sensuality, and say, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall die Chapter 3. 18, etc.
. And even good men are now and then in a great Perplexity about these things,
by reason of the Obscurity and Difficulties with which they are beset, and
begin to doubt and stagger in their Faith Chapter 1. 13.-8. 16, 17.
. If men would therefore view the Scope and Design of the whole Book, and not
take it by Piecemeal or examine each Sentence apart, they might easily see,
that when the Author proposes Doubts concerning Providence and a Future State,
he does not speak his own Sense: for in several places he plainly asserts God's
Ordering and Disposing of all things Chapter 3. 11, 14.-7. 13.-9. 1.-11. 5.
, and speaks of another Life and a Future Judgment, with the greatest Clearness
and Assurance of any of the Canonical Writers of the Old Testament Chapter 3.
17.-11. 9.-12. 7. 14.
. And therefore the Design of those other places which seem at first to
contradict these, is only to show that the Obscurity of these Great Articles of
Faith, had often filled his own and other good Men's minds with Perplexing
thoughts, and that the Generality of Men took Encouragement from thence to mind
only Sensual Pleasures, and make no Conscience of Injuring and Oppressing
others. So that the uncertainty and Imperfection of Humane Knowledge as to
these things, was a great Ingredient in the Vanities of Life: and one of those
sore Travels which God has given to the Sons of Men, to be exercised therewith
Eccles. 1.13.
. And we may observe, that when he mentions the Doubts concerning the
Immortality of the Soul, he Introduces them with this Preface, c. 3. 18.
I said in my Heart (...), which may very properly be rendered, According to the
words or way of speaking used among the Generality of Men: and it is the very
same Phrase as (...), which St. Paul uses Romans 3.5.
in a like Case, where he does not speak his own Sense, but sets down an
Inference which Wicked Men would be apt to make from what he had said.

But if any desire further satisfaction concerning this Book or the Song of
Solomon, I must refer them to that Excellent Commentary which the Reverend and
Learned Bishop Patrick has Published upon these two Books, where he has with
great Clearness explained the Sense and Design of them both, and particularly
as to the Latter, has showed Preface
, how fitly the Mystical Union between Christ and his Church, is Represented in
it under the Persons of a Bridegroom and Bride: that Allegory being agreeable
to the Notions of all the Prophetical Writers of the Old Testament, who
constantly express God's being in Covenant with the Jews by his being Married,
and a Husband Ps. 45. Is. 54.5.-62 4.5. Jer. 3.14.-31.32. Hos. 2.2.7.16. Ezekiel.
16.8.
to them; and in pursuance of the same Metaphor, reprove their Idolatry under
the names of Adultery Is. 57.7.8. Jer. 3.1. etc. Ezekiel. 16.15, etc. ^ c. 23.
Hos. c. 1. and 2.
, Fornication, and going a Whoring after other Gods: and the same Metaphor is
alluded to by Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament Matt. 22.2. Joh 3
28, 29. 2 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 5.31, 32 Rev. 19.7.-14.4.
. All which is made out by that Reverend and Excellent Author with so much
Learning and Exactness, and does so fully Vindicate this Book, from the Rash
Censures of those who have doubted of its Authority, and from the Profane
Interpretations which some Wanton Fancies have applied to it, that 'twould be
Unpardonable Presumption for me to think I can add any thing upon this Subject,
to that Great Man's Judicious and Accomplished Labors.

THE CONCLUSION.
ANd now I have Finished my Undertaking, and have given a particular Answer to
all the Arguments Mr. N. has advanced against the Divine Inspiration of the
Holy Scriptures. I have not to my Knowledge passed by any thing which is of
Weight in any of the Letters, nor dissembled the True Force of any of the
Objections contained in them. And upon the whole matter it appears, that the
Main Strength of the Book may be Comprised in this one Argument, viz. That Book
cannot be of Divine Authority, nor Written by God's Direction, where there are
any Marks of Humane Industry, and of Men's making Use of their Natural Talents
of Memory or Invention in the Composure. The Falseness of which Assertion I
have showed in several places of the Foregoing Discourse: and at present I
shall only make this further Remark upon it, for a Conclusion of the whole
Discourse; viz. That at the same Rate of Arguing a Man might prove that God had
no Hand in Governing the Ordinary Course of this World by his Providence, nor
Fitting Men for the Next by his Grace. For we see nothing brought to pass in
the World without the help of Natural Agents, and God requires Men to work out
their Salvation with as much Care and Diligence, as if he gave no Grace at all.
And in either Case it is very hard to Assign just how far Nature goes, or
exactly to Define how much Second Causes contribute toward the Production of
the Effect, and how much is to be ascribed to God. I would not be
misunderstood, as if I thought the Writing of the Scriptures owing to God's
Providence, no otherwise than as other common Events in the World are, or that
there was no greater Degree of Divine Grace and Assistance went to the
Composing of them, than does to the making other Pious and Good Books. I hope I
have made it appear that these Books were Designed by God for the Perpetual Use
and Instruction of the Church, to be a Fixed Rule of Faith and Manners, and the
Standard by which all other Doctrines and Practices are to be Tried. And then I
think it is to Reflect both upon the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to suppose that
he did not Assist the Holy Writers with such a Degree of Infallibility, as was
requisite to make their Writings serviceable to that End. But still I believe
that the Extraordinary and the Ordinary Means of Grace agree in this, that in
both Cases God never affords Supernatural Assistance to do that which Natural
Causes are sufficient to Effect of themselves: and that his Constant Method is
to let Natural Means go as far as they can, and then supply the rest himself.

And if Mr. N. had well considered this, he might have spared his pains in
Writing this Treatise. Or however Innocent his Intentions might be in Writing
it, yet it was not so Prudently done in the Editor to Publish it, when at the
same time he was sensible v. Fr. p. 245, 24^. Eng. p. 51, 54.
that very Ill Consequences might be drawn from it: and he could not but think
that Bad Men would greedily catch at them, and make what advantage they could
of them. I am as little for an Implicit Faith, or Building Sacred Truths upon
False Principles as he or his Interpreter Eng. Pref. p. 7.
: but yet I think a Man ought to be well Advised, and very sure he is in the
Right before he ventures to Unsettle Foundations. I find the Publisher himself
is of the mind, that all Truths are not to be spoken at all times, especially
when it is likely they will do more Harm than Good Eng. 123, 124. Fr p. 219.
: and therefore I wonder he should set such a value upon that which at best is
but a Probability, (for he himself v. Fr p. 245, 221. Eng. p. 51, 127.
looks upon this Hypothesis to be no more) as to venture the Publishing it at
the Expense of the most Important Truths. And tho we should suppose the
Principles Mr. N. has advanced in his Treatise to be True, yet I cannot look
upon them to be of such Importance, but that ' twere better the Public should
be deprived of the Advantage it might draw from the Knowledge of such Truths,
than to be visibly Exposed to the Danger of Abusing them so lamentably as it
will be apt to do: which the Publisher tells us Fr. p. 218. Eng. p. 122.
was the Opinion of several Learned Men concerning these Papers. And I don't
see any thing that he has said to the contrary, has force enough in it to make
these Gentlemen alter their minds. For as to what he Fr. p. 221. En. p. 126
alleges, that these Principles may be made use of to overthrow the Pretenses
of Libertines; tho I grant 'twere better men should believe as much of the
Scriptures as Mr. N. does, than none at all, yet I conceive it a very improper
way to go about to convince Infidels of the Authority of the Bible, by telling
them that several of those Writings which go under that Name, are mere Fiction
and Romance Fr, p. 248. 253. Eng. p. 164, 170.
, and Pieces of Wit and Fancy Fr. p. 274. 285. Eng. p. 99. 116.
: that other things in that Book are writ with Excessive Choler, and Impatience
Fr. p. 228. Eng. p. 24.
, and unworthy not only of a Pious man, but even of an Honest and Wise Heathen
Fr. p. 275. Eng. p. 100.
. Nay that some of the Writings that go under the Venerable Name of God's Word
maintain the Principles of Libertinism it self Fr. p. 273. Eng. p. 96.
, and have Expressions in them very like Blasphemies Fr. p. 275. Eng. p. 101.
. These and suchlike goodly Titles does this Author bestow upon several of
those Writings which Christ and his Apostles, and the whole Christian Church
ever since, have looked upon as the Word of God, and written for our
Instruction. Certainly this Method, to use Mr. N's own words, Fr. p. 281. Eng.
p. 100.
Instead of Converting Libertines, does but excite their Raillery, and confirm
them in their Impiety.

At least if the Publishers of such Tracts as this, have a mind to convince the
World that they design no Harm to Religion, they ought to Publish them in the
Learned Language, that none but Scholars may Read them. For the Publishing such
Writings in Vulgar Languages proves a snare to Men of Unsettled Heads and
Vicious Inclinations. They have not Capacity enough to Examine the true Merits
of the Cause, or to weigh Exactly what can be said on both sides, in such Nice
and Difficult Subjects: and therefore they presently run away with any thing
that seems to make against Religion, without considering what can be said on
the other side, because they are glad to find any Pretense or Plea for Sin and
Wickedness.

But if the Editor had no good reason for Publishing this Treatise, I am sure
the Translator has much less for Printing it in English. He himself Engl.
Pref. at the End.
acknowledges that this Treatise is not Calculated for the use of
simple-hearted Pious persons, nor consequently the Translation: tho one would
think an English Translation were made for the use of Ordinary English Readers.
But since he tells us these Discourses were not designed for Plain, Honest,
Illiterate Christians, I cannot imagine why they were Translated, except it
were, as some other Precious Treatises have been of late, for the Benefit of
Dishonest, Illiterate Atheists; and to furnish those Wits with Objections
against the Scriptures, who set up for Advocates of Irreligion, and value
themselves for reasoning out of the common Road, and not blindly following the
Dictates of others: and yet for all their mighty Boasts, can only Repeat the
Arguments which other Men put into their Mouths, and those too must be
Construed into English, before they can Understand them.

FINIS.

