THE REASONABLENESS OF THE Christian Religion, A SERMON PREACHED At the
Visitation held at Stoakesley in Cleveland, in Yorkshire.

Being the first Visitation of the Reverend Mr. Long, B. D. and Archdeacon of
Cleveland.

By Ja. Loud, Rector of Esington in Cleveland, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable John Earl of Bridgewater, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1684.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of BRIDGEWATER, VISCOUNT BRACKLEY, BARON of
ELLESMERE, Lord Lieutenant of the Counteys of BUCKINGHAM and HERTFORD, And one
of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
WHEN I was first desired to make this Sermon public, I was sensible that it
wanted, and yet was afraid to entitle it to so great a Patronage; but the
Knowledge and happy Experience I have of your noble and generous Temper,
together with the many and great Obligations I lie under from your Lordship, do
not only encourage, but oblige me to take all Opportunities of testifying the
Sense I have of your Favors, and my Gratitude to the World; so that I have this
to plead in excuse of my Presumption, that even Duty and Justice required this
Dedication: For you have a Right and Title to all the Results of my Studies of
this Nature, provided they were worthy of your Acceptance, seeing it was your
Lordships Favor to which I at first owed these quiet and happy Opportunities of
a Studious Retirement.

And that which further adds to my Obligations is this, that the Remoteness of
the Place does not put me beyond the Reach of that Continued Kindness, whose
Influence, like that of Heaven, challenges a kind of an Ubiquity.

Upon these Accounts, my Lord, I presume to prefix so great a Name before so
mean a Piece: Mean I call it, not in Respect of the Subject Matter, but as to
the manner of my handling it. The Subject is great and worthy, containing the
Reasons both of our Religion and Loyalty; and whatever Defects I may be
otherwise guilty of in treating of them, I shall yet make this abundant
Compensation to the World, in propounding so great an Example of both as your
Lordship is, to its Imitation.

The Jews required a Sign, and the Greeks looked after Wisdom. Those Signs
indeed are now ceased, nor is this an Age of Miracles; yet, thanks be to God,
we can yet justly boast of such moral Miracles (if I may so speak) of Religion
and Learning as your Lordship may be justly counted.

My Lord, I shall only add my Prayers to God, that the King and Kingdom, that
both Church and State may be long happy in your able and faithful Councils,
that Religion and Learning may long enjoy so great a Patron, and Allegiance and
Loyalty may be long encouraged and promoted by such a great and eminent
Example, and remain,

My Lord, Your Lordships most dutiful and faithful Servant, Ja. Loud.

1 COR. 1. 23, 24. But we Preach Christ Crucified, to the Jews a stumbling
Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness; but to them that are called both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God.
THere is nothing that affords us more Pious and more Profitable matter of
Meditation, then the Consideration of the Way and Method, by which God first
designed, and in due time effected man's Salvation: For hereby we come to the
most excellent and most useful piece of Knowledge, that we are, capable of,
that is, to the Knowledge of God and of our selves, this Method, when duly
considered and rightly understood, being not only the Illustration of all the
Divine Attributes of Wisdom, Justice, Power, and Goodness; but hereby also we
see the shortness of our own mere humane Apprehensions, when we consider by
what weak and improbable means, at least in Men's esteem such, God has effected
the greatest things, that ever Heaven designed, or Earth bore Witness to, thus
giving an undeniable Argument of the Truth and Divinity of that Religion, he
then instituted; But this admirable contrivance of Almighty God met not with an
answerable Reception in the World, for both Jews and Gentiles, either out of
weakness or wilfulness, either out of ignorance or perverseness were offended
at it; these two sorts of Men, though differing much among themselves, yet both
agreed against Christ and his Religion, and thought it a very improbable thing
to reconcile the World to the Cross of Christ, and indeed a very unreasonable
thing to persuade Men to Worship a crucified Savior.

As for the Jews, they were prepossessed with Apprehensions concerning the
Eternity of their Law, and the Splendour of their expected Messiah, so that
nothing that was outwardly mean and humble, did agree with that pompous Scene
of things which they had fancied.

They expected a great Prince for their Messiah, who should indeed cause an
alteration in the Government, but none in their Religion: For that they looked
upon as Eternal, and never to undergo the least shadow of change.

And therefore for the Jews, who were thus accustomed, at least in their own
thoughts, to Pomp and Ceremony; for them who looked upon themselves as the
Children of Abraham, and so Heirs of all the Glorious Promises made to them in
Scripture; for them to embrace an humble, persecuted, and at last crucified
Savior, this they thought inconsistent with their Religion, as Jews, and with
their Reason, as Men.

And Christ as he was to the Jews a stumbling Block, so was he to the Greeks,
that is, as they thought themselves, the learneder part of the Gentile World,
Foolishness. Now the Greeks were offended at the plainness and simplicity, of
the Gospel, they looked upon it as an Ignorant and unlearned Institution, they
expected to have found it full of Philosophy, or some kind of nice and curious
Learning, which was in request and esteem among them, and being disappointed
heroin, they began to entertain low and mean thoughts concerning it, as not
worthy to enter into their Schools: and upon this account was the Gospel to the
Greeks Foolishness. These were the two Grand Imputations under which the Gospel
then lay, both from Jews and Gentiles, to both which the Text is a direct
Answer, that what ever mean thoughts the Jews might entertain concerning the
Crucified Jesus, and what ever unworthy apprehensions the Greeks might have of
his Doctrine, yet upon a due Consideration of things, to those that are called,
that is, to those that become Christians, for that is the plain and proper and
usual sense of Calling in Scripture, to those who Judge by better Principles
and surer Rules it is the Power of God, in Opposition to the Jews, and the
Wisdom of God, in Opposition to the Gentiles.

These two Scandals here cast upon Christ and his Religion, together with the
respective Answers which the Apostle here gives to them, are the general parts
of the Text, and shall be the Subject of my present discourse.

First in Answer to the Jews I shall do these two things.

1. I shall show what little reason the Jews had to be offended at Christ, or
his Religion in General.

2. I shall show the particular Grounds and reasons upon which they were
offended, and also the weakness and unreasonableness of them.

1. The Jews had little reason to be offended at Christ or his Religion in
general, if we consider,

1. The great correspondency that is betwixt Isai ah 7. 14. Mat. 1. 23. Genesis
49. 10. Mat. 2. 1. Micah 5. 2. Psalm. 16. 10. Luke 24. 7.
the Prophecies of the Law, and the History of the Gospel, how exactly the
Gospel is the fulfilling of those Prophesies of the Messiah, which we meet
withal in the Old Testament. So that if the Jews had not given themselves up
to an obstinate perverseness, Moses himself would have lead them to Christ; for
how exactly do we find him described by the Prophets both as to the manner,
time, and place of his Birth, and the most remarkable Circumstances of his Life
and Death; these I shall not particularly insist upon, as supposing them
sufficiently known and manifest.

So that if it be possible to know a Person by any precedent Marks and
Characters that may be given of him, then we may be fully assured that Christ
was that Messiah which was Prophefied of in the Old Testament, especially if we
consider that there were some Marks and Characters, which did, and only could
belong to himself, as his being born of a Virgin, and the manner and time of
his Resurrection.

To these we may add the Consideration of those hard shifts and frivolous
Evasions and forced Interpretations, that the Jews make use of to evade the
force of this Argument, which though singly in their own Nature are no Proofs,
either of the truth of the Christian or falseness of the Jewish Doctrine in
this particular, yet, to an Ingenuous and impartial Considerer, they are
additional confirmations of that truth, which before we had more positive
Grounds and Reasons to believe.

2. The Jews had little reason to be offended at our Savior, if we consider
the concurrence of those Qualifications, which they themselves required in a
true Prophet, or at least in order to his trial whether he was so or no; Now
the generally received Qualifications of this Nature were these, 1. An eminent
degree of Wisdom and Prudence. 2. Of Courage and magnanimity. 3. Of Virtue and
Piety. All which were so remarkable in our Savior, that the malice of Men and
Devils was either forced to acknowledge them, or not able to say any thing
material against them. To which if we add his Power of Working Miracles,
nothing further could be required in order to his being received as a true
Prophet, so that if the Jews would but either have admitted our Savior to his
trial, in this particular, before they had condemned him, or in judging made
use of their own Rules in other ca'es of the like Nature, they must have
acknowledged Christ to have been a true Prophet: So that he had both the
Prophesies of the Law, and the Principles and Practices of the Jews themselves
in the like Cases in favor of him, if any thing could have prevailed against
Prejudice and Interest; but they reject him by a Law which they themselves
never acted by before, and which they according to their own Principles must
resolve shall never after be drawn into a precedent.

3. The Jews had no reason to be offended at Christ or his Doctrine, if we
consider those many excellencies and advantages the Gospel had above the Law,
so that whatever it was the Jewish boasted it self above other Nations of the
Gentile World, even in those very things did the Gospel much outdo them. As,

1. We have under the Gospel a clearer Manifestation of those fundamental
Truths, which were but obscurely shadowed out under the Law. Now are shadows
turned into Substances, and Types into Realities; the Law came by Moses, but
Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ.

I doubt not but the more divinely Instructed among the Jews did rightly
understand, and piously expect a future state of Immortality. Yet it is probable
that the Common sort amongst them looked no further then the Letter of the Law,
expecting no other reward of their Obedience, then the enjoyment of a Land
flowing with Milk and Honey, it being the great Prerogative of the Gospel, that
it brought Life and Immortality to Light, that is, made a more full and clear
discovery of it.

2. We have a more plentiful effusion of the Spirit and divine assistance now
under the Gospel, then ever was known under the Law, this was the time of which
it was Prophefied, that God would power out his Spirit upon all Flesh, and that
all from the highest to the lowest should be (...) taught of God; But this is
not so to be understood, as some of our late Enthusiasts do interpret it, as if
we should now expect any new Revelations either above or besides the Will of
God made known to us in Scripture.

But this Prophecy was then fignally fulfilled, when God powered out his Spirit
upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost, thereby furnishing them with Gifts
and Graces for the planting of his Church and promulging the Gospel.

And it is also this day fulfilled in the Hearts of all good Christians, as God
by his preventing and assisting Grace does accompany particular Persons, and
assists them to Work out their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

And thus much for the first particular, to show in general that the Jews had
no just reason to be offended at Christ and his Doctrine; and that it was
rather Malice and Envy against his Religion, that it had so much of Truth and
Reason on its side, rather than Contempt for the want of either, that moved
them to a dislike of it.

2. I shall show the particular Grounds and Reasons upon which the Jews were
offened at the Gospel, which more especially were these two.

1. They thought the Christian Religion not sufficiently confirmed with Signs
and Wonders.

2. They were offended at the meanness of Christ's Life and the dishonor of his
Death.

1. They were affended at the Christian Religion, as supposing it not
sufficiently confirmed by Miracles, Verse 22. The Jews require a Sign.

But in Answer to this it will be sufficient only to remind you, that Christ
did Confirm his Doctrine, and the truth of his mission with sufficient Signs
and Miracles, beyond the possibility of any reasonable Exception, if we
consider either the number, or quality or manner of Performance, or the end and
design of them, which was always either for the necessary Confirmation of his
Doctrine, or in Compassion to the Souls and Bodies of Men, never to gratify
Curiosity in others, or vain Glory or Ostentation in himself; so that the
manner of their performance, sometimes only by a word, together with the end
and design of them, the promoting the great Designs of Truth and Charity, those
seem still to add more Divinity to his Miracles.

And farther our Savior at his having the World, did invest his Apostles with
the same Power of Working Miracles, so far and so long as was necessary for the
planting of his Church: Which thing also is an Argument of the Truth and
certainty of our Saviors being a true Prophet, for that Impostors commonly are
neither able nor willing to convey and communicate that Art to others, which
they pretend to themselves.

This being premised, the unreasonableness of the Jews requiring still further
Signs, will appear upon these following Accounts.

1. The too great frequency of Miracles, though it would not destroy the Nature
of 'em, yet would it make them less Solemn and Venerable, less Cogent and
Argumentative, and more liable to the Cavils and Contempt of ill disposed Men,
for by how much any thing is more frequent and usual, the nearer it comes to
Common and Natural, at least in the Apprehensions of some Men, and familiarity
even of Miracles, as well as of other things, would in time, breed Contempt.

This would give too just an Occasion to that which yet the more improved
Atheism of our Age asserts notwithstanding, that there are no such things as
Miracles in the World; but that all things of this Kind are to be resolved into
the fixed course of Nature.

In short, if Men should once come to this; to desire one Miracle for the
Confirmation of another, thus they might run on in Infinitum, and end in
Scepticisme.

2. The Jews requiring Signs, in that manner as they did, was not only saucy
and impudent; but also would have been, if granted, a Lessening of that
Evidence, which otherwise our Savior gave by denying them, nothing would
satisfy them; but Signs suited to their own Humors and Fancies, they must have
(...) Signs from Heaven, (those they had too) though those were more liable to
Exception, than these nearer and more palpable Signs, which he more commonly
showed them.

The Chief Priests and Scribes told our Savior, when he hung upon the Cross,
that if he would come down, that is, save himself from Death, they would
believe: Now what an unreasonable request was this? they would dissuade our
Savior from doing that upon which theirs and all Mankinds Salvation did
depend; but what if, upon granting their request, they would not yet have been
as good as their Word? They could not give our Savior any good security for
performance. Yet further, they did hereby indeed and in truth contradict their
own pretenses, for if he had so come down from the Cross, as to save himself
from Death, they could not, upon just Grounds, have believed him to be the true
Messiah.

In short, if he had thus gratified them in their request, he could not have
given them that, which was indeed a greater Sign than that which they demanded,
that is, the raising himself from the dead, thus could he not have been true to
his own Word, whereby he promised to give them the Sign of the Prophet Jonas,
Mat. 12. 38.

3. Supposing, what yet we cannot reasonably Suppose, that the Jews who lived
at the Writing of this Epistle, had not been Eyewitnesses of several Miracles
done by the Apostles in their Days, yet they had a constant, universal, and
undoubted Tradition of these things delivered down to them from the former Age,
and they who will not believe such a Tradition as this, that is, when they have
all the Evidence that a thing of that nature is capable of, neither would they
believe but either find or make some Occasion of cavilling at that which they
saw done before their Eyes. Our Savior prefers the Faith of those who believe
and yet have not seen, before those who have, and it is not to be supposed that
he would commend a Groundless Faith or vain credulity if we should believe
nothing now but what we saw, this would destroy the end and use of all History,
and needlessly take up the greatest part of the time of one Age to act over
again the things of another.

Thus much in Answer to the first Offense that the Jews took at the Gospel,
that they thought it not sufficiently confirmed by Miracles, but still required
a Sign.

2. The Jews were offended at the meanness of Christ's Life, and the Dishonor
of his Death.

In Answer to this in general: Christ's appearance in the World, together with
all the Circumstances of it, according to a true estimate of things, was as far
above any thing that was mean and Vulgar, as it was below that Fantastic Pomp
and Splendour which the Jews unreasonably expected, here I might Instance in
thatGloriousQuire of Angels which first ushered him into the World, and that
extraordinary Star that directed the Wise Men to the place of his residence,
both which spoke him to be no common or ordinary Person; those several
Attestations of the Divine Love and Approbation from Heaven, and the forced
acknowledgment that theDevils themselves made of him, his Transfiguration in
the Mount, and tion into Heaven, all these spoke him to be more than Man, by
all which and several other Instances of his Power, this Sun of Righteousness,
though clouded in the Vailes of Flesh, by such Vigorous Eradiations gave
undeniable Testimonies to the World of his Divinity.

But more particularly the way and Method of Christ's appearance in the World,
was the most proper and effectual means to prove himself to be, what indeed he
was, the Power of God. And this will appear upon these following Accounts.

1. The way wherein Christ appeared in the World was the most proper means for
the accomplishment of those ends, for which he came into it; which were. 1. To
offer himself a Sacrifice for Sin, and so to reconcile Man to his offended
Father. 2. To leave us the most powerful Example of an Holy Life.

Now in order to the first, he became Man, that so he might put himself into a
Capacity of dying for us, and in order to the second, he chose this mean
Condition, thereby to make his Virtues and Graces appear more eminently Divine,
thus by his Example encouraging and recommending those more weighty and
difficult Duties of Christianity, Humility, Patience and Self-denial.

Christ very well knew that the whole Malice of Men and Devils would be
vigorously employed to traduce his Actions and scandalize his Religion, he
therefore chose this Valley of a meaner Fortune, wherein he might, if possible,
not only be safe from; but from whence also he might more easily repel them.

It he had appeared in the Pomp and Glorys of an Earthly Kingdom, and so
prevailed upon the easy World, then had he wanted that Argument of Divinity,
which now his Religion has, that is, a prevailing over all Opposition without
the help of any outward Assistance.

Besides it would have been counted Policy rather than Devotion, that joined
Men Prosylites to a flowrishing Religion.

But now theStricktness of our Savior's Precepts, the severity of his
Discipline, the great contrariety his Doctrine bore to the corrupt Customs and
Vicious Inclinations of the World, all these show that it was nothing less than
a Divine Power accompanying it, that made it successful.

2. Christ thus showed himself to be the power of God, because he has done
that which nothing but the Power of God could do, As.

1. He has destroyed the Kingdom of Satan without us. 2. He has subdued our
wicked Lusts and Corruptions within us.

1. He has destroyed the Kingdom of Satan without us; this the Pharisyes
themselves acknowledge that he cast out Devils; but then, they say, it was by
Beelzebub, the Prince of the Devils.

But Christ did very solidly and rationally confute the Weakness and Silliness
of this surmize.

A Kingdom, says he, divided against it self is brought to Desolation, and an
house or City divided against it self cannot stand, and if Satan be divided
against himself, how shall his Kingdom stand? For he that can believe that the
Devil should assist him, whose great end and design was no other, but only to
destroy Sin and Wickedness, and to encourage and promote Virtue and Piety in
the World, such an one may by the same Reason believe and assert any thing.

Christ came into the World to dissolve the Works of the Devil, and to restore
things to the State wherein they were before: for God might have seemed
frustrated in his End and Design in creating Man, if that Method of his
Providence first instituted for Man's Salvation, if it had been so utterly
broken, beyond the possibility of all recovery; but now Christ has given the
Devil and all the Powers of Darkness to understand, that he is able to produce
Light out of Darkness and Order out of Confusion; thus has God restored man
again to a possibility of Salvation, notwithstanding all the former attempts
and present endeavors of the Devil to the contrary.

2. Christ by the Gospel has subdued our wicked Lusts and Affections within us,
and this was more then either the Jewish Sacrifices of themselves, or the
imperfect Rules of the Gentile Philosophy was ever able to perform: He has not
only himself overcome the Devil, but also enables every true Christian to do
the same, this he does by the assistance of his Holy Spirit, whereby we become
more then Conquerors over all Temptations. Thus Christ does at once instruct
and strengthen us, he teaches us what to do, and enables us to do what he
teaches, precepts though never so excellent, yet if they be unpracticable, are
altogether void and to no purpose; but this is thepeculiar Privilege of the
Gospel, that it enables us to perform that Obedience which it requires of us:
Thus is it the Power of God unto Salvation; that is, a Method every way
sufficient in its own Nature for that purpose; but then this is not so to be
understood, as if there was nothing left to be done by us, for Christ has not
so effected Man's Salvation, that nothing now remains for us to do, but idely to
expect it; the Grace of God indeed has brought Salvation; but then it is by
teaching us to deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, which supposes our
willingness and our endeavors too to learn. Thus the manner of Christ's
appearance in the World could give no just Occasion of Offense to the Jews, it
being the most proper means to effect those great and worthy ends of his
coming, and to prove himself to be the power of God.

And as for Christ's Death, if it was no dishonor for him to be born, neither
was it any to die; for the one seems naturally to follow from the other. And
supposing the Person suffering to be Innocent, as Christ certainly was, the
manner of his Death cannot reflect any thing of real dishonor upon him, so
that all that can be gathered from Christ's Crucifixion is only this, his
greater love to us, and the Jews their greater malice and cruelty to him.

And further, the Circumstances that attended his Death spoke him to be more
then a common and ordinary Person; then was the Sun darkened, the Graves
opened, the Vail of the Temple Rent, and such general Convulsions of Nature
every where appeared, that it caused a Philosopher thus to argue, either that
Nature it felf was dissolved, or that the God of Nature suffered.

2. The Death of Christ could give no just Occasion of Offense to the Jews, if
we consider the honorary consequences of it, for by this was afforded the
greatest matter of Triumph to the Christian cause imaginable; for if Christ had
not dyed he could not have risen again, and it was a greater Argument of his
Power to raise himself from Death, then it would have been to have kept himself
from dying.

Thus the Resurrection of Christ was the greatest Evidence of the Divinity of
his Person and the Truth of his Doctrine.

And thus much as to the first general part of my Text in Answer to those
Offenses, which the Jews took at Christ and his Religion.

2. The second Scandal here cast upon the Gospel by the Greeks, was the
Imputation of folly, And to the Greeks Foolishness.

HereI shall likewise vindicate theGospel from this Aspersion, by speaking to
these two particulars.

1. I shall show what little Reason the Greeks had to impute Foolishness to the
Christian Doctrine, seeing this does infinitely transcend the Religion of the
Gentiles in the truth, and certainly of its Principles.

2. I shall show the Wisdom and Prudence of the Christian Practice.

The first of these shows the Improperness of the Objection as made by them,
the other the falseness of it in it self. The first shows how unfit it was to
be objected by the Greeks, the other how impossible it is to be defended by
any; and both together, I hope, will sufficiently vindicate the Gospel from the
least Imputation of folly.

1. I shall show the reasonableness of the Christian Doctrine, in Comparison of
that of the Gentiles.

1. As it is a practical Institution or a Doctrine of Morality, so the very
Heathens could not but testify their profound Veneration for it: all that
their wit and malice could object against it in this particular being only
that, which was indeed a tacit acknowledgment of its Excellence, viz. that it
required greater degrees of Holiness then was consistent with Humane nature,
and that it put its Professors upon endeavors after unattainable Measures of
Purity and Piety. And as to the Mystical part of our Religion, what is there in
it that does not become the solemn and venerable Nature of a divinely revealed
Religion? Indeed if we must reject every thing as false and foolish, because
See Pref. to Amyral. of Divine Dreams.
inexplicable and incomprehensible, as to the modes, then must we bid adieu to
our Natural, as well as our Christian Religion.

But the great matter of offense to the Greeks was Christ Crucified, God and
Man joined in one Person, and suffering for the Expiation ofSin. God manifested
in the Flesh is certainly a great Mystery, so also is the Union of the Soul and
Body a thing altogether Inexplicable.

As for his dying as a Sacrifice for Sin, it is certain that Humane Sacrifices
were frequently practiced among the Heathens and looked upon by some as
expiatory.

I shall not here enquire into the first Ground and Original of those
Sacrifices among them only shall leave it to Consideration, how far these though
Wicked and Barbarous in them, yet might, in the Methods of Divine Providence,
be suffered among the Gentiles, thereby to prepare their minds, facilitate
their Conceptions, and in due time to convince them of the unreasonableness of
Christ's Crucifixion for the Expiation of Sin. But more particularly.

It does not become a Christian whilst he is answering the Scandals cast upon
his Religion, unjustly to recriminate and load his Adversaries with false
Imputations; the generous and virtuous Temper of Christianity, as it needs not,
so it scorns to build its Reputation upon the Ruin of other Men's. Therefore I
do not here go about to charge the Heathens in general with that stupid and
grossest sort of Idolatry, which some are too apt to do, as if they owned no
higherObject of their Adoration, then that of the Sun or the Soul of the World,
and that all their Worship did not suppose the belief of any higher Deity.

I humbly conceive we have neither Reason nor Scripture in favor of this
Assertion, but much of both to the contrary.

But tho'I go not thus far in my Charge against the Gentiles in general, yet
this I may truly say, That their Notions of God and of the Divine Nature come
very much short of those which Christianity affords us, both in respect of
truth and certainty. But however true in some respects, their Notions of God
might be in the Theory, yet their Religion, as a Doctrine of Worship, was very
false and Idolatrous, and though they did know God, yet they did not Worship him
as God.

Thus all or most of their Religious Rites of Worship were but so many various
Modes of Idolatry, and sometimes they became wicked in Imitation even of those
Gods, whom they worshipped; and upon this account, others sometimes, as they
thought, out of a Principle of Devotion and Religion became Atheists, choosing
rather to believe there were no Gods at all, rather then think them such, as
some Men had represented them.

But now Christianity corrects the falseness of these mistakes, and teaches us
to Worship the true God in a true manner, God did not require the Blood of
Bulls and Goats in the Jewish Sacrifices for their own sakes, nor did he at all
require the bloody and wicked Sacrifices of the Gentiles, the Gospel teaches
us that a broken and contrite Spirit is the true Christian Sacrifice, that we
must offer our Souls and Bodies an Holy living Sacrifice, acceptable unto God,
not by any Barbarous Cruelties exercised upon either; but they are to be
offered unto God in a way of Purity and Holiness.

Secondly, Christianity does not only correct the salse; but also improves
those better and truer Notions, which the Gentiles had, to higher Degrees of
Perfection and Clearness, then they were ever able to do.

1. The Greeks had some Notions of the being ofGod, and the Immortality of the
Soul; but then they were very much mistaken in the Nature of the Deity, and
their belief of a future State was joined with a great deal of doubt and
uncertainty, it was only the Gospel that perfectly acquainted us with the one,
and fully assured us of the other. They had indeed sufficient Grounds to
believe both; but yet they came as far short of the Strength and Evidence of
those Arguments which the Gospel affords us, as reason comes short of
Revelation.

Not but that Christians may also make a very good use of those Arguments which
Reason and Philosophy afford us, for it much strengthens our Faith in the
belief of those things declared in Scripture when we find the same also
confirmed by reason, though Reason alone had been herein, but a weak and
insufficient Ground of Faith.

Socrates, who yet died as it were a Martyr to his Natural Religion, argued
very well, when he came to die, of a future State, yet it was with such a
Degree of uncertainty, as Christianity would have quite removed in the like
Circumstances.

2. The Greeks had some Notions of the thing, though not of the Name and Nature
of Original Sin, that is, they did acknowledge an Universal depravation of
Nature; but then as to the cause and head of it, that was as unknown to them,
as that of Nilus, they thought it rather from the beginning essential to our
Natures, rather then any ways afterward contracted, they looked upon it indeed
as their Misery but not their fault: And being thus Ignorant of the Cause, they
were as far to seek for the Remedy, the best and highest means that they ever
used, in order thereunto, being only the imperfect Rules of Art and Philosophy.

But now Christianity, as it shows us the true Cause of it in Adam, so does it
provide a sufficient means for the removal of it, viz. the blood of Christ, and
the Grace of the Gospel.

3. The Greeks were conscious to themselves of the necessity of a Divine
Revelation, as may appear from that high esteem and constant recourse they had
to the Oracles, their pretended Deities.

But then they were so far from being bettered by these, that this seemed the
very Masterpiece of the Devils malice and subtlety, thus to enact Wickedness by
a Law, and to give it the Stamp of Divine Revelation.

But now God in these last days has spoken to us by his Son, by whom he has
fully and clearly revealed his Will to Mankind, thus have we the true Oracles
of God committed to us, not with an intent to deceive us, but to guide us in
the undoubted ways to Happiness.

4. The Gentiles had some Notions of the pacability of the Deity, this all
their Sacrifices did necessarily imply, and indeed Mercy and Goodness seems in
the first place to offer it self in that Notion of a Deity, which is Naturally
Imprinted on the Minds of Men.

-- Quamvis Meritis venia est indebita Nostris,
Magna tamen Spes est in bonitate Dei. --
Ovid. But then Sin and Guilt being naturally full of Fears and Jealousies,
though perhaps we might have some glimmering hopes of Pardon, which yet could not
be fixed upon any good Ground or firm Foundation, yet we could never have
arrived at that full assurance, which the Gospel has now given us: God having
thus provided sufficient Answers to all those doubts and fears, with either the
Malice of the Devil, or our own guilty Consciences can possibly suggest: So
that we have now all the assurance of Gods being reconciled with us, upon the
Terms propounded in the Gospel, that either God can give, or Man reasonably
require.

But further, suppose that it had been knowable by the Light of Nature, that
God, upon our begging Mercy would have pardoned our Sins; Yet we could never
have any Reason to believe, that he would conter on us such high Degrees of
Happiness, as now we are assured of, without a particular Revelation.

And thus much for the first thing, to show what little Reason the Greeks had
to impute Foolishness to the Gospel, as to its Principles.

2. I shall now show the Wisdom and Prudence of the Christian Practice, and
that upon these two Accounts. 1. As the Christian Practice does the best secure
our Temporal Happiness here. 2. Our Eternal Happiness hereafter.

1 As it best secures our Temporal Happiness here, and that in general by
teaching us to act according to those two grand Principles of a Christian Life,
Prudence and Innocence: The one teaches us to do no hurt our selves, the
other, as far as lawfully we can, to avoid the receiving it from others,
however if our Prudence cannot secure us from Injuries abroad, yet our
innocence will give us the satisfaction of a quiet mind at home, so that
whatever Miseries befall us, whilst we thus act we have this comfort within our
selves, that as far as Humane Frailty would permit, we neither by our unadvised
Folly, nor wilful Wickedness incurred the Misery.

Thus are we taught by the Gospel, to be Wise as Serpents and Innocent as
Doves, not to suffer as Fools, nor live Apostates, not wholly to neglect our
own self-Preservation, yet not so to regard it, as to forfeit our Religion. It
teaches us in all Emergencies of Life to act so, as becomes Men, and as becomes
Christians, and so to avoid the Imputation both of Wicked and unreasonable Men.
But more particularly.

Whatever is truly desirable here in this World, may be reduced to some of
these four Heads; Health, Riches, Honor, or Pleasure: Now all these are
ascribed to Wisdom, that is, Religion. 3 Prove. 16. 17. Length of Days is in
her Right Hand, and in her Left Riches and Honor. Her ways are ways of
Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.

1. Health, this is put in the first place, as being the Foundation of all the
rest. It was Sin that first brought Death and Diseases into the World, and it
is that which still continues and promotes them: thus the debauched and
Luxurious Man does not only Sin against his Soul, but his Body too: and even
those more retired and secret Sins of Envy, Malice and Hatred these prey upon
the vital Spirits, and strangely discompose the Natural Temper and Disposition
of Men's Bodies, whereas on the contrary, the calm, even, Christian Temper of
Mind, together with the Observance of those Evangelical Precepts of Moderation,
Temperance and Chastity, do most naturally preserve Men in Health, and either
prevent or cure most Diseases.

So that our Savior by his Sovereign Precepts did not only show himself a
Physician of the Soul, but Body too.

2. Riches, this perhaps may be counted a great Parodox by some, to say that
Justice and Honesty, and an universal Practice of Christianity, should tend to
make Men Rich, whereas it is more generally believed, that Hipocrisy and
Dissimulation, Violence and Oppression, and an Universal neglect of Religion
and Conscience, that those are the more proper means to raise an Estate: but
when things are rightly considered, we shall find that the Christian Practice
does really tend to make Men Rich, and that both upon a Natural and a Moral
Account. 1. Upon a Natural Account, both as it frees Men from those many
Expensive Lusts and Vices, as Pride, Vainglory, Ambition, and the like, which
cannot be maintained, but at a great Charge, yea, sometimes to the Ruin of
that Estate that bred them, and also as it engages Men to an Honest Industry in
their several Places and Callings, which is the most Proper and NaturalMeans of
raising a great and good Estate. 2. Upon a Moral or Divine Account as the
Blessing of God does Accompany Honesty and upright dealing. 1 Timothy 4. 8. But
Godliness is Profitable unto all things, having the Promise of the Life, that
now is, and that which is to come. Thus though it be the future State, wherein
Godliness, this Sun of Righteousness does display its greatest Luster, yet does
it also vouchsafe to enlighten this lower World, with its Golden Rays, with the
Promises of this Life as well as of another Life.

3. Honor, Romans 6. 21. What Profit had you of those things, whereof you are
now ashamed, For Sin is both in its own Nature, and in its Consequences
Shamesul: Whereas Virtue and true Goodness is always honored and esteemed even
by those, who otherwise have no great Love or Value for them, and though there be
a sort of Men in the World, who look upon Religion as a Mean despicable thing,
not worthy of a Man of Honor as they call him; Men, who Glory in their Shame,
and count it a piece of Galantry of Spirit to Sin with an high hand, in
defiance of God and of their own Conscience, yet thanks be to God, these men
though more in this Age then ever, yet are but few in number in Comparison of
those other more excellent Persons, who both scorn and pity such horrid folly.
And as for these Men, who thus seem to pride themselves in their own
debaucheries, yet we have reason to suspect, that they are not in Earnest, when
they thus speak that they do not really and indeed believe Sin to be so
Honorable a thing as they pretend, and that first, because they then only
Glory most in their Wickedness, when they are in Company like themselves, if
there be any grave Religious Persons in presence, they then commonly are more
Modest, and seem Naturally to show a kind of awful Veneration toward such Men.

2. When these Men would really and to purpose revile a Man, they do not then
reproach him with his Virtues, but either with some real or pretended Vice and
Wickedness; thus the Devil himself could not cast cast any Reproach or Scandal
upon upright Job, as such, but he must be first falsely represented and
unjustly accused of Hypocrisy (Does Job serve God for naught) before any thing
of Reproach or Scandal could be fixed upon him.

4. The Christian Practice does the best secure our Pleasure and Satisfaction
here in this World, so that Religion is no such sower Melancholy disconsolate
thing, as some Men represent it, God does not envy Men the Enjoyment of just
Pleasures and Recreations, so far as they are Virtuous and Innocent, and when
they cease to be such, they cease to be Pleasures, truly so called; but they
are then only the Pleasures of mad Men, consisting only in a fantastic
Imagination, or the Pleasures of Fools, by which they purchase to themselves
infinite and unspeakable Pains and Miseries. And as for those Troubles of
Conscience and Sorrows of Repentance, which some Men are so much offended at in
Religion; these if rightly con sider'd are not truly chargeable upon Religion,
but upon the Violation of its Laws and breach of its Commands: Nor are the
Tears of Repentance so bitter, as some imagine, for the true Penitent weeps,
and at the same time rejoices that he does so, his sorrow is kindly and
Ingenuous, and has always this Satisfaction going along with it, that by this
means he is reconciling himself to his offended Father. So that Religion in the
just Practice of its Precepts, and due Observance of its Laws, is certainly the
most cheerful pleasant thing in the World.

And thus much for the first particular, that the Christian Practice does the
best secure our present Happiness here.

2. It best, secures our Eternal Happiness hereafter, by teaching us to Act in
conformity to our own Principles, and by assuring us that by Holiness here we
shall certainly arrive at Happiness hereafter.

For the Divine Providence in the very Order of Nature, and the first
Constitution of things, has so ordered Affairs, that there is a Natural and
Necessary Connection betwixt Sin and Misery, and betwixt Holiness and Happiness;
This the very Heathens were sensible of, that Holiness did either entitle a Man
to Happiness, or at least to a Freedom from Misery; So that if an Holy Man at
last prove Miserable, with Reverence be it spoken, he may say that it was God
that made him so, which we may assure our selves he never did, nor will make
any so without their own fault. So that we must either grant, That Holiness
will at last bring a Man to Happiness, or else assert what is impious to
suppose, That God ever since his first Creation of Man made it his whole
business to deceive him, both by those first Impressions made upon his Soul,
and by his after Revelations. But this is so unworthy of God and contrary to
all his Attributes, that it can never enter into the thoughts of any sober or
considerate Man to Imagine.

Thus have I done with the two general Parts of the Text, wherein I have
endeavored to prove, what the Apostle here asserts Christ to be, that is, the
Power ofGod in Opposition to the Jews, and the Wisdom ofGod in Opposition to
the Gentiles.

And now I hope I shall not need to make any Apology for a Discourse of this
Nature, for Meditations upon such Subjects as these are not Matters of mere
Speculation only, nor are they antiquated now by the distance of time from that
of the Apostles; but are even still of great Concernment to the present State
of Religion.

It Is true indeed that we have not now Jews and Gentiles to deal withal, as the
Apostles had, but yet we have as inveterate Enemies against Religion in
general, and the Protestant Religion, as now by Law established in particular,
as the Jews and Gentiles were against the Christians. And it is observable,
that so maliciously are they set against us and our Religion, that they care
not from whence they fetch their Weapons and Arguments, whether from Jew or
Gentile or Hell it self, provided only they can by any means annoy us, or get
any advantage over us. And sometimes they make use of the same Arguments, or
the same a little variously modified, which the Jews and Gentiles did against
the Christians.

It is therefore our great Duty and Interest rightly to understand the Grounds
and Reasons of our own Religion, as also the Nature and Force of our
Adversaries Arguments, and the Various Ways and Methods by which they make
their attempts upon us.

This if we rightly do, we shall not only thereby barely defend our selves; but
also with Advantage and Reputation to our Religion repel our Adversaries; for
I am apt to believe that the Christian Cause got more Advantage by those solid
Vindications and those rational Apologies, which the Apostles and Primitive
Fathers made for it, then it suffered by the Force or Malice of the Opposition,
Occasion being thus given it by answering the Objections, to exert its own
Strength, and to bring forth and show the inexhausted Treasures of its own
Truth. Whereas on the contrary, there is nothing wherein a good Cause can
possibly be injured, but only by a weak defense.

I shall now only make some short practical Observations from a more general
review of the Words, and so conclude. But we Preach Christ Crucified, etc.

Hence we may observe the great Duty and Office of a Minister of the Gospel, to
Preach Christ Crucified, that is, to declare the whole Will of God to Man, as
it is plainly and clearly laid down in Scripture, without any Tincture of our
own private Humors, Interests or Inclinations, nor must we arrest Scripture in
favor of any Party or Faction, but must with the greatest sincerity and
impartiallity study to find out the true Sense of Scripture, not to make a new
one of our own.

We must Preach not only the more easy and pleasing, but also the more
difficult Duties ofChristianity, Christ Crucified, that is, the Doctrine of
Mortification, of Passive as well as Active Obedience, etc. But more
particularly,

We much Preach Christ Crucified in Opposition to three sorts of Men in the
World, 1. Those of the Church of Rome, 2. Some later Enthusiasts of our own, 3.
The profane and Atheistically inclined Persons of the Age. I shall not
consider these in their utmost latitude, for this would be too remote from our
present purpose; but only so far as they seem offended at the Gospel upon the
same or like Accounts that the Jews and Gentiles were here against Christ
Crucified, so far only as they also in their several ways look upon the Cross
of Christ, either as a Stumbling Block with the Jews, or as Foolishness with
the Gentiles.

1. In Opposition to those of the Church of Rome. But this perhaps will seem a
great Paradox to some, to say that any of that Church should be offended at the
Cross of Christ, those who pay so much Honor and Veneration to it, those who
institute whole Orders of Men in Honor to the Name and in Imitation of the
humble and Crucified Jesus, to say that these are offended at the Cross of
Christ, this perhaps may be thought as great a scandal cast upon them, as those
which were cast either by Jew or Gentile upon Christ Crucified.

But yet we know it is possible to betray Christ by that Kiss, by which it is
pretended to Honor him.

But it is not the Cross of Christ in this sense, that those men are offended
at; but it is the Humble and Peaceable Doctrines of the Crucified Jesus, those
Commands of his which do not so well agree with their Interests or
Inclinations: The Doctrines of Loyalty and Passive Obedience, of Truth,
Sincerity, and open profession of Faith, though with the hazard of Life, these
and such like are the Doctrines of Christ, which these men are offended at.

And these Romanists like the Jews, seem to be offended at that mean Appearance
that Christ and his Doctrine makes in the World, that is, that it is not so
exactly suited to maintain and bear up that Pomp, Grandeur, and Interest, which
that Church has unreasonably raised it self unto, upon the Ruins of Truth, and
Corruption of those humble and peaceable Doctrines of Christ Crucified.

And it might easily be made appear, how most of the Roman Doctrines, those, I
mean, wherein they differ from the Church of England, as those of Deposing
Princes and absolving Subjects from their Obedience, of Purgatory, and Prayers
for the Dead, and the like, how these both in their own Natures, and as they
are managed by those that entertain them, do more Naturally tend to get Riches,
and maintain a secular Pomp and Grandeur, then to promote Piety in the lives of
their Professors.

These are the Men, who partly by their Contrariety of Doctrine, partly by
their loose Rules of Conscience, partly by their frivolous Distinctions and
Evasions have made many of the most weighty Duties of Christianity of none
effect.

And some of these Roman Doctrines, particularly that of Disobedience to, and
Resistance of lawful Authority, has been exactly copyed out by some, I cannot
say of our Communion, those I mean, of the Separation: I am no Friend to the
fixing of bad Names upon any scrt of Men, yet this, I think, I may truly say,
that there is more real Popery, so far as it is false and dangerous, in this
single Opinion of resisting of Authority, which is so much espoused by some of
our Separatists, then there is in all the Innocent Ceremonies and those other
things which have occasioned so many groundless Clamours against the Church of
England.

Indeed this Doctrine of Resistance is too ugly to appear barefaced in the
World, and therefore has always had some specious pretense or other, as the
Glory of God, the Purity of Religion, the Liberty of Conscience, or the
property of the Subject, and all these backed with a great many of false and
Foolish, Silly and dangerous Distinctions.

But the most modern Mask that this Opinion has appeared in of late, is this,
that Non-Resistance, say they, was only a temporary Command, proper only for
those first and primitive Ages of the Church, when Christians suffered
according to the Laws of the Country; but the Case was much different in after
Ages, when the Laws were in Favor of Religion, and Christians persecuted
contrary to Law.

I shall not need to speak much in Answer to this Argument, the Weakness and
Falseness of it being already fully and sufficiently shown by several Worthy
Persons.

I shall only intimate these two things. 1. To say that Passive Obedience was
only a Duty Incumbent on Christians in the first Ages of the Church, is an
Assertion without the least Ground or Evidence of Proof; for Scripture speaks
of Obedience to Authority as a Constant indispensable Duty of Christianity,
without any Restriction or Limitation, as to time or place: and we must know
that Scripture was intended as a Rule of Faith and Manners, not only to that
particular time wherein it was writ, but also to all succeding Ages; and it
would be a great Reflection upon the Scripture, as to the Perfection of it, if
it required Non-Resistance of Authority only as a temporary Duty, and yet never
in the least to intimate, how long it should continue thus, or how we should
know when the time was expired, or by what Rules and Measures we should guide
our selves, when things came to be otherwise.

I hope they will not say that this is Casus Omissus in Scripture, and so to be
supplied either by the Popish Additions, or Euthusiastick Interpretations of
later Ages.

But in short, these men's way of arguing seems very much to resemble that of
Mr. Hobb's in another Case, of whom it is observed, that he supposed Men worse
then they were, and from thence drew Principles to make them worse, then
otherwise they would be. That is, from the Observation of the General
Depravation of Humane Nature, and the Vicious Inclinations of most Men, hence
he unwarily drew such Conclusions as these, that Violence and Oppression,
Self-Preservation and Interest, without any respect to any higher Principles,
are the Prime and Fundamental Dictates ofNature and Reason in general, without
ever distinguishing betwixt pure and corrupted Nature, or betwixt Reason truly
so called, and that which is only the Dictate of inferior Sense and Appetite.

So these Men from some irregular Proceedings, either falsely imputed to the
Christians about Julian's time, or if truly, yet but the Miscarriages of some
particular Men, yet from such premises as these, would draw such false and
dangerous Conclusions, as should justify and legitimate the like irregular
Practices to all succeeding Ages.

2. This Assertion has a very bad Influence upon several other Duties of
Christianity; for thus they argue, where there is any Variation of
Circumstances now, different from what was in the Apostles times, there that
ceases to be a Duty now, which was one then. I deny not, but where the thing is
in its own Nature indifferent, and the Reason of the Obligation depends upon
the present Circumstances, there the Circumstances being changed, the
Obligation ceases; but it is not so in his Case, Obedience to Magistrates is an
Eternal Duty, and that which the very Essential Constitutions and Principles of
Government require of us, here the Variation of some smaller Circumstances will
not alter the Nature of the thing, if it did, we might also by the same way of
Arguing prove, that voluntary Charity to the Poor now is no Duty incumbent upon
Christians, this indeed, we may say, was a Duty in the first Ages of the
Church, because there were then no Laws in Favor of the Poor, but their whole
Subsistence depended upon Voluntary Contributions; but the case is far
otherwise now, and thereforethis kind of Charity ceases now to be a Duty; the
weakness of this Argument, I suppose easily appears to any Considerate Man at
the first view: For though there is Provision now made for the Poor by the Law,
yet notwithstanding there is no Law, neither of God nor Man, against Voluntary
Charity to the Poor; So though the Laws, thanks be to God, be in Favor of our
Religion now, yet there are no Laws, neither of God nor Man, in the least to
encourage Rebellion or Resistance of lawful Authority for Religions sake.

2. We must Preach Christ Crucified, both in Opposition to some Heretics of
Old, who tell us, that Christ did not really and truly suffer, but in
Appearance only, so subverting our Faith, and also to some later Enthusiasts of
our own Age. These seem to be offended upon the same Account that the Jews were
here in the Text, that is, at the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel, those
Men think every thing Foolish, that has not something of Mystery and Enthufiasm
in it, making all Religion to consist in airy Notions and nice Speculations,
these are the Religious Chemists of the Age, who think they then only speak
nothing to the purpose, when they speak so as to be understood, making it
their great business to involve and entangle the otherwise plain and easy
Doctrines of Christianity. These Men pretend to make Religion a far more
profound and mysterious thing, then God ever made it; and whenever any one
Argues any thing against 'em according to the best and truest Principles of
Reason or Religion, they then only return this Answer, That they are Carnal and
Natural Men, and therefore cannot apprehend the deep things of the Spirit of
God; but this is only falsely to interpret Scripture, and poorly to beg what
they should indeed prove.

3. We must Preach Christ Crucified in Opposition to the Profane and
Atheistical Persons of the Age, who look upon all Religion in general as a very
Foolish thing; but more especially are they offended at the Cross of Christ,
and think it the highest pitch of folly imaginable to talk of dying for the
sake of Religion. These are the Hobbists of the Age, who make Interest and
Self-Preservation the great and fundamental Principle of Reason and Religion.

And these men stick not to tell us, that in Obedience to our own Dear
Sovereign Self-Preservaticn, it is lawful in Words to deny even Christ himself
before men, and then in Answer to that place of our Savior, Whoever denies me
before men, him will I deny before myFather which is in Heaven, in Answer to
this they tell us, that whatever a Subject is forced to de, so that he do not
the thing on his own accord, that is not his Action, nor to be imputed to him;
but it is the Action of the Sovereign, and to be imputed to the laws of the
Country. To this I answer, First, That in times of Persecution, according to
this Interpretation, it is not possible for any but a Sovereign to deny his
Savior, becaufe all the Actions of a Subject in his case are imputable only to
the Prince; but this I look upon as a very false and foolish Assertion. 2. If
the Subject in this case may transfer the fault from himself to the Prince, why
may not the Prince by the same reason transter it from himself upon the Laws,
according to his own words, Factum illud esse Civitatis Factum and Legibus
Imputandam: So that whereas Christ's words threaten a Punishment upon some
Person thus offending, the result according to him will be only this, that
those Laws that deny Christ before Men, Christ will deny those Laws before his
Father, which is in Heaven: But this is such a trifling with Scripture, as is
unworthy of a Divine or a Philosopher. Thus much for the first inference.

2. We Preach Christ Crucified, to the Jews a Stumbling Block, etc. Hence I
observe, that the unreasonable offense or scandal that some Men take at the
performance of our Duty, is no just Ground or Reason for us to forbear the
doing of it; for we must distinguish betwixt a Scandal given, and a Scandal
taken, we must not indeed give any just Occasion of Offense to others, in
things that depend merely upon our own Liberty, but if others will unreasonably
take Offense at us in the Performance of our Duty, that as we cannot help, so
must we not so far take notice of it, as to be disobedient to the Lawful
Commands of our Superiors, under pretense of being civil to our Equals.

3. Hence we are taught, not to be offendediat the Cross of Christ, or to think
the worse of our Religion by reason of the mean appearance of its first
Founder, the Holy Jesus: This would be such a piece of Folly, as if a condemned
Person should refuse his Pardon, only because it was not brought him by one in
splendid Apparel, or because it was not writ with Golden Letters: Nor let us
be offended at the pious severities of the Christian Institution, as if
Religion went about to build the Christian upon the Ruins of the Man, and that
Mortification was only a more mild and gentle Word for Martyrdom, whereas
Religion requires nothing of us, but what really tends to the Perfection of our
Nature, to the good of Humane Sosiety here, and the fitting and preparing us
for the society of Saints and Angels in Heaven; whither God of his Infinite
Mercy bring us all, for the sake of Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Glory and Praise both now and for
evermore.

Amen.
ERRATA.
P. 9. 10. r. offended, p. 20. I. (...). T. reasonableness. p. 32. l. 1. leave
out the first life. p. 37. r. wrest. In the Epistle Dedicatory. p. 1. r.
Counties. p. 2. l. 4. r. sense. ditto l. 18. for that r. your p. last, l. 5. r.
Councels.


