THE PREROGATIVE OF THE MONARCHS OF GREAT BRITAIN, ASSERTED According to the
Ancient Laws of ENGLAND.

ALSO, A Confutation of that False Maxim, that Royal Authority is Originally
and Radically in the People.

By Bartholomew Lane, Esquire

LONDON: Printed for William Bateman, at the King's Head, in the Old-Change,
1684.

TO THE READER.
THe Laws and Constitutions of Kingdoms and Commonwealths have ever been
esteemed by those happy Subjects whose lot it has been to be governed by them,
as the most Precious and Sacred Treasure wherewith the Divine Bounty had
Enriched them, and therefore they would as soon have been prevailed upon to
part with their Lives as their Laws, and among all those Nations whose Monarchs
are truly Royal, and whose happy Subjects are Ruled and Governed by the
Unerring Precepts of Equity and Law, England is yet the most happy, and
challenges the Precedence above the rest of her Neighbors, for the
Constitutions of her Government are the best in the World, being no Absolute,
Arbitrary, or Despotick Tyranny, wherein the Will and Pleasure of the Prince
disposes of the Lives and Fortunes of his miserable Vassals; nor is it an
Oligarchy wherein the Nobles and those who bear sway, like the larger Fish in
the Ocean, prey upon, and live by devouring the smaller, and raise themselves
to Wealth and Grandeur by the Oppression and Ruin of their Inferiors; nor yet
is it a Popular Democracy, or a Confused Anarchy, but the Law maintains the
Sovereigns Dignity, and yet secures the Subjects Liberty. It is by the Law that
the King is enabled to govern and dispose of all things with a Royal
Sovereignty, and free from any kind of Arbitrary Severity, and thereby obliged
the People to a willing subjection without force or compulsion; and the same
Laws by uniting the Interest of the Prince who governs by that of the People
who are governed, has so firmly knit and tied them together, that the
happiness of the one is inseparably wrapped up and Involved in the good of the
other, so that Majesty may be maintained in its just splendor, and the Royal
Prerogatives of the Crown preserved from any kind of Diminution, and yet the
Liberty of the Subject be secured, and Property no way infringed or violated,
and thereby approves it self to be the best security of both, and that when it
is trampled under Foot, and violated, neither the one nor the other is safe.

And that which still augments the excellency of our Constitution, and renders
it the most happy, desirable thing under the Sun, for the Prince to govern, and
the People to be governed by Law, is its exact agreement with the dictates of
Heaven, and the resemblance it bears to the Original of all Government. For the
Supreme Monarch and Sovereign of the Universe governs his Subjects by Laws,
clearly stating and ascertaining the Duties commanded, and the Crimes
forbidden, together with the rewards of the one, and the purishments of the
other.

And as those Sacred Precepts whereby the Almighty rules his Subjects are all
of them designed for, and directly tend to the Honor and Glory of God, who is
the Lawgiver, so they are as properly designed for, and have as direct a
tendency to the present good and felicity, and the fortune, happiness and glory
of Mankind who is to yield obedience to them, and the honor of the Sovereign
and the happiness of the Subject are thereby so inseparably united, that one
and the same Act of Obedience effects both, and the same act of Rebellion
reflects dishonor upon the Sovereign, and merits punishment to the disobedient
Subject; so our Wise Legislators in the composeing of our Laws, have so
contrived them, that by the very same act of Subjection whereby we manifest our
obedience to them, we bring happiness and safety to our selves, as well as
yield honor and homage to our Prince, as is more fully proved in the following
Tract, wherein you will find a brief account of the Laws and Customs of most
Nations, and a Convincing Demonstration from the most Authentic Historians,
that those Countries have ever been the most happy and flourishing whose Prince
have ruled, and whose Subjects have obeyed by Law.

J. N.

IT has been always the Great Happiness of this Nation, even as far as we can
pierce into the dark and obscure Coverts of Antiquity, to have been famous for
the Equity and Justice of her Princes: and that from such most wise and prudent
Legislators, she has received the chiefest of her wholesome Laws, according to
the Temper and Genius of the People. So that although perhaps some few in the
long successive Series of her Monarchs, may have aspired to absolute and
uncontrollable Dominion, yet the Opposition which they met with from the
provident Establishments of their Predecessors, would in no wise suffer them
to be successful in their Attempts; and others, though perhaps meaning no better
than the worst, have thought it no imprudence not only to confirm those ancient
and wholesome Laws of their Ancestors, but to make some new additions of their
own, to rivet themselves into the favor of the People, as being otherwise
obnoxious to those Violences incident to Usurpation and a crazy Title. Which as
it was their Wisdom to do, so was it an Excellency in their Government far
longer lived, and much more beneficial to the Public than the Peccadillio's of
their Ambition could be prejudicial to private Interests. For all good Laws are
the Honor and Renown of them that frame them, whether out of real, or out of
seeming Virtue and Affection to the People.

Yet some there are, perhaps, that may despise the Generous Constitutions of
their Native Country, believing nothing super-excellent, but what is Foreign.
But they are not to imagine there is the same judgment to be made of
Governments, as of Diet and Habits; besides, that it is the Fate of English
Travelers to be very unhappy in their Observations of things of Moment:
Neither is the Insight into Government to be traveled for only into France, or
Italy, or Spain, nor to Jerusalem neither, unless it were the ancient Sion; but
into History and approved Authors, where is to be seen the Reasons of the
Periods and Dissolutions of Boundless Empires, and the Causes of the
Revolutions and overturnings of Potent Commonwealths.

That Law and Government are of Celestial Extraction, is a Dispute which will
admit of no Controversy. For no sooner Man committed a Transgression, but
Nature, which is that Reason which Man at first derived from the benignity of
his Maker, soon informed him he had done amiss. And no sooner was Mankind
multiplied into Numbers, with disparity of Parts and Genius, Temper and
Humors, but the same Nature taught them the necessity of Rule, and the Benefit
of Subjection. I say these things were instilled into the Breasts of Men by
Nature, and not by the growing Experiences which one day prompted by another
perceived, and concluded to be the only Remedies of the Evils they sustained.
Those Conjectures therefore of Tacitus and Livy are altogether to be laid
aside, who tells us of the Simplicity and Virtues of the first Ages of the
World, and that the most ancient of Mortals co-habited without inordinate
Desires, free from Villainy and Impiety, and so not under fear of Punishment or
Coertion; and that there was no need of reward, when every one voluntarily
pursued the Tracts of Virtue, and void of all extravagant Desires, required no
restraint of their Excesses. These were only florid Conjectures: For it is
apparent from authentic History, that Violence and Treachery entered the World
when there was yet but the small number of Four, and of them, the one that
slew, and the other that was slain. Of which the Tyranny and Cruelty of Lamech
being no less an immediately ensuing Instance, they both afford an emergent
Evidence, that they were not ignorant of the Enormity of the Facts they had
committed, as convicting themselves by that Law of Nature which inwardly
upbraided them for having so highly transgressed. So though in part it might be
true, that Luxuriant Dominion and Injurious Violence, when just Equality and
Modesty grew out of date, enforced the necessity of Laws, yet does it not
appear that the World was so long ignorant of Mischief, as to merit those
Encomiums of Ethnic Fancy.

But though the Apprehension of a Law commanding Good, and restraining Evil,
and a deep fence of Punishment incurred by the breach of that Law, were
imprinted thus in our first Progenitors, yet we do not hear in all the
Thousand six hundred fifty six Years (for I omit the fabulous Calculations of
the Egyptians) before the Flood, that ever any one attempted to erect a
Sovereignty, or to assemble the confused Multitude under any settled
Constitutions. Although there be who affirm, Dresserus among the rest, that
Cain Erected a Peculiar Kingdom and a Religion of his own, which well he could
not do without prescribing Rules and Institutions proper to his Government.

After the Flood, no longer than a Hundred sixty one Years, (so ancient is
Kingly Government) most certain it is, that Nimrod assumed to himself Imperial
Dignity and Dominion, as being the first Founder of the Assyrian Monarchy: In
whose Reign also Ashur went out of Shinar and built several Cities; wherein it
cannot be thought Men lived without the Ties and Bands of Political Government.
Nimrod having led the way, we read of many others in many other places, as
Amraphel, Kedorlaomer, Tidal King of Nations, and therest all mentioned
together. And now Particular Laws and Customs apparently discovered themselves.
Abraham gives the Tenth of his Booty to Melchisedech, and the reseu'd Kings
voluntarily resign him the share of the Spoil which he had won in Battle.
Leagues were made for mutual defense; and under variety of Governments, every
one held their Native Rights and Customs so dear, that as the first War we read
of in the World was made to subdue, the next was a revolt, to recover lost
Liberty, and to throw off the Yoke of Arbitrary Dominion.

Now the same Law that restrained Injury and Wrong, asserted Right and
Property, or lawful and peculiar Possession of the Assistances and Conveniences
of Living. And this was also taught to Man by Nature: For at the same time that
the Breath of Life was infused into him, was also bequeathed him that light of
Nature, that gave him not only Reason, but right Reason, and consequently the
true Grounds and Foundations of Law. Therefore it was that Cain and Abel betook
themselves to different Occupations, to the end they might the better
understand what belonged of right to each other; it being but reason that they
should both enjoy the advantages and emoluments of their different Labors.
Thus Adam was the first that Planted, Cain the first that dealt in Pasturage,
and Abel the first that followed Agriculture. Who as the World increased made a
disposition of right to others according as they saw convenient. And it was but
rational for them that were thus invested in possession, to establish the right
of their peculiar Claims and Properties upon the Divisions and Bequests of them
that were Lords of All. After them were born the Inventers of Arts and
Handicraft Trades. From whom it is very improbable to think 'twas then lawful to
rifle their Inventions, without Exchange or the plenary satisfaction of one
Commodity for another.

These things were well observed by Seth, the third Son of Adam, 235 Years
after the Creation, in the hundred and fifth Year of his Age, by which time as
the World was vastly stored with People, so had they as greatly increased their
Proportions of Stock and Substance, and improved their Allotments and
Inheritances of Land. And therefore he began to deem it now high time to think
of Framing Laws and Ordinances, for the better Government of so numerous a
Commonweal. And this fell out to be in the Year that his Son Enoch was born;
at what time, as the Text records, Men first began to call upon the Name of the
Lord. For that then it was, that Seth first introduced the Practice of
Religion, or the Awe of Divinity, and made Laws and Constitutions for the
safety and security of Right and Property; and to prevent those disorders and
disturbances of common Tranquillity, of which it may be well conjectured he was
not a little fearful from the bad Examples of Cain and Lamech. So that although
Cain and his Offspring, that totally perished in the Deluge, were the first
that broke the Law of Nature, Yet Seth, by another Line; another Son of Adam,
begot by him after his own Image and Likeness, that is to say, Prudent, Good
and Virtuous, as he was, whose Race re-peopl'd the drowned World, and continues
to this day; He it was that made this Light of Nature burn more clearly, by
bringing Religion into Form of Worship, and Law into Precept and Practice. And
it may not vainly otherwise be thought, but that under that same Form of
Worship, and under those Laws, Men in all respects continued obedient and
conformable while Adam lived; that is, till within seven hundred and seven
years before the Flood, so great a veneration they might have for him that was
so well known to be the surviving Original of all Humane Race. However it were,
this remains unquestionable, that the general Corruption and Impiety of
Mankind, occasioned the Wrath of the Omnipotent Creator, and that thereupon he
sent the Deluge to destroy from the Earth that numerous Succession which had so
highly offended him. Of this the reason assigned in general was that already
mentioned; a total Defection of all the Sons of Men from God, which had
infected every thought of their hearts. All the Precepts of Religion and
Nature, all that good Order which Seth had settled in the World, was at length
utterly ranvers'd; Liberty and Property was invaded, and the Repose and Peace
of Common Society spurned and trampled on by Potent Cruelty and Domineering
Injustice. And all this seems to be included under the particular reason of
Divine Vengeance. For says the Text, In those days were Giants upon the Earth,
(...) that is to say, Men who either were such as bore down all others before
them, by reason of their vast strength, and huge proportion of bulk, from
Naphal, to throw down; or from the same word signifying, to revolt; such as
were Revolters from God, or from the same Root again, signifying to rush upon,
such as by violence invaded the Rights of others by Violence and Oppression.
According to which two latter significations, the mighty Men of those times
were called Giants. For that contrary to the Law of Nature, supposing then no
other Law, by force and power they despoiled the weaker sort not only of their
Goods and Possessions, but robbed them of their Children, their beautiful
Daughters at their will and pleasure; so the words Lakach, and Bathar imply,
the one signifying to ravish away by violence, and the latter to cull and
choose. Otherwise, with reverence be it spoken, it cannot be thought, that the
being delighted with the Charms of beautiful Women, and taking them for Wives,
was a Crime to merit the Destruction of the Almighty's Handiwork; or as the
Scripture terms it, the Repentance of the Creator that he had made Man. But
this is mentioned as a Crime (...), including all those other Violations of Law
and Justice then raging in the World. And this is apparent from the Context,
which gives the best and brightest light to Interpretation. For among all the
High Crimes and Misdemeanors that so insanely provoked the Indignation of the
Lord, there is none particularized, but this one Act of the Mighty, styled the
Sons of God, incroaching upon the Rights and Privileges of the meaner sort,
called the Sons of Men, by taking forcibly from them their Daughters and
Virgins, to satisfy the fury of their Lust and Incontinency. For which, at
first, God only determined to abbreviate their Days, and shorten the measure of
their long Lives. Perhaps he might forbear, expecting a Reformation of their
Oppression and Cruelty, repeated in the next Verse, with aparticular
aggravation of the same Fact, of going into the daughters of Men; not to be
avoided by reason of their irresistible force and power, as being the Sons of
God and Giants. But by virtue of those Conjunctions, the Giants had Sons, who
became afterward Men of Renown; that is, such as made themselves terrible and
redoubted by their Cruelties, and Exercise of Illegal Dominion; and as they
multiplied, filled the World, no doubt, with Arbitrary Rapine, and wilful
Bloodshed, to obtain their wicked purposes. Which is also more palpably
discovered in the following words, explanatory of the preceding general
Accusation, that the Earth was filled with Violence. A word so diffusive in its
signification, that it comprehends all the signal breaches of the Law and
Religion, and all the Effects and ill Consequences of Violence, Rape, and
Injury; which where ever they predominate, renders the sufferers miferable.

Thus we are come to the Destruction of the First World; and find the Causes
that hastened it, to be the want of Order and good Government. So that it may
well be said, that while all the Sons of Men had abandoned themselves to the
neglect and contempt of the Law and Justice, while Dominion ranged without the
curb of Primitive Reason, and Obedience was only Passive Confusion, the general
Inundation of merciless Cruelty and remorceless Violence, set open the
Floodgates of the Deep, and let loose the general Inundation of Water, that
overwhelmed the whole Earth. From whence it being apparent, that the contempt
and disregard of right Reason, and consequently of Law, Government, Order,
Justice and proportionate Equality between Dominion and Subjection, produced
those Effects which were the universal subversion of Mankind, the chiefest
Lesson which the next World had afterward to learn, was to observe the
Failings and Miscarriages of their Predecessors, and to be tender of running
into these Enormities that draw down the Judgments of Heaven, and distract and
dislocate the Unity and Society of Mankind.

And had it not been for the solemn Promise of the Almighty, how soon another
Deluge might have washed away the replenished Race of Noah, no Man can say. Yet
might it well be thought there was cause enough given for it, while early
Nimrod trod the Giants steps, became the Proverb of those times, and was called
Gibbor Tsaid, or the strong Hunter before the Lord. For He perceiving the
People terrified with the thoughts of the late Deluge, and afraid themselves of
the same Calamity, takes from thence a plausible Pretense to make himself their
absolute Lord and sovereign Commander; and to inculcate into their grosser
apprehensions a deeper awe and reverence of his Person, persuades them that he
had found out a Means to secure them from all their Fears, Joseph. Antiquit. l.
1. c. 4.
and to that purpose puts them upon that stupendous Labor of building a
Tower, whose vast height should bid defiance as well to Heaven it self, as to
all future Inundations. Which Toil and Travail while they undertook, he had the
advantages both to exercise and establish the Tyranny which he had long before
affected. In the pursuit of which Design the numberless Multitude being
shattered into several Languages, were constrained to quit their intended
Enterprise, and having no way to unite again, they only assembled and embodi'd
together, as variety of Language prompted their understanding, and parting
sundry ways sought out particular Habitations, some in the nearer, some in the
remoter empty Regions of the Earth, as Room and Convenience led them. Where
under several Kings and Princes doubtless were Erected several Forms and
Constitutions of Government, according to the Genius of them that bore sway.

Nimrod all this while kept his station with those that spoke his own Dialect,
and minding nothing more than to extend his Territories, propagated his
Dominion where he built Nineveh and Resen, particularly called the great City,
by subduing his Neighbors, and laid the first Foundation of that Monarchy. And
these were the first beginnings, according to the report of the best Authors,
of Political Rule and Political Subjection. Nor were they in those times,
though the true Worship of the true God were altogether forgot, quite void of a
sense of Religion. And therefore Nimrod being dead, for his great Prowess and
admired Achievements, after his decease was worshipped, though not by the
Name, yet in the Person of Saturn. And the Statue of Belus his Successor
promoted also to Celestial Dignity, was adored under the Name of Jupiter. Which
is thought to be the Original of all the Heathenish Idolatry. For though, as
already has been said, there was then a general Oblivion of all true Religion,
yet they found it absolutely necessary there should be some sort of Religion
conjoined with Policy, finding it so impossible they should be separate, and
that they were so dependent one upon another, that neither could subsist
without the other's support.

To this same Ninus, Justin seems to attribute what Scripture imputes to
Nimrod. For first he asserts, that Kingly Government was the most ancient in
the World: l. 1. c. 1. deleg 3.
Principio rerum, says he, gentium, nationumque Imperium penes reges erat.
Conformable to that of Cicero, Omnes antiquae gentes regibus quondam paruerunt.
Confirmed by that of Salust, Sal. l. 1.
Initio reges diversi; nam in terris nomen Imperii id primum fuit. Then he also
pretends to tell us the Manners and Customs of those Times preceding Ninus,
That the People were restrained by no Laws, but that the Determinations of
Princes were obeyed as such. That it was the Custom to Defend not to Enlarge
their Empires. But that Ninus was the first who made War upon his Neighbors,
and by subduing People unskilful in making resistance, extended the Limits of
his Dominions, and violated the former Justice and Moderation of regal Power.
In all which it cannot be said that Justin was any where mistaken, but only in
the Person of Ninus. For that the Antiquity of Kingly Government is
unquestionable, and that so highly commended equality of Temper between Prince
and People, by him suggested before the Birth of Nimrod, is not at all
improbable. However, Scripture and Justin with others, agree all in this, that
there was a Law in the World from the beginning, though only of Reason and
Nature, so long as Men obeyed in Quiet and Repose, and Princes Ruled with
Justice and Prudent Equity. On the other side, when Men were deprived of that
Primitive Safety and Tranquillity, Law ceased, giving way to War and Public
Devastation. Which Cessation of Law began in the time of Nimrod, and not of
Ninus.

And certainly though the Nature of Man be in part corrupt, yet there are those
Seeds of Virtue and Divine Reason still remaining in his Soul, which will not
suffer him to deny, but that the real distinctions between Good and Evil, are
Members of that True Reason, and Divine Knowledge, which were at first infused
into him. Cicero, De leg. l. 1.
by a light more than Human, labors hard to make this out, that the
Foundations of Law and Justice are fixed in Man by Nature, and in that reason
with which Man is naturally endu'd to difference Right from Wrong, Justice from
Injustice, and Evil from Good. Seeing that Men are in the first place furnished
and adorned with heavenly Gifts. Next, because there is but one consentaneous
and common Method of Men's living one among another. And in the third place, by
reason that all Men are obliged and bound one to another, as well by a certain
natural Indulgence and kindness one toward the other, as by the Tie of the Law.
Which being granted to be absolutely true, how is it possible to separate Law
and Right from Nature. And indeed should it be otherwise, it would fall out
unhappily for the preserving the Strength and Unity of a Nation, or the People
in their right Senses. Seeing that no Laws ought to be propounded, but such as
are approved by those who believe all things just and honest to be desirable
for their own sakes, and that nothing was to be reck'ned in the number of good
things, but what was laudable in it self.

Again, if only Fear of Punishment, and not Nature, were the only reason that
deterred Men from Acts of Impiety and Injustice, no Man could be properly said
to be unjust; but the wicked were rather to be accounted inconsiderate and
imprudent. Or if advantage and profit were the only Motives to do well, then
were Men to be accounted rather subtle and cunning, than naturally and
intrinsically just. Consequently the Law, though never so strict, has no
effectual or valuable tie upon such persons, and the security expected from it,
is in a manner rendered void to all Civil Society and Co-habitation. For what
will not persons so principled adventure to act in the dark, when they are out
of the danger of Witnesses, and by that means freed from the fear of a Judge?
The Giants of the old World had forgotten Nature, when they acted only by the
sway of Arbitrary Will and Pleasure. For Nature proposes but one Law for the
preservation of Mankind; that is, the right Method of commanding and
restraining upon the solid knowledge of Natures Good and Evil. Which they who
understand not, or at least neglect and scorn, must of necessity be unjust. And
such were they who by neglecting Natures good and evil, ranvers'd the Laws of
Human preservation, and ruined not only themselves, but all the Earth besides.
Nor was it any Opinion or singular Judgment of their own, that could make their
Actions just, seeing that all Virtue is inherent in Nature, and cannot be
separated from it. Only Men may be so wicked as to despise Nature, and cry up
that for good and honest, which is not so in it self. Not considering that what
ever is vertually good, must of necessity include within it self that which is
without all contradiction to be valued and esteemed. And thus in all
Governments that pretend to right reason, though Circumstantial Laws may differ,
yet the Law of Nature is immovable throughout all Nations. Otherwise should
one Nation think it lawful to Kill, another to Rifle and Steal, or another
believe Perjury no Crime, not only Public Commerce between Nation and Nation,
but Private Dealing betwixt Man and Man would be at an end. Nor that Men were
instructed of the Mischief of these things by the Conveniences of peaceable
Living one among another; but by the Dictates of Nature, and Impressions of
right Reason.

Cicero goes yet a little farther, affirming, That it was the Opinion of the
wisest of the Ancients, That Law was never the Invention of Humane Wit, but
something Eternal that governed the Universal World by the wise Conduct of
Command and Prohibition. Which supreme and ultimate Law, was the Mind or
Omniscience of the Deity, enjoining or forbidding all things according to
reason. Wherefore that Law which Heaven imparted to Mankind, is rightly to be
extolled, as being the reason and intelligence of a wise Man proper to control
and deter. Which Power was not only elder than the Age of People or Cities, but
coeternal with God that rules and governs both Heaven and Earth: for that
neither can the Divine Intelligence be without reason, neither is it possible
but that such reason should be incapable to determine what was good and what
evil. So that had there been no Law against those who first were guilty of
Murder, Envy or Malice, or any other sort of destructive Violence, this Law
would have condemned them, as it did in Cain. In regard that same reason
proceeded from the Divine Light of Nature, persuading Men to do well, and
dissuading them from evil, which did not then begin to be a Law, when it first
came to be written, but when it first had a being; that is, from Eternity.
Which being the Original of all upright and just Law, we must thence conclude,
that the true End of all Laws, are the Safety and Welfare of those Nations, and
the Peace and Tranquillity of such Societies for which they are ordained. Law
being as it were the Distinction between the just and unjust, derived, next to
God, from the most ancient Fountain of all things, Nature to which all the Laws
of Men, that punish the bad, and protect the good, should tend as to their
center of Light and Information.

And this was that which the Poets meant by all their Fables of the Golden Age,
which is described by them to be a time when Men lived in Peace, Plenty, and
Liberty, without written Laws, but by those Rules of Justice and Sincerity
which Primitive Nature had planted in their minds, when it was a pleasure to
Rule with Mildness and Equity, and without Care, keeping just Dominion within
her proper bounds; and a happiness to obey without Disorder, Tumult and
Contention, while Astrea her self held the Balance of Authority and Subjection
in an equal poise.

Which reverence of Law and Justice was not then committed to Parchment, nor
cut in Brass, but imprinted in the Hearts of Men: According to that of Virgil,

-- Neve ignorate Latimos
Saturni Gentem, haud vinclo, neclegibus aequam
Sponte sua, veterisque Dei se more tenentem.
And Hesiod, also describing the Golden Age, says, that they lived like the
Gods, (...) -- (...), (...) 1.
without care or fear. For most certainly they who are constrained, through
fear of punishment, to live according to the Integrity of written Laws, not out
of a spontaneous probity, cannot be said to be good or virtuous Men, seeing
that they who forbear to commit evil, through fear of punishment, cannot be
said to be really good, but only not to be evil. They are only said to be good
Men, who by the conduct of Nature, and not to avoid the lash of Human provision
against Vice, bend their minds to practice Honesty, Virtue, and Justice. And
thus this Golden Age continued, till Jupiter, ambitious of Empire, overturned
this Harmonious Frame of Nature's Law, and expelled his Father from his Kingdom.

Tunc Jove sub Domino caedes and vulnera semper. Yibul. l. 1.

-- Tunc Lethi mill repent viae.
Which is no more than this, that after the Golden Reign of Noah, the Earth was
filled with Iron Violence, by Nimrod and his Successors. Yet as Jupiter, by his
Example, taught those that came after him to lay violent hands on Thrones and
Scepters, so may good and virtuous Princes be said to restore, as it were, so
many Golden Ages at least within their own Dominions, by making wholesome Laws
for the benefit and security of the People. For though the Tyranny of Jupiter
chased Astrea from the World, yet it is said, and the Allegory may well hold,
that she left behind her, as her Legacy, that Primitive light of Nature and
right Reason, which they who follow closest may be accounted the nearest
Restorers of the Primitive Purity and Innocence of Law and Justice. And for
this reason some will have the Golden Age to be no other than the Common
Liberty of People in a Commonweal, established and secured by wholesome
Constitutions; where Hares with Hounds, Sheep with Wolves, converse together
with freedom and safety, under the protection of good Laws.

This is then the difference between the Primitive Ages of the World, and those
that succeed. At first the Natural Inclination of Man to Good, and his Aversion
from Evil, governed his Actions so exactly, that there was no need of any other
Law, than that Law of Nature which was imprinted in his mind. Afterward when
Ambition, Pleasure, and Profit, had, it cannot be said extinguished, but only
eclipsed that Light of Nature, then Men resolved they would not see or
understand what Law was, until they saw it first put down in Writing, and
obedience thereto commanded, under such and such Penalties. So that before
there were none at all, now there was an absolute necessity of written
Ordinances and Constitutions.

And indeed it was high time to set up Law and Government, when Wrong and
Injury did so infest the World, that there was no security of Liberty and
Property, but what Law and good Government procured. From which Men reaped
those vast Advantages, and superlative Benefits, that then they began to
acknowledge the Sacred Original of Nature's Law, as descending first from
Heaven. Therefore was Themis presently exalted to be a Goddess. No less than
the Wife of Jove himself, and said to be the Mother of (...) and (...), or Law,
Justice, Hes. ^^^og.
and Peace, as Hesiod witnesses. And Law or Eunomia is made the eldest Sister,
Pind. Ode. 9.
whom Pindarus calls (...), or servatricem; as well knowing that the making and
observance of Good Laws are the preservation of all Kingdoms; without which
they would soon fall to ruin. He also adds the Epithet (...) in regard that
good Laws bring both Honor and Glory, as well to the Legislators, as to the
Observers. In another place the same Author, applauding Law, entitles her the
Queen of Cities. And Homer, speaking of Jupiter, does not attribute to his
Divinity, the giving to Princes and Sovereign Rulers, the Destructive
Instruments of War and Bloodshed, but his arming them with Laws and Justice.
And therefore it was the saying of the Orator Demosthenes, that Law was the
Soul of a City: seeing that as the natural Body of Man could not subsist,
without a Soul, so without Law and Justice, Cities and Kingdoms, and all
Politic Bodies, were but as expiring slumbers, which nothing can preserve from
Politic Death. And thus the Primitive Light of Nature and right Reason was in
some measure recovered from that neglect and oblivion which had overwhelmed it.
For that this written Jus, or Genus of written Law, had the same Original with
the spontaneous and harmonious Concord of the Golden Age. Seeing that if all
Men at that time had been principl'd like their Legislators, they might
doubtless have lived in the same happy Estate and Condition, as their first
Forefathers.

By which Encomiums and high Applauses of Law and Government, it appears, that
the End of all Law is in general the preservation of Mankind; more particularly
of all Public Weals and Societies of Men.

Among those that first made use of written Laws, L. 6.
are reck'ned the Locri Epizephirij, as Strabo relates. A flourishing People
once in the farther part of Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples, not far from
the Promontory, now called Punta di Saetta. Pindarus gives them a high
Commendation in these words, (...), Ode. 10.
Truth governs the City of Locri. So careful had Zaleucus their Legislator,
been to pick and cull the choicest of their Cretan, Lacedemonian and Athenian
Customs.

But Scripture, of indisputable Authothority, tells us that in the time of
Moses, the first Lawgiver in the World, the Decalogue was written in Tables of
Stone, and for the rest of his Constitutions they were also otherwise committed
to Letters, as being too prolix to be preserved by Memory or Tradition, and the
Original Copied up in the Ark, by the command of Moses, where the Levites might
have recourse to it upon all occasions; who also had it in Charge to read it in
the hearing of all the people at the end of every seven Years. And certainly
there never was a nobler mixture of Civil and Ecclesiastical Sanctions, all
tending to perpetuate the Establishment of the Jewish Nation; nay, they had the
absolute promise of God for their Duration, upon the bare condition of Dutiful
performance. All the encouragement of Victory, Plenty, Peace, Renown and
Liberty to the Observers of this Law; and on the other side, all the fair
warnings of that Misery and Destruction that would befall them, if they
revolted from it. And to preserve them from all occasions of going astray, the
strictest injunctions and prohibitions that could be devised, were laid upon
them against Idolatry. To which purpose they were as straightly commanded not
so much as to cast their Eyes upon the alluring Beauty of strange Women; and as
expressly inhibited from the use of such Diet and Meats, both Flesh and Fowl, as
by their lushious moisture and extraordinary nutriment excited the heat of
their natural Incontinency; and as a farther bar to Foraign lust and female
communication, the Pander to Idolatry, they were permitted to take as many free
Women and Bond Servants of their own, as their Revenues would allow of. In a
word the whole scope of Moses Law, the sole intent of all his Constitutions
both Ecclesiastical and Civil, was for the glory of God, the safety and
preservation of the whole Nation in general, and the security of every
individual person in particular. That by the Observation of the words of his
Law, which as he told them was their Life, they might prolong their days in
the Land which God had given them; That Israel might dwell in safety alone,
that the Fountain of Jacob might be upon a Land of Corn and Wine, their Heavens
drop Dew, and they themselves tread upon the High Places of their Enemies. In
which words are summed up all the blessings that can befall a free Nation under
good Government. Yet all this while, for all his pains and travel, for all his
restless Study, and incessant cares, for his prophetical Blessings upon every
particular Tribe, for his attoning even God himself, upon their hasty and rash
erection of the Molten Calf, he does not exact one single kindness for himself
or his Sons; but as if the Laws of God had been the only Successors which he
took care of, enjoins Obedience only to them as well to the chiefest in
Authority, as the meanest under Subjection.

And thus Moses having fitted them for peace by Laws and Statutes that gave to
God his own established Reverence and Worship, to the Church her due, to the
people their just Rights and Privileges (not excluding the Daughters of
Zelophahad from the Inheritance of their Male-issueless Father) Joshua was next
appointed by God, who had inspired him with Valor and Conduct fit for so great
an undertaking, to lead them in the Field. Yet not so, but that although the
people heark'ned to him in reference to Military Affairs, yet in other things
they did as the Lord Commanded Moses.

But Moses had the pre-eminence above all that came after him: He had the
supreme Oracle of the World to consult upon all Occasions. The pretenses of
Others were but mere Imposture, and Delphian Figments. Which however it is not
improbable but that they might have learnt from the obscure and imperfect
knowledge which they had gathered among the Egyptians of the Story of Moses.
And therefore Rhadamanthus among the Cretans is said to have faign'd a
Familiarity with Jove in Jupiter's Den. Numa pretended to frequent consultation
with the Goddess Egeria. He first Civilized the Romans by introducing among
them the practice of Religious Ceremonies, and the worship of the Gods. To
which Serve. Tull. added several Institutions relating to the Civil
Administration, Vt quemadmodum Numa divini auctor Juris fuisset ita Servium
conditorem Omnis in Civitate discriminis, Ordinumque, Live. l. 1.
quibus inter Gradus Dignitatis, Fortunaeque aliquid interlucet, posteri Fama
Ferrent. Which Laws were afterward collected and digested into a Method by
Papirius, from it was called Jus Papirianum. But the chief of the Roman Laws
were those that were contained in their Twelve Tables cut in Brass; of which
ten were compiled by the Decemvirs, after the return of those Ambassadors which
were sent by the Senate to Athens to Transcribe the Laws of Solon, and of those
other Cities of Greece which were most famous for the Excellency of their
Government; to which soon after two others were added. Of which Ten Tables
Livie writes that in his time, L. 3.34.
when there was such a prodigious pile of Laws heaped one upon another, they
were still the Fountain of all the Roman Equity. And it is observable that when
the Decemvirs first proposed them to the People, they commanded them to
consider 'em well, that there might be nothing but what was for the good and
prosperity of the Commonweal and their posterity. For that as much as lay in
the wit of Ten men, they had adapted the equality of the Law with the same
respect to the meanest as to the most Wealthy and Noble.

Lycurgus boasted Apollo for his grand Associate, and made the World so far
believe it, that both Plutarch and Strabo confirm it, and Herodotus tells ye
the very Verses with which the Priestess of Delphos congratulated him at his
Entrance into the Temple, wherein she gave him the Title of (...), the Friend
of Jove, and all the Gods besides. And most certainly he was a Person of
exquisite Justice, as appeared in the preservation of the young Prince
Charilaus, whom his Mother offered to stifle in her own Womb, and to give him
possession of her self and the Kingdom, if he would have Married her. And
therefore fit to give Laws to a Kingdom that could refuse one, when it was
thrown into his Embraces. Neither could any thing be more signal than his Love
to his Country, while he so laboriously turmoil'd not only to advance but to
perpetuate the felicity of the Lacedemonian Kingdom. Justin says of him, that
he was not more famous for the Invention of his Laws, than for the Example
which he set in his own Person, for that he never decreed any Law against
others, which he was not most punctual to observe himself. Populum in obsequia
Principum, Principes ad justitiam Imperiorum formavit. In which words, could
they be but faithfully and heartily extracted, lies that grand Arcanum, the
True Balance between Dominion and Subjection.

He so endoctrinated his Lacedaemonians, that they should neither be willing,
nor indeed know how to live asunder; but that, like Bees, they should always
stick to their Hives, and be always ready about their Prince to receive and
execute his Just Commands.

Neither did he care to put his Laws in Writing; as judging that those things
which most conduced to the felicity of the City, and the bravery of the
Inhabitants, were to be planted in their Minds by Education and Custom.

At length, having done as much as he thought could be done to advance the
Glory and Renown of his Country, and the Welfare of the Realm, that he might
render the effects of his labor diuturnal, he assembles the People, and takes
an Oath from the highest to the lowest, that they would observe the Form of
Government which he had established among them till his return; for that he was
then going to consult the Oracle, about something farther of great Importance
for the Common Good. To the Oracle thereupon he goes, and after Consultation,
sends back Apollo's Answer, that Lacedemon should flourish so long as they
observed Lycurgus's Institutions; which done, he starved himself to death at
Delphos, that he might not absolve the People from their Oaths by his Return.

Solon also refused the Kingdom of Athens, when he might have had it. Justiu,
l. 2. c. 7.
A Person of that extraordinary Justice, that he is by the Historian said to
have made Athens a new City, behaving himself with that equal Temper between
the Senate and the People, that both himself and his Laws were equally grateful
to both. And Lucian also brings in Anacharsis, Dial. de Gymna^.
highly commending him, as one that had framed most excellent Laws, and
introduced most useful Customs into the Country where he lived, to the great
benefit of the Public. Which Laws, as Lucian afterward, in the same Dialogue,
makes Solon to acknowledge, were publicly exposed in the City of Athens, for
every one to peruse, that so they might understand when they did well, and what
they were to avoid. He could not it is true reduce the Athenians to that
austerity of living, to which the Institutions and Education of Lycurgus had
enured the Lacedaemonians, as being of a quainter and more airy Geniu^, where
Mercury had an equal ascendant with Mars, and would therefore have an equal
share in the public Concerns. Yet the renowned Captains that Athens bred, the
many and famous Victories which they won, the Learning of her Philosophers, the
Liberty of the People, and the long flourishing Estate of the Government, make
it appear that there is more than one way for a Nation to be happy by her own
Laws. And that Laws agreeable and consentaneous to the Temper of one People,
will not correspond with the Humor of another. On the other side, when a
Kingdom is once established under settled Constitutions, which are found to
suit with the Disposition of the People, those Constitutions are the Safety and
Protection of that People, and the Change of such Ordinances has been always
the forerunner of their destruction, as by History has been fatally verified
in the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, and Romans themselves.

But they who laid the Foundations of Despotic Turanny and Absolute Dominion in
War and Devastation, cannot be said to have those noble aims of bequeathing
Liberty and Safety to the People under their Subjection: but only the
advancement of lawless Power, as believing all Mankind besides to be their
Vassals and Slaves: and therefore in the height of their over-soaring and
presumptuous Mortality, calling themselves Lords of the Earth, and Kings of
Kings, which swelling Titles were derided in Alexander, though in the amidst of
his Victories, by his Followers better observing the Laws of Nature and Reason.
All this while they disregarded the equal distribution of Right and Propriety
to any, and denied the Privilege of Liberty to all, while most lived
miserably, and contemptibly, none lived free. This unhappy Bondage the
Europeans contemned. While Conon refused to worship the Persian Monarch in all
his Glory, Just. l. 6. c. 2.
and Manius the Consul, called the Asiatic Grecians, and Syrians. Liu. Hist. l.
36.
Levissima Hominum Genera and Servituti nata. For here was no Safety, no
Security for the People, whose Lives were at the Mercy and Beck of one Man.
They Tilled the Earth and Labored only for him; they got Posterity only for
him to sport away in the bloody Games of War and wilful Vexation. Whereas in
well Constituted Governments, the People enjoying all those Privileges with
which they are satisfied themselves, by the same Law that warrants their
security are bound to pay the Homage of their Obedience to the Prince, for his
continual Care of their safety. And Princes can claim a security of their own,
without fear or hazard, which Tyrants in continual distrust and jeopardy are
forced to hire and largely pay for. Thus if we consider the mighty Ottoman
Empire, we find him indeed expanding his vast Dominion over the largest part of
the habitable World, yet through those Violences which his Inhumane
Constitutions of Self-safety commit against the Dictates of Nature and
Primitive Reason, he may be said to be an Emperor rather over Solitudes and
Deserts, and the wild Beasts that ravage the forsaken Habitations of Mankind,
than the potent Lord of Numerous Cities. He is indeed surrounded with populous
Guards; but what are they? the enforced Tribute of Christian Children through
the neighboring Territories under his Subjection, who are more his Lords and
Masters, than he theirs. If those his own Domesticated Lions once begin to roar
for want of Pay or other discontent, all his Majestic Titles tremble, and he
must appease their fury with the Heads of his best beloved Favorites. His
Armies, a confused Rabble of several Nations brought together to stop the
Mouths of Cannons, and overbear his less powerful Adversaries with the weight
of Multitude. In whom there is no faith or confidence neither, as not being
reciprocally obliged by any Act of Kindness which his care confers upon them;
and therefore following him for Fear, not Love. And then their own Thrones so
tottering, that they never think 'em fixed, till they have cemented them to the
Floor with the Blood of their Brethren, or obliged their Stipendiaries with a
Magnificent Overplus, like Amurath the Third. Thuan. l. 104.
And yet notwithstanding all their Care and Courtship an Ibrahim lies strangled
at the feet of his Stipendiaries. In a word, the Emperors Will is his Law, a
Capricio lutestrings the most deserving of his Princes. And to preserve himself
in this excess of Arbitrary Power, he deprives the People of their
self-Defence, their Arms, and puts them under the domineering Mastership of
Christian Apostates. So that in short, all things are carried on for the sole
benefit and advantage of the Tyrannical Monarch, without any regard to the good
and welfare of the People; contrary to the true end of Law and Justice, which
equally respects the good of all, and therefore advances the Shepherd, to take
care of the Flock.

As for the Persian Monarch, it is accorded on all hands, that his Dominion is
not altogether so uneasy to the Subject, however he is an absolute Tyrant, the
People enjoying nothing of their own, but what is absolutely at the disposition
of the Sophi. And the Constitution of the Government is wholly such as mainly
aims at the profit of the Sovereign, with little regard to the safety and
well-being of the People: nor is there any other method or distribution of
Public or Common Justice, but what lies solely in the breast of the Emperor.
His Princes, like those of the Grand Turk, are his Slaves, and he sends for
their Heads as he pleases himself upon the least jealousy or distaste; nor does
the Despotic Tyrant think himself obliged to give the World satisfaction for
what he does. So that Sha Shephi is said to have carried his Scimitar always
ready drawn in his bosom, to cut off the Heads of his Nobles upon every slight
occasion. Yet is he for this never a whit the safer; as being harrass'd with
frequent Rebellions of his Shans; and Emir Hemptza Mirza had the sad fate to
have his Throat cut by his Barber, by the Command of his great Officers. Which
is confirmed by Thuanus in these words, speaking of the Persians, Crebrae inter
eos contra principes suos conjurationes; nec in Regia Familia inter fratres aut
silios cum patribus Pietatis Officia constant. So little does Arbitrary Power
avail to the Security of a Prince.

The Great Mogul is said to be a mere Sponge, that sucks away all the Wealth of
his chief Governors and Kans, after they have squeezed out the very
Heart-blood of the People. Who may be only said to Sow, the Kans to Reap, but
the Mogul himself to inn the Harvest. And thus he supports his Grandeur by the
Misery of his Subjects. And yet for all his Guard of 30000 Men watching Day and
Night about his Person, he is forced to part with his Command sometimes to his
rebellious Peers, sometimes to his undutiful Sons. And Aurangzeeb now holds, or
lately held the Scepter of that vast Empire wrested out of his Father's hands.

The Ethiopian or Abissinian Potentate, commonly, though erroneously, called
Prester John, is so absolute, that none of his Subjects, whether noble or
plebeian, can claim any Propriety in what he enjoys. Which is the reason that
they adore their Prince as their absolute Lord and Master, as being perfect
Slaves to his Will and Pleasure. Yet notwithstanding all their absolute
Dominion, none less secure in their Thrones than the Habessinian Monarchs. As
the stories of Maenas, slain in battle by his rebellious Subject Bernagassus.
Jacob, Crowned, Deposed, Recalled, and Redepos'd by his own Nobility, and the
frequent Rebellions against one of the best of their Emperors, Susneus,
sufficiently declare. Fatal Documents that the slavery of Subjects is no such
protection to regal Power, as vainly some imagine.

Thus it appears upon what Foundations stands the absolute Dominion of the
Asiatic and Ethiopian Monarchs. Their Subjects are made a Prey, as having no
refuge to the Sanctuary of known Laws, and Soldiers of Fortune are the Pillars
upon which they depend. For it is necessary that the Power of Princes be
sustained by the Love of their Subjects, or of others: for he that is feared by
all can assure himself of no long continuance. But when Tyrants can promise to
themselves nothing of security from their Subjects, whom they treat as their
Slaves, there is a necessity for them to guard themselves with Foreign armed
Forces; and to merit their favor, to allow them their full swinge of preying
upon, and insulting over their Subjects. Thus the Turk supports himself by
Janissaries, who know not only no other Lord, but indeed scarce any other Father
than himself, and therefore he indulges them in all things to preserve their
affection. And the Kings of Ormus, Cambaya, Decan and Achen commit the
management of their Affairs to their Slaves. Whereas a lawful and just Prince
takes care to be beloved by his own Subjects, as being the safest. Bulwark
against his external and domestic Enemies. Nor is there any better or securer
way to gain the Affections of a People, than by protecting them under the rules
of their ancient Customs and Constitutions.

The Europeans are of a more fierce and haughty temper, and were always more
impatient of servitude. Though some of them much more than others. In which
variety we may easily observe those Princes most secure, where the Laws and
Constitutions of the Realm are most sincerely adapted for the preservation and
welfare of the People.

The Spaniard takes the first care of himself, in the next place indulges his
Nobility, and takes the least care of his People. The Nobility and Clergy get
all, being altogether Tribute free; the People lose all, being so intolerably
burdened that they are forced to forsake the Tillage of their Country,
Oldenburgh. T. 1. p. 166.
not being able to support their Families. Hence a scarcity of the People, and
the strength of the Kingdom weakn'd. Hence the Castilians out of their natural
Pride no great Lovers, sometimes contemners of their Prince.

The Arragonians cannot forget the loss of their ancient privileges. The
Catalomians impatient of their Subjection, as they have made apparent by their
late revolts. The Neapolitans, Sicilians and Milaneses unfaithful and tottering
upon all opportunities; as finding themselves reduced to misery to enrich their
Oppressors. And what he has got by the neglect of his People, and by Riding
with so strict a Curb, is sufficiently known to the most meanly read in modern
History.

As for the Portugals, the Scope of their ancient Government was the joint
regard equally both of the Prince and Peoples safety; Olden. T. 1. p. 370.
for some time interrupted under the Spanish Usurpation, but afterward restored
by John of Braganca. Therefore such is their Love to their natural Princes,
such their hatred of the Castilian, that Thuanus said of them, in quorum animis
incertum plus ad insaniam usque improbus in reges suos amor, Lib. 126. circa
fin.
cum implacabile Hispani nominis odium valeat. Him they Defend, him they Adore
and Honor, because under him they live in plenty and freedom governed by just
and equal Laws. And if their Country be not over-abounding in People, it is to
be attributed partly to the heat of the Climate, but more especially to their
draining their own Country to supply their great Navies, and more beneficial
acquists in other parts of the World.

And that the safety of Prince and People are equally sought in that Nation,
appears by the Laws to which King Philip was sworn in the year 1580. Nor is it
a mean sign that the Laws are good and wholesome, when they agree with the
Constitution of the People. The health and soundness of a Commonweal appears
in the health and vigor of its particular Members. It being the Maxim of
Tyranny, only to keep the Subject poor. To which auri vis, Arist. l. 5. pol. c.
11. Annal. l. 11. c. 1.
and opes infensae, says Tacitus. Nero never gave to any Favorite any great
employment, but he added, Thou know what we want. Let us take care, Sueton in
Neron.
ne quis quidquam habeat. And it is a Proverb relating to the great Turk, That
where he has once trampled, there neither grow Leaves nor Grass. On the other
side, we find with what a torrent the Portugals bore down all before them to
recover their ancient Laws, and the Sovereignty of their lawful Princes, from
the servitude and oppression of the Spaniards; insomuch, that when the Duke of
Braganca had once declared his mind, the revolt was universal, and with such a
rapid motion, that one single day determined the contention with little blood;
so swift and astonishing was the surprise. Nor must we forget how impatiently
this Nation bowed under Usurpation; how hainously they bore the exilement of
his present Majesty, and the loss of their ancient Liberties, almost buried in
a most impious Tyranny, not ceasing till they had recovered both their Prince
and their Laws, to the unspeakable joy of the whole Kingdom.

In France the King is Absolute and Arbitrary. His word is the Law. He may
thank Lewis the XI. for laying the Foundations, and Richlieu and Mazarine for
perfecting the work. However, Olden. T. 2.
as it is brought about, the Final cause of the French Government, at present,
is the Grandeur of the Monarch; for the support of which, the welfare of the
People is but trampled under Foot. The King squeezes with his Exactions, the
great Lords and Gentry for their Rents, till the Commonalty are reduced to
utmost penury. For which reason France is compared to a most flourishing plain,
that feeds innumerable Flocks of Sheep, which are to be fleeced when the
Shepherd pleases. He is never safer than when he is in War, to keep his haughty
Nobility from hatching mischief. But his own Subjects being so cowed and out of
heart for Infantry, he is forced to hire among his Neighbors, and Skins the
servile Peasant for their pay: by that means dilating his Territories to the
intolerable detriment of his enslaved People. Only they are happy, because they
know no better.

In Swedeland it is quite otherwise; Olden. T. 2.
for there the King is bound to govern by the Laws of the Country, which he has
no power to alter without the consent of the People. So that the Character of
the Swedish Government is this, That it aims more at the welfare of the Subject
than the Interest of the Prince. And therefore it is observed, that no
Commonalty in the World live more happy than they. Which renders them stout
defenders of their Country, and formidable to the most formidable of their
Neighbors.

The Danish Government regards the Common Interest of the People, who are
governed by the ancient Laws of the Country; which the King is sworn to observe
at his Coronation. Therefore the People thrive, and live in a plentiful and
flourishing condition.

Whether the English imbibed their love of Liberty from their ancient Ancestors
the Danes, is not material here to discuss. Yet certainly no Nation under
Heaven enjoys those Rights, those Privileges, that uncontrolled Propriety with
more ample provision, and careful circumspection of Law, or a more equal
balance between the Prince and the Subject, than the People of England; which
makes them jealous of their infringement, sometimes even to excess. For the
Laws of England are made with the consent of the People themselves. By which
means they prevent the imposing any oppressive Burden upon their own Shoulders.
So that it may well be said, that the safety and security of the English
People, their Lives, their Liberties, and peculiar Proprieties, are as it were
entrusted to the Guardianship, and deposited in the keeping and defense of Laws
and Constitutions of their own framing. Not of yesterday, but derived from the
provisions of distinct Legislators and Princes, from the most ancient to these
present times, carefully deliberated and debated among the most eminent for
Wisdom and Counsel in the Nation. The want of Laws in the greatest part of
those Governments already recited sufficiently declare, how little the People
have to trust to, that are only governed by Will and Power. On the other side,
those People who are governed by Kings, not Tyrants, are the most happy; and
those Kings approach nearest to the King of Kings, who govern like Shepherds
not like Wolves. Which is the reason that David calls God himself the Shepherd
of Israel. Now then the Common good being the Rule and Quadran of good
Government, the better the Laws are, and the more they tend to the Common good,
their ultimate end, the better must that Government be; in regard that where
the Law is predominant, the Common good can receive no injury: and where the
Common good is so secured, there the People are safe in all things that concern
their Civil welfare. And in this appears the excellency of those Laws that
mainly design the common Benefit, that they resemble nearest the Laws of God,
whose Dispensations of Justice were the same to the Peasant as to the Prince.
And as it was most certainly a greater Prerogative of the Hebrew Kings above
all other Kings and Monarchs whatsoever, that they governed by the Law of God,
so does it not admit of much dispute, whether the Monarchs of England may not
claim a Prerogative of the same kind over all other Potentates, by governing by
a Law, the nearest to Divine of any extant: more justly far deserving the Title
of most Christian Kings, than they who glory only in commanding numerous swarms
of Slaves. But where the National Constitutions of a Kingdom have so interwoven
and twisted the Interest of Prince and People, that they are inseparable
without detriment to both, there the Laws are the safety of the Prince, and the
security of the People; and as the balance kept but duly even, render's the
Obligation and reciprocal relation between the one and the other indissoluble,
so it perpetuates their mutual happiness and tranquillity.

Now the People claim their security by the Law from the equal distribution of
Justice, the preservation of their Freedom and Proprieties, and protecting the
public Peace from Tumult and Disorder. On the other side, the Prince expects
all due Obedience from the People in the execution of the Law, and an exact
condescension to his just Prerogatives, without which his Authority lessens,
and grows into contempt. The Laws of England ordain to these ends, a limited
Authority to the Prince, and a consigned freedom to the Subject; thereby
providing at one and the same time, for the safety of the Prince and the
security of the People. For it is as equally dangerous and wicked for the
People to deny the Prince his just Prerogatives, as it is of ill consequence to
deny the People their Freedoms warranted by the National and Fundamental Laws
of the Land. We are then to believe that the Princes just Prerogatives, and the
Peoples safety, are the common Good of this Nation; and that their Lives and
Fortunes equally depend upon those Provisions which the Law has so equally made
for the security of the whole Body of the Commonweal, of which the Sovereign
Prince is the Head.

It is one of the Excellencies then of the English Laws, that they provide for
the Common good, which is the end of all true Law. For this is the general
Axiom, That the Reason and Substance of Law, demands that every part should be
framed for the Common Benefit, Greg. Lop. in l. 9. ^^t. 1. part 1.
which was the Condition that Alphonsus King of Spain required also in his
Laws. And thus it is understood by the Interpreters of the Civil Law, who
affirm that the Law is a common Precept, respecting the Benefit of all.
Aristotle observes, that the chief end of a Commonweal is to live well and
happily. And therefore adds, Ethied. 4. c. 1.
That the Laws are to be accommodated to the Commonweal, not the Commonweal to
the Laws. In my opinion, says Plato, the Law is made for Benefits sake, In
Dialog. Hippias.
as intended by the Legislator to be the supreme happiness of a Commonweal; for
the Law being taken away, there is no well being in a City. And in another
place he shows at large, that the end of Law is the common safety and felicity.
And Plutarch tells us, In Problem. tit. 40.
That Laws are then accounted good and wholesome when they procure the public
Benefit.

Which is evident from the most sacred Laws of the Almighty. For though they be
ordained to the honor of God (for that God cannot will any thing without
himself; nor operate, but for himself) yet in those Laws the great Monarch of
Monarchs, seeks not his own Benefit, but the good and felicity of Mankind.
Suarez l. 1. c. 7.
Which then also the Laws of Man most nearly imitate, when they drive nearest
to the same Perfection. Therefore as Laws are imposed upon a Community, so are
they to be framed for the good of that Community: otherwise they are irregular.
For it is against all rectitude and justice, to direct the Common good to
private Interest, or to make the whole relate to the part, for the parts sake.
And therefore when the Law is framed for a public Society, the good of that
Society ought primarily and principally to be procured. The same thing is
apparent from the Order of small Causes. For the end ought to be proportionate
to the act, its beginning, and its virtual efficacy. Now the Law is the common
rule of moral actions; and therefore the first principle of moral actions ought
to be the first beginning of the Law. For in Morals, the End is the beginning
of Operation, and so the ultimate end is the first beginning of such
Operations: But common good and felicity is the ultimate end of a Commonweal;
therefore, that also ought to be the beginning of the Law, and therefore the
Law ought to aim at the Common good.

This is illustrated by St. Austin, who collecting a Consequence, from the
Relation of the part to the whole, argues, that a Master of a Family ought to
take his pattern from the public Laws, and so to govern his House, as to be
conformable and agreeable to the public Peace. Therefore ought the public Laws
to give a good Example of public Benefit, and common Safety, that Domestic
Government may not be ruined by a bad President.

Suarez brings another reason from the Original of Law, For that the ruling
power which is in Men, is either immediately from God, as in spiritual Power;
or from men, as in Power purely temporal. But both ways, Suarez l. 1. c. 7.
such Authority is given for the public advantage of all in general. For
therefore are the Rulers of the Church called Pastors, because it behooves them
to lay down their Lives for their Sheep; and Dispencers, not Lords, and
Ministers, not Primary causes; and therefore they are obliged to be conformable
to the Divine Intention in the use of such Authority. Therefore also are the
supreme Magistrates called the Ministers of the Public: as not being created
for their own benefit, but for the advantage of them from whom they derive
their Power. They are also called the Ministers of God, and therefore ought to
use the Power entrusted in their hands in imitation of the King of Kings, who
in his Government, solely respects the common good of Mankind. For which reason
St. Basil makes this distinction between a Tyrant and a King, that the one
seeks his own proper advantages, the other labors chiefly for the common good
and benefit of all his Subjects; not excluding himself, as being the supreme
Member, and consequently the first that ought to share in the public and
general Emolument.

The reason why so few People attain this summum bonum of Government, appears
by the ways of practizing Dominion already recited; the want of a due poyse
between Rule and Subjection. For in the Arbitrary Eastern Monarchies, the
People are altogether Slaves, and may be only said to live, not to live with
any comfort or enjoyment of themselves. In the Elective Kingdom of Poland, the
Nobility carry such an unbridl'd sway, that the King is but a Cipher, a King
and no King; which subjects the Royal Sovereignty to such an insufferable
Bondage, that the Title is hardly worth the acceptance of an English Knight. A
King in subjection to many Kings. And all this while the People live miserably
under the Slavery of a many-headed Tyranny.

The Emperor is so overmaster'd by his Golden Bull, and so hampered with
Electors and Dyets, that in the most emergent affairs, the slowness of
deliberation, many times renders him useless to his Friends, and his Authority
cumbersome to himself. So that he never moves but like a Clock, when his
weights are hung on. Such clogs upon Sovereignty, are frequently the ruin of
great Atchievments. Neither do the Laws of God any where enjoin the Kings of
Judah when they should make either War or Peace.

The Ephori were added as a check to the Lacedemonian Kings. Which though it
grieved the Wife of Theopompus, who upbraided her Husband for suffering such an
Eclipse of his Authority, yet was not Theopompus of her mind; who returned her
answer, So much the greater, by how much the more lasting. And this Remedy
says Plutarch, was invented by the Lacedaemonians, to prevent the evil
accidents and ruin that befell the Kings of the Messenians and Argines, who
lost all for obstinately refusing to condescend a little to the Grievances of
the People. Plut. in vit. Lyc.


The Romans were terribly pestered about keeping the balance even between the
People and the supreme Magistrate. For after they had ingratefully thrown out
the Regal Government, which had laid the Foundations of all their Grandeur,
they betook themselves to their Annual Consuls; but when the Nobility had
engrossed that Office to themselves, the Plebeians began to wince at their
Oppression, and departing to Mount Aventino, threatened the Roman Nobility to
forsake the City unless they released them of their Burdens. Thereupon the
Tribunes of the People were invented to be Protectors of the Commons (for I
omit the Consular Pretors and Decemvirs, as of no continuance) but their Power
was over-large, and they rastl'd with Authority at too high a rate. Sometimes
the Tribunes, says Tacitus, were mutinous and headstrong, sometimes the
Consuls prevailed, whence Civil bloodshed and slaughter, even in the heart of
the City. Till at length Marius one of the meanest rank of Plebeians, and Sylla
the most cruel of the Nobility, turned the Roman Liberty, vanquished at length
by both their Arms, into Arbitrary Dominion. After which, no other Contests but
those of Ambition. So that it is apparent that the Romans lost their Liberty
for want of the Tribunes prudent management of the Balance which was put into
their hands, whereas the Ephori knew the Limits of their own Authority, as well
as the Bounds of that Power to which they were appointed as Assistants and
Moderators.

Nor is this Equilibrium in Government an airy Notion or Idea; It may easily be
found in the moderation of our own Laws, wherein there is that veneration of
Just Prerogative, and that care of the Peoples Rights and Liberties, that did
not sometimes Popular Affectation, sometimes the Ambition of evil Ministry shog
the Beam, it would be a difficult thing for Sovereignty to find an occasion to
complain, or subjection to murmur. And for this excellency of our Laws, we are
chiefly beholding to the prudence and moderation of our own Princes. Two such
Celestial Virtues, that of the whole Succession of Roman Emperors, they
rendered only Vespasian, his Son Titus, and Antoninus Pius the most Illustrious
Monuments of the Imperial Dignity. Neither is good Government any other thing
than Justice by another name; which is always pictured with an even Balance in
her hand. And that high Character sounds like somewhat immortal, given of Hiero
King of Sicily, that he was, justus in negotio, in imperio moderatus. Of whom
Livy also reports, Justin. l. 23 c. 24.
that he would have made the Romans his Heirs, that he might leave the
Syracusans in the same Liberty which for fifty years he had maintained among
them. l. 24. c. 4.
In all which time his Subjects had not beheld him nor his Son Gelo, aut vestis
habitu, Justin. l. 7. c. 6.16.
aut alio ullo insigni differentes. And it is reckoned among the Elogies of
Philip of Macedon, that he was not only moderatus, verum etiam mitis adversos
victos. It is farther said of Valerius Poblicola, that when he was advanced to
the highest degree of Roman Honor, he lessened his own Authority by degrees,
that the Law of the whole City might appear more free. To which we may add the
saying of Theopompus, a King himself, who being asked by his Intimate, which
was the most severe method for a Prince to preserve his Dignity, made answer,
If he made his Friends sharers of his Prerogative and Authority, and took care
that no injury were done to his Subjects.

Nor can any thing more brightly illustrate the moderation of ancient
Legislators, than the Laws themselves which they have left behind, so easy and
gentle, so tender of Life and Limb, so indulgent to reputation, so strict in
the preservation of Liberty and Propriety, so equal to the highest, to the
lowest, to the most wealthy and the poorest, that if they fail of their aim,
the Common good and welfare of All, it is when they fall into the hands of bad
interpretation, and such as wrest their sincere and just intention. Which
creates no little astonishment in the breasts of many judicious men, that the
Remedy of their strictness should be so highly advanced, which frequently
proves worse than the Disease, and proves oft-times more fatal both to Purse
and Person, than the most grievous sentence, that lies in their Power to
pronounce. The main blot in the fair Scutcheon of our English Constitutions.
Though there may sometimes happen another misfortune to their Noble Characters,
when Ecclesiastical jealousy seeks to gall the People with spiritual
Impositions, or Temporal for the sake of spiritual Interest; by which means the
Yoke of Christ, by himself asserted to be light and easy, is made like
Rehoboams little Finger, thicker than the Loins of humane Sanction.

Pulton, the Laborious Collector of all the Fundamental Laws and Statutes of
the Kingdom, highly extols them beyond the Constitutions of the Roman
Emperors, and of all other Nations. And before him the Great and Learned
Fortescue was also of the same Judgment, who prefers the Law of England far
beyond the Civil Edicts. But above all, nothing commends it more than that it
preserves the Rights and Liberties of the Subject inviolable, and is of that
nature that as the same Fortescue affirms, the Prince himself cannot change
them without the Consent of his Subjects, Delaud. Leg. Ang. c. 9.
nor charge them with strange Impositions against their wills. For which reason
the People frankly and freely enjoy and occupy their own Goods, being ruled by
such Laws as they desire. Therefore says he, rejoice O Sovereign Prince, and
be glad that the Law of your Realm wherein you shall succeed, is such. For it
shall procure to you and your People no small security and comfort. With such
Laws should all mankind have bin governed if in Paradise they had not
transgressed. With such Laws was the Synagogue ruled, while it served under God
only as King, who adopted the same to him for a peculiar Kingdom. Concluding
with a short Memorandum of the wealthy and flourishing Condition of the Jews
under their good Kings, and the Misery and Captivity that attended wilful and
Arbitrary Idolatry.

St. Austins Definition of a People may be rightly applied to the English
Nation; De civit. Dei, l. 19
A People, says he, is a multitude of Men associated by the consent of the
Law, and Communion of public Benefit. Which as it is most certainly true of
the English Nation, so may it farther be said, that this same Body of Men thus
Incorporated within this Island, has from the first beginning had that peculiar
Felicity never to have had any other Head but what wore a Royal Diadem. And
these Laws which are the Guard and Muniments of the Common Good, may be said to
have bin compiled by a grand Sanhedrim of Sovereign Potentates, West Saxon,
Danish, Northumbrian, Mercian, Ina, Ethelwolph, Cednulph, Alfred, Athelstan,
Edwin and Canute, every one throwing the Royal Contributions of his particular
Cares and Studies into the public Treasury of the Common Good; which being the
Act and Deed of Sovereignty it self, it cannot be thought that Regal Power was
regardless of its just Prerogative, or that Edward the Confessor would have bin
so chary of them to collect and reduce them into one Body, and leave them as a
sacred Relieque to the prejudice of his Successors. And from thence our
Fundamental Laws derive their illustrious Descent, and may therefore justly
claim the Title of Highborn, contrived by Sovereign Princes, as well for their
own safety as the Peoples security. Which being at length made public with the
unanimous consent and approbation of the Peoples Suffragans; there was nothing
binding to the Prince, but what Princes had already condescended to; and
nothing imposed upon the People, but what themselves thought necessary and
convenient.

To come to particulars, first in reference to the safety of the Prince; those
good and famous Monarchs of our own gave ample testimonies, that they were not
ignorant what procures the Honor and Esteem, what the ill will of the Subject.
And therefore in the first place, none were more devout according to the
knowledge of those times, none greater observers and setlers of Religion, and
none more bountiful enlargers of the Churches Privileges. And in regard the
next Applause belongs to them who best provide for the Civil Government,
therefore they took care to make good Laws, that by them they might govern
well. For as they have justly merited immortal Honors who have bin the
Establishers of Religion and good Government, so none have clouded their
Memories with greater infamy, then the Contemners of Religion, the Subverters
of established Government, and Oppressors of the People. For it is but the
Counterfeit Glitter and Delusion of false Honor, that captivates the
Ambitious, and enslaves them to the desire of enslaving others; and mounts
their unruly passions rather to an affectation of upbraided Tyranny, then
renowned and God-like Kingship. And yet there is that shame of ignominy, and
that eager thirst after what is most praiseworthy among Men, that the worst of
Tyrants would sooner be accounted Agesilaus's, Timoleon's and Dio's, then
Nabis's, Phalaris's and Dionysius's.

Nor shall we find that Timoleon and the rest, had less Authority in their
several Dominions, then Phalaris or Dionysius; but this is certain, they lived
in much more safety and security. If we consider the difference between those
Roman Emperors, and virtuous Princes that ruled according to Law, and those
that took a contrary course, Story is full of the never dying Encomiums of
Nerva, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Antoninus, who needed not the
Guard of Praetorian Bands, nor the Defense of armed Legions to secure them, as
being sufficiently defended by their own Justice and Moderation, the Affection
of the People, and Love of the Senate; whereas all the Power of the Roman
Empire could not save Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, and those others like
themselves from those mortal Enemies which their own depraved Lusts and Tyranny
raised to their destruction; the most abandoned of Men at their Falls. Which
was the reason, that of twenty six Emperors from Caesar to Maximus, sixteen
came to untimely and unfortunate Ends. Landmarks sufficiently visible, whereby
to discover the happy Road of Honor and Security, from the Sands and Shelves
of Reproach and timorous Anxiety. It is a pleasure to dwell in History under
the Raigns of those virtuous Emperors, which give us a full view of Princes,
safe and secure in the midst of their secure and faithful Subjects; the World
flourished in Peace and Justice; the Senate enjoyed their Authority; the
Magistrates their due Honors, the People grew Rich and Wealthy; Virtue and
Nobility was exalted; and fear only possessed the Gates of the Enemy.
Reverence, Obedience, and the Peoples Hearts, were the Princes satisfaction;
Freedom and Security the People's. On the other side, under the Lawless Reign
of Will and Tyranny, behold the World all in dismal Combustion, there War and
Bloodshed, here Tumult and Sedition, Cities dis-peopled, Rapes and Adulteries
Triumphant, Guards doubled, the Prince in perpetual Fears and Jealousies, in
continual disquiet and distrust; the People mad and raging, and unruly as the
inundations of the unfettered Ocean: and in a word, nothing but disorder and
confusion, till the gaping Jaws of Ruin swallow All.

And therefore it is recorded of Numa, Plut. in vit. Number.
so highly eminent for his Justice and Affection to his People, that during all
his Reign, there was neither War nor Sedition, nor so much as the least
commotion that tended to a Tumult. Which was the reason of Plato's assertion,
That it was impossible to move the Throne of that Prince, in whom a
Philosophers mind and Regal Supremacy met together. On the contrary, it is said
of Tiberius, Non Fortuna, Tacit. Annal. l. 6. c. 6.
non Solitudines prolegebant, quin Tormenta pectoris suasque ipse paenas
fateretur. Therefore, says Cicero, Fear is an ill preserver of Diuturnity, but
love and respect is faithful, and to Perpetuity. And from hence it was, that
when the Poets represented, in the person of Jove, a wise and virtuous Prince,
they brought him in, attended by Obedience and Equity; but when they make him a
Tyrant, they associate with him Injury and Fear. And Juvenal setting forth the
unsafe Condition of Arbitrary Pomp, and the perilous Estate of Tyranny, goes a
great way in two lines,

Ad generum Cereris, Sat. 10.112.
sine caede and vulnere pau^^
Descendunt Reges and sicca morte Tyrann^^
Reges being there taken abusive, in the same sense with Tyranni.

But the words and sentence of a King are of greater force. Therefore let us
hear the determination of Ferdinand of Arragon, ^^uan. l. ^. 4.
who married Isabella of Castil^. It was a part of the Arragonian Constitutions
at that time, that if the King went about to violate the fundamental Laws of
the Kingdom, it might be lawful for the Nobility to create another in his room.
This seemed very severe to the Castilians; and therefore they advised Ferdinand
to abolish that Law, as prejudicial to Royal Dignity. But Ferdinand replied,
That he was bound by the sacred Oath which he had taken, from doing any such
thing. Besides, that he was of Opinion, that the safety of a King and Kingdom
was secured by the equal poise of Power; and that if at any time it happened,
that the Power of the one out-hallanc'd the other, that without doubt the ruin
of the one or the other would ensue. And it is recorded of Augustus Caesar,
That when he listened to the Advice of his Wife Julia, and governed by the Law,
Dio in vit. August.
that he was from thenceforth free from Conspiracies, and that the People and
Senate were always after that faithful and obedient to him. Which was also
Escovedo's Counsel to John of Austria, Governor of the Spanish Netherlands;
telling him withal, that he could never be safe among those, who were not safe
from his own Ministers: for that Security was to be obtained by mutual
Security. S^ada l. 9. circa princip.


And indeed the Kingly Office (made and ordained for the defense of the Law of
the Subjects, Fortes Cur. de Laud. leg. Angl. c. ^^
their Bodies and Goods, to which end a Prince receives Power of his People, so
that he cannot govern his People by any other Law) is of that vast and high
importance to the preservation of Mankind, especially considered according to
those Appellations which are given to virtuous Princes, for the reasons
aforesaid, that nothing in the World ought more to oblige the Subject to the
perfect awe and reverence of it, as well for their own as the Princes sake.
Which awe and reverence, while it continues toward the Dignity, it is
impossible but that the Person must be secure and safe in all respects. For
while Princes govern by the Fundamental Laws of Justice and Equity, they are
not only impaled with the defense of a Loyal People, but under the promised
Protection of God himself. Their Justice and Moderation demands both Honor and
Veneration; their Vigilance Obedience and Loyalty. In this respect all Virtuous
Princes, that seek the prosperity and felicity of the People under their
charges, are called by Homer, (...), Shepherds of the People. And certainly it
would be the highest Iniquity imaginable for the Sheep to rebel or murmur
against a Shepherd, that sought nothing more then the common welfare of them
all, and never shear'd them, but when the Tribute of their Fleeces was justly
due. For which reason Pindarus calls the Royal Dignity (...), an Honor given
to Princes for nourishing and cherishing the People. He also calls Apollo
(...), Olymph. Ode 6.
and Acastus (...), Inspectors, Overseers, or Guardians of Delos, Nemeor. Ode 5.
and the Magnetes, denoting the cares and continual watchings that attend upon
true Kingly Government; which is also the Character given of it by Homer,

(...). And for these reasons is Royal Sovereignty the highest Dignity among
mortal men. For the Title of Emperor is only a nominal, no real difference.
Wherefore Pindarus speaking of Jamus, the Ancestor of Agesias, that he was as
great as Man could be. Some, says he, are more eminent then others, but he,
(...), had attained to the utmost extent of Honor, as being in the number of
Kings. It was the public Benefit which Men received by the Glorious Actions of
the Ancient Hero's, that made them ascribe Divine Honors to their deceased
persons. And the same Virtues in all just and virtuous Princes produce the same
Effects of Veneration and Reverence, Obedience and Loyalty in all good
Subjects. A King thus armed with his own Virtues, and for their sakes, with the
Hearts and Affections of his People, may justly warrant that Axiom of the King
of the Argines in Aeschylus, In Trag. H^ertides.


(...) The Awe and Terror of Princes is hardly to be imagined.

And yet he was none of those that lawlesly controlled; for presently after,
says he,

(...) I will persuade the Common Good. From all that has bin said, it plainly
appears wherein the true and diuturnal security and repose of a Sovereign
Prince mainly and principally consist. In which particular, the Laws of England
cannot be said to have bin any way defective; as having extended their power
all along to their own satisfaction; rather have they bin so tender of it, that
they would not suffer the Pope to make his Ecclesiastical ^^^^oachments upon
it, even in the most flourishing Estate of Papal Usurpotical. Which was never
admitted in England, but only when the Desertion of his Barons exposed King
John to the Exorbitancy of Papal Triumph.

To deseend to the cause, and primum mobile of the Subjects security, none can
be found more apparent then good Laws, including Justice and Freedom; And he
that is the Sovereign of a People so governed, may be rightly said to be as
Agamemmon is frequently styled by Homer, (...), the King of Men. Which cannot
be thought to be, where Arbitrary Will only controuls a multitude of Slaves.

Therefore, says the famous Pindar, (...)

The foundation of Cities is firm Justice, and Peace accomplished with her
Virtues, the Dispencers of Riches to Men, the Golden Daughters of considerate
Thenis. Olymp. Ode 13.
And praising the City of Opus, the Metropolis of the Locrians, (...). Which
Themis, and her Sisters good Government, the preserver of Common Weals, took
into their protection. And in another place, extolling the City of Aetna for
its freedom, which is the other main happiness of a Kingdom, (...). To whom,
meaning his Son, Hiero gave that City which he had built, and endowed with
Divine Liberty, according to the Standard of the Laconic Laws. Taking an
occasion to commend the Constitutions the Aetnean Commonweal, from the
Excellency of its Government founded in Justice and Liberty, after the example
of Lacedaemon, then accounted the most exact Form of Dominion in the World; and
therefore by the Poet styled the Standard of all other Governments.

Certainly the Government of England cannot be thought to stand upon a slight
Foundation, that has stood so long upon the single Basis of her own Laws. And
it is observable, that then England first began to flourish, when the Laws,
being reduced into one Body, were under the execution and care of one Universal
Monarch. Nor could the Breach of Norman Conquest hinder the Chasin of long
enjoyed Liberty, from uniting again, and closing it self more firmly with the
Cement of its former Constitutions; calculated by so many Kings of this Island
for the Meridian of English Freedom.

To come to particulars; the Statutes are made not only by the Princes
pleasure, but also by the Assent of the whole Realm; so that of necessity they
must procure the Wealth of the People, and in no wise tend to their hindrance:
and it cannot be thought but that they are replenished with much prudence and
wisdom, seeing that they are ordained not by the Providence and Deliberation of
one Man alone, but of more then five hundred chosen persons.

And here now in the distribution of Justice between Man and Man, the
Excellency of the English above the Civil Laws, is manifest from hence, that
the Issue of the Plea is not tried by the Deposition of two Witnesses only,
according to the proceedings of the Civil Law, but the Truth of the matter must
appear evident to the Judge, by the Oaths of Twelve men, Neighbors to the
place. For that Man may well be thought to be the Master of little Cunning or
Industry, that cannot find two persons, who either for fear, for love or
profit, will not be ready to contradict the Truth. Nor is it so easy a thing
to disprove the affirmative, or to expose the wicked Lives and Conversations of
persons altogether unknown.

The second Excellency of the English Laws derives it self from the Equitable
proceeding, or at least, intention of the Law in the Election and Swearing of
Jurors. Who when the parties are come to the Issue of the Plea upon matter of
Fact, are by Writ directed to the Sheriff of the County, by him to be chosen,
good and lawful Men, Neighbors to the place where the Fact is supposed to be
done. Upon their attendance, either party may refuse them, upon the reasonable
Allegations of Favor or Affection in the Return. Which Exceptions proving
true, the Panel shall be quashed, and another Writ directed to the Coroner for
the Return of a new Panel. And if that be found faulty, the Judges shall
appoint two Clerks of the same Court, who upon their Oaths are bound to make up
an indifferent Panel, which shall be challenged by neither party; yet
notwithstanding all this, either of the parties has the liberty to make his
particular Exceptions against the person of any, if they can tax him either of
Alliance, Friendship, or any other warrantable suspicion of prejudice; upon
which the name of the person shall be cancelled in the Panel. Moreover, they
must have Lands or Revenues for term of Life at the least, to the yearly value
of Forty shillings, lest for need or poverty such Jurors might be corrupt and
suborned. Being thus admitted and sworn to Impartiality, their determination of
the matter is called a Verdict, or Verum dictum, a true Report.

Here it is evident, that the final Cause of this Constitution, is the
determination of Controversy as much as can be devised, to the satisfaction as
well of the loser as of the gainer. For in regard every man is apt to believe
his own cause to be the justest, he can have no reason to be discontented, when
he finds himself convinced by a fair Trial, and the true report of so many good
and substantial Men; of whose Probitie he has as it were, the winnowing and
sifting, before he is bound to submit to their Arbitrament. The same method, or
very little different, is observed in Criminal Proceedings. So that no Man can
be condemned either in Life, Forfeiture, or any other poenal Punishment, unless
so many men, whose integrity and probity cannot be impeached, be upon their
Oaths, and upon mature deliberation fully evinced of the Merits of his Crime.

By this means the Lives and Estates of the People of this Nation are in a
great measure secured. For that no man can be deprived of his Possessions, if
his Tenure be just. Nor is his Life or Liberty liable to the blasts of
Arbitrary breath. So that the Courts of Justice are as it were public
Registers, ready to give an Account of all the particular Actions and demeanor
of the Law. Insomuch that the Law it self may in a manner be said to be upon
its Good Behavior. And therefore it behooves every Juryman and every Evidence,
to be in the highest degree careful how they mislead the intent of the Law,
since he may have need at one time or other, of the same Justice himself. And
he is to consider that his own Verdict is the fence and pale of all his fellow
Subjects Right and Liberty. And that he is guilty of all the mischief which
shall ensue, who opens the least Gap for Injury and Injustice to break in upon
Right and Freedom; and that thereby he violates the intent of the Law, which is
the common good as well of himself as of all the rest. For Injury and Injustice
are of the Nature with Quicksilver; which upon a smooth and polished Table
cannot take the least advantage, but where it finds the most diminutive chink,
there it harbors and corrodes. Hence we may conclude, that there are not two
things more pernicious to the Probity of English Verdicts, then Ignorance and
Faction. For the end of Juries being to distribute equal Justice for the
public security, Ignorance not knowing when she does well or ill, must of
necessity be guilty of many gross and foul transgressions, while not
understanding their value, she sports away the Jewels of other Men, as Children
play away their Parents Jacobus's. Therefore the Law has with solemn prudence
provided, that none should be the Judges of Estate and Liberty, but such as
enjoy both. And therefore if others are put upon that employment, whose
familiarity with Beggary values not Estate, or whose abject Spirit matters not
Liberty, it is the miscarriage of Execution, not of the Law it self. Which many
times may prove dreadful in the conclusion, even to Posterity.

Nor is Faction less dangerous, which seldom makes a true construction of the
Law, but carries along with it prejudice, and an opiniater'd Zeal for biased
Interest to the Bar. Thus a Ghibelline is a forejudg'd Offender right or wrong,
in the breast of a Guelph. And a Guelph is fore-condemn'd without any farther
consideration, by the Verdict of a Ghibelline. So that where persons are
brought to Trials, where they who try believe themselves cock-sure of a Jury
for their Turn, those cannot properly be said to be Trials, but only the
Formalities of Trials. And Jurors that go with a premeditated good will or
aversion to such a Trial, may not be said to give a Verdict, but to follow the
dictates of Passion and Affection, more frequently in the wrong, then in the
right; as being carried like floating and unfix'd pieces of Timber, which way
soever the Stream runs. And therefore what is done by Faction cannot be said to
be a Law. For it brings the World into confusion; while one thing shall be
accounted lawful to day, and another thing lawful to morrow. But the Law of
England is certain and unalterable; It had its Birth from King and People, and
was solely intended for the common good and preservation of Both. So that there
needs no picking and culling of Jurors by Interest and Faction, but the return
of Men of Understanding, Integrity and Probity, and then they who fall by their
Judgments, may be rightly said to fall deservedly.

The Law most certainly aimed at the right mark; and there is undoubtedly that
security of our Lives and Liberties from it, that without it there cannot well
be any. And therefore if there be any such who strain it from its natural and
genuine Intention. They are in the fault and not the Law; and Heaven will
require the oppression and blood of the Innocent at their hands. For the Law it
self is absolutely grounded upon the firm Basis of Reason, Nature and Justice,
the Common good of Prince and People.

And most assuredly, Fortescue, when he was so deeply engaged with Prince
Edward in the praise of the Laws of England, might have pitched upon far more
noble Themes, setting this of Juries aside, then to set them at variance with
the Civil Laws, only about Bastardy and Wardships. But he aimed at Brevity, and
therefore passes over Magna Charta in silence; wherein, as in a Mirror, all the
World may take a lovely Prospect of the advantages which this Kingdom of
England has above all other Nations under the Sun. Yet can it not be said to be
the Original of the Laws of this Realm, but a Collection of those ancient
Constitutions of the Saxons, Danes, Mercians and Northumbrians, which were by
Matthew Paris called Bonae and adprobatae antiquae Regni leges; and leges
Edvardi Regis, quae prius inventae sunt, and constitutae in tempore Adgari, avi
sui; and leges aequissimi Regis Edvardi.

These the English, oppressed by Norman Tyranny, eagerly thirsted to have
restored, and were impatient, till they were at length in most solemn manner
confirmed, first by King John, and afterward by Henry the Third, with the
severest Anathama upon the Infringers of it, that State or Religion could
devise. Know ye, says the King, that We, in the fear of God, for the Salvation
of our Soul, the Exaltation of the Church, and the Amendment of the Kingdom. In
which words are contained the Motives inducing the King to make the Grant, and
next the Final causes of the Grant. The first Inducement is the Fear of God.
And this those Two Great Monarchs, Favorites of the Almighty, Victorious David
and Wise Solomon both conclude to be the beginning of Wisdom. Which Wisdom, as
it can consult nothing but what is good and virtuous in General, so when It
comes to be chief Privy Counselor and Minister of State to a Prince in the
Establishing a particular National Government, can never be suspected to advise
otherwise then for the general Good and Preservation of the People from whom
Obedience to that Government is required. 'Twould be impiety to think that the
Beginning of Wisdom could have any other aim or intention then what is just and
profitable. Therefore where a Prince is blessed with the fear of God, That
Religious Fear instructs him with Heavenly Wisdom; and that Heavenly Wisdom
guides him to make and establish such Laws as may come nearest to the Laws of
God himself, which respected nothing more then the safety, repose, protection
and welfare of his own People. Happy then is the English Nation, whose Lives,
Estates and Liberties are wrapped and folded up in such a Charter of Laws, which
had its Confirmation from the fear of God. Certainly their Estates, their Lives
and Liberties can no where be more safe then in the fear of God; by nothing
more cordially or warily preserved, then by the Beginning of Wisdom. Which when
the late Usurpers violated, they soon found it to be the Beginning of Folly.

The second Inducement was the Good of the Kings Soul. Which he well might hope
for from the Promises of the King of Kings Himself. He might well have a fair
prospect of Eternal happiness, when he was so largely providing for the
Temporal Felicity of his People. It was an Argument of the Queen of Sheba, That
God delighted in Solomon, and that the Lord loved the People of Israel, because
he had made him King to do Judgment and Justice. This is the Great Charter of
Heaven, by which Princes hold their Supreme Dignity; the Execution of Judgment
and Justice is the high Employment, to which God has appointed Kings. In so
doing, they observe the Statutes and Ordinances of Heaven. The Rock of Israel
spoke to David, saying, Let him that rules over Men be just, ruling in the
fear of God. The recompense of which, is to be rewarded according to their
Righteousness. Which is the Guerdon that David acknowledges to have bin the
happy retaliation of his Integrity in observing the Precepts and Statutes of
God, by him framed for the public Benefit of his People; and who may be also
said to be the Author of all good and wholesome Laws grounded upon Reason and
Nature. And therefore the King might well hope for the reward of his Equity and
Justice from the God of Both. And the People might well hope for security
temporal of their Lives and Liberty, from Laws confirmed for the Eternal
security of the Confirmer.

And as the Motives and Incentives to pass this Grant were twofold, so were
likewise the Final causes of the Grant it self.

First the Exaltation of the Church. Thus Moses provided first for his own
Worship in general, in the first part of the Decalogue; as he also did in his
particular Worship, in the Erection of the Tabernacle, and the Consecration of
the High Priest and subordinate Levites. And this order and method the very
Heathens were prompted to observe by the very Light of Nature. The first care
of Numa was to settle the Heathen Worship of the Gods, the next care of Servius
Tullus was to provide for the good Order of the Politic Government. And Justin
speaking of Moses and a feigned Son of His, whom he calls Arnas, and the great
Benefit which the Jewish Commonweal had reaped from their good Government,
Quorum Justitia, says he, Religione permixta, incredibile quantum coaluere.
Which mixture of Religion with Justice, was by some of the Heathens accounted
so absolutely necessary that they would not separate the Priesthood from the
Kingly Office, as we may read in Virgil:

Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos
Vittis, Aene^d. l. 3.
and sacro redemitus tempora Lauro.
And it was the Fatherly advice of Charles the Fifth to his Son, whereby he
might approve himself a worthy Prince, Strada, l. 1.
to be constant in the Patronage of Religion and the protection of the Laws,
which he calls the true and certain Establishments of all Kingdoms. For the
Ship of the Commonweal can never Ride safe without the sacred Anchor of
Religion.

For it concerns all Princes that Study the Diuturnity of their Dominions,
above all things, to preserve the Worship of God in its entire purity. There
being no more dangerous symptoms of a perishing Kingdom, then the neglect and
contempt of Religion. This is easy to be understood, if Men would give
themselves to understand the Fundamental ground and reason of the Religion
where they are born and bred. For that Religion has its Birth from some
peculiar and awful Original or other. The Religion of the Heathens was grounded
upon the Answers of the Oracles, and the Observations of Diviners and
Soothsayers. Believing that those Gods which could foretell good and evil, could
also bequeath them the same Felicities, or vex them with the same Misfortunes.
But the Foundation and Original of Christian Religion, it is not to be
questioned but that we all know, as being established in the World by the
Eternal Son of the ever living God. And the ends of it are to procure Salvation
in Heaven, and Tranquillity, Union and Peace upon Earth. And while the Faith and
Integrity of Men makes no other use of it, the Intermixture of it with secular
Justice makes that binding Cement, that renders the Bulwark of Government
impenetrable to all the assaults of Humane Violence. For by the Exaltation of
the Church is not meant the Exaltation of Pomp and Gaudy Ceremony, and the
pampering it up in worldly Honor and exorbitant Wealth, quite contrary to the
Institutions of the Founder, who laid the Foundations of his Doctrine in
Humility and Peace. From whence while Men in Holy Orders deviate, and maintain
the forbidden Interest of Worldly Glory, while they seek to support the name
and show of Religion, they Adulterate Justice, and many times become the main
disturbers of the public Peace. Whence Matchiavel makes this observation,
Matchiavel. dis^c^^si. l. 1. c. 12.
That those People who inhabit nearest to the Church of Rome, have the least
Religion; and ascribes the Bad Estate of Italy to the Roman See. And for this,
he gives two invincible, as he calls them, Reasons. First, for that by the evil
and wicked Examples of that Court, the whole Nation have lost all their Piety
and Devotion. The next Reason proceeds from the different Interest of Christian
Humility, and Antichristian Vainglory. For the Roman Court to maintain the
Pomp and Splendor of a Temporal Hierarchy, is forced to keep not only Italy,
but all Europe in Division, and sometimes to League even with the Turk for its
own preservation; by which means unhappy Italy, being prevented from uniting
under their own supreme Prince, and one frame of Law, is exposed to all the
Pretenses of her more powerful Neighbors, and her petty Princes are but the
precarious Tenants at Will to more mighty Potentates.

Nor does the Exaltation of the Church encourage the Priesthood to move
irregularly out of their Sphere, or to lead an Amphibious Life, sometimes in
the running Streams of the Gospel, sometimes upon the Terra Firma of Temporal
Government. Nor is it in Scripture a warrantable method of seeking Church
preferment to oblige the secular Interest by strained and wrested
Interpretations of the Immaculate Scripture. Like Shaw Preaching up the Title
of Richard the Third, and Latimer the right of Jane Seymour. For if the Kingdom
of their Lord and Master be not of this World, no more does temporal preferment
belong to the Ministers of his Doctrine. But the true Exaltation of the Church
is to protect it is Ministers in the Preaching of sound Scripture, to the
Conversion of Souls, to the building up the new Jerusalem, and advancing the
future Kingdom of Christ, by their endeavoring to increase the number of his
Celestial Subjects. The Exaltation of the Church protects her neat and pure,
and exactly cleans'd and swept from all the Cobwebbs of Babylonish
Superstition. For then will Rome despair of ever setting Foot in England more,
when with grief she beholds all her Follies and inveigling Allurements Root and
Branch, extirpated. To which end, the same resolution might well become the
Clergy of England in reference to the Relics of Popish Ceremonies, which was
applauded in King Stephen in relation to the Roman Laws; who hearing that they
were brought into England, and lodged in the custody of Theobald, Archbishop of
Canterbury, commanded them out of his House, published an Edict against the
Laws of Italy, and banished them out of his Realm. Not enduring, though a
Forraigner himself, any other then the Honesty of the English Constitutions. An
Act of his not recorded by any of our Historians, but by the Learned Seldom in
his Notes upon Fortescue, cited from Roger Bacon's Compendium Theologiae, and
John of Salisbury in his Treatise de nugis Curiaticum.

On the other side, the Wolf in Sheeps clothing, outwardly Meek, and
insinuating Heresy and Schism, are equally dangerous and contagious. For
Heresy, the Illegitimate Brat of Contumacy, while it labors to shake off from
the minds of Men the easy Yoke of Christ, at the same time teaches Men to
violate their Allegiance to their lawful Princes: and they that strive to bring
in the Innovations of obstinate Opinion, if they get the upper hand, seldom
change the Religion alone.

Therefore the Exaltation of the Church defends and guards those Men that give
themselves to compose the breaches of Ecclesiastical Differences, and labor to
beget a harmony and unity of Faith and Devotion, which then Religion most truly
useful, and the most unblemished Aid of Civil Justice.

The second final Cause of this Great Charter, was the Amendment of the
Kingdom. The miscarriages of those times are by our Historians said to be the
Cancelling of the Great Charter, by the advice of Hubert de Burgh, Chief
Justiciary of England, as first confirmed by the King during his Nonage. The
displacing the English Nobility, and admitting Poictovins and Forraigners into
the Chief employments of the Kingdom, and the Impoverishment of the Nation by
vast and continual Taxations. By the means of which undue proceedings the
ancient Laws of the Realm were rendered useless, and the Liberty of the People
lay at the Mercy of Evil Ministers. The amendment of which Grievances, as being
an Act due to the Honor of God, the Salvation of the Kings Soul, and the
Exaltation of the Church, is now intended by the Confirmation of this Great
Charter. From whence it is inductively demonstrable, that if the Establishment
of good Laws be the way to procure such inestimable Happiness to a Prince, the
continuance of bad Customs and Oppression inclines to all the contrary
consequences; that is, to be dishonorable to God, hazardous to Salvation, and
injurious to the Church. Which considerations of Eternal Detriment or Felicity,
when they come to be the inducements to Reformation, must certainly be a great
advantage to such Reformation, that it may prove effectual to all its purposes.
And then such Act of Reformation is of that high Merit, that it produces a
benefit of the good, exceeding the mischief of the Evil; the reason perhaps why
Machiavel ascribes a more Exalted renown to those Princes who reform the
corruptions of a disordered State, then to those who only continue the Good
Government which they found. E veramente, says he, un Prencipe cercando la
gloria del mondo doverebbe desiderare di possedere una Citta corrotta, non par
guastarlo, come Caesare, ma per riordinarla, come Romulo. A Prince Ambitious of
the Honor of this World would desire to come to a Kingdom under the corruption
of ill Customs, not to ruin it like Caesar, but reform it like Romulus. For as
it is impossible but that Ambition, desire of absolute Dominion, and many other
oversights of Government, will many times disturb the Courts of Justice, and
let in confusion at the Breaches of the Law, so is that Prince the more highly
to be honored, who reforms those abuses, and restores exiled Justice, by how
much such Reformation must needs be the more welcome and acceptable, even as
health is more valued by such as know the Inconveniences of Sickness, then by
those who never understood the want of Cure: and by how much the Joy is greater
for the recovery of the lost Sheep, then for those that never went astray.

Now this Amendment of the Kingdom implied the defect of Government, and such a
defect which endangered the Estates, Lives and Liberties of the Subject; which
since they could be no way secured, but by the Recovery of the Ancient Laws of
the Kingdom, it follows, that seeing the Rights and Liberties of the English
People are still the same, they can be guarded by no better security then what
has hitherto preserved them, as upon which the Salvation of the Princes Soul,
and the Exaltation of the Church depend, and all redounding to the Honor of
God.

Neither could Time it self dissolve this Charter, as being granted to all the
Freemen of the Kingdom, to be held and enjoyed in the Kingdom for ever.

But what those Liberties were, and what the Amendments were, is better seen by
the Charter it self: in regard that what was good by Amendment, was on the
contrary, evil and unjust in practice: No Man may be taken or imprisoned, or
disseis'd of his Free Tenement, his Liberties or Free Customs, or be Outlawed
or Exiled, or any way destroyed, nor will we enter upon his Possession, Nec
super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus.
nor Commit him (so Seldom renders the last words) but by the Loyal Judgment of
his Peers, or Men of his Condition, or by the Law of the Land.

By this Paragraph of the Charter it is plainly to be made out, that the
Estates and Liberties of the English Subjects are desended and guarded as well
by the Law of Nature, as by the Law of the Land: as having embodied those
Principles of Morality, which most conduce to Public Honesty, which is the
Common Security. All which are mustered up under that General Head of Alterine
feceris quod tibi fieri non vis. Which being the Law of Nature, is also the
Will of God, who is the Author of Nature. So that as God can command nothing
but what is purely honest and just, no more can the Law of Nature. Now that the
Materia prima of this Law is the same with that of the Law of Nature, is
apparent from hence, that it enjoins necessary Honesty, and forbids the Evil
contrary to it. To clear the point a little farther, This Paragraph contains
nine Branches relating to the Liberty of Person, the security of Property and
Possession, and the general execution of Justice.

1. No Freeman may be taken or imprisoned; That is, as the Lord Chief Justice
Cook expounds it: No Man shall be restrained of his Liberty by Petition or
Suggestion to the King or his Council, but by Indictment, or Presentment of
good and lawful Men, where such deeds be done. For Liberty is the power of
living at pleasure. And no Man lives as he pleases, who is not permitted to
enjoy that repose and tranquillity both of Mind and Body which he proposes to
himself. Which Liberty was given him by Nature, and in some measure granted
even to the wild Beasts themselves. And therefore to deprive him of the Power
of himself, is to deprive him of the gift of Nature, to which there is nothing
that he can have more Right, until he forfeit it back to the Law by
transgressing it. And that it is the gift of Nature, is evident from that Love
of Liberty which Nature has infused even into all the particular Members of the
Creation. The Elements themselves disdain the Curb of Servitude. Imprisoned
Fire when it gets loose revenges it self with greater fury. The fettered Ocean
foames and roares at his Confinement; The Winds against their will detained in
the Earth's bowels, put the Earth into most violent Convulsions. We see how
impatiently young Horses brook their Imperious Curbs; and how the little Birds
at first bewail the Captivity of the Cage. Liberty is one of the chiefest
Felicities Man has to boast of that he is by Nature Lord of himself, and has
only Reason to be his Governor. Nor does the Law require slavish Subjection
from him, but natural and necessary Obedience; which is therefore so far from
being oppressive, that it becomes delightful to him, because he finds thereby
his Liberty preserved. For these reasons every Man that enjoys his Liberty is
said to be the treasurer of a most inestimable Jewel, the Privilege of Nature
and his Birthright, which they who ravish from him by violence and against the
Law of Nature, despoil him of the Benefit of Heaven, and reduce him to the
slavish condition of Beasts, as if he were only made for the use of Tyrannizing
Power.

Therefore says this Law, let No man be restrained of his Liberty or imprisoned
but by the Law. I omit the fatal Consequences of endangering the Liberty of a
People enured to Privilege and Freedom, the love of which to them is so
excessive, that accounting nothing dearer to them in this World, they prostrate
Life, Estate, and all at the feet of its Preservation. On the other side,
Popular License is with all the severity imaginable to be restrained; for that
unhinges public Safety, and makes an Inundation upon the true Justice of
Government. Then which nothing can be more pernicious to the Public Security,
and the Common Good of Prince and People.

2. Let no man be disseis'd or dispossessed of his Freehold, that is, of his
Lands, Livelihood, Liberties, or free Customs as belong to him by his free
Birthright.

And this also depends upon the Law of Nature. For no sooner was the World
Created, but immediately appeared Propriety. Abel was a Keeper of Sheep, and
Cain a Tiller of the DGround. And therefore was Man endu'd by Nature with
Industry, to advance his Estate, to the end he might not only live, but live
comfortably upon what by his Labor he enjoyed. Which being obtained by his own
industry and pains, Nature instilled that Moral Principle among Men, that it
was but just that every man should quietly and peaceably enjoy what he had got
by his Labor and the sweat of his Brows. And this is evident from the Law of
Inheritance, the Institution of God himself. For if by the Law of Nature he had
not power to possess and keep, he could not have power to dispose. But the
undeniable Power of disposition confirms the right of Property and Possession.
So that for a Man to be despoyl'd of the fruits of his Labor, or of the
Inheritance of his Ancestors, is against the Law of God and Nature. Thou shall
eat of the Labor of thy hand; happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with
thee; and He that gathers by Labor shall increase. This was the
Establishment of Property by two of the best of Kings, by the dictate of God
himself. And therefore for Tyranny to waste the Labors of the Subject
profusely upon illegal Innovasions, and unnecessary Pomp and Riot, is a piece
of Injustice of the highest Nature. And therefore this Law grounded upon the
Law of God and Nature, takes especial care to secure the Property of the
Subject from Exorbitancy and Oppression.

Not that hereby the Laws of legal Tributes are any way contradicted. For they
are imposed upon the People, and given to the Prince as a public Person for
the Common Good; of which the support of his Dignity is a part. And generally
in England they are given with the Subjects consent. And this is also warranted
by Scripture. For this reason you pay Tribute also; for they are Gods
Ministers. Nor can the People expect to be safe in what they possess, unless
the Prince be sufficiently supplied for their defense. And yet the Law has so
provided too, that they cannot be put upon the expense of chargeable and
unnecessary Wars; for tho it be in the power of the Prince to make and proclaim
the War, yet the Sinews of it are in the Peoples keeping. However, for the
People to deny their Prince his just and legal Tributes is altogether as
unnatural, as it may be thought unkind in him to deprive them of their Goods
and Fortunes, without a lawful cause against their good-liking.

The third and fourth Branches are made to interpose in bar of unjust
Exilements and Outlaries. Of which the one is the Occasion that a Man is said
Perdere Patriam, to lose his Country; and the other to be deprived of the
benefit of his Native Laws. Two heavy Burdens, and two unmerciful Injuries for
a Freeborn Man to take at the hands of Violence without a Legal Provocation.
They are a sort of Civil Excommunications, which cut a Man off from the society
and commerce with his dearest Friends and Countrymen, and the benefit of the
Law; and leave him as it were forsaken both of God and Man. Banishment was
looked upon in former times, as an affliction so heavy and so insupportable,
that it was thought a Punishment sufficient for Treason in the Reign of Henry
the First. Even in the time of Richard the Second, the offenses of great
Personages were punished by Banishment. In short, they are both when
undeserved, Breaches of Man's Liberty, and consequently contrary to the Law of
Nature, which gives to every Man the right of a Civis Natu in the Country where
he was born. For it is not to be questioned, but the Land which the Lord thy
God has given thee, was spoke to every individual Native of the Country, and
not to particular persons. And therefore it is not a thing of that slight
Importance, to hurry the Freeborn Citizens of a Commonweal, out of the Land of
their Nativity, or to put them upon the necessities of voluntary Exile, upon
the Score of Conscience and Ecclesiastical Interest. For all true
Ecclesiastical Interest is the Interest of Christ, and as such the Interest of
Christian Religion as to this World, is grounded upon the Law of Nature; one of
whose chief Maxims therefore is, Do as you would be done by. For which reason
that Law which forces the freeborn Subject of a Nation into Exile, and all Men
are constrained that go to avoid some inconvenience or violence prejudicial to
their present Peace, is contrary not only to this Statute, which says, that no
Man shall be exiled but by the Legal judgment of his Peers, but also to the
Laws of Christian Liberty, which admits of no Corporeal punishment upon the
score of Religion, much less of Exilement, which is a forfeiture of the highest
degree. Ecclesiastical Interest, which is far the more sublime and more noble
Power, may exterminate from Heaven, but not from Earth; For it is the same
thing whether Interest advise or act. According to that of the Learned Bishop
Tailor, Many, says he, have got a trick of giving People over to the Secular
Power, which at the best is no better then Hypocrisy, removing Envy from
themselves, and laying it upon others; a Refusing to do that in external Act,
which they do in Counsel and approbation; which is a transmitting the Act to
another, Liberty of Prophesying, p. 229
and retaining a proportion of the Guilt to themselves, even their own and the
others too.

And therefore this Law, having a greater regard to the Public good and the
Defense of the Prince, enervated by the dispeopling and emptying of his Country
of its chiefest Sinews and Strength which consists in the Number of
Inhabitants, (and which he that travels the Popes Territories may easily
observe not to be the Interest of Rome) has here taken care that no Man should
be exiled before legal judgment of his Peers. Not but they who deserve
Banishment ought to be punished according to their deserts; but then they must
be first convicted according to the Law of the Land. Otherwise it is not only
contrary to the Law but the Customs of the Realm, by which no Man can be
banished out of his Native Country, but either by Authority of Parliament, or
in case of Abjuration for Felony by the Common Law.

Therefore the secular Law, (never so certain in its course, as when it steers
without the helm of Ecclesiastical Ambition) is so tender of Exilement, that it
will not permit even the Prince himself to send any Subject of England to serve
him against his will: nay, if you believe the Lord Cook, a Man cannot by
constraint be commanded out of England into Ireland, though for his Honor to be
Deputy of the Kingdom. Which shows how nice the Laws of England were to tread
the Footsteps of Nature and Reason in this particular.

5. No Man shall be destroyed, that is, by the interpretation of the Lord Cook,
No Man shall be forejudg'd of Life or Limb, dis-inherited, or put to torture or
Death.

And thus all oppression against Law, by color of any usurped Authority, or
under the pretense of Justice, is a kind of destruction. Which is neither to be
done aliquo modo, by any way, means, pretense or shadow whatsoever.

Of this sort of Destruction the Psalmist complains when he cries out, All the
Foundations of the Earth are out of course. The public good and safety was
turned into public Violence and Oppression, while Lawless Power and Arbitrary
Dominion made Havoc of the Lives and Liberties of the succourless People. Then
which a greater Calamity cannot befall Mankind. For what more irreparable
injury can be done to a Man then to deprive him of his life, or maim him in his
limbs; thereby to demolish not only his well-Being, but his very Being it self,
upon every Choleric Incentive of Lust, Ambition, Superstition, Revenge, and
many times of Interest and Politic Convenience? This prudent Nature foresaw,
and engraved in the heart of every Man a desire of association for mutual
defense against the Rage of licentious Will and Pleasure. Nature approved their
design, aided them with her own Light, and dictated to them Her self those
Principles and Precepts of Honesty, Justice, and Moderation, which Heaven had
infused into Her, that they might reduce them into Laws, to prevent the Havocks
of unlimited Control, which wherever it sets footing, reduces All to Beggary,
Slavery and Destruction. Which while it is the chief endeavor of Nature,
aiming at nothing more then preservation, to keep fast bound in the Chains and
Fetters of her own Law, warrants the same method in Constitutions of Human
Frame. And certainly if they are to be thought the only Foelices Agricolae,
that live under the Protection of good Laws, the English may be said rightly to
be They, who have the Laws of God and Nature spreading their Cherubim-Wings
over the Lives and Liberties of every particular person in the Nation.

The next and sixth Branch, Neither will we enter upon his Possession, nor
commit him, may seem to be a particular Promise of moderate Indulgence to the
Subject in reference to the peculiar claims and Suits of the King relating to
the Crown, yet still springing from the same Original. Which shows the Kings of
England truly fit to rule, while they themselves submit to the Laws by which
they govern. As it was said of Lycurgus, Quod nihil lege ulla in alios Sanxit,
cujus non ipse primus in se Documenta daret.

The three next Branches relate to the great prejudices and damages which are
sustained by the ill management and Execution of Justice through the Corruption
of its Ministers; against which the Law provides in these words:

We shall sell to no Man Justice or Right.
We shall deny to no Man Justice or Right.
We shall delay to no Man Justice or Right.
The selling of Justice or taking Bribes, and the denial and delay of Justice
as they are equally dishonorable to God, so are they to them that require
Justice equally injurious. For it is the highest presumption that Man can be
guilty of to expose to sale one of the chiefest Attributes of the Almighty.
There is nothing whereby God more exalts himself to Mankind, then in the
frequent Repetitions of his Justice. Of which he that makes Merchandise,
prostitutes the Honor of his Maker for filthy lucre: and yet neither is it his
own to sell; for God is the Fountain of Justice; from him it all flows, and his
it is. Only he entrusts it with the Ministers of Justice for the good of
Mankind. He that does Justice uprightly, acts like God; but he that sells it,
sells the Act of God and not his own; for tho it prove Justice in the
purchaser, yet it is not Justice in the seller, but the Price of the Buyer,
which if the poor and needy want, they must not have, because they have not
wherewithal to bid for it, who are nevertheless under the Protection of Justice
equally with the most Opulent. However God out of his boundless Providence
foresaw how great would be the Temptations of Avarice, and the allurements of
Gold, tho current no where but upon Earth, that he provides against the
charming Iniquiry by a strict command, Thou shall not respect persons, nor take
a Gift, for a gift blinds the eyes of the wise. So that the high Crimes
alleged against the Sons of Samuel were, that they turned after Lucre, and
took Bribes. From whence the Light of Nature infused the same detestation of
these Misdemeanors in all other Ministers of Justice. By Hesiod they are called
(...), or Gift-eaters, whom he makes Justice to follow weeping, and bewailing
the fatal Consequences of her bad usage. Phocyllides also, from the same Law of
Nature could give this advice,

-- (...). Let not favor bias Justice; for if thou do says he, -- (...).
God will afterward judge thee. And another of the Gnomonicks, would thou
support thy life, (...), by doing justly? then (...), fly ill got gain. We read
in Herodotus of Sesamnes one of the Persian Judges, put to death for Bribery by
Cambyses, who caused him to be flayed after he was dead, and his Tanned Skin to
be cut into Thongs to make a Seat for his Son.

Among the Roman's by the Junian Law Bribery or selling of Justice was punished
with Exile; and by the Acilian Law, they were immediately to receive Judgment,
without any demurs. It may be thought that selling of places relating to Courts
of Judicature was not a custom then in practice, else we might conclude that
they who made such ample provision against the selling of Justice, would have
as carefully provided against the selling of those Inferior Authorities that
refer to the Execution of it. Especially when the Rates run so High as now they
do. Twelve hundred, Two Thousand pound for a Jaylours place, Four hund^^^ ^o^
^ Sergeants, and so proportionably for others. For it serves for a specious
Plea to those that shall be called to account for their miscarriages, that they
have bought so dear. Nor does the Name of a Favorite in Court sound well, for
though it may not be so effectual as some may think, yet is the thing it self
suspicious to all, especially when they see the Fortunes and Emoluments of that
person advanced above others of equal merit.

But after pardon for this short digression, the two next Grievances by this
Charter promised to be reformed are the delay and denial of Justice; both much
of the same Nature, seeing that the Delay is in some measure the denial of
Justice. Which words, delay of Justice, are so expounded by several Acts of
Parliament, that by no means Common Right or Common Law should be disturbed or
delayed, though it be commanded under the Great or Privy Seal, or by any Order,
Writ, Letters or Command whatsoever, even from the Prince himself, or any
other; but that the Justices shall proceed, as if no such Writs, Letters,
Messages or Commandment were come to them. And therefore the Epithet of
Celeris is given to the Law; in regard there is nothing which can be more
welcome to those who are aggrieved or distressed then quick and speedy Relief.
And this is without doubt the meaning of those positive Commands in Scripture
to which the Judges of the Earth, to hear the cries of the Poor and Needy; who
if not soon redressed, are doubly undone by unnecessary Expense, and
withholding from them the profit of their legal and just claims. But as the
Delay is bad, so is the positive denial so much the more to be avoided, by how
much the Lamentations and Cries of the injured make a louder sound in the Ears
of Heaven, and open with greater swiftness and more rapid violence the
Floodgates of Divine Vengeance upon a Nation. For if the cause of the
oppressed be the cause of God, then the denial of Justice is the denial of the
Almighties own Suit, with whom this great Charter would not contend. And
therefore the Prince, here minding his future Salvation, freely discards the
selling, delay and denial of Justice, knowing how little they would avail, when
unreliev'd Oppression should plead against him at the Bar of Heaven. If then
the Law of England be the surest Sanctuary which an English Man can take, and
the strongest Fortress to protect the weakest of All, it must be assuredly much
more sacred and beneficial, when built up of the Materials of Gods Commands and
Natures Light. Nor can they who at any time shall seek to destroy so beautiful
a Structure, expect other then to perish in its Ruins.

But here may some advance a Quaere, and ask, what is meant by this Per legem
terrae, this Law of the Land? A Scrutiny with the same facility as made plainly
resolved by the Statute of the 25 Ed. 3. c. 4. where per legem terrae is
expounded to be by due Process of the Law. For thus the words run: Whereas it
is contained in the Great Charter, etc. that no Man shall be imprisoned, etc.
It is accorded, assented and stablish'd, That no Man shall be taken by Petition
or Suggestion to our Lord the King, or his Council, unless it be by Indictment
or Presentment of his good and lawful People of the same Neighborhood where
such Deeds be done, in due manner, or by Process made by Writ Original at the
Common Law. Nor that none be outed of his Franchise or his Freehold, unless he
be duly brought in answer, and forejudg'd of the same by the Course of the Law.
And if any thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed and holden for
none. Upon which words the Lord Cook observes, that Process of Law is twofold,
By the Kings Writ, or by due proceeding and Warrant, either in Deed, or in Law
without Writ. Which latter way of Proceeding is against Criminals, where there
is good Witness against the Offender. And Evidence must proceed from persons of
good Fame, Credit and Honesty, not from debauched, malevolent and scandalous
Informers. And therefore the Law requires, that they who grant any such Warrant
have lawful Authority; that the Warrant be lawful, and under Hand and Seal;
that the Cause be specified in the Warrant; and lastly, that the intent of the
Warrant be Legal, for the safe Custody of the Party till he be delivered by due
course of Law. Which is plain from the Style of our Habeas Corpus's, Vt
Justiciarii nostri visa causa, fieri faciant quod de Jure and secundum Legem
and Consuctudinem Regni Nostri Angliae foret faciendum.

In farther proof of which Exposition, we sind it Enacted in the 27 of Ed. 3.
c. 3. That no Man of what Estate or Condition that he be, shall be put out of
Land or Tenement, nor taken nor imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death
without being brought to answer by due Process of the Law. Which last words
expounding and fully answering the doubt upon per Legem terrae, plainly evince
the Law of the Land to be such, that no Man ought to receive detriment either
in Person or Estate before legal Trial and due proof of the Offense.

True it is, that the Lord Cook brings an Instance of an Act of Parliament made
in the face of this Fundamental Law of Magna Charta in the 11th year of Hen. 7.
That as well Justices of Assize, as Justices of the Peace (without any finding
or Presentment of Twelve Men) upon a bare Information for the King before them
made, should have full Power and Authority by their discretions to hear and
determine all Offenses and Contempts committed or done against the form of any
Statute in force and not repealed. But the Fence of Common Justice being thus
broken, what ensued? By this Act, shaking the Fundamental Law of Magna Charta,
it is not credible, says He, what Oppressions and Extortions to the Ruin of
infinite numbers of People were committed by Empson and Dudley.

Therefore in th first year of Hen. 8. that Act was repealed and made void; and
the reason is given, For that by force of the said Act, many sinister, crafty,
feigned and forged Informations had bin pursued against diverse of of the Kings
Subjects, to their great Damage and wrongful vexation. So that even Acts of
Parliament themselves, if they entrench upon the Subjects Liberty grounded upon
the sacred meaning and intent of this Fundamental Law of Magna Charta, are as
liable to be put to death, as any that offend against the justest Ordinances of
the Realm. Neither was this a thing that escaped the consideration of former
Princes. And therefore to prevent so foul a miscarriage by the best means that
could be, It was Enacted at Westminster in the Third year of Ed. 1. That,
because all Elections ought to be free, no Man should under grievous forfeiture
by force, malice or menaces, disturb any to make free Election. It being the
ancient maxim of the Law, Fiant Electiones Rite, and libere sine aliqua
interruptione, Let all Elections be due and Free.

By the 1 Hen. 5.1. it is ordained and Established, That the Citizens and
Burgesses of the Cities and Boroughs be chosen of Men, Citizens and Burgesses
Resiant and dwelling, and free in the same Cities and Boroughs, and no
otherwise.

The like provision is also made by the 23 of Hen. 6. c 15. Nor was there less
care taken to commit the charge of Elections to Men of Substance and Estate;
besides that all Sheriffs and Mayors, and others concerned are liable to great
Fines and Actions of the parties injured for undue Returns.

For it might be well thought, that Persons of Credit and Reputation in the
places of their Birth, or long habitation, and where their Fortunes lie, will
be more tender of the Common Good and welfare of their Friends, Relations, and
Neighbors with whom they have daily Converse, then Strangers creeping in at
the back doors of vast Expense and Purchase to gratify their own Ambition.
Which sort of Ambitus by the Culpurnian Law among the Romans was punished by
heavy Fine on the Canvasser; beside that, he was afterward rendered incapable
of being Elected into a Senators place. And the same Law was also after that
ratified by the Senate in the Consulship of Tullius and Antonius. And by the
Tullian Law the Commonalty themselves offending in that point were also most
severely punished, beside that the Canvassers were to suffer ten years
Exilement. And thus we may see how vigilant even our Princes themselves have
bin to set strong Watch and Ward about the Election of our Lawmakers and
Preservers. But if needy Corporations will sell their Rights, and surrender the
Fortress of wholesome Statutes to Philip of Macedon's laden Mules, they must not
blame the steady Ordinances of the Realm, and the just Provisions of their most
Noble Princes, but their own Edomite Hunger after the Amiable Pottage.

There is a second Question which may be propounded by some, Where the Remedy
lies if a Man be wronged or injured contrary to the Law of the Land? To which
the Lord Cook himself replies, That every Act of Parliament made against any
Injury, Mischief or Grievance, either expressly or impliedly, give a remedy to
the party wronged; which also is done by many Chapters of the Great Charter;
and therefore he may have an Action grounded upon the Charter it self. And that
moreover it is provided by the 36 Ed. 3. That if any Man feels himself
grieved contrary to any Article in any Statute, he shall have his present
Redress in Chancery, that is, by Original Writ, by force of the said Articles
and Statutes.

That Nation would enjoy a most perfect Happiness indeed that were not
sometimes liable to the incroaching Distempers and Corruptions of a sickly
Government. The most healthy person in the World may sometimes need a little
Physie; and the most temperate and sane may sometimes disorder the frame of
their Health by their own Excesses. But it is rarely known that such accidental
Commotions of the blood prove mortal; as meeting with those timely Applications
which soon restore and settle all again. Thus the Epidemic Fever of Dudley and
Empsons Prosecutions infected for a while the Veins of the whole Nation, but
the Healthy Constitution of the Kingdom foon threw it off, and it was cured
with a little Blood-letting.

The Proceedings, Censures and Decrees of the Star Chamber, were for some time
in the very words of the Act an Intolerable Burden to the Subject, and looked
upon as a means to introduce Arbitrary Power and Government. Even the Privy
Council it self was taxed, with determining of the Estates and Liberties of the
Subject contrary to the Law of the Land. Therefore was the Power of the
Star Chamber by that Act absolutely and clearly dissolved, taken away and
determined. And that not only for the general reasons already recited, but upon
the rehearsal of the Grand Charter, and the several Confirmations of it from
time to time; First, because the Judges of that Court, had undertaken to punish
where the Law did not warrant, to make Decrees for things having no such
Authority, and to inflict heavier punishments then by Law were warrantable; and
secondly, for that all matters examinable and determinable before the said
Judges might have their proper remedy and redress, and their due punishment and
correction by the Common Law of the Land, and in the ordinary Course of Justice
elsewhere. And with this same Court fell also several other Jurisdictions of
the same Nature.

Then for the Regulation of the Council, it was enacted, that neither the
Prince or his Council had or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority
by English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libell, or by any other Arbitrary way
whatever, to examine or draw into question, determine or dispose of the Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels of any of the Subjects of this
Kingdom, but that the same ought to be tried and determined in the ordinary
Courts of Justice, and by the ordinary Course of the Law.

And thus the Grievances of a well constituted Nation at one time or other have
still their mortal Periods, and are forced to fly from the stern and awful
Countenance of Fundamental Law. For Law has Heaven on her side, which Injustice
and Oppression cannot pretend to. For where Laws are grounded upon the firm
Basis of Divine Reason, the violation of Humane Constitution, is the violation
of Heavenly Justice. Against which for Cruelty and Oppression to make a kind of
a Titanic War, proves as fatal in the end as the Insurrection of those Giants
against Heaven it self. Leges dormiunt, non moriuntur. The Laws may sleep but
never dye. The locks of the Law may be cut off, but they will grow again; and
then she rouzes up her self more vigorously and with new recovered strength,
shaking off the feeble bands of Violence, nere ceases till she has brought
Illegal Force and Arbitrary prosecution upon their Knees.

Nor fares it better with those who to enrich and raise their own Families
advise the infringement of Fundamental Law and moderate Rule. Who for the sake
of Temporary Splendor and Command, care not tho they drive the Chariot Wheels
of their Ambition over the Necks of undone Millions. And thus we may behold in
History, even where Tyranny it self controuls, an Ibrahim Bassa with all his
tickling flattery dragged to the block to atone the oppression of the Incensed
Multitude with the loss of his Criminal Head. Our own story brings us forth the
Great Justiciary of England, Hubert de Burgo, once a Patriot and lover of his
Country, but at length beguiled by the Advantages of Honor and Preferment, for
Caressing the humor of a young Prince, and instructing him which way to avoid
this very Charter granted by his Father, and by himself in his Nonage
confirmed, (for which he was advanced to the highest Dignity in the Kingdom,
and made Earl of Kent,) not only degraded of his Honor, not only stripped of
all his Wealth which he had so unduly obtained, but which wat more, he saw
himself a forlorn sufferer under the heavy Indignation of that Prince to whom
he had so officiously devoted his Illegal Industry. We may also in the progress
of the same Story read the Tragical Exits of the Potent and Opulent Spencers,
Father and Son, for giving rash and evil Counsel to their Sovereign against the
Form of the Grand Charter. So hard a matter it is for the most powerful and
politic Champions of Illegality and Oppression to wrestle with the Fundamental
Law of this Nation without a dismal fall. According to that of Pindar, for this
is not novel but ancient Experience. Isthm. Ode 7.
-- (...). Most bitter is the end which attends the sweets of Injustice. And
therefore Thuanus reflecting upon the Calamity of Ibrahim Bassa
beforementioned, A most remarkable example, says he, to those, who for the
sake of one person, whose favor they have won by most unseemly and pernicious
Devotion, trample under Foot the general Hatred of all others; whereas they
ought rather to imitate those persons, who being advanced to highest
preferments, so behaved themselves in the discharge of their Trusts, Thuan. l.
96.
that they may be always ready to part with their preferments, and not be
afraid to retire to a private life, if it be their Fortune to be removed.
Otherwise it many times falls out that they are left to the free revenge of all
whom they have offended, or else with the great regret of the Prince himself
are hurried away to open punishment for the satisfaction of Popular indignation.

Even Princes themselves have labored under the evil consequences that have
attended the Injuries which they have done to the fundamental Constitutions of
their own Realms; which has only served to render their Lives and all their
Glory troublesome, vexacious, and full of perplexity; and to deprive them of
that quiet and tranquillity which makes the Enjoyment of Life sweet.

Lewis the XI, as Comines his own Servant records, was the first, to use his
own words, who at his own pleasure levied money upon the People without their
consent. And to gain the consent of the Nobility so to do, within their own
Jurisdictions, promised them Annual Pensions. Certainly says the Historian, he
gave so great a wound to France, that it will not easily be cured. For none of
the former Kings so afflicted France as he did, but more especially by
subverting the Authority of their Parliaments. And is therefore said to have
bin the first of the French Monarchs that freed his Successors horse de Page,
out of Guardianship.

Of this Prince, Mezeray gives this account. The Conduct which Lewis while he
was yet but Dolphin, observed in all his Actions, particularly toward his own
Father, and Subjects of the Dauphinate, La vie du Louis XI.
sufficiently demonstrated what his Friends and Subjects were to hope from him.
He governed always without Counsel, most commonly without Justice, without
reason. He thought it the height of Policy to forsake the Road of all his
Predecessors, and to leave nothing unassay'd, whether good or evil to make
himself redoubted. His piercing but too fine and crafty Wit, was the greatest
Enemy of his own and the repose of France. He chose rather to follow his own
irregular Fancies, then the prudent Laws of the Realm. And he caused his
Grandeur to consist in the Oppression of his People, the undoing and debasing
his Nobility, and the advancement of the meanest and most indigent. But when he
grew near his end, then the considerations of what he had done, tormented him
in so cruel a manner, that he was afraid of every one that came near him, grew
jealous of his own Son and Daughter; Comines.
and he that had invented Prisons and Fetters for others, was now his own
Prisoner in his Castle of Plessis, fortified with a grate of Iron-Bars; and
planted with Watch-houses of Iron for his Guards. So that it was impossible to
hold a King in a streighter Prison then he held himself; where he lived unseen
of any, because he would let none come at him. His Physician, who had sworn to
him he should not live eight days, if he turned him away as he did his other
Servants, he so dreaded, that he flattered him to obtain his Favor. And to
prolong his Life which he was so afraid to lose, he superstitiously sent for a
Hermit from the farthest Corner of Italy, expecting great matters from his
prayers. In short, says Comines, From his Childhood to his Death he was in
continual noise and trouble, so that were his joyful days to be numbered, they
would be found but very few. But when there was no hopes of life, he sent for
his Son, and gave him other advice then he had followed himself, to rule
according to the Law, to ease his People, and reduce the Taxes to their former
Establishment.

So that the Law is as much the security and safety of the Prince as of the
People; and the Observation of the Law is so far from being a servitude, that
it is a Royal Virtue. For this is that, which as it secures his outward
felicity, secures the Inward tranquillity of his mind, and raises him a Monument
of lasting Fame and Veneration after death in the hearts of his Subjects from
Generation to Generation.

And thus Lewis the XII. sirnam'd the Just, so dear to his People while He
lived, became so much the Darling of Posterity, and his memory continued so
sacred and so much reverenced even in the time of Thuanus, that when any debate
arose either in Council, Parliaments, or Courts of Judicature, about the
Miscarriages of the Government, always the Reign of Lewis the XII. was proposed
as the Pattern and Standard of the Reformation intended.

Thus the Law of England is the Security of the Prince and People. The security
of the Prince as being the security of his Prerogative, which is a part of the
Law, and comprehended in it. And so the security of the Prerogative becomes in
course the security of the Peoples Liberty, being both determined by the Law
and Customs of the Land; there being no other Prerogative, nor any other
Liberty of the Subject then what they allow.

So that there is nothing can injure the Law of England but wresting and
misinterpretation, nor can it well be wrested neither, unless it be screwed
from the intent of Reason and Honesty. Neither is it possible for any man to
mis-interpret it, without the Shipwreck of his Conscience upon the Rocks of
specious pretense. For misinterpretation mis-guides the Law to Evil; which no
man can think to be a virtuous Act, whatever may be his aim in doing of it. The
Law of England imposes nothing but what is grounded upon the Maxims of what is
just and honest in it self, and is current to all, as bearing the Stamp of
Right Reason and Divine Truth; which They who mis-interpret, counterfeit the
Impression, and utter the base Coin of Falsehood and Dissembled Pretense for
Real Verity.

But when Dominion and Authority believing it self too rudely curbed, or
Popular Liberty deeming it self too severely checked, seek to transcend the
Limits of the Law; then Interest and Faction create Sidings and Parties, and
invent wicked Names of Distinction; and the whole Frame of Law is put into
Disorder. Nor does either party want Incendiaries, who for their private
Emoluments and Advantages kindle those Fires on Earth that shall torment 'em
hereafter. Whereas the strict observance of Command according to the Law, and
the due performance of Homage and Obedience according to the Injunctions of the
same Law would keep all things right, and nothing could shake the Prerogative
and Safety of the Prince, or the Liberty and Security of the Subject.

The greatest Happinesses that God bestows upon Mankind have all their Limits
set. The Sun is tied to his Diurnal and Annual Motions; The Stars are fixed
within their proper Spheres, and cannot stir beyond the Law of Nature. The
Seasons have their limits; the Sea and Land have both their bounds. Nay Virtue
her self, if she runs into Excess, mounts or descends to some particular Vice.
And therefore good Government cannot take it ill, if it be impaled within the
Laws of Order and Moderation. Especially seeing that Justice it self whose
Minister it is, is restrained and limited in her Power.

The same considerations fasten the Ligaments of Obedience. For the whole World
is but one entire piece of Obedience to its Sovereign, of which that only
unruly part is Man himself. We are bound to obey our lawful Supreme not only as
Subjects, for the outward benefits of Peace and Protection, but as Christians,
for the inward satisfaction of Conscience, as being a part of our Christian
Duty. Neither is it less folly then Impiety to be disobedient to those that
govern by good and wholesome Laws. For thereby they destroy their own
preservation. Therefore it was one of the highest praises of the Lacedaemonians,
that they knew when they had good and wholesome Laws, and as well knew how to
obey them. And it was their constancy in adhering to their fundamental Laws,
and the reverence they bare to their Princes so strict in the Observance of
them, that so long preserved them their Reputation of being what they were, the
most renowned People of Greece.

To serve a Prince because we receive particular Benefits and Graces from his
Authority, is no Obedience but Self-Interest, and consequently there is no
assurance of their Fidelity, which changes of an instant upon the hopes of a
better Market.

Neither can that be said to be true Obedience, which is only a submission out
of fear of punishment. For that is only Self-love, and a natural propensity to
ease and repose. If it may not rather be said to be Slavery. For submission out
of fear denotes compulsion: and compulsion is a mark of servitude and
vassalage, rather then of real Homage and Obedience.

But the Fidelity and Obedience of a true Subject proceeds from the obligation
of Conscience; and is the same Tie to his Prince, by which the Prince is bound
to God Himself, by Conscience to do Acts of Justice and Mercy, as being the
Vice-Pastor of the People of God, and the Vicegerent of the King of Peace and
Justice. Nay he is the living Image of God; (...). And how comes that to be?
The Light of Nature tells us, shining even among the Heathen. (...). For that
having obtained a Kingdom, he is to show himself most worthy of so supreme a
Dignity. Which high deserving Excellence then most radiantly displays it self
in Majesty, when it appears arrayed with the Beams of Divine Attributes. (...),
Philo.
(...) As to bodily substance a King is like another Man, but in the power of
his Dignity he is like to God who is above all. So that when the Authority of a
King is like the Authority of God, (and Righteous and true are all his ways)
there to refuse Obedience to the King, is the same impiety as to refuse
Obedience to God himself. However, it is not to be imagined that so much
strictness can be expected from Mortality: the resemblance is enough to fix our
Veneration. Therefore all Princes are by the Psalmist styled Gods; tho he is
very severe against those that deviate from the Resemblance of the Heavenly
Prototype. Niloxenus also the Wise Man, being asked what was the most
profitable and useful Thing in the World, answered, a King, as most resembling
God in his works of Justice and Mercy, and to whom therefore the People by
Conscience are bound with all humility to pay the Tribute of Homage and
Obedience. And for this reason all persons, of what Quality, Condition, or Sex
soever, tho they never took the Oath of Allegiance, are as firmly bound by it,
as if they had taken it, as being written by the Finger of the Law in the
hearts of every one, and the taking it is but an outward Declaration of the Act
it self. For as it is proprium Imperiis imperare per leges, So is it proprium
Subjectionis, obedientiam praestare per leges. Which is no more then the
reciprocal Stipulation of God himself with his Creature Man. I am the Lord thy
God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, therefore thou shall have no
other Gods but me. I am the Lord thy God, etc. therefore obey my Commandments.
And it is remarkable that God always expostulates with his People for their
Ingratitude for signal benefits received, before he punish them for
disobedience.

Now there is one prevailing Lure that draws Men into the Snare of
Disobedience, and that is called pretense of Religion; which falling into the
management of Crafty Heads, proves the pernicious Coverture of Rebellious and
Traiterous designs, and therefore one of the greatest Enemies of Law and
Government in this World. It ought to be marked for destruction, as Cain was
for his preservation. For it is a hard matter to discover it, so exactly do the
Incendiaries and Promoters of Sedition paint and dress their false
Plantagenets, and Pseudo-Mustapha's in resemblance of the real Portraiture.
Especially when they come to be fucuss'd and periwigg'd by the Skilful hands of
Spiritual Ambition, for the support of Ecclesiastical Pomp and Superstition. It
is nefarious any where, but never proves worse then when it ascends the Pulpit.
From whence it ought to be exterminated with all the care imaginable; there
being nothing more fatal to all good Government then to foster it in the Bosom
of Interest. Which sullied the Encomium of Ferdinand of Arragon, a most prudent
and happy Prince, in whom says the Historian, there was nothing to be desired
but that Integrity with which he used to cloak his ambition and immoderate
desire of enlarging his Dominions, under the pretense of Religion. Thuan. l. 1.
Nor need there any farther Examples of the mischiefs of dissembled Piety, then
those which so lately imbrued their hands in the bowels of this Nation.

However, the truest touchstone of feigned Zeal and counterfeit Religion is
the Fundamental Law of the Land; which being grounded, as has bin already made
out, upon the Law of God and Nature, nothing of true Zeal, nothing of sincere
Religion, nothing of Conscience will adventure to violate or disturb. No real
Christian Subject, no person of Conscience, no man professing the true grounds
of Religion will deny his Prince the least tittle of his lawful Rights, or
refuse him the least Mite of his Legal Tributes, or whisper the least undecent
Murmur against his just proceedings, according to the Fundamental Law of the
Land, which if true Prerogative it self cannot pretend against, much less are
the Encroachments upon it of dissembled Piety and masqueraded Zeal to be
endured. So that whatever pretense of Religion impugnes the Fundamental Law of
the Land, the pretense is unjust and irreligious; and such pretenses are to be
grappl'd with, as the intending Introducers of Confusion and Subversion.

Not that this extends to the inforcement of Obedience to any unjust Law which
the Self Ends of Interest, may produce. For according to the Sentence of all
the Grand Casuists now in Fame, and of Suarez among the rest, an unjust Law is
no Law, L. 3. de leg. c. 19.
and therefore lays no obligation upon the Conscience or Moral Obedience of the
People, but is rather to be peremptorily refused. Now whither any Law be unjust
or no, is to be decided by Magna Charta, for that all Laws made contrary to
That, are by other Fundamental Laws of the Realm adjudg'd to be void and of no
effect. And thus the Great Charter becomes the Judge of True Religion as well
as True Law. For True Law commands nothing but what is just and consonant to
true Religion. But an unjust Law is ex part materiae unjust, as commanding
that which is dishonest and Irreligious; of which only the pretense of Religion
will adventure to be the Patron; and which they who wrest the favor of the Law
to protect, can never be accounted Men of Religion or Piety. And therefore the
vigorous defenders of pretended Religion cannot be too severely censured, as
being breakers of the Law. For,

(...). A wicked Orator pollutes the Laws; defending Falsehood by Fallacy, and
Imposture by deceitful Argument. Which tho they have their successes for a
time, yet no sooner comes the Storm of Reformation, but they dash to pieces
against the Rock of Fundamental Law. Against which all the Cabals and
Combinations of Policy and pretense of Religion have not yet been able to
prevail. Even the most Potent and Arbitrary Usurpation that ever hampered this
Kingdom, and the most powerfully defended in all it is specious Pretenses tam
Mart quam Mercurio, by Arms and Pens, was compelled at length to surrender all
its counterfeit Glory to the Restoration of Legal Sovereignty and Fundamental
Law.

Since then the Fundamental Law of England is the free and open Asylum for
every Freeborn English Man to repair to for the Redress of Grievances, and
Oppression; as they who have recourse to other Remedies travail with Reproach
and Scandal, so they who suffer Languishment and Ruin, without seeking relief
in its proper place, and by those declared means, which with the consent of the
Prince himself the Law of the Land, for so many Ages constituted and confirmed,
so frankly affords, are themselves the Felo's of their own Rights and
Liberties. And if by other attempts they show their desire of Innovasion, and
have it, tho perhaps not to their own content, they are the cause Original of
such Encroachments, and chiefly to be blamed if any Violence be offered to the
Fundamental Laws. It is their Interest therefore to defend those Laws which
defend and secure their Prince and them; their Prince's Successors and their
own Posterity. It is their business to stand by the sincerity of Religion, and
the Integrity of their established Law: And therefore as the Patronage of True
Religion and the Guardianship and Protection of the Fundamental Law belongs to
the care of the Prince, so for the Subject to desert the Prince in the
prosecution of such high designs, is to desert the chief security of their own
Rights and Liberties: and to ramble after Innovasions and Changes of their
Established Laws, is to forfeit their Estates and Fortunes, and the Felicity of
the whole Realm to the next most Potent Seizer. Nothing rendered the
Lacedaemonians more formidable to Foreign Nations then the strict observance of
their fundamental and experienced Laws. And then their ancient Glory and Renown
first deserted Them, when first they began to relinquish their own Security.

It Is a folly therefore for a Nation to dis-unite about Trifles which the Law
of Man is able to decide whether just and honest in Temporals, and the Holy
Scripture to determine whether necessary or useful in Spirituals. To insist
upon the determination of these sacred Arbitrators is not only Regular but
necessary, to avoid the forfeiture of Temporal Right and Christian Freedom.

If a rigorous Creditor should come and sweep away with an Execution ten times
the value of his Debt, he would be thought to have a strange distrust of the
Law, and to be monstrously forgetful of his Family and himself, that should
forgo the relief of the Law, and suffer his Creditour to enrich himself with
the Spoils of his ransackt Estate. Or if a Person of great wealth and high
Authority should set up a feigned Title to the small Tenement of a Poor man, he
must be deemed to have a very slight Opinion of the Law, that should stand
still, and suffer his slender Patrimony to be ravished from him by the violent
hands of opulent Oppression. The Law has provided Remedies against all sorts of
Cruelty, and infringements of legal and due Liberty, which the natural Law of
Self-preservation encourages every Man to lay hold of. So that he who carelessly
neglects, deservedly suffers under the neglect of his own Security. Therefore
it is a Maxim of the Law, Vigilantibus, non Dormientibus Jura subveniunt. And
therefore also says the Son of Syrach, A man of understanding trusts in the
Law, Eccles. 3.33.
and the Law is faithful unto him, as an Oracle.

But wherever Division and Distraction, displacing Concord and Unity so like
the precious Ointment that ran down from the Beard to the Skirts of the
sacrificers Garment, disturb the Economy of good Government, and disorder the
steady Course of Meum and Tuum, Justice is put to a Nonplus, being courted of
all hands at the vast Expense of fawning Rhetoric and Reward, while both
Parties endeavor to make her the Patron of their pretensions. So that when
Grievance seeks redress, or Wrong and Injury implore relief, Justice like a
certain kind of Sentinel, demands first of all, Who are ye for? and puts ye to
the Shibboleth Test, before she will admit a Parley. And while a Nation is thus
embroiled, what can be expected, but saeva Jussa, continuae accusationes, and
fallaces Amicitiae; Which only tend to Ruin and Destruction. A Scene far
different from those Times of Unity and Peace, of which Tacitus speaks, when it
was lawful to think what a Man pleased, and speak what he thought: Hist. l. 1.
c. 1.
the surest Character of National Quiet and Unanimity.

The Romans had no less then four Temples in Rome, dedicated to Concord. More
then are sometimes to be found in some Christian Cities, which have three times
the number of Churches. Concord is the Medulla Spinalis of a Kingdom, that
fortifies and strengthens the several parts of a Realm, gives it Force and
Activity, and makes it pliable to all the performances of Virtue and Heroic
Magnanimity, that renders it compact and strong at home, and formidable abroad,
and consequently secure from Clandestine and Domestic Distempers, and the
Menaces of Foreign Violence. And for this reason it was that the Thebans
assigned the Protection of their City to the Goddess Harmonia; Thereby
intimating the vast benefits which Kingdoms and Cities received from the strict
observance of Unity and Concord among themselves. And the Achaeans then
flourished most highly in renown, when, singularium urbium pericula mutuis
viribus propulsabant. For such was the Unanimity of the several Cities under
their Jurisdiction, that they were said to be but one City environed with
several Walls. And it is farther recorded to their fame, that while Justice and
Concord hold the Raines of their Government, not all the force of their
confederated Adversaries could remove them from their Station. But when those
Virtues were exiled by Avarice and Ambition, and the poison of Discord had
infused it self into their Counsels, Polybius.
then fell that noble and renowned Commonwealth. Which Felicities of Justice
and Concord proceeded from the equal poise between the Authority of the supreme
Rulers and the Peoples Liberty.

But the Concord and Unanimity of a Nation, more especially born to Freedom and
the remembrance of their Ancestors Heroic Atchievments, are such frightful
Apparitions to the jealous Politics of all the Neighboring World, that every
one endeavors to prevent the progress of such a menacing Association. Nor are
the fatal Instruments of Discord wanting to assist and forward their designs.
So prevalent are the sedulous and crafty to the service of the worst of
Mistresses.

Among the rest, none have infused their poison more deeply into the veins of
secular Authority and spiritual Jurisdiction, then the Mysterious Society of
Jesus, combined against the Maxims of the Sovereign of their own Order. Whose
only business and employment in this World it is, to incense the People against
their Princes, and Princes against their Subjects. These Vermin far excel
Proteus, or any Infernal Spirit in the Assumption of Shapes, and are now at
length a Terror even to their first Indulger, even Antichrist Himself.

To arm themselves against these several Pests of National Concord and
Unanimity, it behooves every true Christian and every good Subject. For it can
be no Crime for Men born Free, to preserve their Ancient Liberties and Rights
by the proper and legal means by Fundamental Law prescribed. It can be no Crime
to countermine the hidden Trains of Ambitious Project, and self-ended Advice,
which for present gratification lie sapping the very foundations of Common Good
and National Unanimity. It can be no offense to have a watchful and vigilant
Eye upon the concealed Corroders into the Bowels of Law and Liberty, and to
display the discoveries of their Wiles and Frauds. For, for want of detection
the Law loses in part the opportunity of Reformation. Nature has given to all
Creatures some or other defense to preserve them from the Oppression of
superior Violence. To some Horns, Claws, Tuskes, Probosces, Taloons and
Stings, from the Lion to the Crawling Serpent. To others Scales and Armor Cap
a pe from the Leviathan to the little pitiful Prawn. Neither are Vegetatives
without their Thorns, Barks and Prickles. And it would be unreasonable to
think, that Man should be the only part of the Creation left altogether naked.
To him therefore is given, both for private and for general preservation, the
defense of Reason and Law. Which they who enjoy by Fundamental Constitution,
are the most happy People in the World; nor can they be deprived of their
Inestimable Treasure, their Strength in the Law of Justice, enless they will be
so unkind to themselves, and so treacherous to their Posterity, as to surrender
it to the Green Withs, and weak Cords to such as love not Righteousness, Wisdom
1.1.
nor think of the Lord with a true heart.

And as the People are allowed the Defense of the Law for the maintenance and
Protection of their Liberties. So is the same Law no less the Fortress and
Bulwark of Prerogative. And indeed the Law gives to Princes the highest
Prerogative imaginable. For the Law of Justice is Wisdom, and not the Wisdom of
one single Person, but the Wisdom of God and Nature. Which therefore Kings are
advised to seek, that they may Reign for evermore. And who knows, for it is not
improbable, seeing there are Thrones and Dignities and Preheminencies in
Heaven, that the Just Vicegerents of God upon Earth, may be allowed to
reassume their Dignities in the New Jerusalem; which tho just and virtuous
Princes cannot be sure of, yet Tyrants and Oppressors can have little hope,
that it shall ever be their Lot.

Princes without their just Prerogatives look like the Sun in Winter deprived
of all his Beams by a thick Fog. They are but Fettered Dukes of Venice, or
Elective Kings of Poland. Their Res Angusta domi, levels their condition with
the meanest; obstat Virtutibus; It will not let them display their Virtues in
the performance of those glorious Enterprises which their Heroic Souls pant
after. Their Subjects, if so they may be called, cannot apprehend whether they
deserve or not. For it is no thanks that they do justly, when they have no power
to do ill. And it is apparent that the too much over-weaning and over-wary
curbing of Regal Power, has bin the utter overthrow of many a glorious
Undertaking. And we find the Romans, tho they had expelled their Kings, were
forced, when they knew not what else in the Earth to do, in the low Ebb of
their Affairs, to trust a greater Power then ever their Kings had in the Hands
of a Dictator. A remedy which never failed 'em. And therefore it behooves the
People to defend the just Prerogatives of the Prince with the same Zeal, the
same Conscience, and the same Resolution which they owe to the maintenance of
their Liberties, Lives and Fortunes. Since it may well be thought that the one
cannot subsist without the other. The same Divine Oracle of Truth, that said to
Kings, Do Justice and lead my People, commanded the Subject to give Caesar his
Due. In which proportionate and equal Poyse of Relative Care and Obedience
whatever State or Kingdom keeps its Station fixed upon the Foundations of Law
and Unanimity, may be certain of an unshaken and immovable Diuturnity.

FINIS.

