LOYALTY VINDICATED. Being an Answer to A late False, Seditious and Scandalous
Pamphlet Entitled, A Letter from a Gentleman of the City of New York to
another* Concerning the Troubles which happened in That Province in the Time of
the late Happy Revolution.

Published for the sake of Truth and Justice. By a Hearty Lover of KING William
AND THE Protestant Religion.

BOSTON, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. School.

LOYALTY Vindicated
From the Reflections of a Virulent Pamphlet called [A Letter from a Gentleman
of New York, concerning the troubles which happened in that Province, in the
time of the late happy Revolution] wherein the Libellous Author falslely
scandalises those Loyal Gentlemen, who courageously threw off the absolute
Slavery that Province, then lay under: and Declared for His present Majesty,
the Protestant Religion, and the English Laws.
ALthough to name but the Authors of this Pamphlet, to give account of the
time, manner, and design of its Publication, would sufficiently confute it; and
were it all Truth, take away its Credit: Yet I shall first by plain proof of
Fact and Reason, disabuse whom it may have imposed on* and then expose the
Seducers themselves whose corrupt minds gave birth to this Ignis fatuus.

I know the Authors have triumphed, that their Libel has not hitherto been
answered; but they will have but little cause, when they consider it required
some time to recover the damp and stunn given to honest minds, by the late
corrupt Government of New York that published it: and some time will always be
naturally taken up for the exults of joy; that truth and honesty will now have
their turn of being protected by Authority.

It was with great dread known, that the late King James was bound in
Conscience to endeavor to Damn the English Nation to Popery and Slavery, and
therefore no wonder (since he made such large steps toward it in his
Kingdom's) that he took a particular care of this Province, of which he was
Proprietor, and at one jump leapt over all the bounds, and Laws of English
Right and Government; and appointed a Governor of this Province of New York,
who (although he was a person of large indowments of mind yet) gave active
Obedience to his Prince without reserve; and accepted of a Commission now on
record in the Secretarys Office, giving him power with consent of any Seven of
^is Council to make Laws and to raise Taxes (as the French King does) without
consent of the People, (for the Council are no body but whom he pleases to
name, and therefore could represent nothing but the Kings pleasure) Hereby the
will of the Prince became the Law; and the estates of the Subjects became the
Kings property. And this Governor and Council were the too^ to inslave their
Country, who pursuant to their Commission did make Laws and Assessed Taxes
accordingly, without any Representatives of the People, as appears by the
Records of the Council book.

This French Government being thus (by Commission) introduced, it was natural
that Papists should be employed in the highest Trusts; such (...) the Council,
the Revenue, and the Military Forces; and since no Law was left alive to make
them unqualifyed, therefore this Obedient Governor admitted major Brockholse
and major Baxter into the Council; Matthew Plowman to be Collector of the
Revenue, and said Baxter and Russel to Command Military Forces; all professed
Papists to assist in making Arbitrary Placts, and forcing Obedience to them
from a Protestant free People.

This was the condition of New York, the Slavery and Popery that it lay under,
until the Hand of Heaven sent the glorious King WILLIAM to break those chains,
which would otherwise have fettered all Europe. And these were the reasons that
moved the Gentlemen concerned in the Revolution of New York, to be early in
shaking off their Tyrants, and declaring for their Deliverer.

These things premised do make way for the answer to the bold Assertions of the
Libeller, who had the Author Printed the Letter ten years before, viz. the time
of the Revolution, he would have come under the penalty of spreading false
News, which he in particular knows, in Scotland is called Leesing, and deserves
the death called the Maiden.

[Pag. 3.] In the third page which is the first of the Letter, he declares that
Jacob Leisler and his accomplices committed great disorders in the Revolution.
And was ever Revolution made without them? What, must the noxious humors of
the body natural, be loosned and put a float, and very often with pangs and
gripes, before the Medicament can officiate the discharge? and must not the
body politic suffer a Convulsion to pluck up Spiritual and Temporal Tyranny
that was taking root in it? But I pray explain your self, was not the
Revolution it self the greatest disorder that could be given to you and the
Jacobite party? and therefore you need not admire nor wonder that all those
that have a good opinion of the Revolution, have so likewise of Jacob Leisler,
and other early Instruments of it in this Province: Nor is it a wonder that it
should be credited, that the persons, then in Commission in New York were
Jacobites, and persons ill affected to the Revolution (which now the Libeller
dare not say otherwise than call happy) for their very Commissions from King
James were expressly contrary to Law, and their persons unqualified to serve in
any Capacity in any English Government, and so that as Jacobites (i. e. obeyers
of King James's Arbitrary Government) and as Papists they must naturally be ill
affected to the happy Revolution in England, and implacable Enemies to the well
wishers thereof in New York. The proof of this appears by the Printed account
of the State of the Government of New York, attested by the Records of Sir.
Edmund Andross, Coll Nicholson, Matthew Plowman, major Baxter and Bartholomew
Russel's Commissions; which are Evidence undeniable and point blanck contrary
to the Testimony of the Libeller, who calls himself a personal witness. But the
Author was safe at the time of Publishing the Letter, for it was when the
Province lay under the calamity (more then in any other age) of Licensing this
Letter, which gives Authority for the palliating of Vice with false glosses,
and of criminating the Actions of the most Just and Virtuous and pious persons,
and when Truth and Innocence were stripped of all defense against the malice,
falsehood and calumny of Col. Fletcher, and his complying Council.

We are told the Lieutenant Governor and Council were Protestants, and perhaps
they were; and so were Friend, Perkins, Jefferys, Herbert, Bishop of Chester,
and Brian Haynes the player; therefore that is no infallible Test that they
were well affected to the Revolution, if they had no other. But they resolved
Thereupon to suspend all Roman Catholics from Command and places of trust in
the Government. Well resolved, though they did not perform it, as the Libeller
afterward owns. But what means the word [Thereupon] i. e. King James was fled
into France, the Prince of Orange was Arrived with considerable Forces in
England, and by consent and voice of the Nation declared their Deliverer and
King* and since King James could not stand by them, and the Arbitrary
Commissions he had given them, and Old England would be sure to Command New
York: Thereupon they etc. No thanks to them for their Thereupon. Besides if I
am not mistaken, the execution of their Illegal Commissions (which they held as
long as they could) and their fear of exasperations they had justly given to
the People, by being Voluntary slaves to King James his Will, and Authorized to
make all under them to be likewise so: (as the Devils would have all men Damn^d
with themselves.) For these reasons these faint resolves were made and ill
executed. But we do not find that Thereupon they declared ^or the Prince of
Orange, or the Protestant Religion No, these Gentlemen had submitted so
entirely to such a blind Obedience to their Prince as (notwithstanding their
Profession) was never practi^d by any Christians, but the Papists; and think to
hide their nakedness by the fig leaf of turning a single Papist out of the
Council, just as their Master King James did, when the Prince of Orange was
landing; the Nations hearts alienated from him, and his standing Army likely to
run over to the Prince: Thereupon, he restored the Charters of Corporations,
and Magdalen College of Oxford, and declared to call a free Parliament: Just
with the ^ame good will as these New York Thereupon-men. [Pag. 4.] But it is
notoriously false and known to be so by the Inhabitants of New York, that
Thereupon these disbanded Papists forthwith left the Province: For Baxter stayed
here several Months, not knowing whether it was a real Revolution or no; and
Russel stayed and dyed in New York, but Plowman continued fixed in the greatest
Trust of Collector of the Revenue, being entrusted by the Protestant Lieutenant
Governor and Council with the sinews of War in his management, who would be
sure as a strict Papist to employ it in the service of a Protestant Revolution,
from the same good affection with themselves.

To proceed, this Libeller names three Dutch Gentlemen of their Council, and
tells you that but two of them were moct affectionate to the Royal house of
Orange, although Mr. Phillips (I believe) had the same affection with the rest:
but the Libeller never tells you, that any of them were pleased that the Prince
of Orange, had rescued from ruin our English Laws, Liberties and Protestant
Religion, and was become a Royal English King: which was but a small reward to
Him for the Blessing it gave us: he only tells us, that as Dutchmen they loved
the Royal house of Orange: So, I presume the late King James does, being tied
by blood thereto; although he wishes him far enough from England. I suppose
those Dutch Gentlemen will give the Libeller (...) thanks for his remark on
them. He ^dds, (...) the said Lieutenant Governor and Council Convened to
their Assistance* all the Justices of the Peac^ and Civil Magistrates, and
Military Officers. But they had quite forgot the English Constitution of
calling the Representatives of the People: and whereas several of this
Convention were the Persons that were pitched upon, and thought fit by the then
Arbitrary Government to have Commission, Office and Power to enslave the
Subject. No wonder the People did not think themselves safe in their hands, to
be managed by the major Vote of such a Convention.

Neither was the first thing they ordered, viz. Fortifying the City of
New York, and wise satisfactory; since it was most proper that those persons
who gave occasion for a Revolution, were most probable to make themselves
strong to oppose it. And therefore Coll. Bayard made Coll. of the Militia by
King James, was most liable to obey and execute King James's order, and an
unsure Security for the Fort; Especially having so often declared in Words, and
Letters, under his own hand to Mr. West etc. That those who were in Arms for
the Prince of Orange were Rebels. But it is absolutely false, that Coll.
Bayards. industry fortifyed the Fort; for Capt. Leisler opened the Well, which
was closed up; he it was ordered the Batteries, that were made about the Town,
he mended the Breast works of the Fort, as likewise the Platforms, and Powder
Room; all which were in a miserable Condition: and these great works took up
near Twelve Months time, with Vigorous application and industry of the
Inhabitants, after Bayard was out of the Power of betraying the Fort, which
could never have been de^ended in the posture he kept it, with no Well open,
nor any covering for it, defense or security for their Ammunition. Besides when
the Mi^itia Forces were on guard in the Fort, the Lieutenant Governor in
Passion altered their Orders given by their Officers, and told them, if they
gave him any farther trouble he would set the City on fire. This prooved by the
Depositions of Albert Bosch and Henry Coyler. [Pag. 5.] And for their own sakes
they appointed and continued the Revenue, as being very useful for men of any
design: which makes nothing for their cause.

It matters not what Letters were sent home by the Lieutenant Governor, for it
is plain neither Governor nor Council would declare for the Prince of Orange,
pretending they wanted Orders; No, they wanted good will; for without Orders
this Libeller pretends they turned out Ba^ter and Russel out of Commission. I
wonder how they dared to go so far, and no farther. But no body but themselves
know or care whither they Wrote or no, for it signified nothing, except to
excuse themselves from declaring till an answer came, and they knew who was
uppermost* I suppose they had a mind to stay to see who got the better in
Ireland, before they would declare.

[Pag. 6.] A lying building must have a lying foundation, and therefore the
Libeller says, That Capt. Leisler unwilling to pay the Duty of his (...),
stirred up the People to Rebellion. The case was thus, the Popish Collector
Plowman was then continued in Office, and Capt. Leisler did, even with him,
make Entry in the Custom house for his Wines, and engaged to pay the Customs to
such as should be legally qualified to receive them; which the Papist Plowman
was not.

And now the People being exasperated by the delay of the Governor and Council
to declare for the Prince, the greater body of the Militia with their Officers,
did Seize on the Fort, and did send and demand the Keys from the Lieutenant
Governor; and since they had taken the Government on them, they did Seize what
Public Moneys they could find; and took the Seven hundred Seventy three Pounds
from Coll. Nicholson, which with great prudence they did Expend for the safety
and defense of the Revolution: nor were the People Drunk or Mad: for no Man,
Woman, or Child, was hurt by them even in the very Convulsion of changing the
Government; nay the very Papists then in Office, and others who were justly
suspected of designs of betraying the Country to King James's faithful Allie,
the French King had not a hair hurt, except by the fright their own guilt
occasioned; and these Revolutioners must either be very sober or loving in
their drink, or these Jacobites had never escaped being Dewitted by a
sufficiently provoked People, who had the Power, but more grace than to use it.

False Assertions without proof are sufficiently answered by denying them. This
northern forehead answers himself: for the Libeller says, the people cried out
that they disowned all Government, and in the next line tells you, they
proclaimed Capt. Leisler their Commander. But I suppose, he gives this
contradiction as a proof of the Peoples being drunk; to be against all manner
of Government, and choose a Governor in the same breath. It Is likewise
notoriously false, that no other Commissioned Officer was amongst them: for
most of the Officers of the Militia of the City joined therein: But had it been
true, then Capt. Leisler as the only Commission Officer ought to Command them;
and they were just and sober in their choice, as well as prudent in their Trust
of so good and faithful a Person. But the fact of this was false, for Capt.
Leisler though instrumental in shaking off the Tyrannical Government, did not
believe he had a Title to govern longer than the Peoples Resolutions were
known; and therefore circular Letters were carried by Coll. Depeyster and Capt.
De Brayn to the several Counties; whose Freeholders chose their
Representatives, who being met appointed Capt. Leisler Commander in Chief under
their Hands and Seals, and appointed several to be of his Council, under the
name of a Committee of Safety to preserve the Public Peace of the Province:
Who did it so effectual, that those divested of the Governing power had no
other harm done to their persons; and the late Lieutenant Governor was
permitted to withdraw himself whither he pleased. And here I must remark that
he fared much better than Sir. Edmund Andross at Boston, who was made close
Priosoner and sent home to England, and yet no man was Executed or attainted
there for that act of Loyal Violence.

Boston having proclaimed King WILLIAM and Queen MART, and New York Fort and
Government possessed by Loyal Leisler and ^is party, and the Lieutenant
Governor withdrawn out of the Province, then the ^ibeller says, That the late
Council and their Convention o^ Justices of the Peace and Officers, had great
mind to proclaim the King and Queen, whom they never had declared for, and we
must take his word for it: but he owns the Loyalists did proclaim them, but
says, it was very disorderly. I observe what ever made for the Revolution, or
against the late King James, is very displeasing to the Scribler: For when the
People took the Government out of their Arbitrary betrayers hands, he says,
they were drunk or mad; and now the proclaiming of the King and Queen, was very
disorderly, in neither of which he gives one instance: [Pag. 7.] But thank God,
they were proclaimed, and their goodness will pardon small disorders which were
the effects of Loyal Zeal. Although the Jacobites will never forgive them for
it. Some of which Council and Magistrates went to Coll. Bayards house and drank
and rejoiced that Leisler had done what they never could have the heart to do,
nor made one step toward. And we may know what kidney these drinkers were of,
by whose Wine they drank: For Coll. Bayard having been a complying tool all
King James's Arbitrary Reign, you shall judge of the rest by his opinion of the
happy Revolution, in his letter to Mr. West of the 14th. of January 1689, 90.
Wherein he calls them Philistines, calls Leisler and his Loyal party, the Arch
Rebel and his hellish crew; wishes he had a sufficient number to suppress the
Rebels, calls them usurpers of the Government, and calls Sir. Edmund Andross,
his Excellency, and calls his friends Loyal; and the whole tenor of the Letter
is to keep up King James's title to admit his Commissions of Government to be
of force, to brand all that declared for the Prince of Orange, with the black
name of Rebels; by which he owned King James was still in his heart, and had he
power equal to his will, would have kept him still on the Throne, and therefore
we may judge of his and his Companies joy, on this occasion, and whose Health
they drank: which, eight years after, they tell us was King WILLIAM'S and Queen
MARYS.

His Majesty's Proclamation to confirm Sheriffs, Collectors, etc. in their
Offices, being Published, the Convention removed Matthew Plowman a Papist from
being Collector, but this is now when Capt. Leisler had rescued the Government,
was possessed of the Fort and had proclaimed King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Then
the Conventi^n (who had done none of these things and were angry at those who
did) they removed a Papist from his Office, about the middle of June, who was
permitted by them to act above two Months from the time that the Lieutenant
Governor and Council resolved to remove Papists from Offices; which (as the
Libeller in the first page of his Letter says) was the beginning of April:
they kept him in as long as they could, and now to mend the matter, they put
others in his place of the same principles as to King James, of which the
famous Bayard aforementioned was the Ringleader. And the Libeller brags, that
they were the first in the Province that took the Oaths to Their Majesty's,
appointed by Act of Parliament: It may be true; but it is as true, that they
were the last and backwardest to assist in the Revolution, or declare for the
Prince of Orange, which they never did; but afterward pursued to death those
that had done it. They were indeed most forward to take Oaths, when they were
to gain by them, and to have the fingring of the Revenue. For the carrying of
the purse they will deny their old Master King James; not out of hatred to him,
but love to Money; being (...) by solemn Oath to be true to their own interest;
which Oath binds them closer than any Oath of Allegiance.

These worthy Commissioners of the Revenue sat in the Custom-house, but Capt.
Leisler with the Inhabitants who had possession of the Government and Fort,
demanded of them by what Authority they pre^ended to act; who refusing to give
Capt. Leisler any Account they offered to turn him out of the Custom-house by
force; on which tu^^^: (ma^e by three Jacobites) a guard of Inhabitants from
the Fort came to defend their Captain. And the People in the Streets were so
enraged at Coll. Bayard (who they knew was as inveterate as any Papist against
the Revolution) that they had certainly tore him to pieces, had not the good
temper of Capt. Leisler been his protector, who was the only person capable of
saving him in that extremity, and favored his escape, and let him live to have
afterward a hand in the Murdering his deliverer: So that the Violence of Armed
men and naked Swords, beating the Commissioners from the Custom-house, was very
modestly done, for no man was hurt, not so much as a skin broke of those who
deserved the halter; but they are still alive; some of them to watch another
occasion to betray their Country, when they can get a Popish King of England to
assist them.

[Pag. 8.] Captain Leisler finding several Papists and false Protestants in the
Town, like a prudent Officer kept good guards, sent parties to prevent any
Conspiracy they might make to resume the Government; and to preserve the Peace;
which was daily attempted to be broke by (...) for King James, and his
Governor Sir. Edmund And^oss, and denying the Authority of the People, and
Capt. Leisler (...) by them* on which it was wisely d^ne of Capt. Leisler to
(...) in the (...) those whom he found so troublesome to the public Peace, and
as the heads of them he Imprisoned the aforementioned famous Coll. Bayard and
Mr. Nichols, but without barba^i^y they were confined, and not in a nasty Goal,
but in hands^me lo^^ing, such as now are thought proper for the Captain of the
Guard, the Store keeper and the Secretary of the Province to lodge and keep
Office in. It is true that Coll. Bayard was put in Irons, as he well deserved
for his aversion to the Revolution, disturbing the Peace, and attacking Capt.
Leisler (then Commander in Chief) in the open Street, as appears by several
credible Oaths. Nor could i^ be safe to admit such firebrands to Bail; and
therefore they were kept close from doing mischief, which is the part of all
good Governments to do, and was most necessary in this Revolution.

Captain Leisler with the Committee of safety (appointed by the Representatives
of the Freeholders of the several Counties of the Province) having published
their Declaration for the Prince of Orange the Protestant Religion, and the
English Laws and Liberties, they thought it prudent to discriminate the Well
affected from the Enemy, and therefore Summoned all the Inhabitants of the City
to the Fort, to sign their names to such a Declaration as owned the Authority
of the Prince of Orange. And the refusers must justly by him and all mankind be
deemed Enemies to the Revolution, to His Majesty, and their Country. And is
this a crime to know the Sheep from the Goats, or to take all Reasonable
methods for the safety of the then Government: but the Libeller is angry at
every prudent step was taken, nor is he satisfied, although it is above Seven
years since he was gorged with their innocent blood which he had a hand in
shedding.

It is notoriously false that Capt. Leisler opposed the Collecting of the
Revenue; indeed he was not willing a Papist should run away with our Protestant
Kings Money, nor did he think it safe in Bayards etc hands. But the Committee
of safety (and not Capt. Leisler) appointed Mr. De Lanoy (in whom they durst
confide) to that trust, who received no Customs until December following, when
His Majesty's orders arrived; till then he took only notes from the Merchants
to pay the Customs when demanded. And it is well known that Mr. De Lanoy gave a
fair and true Account of his Receipts and payments of the Customs to Governor
Slaughter: whereby it appears he had expended five hundred Pounds of his own
Money above the Money of the Revenue, for the Kings Service and the support of
the Revolution; which Money is not repaid him to this day through the iniquity
of some Jacobites aforementioned, who crept into power, and who have thereby
gratified their revenge on men of greater sense and Loyalty than themselves.

On the tenth of December one Riggs brought His Majesty's Letters which were
delivered to Capt. Leisler, as they ought according to their direction; for
Coll. Nicholson (to whom they were first directed) had withdrawn himself out of
the Province, and in his absence the Letters were directed to such as for the
time being took ^are for the preservation of the Peace and Administering the
Laws; which was none other but Capt. [Pag. 9.] Leisler, who was appointed
thereto by the Representatives (...) Freeholders of the several Countyes of the
Province, and had the Command of the Fort; nor could those who called
themselves of the Council be entitled thereto, for they were the Persons that
were made use of in the late Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, to the
^ver-turning of all Laws, and Civil Rights, and who gav^ Occasion, for the
Revolution in New York, and did never declare for the Prince of Orange.

These Letters from His Majesty fully confirming Capt. Leisler in the
Government, whereto he was chosen by the People's Representatives; he
endeavored to execute his trust faithfully, and on such an Emergency it was
the greatest wisdom and prudence to find Money to support the Government, which
he did as regularly as the time would permit, by and with the consent of the
General Assembly of the Province ^airly chosen by the Freeholders; which this
seducer falsely insinuates were only Selected and Appointed by Capt. Leisler.
And by and with their advice and consent Taxes were raised and properly
applied. And it is observable the Libeller tells us, that Capt. Leisler applied
these Sums to his own private use, and yet in the very next words tells us, it
was to maintain said disorders, al^owing private men Eighteen Pence per day: by
disorders he means the Government reposed by the People and confirmed by King
WILLIAM in Capt. Leisler, which had disordered and routed the former Slavery
the People lay under; ^or it was disorder to none but Papists and Jacobites.
And the Eighteen pence a day was for the private use of the private men to whom
it was paid, for their subsistence in de^ending the Government: and their (...)
was indeed of private use to Capt. Leisler, as comprehended in the Public
general good thereof: But the Revenue was not sufficient to def^ay so great a
charge, had not Capt. Leisler expended great Sums out of his own private
Estate, as others concerned with him likewise did, for which he was repayed
with a barbarous Death, through the means of men who will never venture their
Lives or Estates to serve their Prince, Country, or Protestant Religion.

[Pag. 10] Nor could Coll* Bayard and Mr. Nichols complain of their
aforementioned confinement in the Fort, since they would fly in the face of
Government, and give such vent to their invenomed passions as appears b^ the
Record of their Committment, and Coll. Bayards con^ession in his Petition to
Capt. Leisler.

But it is point blanck a lie, nor was it ever, or can be proved that Capt.
Leisler gave directions to any man to plunder Coll. Bayards house, nor was any
thing of that sort done by his order to any house, but Commands given to the
contrary, and the Soldiers were compelled to restore what could be made appear
they had forcibly taken from any man. Even so small a matter as a Hat taken out
of the house of Mr. Lambert, was restored to him.

Coll. Cortland and others might leave their houses and families, but they
would have had no occasion for so doing had they peaceably and quietly minded
their own affairs and submitted to the Government; for all such had no manner
of disturbance given them, but were protected.

[Pag. 11.] The Protestant Ministers the Libeller says, could not escape Capt.
Leislers Malice and Cruelty: I am afraid those Ministers he mentioned, were
Popish Trumpets, to Preach up the damn^d Doctrins of Passive Obedience, and Non
Resistance, and to noise in our Ears with their accursed breath, that we ought
patiently to hold our Protestant Throats to be cut by the Command of a Popish
King: and when Capt. Leisler with his friends had taken hold of that wonderful
Deliverance offered immediately from God to Redeem His People from Slavery upon
Earth, and Popish Damnation in Hell; to have false Priests of Baal get up, and
use their wicked Eloquence, to make the People believe a lie, even in the house
of the God of Truth; and from the Pulpit, to tell these Captains of our
Temporal Salvation to their faces, that being faithful to their God, their
Country, and their Laws, in the defense of the Holy Protestant Religion, and
the Rights and Liberties of English men, and their thankful declaring for the
most glorious Prince upon Earth their Deliverer: was the blackest of Treason
and Rebellion. Such Apostasy and base Treachery has deserved, and often met
with severer rebukes than the friendly Verbal admonition given by Capt. Leisler
to the blind Seer, and had nothing of the Malice and Cruelty in it of the
Libeller, who wrote so false a Pamphlet: and so the other time-serving Priests
(who were Protestant shooing horns to draw on Popery) might have been more
quiet, and left the result of the Revolution to Divine Providence, and not pass
such hard Censures as to attaint blood and accuse of Rebellion, all that would
accept of Gods deliverance from the two greatest plagues of mankind, Popery and
Slavery. But I hope they have repented and will be saved, otherwise whilst they
Preach to others they themselves will be cast away.

It Is true Capt. Leisler sent to the Merchants of the Town to supply the
Garrison with Provisions and other necessaries, and sent without distinction to
all People who had Stores; otherwise the Garrison might have perished: but he
honestly gave them Credit in the Kings Books, and they have since (for the
greatest part) been satisfied; and Capt. Leisler (as he ought) did order
forceibly to break their Warehouses open, where they were refractory, and
refused on so great Emergency to afford support for the Government; but exact
Accounts were kept of all such goods, and Entries made in Books kept for that
purpose; so that it was not plunder, (as the Libeller falsely calls it) but
they were to be satisfied, and paid for the same. And I believe it was never
known in the Memory of man, that ever a Revolution, or change of Government,
was more regular: or where Military power would not force Victuals where it was
denied them, when they wanted it: and therefore it was for the special Service
of King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, to keep alive those that were the only persons
in that Province, who declared early for Them, and owned Their Authority. Nor
can any proof upon Earth be brought (except such as the Libeller) that one
Farthings Value of goods was ever converted to the private use of Capt.
Leisler, or Transported by him to the West Indies, but the imposture of the
wh^le book depends on such positive falsehoods.

[Pag. 12.] The Account of Thirteen Thousand nine hundred fifty nine Pounds of
damages done the Province is made up by the Libeller himself: for no man living
of truth, has ever demonstrated that Capt Leisler or his friends, ever made
pillage of any man's Estate, but I believe the Libeller rec^ons that he and his
^acobite party had so much damage by the Revolution, which they might
Arbitrarily have extorted from the Kings good Subjects, i^ it had not happened.
Good damages! which I am glad of with all* my heart. At this rate pray what
damages had the Popish Clergy of England and Ireland, by King WILLIAMS
hindering their being resto^ed to Abbys, Monasterys and Peter Pence; but it is
better that the Jacobites should suffer damage of their Estates and Lives too,
than an English Protestant People should have the damage of loosing their Laws
and Religion, their Properties and their Souls. And as for Coll. Willets
losses, which the Libeller magnifies, he could not put a particular Value on
them, they were so small. Had they been considerable, he would since have made
a particular complaint, to have reparation, which he never did, nor had
occasion for; but had he been ruined he would not have been pittyed by good
men, because he so far forgot that he was an English man and Protestant: that
he Execused an Illegal Commission, and raised Forces to destroy all those that
declared for our Deliverer, that we might return to our Vomit, which was a Dog
trick in him.

And thus the Libeller expatiates on Capt. Leislers Arbitrary proceedings over
his Majesty's Subjects Persons and Estates, against the fundamental Laws of the
Land; but he should have considered that all the fundamental Laws of the Land
were wholly subverted and trampled upon by the Hellish, Popish, Arbitrary
Government, Established by King James's Commission; so that Capt. Leisler found
no fundamental Laws to transgress; and was forced in discharge of his trust
from the People, and by and with the consent of those appointed by their
Representatives, to use these violent methods which Heaven gave him the power
to make use of to restore those fundamental Laws, which were abolished by tools
of the same temper with the Libeller.

Major Ingoldesby a Captain of a foot Company, arrives near two years after,
says the Libeller, And with several Gentlemen of the Council, sends to Capt.
Leisler, that for the preservation of the Peace, he might continue to Command
in the Fort, until Coll. Slaughter's Arrival, and only desired that major
Ingoldesby and the Kings Soldiers might be permitted to quarter, and refresh
themselves in the City: but instead of complying, he in passion told Mr.
Brook, on his acquainting him, that Mr. Phillips, Coll. Bayard, Coll. Cortland
were of the Council, that they were Papist Dogs, and if the King should send
Three Thousand of them, he would cut them off; and without cause Proclaimed
open War; on which said major Ingoldesby persuaded several of the Inhabitants
to join with him merely for self preservation. On which several great and small
Shot from the Fort killed and wounded several of His Majesty's good Subjects,
who made no opposition.

This whole Paragraph I shall show to be the greatest complication of Iniquity,
and fit to be the production of a Monster begat by an Incubus on a Scotch
Witch, who had kindled his malice against Truth from the flames he put to the
holy Bible, thereby to become the Adopted Son of the father of Lies.

For major Ingoldesby having no Commission, nor Authority to Command, on his
Arrival, took on him the Title of Commander in Chief, usurped a show of
Government, calling a Council, and Issuing peremptory orders, as appears by the
Records of the Council Book; nay quite contrary to the Romantic Account of the
Libeller, he sent a demand under his own hand, which I have seen, wherein he
acknowledges Capt. Leislers offer to him of his own Houses in the City for the
Accommodation of himself and Officers, and to appoint fit Quarters for the
Soldiers; which major Ingoldesby under his hand denies to accept of, saying,
he demanded the Fort from him, which unless Capt. Leisler would deliver up to
him, he would esteem him as an Enemy to King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. I have
likewise seen Capt. Leislers Letter to major Ingoldesby full of Civility, and
true Reason, wherein he acquaints him, that he held the Fort and Commanded by
Virtue of a trust reposed in him by the People, and confirmed by His Majesty,
and assuring him, that if he had any Commission from His Majesty, or any
Instruction, or Order from Coll. Slaughter appointed Governor of the Province,
on his producing it, The Fort should be immediately delivered to him, but
desired to be excused from resigning his trust, till he found one qualifyed and
authorized to receive it from him. But this was not satisfaction to major
Ingoldesby who was prevailed with to take the Government on him in opposition
to Capt. Leisler, and as Governor in Chief (although never Empowered by King or
People) he issues orders to the several Counties to be ready to attend and
assist in opposing Leisler, and his party with Arms; which was the proclaiming
open War; and pursuant thereto, he sends his Rounds in the night, and ordered
or permitted his Rounds at all hours to pass the guards and centrys on the
Walls of the Fort, and not to make answer, but by reproachful Language, when
challenged by them, in order to provoke the drawing of blood, and engaging the
People in a Civil War: and farther, major Ingoldesby ordered all the men under
his Command to wear Marks on their Arms, to distinguish them from those who
joined with Capt. Leisler.

During this Revolution and Civil War, I am told not above two persons were
killed, which happiness attended the moderate temper of Capt. Leisler and the
Committee of safety, who could not be raised to punish the Insolence of the
Tory party, suitable to what they gave just occasion for.

Soon after, viz. in March, about a Month or five Weeks after major
Ingoldesby's usurpation, Coll. Slaughter Arrived, who Summoned the Fort late at
night, and, contrary to the Libellers assertion, it was never den^ed to be
delivered: but the delivery suspended till next Morning, it not being prope^
(according to Military Rules) to deliver a Fort in the night; and then it was
Surrendered by Capt. Leisler, who wa^^ing on the Captain General Coll.
Slaughter, instead of thanks for the faithful Service he had done His Majesty
in defending the Fort and Province from the French (our professed Enemies) and
the Treachery of Papists and Jacobites amongst our selves, was immediately by
his order Seized with Mr. Milbourn, and others of the Loyal party, and bound
over to answer at the next Supreme Court of Judicature; where Capt. Leisler and
Mr. Milbourn pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court, That whereas he was in
possession of the of the Government by the choice of the People, and con^^med
in it by the Kings Majesty's Letters, that he was not bound by Law to answer
for his Mal Administration in Gove^nm^nt, to any Court or Authority, but to His
Majesty, who had entrusted him; but this was overruled by the Violence of the
Court, without reason or Law, and as Mu^es they were found guilty of High
Treason and Murder; and although a Reprieve was granted them by Coll.
Slaughter, until His Majesty's pleasure should be known in the matter: yet the
Violence of the Jacobite party (of which sort were most of Capt. (...) Judges
and Officers of the Court) was such that they gave no rest to Coll. Slaughter,
until by their Importunity they prevailed with him to sign the Dead Warrant.
And they were Executed accordingly. So that the representation of the matter,
with an account of their Reprieve reached His Majesty at the same time with the
account of their Execution and Death. So fell Capt. Leisler, and Mr. M^^bourn
men of known Integrity, Honesty and Loyalty, and by a pretended course of Law,
contrary to all Law condemned, where their Judges were most of them violent
Enemies of the happy Revolution, and therefore resolved to revenge themselves
on these Gentlemen who were the most Early and Zealous Instruments of it; and
who had first expended great part of their Estates, and then suffered Martyrdom
for King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, their Religion and Laws. The proofs and papers
referred to in this account remain in the hands of Mr. Jacob Leisler only Son
of Capt. Jacob Leisler the Martyr to Jacobite Revenge. The proof that Capt.
Leisler was legally Governor of New York* That major Ingoldesby was but a bear
Captain of Foot, and had no other command in that Province, nor authority to
demand the Fort from Capt. Leisler; The proof that Capt. Leisler did as a good
Subject d^liver the Fort to Coll. Slaughter upon demand, and his Justification,
is immediately expressed in the Act of Parliament of England which (...) their
Attainders, and restores their Familie^ in Blood and Esate.

So that this is the full and true account of this Tragedy; New York lay under
the Curse of an obsolute Government by King James's Commission to Sir, Edmund
Andross; the people took courage on the first News of the Revolution in
England, and (...) off the Opp^essers, and declared for the Prince of Orange;
the Lieu^en^nt Governor, the Council, and Justices of the Peace, which met and
cal^d themselves a Convention (being Officers (...) by king James) would not
declare for the Prince of Orange; Wherefore the people did not think themselves
(...) in their hands, but Seized upon the Fort, and chose Capt. Leisler
Commander of the Fort until (...) procured a return of Representatives of the
(...) hol^^rs of the several Counties of the Province, who on their meeting
making a Declaration for His present Majesty, did under their Hands and Seals
constitute Capt. Leisler Commander in Chief until the Kings pleasure should be
known; and likewise appointed him a Council, by the name of a Committee of
Safety. And in these Persons the Government was lodged, who proceeded to
support themselves by the most moderate methods could be devised.

The Lieutenant Governor hereupon withdraws out of the Province, major
Ingoldesby Arrives with Authority over none but his Foot Company; and yet
demands the Fort, which Capt. Leisler durst not deliver to him without
betraying his Trust both to the King and People; major Ingoldesby usurps the
Title of Commander in Chief, he Issues Orders and Warrants to the People to
rise in Arms to assist him to wrest the Fort out of Capt. Leislers hands, and
provokes Capt. Leislers men in the Fort to Acts of hostility, by which means
one or two men were accidentally killed. Coll. Slaughter Arrives, demands the
Fort, which was surrendered to him immediately; the Persons of Capt. Leisler and
Mr. Milbourn are Seizd, and soon after brought to Trial; their plea to the
Jurisdiction of the Court (which could not by Law try them for Mal
Administration in Government) violently over ruled, and they Condemned as
Mutes, for High Treason and Murder; they were Reprieved until His Majesty's
pleasure should be known; and notwithstanding the Reprieve, the Warrant of
Execution Signed, and they Executed.

But the Enemies to King WILLIAM, and consequently to these Gentlemen, had not
sufficiently gratified their malice, by these men's innocent blood: but they
labor in England to get a Justification for themselves, and a confirmation
that the said unjust Judgment was according to Law; and when His Majesty was in
Flanders and several Ministers of State were in place and trust in the
Committee of Trade, which His Majesty has since thought fit to remove from His
Council and their Offices: a report was obtained from the Committee of Trade
affirming that these Loyalists were Condemned and Executed according to Law.
But however the said Committee represented their Sons as fit objects of Her
Majesty's mercy, to be restored to their Fathers Estates; which Her Majesty was
graciously pleased to grant. And these maglignant Confederates so far prevailed
with the Assembly of New York to compliment and flatter their new Governor
Coll. Slaughter, as to pass several Votes against the whole proceedings of the
happy Revolution, and to excuse the barbarous Severity of the Illegal
Condemnation and bloody Execution which he had ordered. And this was the S^ate
of the Case until the Parliament of England took the matter into their
Consideration, and the Honorable the House of Commons in the Sixth and Seventh
year of His present Majesty's Reign appointed a Committee to examine all
parties in relation to Capt. Leislers Execution, where they were heard by their
Council at Law, and where Mr. Dudley (who formerly applied to get Money by
Magistracy and Government in New England, and set up for a Judge in matters of
blood in the Trial of Capt. Leisler at New York) was heard to make his de^ence,
where his Cobb-Webb Eloquence was too thin to put a vail over so black an
Action, as created horror in the minds of that Honorable and Numerous
Committee; who reported the matter fully to the House, and thereupon an Act of
Parliament passed the Royal Assent, wherein His Majesty, the Lords, and Commons
of England do recite the Legality of Capt. Leislers Authority, and justify his
proceedings in the Government, and more especially his refusing to deliver the
Fort to major Ingoldesby, being the Fact for which he was Condemned; and do
absolutely reverse the Attainders and restore the Blood and Estates of Capt.
Leisler, and those persons Condemned and Executed in New York; which Act of
Parliament is Printed at the end of this Treatise.

And now after all, it being about Eight years since these men d^ed, when the
Grave and Time should have so buried the Persons and Memories of these good,
but unfortunate Persons, that no Revenge should have room to desire a farther
gratificati^n; and when the Annim^sities between those of a Dutch extraction
(who are the most numerous, Loyal and Sober Subjects of that P^ovince) and ^he
few Eng^ish (who were most averse and backward in the Rev^lu^ion, but violent
and bloody in the Execution of Capt. Leisler, as well as the most dissolute in
their Morals) in this Province, had time to cool, and might by a good
Government have been wholly healed. After all, I say, to have this fire again
blown up, to open these Wounds and to open the Graves of the Dead, to disturb
the Living; was such an artifice of the Devil as must give a more than usual
abhorrence in good minds; which seads me to give an account of the Occ^sion,
the time, manner, and design of the Publication of this fire brand called a
Letter, and withal take some n^tice of the supposed author.

It is evident in New York, and will soon be made appear to His Majesty, that
the ^ate Government of New York under the Administration of Coll. Fetcher, was
a perfect sink of Corruption. And although he was exalted to that Government
from a poor mean refugee of Ireland; yet he soon forgot the hand that raised
him, and to satisfy his Soul, his Idol Gain, he made a fast friendship with the
few Papists, Jacobites, and dissolute English of New York, who had opposed the
Revolution and revenged themselves on Capt. Leisler; and who to be supported in
their hatred to the Loyal Wi^iamites, and connived at in their open breach of
all the Acts of Trade, found great advantage to reward Coll. Fletcher's
friendship by Presents from themselves, and gifts from Pirates; and complied
with him, and consented to all things proposed to them by him; to the
squandring of the Kings Revenue and (to the great dishonor of the King)
destroying all conveniences of a Succeeding Governor; and disposing of all the
Lands in the Province, that not one Inch is lest to be given in reward to any
who may by their Services to His Majesty, deserve; or to encourage new
Settlers, and that in such quantities as will wholly make it impossible ever to
People the Province; giving to one man Seventy Miles in length; and to several
Fifty, Forty and Thirty Miles in length, and several Miles in breadth; with
many other unjust gross Mal Administrations.

On this bottom Coll. Fletcher joined in the mortal hatred to the lovers of the
Loyal Leisler; and when several condemned to dye for their motions in that
Revolution were ordered by Her gracious Majesty of Sacred Memory to be
discharged, Coll. Fletcher did it as an act of grace of his own, and told them
that although he released them, yet he could call for them when he pleased, and
hang them. And some time after told them, That they dealt worse by him, than
the Lepers cleansed by our Savior, some of which returned to thank him, but
none of them ever did, meaning none of them had given him a wicked Bribe or
reward, which he was used to receive, These Truths Mr. Beekman and Mr.
Gouver^^^r will attest. Coll. Fletcher likewise paid that disregard to the Act
of Parliament of England (Reversing the Attainders and restoring Capt Leisler
and others Condemned, in Blood and Estate) that he refused the Widow* Leisler
to be repossessed of her Estate; nor had she that justice done her, during
Coll. Fletchers Government, nor until my Lord Bellomont granted (...) W^it of
Possession; which was a year and half after she was Entitled to it by Act of
Parliament in England, Reprinted at New York. He likewise wholly discouraged
the generality of those who were active in the Revolution, putting few or none
of them into Office, or Employment; and wholly adhering to those that gratifyed
his Vanity, Pride, and Covetousness. For which in return he gave them
countenance in all matters, as we^l as connivance at their unlawful Trade.

His Majesty having appointed the Earl of Bellomont Governor of New York
(whose great Honor and Justice Coll. Fletcher both knew and dreaded) some
considerable time passed between his Patents being passed; and his beginning
his Voyage, which Coll. Fletcher took the advantage o^, therein to contrive
methods so to divide the People of the Government, that in Public disorder he
himself might escape having strict Scrutiny made into the Corruptions of his
Government, he therefore not satisfied with crushing the Loyalists, during his
Government, was resolved to assist the Publishing this Libel, which might give
such an Account of the Revolution of New York as should Exasperate to the
highest degree, all that were concerned in it and at the same time assured his
Jacobite party, that it was nec^ssary such a book should be Licensed, to
possess the Strangers who came with my Lord, with such falsehoods as were
useful to their party; my Lord being* as he feared, inclined to favor whoever
was we^l inclined to the Loyalty of Leisler. So that, as is supposed, one Mr.
Jam^^^n was employed to frame this Libel, who was Clerk of the ^loody Court
that Condemned Leisler; a person most in the graces of Coll. F^etcher, who was
in Scotland condemned to dye for Atheism and Burning the Bible, and was
banished to New York; where he was by Cont^ibution ^reed from being a Servant,
and ^ermitted to teach School, and being somewhat a Scholar, and having good
natural sense made use of his wicked parts to teach Blasphemy, and Atheism, and
to ridi^ule Sober Religion, till he got a Reputation amongst the disso^ute
Church of England men, whose Li^urgie he then would, and still does gabble over
with great seeming devotion, and up lifted eyes a few hours after he had been
Blaspheming Christianity: but his form of saying the Common Prayer s^fficiently
recommended him to Coll. Fletcher, so that the Secretary Clarkson was prevailed
on to make him his Deputy for a Hundred Pounds a year Rent; and Coll. Fletcher
gave him Fifty Pounds per Annum Salary out of the Kings Revenue as Clerk of the
Council, and through all his Government made use of his vile Service, and
afterward recommended him to the Earl of Bellomont, as one of the honestest
men in the Government; although at the same time he knew the said Jamison was
actually married to two Wives t^en living. This man so qualifyed was entrusted
to do this piece of Service, but it is believed the aforemen^ioned Coll. Bayard
gave him some assistance in furnishing him with some Materials, and without
doubt according to orders, no falsehood was balk'd that could serve the cause,
and so this Libel was hammered out, in which there is scarce a Paragraph but
what contains one or more Scur^ilous Untruths, which are delivered with an
Highland modesty and peremptorily affirmed to be truth without any proof, on
purpose to Vi^ify the Transactions of the Revolution, and Massacre over again
the Reputation of those, whose persons were Murdered Eight years before for
their Loyalty, and withal the Villainy proper to persons who hate the present
Government, are added to this Account some Servile Votes of the Assembly of
New York made to slatter their new Governor Coll. Slaugh^^r, who signed these
Loya^ists Warrant for Execution, and likewise is Printed an order or report
(God knows how obtained) of the Committee of Trade for J^st^ying the said
Condem^ation and Execution. But this Libeller, contrary to his duty, to truth,
all^giance to His Majesty, and respect to Laws (for he could not hide his
Virulency to the present Government) takes no noti^e of the Act of Parlia^ent
o^ England Reversing the Attainders of these Condemned Gentlemen, which gives
the Lie to his whole Li^el, Justifies Capt. Leisler as Lawful Governor of New
York, and in full effect expresses that he was basely Murdered, contrary to all
Law and Reason, for doing his duty as His Majesty's La^ful Governor of New
York: which is the sense of the words of the said Act. But the Libeller did as
he was ordered, and the book raised the flame it was designed to raise, and was
carried to the Press by Mr. Brook (who although a Refugee from Ireland and
preferred by King WILLIAM to be Collector and Receiver General of the Customs
and Revenue of New York, and a new-comer thither, took upon him to be one of
the bloody Judges of this Royalist; but is since for betraying his said Trust
and neglect of his duty, suspended from all his Employs, even that of being
Judge, and one of the Council, by the Right Honorable the Earl o^ Bellomont,
who was ^is Security for his Collectors place to the Commissioners of the
Customs of England, but could not bear his treachery to that Trust which he
himself had been Instrumental to advance him to. And Mr. Wilson late Sheriff of
New York a hot headed despicable fellow, who to serve the Tory party, contrary
to his Oath, made a most false Return of Assembly men to serve for the Counties
of New York, and Orange in the last Assembly. For which palpable breach of his
Oath and Trust, His Excellency the Earl of Bellomont with consent of the
Council suspended him from being Sheriff of New York. But when this Libel was
so midwived to the Press by the Kings Collector (who was likewise one of the
Council, and this foresworn Sheriff. Then Coll. Fletcher calls the Council
where it is proposed (as appears by the Minute of Council) that a book being
found at the Printers, giving an Account of the Revolution of New York and
containing nothing but Truth. It Is resolved N^mine contradicente, that it
should be Printed. But who were the Council who consented to this great piece
of Service to His Majesty? Why Coll. Fletcher, who is supposed to have given
orders for its being Written. Coll. Bayard of whom enough is said plainly and
truly. Mr. Brook who carried it to the Press and was one of Leislers Judges;
Mr. Pinhorn, another of Leislers Judges (who is since removed by His Excellency
the Earl of Bellomont from being Judge and of the Council, for speaking most
Scandalous false and reproachful words of His most Sacred Majesty King WILLIAM,
and for protecting and concealing in his house a Popish Priest) and some other
Enemies of the Revolution. So that (to omit the false sordid flatteries given
to Coll. Fletcher, which are impertinently added by the Libeller) it is
apparent that there was a wicked conspiracy, by this book to give distraction
(by Printing it just before the Earl of Bellomont's Arrival at New York) and
thereby to divide the People and so to disturb Affairs under his Government,
that there should be no time or opportunity of quickly inquiring into the
Corruptions of Coll. Fletchers managements.

This was the time and design of its Publication, these the qualities of the
supposed Authors, and of the Persons who carried it to the Press, and after
this manner (by Coll. Fletcher and the before mentioned of the Council) it was
permitted to be Printed; so that it is no wonder, that this book was a Mine
Sprung from Hell to blow up the Peace of this Province, when so many Sons of
Belial in Office and Authority joined in its Contrivance and Publication, who
must keep to their nature and not stick at any plain falsehood (although it fly
in the face of the King, Lords and Commons of England, and Truth it self) that
may Exasperate and raise a flame, and if possible Murder over again those
Martyrs for their Loyalty, Capt. Leisler and Mr. Millourn, who were barbarously
Executed for bravely Asserting the Rights and Liberties of English men against
Popish and Arbitrary Government; and for their Early and Sincere Affection to
His most Sacred Majesty KING WILLIAM, whom GOD send long to Reign.


