Imprimatur.

May 16. 1693.

Gul. Lancaster.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature of MAN BOTH IN HIS Natural and Political
Capacity: Both as he is A Rational Creature, AND Member of a Civil Society.

With an Examination of some of Mr. Hobbs'sOpinions relating hereunto.

By IA. LOUD, Rector of Settington in Yorkshire, sometime Fellow of Clare-hall
in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by T. Warren, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1694.



TO THE Most Reverend Father in GOD, JOHN, By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, AND One of
Their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council; THIS TREATISE, With all Duty and
Gratitude, Is most Humbly Dedicated by His GRACE's Most Obedient, Faithful, and
Obliged Servant, Ia. Loud.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
NOtwithstanding the many, though undeserved Reproaches cast upon Mankind, as if
Man by Nature was a very Wolf or Tiger; yet I shall at present so far presume
upon the falseness of these Scandals (hoping hereafter to prove that they
really are so) as freely to expose this small Treatise to thy more favorable
reception. I would willingly suppose thee, and the rest of Mankind, as good and
gentle as possibly I could, so far as with Truth and Prudence I might do it;
yet I do not here go about to flatter thee into good nature, or to impose upon
thy Judgment, by bespeaking thy Affections.

It Is true indeed, if we consult the present state of Affairs, if we look into
our selves at home, or consider the Practices of the World abroad, we shall not
find such an universal Love and Benignity to prevail therein, as the Poets
describe in their Golden Age, or such as we might certainly have experienced,
had Man continued in Innocence. But then, to assert Humane Nature in general,
as the great Patroness of all Vice and Villainy, because it is now fallen from its
original perfection, and adulterated with some vicious mixtures, is just as if
we should say, that there is no Gold in the mass of Ore, because mixed with
greater quantity of Dross or Sand. That which I here design, in reference to
Humane Nature, is Likeness, rather than Curiosity: So that I must not so far
favor thee, as to represent thee without any Deformity or Imperfection; nor
yet be so injurious, as to draw both Mankind in general, and thee in
particular, so much like Devils, as some have gone about to do.

I shall not here make any Apology for the publication of these few Papers, nor
trouble thee with those many pretended Reasons, the commonness whereof makes
^^m suspected, even then, when perhaps they may be real: If upon thy perusal
thou can find any tolerable ground of excuse for me, it will be more proper
for thee to make, than for me to plead in my own defense. And thus to thy own
Candor I submit'em; nor do they go about to enter into compacts for their own
security; nor are they so sollicitous about their own preservation, as to
desire any one common Reader to transfer his Right of judging and condemning
too, if he so think fit.

As for those learned persons, from whom I differ in some particulars, I know
that nothing, unless it be their Learning, is greater than their Candor and
Ingenuity; therefore, I hope, they will not attribute this my freedom of
declaring my own sentiments, to any spirit of contradiction, or to any pleasure
I take in opposing theirs: But there can be no greater Friend to Truth and the
Commonwealth of Learning than he, who with calmness and unconcernedness, far
from Passion and Personal Reflection, seriously debates things of this nature:
And though I may err in my Opinions, or mistake in my Reasonings, yet I will
not be confident in 'em; so that I shall still reserve a fair opportunity of
changing my Mind, when either by any kind notice from others, or by my own
maturer thoughts, I shall be better informed: However, I do not pretend to set
up for singularity; if I do err, I err with very good company.

The Argument here handled has already been variously treated of by learned
men, yet the Subject seems not so wholly exhausted, but that others yet may,
with profit both to themselves and others, employ their Meditations hereupon.

The knowledge of our selves, and of Human Nature, was always counted a good
Foundation both of Piety toward God, and of Justice and Charity toward Men;
and it is probable, that a great many of the Errors that have crept into
Religion it self, have been occasioned by the want either of the true
knowledge, or due consideration of our Natures, as rational, and of the Duties
and Obligations that lie upon us therefrom; for the Scripture does every where
exhort us to the practice of Moral Duties, but does not go about to explain the
natures of 'em, as supposing that sufficiently known to us already.

There is nothing of greater force, even if possible to patronize Vice and
Error, than those powerful Names of Nature and Reason; thus those that have
gone about to disparage the one and oppose the other, have yet done it under
the plausible pretenses of advancing both. Thus the Soicks, whose Tenants were
the most contrary to Human Nature, rightly understood, yet did they prevail
above, and grow more numerous than any other Sect, and that probably for no
other reason than that of their constant boasting of living (...), according to
Nature. Thus the Atheists of our Age oppose Reason to Religion, and think they
may justly reject the one, seeing they are such devout Proselytes, or at least
such great Pretenders to the other. So that there seems to be nothing, wherein
all sorts of men, though otherwise differing both in Principles and Practices, do
more agree than in this, That there is a certain due Respect owing to the
Dictates of Nature and Reason. Of what great concernment therefore is it,
rightly to understand both these, lest the Devil and his Instruments make use
of those very Faculties, which GOD implanted in Man, on purpose to promote the
Designs of Virtue and Piety, to the carrying on his own base Ends of Vice and
Error.

Thus we may be sure there is some falsity in the Citation, or some Malice in
the Design, when the Devil quotes Scripture: And the like may be said, that
some fallacy is in the Argument, when Reason and Nature are made use of to
patronize Vice and Error.

My Design then here is, to vindicate the Honor and Innocence of those great
and worthy Names, Nature and Reason, from the bad usage they meet withal, when
challenged by those unjust Pretenders.

The nature of the Subject will necessarily engage me in the examination of
some of Mr. Hobbs's Opinions, which I shall do with as much fairness and
impartiality as possibly I can. He has indeed made several ingenious
Observations upon Human Nature in general, but that wherein he seems very often
to fail, is, either that he does not carefully avoid those Faults himself,
which he has justly blamed in others, or that he sometimes draws universal
conclusions only from particular observations; and sometimes from the mere Fact
he insers the jus of a thing; and from the more general practice of most men,
he goes about to justify that which is not in it self lawful.

It Is the Observation of a learned man, that a flight and superficial study of
Nature and Natural Causes, may incline a man to Atheism; but a full and perfect
understanding of 'em fixes him more firmly in the Principles of Religion and
Piety. Thus it is probable that it was only Mr. Hobbs's superficial observation
of Human Nature that betrayed him into those mistakes and false notions of it;
if he had, by a profounder study and impartial search, enquired into the inward
recesses of it, he would then have found Man not altogether so void of all
natural Principles of Virtue and Goodness, as he has represented him.

His political Principles seem to be founded upon no better or surer grounds
than the observation of the vicious Inclinations of some, and the prudent and
cautious Practices of others, because some men are violent and injurious, and
make no conscience of doing Wrong; others are wary, and accordingly arm
themselves, as much as they can, against the receiving of any: From hence he
would infer the State of Nature to be a State of War, and all the evil and
false consequences that follow thence.

So that the approbation that his Principles have met withal in the World, was
the result of Men's vicious Inclinations, and natural proneness to believe such
Opinions, rather than any solid Ground or Reason, on which they were founded.

It might perhaps be some mitigation of his fault herein, if by supposing men
worse than they were, he hereby laid the Foundation of Humility and Amendment:
But it has been well observed of him, that he supposed Men worse than they are,
and made 'em worse than otherwise they would be, thus making 'em more the
Children of Wrath, than they were by Nature.

Mr. Hobbs has well observed, That Arguments seldom work upon Men of Wit and
Learning, when they have once engaged themselves in a contrary Opinion; and
that, if any thing will do it, it is the showing them the Causes of their
Errors. I shall accordingly here intimate some few things in general, and leave
them to thy own consideration, whether they might not be some ways influential,
either as Causes or Occasions of his Mistakes.

And first, Has he not dug for Principles out of his own Fancy, without
consulting the universal Consent of Mankind, or the more constant received
Opinions of the best and wisest both Moralists and Politicians? For the true
knowledge of Human Nature does not consist only in the searching of our selves,
but it also requires a full and perfect understanding both of Men and Books.
Thus we ought to consider what the best and wisest Men of all Ages have left
upon Record concerning their apprehensions of it, and by our own Observations
both of our selves and others, either more fully confirm, or prudently correct,
what they have delivered. And though, it is true, there may be, as it were, a
mechanical use of Books, an enslaving a Man's Reason to his Reading, without a
due examination or just digestion of what we read, into our own Reason and
Judgment; yet there are some who have fallen into Mistakes, by being more
conversant with their own Meditations, than with other men's Writings: Or, if he
has been a great consulter of Authors, yet does he not seem rather afferre
quam auferre sensum, does he not come to 'em with Prejudice, and with a
Resolution rather to elude, than fully to answer their Reasons? How does he
sometimes seem to march boldly into his Enemy's Country, and leave their
greatest strength behind him, never regarding to answer the Reasons upon which
the contrary Opinion is founded? Does he not seem also to suit his Principles
to the Times wherein he writ, rather than to the Truth of things, yet always in
obedience to, and pursuance of his own grand Principle os Self-preservation?
Seems he not sometimes to affect Novelty more than Truth, being perhaps more
desirous to be the Author of a New Error, than the Asserter of an Old Truth?

In his Introduction to the Leviathan, he tells us, That there is a Saying much
usurped of late, That Wisdom is acquired not by reading Books, but Men;
consequently here upon those persons that for the most part can give no other
Proof of being Wise, take great delight to show what they think they have read
in Man, by uncharitable Censures behind their Backs. But does not he himself
here lie under his own lash? Does he not seem to please himself in uncharitable
censuring of what he thinks (but without just grounds) he has read, not only
in Particular Persons, but in Human Nature in general? Here we may observe how,
like the troublesome Fly, he is always busy about the Sores of Human Nature;
not with an intent to cure 'em, but to make 'em worse. How much more worthy of
a Man, a Philosopher and a Christian too, was M. Antoninus Advice, lib. 6.
Whenever thou would rejoice thy self, call to mind the several Gifts and
Virtues of those whom thou do daily converse with, viz. the Industry of one,
the Modesty of another, the Liberality of a third, etc. for nothing can so much
rejoice thee, as the Resemblances and Parallels of several Virtues eminent in
those that live with thee, etc.

Here we may also observe the many Straits and Difficulties he is sometimes put
to in defending his Opinions, what inconsistency of Notions and Expressions he
is forced to use in making out his Assertions, or answering the Objections that
are brought against 'em; so that sometimes his Notions seem to lie across his
Brains, as the Cudgels of his natural Statesmen did to each others Heads. Thus,
when it is objected, That if a Son kill the Father in the state of Nature, he
does him an injury; he answers, That we cannot at any time suppose a Son in the
state of Nature, as being under the power and command of those to whom he owes
his Protection, as soon as he was born. But seeing we cannot suppose the
propagation of Mankind any other way, than by Father and Son, and that there is
a natural obligation incumbent on a Son to his Father, may we not with more
reason say, That there never was, nor could be, such a state of Nature as he
describes, rather than that therein there can be no Son supposed? 2. Though Sons
be under the power and command of those to whom, under God, they owe their
Beings and Preservations, does this take away their Obligations, as Sons? Do
they therefore cease to be Sons, because now they are also become Subjects?
This way of reasoning cannot hold good, unless we supposed Men in the state of
Nature to spring out of the Earth, like Mushromes.

That which at present I would only infer from hence, is a great presumption,
at least, of the falseness of such Principles, seeing Truth always lies so
plain and easy, especially in things of this nature, so consistent with our
natural Apprehensions, and with all other Truths, both natural and revealed,
that it stands not in need of such perplexed ways and methods for its own
defense.

Nor is Mr. Hobbs the only man that has made false representations of Human
Nature; there are also some foreign Philosophers, who have been very obnoxious
in this Particular. Cuperus, in his Arcana Atheismi, 9. and 10. cb. 2. lib.
denies all Natural Knowledge of God, and all Natural Difference betwixt Good
and Evil: And in his Proeme, p. 2, 3. he makes Natural Reason to be
ratiocinatio ex innatis homini affectibus and passionibus legitime deducta: And
this farther account he gives of these Affections, p. 3. Affectus and passiones
Jesus Christi mandatis contrarias, sive quae nos ad ea, quae ipse prohibuit,
sectanda stimulant, per se and sua natura non esse malas, nec expeccato
originali malave consuetudine ortas existimo. These seem but bad Principles for
Human Nature to proceed upon: And as for right Reason, Rectam and sanam
rationem appello ratiocinationes ex claris and apud neminem controversis sacrae
Scripturae sensibus, vel ex expressis verbis in scriptura contentis vel per
legitimam consequentiam elicitas. This indeed is true, but right Reason, in the
just and full nature of it, is of larger extent than arguing merely from
Scripture. And P. Poiret, in his Cogit. ration. de Deo, lib. 3. cap. 10. makes
all the Reasons of Truth and Goodness to depend wholly upon the Divine Decree;
and that nothing is in it self either good or evil, but only as God has been
pleased to make it so, and might also, if He had so pleased, have made it quite
otherwise. These I shall make some short Reflections upon, and leave the fuller
examination thereof to some abler Pen.

I have not had recourse to Scripture, to prove my Assertions, because my
design here is to speak of Man, as guided rather by Reason than Revelation; and
because those I have here to deal with, do more especially appeal thereto: Yet
here I cannot but take notice of the strange Humor of some men, who reject
some things for those very Reasons, for which they ought to receive 'em: thus,
when they are urged with Scripture, they look upon that only as something that
would impose upon their Understanding, and oblige 'em to a blind Obedience, as
if it designed only to erect an arbitrary government over the Minds of Men,
without giving any reason of its Commands. But though they will not give these
Writings the credit and authority justly due to 'em, upon account of their
divine Revelation, yet it would be unreasonable to reject 'em, and the things
therein contained, before they have inquired into the Reasons, and credibility
of 'em; which if they vouchsase to do, I doubt not but, as our Savior said in
another case, If ye believe not me, yet believe my Works: So here, though they
believe not the Scriptures for their authority, yet they will at least be
convinced by the Reason contained in 'em. Thus a learned Prelate of our Church;
Though sacred Authors have little authority with Atheists, speaking as mere
Witnesses, yet when their Testimony is attended also with the highest Reason,
those Reasons must be acknowledged and answered, though the Author be rejected.
Nor do I here insist much upon the authorities even of Heathen Authors, being
willing so far to comply with the Humors of some of the present Age, as only
to appeal to men's unprejudiced Reasons, whether what is here humbly proposed to
consideration be true or no; for, if what is writ by any one be not in it self
reasonable, I know no authorities great enough to make it so: Only, if any
think that the concurrent Testimonies of such Authors may add any strength to
the things here handled, I doubt not, but they, who have been but moderately
conversant in those Writers, may easily furnish themselves with such
authorities from their own reading and observation.

I shall here advertise the Reader one thing further, That whereas I have
frequent occasion of making use of these words, Vice and Virtue, I there take
'em according to the acceptance of our old English Dictionaries, and in the
sense wherein the ancient moral Philosophers formerly took 'em, that is, to
signify much what the same thing with Good and Evil, Sin and Duty, as
supposing 'em founded upon something more sixth and certain than the Custom of
Countries, or the Mode and Fashion of those with whom we do converse.

I should have counted this a needless Advertisement, but that I find the
ingenious Author of the Essay of Human Understanding, p. 158, 159, etc. telling
us, That the measure of what is every where called and esteemed Virtue and
Vice, is his Approbation or Dislike, Praise or Blame, which by a secret and
tacit consent establishes it self in the several Societies, Tribes and Clubs
of Men in the World; so that Virtue is every where that which is thought
praiseworthy; and nothing else but that which has the allowance of public
esteem, is Virtue. And here he quotes Cicero, Tusc. lib. 2. Nihil habet natura
praestantius, quam honestatem, quam laudem, quam dignitatem, quam decus: Which
he says, are all Names for the same thing. But here we may observe, that he
puts Honesty in the first place, then Praise, viz. such as is consequent
hereupon; quam dignitatem, that is, that Dignity of Nature, which is the
greatest Ornament of a Man. The same Author of that Essay has much better
explained the sense of the old Heathen Philosophers upon this Subject, p. 17.
If one of those had been asked, (here, I suppose, the Question should not have
been propounded, as before, Why a Man must keep his word; but rather thus, why
a Man should not break his word) he would have answered, because it was
dishonest, below the Dignity of a Man, and opposite to Virtue, the highest
perfection of Human Nature.

By the Dignity of a Man, I suppose, was here meant the same that Tully meant
by his, that is, the Dignity of Human Nature, considered in it self, not with
respect to the accidentally good or bad Opinion that Men might entertain of it.
But he further tells us, p. 159. That the Exhortations of inspired Teachers
have not feared to appeal to common Repute. Whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there be any
praise, etc. Phil. 4. 8. But the Apostle does not here appeal to common Repute
absolutely, but with a certain restriction and limitation, that Men do not
confound the notions of Good and Evil, whatever things are of good report, with
this Proviso, that there be any Virtue, or any such Praise as is virtutis
comes, then we are to think on 'em.

But then he says, That since nothing can be more natural than to encourage
with Esteem and Reputation that wherein every one finds his advantage, and to
blame and discountenance the contrary; it is no wonder, that Esteem and
Discredit, Virtue and Vice, should in a great measure every where correspond
with the unchangeable Rule of Right and Wrong, etc. But then suppose Men should
so far mistake themselves, as to place their Commondation or Blame on that side
that really deserves it not, (and such a thing may possibly sometimes happen)
would this alter the nature of things, and make Vice Virtue, and Virtue Vice?

Lastly, Though thou do not find in these Papers that profoundness of Thought,
that depth of Reasoning, that may be elsewhere met withal; yet, I hope, what is
here offered is free and natural, easy and obvious, and therefore probably not
less true, but more useful; for I never looked upon Intricacy and Obscurity
either as any certain sign of Truth, or any ways to promote the Benefit and
Advantage of the Reader.

Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP. I.
THE Excellency of the Knowledge of a man's self briefly intimated; Mr. Hobbs's
Interpretation of Nosce Teipsum examined and confuted. The Knowledge of our
selves in six particulars; the possibility of this Knowledge; the certainty of
it; hereby we come to the knowledge, 1. of the Being of God; 2. of the Nature
of God; 3. of the Worship of God.

CHAP. II. Of Man, as compounded of Soul and Body.
A Physical Account of Man, not here intended. The Question stated betwixt the
Stoics and Epicureans. Pride and Ignorance of the true state of Human Nature
justly chargeable upon the Stoics; the Epicureans ascribe too much to the
Body; Epicurean Tranquillity of Mind not true Peace of Conscience: how far
Epicurus chargeable with Atheism: Virtue, according to him, founded upon very
uncertain grounds: Happiness, according to him, impossible: Enthusiasts among
Christians resemble the Stoics among the Heathens: some short Reflections upon
the first and second Chapt. of Tractatus Theol. Posit. concerning Prophets and
Prophecy.

CHAP. III. Of Natural Notions of Truth and Goodness.
Natural Inscription and Divine Revelation, the two great means of preserving
Truth among all the Disadvantages it labors under: Dr. Parker the late Bishop
of Oxford's Opinion, concerning Experimental Observation examined and confuted:
Our Faculties not false: Des Cartes's opinion concerning Eternal Truths
examined: Dr. Cumberland, the present learned Bishop of Peterborough, no direct
Enemy to Natural Notions; some Remarks upon his opinion herein: Some short
Reflections upon the Ingenious Author of the Essay of Human Understanding: Mr.
Norris's opinion examined: That opinion that distinguishes betwixt the Idea's
of the Understanding and the Phantasms of Sense and Imagination, seems no ways
to favor Enthusiasm: Some Remarks upon P. Poiret's Cogitationes Rational. de
Dco, and upon Cuperus his Arcana Atheismi; the one asserting, That there is
nothing good or evil antecedent to the Divine Placitum; the other, that it does
not appear by the light of Nature, that there is any difference betwixt Vice
and Virtue.

CHAP. IV. Of the Being of GOD.
How an Atheist ought in Prudence to demean himself, seeing he cannot be
positively certain, that there is no God: the belief of a God antecedent to all
Atheism: not first invented by Statesmen: the two great Arguments to prove the
Being of God, the Constitution of the Universe, and the general Consent of
Nations: The production of Mankind not the result of blind Chance: No Reason
why the Christian Philosopher should willingly give up that Argument drawn from
the Consent of Nations: Unseasonable Differences among our selves, in the
choice of our Arguments to prove the Divine Existence, so preferring one, as to
invalidate the force of all the rest: Cuperus's opinion herein examined.

CHAP. V. The state of Nature neither a state of Equality, nor a state of War.
A fault in Mr. Hobbs, in not first settling the significations of those words
Nature, Naturally, and by Nature: His Arguments to prove the equality of Men
frivolous and insufficient; those to prove the state of Nature a state of War,
the same: Man a sociable Creature by Nature, not only by Education: Me. Hobbs's
Principles of Politics a mere Hypothesis; and not a good one neither, as
wanting the necessary Qualifications of such a one: Of Self-preservation.

CHAP. VI. Religion the best Foundation of Civil Government.
The nature of Religion in general, in reference to Government: Two
Considerations to prove the consistency of the one with the other: The divine
original of Civil Power: Grotius's Opinion examined: Dr. Donn's Opinion of the
original of Civil Power asserted: Dominion not founded in Grace: not the Honor
or Interest of a Prince to be wicked; against Machiavil: some of his Arguments
answered: Christianity does not depress or effeminate Men's Spirits.

CHAP. VII. Of Moral Virtue.
Virtue in general natural and essential to Man in Innocence: Moral Virtue
distinguished from original Righteousness and Evangelical Holiness; founded in
Nature, not by inspiration from God: Plato's Opinion herein examined: natural
and original Excellencies of Human Nature, in respect of the Soul: the
adventitious Dignities thereof, such as are conferred upon it by Divine
Benignity: their Reasons briesly intimated, who would willingly grant a
possibility of some Heathens being saved.

CHAP. VIII. Some short Observations upon Mr. Hobbs's First Chap. of his
Kingdom of Darkness.
Mr. Hobbs inconsistent with himself in his Discourses concerning Phantasms:
the Church in a proper sense the Kingdom of Christ: Mr. Hobbs's notion of a
Covenant no ways applicable to God Almighty: his Answers to those places of
Scripture, which are commonly brought to prove the Immortality of the Soul, no
ways sufficient. Appendix to the 7th Chapter.

CHAP. I. Of the Nature and Excellency of the Knowledge of a Man's Self.
THE true Worth and Value of a Thing, consists either in its Intrinsic Nature,
or in the Relation it bears to us; either that it is in it self Excellent, or
to us Useful: Now both these meet together in the Knowledge of a Man's Self;
this being that which so nearly concerns us, that no one ought in Honor to be
ignorant of it. Thus those whose ancient Families, or personal Merits, have
Entitled to a Coat of Arms, do usually think themselves bound, at least, to
attain to such a degree of Skill in Heraldry, as to be able to Blazon them. So
would it be a Disparagement to a Man, as such, to be owner of so many and great
Excellencies of Nature, and not rightly to understand them; not to be able to
derive their Descent from their first and divine Original; not fully to know,
and duly to consider that nobleness and generosity of Action, which even his
Order obliges him to.

Now since there is no more effectual Way or Method to recommend a Thing truly
Excellent, than only fully to explain it; I shall therefore show wherein the
Nature of this Knowledge of a Man's Self consists.

Mr. Hobbs in his Introduction to his Leviathan, has justly found fault with
those, who so understand that saying, Nosce te ipsum, As hereby either to
countenance the barbarous State of Men in power toward their Inferiors, or to
encourage those of a low Degree, to a saucy Behavior to their Betters: But
then whether he has been as happy in assigning the true meaning of it himself,
as he was in observing the salse Interpretation thereof in others, may be
justly doubted: his Interpretation is this; This, says he, teaches us, that
from the Similitudes of Thoughts and Passions of one Man, to the Thoughts and
Passions of another, whosoever looks into himself, and considers what he does,
when he thinks, reasons, opines, hopes, fears, etc. and upon what Grounds, he
shall hereby read and know, what are the Thoughts and Passions of all other Men
upon the like Occasions.

Now this Explication of his seems liable to this Inconvenience, that it makes
each Man in particular the Rule and Measure of Humane Nature in general, by
attending to the Grounds and Reasons of his own Thoughts aed Passions, to judge
the very same of all others; so that according to this, Humane Nature must
appear to the World, according to the false Notions or vicious Affections of
those who represent it; according to the accidentally good or bad Dispositions
of those who undertake to give an account of it. Thus, because the blood-shot
Eye of one Man's mind represents all things in red Colors; therefore must
Cruelty be the immediate and universal Dictate of Nature. It Is true indeed, in
the very next Sentence he adds: I say, The Similitude of Passions which are the
same in all Men; Desire, Fear, Hope, etc. Not the Similitude of the Objects of
the Passions, which are the Things desied, feared, hoped, etc. For these the
Constitution individual and particular Education do so vary, and they are so
easy to be kept from our Knowledge, that the Characters of Man's Heart are
legible only to him, who searches the Heart. But how can we possibly gather
the Similitude of other Men's Thoughts and Passions from our own, without any
relation they bear to their respective Objects; for from the consideration of
our Thoughts and Passions abstracted from their Objects, we could only inser
the Similitude of ours with other Men's, merely as bare Acts and Operations of
the Soul; that is, that the Soul in its respective exercise of its Thoughts and
Passions, acts or suffers after the same manner in all Men: but now this would
be nothing to his purpose. But surther, when he says, Whoever looks into
himself, and considers what he does, when he thinks, opines, hopes, fears, etc.
and upon what Grounds. Now how can a Man consider upon what Grounds and Reasons
he desires, or fears, without respect to the Objects of those several Passions;
for Men desire or fear, either because the Things desired or feared, are really
good or bad for 'em, or at least apprehended as such: Nor can any just or full
Account be given of our Passions abstracted from their Objects. So that Mr.
Hobbs, by his seemingly distinct stating of the Question, takes only the
greater pains to blunder the whole Matter. But to return:

This Knowledge of our selves includes in it these following Particulars:

1. It includes the Knowledge of our selves, as consisting of two distinct
Principles of Soul and Body, together with a right understanding of the Nature
and Properties of both.

2. A right understanding of the mutual Relations and respective Influences,
that each has upon the other by virtue of their Union: Hence are we taught not
to mistake the brisker Motions of the Blood, or a more slorid temper of Body
for the Influences of the holy Spirit; nor the more black melancholy temper of
Mind, sor a severe and religious Reservedness, with some; or for the Frowns of
the Almighty, or the Testimonies of the Divine Displeasure against us, with
others.

3. It includes in it the true Knowledge of our Original Perfections, and how
far they are impaired by the Fall, both what God made us at first in the state
of Innocence, and what we have now made our selves by our Sins.

4. The Knowledge of the right use of our Faculties, as also a due
consideration of the Ends, for which God gave us such Souls, and a due care of
acting in Conformity thereunto.

5. It consists in a just and due regard and reverend esteem of our Selves, not
such as is the result of Pride, or the Thus Simplicius prays, that be may be
mindful of this Nobility of Nature.
affectation of Popularity; but in a true virtuous Care of doing nothing
unworthy the Dignity of our Natures.

6. It implies a due consideration of those Relations we stand in to God, our
Selves, and Others, so as that we may lead a fober, righteous and holy life in
this present World.

Now, that which further speaks the Excellency of this Knowledge, is, That it
transcends not the ordinary Capacities of a finite Understanding, nor
discourages us with the Difficulty, much less with the Impossibility of the
Thing; the Knowledge of God, so far as he has any ways made known himself to
us, and the Knowledge of our Selves in the utmost extent of it: This God has
made our Duty, and therefore has not placed it out of the compass of those
Powers and Faculties which he has given us. Not but that there are some Things
in this lesser, as well as in that greater World, which are above our
Knowledge, viz. The Mode of the Union of our Soul and Body; whether our Souls
praeexist, or no, etc. But these few Things which are unknowable, ought not to
discourage us in the search of those Things we may know, especially in Things
of a more practical Concernment: only here we may consider, That those Natural
Mysteries of Humane Nature, if I may so call'em, may be made use of to teach us
Modesty and Submission of our Understandings in Things of a more Divine
Concern. Thus even Philosophers tell us, That God on purpose constituted some
unsolvable Difficulties in Nature, to teach men not over-highly to value their
own Understandings.

2. This Knowledge of our Selves is founded upon surer Principles, than any
other Study Men commonly give themselves unto, particularly than those two
famous Mistresses of most Men's Courtship, Philosophy and Philology: as for
Philosophy, though, I believe, that it has arrived at as high a degree of
Perfection in this Age, as in any known Age of the World; (and it is to no
purpose to talk of what might possibly be in those other, of which we have no
History, no Records remaining;) yet it may be justly questioned, Whether Truth
it self was ever yet pulled out of that Pit, in which the Ancients placed it,
considering the several Hypotheses now extant in Philosophy, each embraced with
equal eagerness, and as their respective Followers think, with equal appearance
of Reason: And Philology, that labors under these two Disadvantages, that it
is commonly founded upon no better Grounds, than mere Conjecture and
Probability; so that it must be great good Fortune, if its Archers chance to
hit the Mark.

2. The Subject Matter of those Enquiries are many times of such small
Concernment, that it is no great matter whether they do or no: only both these
are then best employed, when they are made use of to explain or consirm some
moral or divine Truth.

3. The Knowledge of our Selves does naturally load us to the Knowledge, 1. Of
the Being of God. 2. Of the Nature of God. 3. Of the Worship of God.

1. Thus we come to the Knowledge of the Being of God, in as much as at first
he stamped such lively Characters of Himself upon our Minds, as speak their
Author: Thus both Reason and Religion tell us, That God did not leave himself
without a Witness either in the greater or lesser World. I know there are some,
who deny any such Natural Notions or Idea's at all, and particularly, this of
God; but I hope the contrary hereof, in the Sequel of the Discourse, will
appear both piously and rationally credible. God at first Created us after His
own Image or Similitude; more especially in respect of the intellectual and
moral Endowments of the Mind: Now this seems most naturally to suppose
something actually existent in the Soul, wherein this Similitude or Resemblance
should consist, and not only in a bare capacity or possibility of the Thing
afterward.

And by reslecting upon these, we come to the Knowledge of him, whose Image and
Superscription they bear: Thus do we sometimes more perfectly behold the Sun,
by looking downwards into the Water, than we can possibly do with a direct Eye.

I shall not here enter into a particular examination of that Argument; How far
the Idea or Notion of God in our Minds does prove his real Existence: This
being already so excellently done by the Learned Bishop of Worcester, in his
Orig. Sacrae, and by Dr. Cudworth in his Systeme, etc.

Only we may observe, That since Moral Arguments do not, as Mathematical ones
do, force Assent; but suppose certain Dispositions of the Subject, upon which
their Prevalency does in a great measure depend: therefore I conceive, the
persuasive force of this Argument, is greater to a sober and considerate Person
within himself, than perhaps it will appear to others: For that which is very
apt to prevail with such an one, is to consider, how agreeable this Notion of a
Deity is to all his Faculties, how consistent with all those Principles of
Truth and Goodness, which he any ways finds lodged in his Soul: So that from
the Consonancy of these, how they mutually defend and support each other; nay,
how there could scarce be any Notions at all either of Truth or Goodness,
without the supposition of a God: Hence a considerate and ingenuous Person is
much more consirm'd in the belief of the Thing. Thus D. Carts was more fully
persuaded of the Truth of his Philosophical Principles, because they were so
consistent with the present Phenomenon of Nature, and gave such easy Solutions
of 'em.

2. From the Knowledge of our Selves, we come to the Knowledge of the Nature of
God, for we are conscious to our selves of some Actions; viz, Those of
Cogitation, beyond the power of Matter to perform, and therefore to be ascribed
to some Being of greater Excellencies and Perfections, than mere Matter is
capable of, that is, to a Spirit. Hence we infer, first, the Immateriality of
our own Souls, and then the Spirituality of the Divine Nature; because what
ever real and absolute Perfection we find in our selves, that in the highest
degree must we attribute to God. Here I shall first prove the Immateriality of
our own Souls; and then make good the Consequence; when from thence we infer
the Spirituality of the Divine Nature. 1. The Immateriality of our own Souls,
or what is the same, that Matter cannot think; and this one would almost think
a needless undertaking, to prove that which the common sense of Mankind does
generally agree in; that being a thing in a great measure self-evident, it will
be the more difficult, by any other Argument, to prove it. The most effectual,
if not the only way to do it, is to show the strange and absurd Consequences
that would follow from the contrary Assertion. There seems no greater Argument
against the possibility of Matters thinking, than the unsuccessfulness of their
Attempts, and the improbability of their Ways and Methods, who have gone about
to explain it. First, They grant that Matter it self, unless so and so
modified, cannot think; and it is altogether unconceivable, how either the
tenuity of the Parts, or the most vigorous Motion should add to it any
principle of perception, which otherwise of its own nature it was destitute of:
nor is it rendered the more intelligible, by placing, as Mr. Hobbs does, the
Nature of it in Re-action, this being only such a particular kind of motion,
with respect to the terms a quo, and ad quem; as if Reflection in the Soul,
which is an inward consciousness to our selves of our Thoughts and Actions, was
the same with, or could be any ways explained by Re-actoin or Reflection in
Matter. I might as well argue thus, That because Angulus reflectionis est
aequalis angulo incidentiae: Therefore if Matter cannot think in its direct,
neither can it in its reflected motion.

Nor is it any ways conceivable, how senseless Atoms should grow into greater
Wits, only by jumping and running their heads against one another: nor will
Organization any whit help the matter: for suppose a Company of plenipotentiary
particles sent from the material Universe to the no less material Sovereign the
Soul, to treat about some grand astairs of State; these while they rid on
briskly in a direct Road, might perhaps have their heads full of Intrigues, and
Politics: but then when they came into those many cross Ways, which they must
necessarily meet withal in Organized Bodies, they will then probably either
lose themselves, or forget their Errand; and when they came to Court, find
their heads fraught with nothing, but some certain cross questions, which they
picked up by the way.

Further, It would be very hard, for the Patrons of this Mechanic Hypothesis
to assign the respective Modes of action and re-action to the several modes of
Cogitation; what kind of Motion it is that causes assent, what dissent; what
kind of agitation of the particles is required to cause understanding, and how
distinguished from that of the Will: and then supposing that after a great deal
of ill placed pains, they compass their designs, and be able to solve all the
modes of cogitation, as Des Carts has all the variety of Colors, only by the
various motions, figures and disposition of the particles; besides the
improbability of the thing, it can never arrive at greater certainty, but that
whatever way they pitch upon, we may, with as good reason, assign the just
contrary. Now seeing, according to this Hypothesis, Assent and Dissent,
Affirmation and Negation, etc. must consist in such a respective motion and
agitation of the particles; how can any one secure himself or others, that a
saction of the dissenting Particles (for Example) or such a motion, as causes
dissent, may not rise up, when the nature of the thing requires the contrary
assent; and by this means erect a Babel in Man, and bring all into confusion.

Further, If Cogitation consist only in the various motion and disposition of
the Atoms, then Phaeton might possibly produce a greater and more undoubted
Deity out of his flaming Chariot, than that of his Father Phoebus. If this
Hypothesis be true, then Ex quovis ligno fiat Mercurius, and the Chair may be
as infallible, as he that sits, in it; and this perhaps might gratify some Men
in the World, all other methods failing, thus to solve Infallibility by
mechanic Principles. Pardon me, if in a ferious argument I thus seem to
trifle, seeing, those I have here to deal withal, first taught me the way. For
herein they seem rather to give an Essay of their own extravagant Fancies, than
to persuade others, that they themselves believe their own Assertions. But to
return.

These Men must either assert, That there neither is, nor can be any such thing
as Spirit in the World; or if there be, that it is impossible for such a being
to cogitate; neither of which will they be ever able to prove. As for the being
of a Spirit, they do indeed, with as much strength of confidence, as weakness
of Reason, tell us, that the Notion thereof includes in it a Contradiction;
though this they do not as much as attempt to prove any other way, than first by
supposing a material Universe, and that nothing but matter is contained in it.
But this is to beg, not prove the Question.

But the Essences of things being unknown, the Notion of a Spirit seems as
obvious and intelligible, as that of matter: for we may as easily conceive of
one thing, to which we attribute cogitation, as its immediate property; as we
do of another, to which we ascribe extension and impenetrability. And then
supposing a Spirit, Cogitation seems the natural result of such a being; Though I
do not here go about to explain the particular way and manner, how Spirits
think; for it is hard to conceive, how their own Native penetrability, or the
reduplication of themselves upon themselves does any ways explain the manner of
Cogitation. We must satisfy our selves with this which is as far as our most
exact Searches will extend to, That first and immediate properties are not
demonstrable of their Subjects, neither as to the things themselves, nor as to
the modes.

Indeed Sharron, in his Book of Wisdom, lib. 1. chapter 7. tells us that Spirits
and Devils, according to the opinion of all Philosophers, and our greatest
Divines, are corporeal: Here he cites Tertullian, Origin, St. Basil, Gregory,
etc. The Names he mentions, but not their Assertions, or the Places, where they
say so: But this being a general accusation, we may as easily deny it, as he
assert it. But as for those places which perhaps may seem to favor his
assertion, I doubt not but they may, and have already received easy Solutions
from one of these general considerations: 1. That either they asserted the
opinion of the Platonists, who yet were no favorers of an universal
corporeity, viz. That Souls were never in a perfect State of Separation from
all Body, but had certain etherial Vehicles; and so in that respect might
partake in some Sense, of a Corporeal Nature. Or 2. He does not rightly
interpret those places of the Fathers, where perhaps sometimes body or matter
may be ascribed to the Soul or Angels: but then by Body, there, is to be meant
nothing but Substance or Essence. So that their Sense was good and orthodox,
though their Expressions might be liable to exception: and yet, I think, it is
only Tertullian that expresses himself in that manner.

The said Sharron goes on and tells us, That Whatever is Created, being
compared with God, is gross, corporeal, material; and only God incorporeal. I
would willingly here be so charitable, as to think that such was his awful
respect and veneration of the Divine Essence, that he would not easily grant
any thing else to partake of the same generical nature. Far be it from me to
speak any thing, that may in the least derogate from the excellency of the
Divine Essence; only we may consider, that it is no honor done to that, to
depress other things below that just Order wherein God has placed them. This
seems but a piece of Will Worship, and something like the Opinion of those, who
think they cannot sufficiently magnify God's love to some, unless they
absolutely damn all the rest: thus also, as if we could not sufficiently
magnify the Spirituality of the Divine Nature, unless we dispose all other
beings into the rank and Order of Corporeity. 2. Though I do not assert this,
yet I would propound it to consideration, whether it may not be possible for
the nature of a Spirit to admit of degrees of excellence, as to the very
Essence and Substance thereof: and not only in respect of its more accidental
perfections; yet so, as that which we suppose of the lower order, to be
perfectly Spiritual, and contain nothing of Corporeity in it: and perhaps the
Logicians meant this, when they called God Super-Substantia.

But he says further, if it appear, That Spirits change their place, the very
change shows they are moveable, divisible, subject to time, and the successions
thereof, etc. Which are all qualities of a Body. But here I would only ask,
Whether the existence of a Spirit be possible, or whether God could have
created such a being, or no? If he could, then his argument proves nothing: for
supposing such a being, it must move, and be in a place just in such a manner,
as we now suppose Souls and Angels to be and move: and the argument would have
the same force, if we either supposed, or were on all sides assured of the
actual being, that it has now. So that it either proves the impossibility of a
Spirit, or else nothing at all to the purpose; this being only such an
objection or such a difficulty, as would lie against an acknowledged truth.

I should now Secondly show, how from hence we justly infer the Spirituality of
the Divine Nature. But I shall not need to spend any time herein: for though
there have been some, who, granting the immateriality of the Divine Nature,
have yet asserted the Corporeity of the Soul; yet there never was any, who
granting the Soul to be immaterial, ever asserted God to be Corporeal. As for
those who assert a material Universe, and a Corporeal Deity, they may perhaps
nomine ponere, but indeed they do re tollere Deum. For a Corporeal Deity is
inconsistent with the Notion we have of God, incapable of the Perfections we
ascribe to him, and unable to perform such actions as do properly belong to
such a being: But however those, who thus suppose a Corporeal God, do also
suppose a Corporeal Soul.

Thus from the Knowledge of our Selves we come to the Knowledge of the Divine
Nature.

3. From hence also we come to the Knowledge of the true Nature of the Divine
worship, that seeing we consist of Soul and Body, therefore must we offer both
to God, as our reasonable Service for external Solemnity; and outward
performances are not to be excluded out of the Divine Worship.

First, Because those immoderate pretenses to Spirituality are either the
natural causes, or necessary results of Enthusiasm and Fanaticism.

Secondly, By excluding those outward decent Testimonies of our inward Devotion
toward God, we give occasion of Scandal to Heathens and those that are
without; for they would be apt either to entertain low and mean thoughts
themselves; or at least think that we did so, of that God, whom we, for ought
they perceived, did so rudely worship. But then on the other hand, we must have
a more especial regard to the Soul, for without this, all our other
performances are nothing but mere formality and hypocrisy.

CHAP. II. Of Man, as compounded of Soul and Body.
WHAT was the State and Condition of the Soul before its Union with the Body,
whether it enjoyed any State of Praeexistence, or was then first created, when
first put into the Body; or if it did praeexist, then in what manner, whether
in a pure separation from all matter, or in conjunction with an etherial
Vehicle, is not my design here to examine: only it is observable, that in things
of this Nature, where inclination rather than any cogent Reasons of belief take
place; in things where Providence has not thought fit to give us a certain or
determinate truth of things, there Men are usually determined to this or that
side of the question, by very accidental considerations (as in this case of
Praeexistence) by the more or less favorable apprehensions they may have
received of the Platonic or Peripatetick Philosophy; or by those previous
notions they have entertained of Providence, to which they think this or that
Opinion may seem more agreeable.

Nor, Secondly, shall I consider Man in his Natural or Physical capacity; that
which I here design being an Essay of Moral or Political, rather than of
Natural Philosophy: I shall not here enquire into the more explicable modes of
Sensation or Intellection; much less shall I attempt to explain those natural
Mysteries of Humane Nature, viz. The particular mode of the Souls union with
the Body: being discouraged therefrom, by the difficulties of the thing, and
the unsuccessful attempts of some who have endeavored to effect it.

Claubergius has a discourse particularly de conjunctione Anime and Corporis;
but whether he has left it any whit more plain and intelligible than he found
it, I shall submit it to the judgment of those, who will take the pains to
peruse it. His way is this, The Soul, says he, is united to the Body by those
mutual actions, that pass betwixt 'em; but more especially by those more
confused operations of sense, and by the less distinct perceptions of mind. And
in his 37th chap. he tells us, that homo alius alio, and idem seipso, diver so
tempore, magis minusve homo censeri debet: For according to him, the
denomination of a Man, as such, consists chiefly in such an union of the Soul
and Body, which is more especially performed by the operations of Sense. Now I
see not, why that especially should denominate us men, wherein we come the
nearest to the nature of Brutes: nor is there any reason why a Contemplative
Person, one who enjoys a more quick and lively exercise of his higher
faculties, why such a one should not be counted as much, yea more a Man, than
he that lives more by sense. That the Soul does make use more especially of the
Body and Bodily representations in these actions of sense, is very true; but if
we enquire farther how it is joined to the Body even in these more confused
operations, the difficulty would perhaps still return.

Nor shall I here dispute, whether the Soul immediately upon the dissolution of
the whole Frame, or of the more principal Parts of the Body, does thereupon by
its own activity quit its station, and launch into those other unknown Regions:
or whether besides this, there be not also required (which seems as probable)
as immediate an act of God, to take it out, as there was to put it into the
Body: only we may observe, that God, both by the light of Nature and his
revealed Law, has made the union of the Soul and Body so sacred, that it now
becomes absolutely unlawful for us, by laying violent hands upon our selves, to
separate those, whom God has thus strictly joined together; that whatever
natural tie it is under, as to the Body, it is certain it ought not to quit its
Station, without a lawful Warrant from its great Commander.

I shall here rather state the question betwixt the Stoics and Epicureans, and
show their several errors and mistakes on either hand: the one by ascribing too
little to the Body, and too much to the Soul; the other by attributing too much
to the Body, and too little to the Soul, in the Accounts they give of humane
Nature. The Stoics would make Man so wholly rational, that they will scarce
allow him to be sensible, and would wholly exclude all natural affections and
bodily passions out of humane Nature: and the Epicureans on the contrary, make
all the most noble Actions of the Soul merely subservient to the designs of
such Pleasure, as is really below the true happiness of the Soul. By the Body
here I understand all those passions and affections of the mind, which belong
to Men more immediately upon account of the Body, all those motions and
inclinations of the inferior appetites, so far as they are natural.

The Design therefore of the Stoics to root these Passions out of Humane
Nature, is, First, impossible: Secondly, it would be prejudicial thereunto,
were it feisible; for these when duly regulated, become the subject matter of
moral Virtue, and also add Vigor and Wings to the Soul in its pursuits of
Virtue.

Among the many charges brought against Stoicism, that of Pride and Arrogance
seems the most obvious, and the most unanswerable, it naturally tending to
beget such haughty thoughts of ones self, as are indeed inconsistent with the
State and Nature of a frail and depending Creature.

What a prodigious thing do they make their Wise Man, far above any thing that
is called Mortal, and in some respects equal to God himself. As for Repentance,
they look upon that as a mean thing, far below the height of their seize.
Innocence indeed is better than Repentance, but for them to pretend unto it,
argues a great deal of Pride, founded upon a bad understanding of their own
State. But this description which they give of a Wise Man, is of some thing
which perhaps they may fancy in their minds, but not of any thing really extant
in Nature. These were their undoubted opinions and apprehensions herein; but
whether their own natural Pride of temper, was the cause of these their
extravagant opinions; or whether some other false Scheme of Principles, which
they had entertained, had in some sort betrayed 'em into this excess of
self-conceit, I shall not here determine.

Though perhaps the ignorance of a future state of Rewards and Punishments after
this life, joined with their attempt to give an account of that great question,
which so much puzzled the Heathen World, Cur bonis male, and malis been. This
perhaps might, in some measure, oblige 'em, being not fully assured of a future
State, to entertain such false opinions of Man's self-sufficiency; so placing
all things within his own power, that he needed not to be beholden to any other
assistance, but from himself; or to any future expectations to make him happy.

As for the calamities that befall Men here in this Life, they no ways alter the
case in reference to happiness or unhappiness: for those, they say, only reach
the Body, which, according to them, has no nearer relation to the Soul, than
their Clothes have to it.

Thus the Stoics placed their happiness, where some sort of Phanaticks among
us place their Holiness, merely in the inward Man, without any regard to the
outward: as if we could be either Happy or Holy, without any respect at all to
one of the essential Parts of our Constitution; as if the inward Man of the one
could be holy in the midst of all outward Debaucheries; and the inward Man of
the other happy in the midst of bodily torments. Thus though we grant the Soul to
be the Sovereign, yet the Body may justly challenge the Liberty of the Subject.

The other Sect of Philosophers, who have erred in the other extreme, is that
of Epicurus, who attributes too much to the Body: But this, may some say, is
too favorable an expression; when as indeed he does destroy both all Soul in
Man, and excludes God out of the World. But my charge here does not rise so
high, it is sufficient for my purpose, what is generally granted by all, that
in the account he gives of Man, the Body is too predominant; and the indolency
of the Body, seems far to surpass the tranquillity of the mind. For it cannot
be made appear, That Epicurus by his tranquillity meant that peace of
Conscience and Serenity of Soul, which is the result of a Virtuous and Holy
Life; but only that quiet of mind, in opposition to the disturbance of
business; or those perplexities of mind, which may arise either from Bodily
Distempers, or some secret fears and jealousies. Now if that peace and comfort
of a good Conscience, in the sense before described, be not meant by
tranquillity of mind; then though perhaps the word may sound well, yet indeed it
falls short of the true and real happiness of the Soul, and rises little higher
than the concerns of the Body. We do naturally either make our selves, in some
measure, like him whom we worship; or we fancy him, whom we worship, like our
selves. Thus Epicurus placing the happiness of the Deity in an idle unconcerned
freedom from business, did hence probably assert ours to consist in the same;
or else being first strongly persuaded of the excellency of the thing, and
being mightily pleased with the agreeableness thereof himself, did thence
ascribe it also to the Deity, as that wherein all happiness both Humane and
Divine did consist.

It is indeed unreasonable and uncharitable to urge the consequences of an
opinion upon the Author, when he does expressly deny those consequences to be
his opinion: yet, I think, that he that in words acknowledges a God, and yet
his Principles are such, as are generally embraced by real Atheists; such an
one is not capable of any just Apology. For there is not the same Reason of all
consequences; some are next and immediate, others are distant and remote: these
of the last sort ought not to be urged upon the Author of the opinion, but
those of the former may.

That Epicurus did assert the Being of God, and entertained great and
honorable thoughts of his Nature, is very certain, as appears out of Diog.
Laertius. So that none so charge him with Atheism, as if he did not in words
acknowledge a God: that which is here asserted is this, that that opinion of
God, which flatters him with high and honorable thoughts concerning himself,
his own intrinsic excellencies, his own happiness and immortality, which yet
are but irrespective Attributes, such as bear no relation to us; and in the
mean time to assert, that he no ways concerns himself at present, nor will
hereafter take any notice to punish or reward Humane Actions. This notion of
God lays no Obligation on a Man to holiness of Life, or Obedience to that God,
whom in words he thus admires; and is such a Notion of God, as even an Atheist,
provided he be not a perfect Mad Man, ought to assert: both because perhaps it
may some ways tend to still and quiet the clamours of natural Conscience, and
also as it is safe and customary in respect of those with whom he lives. For we
never yet heard of a Kingdom or Commonwealth of Atheists, such as make it
their business positively and openly to assert and defend the Opinion of
Atheism.

But here it is replied, That whatever his Principles were in themselves, or
what ever bad use others might make of them; yet that he for his part, was a
severe practiser of Virtue and Religion. But it may be justly questioned,
whether the joint belief of a Corporeal God and a mortal Soul had ever any good
influence upon an holy Life. But suppose Epicurus in general to be a very
Virtuous and Pious Person, and that those contrary imputations of Vice and
Luxury were mere Scandals cast upon him by the Stoics; yet we must consider
how far, and upon what grounds, and for what ends he thus led a virtuous life:
Now it does not appear, that it was any further than only in order to a
pleasant Life; and though it is true, that Religion and Virtue are the most proper
means in order to this end; yet it is not probable, that he so understood his
own principles, nor indeed were they capable of being so understood. For
supposing that there lies no obligation upon us to any duty any further than as
it promotes a pleasant Life, in that sense wherein he takes it; it is easily
conceivable how some degrees of Vice may consist with these Principles,
provided that they so partake of this days pleasure, that they do not
incapacitate themselves for those of to morrow. And though he tells us, that the
Gods are delighted with the Virtues of Men: yet this is but cold encouragement
to the practice of the more difficult Duties of Religion, seeing though they do
so far take notice of Men's virtuous actions, as therewith to delight
themselves; yet not so far, as for the sake thereof, to reward the Men.

So that if Epicurus was virtuous beyond these degrees, that we must impute to
the Man, rather than to the Philosopher; rather to his virtuous temper, than to
his principles: So that whatever he was, as to his own person; yet, I believe,
his followers made but right consequences from his false principles, when they
inserr'd, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye.

Nor can the particular excellencies of some of that Sect be any just
vindication of any false principle or wicked practice in the first Founder of
it; any more than Alexander's great Courage and Conduct in War can be made use
of, as an argument to prove the truth of his Master Aristotle's opinion,
concerning the Eternity of the World. Marcus Antoninus was as great an example
of all natural and moral excellencies in the Sect of the Stoics, as any other
could possibly be in the Sect of the Epicureans; and yet in respect of any ones
particular endowments being able to vindicate an error in his Founder, we may
say here, as it was proverbially said of a desperate and ruined state, Ne
Marcus quidem. --

And whereas it is said, That Epicurus took great satisfaction at his Death, by
reflecting upon his Life and his (I suppose Physiological) Inventions; the
greatest invention that he seemed remarkable for, was his solving the liberty
of the Will merely by the motion of senseless Atoms declining uncertainly from
the Perpendicular: now this seems no such pious invention, as to take such
solid comfort in at his Death.

I shall here only add these two general Observations.

First, That Virtue, according to his principles, must be founded on very weak
and uncertain grounds and reasons, especially as to the more difficult duties
of an holy Life; they being at present both unpleasant and afterward
unrewardable. So that if the Epicureans did give themselves to the practice of
such Virtues, out of an absolute sense of Duty, or from the consideration of
the excellency of the thing it self; then were they the most Heroickly
Virtuous, not only of any sort of Philosophers, but also of any other People in
the world: for then were they virtuous without either hopes of reward, or fear
of punishment. Besides, I know not what motions such men can have, according to
those principles, to return to the Practice of an holy Life; who, by a constant
and habitual course in a well regulated extravagance, have made such a degree
of Vice easy and pleasant to 'em.

Secondly, Happiness, according to Epicurus, is impossible: for he founds it in
an impossible condition, in rooting out all fear of Death and all doubtful
suspicions that may succeed it. Now the hopes and fears of future good and evil
are anticipations so implanted in us, that the rooting them out, is a thing
absolutely impossible: now he tells us, that we cannot attain sincere pleasure
without Physiology; that is, I suppose, such an Hypothesis of Natural
Philosophy as his own, which excludes all Divine Providence out of the World,
and takes away the immortality of the Soul; Neque prodesset aliquid humanam
sibi parare securitatem, cum superna, and quae sub terra sunt, suspecta essent;
Diog. Laert.

Now what the Stoics were among the Heathens, that, in some resemblance, are
the Enthusiasts among Christians: and then as for the Epicureans, we have a
sort of Men amongst us, who cannot be said so properly to resemble 'em, as
really to be the same.

Now whereas the great design of the Gospel was to root out sin, and plant the
most exemplary Virtue and Piety in the World; the Enthusiasts, instead of this,
make the design thereof, to consist in something, pretendedly, above it.

As First, In a Pompous set of high flown Notions, and speculative Truths, as
if the Sun of Righteousness came only to enlighten the understanding; but not
either to regulate the Will, or warm the Affections: as if it was enough to be
seraphical in our understandings, though in the mean time our Wills be vicious
and irregular. Though this is not so to be understood, as if it was indifferent
for us, what we believe, provided that we be careful and conscientious in the
way we are in. For it is impossible for us to lead a truly good and holy Life,
without a firm belief of the Christian Articles: but then we must not rest in a
bare belief of Truth; for Truth without Practice, becomes not only useless, but
of bad consequence to us.

Secondly, The Enthusiasts place a great deal of Considence in vain pretenses
to Divine Revelation; as if their Souls were the only Seats of the Deity, and
as if they were the only Ministers of State here below, and Heavens great Privy
Counselors: As if God's written Word were only a dead Letter, unless enlivened
by their Interpretations: all which, though different Comments, must be of
greater Authority than the Text it self, not only when they contradict that,
but also one another.

Thirdly, The Enthusiasts entertain such an imaginary Opinion of Perfection, as
states 'em, not only above all Humane, but Divine Laws; as if their Wills and
Actions were the only Rules of Right and Wrong, and that, what ever they did,
was therefore good, because done by them: Thus are they grown such Giants in
Religion, as that they have baffled all checks of Conscience and Obedience to
Laws, which they look upon, as mean and low dispensations, quite to be laid
aside, when once Men arrive at this State of Perfection.

Fourthly, Enthusiasm consists in an illguided Zeal, prodigiously Partial and
Indulgent to those of its own persuasion; but Furious and Cruel to those, who
differ from 'em.

Now as the Stoics pretended by their false Opinions of Humane Nature to be
more than Men; So the Enthusiasts by the like mistakes concerning true
Religion, pretend to be more than Christians: though indeed they both come short
of what they severally pretended to.

Having thus briefly stated the Question betwixt the Stoics and Epicureans, I
shall here further enquire, how far God makes use of the lower faculties of the
Soul in the communications of himself to Mankind. I shall not here go about to
explain the manner, how God now under the Gospel works upon the minds of Men by
the gracious influences of his Holy Spirit; for these may be more happily
experienced, than successfully explained: however I conceive it would be a very
preposterous method to do it by beginning at the lower faculties of the Soul;
for these are not immediately, and in the first place wrought upon, but by the
mediation of an enlightened Understanding, and a rectified Will: and from those
Fountains is Grace and Goodness derived into the Soul. Thus our Remedy is
applied in a way answerable to our Disease, the Corruption and Depravation of
our Nature: Now this consists more especially in these two things, in ignorance
of the Understanding, and impotence and irregularity of the Will: answerably
hereunto in the Restitution of Man; God first informs his Understanding, then
assists and inclines his will by his Grace, and so applys himself to his
inferior Appetites in a way suitable to their Natures, in bringing them under
the Power and Government of Reason and Religion.

I shall here rather enquire how far God made use of the Fancy and Imagination
in the Communications of himself to his Servants under the Law by way of
Prophecy: and this I shall rather do, because of the dangerous Opinions that
some Men have of late vented on this Subject, thereby endeavoring to undermine
the very Foundation of all Divine Revelation, truly so called, For they think,
if they can but once sufficiently disparage the manner of God's revealing
himself to the Prophets under the Old Testament, they will be hereby better
enabled to reject all Divine Revelation under the New. I shall here therefore
make some short reflections upon the Author of Tractatus-Theol. Polit: in his
two first Chapters of Prophets and Prophecy. In Order thereunto I shall
premise, 1st. God in the Communications of himself to Mankind is not tied to
any either Natural or Moral qualifications of the Persons he pleases to make
use of; For what ever is wanting, either as to the vigorousness of the Fancy,
or strength of understanding, God can supply the defects hereof some other way,
or act more immediately by himself in absence of them all. 2dly. Yet
notwithstanding, God commonly makes use of Second Causes, and of Instruments
duly qualified, in order to the effecting his Designs in the World,
particularly in Prophecy. According to the constant Opinion of the Jewish
Doctors, there were certain previous preparatory dispositions in order to it,
and these were of three Sorts, Natural, Acquired and Moral. 1. A good Natural
Complexion and Temper of Body, a due mixture of the Humors, without any
predominancy of Melancholy, a Mind naturally Calm and Cheerful, a Fancy Active
and Vigorous, an Understanding Clear and Strong, without any Crazedness or
Inconsistency. 2. All these improved to the highest Degrees of perfection by
Study and Industry. 3. To these must also be added a virtuous and well-disposed
Temper of Soul, free from all vicious habits and inclinations. Thus the Jews
had their Schools of the Prophets, for the fitting and preparing Young
Scholars, which they called, the Sons of the Prophets, for that employment. Now
this sufficiently shows, that something more than mere Fancy was required to
the Nature of Prophecy; Yet this is not so to be understood, as if Prophecy was
the Natural result of any of these singly, or of all jointly, unless God was
pleased to Communicate himself to some, as he saw fit. For all these who were
brought up in the Schools of the Prophets, did not presently prophecy: Thus
neither the absence of the usual qualifications do incapacitate a Man for
Prophecy; nor does the concurrence of 'em all make one actually a Prophet:
Prophecy, in the formal Notion and Nature of it, being no ways in the power of
Man, but wholly depends upon the will of God. Hence we see, what little reason
the soresaid Author had to say, that though God did make use of the Fancy
sometimes in the conveyance of his Will to the Prophets; yet that Prophecy, Non
nisi open imaginationis persicitur, and a sola imaginatione pendet: and this he
proves no other ways, than because they prophesied. But this is not to prove,
but to beg the Question.

He first makes an injust Comparison betwixt Natural Knowledge and Divine
Revelation, 1. In respect of the Name, and tells us that the one may be called
Divine as well as the other, because they are both derived from the same
Fountain, viz. God. But thus by the same way of arguing he must, and indeed
does assert, That either there are no Miracles at all: or else that all the
effects of Nature are such; because the power of Nature is the Divine Power, as
well as that of Miracles. But in order to either of these, he should first make
good one or both of these Positions, either that God has not an immediate
Power of Acting by himself, distinct from the ordinary course of Nature; or
else, that since the constitution of the Natural Frame of the Universe, he has
not reserved to himself a liberty of Acting according to that Original Power:
neither of which will he be ever able to prove.

2. Suppose Natural Knowledge may also be called Prophecy or Divine Revelation,
in respect of it is Original; yet how can it be called aequali jure, as he says,
Divine: because in other respects, both as to the manner of their conveyance,
and largeness of extent, there is a great deal of difference betwixt 'em:
however why should Natural Knowledge be called Divine Revelation, since Custom
and good Reason have justly affixed them to several things? for he that goes
about to unhinge the signification of Words, which Use and Custom has truly
appropriated to 'em in Divinity, has probably no better design than he that
removes the ancient Landmarks in a common Field, viz. Injury, Disorder, and
Confusion: Though this must be also granted, that Natural Knowledge does bring us
under an Obligation to those respective Duties which it dictates, even
antecedent to that of Divine Revelation. For we are first Men, and then
Christians; and by both these ways God has made known his Will, and claims our
Obedience.

He grants indeed that Humanae Naturae Leges, in se consideratae, non possunt
ejus, i. e. Divinae Revelationis esse causa. Why he should thus mince the
matter, as to insert these Words, in se consideratae, I know not; whereas it is
certain, That the Laws of Humane Nature can be no ways the cause of Divine
Revelation. I know, his meaning here is suspected by some to be this, that the
Laws of Nature, considered in themselves, that is, without the supposal of a
God, which is one integral part of the Universe; so indeed they cannot be the
cause of Divine Revelation: but then supposing a God so interwoven with the
Laws of Nature, as that he shall be either really the same with, or very little
different from the Universe and the Laws thereof, under this consideration, how
far the Laws of Nature may be the cause of Divine Revelation, that is, of that
which he calls such, is the grand mysterious Question.

The other thing wherein he compares Natural Knowledge with Prophecy, is in
respect of certainty, wherein Natural Knowledge, he says, comes no ways short
of Prophetical.

If we consider the certainty the Prophet himself had of those things which
were revealed to him, we are now at a loss how certainly to determine this
Question; for he only could fully assure us of the truth of these things, they
relating to himself: Yet it seems very reasonable to believe, that the
certainty of their Knowledge did not any way fall short of, but rather exceed
that of Natural Knowledge; seeing we may casily suppose, that God may, by the
secret influences of his Spirit, and by the more immediate applications of
himself to the minds of Men, as fully assure 'em of the truth of his
Revelations, as they can be of any thing by any Natural Principles: and that it
really and actually was so, may appear from hence, that those to whom God
conveyed these Revelations, have by virtue hereof undertaken the performance of
such things, which arguments drawn from mere Sense and Reason, in all
probability, could not have persuaded 'em to.

Cum it aque men's nostra ex hoc solo, quod Dei naturam objective in se
continet, and de eadem participat, potestatem habeat ad formandas notiones,
etc. Merito mentis naturam, quatenus talis concipitur, primam Divinae
Revelationis causam statuere possumus. This seems very strange mystical
Divinity: if by Divine Revelation, he mean Revelation truly so called; then it
is altogether unconceiveable how any impressions of Natural and Moral Truths
(and that is all that he ought to understand by those expressions, quod Dei
Naturam objective in se continet, and de eadem participat) How these can any
ways be the cause of Divine Revelation; if by Divine Revelation he mean nothing
but Natural Knowledge, besides the impropriety of the Expression, I do not see
how the Soul can so truly be called the first cause even of that neither, but
rather the first and immediate subject of it. Upon the whole matter, one might
almost be persuaded from hence to think, That by our Souls containing in it the
Nature of God objectively, and partaking of the very same, that hereby he
designed, as it were, to melt down God and the Soul of Man into an equal
constitution, and both into parts of a material Universe.

Then he tells us, that Quicquid dici potest, ex Scriptura sola peti debet:
What ever is said of things relating to Divine Revelation, ought to be fetched
from Scripture alone. This in general is a very good Rule, yet it is to be
understood with some certain limitations, as he himself acknowledges in the
same Paragraph, unless we had rather say, that the latter part thereof
contradicts the former: for he tells us, That the Jews never took any notice of
Second Causes, but did generally recur to God, as the cause of all great and
excellent things they had occasion to speak of. And therefore we must only take
that for Supernatural Revelation, which Scripture expressly says is such, or
what may be gathered to be so, from the circumstances of the Relation.

First, I grant, that God may declare that again, which a Man either by Natural
Principles or some other way knew before.

Secondly, When God makes any Revelation to a Man, it is necessary, that he
should make such a reduplicative Declaration as this, That this which I now
speak, is Pure, Simple, unmixt Divine Revelation, such as exceeds the Power of
Natural Causes to make known? if so, then it may be questioned, Whether God
ever made any supernatural Revelation to Mankind or no; because we no where
meet with any such Declaration. And as to the circumstances of the Narration,
we can never, according to his Principles, from thence gather any thing to be
truly Divine; because, as I intimated before, he makes the Power of God and the
Power of Nature the same; or however asserts, that we are very much ignorant
how far the Powers of Nature may extend. However we may make use of this
assertion, against himself, that if we may argue from the circumstances of the
Relation; then it is not necessary, that whatever is said concerning these
things, should be fetched from Scripture only. It Is easily observable how this
Author, by unsetling the significations of Words, and confounding the Notions
of things, designs to bring all into confusion: he argues much what at a rate
with Mr. Hobbs, that is, weakly, and probably with the same design, that is,
Wickedly. But Providence has so ordered affairs, that a bad Cause should
always be a weak one.

He founds all Prophecy merely in the imagination: hence, he says, it is that
the Prophets conceived all things parabolically, and expressed spiritual things
after a Corporeal manner; because this agrees more with the Nature of
Imagination. Hence it was, that those that were with Christ, saw the Spirit
descending like a Dove; and the Apostles, as it were Tongues of Fire; and S.
Paul, when he was Converted, saw a great light: because all these things did
suit with the nature of Imagination: As if either there was no Foundation in
Nature for any such belief, but only the imagination of Men; or as if these
appearances reached no further than the Fancy, without any Divine Influence,
making any further impressions upon the minds of those who were concerned
herein.

Si igitur sacra volumina percurramus, videbimus quod omnia quae Deus Prophet
is revelavit, iis revelat a fuerunt vel verbis, vel figuris, vel utroque modo.
That all the Prophecies we meet withal in Scripture, were conveyed to the
Prophets by Words or Figures and sensible Representations, or both. I shall
here show First, That this assertion is false. Secondly, If it was true, yet it
would not prove what he thereby designs.

1. It does not appear that all the Divine Revelations in Scripture were
conveyed one of these two ways: There are some instances where there is no
mention made of either of these two; and to say, that one of these was made use
of, though not expressed, this is gratis dictum, and contrary to his own Rule,
That whatever is said of these things, must be drawn from Scripture.

The instances, I mean, are those of Ioseph's interpreting the Dreams of the
Butler and the Baker, and of Pharoah's Dream concerning the Seven Years of
Dearth, etc. Genesis 40 and 41 chap. Now the Interpretation of Dreams, is as much
Prophecy or Divine Revelation as the Dreams themselves; and yet here we do not
find either any Voice or sensible Representation.

Nor are his Reasons any whit more cogent than his Instances: for though he
grants it possible for God immediately to communicate himself to Men, Attamen
ut homo aliquis sola mente aliqua perciperet, quae in primis nostrae
cognitionis fundamentis non continentur, nec ab iis deduci possant, ejus men's
praestantior necessario atque humana long excellentior esse deberet. But I
know no reason, why the Soul of Man is not of capacity enough to perceive and
apprehend the Objects of Divine Revelation, when duly communicated to the
perceptive Faculties, without the assistance of Fancy or Imagination: For this
is certain, and both. Reason and Religion obliges us to believe, That God does
convey his gracious Assistances, by which he both enlightens the Understanding,
and reforms the Will, without the mediation of the Fancy: and it is also very
reasonable to believe, That God did many times, under the Old Testament, convey
the Intimations of his Will to Men, without either Voice or Vision: however
this is certainly done by the Communications of Divine Grace to Christians, now
under the Gospel.

2. Suppose that God always made use of these imaginary Representations, in the
Conveyance of his Will to the Prophets; will it therefore follow, ad
prophetizandum non esse opus perfectiore mente, sed vividiore imaginatione?
Will it therefore follow, that they did tantum per imaginationem percipere?
Will it therefore follow, that they did non nisi open imaginationis percipere?
Though God in the wise methods of his Providence, did make use of second
Causes, will it therefore follow that the whole Causality must be ascribed to
them? Could the Fancy alone, or the Fancy and Understanding together, rightly
judge of the sense and meaning of those Representations, without the further
assistance of Divine Illumination? to assert either of these, would argue him
either a bad Philosopher, or a worse Divine: so that it would be hard to
conceive, how these imaginary Representations, without a more immediate
interpretation of their sense and meaning, would be any thing better than idle
shows and insignificant appearances.

CHAP. III. Of natural Notions of Truth and Goodness.
THere is nothing that affords us more noble or more useful matter, whereon to
exercise our Speculations, than a serious Enquiry into the respective natures
of Truth and Goodness, which are things of so great Excellency in themselves,
and of such near relation to us, that it does not become a Man, a Philosopher,
or a Christian, to be ignorant of either. It Is observed by some, that Pilate
immediately upon his propounding that Question to our Savior, What is Truth?
He went forth, not staying sor an Answer: yet Providence has not left us in
the dark in things of this nature; we have the certain Guides of Reason and
Revelation, as much as God thought fit to impart to us, sufficient to satisfy
all sober, though not overcurious Enquiries, sufficient to all the ends and
purposes of this humane State. Truth, indeed both natural and revealed, has
ever since its first appearance in the World, variously suffered by the
Ignorance of some, and the Malice of others; by the contrary and eager
pretenses of opposite Parties, by the weaknesses and follies of Men, and by the
power and subtlety of the Devil; and especially by that universal deluge of Sin
and Wickedness, which both upon a natural and moral account, is very
prejudicial to the concerns of Truth, both as Vice is naturally destructive of
good Principles, and also as wicked Men are ready to believe (though never so
false) what they think would be their Interest to be true.

Thus if we consider the state of the Gentile World in the first Ages, we shall
there find a very bad face of things. For not to speak of the grossness of
popular Errors, and the no less impious, than false apprehensions of the
generality of the common sort; the most exact Enquiries of their Philosophers
were often false, but always mixed with a great deal of uncertainty in their
Discourses, having commonly a contrary Sect and Company of Men, that whatever
was asserted by one, was many times with as much vigor and equal probability
of reason contradicted by another. So that a sober and serious Enquirer after
Truth, though he might have reason enough not to profess himself a Sceptick,
but to believe that there was such a thing, as truth; yet he might then see too
much cause to despair of ever finding the certain way that led to it, among so
many Bypath of error and uncertainty.

And even now in the Christian World, the many errors in Opinions, and the
more fatal Heresies, of wicked practices, do sufficiently-testify, that Truth
does not enjoy such an undisturbed Empire, as might have been hoped and wished,
since Christ's appearance in the Flesh. Now among all these disadvantages,
under which Truth always labored, and even still labors, Providence has more
especially provided these two ways for the preservation of it. 1. By natural
inscription upon the minds of men. 2. By after revelation for the further
illustration and confirmation of it. And these two are, as it were, the two
Pillars, that have preserved it, both from the deluge of Sin, and the violence
of all other opposition.

1. Natural Inscription. I hope, I shall not need to desire the Reader, not to
impose any such gross sense upon this word, as is inconsistent with the nature
of an Immaterial Soul.

I shall here therefore first briefly explain, what I mean by truth of first
Inscription, or natural Notions: For the Defendant has always leave to state
his own Question, and to declare in what sense he undertakes the defense of it:
this I the rather intimate, because some Men will put such a Sense upon these
words, innate, imprinted or impressed, frequently made use of in this Question,
as none that I know of, go about to defend.

First, I do not here assert the Opinion of the Platonists, concerning innate
Ideas, in all its circumstances: I do not here suppose the Soul to praexist;
nor do I make all the knowledge we have in this state, to be nothing but
reminiscence or recollection of what we knew in the other.

Secondly, These natural Notions are not so imprinted upon the Soul, as that
they naturally and necessarily exert themselves (even in Children and Idiots)
without any assistance from the outward Senses, or without the help of some
previous Cultivation. For thus reason it self, which yet, we say, is natural to
a Man, is not so born with him, but that it requires some supervenient
assistances, before it arrive at the true exercise of it self: and it is as
much as I here contend for, if these notions be in the same sense connatural to
the Soul, as reason it self is.

But Thirdly, The use of our Understandings being first supposed; that is, our
faculties laboring of no natural defect, nor deprived of those other
advantages, that God and Nature have made necessary thereunto, then our Souls
have a native power of finding or framing such Principles or Propositions, the
Truth or Knowledge whereof no ways depends upon the evidence of sense or
observation: thus knowing what is meant by a whole, and what by a part, hence
naturally results the truth of this Proposition, totum est majus sui part,
without being any ways obliged to sense for it. Of this nature are those
universal Propositions, the truth whereof does not depend upon the actual
Existence of any thing; as quicquid agit, est, etc. Now, I suppose, we may
easily discern a difference betwixt the Truth of such Propositions, as these,
and those others, which are brought by some to vie with those natural Notions,
viz. White is not black, Fellowness is not sweetness, etc.

I shall here 1. enquire into the grounds and reasons upon which Dr. Parker,
late Bishop of Oxford, in his account of the Platonic Philosophy, asserts
Experimental Observation to be the great Rule and Measure of Truth: And first
he blames the Platonic Theology for resolving Knowledge into its first and
fundamental Principles. But Knowledge is of a larger extent than that which
relates strictly to natural Philosophy, or what is the object of sensible
Experiment. There is also a Metaphysical Knowledge, a truth of Propositions,
which no ways depends upon Observation; so that, I suppose, when the Platonists
spoke of resolving Science into its first Principles, they only meant such
Knowledge as was capable of such Resolutions: They did not suppose us born with
innate notions of such things, the Knowledge whereof depends upon Experience:
and therefore we ought not to measure the Truth or Falsehood of many late
Inventions, by searching for the respective Ideas of 'em in our Minds. Indeed
as to matters of natural Philosophy, it is a much more certain way of resolving
such Knowledge, so far as can be done, into the testimony of Sense and
Experience, than into any imaginary Principles of Speculation.

But he tells us, That the Mind from particular Observations does make general
Rules, which after an exact Scrutiny, and comparing of every Individual, are
justly admitted for proleptick and fundamental Verities, and that general
Axioms are only the results and abridgments of a multitude of single
Experiments, and that from the plain experience of several Instances, that we
cannot look abroad, but we see the parts always less than the whole. Hence we
gather this Maxim, totum est majus sua part: this indeed is plausible popular
Discourse, but not severely Philosophical. For what if one should come and tell
us, that in a certain place in the East Indies, he found the contrary to his
observation to be true, viz. That the parts there were bigger than the whole: I
know not what we could Answer, in this Case, upon the former Principles; for
according to them, this Proposition, totum est, etc. is true, only, with this
his Proviso, so far as has been yet observed. But now we find in things of
mere Observation, some particulars to contradict what has been before generally
received for true. Besides, I never heard of any general Council or Company of
Men appointed to declare, when particular observations had undergone a
sufficient trial and probation, so that they then might be admitted into
proleptick and fundamental verities; and I conceive, no Man's private authority
is enough to do it. It is very difficult, if it all possible, to convince a
Sceptick; yet are there more strong and probable ways of arguing with him, than
this, which founds all truth upon experimental observation: for thus the truth
and certainty of any proposition can arrive no higher than this, That so far as
is yet observed, it is true. Now this seems only a more ingenuous and
wellnatur'd piece of Skepticism; for the more moderate of 'em will grant truth
of appearance, and tell you, That Snow seems white, but whether it be so or no,
they know not.

But to what purpose, says he, should God imprint such obvious and evident
Notions upon Men's minds? To this I answer, 1. That it must be granted, that it
is at least possible for God to imprint truths upon the minds of Men: and if
so, then it cannot be done any other way, than by making 'em thus plain and
self evident; for we cannot suppose any other way, than by making 'em such, as
do sua luce patere. So that supposing this possible, and supposing God to
reduce this possibility into act, and really and actually imprint 'em; yet the
objection would lie still as strong against 'em, as formerly: So that this is
only such an objection as would ly against an acknowledged truth, which we
commonly say, upon that account, is none at all.

2. He must give us leave to suppose these natural Notions, till such time as
he has evinced the contrary. Now in strictness of Argument, we ought not to
urge the needlessness of imprinting such obvious and evident Notions, against
those, who say that these truths do in a great measure, owe their clearness and
evidence to their being thus imprinted: they are indeed evident from the Nature
of the Thing, and to us evident from the Nature and Constitution of our
Faculties, that we cannot apprehend 'em otherwise.

And as for Observation, that only claims in the Third place -- sic a Jove
tertius haeres. So that the needlessness of imprinting such evident Notions
cannot be argued from their present clearness; because it is their being thus
imprinted or thus connatural to our minds, that makes 'em so.

If it be here replied, That however they would be sufficiently evident merely
by observation; It is not certain, that they would be thus sufficiently so, as
was before intimated. However we have no reason to find fault, if God has given
us more and clearer evidences, than perhaps were absolutely necessary.

But suppose, says he, that we were born with these innate Notions, how shall
we be assured, but that error may be the natural Result of our Faculties?

Here indeed is such a doubt raised, as I see not, how he either gives, or can
give a satisfactory Answer to, according to his Principles. For supposing that
the seeds of error may be the natural results of our Faculties; that is,
Supposing our Faculties may be false, I do not see, how their truth can be
evinced by the most wary and discreet experience: and this, he says, is the
only way, by which to do it. For if error may be the natural result of my
Faculties, that is, If my superior Faculties be false, I may then justly
suspect my lower: If I may be deceived in what, by the most clear and distinct
methods of reasoning, I conceive to be true; I have then little reason to trust
my Senses.

Here I shall further do these two things, 1. Show that the Seeds of Error are
not the natural results of our Faculties. 2. If they were, the most wary and
discreet experience would not at all help us, in our searches after truth and
certainty.

1. It is not possible, that the seeds of error should, etc. in those things,
that we clearly and distinctly perceive to be true; and this will appear,

First, From the nature of Man, as he is a rational Creature: now rationality
includes in it one or both of these two things.

1. Some certain and undoubted Principles, which are to be the Foundations of
Truth and Goodness.

2. However a natural power or faculty of making right consequences, and
drawing necessary Conclusions from true premises, which way soever we come by
'em. Now the possibility of our Faculties being false, is not consistent with
either of these.

Secondly, This further appears from the nature of the divine Attributes: for
considering the excellency and goodness of the Divine Nature, he could not give
us such faculties, as should deceive us in clare and distinct perceptis, as D.
Carts has well observed: for this would argue either weakness or malice in
God; either that he stood in need of such fallacious methods to bring about his
designs, or that he did purposely impose upon his Creatures. All that can be
here pretended, is this, that indeed it would have reslected dishonourably upon
God to have created us so at first, as that error should be the natural result
of our faculties. But then, what if by some offense, either of our own, or of
some other in our stead, this be brought upon us as a just punishment, the
contrary sat to Cassandra, that as she always spoke true, yet never was
believed: so on the contrary, we should always believe our faculties, though
they never spoke true. But those that make this objection, do either believe
the Scriptures, or they do not: If they do, then it must be the Sin of Adam,
that had this malignant influence upon all Mankind. But then by the same
Scriptures we are as fully assured, that the punishment hereof did not extend
so far; as we are, that it did at all descend upon his Posterity. That our
faculties are weakened, and we hereby become more liable to error by Adam's
Fall, is certainly true: but that our faculties are so corrupted, that we are
become incapable of perceiving natural truth, is that which the Scriptures
deny, and what the assertors of Original Sin, in its greatest latitude, do not
affirm.

If they be such as do not believe the Scriptures, yet the objection it self
does suppose a God, that is, a being infinitely Wise, Just and Good. Now upon
this supposal we may easily refute this unreasonable surmise. For this would
introduce such disorder and confusion into the World, as would be inconsistent
with the nature of God, who is a God of Order, to suffer it. According to this
supposal, we could never come to the certain knowledge of our fault, for which
this punishment was inflicted: for if our faculties should any ways acquaint us
with such a thing, what reason had we to think, that they should rightly inform
us in this particular, and be false in all the rest? Nor could we ever come to
the certain knowledge of the means and methods of amendment; for according to
this we ought to act contrary to our reason, in obedience to our Principles, as
supposing the dictates of our faculties to be false: and several other such
like absurdities would follow hence, which would be unworthy of a wise and good
Man to suffer in the World, if it was in his power to help; much more unworthy
of an infinitely wise and good God.

2. If we should once suppose our faculties to be false; I am afraid we should
be condemned to Eternal Skepticism; however beyond the power of the most wary
experience to relieve us. Lastly, he tells us, That the only way to be
satisfied of the truth of these notions, is to examine them by a wary and
discreet Experience: and if so, to what purpose do they serve? for before I
have made trial, I cannot use them, because I have no reason to trust 'em; and
Experience makes 'em useless, because Experimental Knowledge is of all others
the most certain and most indubitable.

To this I Answer, That suppose these natural Notions were not so certain in
themselves, but that they stood in need of some further confirmation by
experience: yet would they not be altogether useless, both as they would
encourage us in our Trials with fair hopes of success; and then afterward when
we found the experiment fully to answer to, and agree with our former
Conceptions, the concurrent testimony of these two Witnesses would more fully
assure us in the belief of those things thus variously attested: though indeed,
it would be very hard to try the truth of some Propositions by Experiment, such
as this, Nihili nullae sunt affectiones, etc.

But here a little more positively to lay down my apprehensions herein, I
conceive that God, from all Eternity, did see and know the natures of things,
and the several Relations they either did, or possibly could bear to one
another: and this is that which some call Ideas in the Divine Intellect, or
objects of the Divine Understanding. Thus what God understands to be either
true or good, that is necessarily so; as a Learned Man expresses it, the Divine
Will and Omnipotence it self has no Dominion over the Divine Understanding. For
if the nature of truth and goodness did wholly depend upon the mere positive
Command of God, and the arbitrary determination of his Will, then could we not
be so fully assured, but that the whole Scheme, both of Truth and Morality,
might be changed, and that which is now Virtue, might afterward become Vice;
and so on the contrary: the very possibility whereof is very unworthy of God,
and inconsistent with that notion, which we have of him. Thus, I conceive,
things are in respect of God. Now in respect of us, he has communicated
something of a Divine Ray, relating both to Intellectual and Moral Notices,
into the very constitution of our humane Nature; something that is both a light
and a law unto us: and this the very Nature and end of such Creatures (as God
designed to make us, that is, Rational and Religious) did require.

I know I must expect to meet with great opposition in the management of this
Argument. I am very conscious to my self of my own inabilities: but I thank
God, I am not conscious of having said any thing against, but, as far as in me
lies, to promote the designs of truth and holiness. -- Veniam petimusque
damusque vicissim.

D. Carles, though he grant Eternal Truths, yet these he only derives from the
Divine Will. God, says he, is not only the Author of the Existences, but of the
Essences of things: and as it was in his power whether any thing had existed or
no; so also their Essences depended upon his free determination, Ep. 37. Part
I. He tells us, that it was equally free sor God at first to have made this
true, that the Lines drawn from the Center of a Circle to the Circumference,
should not be equal. But does not this weaken the force of his own Argument,
drawn from clear and distinct perception: for we do as clearly and distinctly
perceive that the lines in that case should be equal; as we do the truth of
this Proposition, Cogito, ergo sum. If it be here replied, That supposing such
a Constitution of our Natures, as at present we have, then things cannot be
otherwise than now we apprehend them; but if either the srame of our Natures
had been otherwise at first, or shall afterward be changed, then the things
also had been, or may be otherwise. But now the only way to consute such an
extravagant Supposal, is to appeal to Men's more serious and impartial
Thoughts: would not the very possibility of such a thing be very dishonorable
to God? would it not introduce such a Fate into the World, as would also
introduce a necessity of asserting an immoral Deity? Or should we be ever able
to assert and desend the just Rights and Interests of Truth and Goodness upon
this Supposal? So that as before I observed of Experimental Observation, That
the highest degree of Certainty we can arrive at, by that Principle, is only
this, That such or such a Thing, so far as has been yet observed, is true. So
here, though such or such a Thing (I speak now of such as we call universal
Truths) be at present clearly and distinctly perceived to be true, yet at first
it might have been otherwise, and may, for ought we know, be so hereafter: And
what he asserts of speculative Truths, the same also he says of moral Notions
of Good and Evil.

Resp. 6. There Is nothing, neither matter of actual Existence, nor reason of
Truth and Goodness, but what depends upon God: If by depending upon God, he
means dependence upon his Will; so that it was free for God to have made these
Reasons just contrary to what they now are, which seems to be what he there
means, then in this sense they do not depend upon the Divine Will: If by
dependence upon God he means this, That there is nothing either of actual
existence, or reasons of Truth and Goodness, but what owes its being to some
relation it bears to God. This I grant, for even these Rations very and boni,
do owe their Essences to the relation they bear to the Rectitude and Sanctity
of the Divine Nature; these were the proper and necessary Objects of Infinite
Wisdom from all Eternity, and do there only originally exist.

So that perhaps that which seemed harsh to Des Carts, was this, That there
should be any Thing that was absolutely independent of God, which no one here
asserts; only we say, those Rations very and boni depend upon, or consist in
that relation they bear to the Divine Understanding, as the existence of other
things of more indifferency, do upon his Will. Not but that these notions of
Good and Evil have yet received a further impression of their respective
obligations (to perform the one, and avoid the other) from the Divine Will,
that though they were not only therefore good, because God willed them; yet he
has made them now more absolutely and indispensibly so, by adding the
ratification of the Divine Will to their antecedent Natures. Nor can that place
of Genesis, That God saw that all things were good, that is, says he, according
to the determination of his Will; yet granting this, this place cannot with any
just reason, be extended further than the material Creation: so that though
that was therefore good, because God willed so to make it; yet it does not
therefore follow that those Rations very and boni were only so upon the same
account: or if it be extended further than the material Creation, then why may
not things be good, because God knew them to be so, before the determination of
his will?

I do indeed here suppose some kind of distinction betwixt the Divine
Understanding and the Divine Will; and if it be here objected, that there is no
such distinction of these in God, yet I humbly conceive, that we may, in
obedience to our own imperfect modes of conception, conceive of God according
to our best and utmost Capacity; provided that we do not wilfully and
maliciously derogate from the excellency of his Nature. Now it seems more
honorable to God, and more agreeable to those Revelations he has made of
himself in Scripture, to assert, that Good and Evil do not so depend upon his
will, as that he can altar the fundamental Grounds and Reasons of them: though
our highest conceptions cannot answer the excellency of the Divine Nature; yet
certainly we may mediate upon God, without any danger of committing Idolatry,
or dishonouring him in our Thoughts, provided that we act according to the best
of our possibilities.

Dr. Camberland also, the present learned Bishop of Peterborough, seems to be
no great Favourer of these common or natural Notions; though I humbly conceive,
that the design of that great Man, in his Book De legibus Naturae, is not
directly to oppose 'erm: as may appear, 1. if we consider the Persons against
whom he writ, that is, the Epicureans, as he himself asserts in his 5th
Paragraph of his Prolegomena, against whom he thought that way and method would
not be so Argumentative, seeing it was wholly rejected and dehy'd by 'em. Or,
2dly, The times in which he writ: thus in the 4th Paragraph of his Prolegomena,
he chose rather that method there made use of, Hisce saltem temporibus; that
is, in an Age more Philosophically curious and inquisitive, in an Age that
will-not believe any thing, but what comes fairly attested and sufficiently
proved. And lastly, If we consider his own declaration of his Opinion, which he
lays down with the greatest Candor; thus, Non impossible est, ut and nobiscum
nascantur hujusmodi notitiae, and ab extra denuo imprimantur: So that we see,
he does not absolutely oppose these natural Notions, only he thought it more
convenient, in respect of the Persons against whom, and the times and places in
which he writ, rather to pitch upon another method. Thus his design in that
Book, was to show, That the universal practice of Virtue and Piety was not only
our Duty, but our Interest, and so founded the Obligation of the Laws of Nature
in that more universally acknowledged and more generally prevailing principle
of real advantage to our selves. Now this was a design suitable to the
profoundness of his Meditations, very agreeable to the Genius of the present
Age, and indeed every way so noble and generous, that none that are Friends to
Virtue, can with any reason oppose his undertaking; especially considering with
what respect he treats that Opinion, which (though he does not contradict, yet
there) seems less to favor: Thus does he streugthen Virtue there, where it
seems the weakest, and not in the mean time to deprive it of any of its former
assistances, he fortifies it against the new Assaults of its modern Enemies,
and resuses not to join issue with them in a way, wherein they think they have
the most advantage. But yet that first part of his own Assertion, Non
impossible est, ut and nobiscum nascantur hujusmodi notitiae:] This I look
upon as so great a Truth, that I shall beg leave a little further to illustrate
it. As for his Opinion, that these Notices are again imprinted srom without, I
shall not oppose it; only, I humbly conceive, there are such good Reasons for
the former part, that of their being born with us, that it ought not to be
excluded: As 1. This seems more agreeable to the plain simplicity of former
times, and to the less Philosopical Genius of many of those places, wherein
notwithstanding these Laws of Nature were generally received and acknowledged:
and seeing they were so, and that by those who had neither opportunity nor
capacity to enquire more profoundly into the formal Reasons and Causes of them
any further, than as they were conscious to themselves both of their truth and
obligation; hence it seems very probable, that there was some other way by
which they might and did attain to the Knowledge of 'em, without such
Philosophical Disquisitions. And indeed the very attempt to search into the
Causes and Reasons of a Thing seems to suppose that we have at least some
knowledge of the Thing beforehand, as to matter of fact: for Men would scarce
go about to enquire into the Reasons and Causes of the Laws of Nature, if they
had not some consciousness to themselves, that there were such Things in
Nature; and we cannot, for the reason beforementioned, say, that they then
only first came to be known, when the Causes of them were thus searched into. And
though it is true, that the whole Order of Nature duly considered, does
generally conspire to the confirmation of this Truth, that the doing our duty
is the best way to secure our Interest; yet such is the intricacy many times of
Divine Providence, and the visible inequality in the distribution of Rewards
and Punishments in this life, that without the Motives and Encouragements of
some other Arguments, Men would hardly be persuaded to the practice of that, of
which they did not see the present Advantage. And though Vice and Wickedness,
especially in any high degree, do naturally tend to the prejudice of our
Healths, and ruin of our Estates; yet if there were no other way to attain to
the knowledge of our Duty, or of our obligation to it, we might perhaps
sometimes with too much reasos plead ignorance thereof, and might pretend a
liberty to be vicious, at least so far, as might be without any considerable
prejudice to our Healths or Fortunes: not but that Rewards and Punishments are
naturally interwoven in the frame and order of the Universe without us, and the
constitution of humane Nature within us; that so, though sometimes there may be
an unequal distribution of outward Rewards and Punishments, yet that Virtue
might always be sure, at least of a secret recompense, and Vice not altogether
go unpunished, even here in this Life. But though our duty be always our real
Interest, and Honesty the best Policy; yet such is the disorder and confusion
which Sin has introduced into humane Nature, such the general depravation of
Mankind, that the truth of these Propositions is not readily many times
acknowledged by us: but Men commonly, without any regard, either to the present
nature of things, or their future consequences, do make Lust and Passion, and a
mistaken Self-Interest, the Rule of all their Actions.

2. I would here propound it to consideration, whether our now being able to
resolve these Laws of Nature into their further Causes, as it is called, and to
demonstrate their Obligations from reasons fetched from the Constitution of the
Universe: whether, I say, this does not depend upon that clearer Revelation,
which God has made of those things in Scripture; for hereby we come to a
clearer Knowledge of the Nature and End of the Creation, how that the whole
Universe acts, in subserviency to the glory of God, and to the promoting those
noble ends of Providence, of promoting Virtue, and discouraging Vice in the
World: hereby we are also more fully assured of a future state of Rewards and
Punishments. And these also must be comprehended in the full and adequate
Sanction of the Laws of Nature; for without these, the other of temporal
Rewards and Punishments, would be found many times deficient and ineffectual,
for what they were there designed. Now these things being more clearly
revealed, and sully confirmed to us by holy Scripture, and the belief hereof,
made habitual to us, by the long succession of many Ages, hence probably that
method becomes now more evident to us, than otherwise it would have been; yet
if this should be granted, that, at least, the evidence of that Proposition (
studium communis boni totius systematis agentium naturalium conducit ad bonum
singularum partium, quo nostra, velut partis unius, continetur foelicitas) does
in some measure depend upon some further Revelations made known to us by the
Christian Religion; yet it would be no small or inconsiderable advantage hereby
gained to Virtue, if it be proved, that that Proposition is of equal extent
with the Christian World, both as to its Truth and Evidence: and both these
methods of probation being joined together, seem an undeniable Argument of the
Divinity of these Laws; in that the God of Nature has both made 'em natural to
the minds of Men, which is that which I here mean by Impression; and has also
further added the respective Sanctions of rewards and punishments thereunto in
the natural frame of the Universe.

Not as if that other way of resolving these Laws of Nature into those natural
Notions and Obligations resulting therefrom, was destitute of its proper
Sanctions of rewards and punishments; but then we say, according to this
method, they are not resolved only into these penal Sanctions, but that the
will of the Lawgiver, being published with an intent to be obeyed, is the
intrinsic form of a Law, though it did not come attended with outward force,
not but that these penal Sanctions do also further declare and enforce the Law.

If it be here objected, that it is not easy to conceive the way and manner how
these natural Notions are, or can be imprinted upon the minds of Men. I answer,
there is no more difficulty in conceiving how these truths and obligations may
be the natural results of our Minds rightly qualified at first; than it is to
conceive, how those Ioys and Torments, which ariso from the sense of our
Innocence and Guilt, should be the natural results of our Consciences
afterward: which yet are acknowledged by those who make the objection.

That a Virtuous and holy Life does naturally tend to promote the honor of
God, and the good of all Men in general, and of our selves in particular, is
readily granted, especially by those, who believe the Christian Religion: but
then this Proposition does suppose, First, That we know, what it is to be
Virtuous. Secondly, That this Virtuous and holy Life is a duty incumbent on us;
and both these, in order of nature, before we understand, that these tend to
the glory of God, and the good of Men: otherwise the Virtuoso's of our Age,
those who pretend to be Philosophically Religious, might perhaps plead this in
excuse of their present Wickedness, that they are only at present making an
Experiment, whether Vice may not as well tend to the public good, as Virtue:
but as soon as they find the contrary by Experience, then they will become
devout Proselytes to Virtue.

But Mr. Tyrrell, p. 199. tells us, That though all Men do not ordinarily
reduce the Laws of Nature into that single Proposition of endeavoring the
common good of all rational beings, or may not have an explicit Notion of it:
yet it a Man be but thoroughly convinced; that he is not made for himself
alone, that he does truly observe the Laws of Nature toward himself, by a
temperate and rational Life, toward his Neighbor, by observing the great Rule
of doing as he would be done by; such an one, though never so ignorant in other
things, yet contributes his share to the common good, etc. There is no doubt
but he does, but then may we not rather argue thus, that since Men do not
ordinarily reduce the Laws of Nature into that one single Proposition, as
indeed having no explicit notion of it, and yet do their Duties, both toward
God, their Neighbors, and themselves; that therefore they have some other way
of coming to the Knowledge of their Duty, without resolving the Laws of Nature
into their proper Causes, as it is called.

Dr. Lock, the Ingenious Author of the Essay of humane Understanding, has spent
the First Part of his Book wholly against these innate Principles, relating
either to Speculation or Practice. One great objection that he brings against
'em is this, that Children and Idiots have no apprehension of 'em, and
therefore they cannot be any original Impressions upon the minds of Men;
because if they were, they would soonest appear in such, these being supposed
now to be in puris naturalibus, not tinctured with any adventitious prejudices
of Art or Education: and upon this account also there cannot be pleaded that
universal consent, that is pretended to be given to these original Notions, or
common Principles; seeing thus perhaps one third part of Mankind do not assent
to 'em. In Answer hereto, 1. I observe that those who make this objection, as I
before intimated, will not give the Defendant leave to state his own Question,
and explain his own sense and meaning of it, but will put such a sense upon
these words, innat^^^r natural, as if a thing could not be thus natural or
innate to the Soul, unless it did so immediately and necessarily stare Children
and Fools in the Face; that they must necessarily assent thereto, even before,
by the common course of nature, they are capable of assenting to any thing:
whereas those who defend this Question, make these ^^^^^^l or innate notions
more conditional things, depending upon the Concurrence of several other
circumstances, in order to the Souls exerting of 'em. Thus the Ingenious Mr.
Tyrrell has well observed of Mr. Hobs, that he only takes the measure of humane
nature from those Passions, which precede the use of reason, and as they first
and chiesly show themselves in Children and Fools and Persons unexperienced;
where as according to the Opinion of the best Philosophers, we suppose the
truer nature of man ought rather to be taken from his utmost perfection, viz.
his reason, etc. p. 256. So here it is thought that the truer judgment of these
natural notions ought to be taken rather from the most perfect state of Man,
rather than as they either do, or do not show themselves in Children and
Idiots. And whereas it is asserted, that these general Maxims are assented to as
soon as proposed, and the terms rightly understood: to this the Ingenious
Author Dr. Lock replies, that then there must be an infinite number of innate
notions, even those which no one ever yet pretended to be such, as, an Apple is
not an Oyster, black is not white, etc. Now these and such as these, he says,
are more readily assented to, than those, quicquid agit, est, contradictories
cannot be both true at once, etc. because Children and Fools will readily
assent to the former: but these latter require more attentive-thought and
consideration for the understanding of 'em. I shall not here mention that
distinction, which the Logicians perhaps would make use of in this Case, of
some things being more known in themselves, and yet not so to us; because I
know not what credit now adays may be given to Men of that old-fashioned way
of thinking. But the Ingenious Author himself does assert these three ways of
acquiring Knowledge. First, By intuition, thus we have the knowledge of our
being, p. 318. Man also knows by intuitive certainly, that bare nothing cannot
produce any real being, p. 312. The second way of Knowledge is by Reason.
Thirdly, By Sensation. Now the Knowledge of these Universal Truths, or general
Maxims, I conceive, is by the first way, rather by intuition than by reasoning,
or by the consent or dissent of the terms. For these Propositions, Cogito, ergo
sum, or that upon which this depends, quicquid agit, est, bare nothing cannot
produce a real being: the truth of these Propositions does not so much depend
upon any consideration of the terms; but seems rather the summary result of the
whole, which that Author seems very well to express by intuition, or intuitive
certainly. But then as to those other Propositions, wherein we deny one Idea of
another, as, a Man is not an Horse, blue is nor yellow, etc. The truth of these
depends upon the actual existence of Things, and the consensus and dissensus
terminorum.

But Mr. Norris, the ingenious Author of the Reflections upon the foresaid
Essay, of Humane Understanding, page 20. does not allow any such Things, as
Mental Impressions or Characters upon the Mind, what way soever they may
pretend to come there: So that though he agrees with Dr. Lock in denying all
natural and innate Notions in the Mind of Man; yet it is for other Reasons than
those which Dr. Lock goes upon, and upon a far different Hypothesis. So that
Mr. Norris his Reflections may be a sufficient Answer to Dr. Lock's Opinion, as
it is defended by him, showing the invalidity of the Grounds and Reasons upon
which he founds it: though in the mean time he agrees with him in the
conclusion, in denying all Natural and Native Characters upon the Soul. Which
thing, says he, in the place above cited, Of Mental Impressions or Characters
written upon the Mind, if it pretend to any thing more than Figure and
Metaphor, I take to be mere Iargon and unintelligible Cant.

But here, I humbly conceive, that when we speak of Natural Notions, or Native
Impressions of Truth and Goodness made upon the Minds of Men, though perhaps
there may be something of Metaphor in it; yet the sense and meaning of it, is
generally understood: nor is there any danger, lest any one should hence
conclude the Soul to be made of White-paper, and the Knowledge we find there to
be written with Pen and Ink, Heb. 10. 26. I will put my laws in their hearts,
and in or upon their minds will I write them: That is, says Dr. Tailor, Duct.
Dubit. p. 4. You shall be governed by the Law of natural and essential Equity
and Reason, by that Law which is put into every Man's Nature; and besides this,
whatsoever else shall be super-induc'd, shall be written in their Minds by the
Spirit, who shall write all the Laws of Christianity in the Tables of your
Consciences. Now I do not see any need of any such curious Remark either upon
the Text or Comment; that if this pretend to any thing more than Figure or
Metaphor, then it is mere Iargon and unintelligible Cant. 2. Those who assert
these Natural Notions, do not suppose them super-induc'd or imprinted upon the
Soul, In esse completo; but suppose them to be native Properties and
Qualifications of the Soul, as it is such as God first designed to make it;
that is, Rational and Religious. Now it can be no mere Iargon to ascribe to a
Subject its own natural and essential Properties, such as are the very
essential parts of its Constitution. They do also suppose, with Mr. Norris, the
ideal World, or Idea's in the Divine Intellect, which are the Archetypal Forms
or Patterns of all Truth; these they say, are communicated to the Soul in a way
and proportion suitable to such a being; that is, they are made either the
natural Properties of its being, as such, or the necessary and immediate result
of its Faculties, in the right use and free exercise of them. But the Author in
the forementioned place tells us, That he accounts for the mode of Humane
Understanding after a very different way, viz. by the presentialness of the
Divine (...), or ideal World to our Souls, wherein we see and perceive all
things. So that denying all mental Impressions, not only innate Notions, but
also those, which according to Dr. Lock, derive their Original from Sensation
or Reslection; he asserts all sensible, moral, and intellectual Objects are
only seen and understood in the Divine (...). Thus in his Book of Reason and
Religion, p. 85. This ideal World, this Essence of God considered, as variously
exhibitive and representative of things, is no other than the Divine (...), the
second Person in the ever blessed Trinity; this I think, says he, is highly
agreeable to Reason: for I know no Hypothesis that would so intelligibly make
out the Eternal Generation of the Son of God.

Against this Opinion, I shall briefly suggest these few Prejudices, which
whether they be real or only imaginary, I shall leave to the Reader to judge.
1. I grant that every good Christian, so far as in him lies, ought to defend
against the Socinians, the Mysteries of the Trinity from all palpable and
downright Contradictions. But then it is questioned by some, whether it be
either modest, or indeed possible to invent Hypotheses, which may, as the
Author speaks, Intelligibly make out these Mysteries; or whether the Eternal
Generation of the Son of God may not as well remain, as indeed it is, an
Incomprehensible Mystery, as thus explained, by making the ideal World and the
Divine (...), to be one and the same thing. 2lv, Though the natural parturiency
of the Authors own Mind, p. 185. of his Reason and Religion, did early pitch
upon this Notion, of seeing and knowing all things in God, as easy and obvious,
even before he had consulted any Authors herein; yet other Men's Capacities may
be so dull, as not easily to apprehend the manner of it, even now after such an
exact Elaboration.

3. According to his Hypothesis, there seems not a sufficient difference and
distinction betwixt natural Knowledge and Divine Revelation, seeing God must
immediately apply himself to the Souls of Men in both, and there is no natural
ground or foundation in Man for one more than for the other.

4. It seems not so becoming that profound veneration we ought to have of the
Majesty of God, thus to make the Divine (...), as it were, the Glass of every
trivial perception of sensible objects.

5. May not his Hypothesis, of seeing and perceiving all things in God, seem to
discourage or lessen the diligent use of our Faculties in the search of Truth?
or may it not encourage Enthusiasm, by giving Men occasion to think, that the
only way to Knowledge is, fantastically to give themselves up to the
Impressions of the Ideal World? These things I here propound to Consideration,
though withal, I think that it is more easy to oppose the particular manner of
any Man's explaining humane Understanding, than it is to lay down a true one of
his own.

But lastly, That which seems of the greatest consequence is, that the Author
dangerously forces some places of Scripture only to make 'em favor the
peculiarity of his notion. Thus Io. 1. 3. all things were made by him, or
according to him, (...) p. 89. Reason and Religion, and p. 90. Heb. 1. By him
God is said to make the Worlds, that is, says he, according to the eternal
exemplars or platforms in this ideal World. Now if the Arrians were justly
blamed for putting that interpretation upon those words, (...), thereby to
signify an Instrumental Cause, as if the (...) was only an Instrument in the
hand of God, in creating the World, how much more then ought this
interpretation to be rejected, which makes the second Person in the Trinity
only an Exemplar or Platform, according to which God made the World: but (...)
with a Genitive Case in Scripture, generally signifies the efficient Cause: And
however, I believe, he will no where in Scripture find it in that sense, which
he there puts upon it: So that this ingenious Author seems not so successful in
assigning his own particular way of humane Understanding, as he was in
confuting that of Dr. Lock's. And here I would further appeal to the
considerate Reader, whether this way of seeing and perceiving all things in the
ideal World, if it pretend to any thing more than Figure and Metaphor, whether
it be not as mere Iargon, and unintelligible Cant, as the other.

Anima est abrasa tabula, nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius erat in
sensu. These, and such like Opinions, seem to owe that general reception they
meet withal, rather to the Authority of their first Founder, than to any
strength of reason, that would be found in 'em, did they once undergo a severer
Examination: this Opinion seems to tie the Soul to its particular Seat, or at
most, gives it leave only to go a begging to the Cinque Ports of the Senses,
not only for all the Notices it receives from abroad, but also for all the
knowledge it enjoys at home.

That the Soul, by the very Laws of Creation, was at first dependant upon the
Body, and by the first transgression of the Divine Law, is now more deeply
immersed in matter, and a greater Slave thereto than it was by nature, is
certainly true: but then the Image of God, wherein Man was at first Created,
did first more especially respect the Soul. 2. It consisted in the respective
Endowments and Perfections of the Understanding and Will, viz. in Knowledge and
Righteousness. And therefore 3. Not in a mere capacity, or bare possibility of
having this Pourtraicture drawn afterward upon the Soul, by the assistance of
the outward Senses, but in something at first actually existent in it self. And
supposing this to be the true state of the Case before the Fall, it is
proportionably the same since: for though the Fall did very much weaken our
Facultics; yet it did not wholly alter or invert the method of acquiring, or
retaining Knowledge. There are indeed some, who define an Idea to be nothing
else, but the similitude or representation of a thing made in the Brain: which
definition being so peculiarly appropriated to mere sense and fancy, they
cannot conceive any Idea, or Conception to reside any where else; and that we
talk mystically and unintelligibly, if we suppose any other Idea, to which that
definition does not, or cannot belong. But though it may be justly questioned,
whether the mode of sensation be yet fully and clearly explicated, viz. how the
fancy can represent outward objects in proportionable similitudes to the
superior perceptive faculties, seeing perhaps it would be very difficult to
demonstrate, that any thing, besides motion, can be communicated to the Seat of
the Soul; yet I shall at present grant, that the Understanding does make use of
the Representations of the Fancy for the apprehending those things, which were
there first impressed: and thus I here suppose all material objects are
apprehended by such sensible representations.

But now the Question is, Whether the Understanding cannot frame right Notions
or Apprehesions: of those things, which according to our modes of conception,
neither are, nor can be represented by the Fancy: Whether there be not some
things knowable, both moral and intellectual Objects, relating both to Truth
and Goodness, which are not, and cannot be the Objects of Sense. So that
whatever it is that terminates the Act of the Understanding, that may be
properly called an Idea, Notion, or Conception.

Nihil est intellectu, quod non, etc. This cannot be universally true, in that
latitude wherein some would take it: For Aristotle himself grants a Power of
judging, of drawing Consequences from particular Instances, to the
Understanding, which does not belong to the Sense; and this Power, I suppose,
will be granted to be something: and indeed it is most probable, that he did
not extend that saying any further, than as it relates only to sensible and
material Objects.

One Argument commonly made use of, to prove the Soul distinct from the Body,
does also prove the Operations of Sense and Fancy, distinct from those of the
Understanding: That Faculty of the Mind, say they, by which we reason and judge
of Objects, is so far from being a Body, that it must withdraw it self from all
bodily Representations, when it sets it self to contemplate more speculative
and sublime Truths: for if the Soul should always frame its Notions according
to the Notices of Sense, this would only betray it into Error; but now when it
abstracts from this, and with Reason corrects what may be there justly deemed
amiss, this evidently shows the distinction of these two Faculties, and the
superiority of the one above the other.

So that that opinion which makes the Soul so wholly to depend upon the
representations of sense in all its operations, seems to have a bad influence
upon the belief of its immateriality, or however, upon the excellency of its
way of acting, by making it more subject to the Body, than God and Nature ever
made it.

Those therefore who either from the observation of the accidental bad use,
that some Men make of the distinction of these two Faculties; or from the
difficulty they themselves find in assigning the differences betwixt 'em, are
therefore inclined to believe, that there is no difference at all. These Men
like unskilful Artists, do rather cut then loose the knot: and like those
inconsiderate Men, who from the difficulties and seeming irregularities of
Providence; or from their own inabilities or unwillingness to take the pains to
solve 'em, do take, as they think, this more compendious way to extricate
themselves, viz. to deny that there is any such thing as Providence in the
World.

But it is here objected, that the opinion, which I here assert, lays a
Foundation for Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, as it gives occasions for the
Enthusiasts to think, that those Men are too much immersed in matter, and too
great Slaves to sense and fancy, who do not presently apprehend their pretended
illuminations and mysterious nonsense. I shall here therefore briefly show,
wherein the nature of Enthusiasm does properly consist; and that this opinion,
which I here assert, is no ways chargeable with giving any occasion or
encouragement to it.

But 1. we may observe, that God in the wise disposals of his Providence has
many times placed truth upon the Confines of Error; nor is it any
disparagement to it, if sometimes, by reason of this Vicinity, it may
accidentally give occasion to it. This should rather teach us the true exercise
of our Understandings, to distinguish betwixt the false glosses and plausible
appearances of Error, and the realities of Truth.

2. I shall not here go about to recriminate, for to asperse other Men's
Opinions is not to vindicate our own; for though they may be charged with as
bad Consequences, as those they cast upon ours, yet this will not make our own
innocent, if they be in themselves obnoxious. I might perhaps with as much or
more reason charge Aristotle's Opinion, Nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius
erat in sensu, with giving countenance to Atheism, as the contrary does to
Enthusiasm. Dr. Cudworth's 5th Chap. Intellectual Systeme.

This being briesly premised, I answer, That according to the most rational
account of Enthusiasm, which founds it only in some irregular and turbulent
Motions arising from the Body, and acted more especially upon the Scene of
Fancy: according to this, I do not see, how the aforesaid Opinion has any more
influence upon Enthusiasm, than it has upon any other Errors and false
Opinions whatever.

Thus the Enthusiast together with most other erring persons, do take their own
mistaken Fancy and false Apprehensions for the Dictates of Reason and
Understanding: So that Enthusiasm seems rather sounded in the contrary Opinion,
in not distinguishing betwixt these two; and the Enthusiast of all others seems
the least chargeable with this Error (if it be one) of distinguishing betwixt
the Phantasins of Sense and Imagination, and the Ideas of the Understanding:
for, as such, he scarcely acknowledges any higher Faculty in the Soul, than
that of Fancy. So that that Opinion of distinguishing betwixt the
Representations of Sense and the Idea's of the Understanding, has not any
natural tendency to favor Enthusiasm, unless we make it the (...), the first
grand Foundation of all Errors and mistakes in general; for almost all erring
persons do tell those that differ from 'em, that either they are not
speculative enough rightly to apprehend their Notions; or that they are too
much prejudiced with false Opinions, readily to entertain them.

As an Appendix to this Chapter, I shall add some short Reflections upon the
10th Chap. 3. lib. of P. Poiret's Cogitat. rationales de Deo, and upon the 9th
and 10th Chap. 2. lib. of Cuperus his Arcana Atheismi, concerning Eternal
Truths.

Some Reflections upon P. Poiret's Cogitationes rationales de Deo, lib. 3. Cap.
10. concerning Eternal Truths.

The Question he thus states, p. 125. That God indeed does necessarily conceive
those Truths which immediately relate to him-self, his Nature, Essence, and
Attributes: He was never indifferent as to these; but as for all other Truths,
Quae ipse Deus non sunt, which are not God himself; these wholly depend upon
the most free and arbitrary Determination of his own Will, and are therefore
only true because he appointed them to be so: and that there might, if God had
so pleased, either have been none of these at all, or else quite different from
what they now are; and he extends his Assertion to all Propositions, whether
Mathematical or Moral, relating either to Truth or Goodness; and this he
mannages with as much subtlety both of Argument and Answers, as perhaps the
thing is capable of.

But before I come more closely to examine his Opinion, I shall premise in
general, 1. That it is very strange, that God who created Man after his own
Image, in Knowledge and Righteousness, should yet assign the Methods of
Knowledge and Understanding in Men, quite different from those of his own; we
know the respect and relation that the Actions of the Understanding bear to
those of the Will in Men, viz. That the one, those of the Understanding, always
precede those of the Will. But now according to his Way and Method, it is quite
contrary in God; for according to him God does not know or understand any
thing, but what he first determines to be so. I know not whether I may urge
this in strictness of Argumentation, yet it seems at least a great presumption
against the truth of his Opinion. 2. It is a plausible pretense of Piety, a
seemingly profound Veneration and Respect for the absoluteness of the Divine
Perfections, which seems either the chiefest Argument for, or the greatest
Motive and Persuasive to his Opinion. This tender care for the Honor of the
Divine Nature, is indeed a thing very commendable in it self, and very worthy
of a Philosopher and a Christian; yet Men ought to be very careful and
considerate herein, lest they lessen and derogate as much from the excellency
of the Divine Nature one way, as they seem to advance it another.

Now in order to a more particular Answer to his Opinion, I shall observe, 1.
How in the Progress of his Discourse he relinquishes his own Principle, and
limits the general extent of the question, as it was at first stated, so as
that in effect he Answers himself; for he either does himself tacitly, at
least, or from his own assertions will be forced to acknowledge, That there is
some truth antecedent to the Divine Placitum, or appointment.

In his Answer to the first Objection, that God knows, what it is that he
either will or will not appoint, so that his knowledge must precede his
determination; to these Premises he returns no plain positive Answer, but only
holds to the Conclusion, and says, that they who assert this, do pre-suppose,
that there is something different from God, quod ante Dei arbitrium seu
placitum habeat veritatem and possibilitatem a part sui, which he says is
(...), the grand original mistake: here he asserts, that God knows nothing to
be true, nothing to be possible before his own respective determination of
both: As to the first, I shall only return what Dr. Cudworth says, p. 646. of
his Intellectual Systeme. This is to destroy the Deity, by making one attribute
thereof to devour and swallow up another, insinite will and power, insinite
understanding and reason; for to suppose God to understand, and to be wise only
by his will, is all one as to suppose him really to have no understanding at
all. As to the other, the possibility of things, I would only ask him, whether
or no, there was not a possibility in God of Creating or doing more things,
than ever he actually Created or did; now this possibility must be something,
and something which God knew he had in his power, antecedent to his
determination.

But notwithstanding he confidently holds to the Conclusion, non datur nec
concipitur ullum quid ante Dei placitum: and in the very next words he tells us
(and he does not here suppose any Divine Placitum to intervene) Absurdum est
dicere, etc. it is not much material to repeat what he there asserts. But how
comes he to call any thing absurd in this Case: the thing perhaps may be so in
it self, and may be counted so by others; but, according to his Principles, how
can any thing be absurd, antecedent to the Divine Placitum, or appointment? For
an absurdity does suppose Truth and Falsehood, according to the agreeableness or
disagreeableness to which rules, a thing is said to be absurd, or not absurd:
but it is very hard for a man, who has undertaken such a Province, not
sometimes to contradict himself. Res ipse nolunt male determinari.

He further grants, that there is a necessary truth in this Proposition, that a
thing cannot simul esse and non esse: that it is impossible, that
contradictories should be true at the same time: as may be seen at large, p.
133. for this would make God to be Statuens and non statuens, volens and non
volens, ponens and non ponens eandem operationem; absurda haec sunt, etc. I am
of his Opinion too herein. But then does not this one concession destroy his
former assertion; for why should this truth only be exempted from the common
fate of all the rest. I think, Des Carts acted, at least, more consistently
with himself, when he went thorough with what he had undertaken, and tells us,
that if God had pleased, contradictories might have been true at once: nor is
it sufficient for him to say, that this would be absurd; both for the reason
before mentioned, and also because several other of his assertions might be
thus answered, That they are absurd. But he tells us, p. 126. That the contrary
to his opinion destroys both the unity and absolute perfection of God; for
there would not be one, absolutely perfect God, if he did conceive any thing
necessarily true and immutable, habens similem secum radicitus and
essentialiter proprietatem, besides himself. But then what will he say to his
former priviledg'd Proposition, nihil potest esse, and non esse simul. This
will either be a sufficient Answer to his Arguments of this Nature, or else he
must make it an addition of another Person to the Trinity, and make it God
himself. But why should he be so sollicitous, lest, granting these moral and
intellectual truths to be necessary and immutable, they should thus derogate
from the divine perfection; for it does not thence follow that these truths
have Similem cum Deo radicitus and essentialiter proprietatem: for these truths
are only things of an intellectual nature, such as terminate the act of Divine
Wisdom and Understanding; but no body says, that they have any radical or
essential propriety univocally equal, or like to God.

But further, What inconsistency, or what unbecomingness would there be in the
Notion, if we thus conceived of God, that he is an insinitely wise and
Omnipotent Being, comprehending Himself, and the extent of his own Power, that
is, the Idea's of all the possibilities of things, together with all their
several, either necessary, or accidental relations one toward another. So that
according to this Scheme of things, these truths are but the necessary objects
of Omniscience, or infinite Wisdom; so that it is impossible, that these
necessary and immutable truths should any ways derogate from the Divine
Perfections, seeing we cannot suppose God to be Omniscient, that is, infinitely
perfect without 'em: neither would these truths be so absolutely Independent of
themselves; for we can scarce suppose any moral good or evil, unless we first
suppose a God, in Conformity, or Nonconformity to whose pure and holy nature,
and to his Will, acting always according thereunto, consists the nature of both.

The second thing I shall observe from his management of this Question is this;
that as to things which relate to moral goodness, such is the awful power of
truth, such is the natural modesty of Mankind, that inward sense they have of,
and profound veneration for these things, that many times they are ashamed
openly to assert that which yet may be the natural consequence of some false
Principles they have entertained. And this seems the Case of this Author in
this particular: for it is observable through his whole Discourse, he no where
plainly and expressly asserts (which yet according to his Principles will
necessarily follow) that God might, if he had so pleased, have appointed a
quite contrary Scheme of Morality, or a Set or Systeme of moral truths just
contrary to what they now are. Indeed he does say, p. 126. that this Divine
Placitum was of its own nature indifferent, vel ad haec statuenda, vel plane
omittenda, vel diversa decernenda, and that God might have represented himself
to the minds of Men, per alia, nescio quae, quam per naturas rerum quales jam
sunt, p. 136. Yet these seem to come short of asserting the quite contrary way
and method. But some perhaps will say, that this is too favorable an
interpretation put upon his words; but suppose it be, yet I would rather err on
this side, than on the other: yet if it be but thus far true, it will be
notwithstanding a sufficient confutation of his Opinion. But give me leave only
to suggest the reason of that my charitable interpretation, viz. because he
osten mentions a certain decency, which he seems to make the Rule of Divine
Actions, even antecedent to the Divine Will. Thus, p. 131. he says, that the
justice of God did appoint things modo ipsum decenti, in a way becoming him,
which would seem an impertinent expression, if all the decency that things have
arise only from God's appointing 'em to be so: and immediately after speaking
of God's liberty and freedom in making things thus or thus, he says, that he
was indifferent, vel ad nulla statuenda vel ad alia stabilienda, quae aeque
Deum decuissent: which words seem to imply, that there was something truly
(...), worthy of God, antecedent to his positive appointment.

But then let us see how he answers that Objection, that according to his
Principles, the hatred of God might have been good, and the love of him evil,
if he had so appointed. Now this might either have been so, or not; if it
might, then why did he not plainly say so? if it could not, then his Principles
are false, viz. that there is something good or evil, antecedent to the divine
positive appointment. But when Men either cannot, or will not return plain
Answers to a plain Question, it is a certain Argument, that they ly under
either some natural, or some moral defect; that their notions either do not ly
smooth and clear in their Heads; or else, upon some worse design, they thus
purposely wrap themselves in Clouds. But he tells us, p. 136. amor praesupponit
mentis naturam, haec voluntatem sive placitum Dei sese hoc modo adumbrandi. But
we must abstract, he says, from all these: but now to comply with him in his
own way, I am willing to abstract as far as is possible for us to abstract;
only he must not abstract us into nothing, he must suffer us to remain subjects
capable of abstracting: and yet I believe after all these, he is not that hardy
Man, as in plain words to say, That God might have made the lovc of himself a
Sin, and the hatred of him a virtue. However it does not seem any good Argument
of the truth, or any great commendation of the goodness of an Opinion, that we
must abstract from every thing, that is, (at least at present) either rational
or religious, before we can possibly frame any conception of it. And yet this
is the opinion, which he is so fond of, and seems to value himself so much
upon, that in his Appendix, p. 304. where he makes some reflections upon his
former work, he particularly commends this 10th Chapter de Dei dominio, cujus
excellentiam, sine jactantia, ob ipsam rei veritatem and utilitatem, non satis
possum commendare. And yet this seems a truer Character of it, that it is in it
self false, unworthy of God, and of dangerous consequence to Men.

I shall only here clear one place of Scripture, relating hereunto, from a
forced and false interpretation, which Cuperus p. 246. Arcana Atheismi, has put
upon it, Romans 2. 14. the Gentiles having not the Law, do by Nature the things
contained in the Law; these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves. The
Apostle here designs to assert that natural knowledge, which the Gentiles had
of good and evil. But, says he, before this can be made appear, we must prove
these two things. 1. That by the Gentiles are here to be understood the Pagan
Gentiles, those who had neither heard of the Law of Christ, nor the Law of
Moses. 2. That the words by Nature, are not to be joined with those going
before, thus, the Gentiles having not the Law by Nature, do the things
contained in the Law. But first he has no warrant from any Copy, or good
Authority thus to place the Comma, and so to read it; now if Men may take that
liberty to place Comma's where they please, they may soon make the Scripture
quite another thing. But then further, it would not be worthy of the Apostles
way of discoursing, to tell us, that the Gentiles had not the Law of Moses by
Nature: for who ever imagined they had? Now he does not grant here any other
Law, not so much as any Law of Nature: but then he says, that it is false, that
the Gentiles not believing in Christ, either did or could perfectly observe the
Law; and who ever said they could? The Text only says, That the Gentiles not
having the Law, that is, not any revealed Law, did by nature the things of the
Law. Now he will needs make doing the things of the Law, to be perfectly to
observe the Law: and further, if by Gentiles be understood those that believed
in Christ, how can it be said, that these are a Law unto themselves, seeing
they had both the Law of Moses, and the Law of Christ to direct 'em? But from
hence it will be obvious to observe, what hard shifts Men are commonly forced
to make, when once they engage in the defense of a false Opinion.

Some Reflections upon the Tenth Chapter of the Second Book of Cuperus his
Arcana Atheismi.

THE Position he there endeavors to defend, is this, That by the mere light of
Nature, without Divine Revelation, it cannot be made appear, that there is any
difference betwixt Vice and Virtue, although we were already assured, that
there was a God, etiamsi nobis jam innotuisset esse Deum. Virtue therefore and
Vice, in respect of God, can be nothing else, quam religiosus numinis cultus.
Virtue indeed may, but how Vice can be a religious worship of the Deity is hard
to understand. Some would think such a stumble as this, in the very Threshold,
was very ominous. Others, perhaps more agreeably to his Principles, tell us,
that Vice and Virtue, in respect of God, are the same as to this particular;
and that God, if he had so pleased, might as well have been worshipped by the
one, as by the other. Now worship, he says, necessarily requires the certain
knowledge of these three things. 1. That he, to whom we pay it, requires any
such thing at our hands. 2. What it is that he does require. 3. Upon what
conditions, viz. What Rewards he will give in case of observance, and what
punishments he will inflict in case of neglect. Now he would seem to infer,
that we have no natural knowledge of any of these three. I shall here, once for
all, remind the Reader, that in the stating of the question he supposes, not
only that there is a God, but also, that we certainly know it: Now as to the
first requisite, he grants that there is a worship due to God, when it does
appear that we are his Creatures, p. 250. So that by his own confession, it
does appear, that God requires this worship at our hands, unless we may know,
that there is a God, and yet at the same time not know that we are his
Creatures: which would be a strange position for a Christian Philosopher to
assert. And secondly, if we know that there is a God, then we know in general
how and with what actions he will be worshipped. If God be a Spirit, then he is
to be worshipped with a pure mind, was a natural and easy consequence made by an
honest Heathen. This I say will follow, unless we suppose an Immoral God. But
this, though it be both absurd and impious to do, yet I am afraid it will not
be counted either by him. As to his third Requisite, we grant, that we owe it
only to Divine Revelation, that God will reward our imperfect obedience with
such degrees of eternal happiness: yet this even Nature teaches us, that
holiness does either entitle us to happiness, or at least to a freedom from
misery. And as for what he says, That it cannot be known among Men, whether, or
how they will be served, unless they first openly declare it; the Argument is
no ways conclusive, if it be applied to this case, because Men have no other
way to make known their Will, but by outward Declarations: butGod has, viz.
those natural Notions, which he inwardly inserted into the Minds of Men. But to
this he answers, That since Men draw these things from natural reason, they
must also by the same reason prove the existence of a God: but since that
cannot be done, neither can there be any natural knowledge of good and evil, of
Vice and Virtue. But here though I do not grant, That the Being of God, cannot
be proved by the light of Nature; yet I must remind him, that he flies here
from the Question, as it was by himself first stated, where he supposes the
Bing of God to be now known to us. But then, as if he was himself conscious of
his Evasion herein, he immediately adds, Vel st aliqua inde petenda esset,
scilicet vitii vel virtutis cognitio, etc. if there was any knowledge of Vice
and Virtue to be drawn from Nature, then it could be no other, than that that
should be counted vicious, from which any Man's Nature does abhor; and that
honest, to which Men are carried by a natural Propension. But this is a strange
account of Morality, to make every Man's exorbitant Lusts and Passions the rule
and measure of good and evil; nay, according to these Principles there can
searce be any thing evil, for p. 254. he tells us, Nihil fere est, nec ullum
flagitium, ad quod natura multorum, etc. that there is scarce any wickedness,
to which the Nature of many Men is not naturally inclined. I shall not here
particularly examine his Opinion concerning Original Sin, only herein he shows
himself neither a sound Divine, nor good Philosopher; seeing many of the
Heathens themselves did acknowledge the Substance, that is, the general
depravation of humane Nature, though they were unacquainted with the Name and
Nature of it. But he again resumes his former Argument, That if the way how God
is to be Worshipped, may be known by the light of Nature, then the reward of
eternal Life, might be known also by the same light. But this is no good
consequence, as I before showed. It Is true, neither the way and method of
Divine Worship, nor eternal Life are so clearly known by the Light of Nature,
as they are now made manifest to us by Divine Revelation: yet it does not
thence follow, but that Nature has, in some measure, discovered Both unto us,
2 Timothy 1. 10. Christ has indeed brought life and immortality to light, through
the Gospel; that is, made clearer manifestations of it; but then this hinders
not, but that both Jews and Gentiles might have some more obscure and imperfect
Notions of it before.

But he goes on and tells us, p. 252. Virtutis and vitii Christiani notitia,
etc. That the knowledge of Vice and Virtue, both among Jews and Christians, is
no otherwise conveyed to either of them, but by Divine Revelation. And here he
urges Romans 7. 7. I had not known Sin but by the Law; and I had not known Lust,
if the Law had not said, Thou shall not covet. But here first I would ask him,
Whether those People, who have no outward Law given 'em, either do or can
commit any sin, provided they do but follow their own natural Inclinations?
According to him, there is no sin, but when a Man is guilty of such a strange
piece of Selfdenial, as not to comply with his own natural Appetites, when
there is nothing, as in this case, that forbids him so to do. Thus p. 260. he
tells us, That no actions, with respect to the Worship of God, by the mere
Light of Nature, can be counted sin, Praeter illas a quibus vel omnium hominum
natura abhorret, vel in certis hominibus illas, quae ipsorum naturae sunt
contrariae. Where by Nature he means nothing but natural Affections, Appetites
and Inclinations: But certainly a Man must have a new Nature, and a new Bible
given him, before this will pass either for Reason or Religion. But then for
the better understanding of that place before cited; some say, That St. Paul
there does not speak in his own Person, but in the Person of a Jew, brought up
under such Masters, who did not understand coveting, as it includes the inward
act only, to be a sin. Others say, That sin was known to be so by the Law of
Nature, before the giving of Moses his Law; thus Theophylact, (...); etc. How
was the Deluge brought upon the World? And why were the Sodomites destroyed by
fire, if Lust was not known to be a sin before the Law? So that the Law did not
first make Lust to be a sin, but did more expressly declare it to be so. He
quotes indeed several other places of Scripture, but to as little purpose, p.
254. Si pietatis officia specialia, etc. if the special Offices of Piety were
known by the Light of Nature, then there must be some certain foundation from
whence they might be drawn. Here he mentions three.

1. Natural Instinct. 2. The Sanctity of God. 3. Divine Power, or Dominion.
As for the first, Natural Instinct, this indeed, he says, is not the rule of
humane Actions, to them who live under the Gospel; but, according to his
Principles, it must be to them who only enjoy the Light of Nature.

Nor, Secondly, says he, can the Sanctity of God be the rule of our Actions;
but the reason he there gives, is a very strange one, and very odly expressed,
viz. because God acts nothing but by instinct of his Nature, nor is there any
thing holy in God, but what his Nature desires.

But to this I Answer: First, That God sometimes acts as an absolute Sovereign
of the Universe, and Governor of the World; and in these cases his Actions are
not, in all particulars, to be the rule of ours.

Secondly, It seems an irreverend way of speaking, to say, That God acts out of
Instinct of Nature, which is commonly and properly attributed to mere Animals:
yet granting the Expression in sano sensu, it cannot be supposed, that God does
daily alter the Determination of his Will concerning the same Object.

Thirdly, Yet this we may safely say, That the holiness of God is the rule of
our Actions, so far as, either by the Light of Nature, or Divine Revelation, it
is made known to us to be so.

But in the Third placo, He resolves all into the absolute Power and Dominion
of God, That nothing is just and good, but that only which he commands, and for
no other reason, but because he does so: And yet in the very next Sentence, p.
255. (as if something from within had whispered better things to him) he tells
us, That God indeed may command any thing, Mado Dei naturae non sit contrarium,
ut talia siant, etc. provided it be not contrary to his Nature, that it should
be done. This indeed is a very pious and prudent, a true and rational
Assertion, but then it contradicts the design of the whole Chapter. Some things
indeed may be more evidently and directly contrary to the Nature of God, as not
to love, or not to obey him; but then to forbid all due resemblance of himself,
all Virtue and Goodness, and to command all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit
in rational Creatures, this certainly is also contrary to the Divine Nature. He
then proceeds, as he says, to examine the principal parts both of Natural and
Christian Religion, in order to see whether there lies any obligation upon us
to 'em, but merely by the Divine Command. And here I grant, That those Truths,
and those Duties, viz. the belief of a Trinity and Faith in Christ, that depend
merely upon Divine Revelation, cannot be known to be such, by the Light of
Nature: But then the reason is not the same in those other Moral Duties, which
Christianity did not first reveal, but only further illustrate and confirm to
us. Nor shall I here follow him through all the parts of Natural Religion,
which he there instances in: I shall only pitch upon one, which yet seems of
the greatest weight and moment, that of Justice. This, he says, cannot be
recommended to us from the Nature of God, because it does not appear by Nature,
Deum neminem injuria afficere, That God does no Body any wrong: For, he says,
that if that be injury, when we hurt those who have not deserved any such thing
at our hands; Quid infantes in Deum peccaverunt? Wherein have Infants sinned
against God, who yet many times are grievously afflicted by him? To this I
answer,

1. That I before premised this, That God sometimes acts, as a Sovereign, or
Lord of the World; and in this case some actions may be injurious, or unjust in
Men, which are not so in God.

2. The consideration of original sin, might give easy Solutions to what he
there urges: But because he does not acknowledge any such thing, I shall not
therefore here insist upon it.

3. It is no ways contrary to Divine Justice to inflict very high degrees of
Asflictions on rational Creatures, provided that the Mercies they enjoy be more
than the Miseries they undergo: And he will never prove, that God ever
inflicted such Miseries upon Infants, but that, if they had the power of
Election, they would rather choose to undergo 'em, than their own Annihilation.
But he lays great stress upon that action of the Israelites robbing of the
Egyptians, which was done by God's Command, or Allowance, and therefore was no
sin: Therefore nothing is just or unjust in it self, but only as God commands,
or forbids it.

In Answer to this some say, That God herein acted as the universal Creator and
original Proprietor of all things, and here transferred the Property, as he
justly might, from the Egyptians to the Israelites. Others say, That as
Sovereign Legislator, he dispensed with the Law in this particular; yet it will
not follow hence, that there is nothing good or evil, but with respect to God's
positive Command: For I humbly conceive, there are some other rations boni and
mali, more sacred and indispensable, than those of Property.

If the Reader here Object, That my Style, especially in the latter end of this
Chapter, is more than ordinarily rough and uneven; I willingly acknowledge,
that I am no Master of it, not in the most even way, where all lies plain
before me: But then here in my Reflections upon P. Poiret, and Caperus, I had a
mind to keep as near to their words, as I well could, lest some perhaps might
say, That I injured their sense; and all Men know, how rough and broken the
Style must needs be, when Latin is thus Translated into English.

CHAP. IV. Of the Being of God.
IT is the general method of the Atheists of the present Age, to skirmish, as
it were, in their Arguings, rather than come to a close Engagement; and think
they have got matter enough of Triumph, if they can defeat some of those
Arguments, we bring for the Proof of a God, or by some subtle Evasion, lessen,
or enervate the force of 'em. They do not much pretend, by positive Arguments
to prove the reasonableness of their own Opinions, or the impossibility of
ours; both which they ought to do, if they would gain any Credit to their Cause.

The Heathen Philosophers, and Orators of Old used to invoke the Deity to
vouchsafe a Blessing upon their respective Undertakings, and taught it as a
Duty incumbent upon all, with Prayers to Sanctify their first Entrance upon
any work of Importance. But now to desire an Atheist to do thus, would seem a
direct contradiction, and a begging of the Cause, to desire him to suppose
that, which by the state of the Controversy, he is engaged to deny.

But yet an Atheist himself in this dispute, wherein the right knowledge of the
Truth is of so much concernment to him, ought at least to bring with him a
teachable temper, and disposition of Mind and Will, ready to receive what his
understanding upon the fairest consideration of things that they are capable
of, dictates to be, if not absolutely demonstrated, yet most rationally
probable, and most prudentially credible. The Atheist therefore, seeing he
cannot be absolutely sure, and positively certain, That there is no God, ought
(and that without any Violation to his Principles as a Philosopher, however
highly agreeable to his Prudence, as a Man) at least to make such Applications
as these to that Supreme Power, whose Existence he very much doubts, or perhaps
rather denies; That if there be any such, then that he would vouchsafe to
enlighten his Understanding with the true knowledge of the truth, and incline
his Will to be Belief of it.

And here it is observable, That Protagoras, who was generally counted an
Atheist, and was expelled out of Athens for being so; yet as Diog. Laert.
reports of him, he makes Precatio to be the first part of an Oration.

What was the first occasion of the Platonic Triad, whether the contrary false
Opinions of the Atomists concerning the Materiality of the Universe, and the
manner of its Formation, according to the way and method laid down by the
Learned Bishop of Lincoln in his Treatise of Idol. p. 407, 408. I shall not
here dispute: Yet as to the Belief of a God in general, that was never
occasioned by any false belief of others to the contrary, because Truth, in
order of Nature, is always antecedent to Error. What is said of Idols, Wisd.
14. 13. That they were not from the beginning; the same may be said of Vice,
and Error, that they were not so from the beginning, but that Truth and Virtue
was still antecedent to them. Primus in Orb Deos fecit timor, is so far from
being true, that the Belief of a God was the cause of Fear; and not Fear the
cause of the Belief of a God.

The Opinion of the Existence of a Deity has so much the advantage of the
contrary, that of Atheism, that I believe, its very Opposers, when at any time
they give themselves seriously to consider, and examine the reasons on both
sides, that their dissent is not so much their Opinion that the thing is really
so, as their secret desire and Inclination, that it should be so; for if we
consider either the weakness of their own Arguments, or the frivolous Answers
they return to ours, one would think, that they had not sufficient ground so
much as to found an Opinion upon, so much violence do they offer in their
Arguings, not only to Religion, but to Reason too. Though the Atheists of the
former Ages seem more excusable, than these of ours, for they wanting those
Supernatural Arguments drawn from Divine Revelation, and not knowing so well
how rightly to manage those natural ones (which yet if rightly used, would have
proved a God) they thus argued themselves into Atheism, or into Tenants very
like it. Whereas ours, either out of Ignorance or inconsideration, either not
willing, or not able impartially and thoroughly to examine the Arguments, which
both Reason and Religion do afford them, they thus run headlong into foolish
and false Opinions, satisfying themselves with mere shadows of reasoning
instead of Substances.

Thus a Spirit must be banished out of the World, only because they say the
Notion of it implies a Contradiction: And the World must be the result of the
Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, only boccuse it implies no Logical Contradiction
that it should be so; thus boldly asserting impossibility, where indeed there
is none, and resting in bare Possibilities where there is no reason to do so.
And this seems the very Sum and Substance of the Philosophy of our Modern
Atheists.

But it is here objected, That the Belief of a Deity was an Opinion at first
invented, and afterward continued in the World by those whose Interest
prompted them thereunto, viz. by Kings and Princes, and those of the
Ecclesiastical Order, the one to keep their People in awe, the other to
maintain and bear up the reputation of their Function; as if the Jewish
Religion at first was only the Politic Invention of Moses and Aaron; and
afterward for the same reasons carried on by their successive orders: That the
Thunderings and Lightnings of Mount Sinai were only the well-ordered Plots of
somewhat like Drums and Gunpowder behind the Stage; and that the Miracles of
our SAVIOR were only the deluding and cheating of the outward Senses of some,
and the inward Imaginations of others; that his seeming restoring Eyes to the
Blind, was only the deceiving the Eyes of the Beholders, and a persuading the
Blindman that he saw, what indeed he did not. But it would be too frivolous a
design to go about to confute such an extravagant and groundless Assertion; for
perhaps it would require as much power to persuade a Blind Man, that he saw,
when he did not; as really to restore his Eyes.

But then as to the Principle, whereon the Objection is founded, I shall do
these three things.

First, Show the weakness and falseness of it in it self.

Secondly, The Accidentalness of its concluding.

Thirdly, The Unfitness and Improperness of it, as made by them, and how it may
be with as much strength retorted upon themselves.

1. The Foundation of the Argument is this; That that is justly suspected as
false in Religion, the Belief or Practice whereof is joined with either
public, or private Advantage to those concerned. Now nothing is more false
than this, for this is one main Foundation of our Natural Religion; and part
even of the Gentile's Creed, viz. A Belief that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of those that diligently seek him; That such is the Goodness of God
toward us, that he has joined our Duty and our Interest together, not only as
to the future, but also as to the present Life: And God, in so ordering the
Frame of our Religion, has but seconded and confirmed the common sense of
Mankind, and acted according to the Principles of Humane Nature; for such is
the Constitution thereof, that Good and Convenience is the necessary Object of
all our Desires. Now if any thing of present or future Advantage be made an
Argument of the falseness of things in Matters of Religion, we may then upon
the same grounds question the Truth and Reasonableness of all humane Actions;
because Men necessarily propound some kind of advantage to themselves in 'em
all. But this would lay a Foundation of Skepticism in Humane Nature, and cause
us to reject or doubt of things for those very reasons, for which we ought to
receive 'em.

2. This Objection taken from the Advantages that attend Religion is a very
contingent and accidental one, such as could be of no force in the first Ages
of the Church, when Christianity exposed its Professors to nothing but
Persecution, their Names to Sandal and Reproach, their Estates to Ruin, and
their Bodies to Martyrdom.

3. I shall show the unfitness of the Objection, as made by them that urge it;
indeed if those Men were so Heroical in their pursuits of Virtue and Holiness,
as to embrace 'em merely upon the account of their Intrinsic Excellence; then
might there something more be pleaded for 'em: But since they are Men of
Debauched Lives, and if possible to justify their own Wickedness, would
insinuate into the Minds of others, a secret belief, That Religion is nothing
but a mere Cheat: This is the greatest instance not only of Profaneness, but of
Folly too, because the Argument may be retorted, with as much strength upon
themselves, thus.

If the Belief of a God and Religion be therefore suspected to be false,
because it is the Interest of those that believe 'em, that there should be both:

Then why may not the Denial of a God be rejected for the same reasons; because
it is as much the Interest of wicked Men, that there should be no God, as it is
of good Men, that there should be one. So that if there be any force in the
Argument, it proves as much against themselves, as it does against us.

As for those who tell us, That the Notion of God includes in it a
Contradiction, and that it is and ever was impossible that there should be one;
these Men indeed take the most effectual way of defending their Cause, in case
they could prove their Assertion: For whoever grants the possibility of the
Being of God, must either grant that he really is, or else will be forced to
contradict himself; for what is possible may be reduced into Act. But if God be
not now, and actually was not existent from all Eternity; it is impossible for
such a Being, as is included in his notion, ever to begin to be: And this seems
to be Bradwardine's Argument, Cap. 1. p. 3. So that an Atheist must prove not
only that there is no God, but that it was from Eternity impossible, that there
should be one; neither of which, he will ever be able to prove.

The Being of God is not the less credible, because it is not capable of such
proofs as some other things are; all things will not admit of Mathematical
Demonstrations, nor indeed is it expected, that they should; nor are they on
this account less true and certain than those that do: For sometimes the very
possibility of Demonstration argues some degree of uncertainty, or obscurity in
the thing to be demonstrated; thus Indemonstrables are always the most certain,
therefore the Being of God is not therefore the less certain, because it cannot
be demonstrated. Some indeed are so gross in their Reasonings, that they make
the Invisibility of Spirits an Argument against their Existence; whereas indeed
the very Reasons, upon which we believe their Existence, are inconsistent with
their Visibility.

That some Heathens did worship that one supreme and true God, is certainly
evident both from the Testimony of Profane and Sacred History, Act. 17. 23.
Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. So that the
Athenians, either worshipped the true God, or St. Paul declared to 'em a false
one; yet it is generally agreed, that such Heathens might be, and were guilty of
Idolatry. Nothing therefore hinders, but that the Papists may be guilty of
Idolatry, though they do not only acknowledge the true God, but the Christian
Trinity; nor do I see, how their Idolatry, as such, that is, such as is
consistent with the Belief of the true God, is capable of any mitigation;
because no one charges them with any other, than what they are truly guilty of.

Some Protestants indeed say, That some of the Heathens are capable of the same
defense, that the Papists make for themselves, that is, That they only give an
Inferior Worship to Saints and other Inferior Demons, but pay the Supreme
Worship to the Supreme God only.

Now this Plea seems to hold as much for the one, as for the other, and must
either acquit both or neither. Nor can the Papists their being more
particularly instructed in the Knowledge of the Nature and Will of God, be any
Mitigation of their Offense, but rather an Aggravation of it. Falsehood is
neither in its own Nature fit, nor was it ever intended by God, as a proper
means whereby to defend truth: For this neither stands in need of a Lie, nor
can it really be defended by it; nor is it our Interest or Prudence to attempt
the defense of a good Cause by weak Arguments; for this will only give occasion
to our Adversaries, when they see that they can easily answer these, to think
worse of our cause, and that all the rest of our reasonings are of the same
nature. Yet granting that some Arguments sometimes made use of to prove the
Being of God, are not absolutely cogent and conclusive, yet are they not
presently to be rejected, as useless; and that upon these two accounts.

First, Because they that urge them, do not make use of any single Argument, as
if the Cause did wholly depend upon it. Secondly, In things of a Moral
Concernment, there may be such a thing as an Accumulative Demonstration, as
Bishop Tailor tells us in another Case. ( Page 124. Lib. 1. Cases of Consc.)
Therefore, supposing a Man in his attempt to prove the Being of God, should
either through the shortness of his Meditations, or the sublimeness of the
Theory, make use of an Argument not perfectly conclusive; yet seeing the
success of the Cause depends not upon it, and seeing the Man perhaps has
effected as much, as he intended by it; that is, added his Mite to the former
Treasury; upon the whole matter, it seems hard if such an one must be
prosecuted, as an Atheist, or a Betrayer of the Cause of Religion. Cicer. de
Univers. Si forte de Deorum Natura, ortuque Mundi disserentes, minus id, quod
habemus Animo, consequimur, etc. hand sane erit mirum; contentique esse
debebitis, si probabilia dicentur; aequum est enim, meminisse, and me, qui
disseram, hominem esse, and vos qui judicetis; ut si probabilia dicentur, ne
quid ultra requiratis.

Among the many Arguments brought to prove the Being of God, these two seem the
most considerable.

First, That comprehensive one which is drawn from the Being of the World;
whereby I understand not only the Divine Power of creating or producing
something out of nothing, but that admirable Wisdom also that appears in making
it such as it is; and in the proper subserviencies of things therein to their
respective Ends; That Argument further which is drawn not only from the
Material, but the Intellectual Universe, not only from the structure of the
Body, but the Nature of the Soul.

Secondly, That which is drawn from the Consent and universal Acknowledgment of
all Nations.

As for that, which seems Aristotle's Opinion, That the World was from
Eternity, and yet that it was in Nature of an Effect, in respect of God, the
Cause; it will be impossible to free this Assertion, either from a
Contradiction, or from an unworthy reflection upon the Excellency of the Divine
Nature. For if God, as a Cause, was in time antecedent to the World, then it is
a contradiction to say, it was from Eternity. If it did flow from God, as an
Emanative Effect, as the Beams from the Sun; then this destroys the chiefest
Perfection of the Divine Nature, viz. its Liberty.

And this seems one of the best Arguments to prove, That the World neither was,
nor could be from Eternity, and it will be very hard, (if once we give our
Adversaries leave to suppose it to be Eternal) by any other Argument to force
'em out of their Opinion: For I do not see, that it would be any absurdity to
say, That supposing the World to be Eternal, there has been as many Years as
Days; that is, an equal Infinite number of both, all Infinites being Equal; for
Infinity can no more be exhausted by Years than Days; if it could, then it
would not be, what it is in its own nature, inexhaustible: But the truth is,
such is the nature of Infinite with respect to our Finite Capacity, that the
one is not a Competent Judge of the other: and when we enter into disputes of
this nature, we are often entangled with unanswerable difficulties on both
sides.

But the Atheist tells us, That all this visible Universe, the Heavens, the
Earth, and all Mankind at first were the lucky hits of blind Chance, which
after almost infinite successless Trials going before, did at last happen upon
these admirable and excellent Structures, particularly those of humane Bodies.
But here we must know, that according to these Principles, the same Chance,
which first made us, must still continue us. But then how comes it to pass,
that Chance is so regular and constant in its Productions since? That whereas
it is above ten thousand to one, according to these Principles, but that
Mankind long ere this, must have wholly ceased to have been, or else nothing
but Monsters have been produced; instead hereof we see a very regular and
orderly course of Nature generally observed?

This is, as if a Man should be a thousand years in casting all sizes upon six
Dice, and then for a thousand years after to throw nothing else, if we could
suppose a Man's Life to last so long. Whoever can believe such strange things as
these, ought never to blame any one for being over credulous.

As for that other Argument, drawn from the consent of Mankind, there are some
who tell us, That those natural Impressions of God upon the minds of Men, upon
which this universal consent is founded, are mere imaginary things, and that
there is no need of 'em in our disputes against Atheism. But these Men might do
well to consider whether they do not too much oblige the Atheists, and go too
far toward the betraying the Cause of God, and Religion in the World, who
willingly quit and give up that Argument which has hitherto been managed with
such good success by the best and wisest of Men in all Ages: willingly, I say,
to give it up gratis: for I verily believe, it can never be forced and wrested
out of the hand of a Christian Philosopher, who rightly understands it. And why
should we grant any thing to an Atheist, which may tend to the advantage of
his, or the prejudice of our own Cause? unless he necessarily force it from us
by dint of Argument; always provided, that we readily acknowledge evident Truth
wherever we find it.

First, I conceive, there neither is nor can be any Argument in a true and
proper sense, a priore, to prove the Being of God, that taken from the Idea is
not such; But it is an arguing from the effect to the Cause, only the effect
seems a more immediate one, and such as bears a more particular resemblance to
the Cause.

That somewhat was from Eternity, is evidently demonstrable; for if once there
was nothing, it was impossible for any thing ever to begin to be: Now this
something must be either Matter or Spirit, a thinking or unthinking Being; it
cannot be an unthinking Being, for then it would be impossible, that there
should be any such thing, as Knowledge or Cogitation in the World, which yet we
are inwardly conscious to our selves of. For as Dr. Lock, Chap. 10. Book 4.
has well observed; It is as impossible to conceive, that ever bare
incogitative matter should produce a thinking intelligent Being, as that
nothing of it self should produce matter.

Now it must be either Man, that was the first Eternal Being, the Creator of
all things, or some other Being. But though the Atheists are not the greatest
Wits in the World, yet we must not think 'em such very Atheists neither, as to
make mere Man to set up for a Sovereign Creator. Thus we have an Idea, or
Conception of a Being infinitely more perfect than our selves, and therefore we
were not the Cause of our own Existence: for if we had, we should then have
given our selves those Perfections, which we find wanting in us, and conceive
in another. Therefore we owe our Existence to, and dependence upon that Being
without us, which enjoys all Perfections.

But now the Question is, Whether the Idea be the Cause, or occasion of this
Ratiocination, or the Ratiocination the Cause of the Idea. Some think, that
these two, Reasoning and the Idea, ought not to be separated, or
contradistinguish'd in this dispute: For the Idea is not such an Engine, as of
it self will prove the Being of God, without the Use and Exercise of reasoning
thereupon. So that the Idea does not exclude, but include the use of our
Faculties; nor is it any receding from the Argument so to do: Yet it seems more
probable, that there is something in Man, Co-eval with and connatural to his
very Being, that dictates such a thing, and directs our thoughts and reasonings
that way; for it is not probable, that Men should, as it were, accidentally,
and yet so generally agree in one and the same thing, without some inward
suggestions, and intimations at least to employ their Faculties upon such an
object, viz. a Supreme Being.

So that though this Idea be not so full and perfect, but that it may receive
further Additions of strength and clearness from Ratiocination; yet this is no
more a disparagement to the Works of Nature, that they are sometimes further
perfected by Study and Industry, than it is to a Man, that he was not born with
all those accomplishments, which he has afterward acquired.

Secondly, Next to a Sceptick, who grants no Principles at all, it is the
greatest difficulty to convince an Atheist, who asserts such absurd and
unreasonable ones, that he can scarce be urged with any greater, so that he
will more easily evade the force of any Argument, if what we urge upon him, as
an absurdity, if he make it, as it were the very Foundation of his Discourse.
Only it is observable, that such Men are more usually prevailed upon by the
Convictions of Conscience, which is done, I conceive, by awakening those
natural impressions of God, and their obligations to him in their minds) than
merely by convincing their Understandings.

Thirdly, In the managing our thoughts upon this subject, we ought to consider,
not only what is in it self possible, and perhaps may imply no contradiction,
but what upon a full consideration of things, and all their circumstances, may
be counted most reasonable, what is worthy of our rational Faculties to assert,
and a prudent Person to believe.

So that after these inward impressions made upon the minds of Men, and those
outward manifestations of himself by the Works of Creation and Providence, it
perhaps would be difficult, even for the most Skeptical Person to assign, what
further Rational Evidence he could desire for the Belief of a Deity. Nor does
that variety of Opinions concerning the Nature of God in different Nations and
among different Persons, any whit lessen the credibility of his Being, but
rather confirms and strengthens it. For this shows, that it was not the
Invention or Contrivance of any single Nation at first, nor of more jointly
afterward; for if they had thus combined together, or borrowed one from
another, in all probability they would have agreed better in their Notions and
Opinions concerning him: Nor was Religion any humane Invention to restrain the
Exorbitances of Mankind, because there was Religion before any such Offenses,
as a Learned Prelate of our own has well observed; That Oppression, though by
Accident, grew rather from Religion, than Religion from Oppression; for before
the two Brothers, Cain and Abel, had offered up their Sacrifice, there was no
such thing as Oppression.

There are some, who tell us, that the Being of God cannot be proved by any
Internal Arguments, from any natural impressions made upon the minds of Men,
dictating any such thing; others, that it cannot be proved by any external
ones, drawn from the nature of the Universe, or any thing else without us. Now
the Atheists make this advantage of these our unseasonable differences herein,
That they bid us first Answer our own Arguments, which we bring against our
selves: and if the Being of God cannot be proved either way, which some among
our selves do with too much eagerness severally assert; then they think they
have gained their point. For as for Divine Revelation, they do not much value
that, as thinking it not so proper to be urged against them, because they
believe nothing of the whole matter. What Cuperus in his Arcana Atheismi, says
of Divine Revelation, that we are first convinced by it, That there is a God,
and afterward thereby enabled to prove it by reason, I think, may be better
applied, in some proportion, to these two ways of probation here made use of,
thus; That from these natural impressions made upon the minds of Men, we have
the first grounds of our belief of a God: and then this is further confirmed by
those External Arguments drawn from Nature.

-- Quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant.

I shall here make some short remarks upon Cuperus his Opinion in this
particular; In the beginning of his Proem he tells us, with some kind of
Formality and Ostentation, That the only prejudice, that can be done to a good
cause, is to endeavor to defend it by weak Arguments. That he had frequent
opportunities of hearing Atheists (being bred up amongst'em) discovering the
weakness of those Arguments, which the Theists brought against 'em. Hereupon he
was forced to think upon some more effectual way of proving the Being of a God,
than hitherto had been made use of, which is this, to deny all natural
knowledge of God, and utterly to reject, at least at first, all those Arguments
drawn from the light of nature, and to prove his Being by Divine Revelation.
This indeed is a very firm and sure way of doing it, but I am afraid it will
not be altogether so cogent, as to convince an Atheist: for such an one will
not believe Moses his History, neither the Creation, nor any Tradition relating
to it.

Now the whole force of his Argument will depend upon this slender hinge, viz.
The faithful and uninterrupted conveyance of this Tradition to all succeeding
Ages: But the present Learned Archbishop of Canterbury, in that excellent
Sermon of his against Atheism, Page 51. tells us, That it is much more likely,
that the Belief of God, is a Notion, which was bred in the mind of Man, and
born with him, than a Tradition, transmitted from hand to hand, through all
Generations; especially if we consider, how many rude and barbarous Nations
there are, which consent in the Opinion of a God, and yet have scarce any
certain Tradition of any thing that was done amongst'em, but two or three Ages
before. If the Knowledge of God, says Cuperus, (Proem. p. penult.) was drawn
from the Light of Nature, then it needed not to be proved, That there was a
God; because thus we suppose it, and already believe it: But may not his own
way of arguing be retorted more justly upon himself? When he tells us, p. 246.
That, Postquam per Dei Revelationem edocti sumus esse Deum, tum intelligi
posse, etc. When by Divine Revelation we are taught there is a God, then we can
find out natural Arguments to prove it. But when we are first taught and
convinced by DivineRevelation, That there is a God, How do Arguments drawn from
natural reason, afterward prove it? So that indeed these Arguments will be
little more than Illustrations, or further Confirmations of a thing already
believed, because revealed. But then he says in the same place, Principia
ostendi deberent, ex quibus is, qui nullam unquam Numinis mentionem, vel
suspicionem hausisset, sponte in Numinis, Naturae Conditoris, agnitionem
paulatim deduceretur. Some Principles must be shown, from whence he that never
heard the least mention, nor had the least suspicion of a Diety, might be drawn
to the knowledge of him. To this, I Answer,

First, That according to the Principles of those Men, whom he now opposes, he
cannot ordinarily suppose a Man, without some suspicion at least of a Deity;
for this, say they, is born with him, and he must not suppose his Adversaries
Assertion to be false, but prove it so.

Secondly, Why may not that conviction of mind, which is the result of our
Faculties rightly reasoning hereupon, inferring the Existence of a Supreme
Being, together with that inward consciousness of our Obligations to him? Why
may not these be Principles sufficient to prove, so far as is requisite for
Nature to do it, That there is a God, and that to one who had not heard any
other way that there was one? But he seems to lay a great stress upon that of a
Man's having, or not having heard the least mention of a God before. But if he
suppose a Man so to have heard of a God, by Divine Revelation, as thereupon
really to believe his Existence, then those natural Arguments brought to prove
the same, may further confirm him in his belief; but though he have heard mention
made of a God, and yet not believe that there is any such thing, I do not
understand, how his bare hearing of him before will any ways make those
reasons, drawn from Nature, the more effectual to convince him.

If Men of late have too frequently run into Atheism, it was not any weakness
they found in that Argument drawn from the Light of Nature to prove the
Existence of a God, (so far as can in reason be expected from it) that was the
cause thereof; but he seems to lay the fault there, where indeed he ought not,
and ascribes it to the weak defense that some Men have made of a good Cause,
only thereby to magnify and usher in his own new Notion with more pomp, p.
247. He there grants, that Men generally have some Notion, or Idea of God: but
then, Nullus alius modus inveniri potest, quo mentes hominum occupavit, quam
quod ab ipso Deo per Revelationem, vel Creationem sit insertus. If by Creation
he means that natural constitution of Soul, whereby, by the very Laws or
Creation, natural to such a Being, this Notion of God was imprinted on it: then
his Assertion would be true, but then he would herein contradict himself. By
Creation therefore he must mean only that Tradition of the Being of God,
derived down to all Mankind from the Creation: and then we can easily assign
another way how this Idea might possess the Minds of Men, viz. that before
mentioned natural Inscription. In Chap. 9. Lib. 2. there his chief design is to
prove, that the Being of God is not knowable by the Light of Nature. Now I
humbly conceive, that in that Dialogue, which he framed betwixt Philalethes and
Misalethes, he did not equal justice to Truth in stating the Question so, as to
make Philalethes, (whose Province it ought to have been rather to defend than
prove the Being of God) the Opponent; whereas he should in strictness, rather
have been Respondent: for this advantage accrued to Misalethes, by being on the
Defensive part, that mere Evasions might serve instead of solid Answers. For it
seems a more easy thing to defend an Error, than to oppose a Truth.

Though I speak not this as if Truth was not able, not only to defend it self,
but to convince its Adversaries, provided that reason would do it. But I do not
see, why we should give that advantage to the Atheists, as to give 'em leave to
suppose us at once, both out of our Reason and Religion too. p. 264. Cum vero
omnes ex nature a petitas rations, quae pro utraque sententia proferri possunt,
invalidas esse, etc. Seeing, he says, he has proved all the natural Reasons
brought either for, or against the Being of God, to be invalid, and the
Atheist, he says, has nothing else to rely on: then the most natural
consequence hereof will be, That the Atheists must now hang in aequilibrio, and
profess themselves Scepticks; and this is the utmost that he can pretend to
have effected upon 'em, p. 265. He tells us, That that Notion of a God, which
so generally prevails in the World, must be derived from God himself; for si
conficta esset, etc. if it were feigned, then it would be necessary, that in
every Nation there should be some who first invented it, and persuaded it upon
others; Quod, (p. 266.) sane impossible est, nisi homines qui de Deo nihil
unquam audiverunt, naturali dispositione ad illam opinionem maxim essent
proclives; where he grants, That if there be such a natural Proclivity in the
Minds of Men to believe a God, then his Argument fails: he therefore should
have bent his utmost force to disprove this Natural Disposition, or Proclivity
to believe a God; but the Argument he there brings, will not do it. It Is only
this, that Rochfortius and some others relate, That there are some Nations in
America, who cannot be persuaded that there is a God. To this I Answer,

First, That it will proportionably prove against himself, and destroy the
Universality of his own Tradition, for it will follow hence, either that God
had not taken care to make known this Original Tradition to all Nations, or
that they which were the first Founders of these Nations, had neglected to
teach it to their Posterity; or that in process of time both Parents and
Children were grown so rude and barbarous, as to forget it: and indeed,
according to this Hypothesis, it is a wonder that half of the Gentile World
long e're this, is not become mere Soldanians, without any knowledge of God, or
any Principles of Morality; nor can there be any good account given of those
Moral Principles of Honesty, according to this Traditionary way, which were as
generally believed among the Gentiles, as the Being of a God, and perhaps with
a greater Unisormity.

Secondly, We do not say, that this Notion of God is so implanted in the Minds
of Men, or so connatural to our Faculties, but that by carelessness and
Inadvertency, by Vice and Luxury, by habitual Wickedness and Debauchery it may
be in a great measure obliterated.

Others tell us, That the Being of God is not to be proved either by any
Original Tradition, or by any Natural Impressions made upon Men's Minds, but
only by external Arguments drawn from the Nature of things, and from the Nature
of Man; that is, from the consideration of his Soul and Body, not supposing, or
including any such Natural Notices: I do not here go about to oppose any
Arguments brought to support and defend the Cause of God and Religion in the
World. Valiant quantum valere possunt: Only when their Authors would monopolize
all the force of Argument to their own way of arguing, and absolutely reject
all the rest; this, I think, is to give our Adversaries advantage over us. Thus
that Ingenious Gentleman, Mr. Tyrrell, in his late Book, p. 197. tells us, That
the knowledge of the Being of God is clearly, and without difficulty, to be
read, from the great Book of the Creation, without any assistance from natural
Impressions; and he cites Romans 1. 19, 20. Because that which is known of God,
is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them; for the invisible things
of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the
things, that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead. Where he says, The
Apostle appeals to the common reason of Mankind, guided by things without us,
for the proof of a Deity: But it does not appear from hence, that he draws his
Argument merely from things without us; for the 19th Verse seems as clearly to
relate to those inward Impressions made upon our Minds, as the 20th does to the
outward Creation. (...), is manifest in them; I know that Preposition (...), is
sometimes rendered inter; but when the proper and natural signification of
words may be kept, why should we look for another? For the invisible things of
him from the Creation.] By Creation here is neither meant the things created,
nor the Act of Creation, but only it relates to the time thereof. From the
Creation] that is, ever since the Creation; by which, says Dr. Hammond, it
appears, That there is no necessity of interpreting God's (...), his Doings, or
Actions here, of the Works of Creation, (that is, solely) but of all things,
that from time to time, to this inclusively, have been done in the World by
him; and so it will be extended to all the Doctrines, and Miracles, and Actions
of Christ, the whole business of the Gospel. Nay, I may add, that even those
natural Impressions upon the Minds of Men, may be meant by God's (...) here
mentioned. Even his Eternal Power and Godhead;] (...). The first may refer to
his Omnipotence in Creating the Material World. The other, (...), to the more
Divine Constitution of Spiritual and Intellectual Beings.

CHAP. V. Of the State of Nature, that it is neither a State of Equality, nor a
State of War.
I Shall here by way of Introduction to this Chapter, briefly take notice of
what Mr. Hobbs tells us in Chap. 4. of his Leviathan, concerning Speech, and
the particular uses of it, viz. that it is for the acquiring of Arts, and the
improvement of Knowledge, to convey to others that skill which we have attained
to our selves, and to communicate to them our Counsels and Resolutions, that so
we may have the mutual help and advice of one another: but now how can these
Uses be applied to that cross-grained state of Nature, which he has described
to be nothing but a State of Fraud and Violence? What place is there for Arts
and Sciences? What room for friendly counsel, and kind advice in a state where
all are Enemies to one another, where what counsel we give to others, ought
rather in reason to be suspected, seeing therein we design nothing but our own
advantage? Why should we desire, or hope for the assistance of others, seeing
there we design nothing, but by force or fraud to supplant all we deal with,
and by degrees to draw 'em into their own ruin? Now Speech must be supposed in
the State of Nature; for without it, he tells us, there could be no entering
into Societies, no Compacts, no transferring of Rights per verba in praesenti.

In the same Chapter also he tells us how necessary it is for those, who aspire
to knowledge, to be strict in fixing the true sense of Words, and framing true
Definitions, in examining those of former Authors, and either to correct 'em
when deficient, or to make new ones themselves. Therefore, he says, in
Geometry, which is the most accurate Science, Men begin with settling the
significations of their words; which settling of Significations, they call
Definitions, and place 'em at the beginning of their work.

Now it had been well, if Mr. Hobbs had practiced his own rule, and that, in
one of the most considerable Instances of his Moral Philosophy; that is, if he
had at first given us a perfect definition of that word so often made use of in
his Writings, Nature, and had fixed the Significations of those Expressions,
Naturally, and by Nature: Which he could not well have done without
distinguishing it into pure and primitive, and into corrupt and depraved
Nature: Which he having no where done, it has occasioned a great deal of
obscurity and uncertainty in all his Discourses relating thereunto; which if he
had done, in all probability it would have put an end to many of those
Controversies, which were perhaps at first begun, and afterward continued by
the want of it.

It Is true, he has given us several Senses and Acceptations of these words, but
yet has been so far from settling and fixing their Significations, as he calls
it, that he has rather left them still in greater uncertainty, especially in
those other places, where they are mentioned singly, without any intimation at
all, in what sense they are to be taken. In his Preface to his Book de Cive,
where it is objected, that from his Principles it would follow, that Men are
wicked by Nature. This, he says, does not follow, for though Men by Nature,
that is, from their first Birth, as they are mere sensible Creatures, etc. Here
Nature must signify Man, as he comes first into the World, with respect merely
to his Animal Qualisications, which he has in common with other Creatures. In
the same Preface, forasmuch as God overrules all Rulers by Nature; that is, by
the dictates of Natural Reason: here Nature seems to refer rather to the
higher, than the lower Faculties of the Soul, Chap. 1. Paragraph 2. if by
Nature one Man should love another; that is, as Man; here Nature seems to refer
to Man in his largest extent. The Law of Nature he thus defines, that it is the
dictate of Natural Reason conversant about those things which are either to be
done or omitted for the constant preservation of our Life and Members, as much
as in us lies. Here he makes Natural Reason to truckle under that mean design
of self-preservation in the narrowest sense, as if right reason had no other or
higher end and design, than that of a Man's private security here in this
World. It would be tedious to reckon up all those several Senses, which in
several places he gives to those words, accordingly as may best serve the
purpose he is then about. Now in the midst of these various Significantions,
how must we interpret those places, where he tells us, That the Dispositions of
Men are naturally such, that unless they be restrained through fear, every Man
will distrust and dread each other: that Men by Nature are in such a state,
wherein their Wills are their supreamest Law, with respect to their
Self-preservation: How shall we know, whether by Nature here be meant the
Dictates of right reason, truly so called, or only the irregular motions of
Passion and sensitive Appetite. But I shall here leave Mr. Hobbs to the just
severity of his own censure, and a little examine Chap. 13. of his Leviathan,
wherein he makes the State of Nature a State of Equality, and a State of War:
These are the two imaginary Poles, upon which his State of Nature moves.

First, He tells us, That Men are by Nature equal.

1. As for strength of Body, the weakest has strength enough to kill the
strongest; and to kill is the greatest thing, and they that can do the greatest
thing, are equal: quod erat demonstrandum. The Confutation of some kind of
errors may give occasion to something worth the Writer's Thoughts, or the
Reader's Pains; but the confuting of such insipid stuff, as this, cannot but be
tedious to both. By this way of arguing he might prove, that the meanest
Creature in Nature is, or may be equal to Man: For did not a Fly once kill a
Pope? And may not a Spider poison an Emperor? But then how this should become a
Principle of Policy, any other way than as by considering this casual Power,
which the weakest Man, or meanest Creature may have over us, thereby to incite
our utmost care and circumspection, and to beget in us an inoffensive behavior
toward all Men: how, I say, this should be an Argument to prove the natural
equality of all Men, as the Phrase is used in Politics, is hard to understand.

Then as to the Faculties of the Mind, he says, he finds a greater equality
among Men, than that of strength of Body: for Prudence is nothing but
Experience, which equal time gives equally to all: but suppose that Men were
equal, as to Prudence, which yet is evidently false; yet there are other
faculties or habits of the Mind, wherein one Man may excel another. Here it is
not material to enquire, whether the Souls of Men were equal, as to their first
Creation; we are now to consider 'em in a more complex'd capacity, as joined
with such and such Bodies, wherein we find as much variety in their several
abilities and inclinations now, as if they were really created unequal: but
certainly Prudence must be something more than mere Experience: for Prudence is
a further habit super-induc'd upon the Faculty, whereby we are enabled to
manage our affairs, according to the Rules of Reason and Equity; thus
Experience to Prudence is but as undigested meat to the nourishment of the
Body. Experience indeed may collect general Rules for the mannagement of the
affairs of Life: but then it is Prudence, which by considering matters of fact
in all their Circumstances, by comparing them with the present state of things,
and the possibilities of future contingencies, does as it were digest
experience into laudable nourishment: but if we did suppose Men equal in their
natural, yet it will not thence follow, that they are so in their Political
capacity too. For since Men did not at first spring out of the Earth like
Mushrooms, but came into the World, by the ordinary methods of Generation, by
way of Father and Son; therefore there must needs be a subordination and
inferiority among 'em, a dependence upon one another in respect of Causality,
and an Obligation in respect of Duty and Obedience.

Nor, secondly, is the state of Nature a state of War; if any two men, says Mr.
Hobbs, desire the same thing, which nevertheless they cannot both enjoy, they
become Enemies, and in their way to their end endeavor to destroy or subdue
each other. If he speak this in reference to Dominion or Empire, that common
Mistress courted by all, as he says, in the state of Nature; it may be justly
questioned, whether all do thus inordinately affect superiority, and whether
all find themselves thus naturally inclined to destroy those that seem to stand
betwixt them and the Throne: or are there not some more modestly virtuous, who
out of consciousness of their own inabilities, and out of due respect to other
Men's Merits above their own, who would quit their pretenses to Empire, and
willingly live in obedience to others? Is it not inordinate Pride and Ambition,
rather than the dictates of nature and right reason in those, who thus
unreasonably aim at nothing less than a Crown.

Secondly, These natural Usurpers do not make use of the most proper means, in
order to their own self-preservation. Here I would only apply Mr. H. his own
way and method of reasoning against the attempt of obtaining Sovereignty by
Rebellion to the present Case, Pa. 73. Lev. It Is manifest, says be, that though
the event should follow, yet because it cannot reasonably be expected, but
rather the contrary, and because by gaining it so, others are taught to gain
the same in like manner, the attempt thereof is against reason. Now does not
this equally hold good against the attempt, which these natural Usurpers do
propound to themselves of an Universal Empire? would not the great hazard of
any ones particular design succeeding make the action, in Mr. Hobbs his own
account, very unreasonable? So that there is but little reason for Men to
betake themselves to that way of anticipation in this state of nature, that is,
for a Man to endeavor to Master all before him, so long, till he see no other
Power great enough to endanger him: seeing, that very equality, which he
supposes, should more effectually persuade 'em to Peace, or some more Friendly
way of composing differences, rather than urge 'em to War; seeing no single
Person can in reason ever hope to attain to Empire, since he must always have
ten thousand as strong and as cunning as himself, to oppose all his designs.
Thus that equality which seems to give him right, does at the same time hinder
him from the actual procurement of it. He grants indeed, That this condition of
War was never generally over all the World; yet he says, in many places they
live so now: for the Savage people in many places of America (except the
Government of small Families, the Concord whereof depends upon natural Lust)
have no Government at all, etc.

But how is Government (though of small Families) consistent with that state of
absolute independency, before described, where every one has a right to every
thing, and every Man an Enemy each to other? So that this exception of
particular Families does indeed destroy his general Rule: but then he
interposes these two things.

1. That these Families are small.

2. Their Concord depends upon natural Lust.

But first he grants, Lev. Page 105. that a great Family, if it be not part of
a Commonwealth, as to rights of Sovereignty, is a little Monarchy; but he will
not grant the same privilege to a little Family, viz. unless it be of that
power, as not to be subdued without the hazard of War: but the rights of
governing is that, wherein the nature and essence of any Government does
consist, and not in strength and greatness; now these proportionally are as
much in a little Family, as in a great one; and we may with the same reason
say, that the Essence of a natural, as well as of a Political Body, does
consist in such a proportion of strength and greatness, below which a Man
cannot truly be called a Man.

2. He says, that the Concord of these Families depends upon natural Lust, Sola
cupiditatum similitudine, Lat. Translation. But let the Concord depend upon
what it will, it is not material, the Government and Constitution of Families is
not consistent with such a state of nature as Mr Hobbs describes; and here he
might as well say, That Bastards are not Men; because they are gotten for the
gratification of unlawful Lust; for the different grounds, or reasons, or ends,
Men may have in making a thing, do not alter the nature and essence of it, when
once made. The Question here is not, whether the Families be small or great, or
upon what their Concord does depend; but whether the notion and being of a
Family, does not destroy his supposed state of Nature. But how does he prove,
that the Concord of those Families depends only on natural Lust, as his
English; for War seems the more genuine result of Lust, than Concord: or on
similitude of desires, as his Latin Translation renders it? for this he makes
the great Cause of competition and contest, when several desire, and are not
able to enjoy the same thing. Thus similitude of desires must be sometimes the
cause of War, sometimes of Peace; thus does he at once, out of the same Mouth,
blow both hot and cold. What the meaning of the Author of the device was, when
he made two Pitchers floating upon the Waters, with this Inscription, Si
collidimur, frangimur, I know not; but it seems very applicable to Mr. Hobbs
his methods of reasoning, if they be considered singly, they may perhaps bear
some plausible show of Argument: but if they be compared with each other, they
will often be found as inconsistent with themselves, as they are singly
inconsistent with the truth. But he tells us, that in all times Kings and
Princes, because of their Independency, are in continual Iealousies, in a State
and posture of Gladiators. Here it is observable, how cunningly he joins those
two words, State and Posture, seeming thereby to insinuate, that Men could not
be in a posture of Defense, unless they were in a state of War: for Kings to
put themselves into a condition to repel injuries, when violently offered, is
no more, than what reason and Prudence dictates; but this does not infer Mr.
Hobb's his State of War, but rather the contrary, when we see some Kingdoms
able, and yet not willing to oppress their Neighbors. That Men may awfully do
something in the time of War, which is not lawful to do in the time of Peace,
is certainly true: but then we mast not think, that the same blast of the
Trumpet that Proclaimed the War, did at the same time blow away all those airy
Notions of just and unjust, which according to him, have no other being in
Nature, but what they received from humane Compacts. Justice and Injustice, are
none of the faculties, either of the Body or Soul, they are qualities that
relate to Man in Society, not in Solitude. Further in this slate of Nature,
nothing can be unjust, here Force and Fraud are two Cardinal Pertues: that the
practice and external exercise of Justice, and many other moral Duties, does
suppose a Society, or at least a state of Friendship, that so Men may have
proper objects of those respective Virtues, is certainly true; yet the reasons
of their obligation are founded in the nature of each single Man, and so may
belong to a Man in Solitude, for the reasons of Justice and other Moral
Virtues, are not ultimately to be resolved into that natural support and
advantage they bring to a Society and Commonwealth, and that they cannot,
without great disadvantage, be banished out of it, but into that Conformity
they bear to the Divine Nature, and to the participation thereof in our selves:
God indeed in the wise and benign disposals of his Providence, has twisted our
duty and our interest together: Goodness and Virtue have a natural tendency to
make us as perfectly happy, as it is possible, even in our civil and political
Capacities; but then they are not therefore only Virtues, because profitable to
the public, but upon some other higher grounds and reasons being Virtues, they
thus also, as parts of Godliness, become prositable to all things; having the
promise of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

But why are Justice and Injustice qualities that relate to Men only in
Society, and not in Solitude? seeing these may as well be in a Man alone in the
World, as some of his Passions, which also necessarily relate to their proper
objects.

Mr. Hobbs some where approves of that definition, which the Schools give of
Justice, constans and perpetua voluntas jus suum cuique tribuendi, so that
according to this, a Man may be just, if he have a real and sincere desire to
give every one his own, though he have not where withal to do it. Thus also why
may not a Man be just and charitable, though he want fit objects to exercise
these Virtues upon; for why should the want of the object more destroy the
nature of the Virtue, than the want of the subject matter, or material part, as
in the former Case of the necessitous just Man.

There were some fatal Philosophers of old, and some such there are still, who
make good and evil, just and unjust, mere factitious things, (...) not (...);
such as depend only upon the free and arbitrary determination of the Divine
Will, but then to make 'em to depend merely upon the pleasure of the Civil
Magistrate, this seems to be a peculiar flight, proper only to Mr. Hobbs, thus
to make a God of his Leviathan: This Opinion of his does either suppose no God
at all, or such an one, as does not much concern himself in the Government of
the World, but, leaves all to his Vicegerent here below; obey the King, and you
can scarce, according to him, disobey God.

Some will scarce allow, that granting Mr. Hobbs his Principles, that his
Conclusions do ever necessarily (or but seldom) follow, that is, that there is
but little strict and severe ratiocination in all his Writings: yet this, I
think, we must grant, that his dangerous Errors in Government and Religion,
are but necessary deductions from his false Principles first laid in humane
Nature.

That Man is naturally a sociable Creature, fit for Society, is granted by
most, and not denied by Mr. Hobbs himself, but then he tells us, that Man is
not born fit for it, this he is fitted for, not by Nature, but by Education:
and the reason hereof is, because he is not born at Years of discretion, not at
Age to Seal a Bond, and without this there is no entering into Compacts, or
Civil Society. But he tells us, Pa. 21. Lev. that Children are called
reasonable Creatures for the possibility apparent of having the use of reason
in time to come; and I know not, why we may not by the same reason, grant Men
to be born sociable Creatures, or fit for Society, for the like apparent
possibility, though they were not actually entered into Covenants, for they are
born with all those dispositions and aptitudes to Society, which they have for
reason it self: now that Man is thus really a SociableCreature, will appear
both from the nature and necessities of Mankind. 1. From the nature of Man, for
the very fundamental Laws of Nature suppose either a Society, or something
answerable to it, Quod tibi non vis sieri, alteri ne feceris; Do to others, as
me desire others should do to us, and we are generally as much obliged to the
duties of Justice and Honesty to others, as of Prudence and Caution to our
selves; and this necessarily supposes a Society, or something like it, a state
of Friendship. 2. The necessities of Mankind seem to argue us to be sociable
Creatures, such whose very subsistence necessarily requires the aid and
assistance of others, otherwise the very Birth of a Child would be the certain
exposing of it to destruction.

Mr. Hobbs will not grant any Laws of Nature truly so called, in the state of
Nature; they are only certain Theorems, or Maxims, tending to Peace, rather
than Laws, that bring us under any obligation. But why do not these Laws of
Nature, which he grants to be dictates of reason, lay as great an obligation
upon us for Obedience, as those inordinate Passions of Nature? Especially if we
consider, that obedience to these dictates of reason are more fit and proper
means in order to self-preservation, than the prosecution of those mere rights
of nature, as he calls them, violence and anticipation. And if we reflect upon
matters of fact, and the several instances that History furnishes us withal, we
shall find Examples of Mercy and Compassion to others, of a generous
condescension and self-denial of our selves, and of an universal love and good
will to Mankind, sufficient to confute the scandals cast upon humane nature
upon this account. Though it must also be granted, that there has been too many
barbarous and inhumane actions committed, both by Heathens and Christians too,
but then those actions were not approved by the more wise and sober Persons of
those very Nations that committed 'em. 2. They were universally Condemned by
the more civilized part of the World. 3. They were so far from tending to their
advantage, that they have many times proved the cause or occasion of many and
grievousCalamities brought upon themselves and Nation by the just Providence of
God.

Now Mr. Hobbs his Principles in general seem to be the suiting or fitting the
vicious practices of Mankind to an Hypothesis, thereby endeavoring to enact
wickedness by a Law, and to prove the lawfulness of all possible violence and
injustice, by the Magna Charta of Self-preservation. This bad use has he made
of the general viciousness of Men's Lives, from thence to gather Principles,
which might, if possible, legitimate their actions, like Machiavel, who from
the small respect that Princes generally bore to Leagues and Oaths, taught his
Prince, that there was no obligation lay upon him from 'em, but only to consult
his own interest and advantage by 'em; and whereas his Compurgator admires the
bad fortune of Machiavel, to see one Man inherit in particular the Mass of
reproaches due to all Princes and Statesmen in general, he might have ceased
his wonder, if he had considered, that it was one thing to act wickedly, and
another to teach Men that they might do so. Personal bad actions are but the
failures of particular Men, such as they themselves perhaps may go about some
ways to excuse or extenuate, but not to justify: but now Machiavel his thus
becoming an Advocate for Vice, is of more pernicious consequence; it emboldens
Sin, and endeavors to confound the notions of good and evil, for he that shall
break one of the least Commandments, and teach men so, he shall be called the
least in the Kingdom of Heaven. It is further pleaded for Machiavel, that all
his Documents he gives only to a Prince, for had he recommended this practice
to a Son, or any else circumscribed in a narrower compass, than a Kingdom, he
might have been more justly Condemned. Now this Apology, however weak and
insufficient it is for Machiavel himself, yet is Mr. Hobbs utterly incapable of
any such excuse, because his bad Principles are of a more universal influence,
and reach not only to Prince, but People too.

I called Mr. Hobbs his Principles an Hypothesis, now if any be offended at the
word, as a term of diminution, I shall here further do these two things. 1.
Show, that it is only so, and no more, being something that is rather supposed
than sufficiently proved. 2. That it is not a good Hypothesis, as wanting those
conditions and qualifications, which are requisite to any Hypothesis in
general, much more to such an one, as the nature of the subject required his to
be. 1. It is an Hypothesis and no more, and I have very good Authority so to
call it from Mr. Hobbs his own words, 8 Chapter de Cive. Let us return again, says
he, to the slate of nature, and consider Man as even now sprang out of the
Earth, and suddenly, like Mushromcs come to full maturity, without all kind of
Government to each other. Now this, I conceive, the most proper and genuine
interpretation that can be put upon the place, to call it an Hypothesis. For I
would not willingly think, that Mr. Hobbs did really believe, that once upon a
time Men started out of the Earth, like Mole-hills, especially if we consider,
that he himself does Satyrically reflect upon such a supposal, where he
compares some kind of ignorant persons to Children, that having no thoughts of
Generation, are made believe by the Women, that their Brothers and Sisters are
not born, but found in the Garden: here we may observe how little right reason
there is in all Mr. Hobbs his Discourses, that depend hereupon, for he himself
tells us in his De Cive, 2 Chapter That right reason is that which concludes from
true Principles. Now these true Principles in matters of Morality and Policy,
must be more than supposedly true: indeed a certain kind of truth may be in
favor granted to an Hypothesis of natural Philosophy, if it exactly answer all
the Phenomenon of Nature, though it self do not answer the real truth; but this
Indulgence cannot be granted to things of a moral or political concern.

Neither Secondly is it a good Hypothesis, as wanting those qualifications
which are required to any Hypothesis in general, which are these three. 1. An
Hypothesis must be possible, this is the least that it can pretend to, but it
must not be only so according to the utmost extent of possibility, but also
fairly possible according to the most easy methods of our Conceptions, that is,
probable, so contrived, that we might be thence persuaded, that that was the
way, that God and Nature made use of in that particular: that as the Epicureans
say of the Universe, that though it was the result of blind chance, yet all
things therein have happened as well, as if they had been the result of the
greatest wisdom and contrivance: thus an Hypothesis, though perhaps it be not
the real truth, yet it should give as full and natural Solutions of things, as
if indeed it were. 2. It must be self-consistent, and not contain Principles of
Selfdissolution within it self, for it is impossible, that that should be
agreeable to the wise and regular methods of Nature, and Providence, which is
not agreeable with it self. 3. An Hypothesis ought to employ our Faculties in
the search of true and useful Knowledge, and also to promote real Piety in the
World, therefore we ought not to fancy to our selves such an Hypothesis in
Philosophy, as excludes God out of the World, and such an one as asserts a mere
material Universe. Now here I might easily show, that this of Mr. Hobb's, is
neither 1. Possible, much less probable. 2. Not consistent with it self. 3. So
far from promoting sound Knowledge and true Piety, that it is really
destructive of both.

Whether such a state of Nature, as Mr. Hobbs describes, be a proper and
effectual means, in order to a Man's self-preservation, may be justly
questioned, and indeed he himself seems not to be of that Opinion, seeing he
makes his natural Statesmen to get out of it as soon as they can, in order to
the bettering of their condition; yet this is certain, that he makes private
interest the great and ultimate end of all humane actions in general, and of
his Levia. in particular, as being that, wherein he thinks he has laid the best
and surest foundations of all humane happiness: I shall therefore here, by way
of Appendix to this Chapter, speak something in general concerning this great
Principle of Self-Preservation.

It is the natural folly of Mankind to run out of one extreme of Vice and
Error into another; thus perhaps the ignorant Zeal and blind Devotion of some
who attributed too little, might first give occasion to others to ascribe too
much to Sels-preservation; however we must not deny it its due regard, so far
as Reason and Religion admit, because others have extended it further, than in
either it ought. I shall therefore freely grant, what the greatest Patrons of
Self-preservation can with any just ground or reason demand, and hereby I shall
gain this double advantage. 1. It will hence appear, that it is not out of any
prejudice or heat of opposition, that I contradict any thing, even in that
Opinion I do oppose.

2. Hereby I shall come to a truer stateing of the Question, and so shall be
better able to defend it: for this disadvantage there is even to Truth it self,
in the false stating of a Question, that we either undertake to oppose that in
an adversary which is really true, and so irresragable; or else to defend
something that is false, and so not capable of being defended.

To deny that which is true, is altogether needless, for we need not fear any
prejudice to a good Cause from truth elsewhere, because all truths of this
nature are consistent with themselves, and no ways contrary to each other,
whereas the denial of any thing that is true, though in an adversary, may break
that continuity of truth, and some way or other weaken our own cause, I shall
ad two or three general considerations relating hereunto.

1. That God has imprinted in Man a principle of self preservation is not only
true, but very agreeable to the goodness of God, and very subservient for the
carrying on the designs of Prudence and Piety in the world, for it would have
reflected dishonourably either upon the goodness or wisdom of God, to have
made such an excellent creature as Man, and taken no care for his preservation,
so far as it should not be in the power of any one upon every slight occasion
to throw away himself, and so destroy Gods peculiar Image; or to have exposed
him to all the dangers, that either his own inadvertency or the malice of
others might have brought upon him, without some innate inclinations of self
preservation, and suitable principles of prudence to enable him thereunto. Thus
Religion it self does not only permit, but command us to act with a due respect
to those two grand Principles of a Christian Life, Prudence and Innocence, to
be wise as Serpents, and innocent as Doves.

Further, without this we had wanted that most exact and easy rule of Charity
to others, Whatsoever you would that Men should do unto you, even so do you
unto them, where our love to our selves is made the rule and measure of our
Charity to others.

But, Mr. Hobbs makes self preservation without any respect to the lawfulness
of the means, to be the first and great dictate of Reason and Nature, and
charges Christianity with folly, in that in some cases it so little regards its
own safety, but exposes its professors to Martyrdom for Religion's sake.

If, says he, Chap. 42. we be commanded by our lawful Prince, to say that we do
not believe in Christ, we must obey him, for words are but external things, and
do no more express the assent of the Speaker, than any other external action:
and therefore a Christian in such things has the same liberty, that the
Prophet gave to Naaman the Syrian: 2 Kings 5. 18. In this thing the Lord pardon
thy Servant, that when my Master goes into the House of Rimmon, to worship
there, and he leans on my hand, and I bow my self in the house of Rimmon, the
Lord pardon thy servant in this thing, and he said unto him, go in peace. Here
Mr. Hobbs says, that Naaman believed the true God in his Heart, but by
worshipping would seem not to believe, least he should offend his King. But here
he supposes, but proves not, that Naaman here asks Pardon for what he designed
to do for the time to come, whereas the words may be as well rendered so, as to
signify his asking Pardon for the time past: but supposing, that he here refers
to the time to come, yet this is not so much a denying of the true God, as if
he had denied him with his Lips, as Mr. Hobbs would have it, for here he did
not deny the true God at all, because he declared before, that by this
incurvation he did not design any adoration of the Idol, and this Declaration
was as public as his action, viz. that henceforth he would worship no other,
but the God of Israel. Now Mr. Hobbs could not well imagine a Man to deny the
true God with his Lips before a persecuting Magistrate, and withal suppose him
at the same time to declare, as it was in Naamans Case, that he intended no
such thing, as he spoke by his words, for this in all probability would rather
incense the Prince, than any ways tend to his own preservation. 2. Though the
love of God, and the love of our selves, rightly understood, are no ways
opposite to one another, in as much as God requires nothing of us, that is
inconsistent with our real interest, yet we may truly and properly assert, that
God is to be loved for himself, for the Excellency and Amiableness of his own
Nature, not but that we may, and generally do, love God too with respect to his
relative goodness toward us: thus Religion is suited, both to the most
generous tempers of some, and provides objects for the most heroic acts of
virtue, and takes away all occasion from those, who would, upon this occasion,
fix upon it the name of mercenary, and also on the other hand it condescends to
the more common and ordinary inclinations of Mankind, in suffering and
encouraging them to act with respect to the recompense of reward.

But though the constitution of humane nature be such, that the considerations
of Gods relative goodness to us do generally mingle themselves with all our
thoughts of God, and exercises of our love toward him; I doubt not but we may,
without any fantastical abstraction, so far distinguish betwixt the mercies
received, and the excellency of the Divine Nature, that we may even therein
found a reason of our love of him. So that the loving of God for his own sake,
though, I believe, it seldom occurs in practice, yet it ought not to be spoke
against in Discourse, provided first, that it be not made use of to lead men
into unwarrantable extravagancies, either in opinion or practice, Secondly,
Provided, as Bishop Tailor says, that what is a great perfection in some be not
imposed as a Law upon all.

3. In extreme necessity, it is lawful for a Man to do, what otherwise he ought
not to do: here, I suppose, a Man brought to that exigency, that without timely
and suitable supplies, he certainly perishes; by what means he is here brought
into these circumstances, I do not here consider; only I except this, That he
be not a Malefactor condemned, and now about to undergo the just and due
Punishment of his Offense: but then this necessity must be for the necessary
sustentation of Life, not for the gratisication of Humor or sensual Appetite;
we must not think with Mr. Hobbs, That we may, not only for Preservation but
Delectation also, endeavor to destroy others. He also tells us, That in the
State of Nature there is nothing further required to make a thing lawful, but
its being necessary to our Preservation; and nothing required to make it
necessary, but a strong opinion that it is so; so that, according to him,
confidence of Belief, and strength of Fancy may alter the nature of things, and
make 'em lawful or unlawful accordingly; so that, according to him, we then
principally, if not only offend against the Laws of Nature, when we pretend
something necessarily to tend to our Preservation, which indeed either does
not, or what we do not confidently enough believe to do so. Further,

This necessity must be real, not imaginary; urgent and inevitable, not such as
may be supplied or prevented by our own Endeavors. We must not pretend
Necessity, when indeed we only indulge our own Laziness, and neglect the use of
those means, whereby we might possibly remove, what we now suppose: in these
circumstances a Man may lawfully make use of those means, which necessarily
tend to his Preservation, and no further. Thus in case of extreme Hunger, he
may take so much of other Men's Goods, as are necessary to preserve his Life,
without incurring the Guilt of Theft; and the Reason hereof is, not merely
because the Owner, in such a case, is bound to give as much as is sufficient
for that purpose; for in many cases others may be bound to do, what we have no
power to force in case of denial. Nor, secondly, because at the first Division
of things, the Dividers excepted this case of extreme Necessity; wherein they
did not design the Right of Dominion and Property to be so strict and severe,
but that, in this case, the Ius primaevum should return.

But, first, it seems not so reasonable to believe, that there ever was that
Usus communis of all things, as Grotius asserts, and consequently no such
Division, wherein he supposes all Property to be founded.

Secondly, Suppose the Dividers, either through carelessness or inadvertency had
left this as a Casus omissus, without making any Provision about it, and it
does not any ways evidently appear, that they ever made any such; or if through
perverseness and ill nature they had determined it otherwise, yet the thing
would still have been, as now we apprehend it: so that it is more than
probable, that both Property and that lawful Power that a Man has, to relieve
himself in extreme necessity, does depend upon some antecedent Reason, and some
higher Principle, than that barely supposed Agreement of the first Dividers.

3. The Reasonableness of laying down our Lives for the sake of Religion, will
appear from the unreasonableness of the contrary Assertion, which must suppose
one of these three things; either that God has not Authority to command his
Creatures such instances of Obedience; or not Goodness enough to reward 'em,
for what he thus enjoins; or that we have not sufficient evidence, that his
Will and Pleasure is, that in some cases he requires it: to deny the two
former, is to deny the Dictates of natural Reason; to assert the third, is to
deny the plain Words and Commands of God in Scripture.

And further, if we consider what it is, that we are commanded to part with,
only the short and transitory satisfactions of a frail Life, which at best we
cannot enjoy long, and which may be otherwise so loaded with Miseries, that the
very continuance of it may be the greatest Punishment. Besides, it is probable,
the Martyrs, notwithstanding the greatness of their Torments, being as great as
either the Wit or Malice of their Enemies could invent, yet that they did not
feel so much pain, as mere sensual Men might imagine, if we consider the
intenseness of their Thoughts, then set on the Ioys above, and also the more
plentiful effusions of the Divine Grace, strengthening and assisting them; so
that they seemed rather pleasantly to enjoy, than painfully to undergo the
flames.

CHAP. VI. Religion the best Foundation of Civil Government. With an
Examination of some of Machiavel's Opinions relating hereunto.
IF we consider the Nature of Religion in general: how that it is that Order
and Constitution of things in the World, whereby all rational Agents, either
do, or at least are bound to act in observation of those mutual Respects they
bear to God, themselves and others; how that it is that great instrument of
Providence in the World, for the management of the most considerable Affairs
thereof. And what some Philosophers have asserted of the Soul of the Universe,
may be very well applied to Religion in respect of the rational World, that it
ties each part to it self and to one another, and disposes of every thing for
the Good and Advantage of the whole, and of every part. This considered, it is
impossible, but that Religion should have a very good and benign influence upon
all public Societies, these being the most considerable Bodies of the Universe.

And this the very Enemies of Religion acknowledge in their most malicious
scandals and reproaches, that are cast upon it, viz. when they tell us, That
Religion is nothing but a mere politic Device and Contrivance of Princes, by
which they might better govern their Subjects, and awe them into obedience: but
this, as most Errors are, is founded in a certain Truth; and though it be a
false scandal cast upon Religion, yet it supposes this undeniable Verity, That
Religion is not only consistent with, but also highly promotive of the Ends of
Government. Now the consistency of Religion with Government in general will
appear, from these following Considerations.

1. Religion in the true and sincere Exercise of it, is the only Means
appointed by God for the attaining of eternal Happiness; now one great end of
God's instituting a Government in the World, was to put Men into a better
capacity of performing their Duty toward God, themselves and others.

These things being first granted (which I think also are sufficiently plain
and evident in themselves) it is impossible, that Religion should be
inconsistent with, or destructive of Government; seeing these two are made
joint means in order to one common end of humane Happiness. Thus God sent us
into the World, that by Holiness we should arrive at Happiness; and he has
appointed a Government over us, that under it we should lead quiet and
peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty: therefore these two, Religion and
Government, are certainly consistent with each other; otherwise it would charge
God with Folly and Imprudence, by designing to bring about an end by
incosistent means.

2. Though Government in general, be subordinate to Religion, in reference to
the ultimate End, eternal Happiness; yet the Church (and the Affairs of
Religion) in reference to its private Power and Authority, is subordinate, in a
great measure, to the State. Thus we say, that the Church is in the State, and
not the State in the Church. But now this is not an essential, but only an
accidental Subordination; that is, such an one, as depends upon Divine,
positive Institution: for if God had so pleased, he might have made the State
inferior to the Church in all things, as he has made the Church subject to
the State in most. Now if we may venture to give a Reason of the Divine
Institution, it may seem to be this; That God seeing how much it was for the
Interest of the State, to provide for and secure the Affairs of Religion, has
therefore subjected the Church in most things (always excepting those spiritual
Privileges and Peculiarities belonging to the Church, which I always suppose
sacred and inviolable) to the Power of the civil Government; for it is not
probable, that God would thus have committed his Church (to which he always
bore such a tender regard) to the care and charge of the State, if it were as
our Adversaries suppose, so much for the Interest of the State, to violate the
Laws of the Church and of Religion.

But now particularly, Religion lays the best foundation of Government, these
four ways.

1. By asserting the Original of Civil Power to be truly Divine.

2. By showing the Religious Obligation of an Oath, and founding Obedience
neither in Fear, nor Interest, but in Conscience.

3. By correcting and confuting all those false Opinions and Principles, which
are so destructive of all humane Societies and civil Obedience.

4. By removing all those Lusts and Passions out of the Minds of Men, which are
the great Incendiaries of the World, and Fomenters of War and Discord.

1. Religion does the best secure Government, by asserting the Original of
civil Power to be truly Divine. Here I shall not restrain my Assertion to
Monarchy only, but extend it also to all regular and well-settled Governments.
Though I think, that Monarchy has a great advantage in its Plea, for a more
particular Divine Institution, so far as Example and primitive Practice can
give any right thereto; nor do I here assert, That all Monarchies, in their
original Constitution, were absolute; or however there was no necessity that
they should be so. Some indeed say, That whatever Restrictions or Limitations
have been since introduced into some Governments, yet from the beginning it was
not so; these were the Encroachments of after Ages, and the Peoples usurping
upon the Prerogative; or else the Grants and Concessions of good-natured
Princes. But this, I think, is rather barely asserted, than positively proved:
yet will it not follow hence, that the People are the original Proprietors of
all civil Power. What our Savior said to Pilate, Ioh. 19. 11. Thou could
have no power over me, except it were given thee from above; the same we may
say of the People, that suppose (but not granting) that they had such a Power,
as some imagine, yet they could not have it of themselves; they must either
mediately or immediately derive it from God: so that, they giving this Power to
the King, the Power will be still truly Divine, though it be conveyed through
the People, as through a Conduit. But then to what purpose should we suppose such
a needless circuit in the proceedings of Divine Providence: Why might not God
give it more immediately himself, seeing this is, as easily conceivable,
attended with fewer Inconveniences, and more promotive of the Ends of
Government than the other? Thus Mr. Hobbs no less falsely, than impiously tells
us, That God created Man in such an ill-condition'd State of Nature; not that
he designed him to continue in it, but that he might mend himself by his own
Prudence, by getting out of it, as soon as he could. And Grotius seems to be
much what of the same Opinion, in his Book de jure belli and pacis, where,
among his many perplexed methods of arguing upon this subject; yet this he
seems positively to assert, That civil Power had its Original from the Consent
of the People, not taking the least notice of any higher principle: but yet he
directly contradicts himself herein, in his Epistle Dedicatory, to Lewis the
XIIIth. King of France, (whether only in Compliment or no, I know not) where he
tells him, Quam gloriosum hoc, etc. ut si quando te Deus ad suum Regnum
vocaverit, audacter possis dicere, hunc ego a te gladium pro justitiae tutela
accepi, hunc ego tibi nullius temere fusi sanguinis reum, purum insontemque
reddo. Here he says that Lewis the XIIIth. received the sword of Justice from
God, which if he did, it was more than ever any other King, according to his
Principles, did before, p. 80. de jure belli; Notandum est primo homines non
Dei praecepto sed sponte adductos, experimento infirmitatis familiarum
segregum, adversus violentiam in societatem civilem coiisse, unde ortum habet
civilis potest as quam ideo humanam ordinationem Petrus vocat, quanquam and
alibi divina Ordinatio vocatur, quia hominum salubre institutum Deus probavit,
Deus autem humanam legem probans censetur probare at humanam and humano more:
where we see, that God was no farther concerned in the constituting this civil
Power, but only by way of approbation of what Man had done before: But here
first, he supposes, it would be hard for him to prove, That Men lived at first
in separate Families, without any common Power over them.

But, 2. suppose they did; the sense and experience of the Inconveniences that
attended this way of living might be a motive or occasion of Men's looking out
for help: but I do not see, how they are thus any more the radical Cause of
Civil Power, than the Patient is the Cause of his own Cure, or of the
Physician's Skill, only because he applied himself to him.

Nor is it here denied, but that the People may, in some cases determine the
Person, as in Elective Kingdoms. And further, suppose a mixed company of Men,
such as are neither Parents of Children, nor Masters of Families; such as have
no relation or dependence upon one another; suppose these by chance cast upon
an uninhabited Coast, they may frame themselves into any particular Form of
Government; such as they may reasonably believe to be most agreeable to their
Circumstances, and most subservient to the great Ends of all Government, viz.
Peace and Piety.

But yet notwithstanding the Power, in this case, is not originally from the
People, but, as the Learned and Judicious Dr. Done has determined the Case,
God by a secret Compact made with Mankind, in Nature does infuse the Power, as
the Soul, into the Body Politic (as well as Natural) thus duly prepared, and
as it were presented to God for that purpose, by a prudent and regular Election
and Determination: they who would see this further explained and confirmed, may
consult Dr. Donne's Pseudo-Martyrs, Cap. 6.

That which seems most liable to Exception in this Account is, that secret
Compact which God is here supposed to make with Mankind, etc. so that Learned
Man is pleased to call it; but I am not very sollicitous either about the name,
or the particular way and mode of conveying this Power, only to make the thing
appear the more reasonable. We may consider, that it would be very hard, if at
all possible, for those, who derive this Power merely from the consent of the
People, either to secure the Government at present, or the Succession
afterward upon these Principles. For since, according to them, Men are by
Nature born free, and consequently it may be questioned, how far the Act of the
Father, in this case, will oblige his Posterity: Why may not the Children
plead, that they have as good right to vote and consent for themselves now, as
their Fathers had before; and this would soon prove the utter Ruin of all
Government.

But now since the Obligation that lies upon us, is from an higher Principle;
this, if any thing, will keep Men in their due Obedience; and this, I conceive,
is very agreeable to the Doctrine laid down in Bishop Overall's
Convocation-Book.

Here it is further observable, That the Patrons of that Opinion, which founds
Power originally in the People, are like those of the Church of Rome, in their
Disputes about Infallibility. Those we have here to deal with, are sure, that
the Original of Power is in the People, only they know not where to fix and
where to find it; whether in the Body of the People, collectively taken, or
only in the Heads and Masters of Families; or in the Men only, in contradiction
to Women and Children, or in each particular Man singly, as Mr. Hobbs asserts:
for he does not suppose, that when the People make a Migistrate, that they
confer any Power upon him, which he had not before in his private Capacity;
only they covenant, that they will not use their Power in opposition to his,
but let him alone to rule without a Rival. Now the great incertainty these Men
are in, both in respect of Infallibility, and the first and immediate Subject
of this Power, is a great presumption at least, that there is no such as
either, in that way and manner wherein they assert them: thus, I conceive, this
way of stating the Question gives both to God, the King, and the People, what
is of right their due; and if the People should challenge more than what is
here given them, I think it would be to their disadvantage. As for those other
three Particulars beforementioned, I shall refer the Reader to those
respective Authors who treat of 'em. But though civil Power be originally from
God, yet is it not founded in Grace, which Opinion, as it is now commonly
stated, is but the novel Invention of some brainsick People of latter days,
founded upon the mistaken sense of some Prophecies of the old Testament, and
upon some forced Interpretatious of some Texts of the New; and it has been
further promoted by the fantastic Pride nnd Folly of those that entertain it;
first, by fansying themselves Saints, and then falsely applying all those
Honors and Privileges to themselves, which they think are any where applied
to Saints in Scripture, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge
the world; hence they falsely conclude, That those Kings who have not a just
right or title to a Crown in Heaven, ought to lay no claim to one on Earth, and
therefore those wicked of the World are to be rooted out, only to make room for
their Saintships. But for the better understanding of that place, we must know,
That Saints in Scripture frequently signify no more, than the called and
faithful; such as from Judaism or Heathenism were converted to the Christian
Religion. Thus know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? that is, Know
ye not, that the World shall become Christian, and that it shall be governed by
Christian Magistrates: and why should you deem your selves unfit to exercise
that Judgment now in a more private manner among your selves, without going to
Heathen Tribunals, which Christians shall 'ere long do, in a more public and
solemn manner upon all.

If Dominion was so founded in Grace, that all Christian Kings were truly Pious
and Religious, then would there be no public Wrongs, or Injuries committed in
the Christian World; but this is a thing rather to be wished, than ever
rationally hoped for: Besides, God in the Just and Wise Methods of his
Providence sometimes makes use of wicked Princes, as Instruments of his
Justice, to punish the sins of others; which could not be done, if all Kings
were truly Religious: Neither does God make 'em wicked, that so he may thus
make use of 'em, as Instruments of his Providence, but finds 'em so; neither
does this any ways lessen the sin in them, because God makes use of it for
other Purposes, than they ever intended, their wicked and malicious designs of
Injury and Oppression being hereby nothing abated: And indeed that Opinion is
so destructive of all public and private Properties, that it would soon
dissolve all civil Societies, which our Savior, both by his Precept and
Example made his constant business to uphold: And if any in the World could
ever lay claim to Dominion upon this account, certainly he might have done it,
and yet we find he always declined the taking of any such thing upon him.

I shall here now briefly examine that Opinion of Machiavil, which tells us,
That a Prince ought indeed to appear Religious, but that there is no necessity
of his being so in ^^^^h and reality. Here the Question is not, Whether a
Prince that does not act out of ante Christian Principles, for the Glory of
God, and the Good of Men, but is indeed (...) and Hypocrite, whether such an
one may not yet rule well, and derive all the Blessings of a pious Government
upon his People, provided that his Actions, though they be deficient as to the
principal, yet that they be good and lawful as to the matter. But Machiavil
means not thus much by his seeming Piety, but only a mere pretense of Religion,
till a fair opportunity offer it self, and then thereupon to violate all that
before he counted sacred, viz. to break Oaths, and all the Laws of Justice and
Honor, where his private Interest, or public reason of State prompts him
thereunto: But here we may consider, that the Advantages that attend real
Piety, and unfeigned Religion, what they are, they are constan^ and perpetual,
but those that are the result of Hypocrisy and Persidiousness, they are but
for one turn; we can hardly again deceive those whom we have once imposed upon;
so that this Counterfeit of Religion will not consist long with Reputation of
Piety, his own People at home, and other Princes abroad, are usually
quicksighted enough to epsy the faults of their Governors, and of those they
have to deal withal; and Hypocrisy, when it is once discovered, is the most
contemptible thing in the World.

But indeed it is neither the Honor nor Interest of a Prince to be Irreligious.

First, It is not the Honor of any Man to be Wicked.

And Princes do not cease to be Men when they take upon 'em the Sovereign, but
still remain under all these Obligations that God and Nature had before laid
upon 'em. Now that Wickedness is in it self dishonorable, will appear upon
these several Accounts.

1. Though some Men may arrive at that height of Wickedness as to glory in
their shame; yet, thanks be to God, they are but few in respect of that greater
and better number of Men, which both pity the Persons, and detest the Follies
of such poor deluded People: For we never yet heard of a Kingdom, a
Commonwealth of Atheists, Providence having so ordered the affairs of the
World, that the open and general Profession of Wickedness should be
inconsistent with all Humane Constitutions.

And here we might further appeal to the experience of Wicked Men themselves,
whether their sins were not always the most pleasant, when they were most
private: For there is something of a secret shame in sin, and something of an
awful Veneration owing to Virtuous and Religious Men; so that if Wicked Men at
any time boast of their Wickedness, it is commonly before such who are as bad
and extravagant as themselves.

2. Wicked Men may sometimes glory in their sins, not that they take any such
real pleasure therein, but that they may thus invite others to mention their
Enormities, and so are glad to hear that they have Companions in their Vicious
Follies, and others as bad as themselves.

3. Wicked Men themselves do not seem be in earnest, when they pride themselves
in their Wickedness, for when they would effectually reproach a Man, they then
upbraid him, not with his Virtues, but with some real or feigned Wickedness,
which they falsely attribute to him.

It Is true, such may be the Circumstances of time and place (but more
frequently in Commonwealths than Kingdoms) that Men shall suffer for their very
Virtues and Excellencies, as it happened among the Athenians, who could not
endure a Man of extraordinary Virtue and Excellence; hence was made that Law of
Ostracisme to banish such, whose great Endowments had made terrible, and
suspected by the State: But then the execution of this Law upon any one was so
far from being a Disreputation to him, that the Banishment it self was counted
honorable. Nor

2. Is it the Interest of Princes to be wicked, for nothing does more weaken
the Nerves of Government at home, nor lose the Reputation of a Prince abroad,
than Sin and Wickedness; and Princes as well as Merchants, do in some sense
live upon their Credits. And further, Wickedness in a Prince has a Malignant
Influence upon his Subjects, and a natural tendency to make them so too, so
that there is scarce any Vice in him purely personal, but it commonly extends
its influence as far as his Dominions. Now it is easily conceivable, how the
Viciousness of the Subject tends to the prejudice of the Prince; for by this
means they are neither well disposed to keep peace at home, nor so well able to
manage a War abroad. Thus Machiavil tells us, That Vanquished Provinces do
fully revenge themselves of their Conquerours, by receiving them delicately,
and corrupting them by loose manners: For thus the sostness of Pleasures and
Delights will cause 'em gradually to degenerate from their former Valor. And
whereas Machiavil tells us, That a Prince may as well be hated for his Virtues,
as for his Vices, and instances in Pertinax and Alex. Severus, Wise and
Virtuous Princes, and therefore hated by their Men of War: Hence he concludes,
That if a Prince will preserve himself in his Estate, he must comply with the
humors of such as may hurt him, and even imitate their Vices and Corruptions.

In Answer hereto, I shall not here mention some small Passages of those two
Emperors, which some Historians take notice of, as possible occasions of those
Disgusts that grew among their Men of War, but shall suppose that these
Soldiers did really hate the Virtues of these Emperors, For it will not follow
from hence, that Virtue is equally liable to the hatred of Men. Thus Thieves
hate the Magistrates, because they execute Justice upon 'em, yet hereby do they
get more Love from the public than they contract hatred from the Offenders:
Thus, though those two Emperors were hated by some few dissolute and
disorderly Bands of Soldiers, yet never did any Emperors fall more lamented by
the generality of the Empire, than they.

And though sometimes a private Person, as I before intimated, may be the cause
of some inconveniences to himself by his Natural Ability, or Moral Virtues: yet
this cannot take place in a Prince, because he is already in that Supreme
Authority, which others perhaps only aim at: nay, thus by being eminently
Virtuous he will present all growing Popularity in the most Ambitious of his
Subjects, and eclipse their histre even in the Opinion of those, why would
otherwise be their great Admirers. I shall here only add the Apology that the
^lorentines themselves, make the their Countryman Machiavil, viz. That he
himself did not really believe his own Assertions in his wicked Maxims of
Policy and Religion, only designing hereby, if possible, to ruin the House of
the Medices, who had oppressed the Commonwealth of Florence, he broached these
Pestilent Doctrines, in hopes they would embrace 'em, and so ruin themselves
by the practice of them. As for that Opinion of Machiavil, That the Christian
Religion has so effeminated the Spirits of its Professors, that Christendom is
now become an easy prey to all Invaders; this is so false and soolish, so
contrary both to Reason and Experience, that it scarce deserves a Confutation.
Christianity forbids indeed all private Revenge, and teaches us Meekness and
Humility toward all Men, but this is no way destructive of true Valor and
'Generosity: For a firm belief of God, and the Immortality of the Soul, and a
due care of engaging in a just Cause, are certainly the best foundations of
true Courage: There is nothing that a Christian fears more, than to commit sin;
now if the fear of offending God, and violating his Laws, be counted Cowardice,
then who would be ashamed of such an Honorary Accusation; but there is no
necessity to purchase one Virtue at the expense of another, or to forfeit our
Magnanimity, to maintain true Christian Meekness: For the most Stout are always
the most Generous, Meek and Merciful; and Cruelty is commonly a certain sign of
a Pusillanimous Spirit; and as for Experience, both Ancient and Modern
Histories testify, that neither Turks nor any other Infidels have any
advantage over Christian Kingdoms upon this Account.

CHAP. VII. Of Moral Virtue.
MOral Virtue is a thing so natural, and only proper to Mankind, that a
Discourse of Humane Nature without this, would seem defective in one of its
most principal parts; the retaining of this Virtuous Innocence, was the Duty of
Adam in Paradise; and the regaining of it, as far as this present state of
Imperfection will admit, is still ours now. So that this universal rectitude of
our Natures, was the first and most absolute Duty incumbent on Man, for Faith
and Repentance, those two great Evangelical Duties, though they be absolutely
necessary in this lapsed State of Mankind; yet their necessity did only
commence with Man's Fall: for in Innocence there had been no need of either,
but Virtue and Holiness, Piety toward God, and Honesty and Charity to Men;
these were Duties at first, and will be so to all Eternity hereafter, when
Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision, and when all sin shall be done away, and
so no need of Repentance. Thus Virtue was part of that Divine Image, wherein we
were first created, and whoever, in this sense, speaks against it, Blasphemes
God. Moral Virtue therefore, as distinguished from original Righteousness, and
Evangelical Holiness, may be thus described: It is an habit of the Mind,
founded indeed in Nature, but perfected by frequent use and exercise, whereby
the Man is enabled by the mere strength of Natural Principles, to do that which
is most agreeable to the Duty and Dignity of his Nature, in those three
Relations he bears to him-self, to others, and to God. I shall give a short
Paraphrase upon the Desinition.

First, It is an Habit, and so distinguished from original Righteousness, which
was not an Adventitious Quality, or super-induc'd upon Man in esse completo;
but it was as essential to Man in Innocence, as roundness is to a Globe: Here I
call it an Habit, rather than a Power or Energy, because though External
Causes, and such is frequent Exercise, by which Virtue is gotten, be not of the
Essence of a thing, and so according to the exact Rules of Desining, ought not
to enter into the Definition; yet it is very difficult to come to the knowledge
of the Essences of things of this Nature, and they are usually defined by their
Causes and Effects, by their Ends and Objects, and the manner of their
Operations.

Secondly, Though a Man should be born with this Quality of Virtue, yet
notwithstanding he would be truly Virtuous, yet here we speak of things, as
they are, not as it is possible for us to suppose and imagine them, because
none naturally are born so.

Thirdly, Habit is not a mere dull in-active thing, but Action is included in
the Notion of it, especially in these Habits of Virtue, wherein, besides the
general relation they bear to Action; they also include a necessary obligation
thereunto in the very Nature and Notion of 'em. Indeed some tell us, That
original Righteousness, or that first Grace, by which Adam was enabled to rule
his lower Faculties, was only given as a Bridle into his Hand, whereby he was
to govern his Unruly Appetites; which, like a Wild Horse, would otherwise
easily have cast off their Rider, and that this was only super-added to Man
already perfect. But this Opinion seems not so well to vindicate the Goodness
of the Divine Providence herein; for though Man had a super-added power of
governing his Passions, yet if they were naturally headstrong and exorbitant,
he was in much greater probability of falling than standing.

Founded in Nature, and so neither by Inspiration from God, nor by the
Influence, or Influx of the Stars.

1. Not by Inspiration from God, which either was, or, at least was more
generally supposed to be the Opinion of Plato, that Virtue could not be taught,
but was more immediately inspired by God: But the later Platonists do either
not make this his Opinion, or if they do, they do not then seem much to favor
it. Alcinous. Cum igitur virtus res divina sit, etc. upon which the
Commentator's words are, Omnis rei, cujuscunque sit, summa excellentia, quae a
Deo esse putatur, divina appellatur, quo modo rudiore quadam Minerva intelligi
potest, quod hoc loco dicitur, virtutem, quae hominis est perfectio, rem
quandam esse divinam: Not but that every good and perfect Gift comes from God,
either immediately or mediately; but perhaps this was a way of Expression
common to Plato with the Jews, of calling any thing that was great and
excellent in its kind by the Name of Divine; so that all that was probably
meant by this Phrase, was only to express the excellency of the thing, and the
great Opinion he had of it; or else that Divine Providence had some more
particular concern in the disposing and inclining Men to it, either by giving
them a more happy Constitution of Body, or a more Ingenuous Temper of Mind, or
by affording more advantageous Circumstances of time and place, yet so as that
the most happy Occurrences do not necessitate Men to be Virtuous without their
own Industry and Inclination, nor the most Unhappy force 'em to be wicked
without their own fault.

However if this be Plato's Opinion, That Virtue is so from God, that it cannot
be gotten by Humane Industry, in conjunction with the ordinary Influences of
Divine Providence, this Opinion is neither reasonable in it self, nor is it
sufficiently proved by that Argument made use of by Socrates for that purpose:
If (says he) Virtue was possible to be taught, then would Good Men more
especially teach their Sons, that so they might inherit their Father's Virtues
as well as Fortunes; but the contrary frequently appears. To this I Answer,

First, That nothing can be proved from particular Instances, seeing as many
may be brought to the contrary, where Virtue has been, as it were, propagated
with the Family, and we may furnish our selves, even from our own Observation,
with Examples of the happy success of a Virtuous Education.

Secondly, Virtuous Parents, tho they may desire their Children may be such
too, yet many times such is their Tenderness and Indulgence to 'em, that they
do not make use of those Methods which are most proper thereunto, which are
commonly joined with some degrees of Severity.

Thirdly, Virtue, though it may be taught, and is capable of being learned, yet
is it a very conditional thing, and depends upon the concurrence of many
Circumstances together, for the producing the effect, and that which often
defeats all the rest, is the liberty of the Will, which many Men use in
opposition to all those Moral means, which are otherwise sufficient in
themselves and designed by others to moderate their Passions, and reduce 'em to
Virtue. Nor

2. Does Virtue proceed from any Natural Influx of the Stars, for if we
consider the Nature of the Heavens, and natural Causes, and compare 'em with
the Nature of the Soul and the Native Liberty of the Will, it will be
impossible to conceive how any Sydereal Influences can any ways certainly or
necessarily determine the Minds of Men. And the same Arguments that prove the
Vanity of Judicial Astrology in other respects, do much more evince the folly
of their pretenses, who go into Heaven to fetch down Virtue from thence, when
indeed it is nearer us, even in our Mouths, imprinted upon our very Hearts and
Natures: I shall here give you Savanorola's Argument in a case much what to
this purpose: If (says he) the Christian Faith and Life proceed from the Stars,
then their Faith is either true or false; if it be true, then it cannot proceed
from thence, because it condemns that Opinion, and asserts the Vanity of
Judicial Astrology; if it be false, and proceed from the Stars, then it
follows, that the Stars incline Men to falsehood, and the falsehood of the Effect
will be no good reason why we should believe the truth of the Cause. Whereby
Men by the mere strength of Nature, etc. And thus Virtue is distinguished from
Grace; thus the Heathen Moralists have discoursed very well of Virtue in their
Writings, and given great Instances thereof in their Practices, who yet were
very Strangers to all Supernatural Revelation: And this Notion of it seems
fitly to assign the just Limits betwixt the Gentile and the Christian Religion,
it deprives not the one of what it may justly challenge, as its right; it
allows to men in the state of Nature, some inclinations and abilities too to
Virtue, but yet that without supernatural assistance, he can never arrive at
Evangelical Perfection: it does not so far depress humane nature, Modices to
make it perfectly stupid; nor on the other hand does it raise it to a pitch of
Pelagianisin; it grants Heathens to be Men, and reminds Christians of their
Original Sin, and the present depravation of their Natures. And though the
Heathen Moralists do sometimes mention such a thing, as afflatus divinus yet it
cannot be in reason extended so far, as to signify that which Christian Writers
commonly understand by that expression.

To perform that which is most agreeable to the duty and dignity of his nature.
Thus though virtue in the proper acceptance of it be distinguished from Grace,
as to the Principle from whence it flows, the one proceeding from nature, the
other from a more divine original; yet do they agree in their end, and Friendly
conspire together to carry on the same designs of Providence in the World, viz.
the glory of God and the good of Men. Now the dignities or excellencies of
humane nature are of two sorts. 1. Natural and original. 2. Such as are the
results of the divine benignity afterward.

1. Natural and Original, and under this head I shall only consider the
excellencies of the Soul in particular. 1. As to the excellency of its nature
and essence, that it is a spiritual being, and ray of Divinity; now considering
this natural pre-eminence of the Soul above the Body, we act unworthy of the
dignity and excellence of the Soul, when we make it only a Slave to the Body,
and only as it were the Bodies Purveyor to make provision for the flesh to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. 2. As to its intellectual Endowments, Man only, of
all this lower Creation, is endowed with a power of reasoning: now certainly
God never gave us such excellent faculties only to employ 'em upon mean
objects, and debase 'em by unworthy Employments, Phil. 4. 8. What soever things
are true, what soever things are just, etc. (...), think on these things. 3. As
to its moral Endowments, that is, all those natural Inclinations and Capacities
the Soul has to Virtue and Goodness, that inward sense of Honesty, that tactus
quidam divinitat is, as Iamblicus calls it: now this also obliges us to be true
to that inward sense of obligation that lies upon us.

2. Such dignities as are the result of divine benignity afterward, and these
I shall consider as belonging to humane nature in general: 1. The honor that
Christ has put upon humane nature, by taking it upon himself. 2. As Man now is
made the Temple of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 6. 19. 3. As humane
Nature, by being joined to the Divine, is made capable of enjoying Eternal
Happiness in the highest Heavens: but these are things rather of a Divine than
Moral Consideration.

Thus have I more fully explained the definition of Moral Virtue, wherein
whilst I endeavored to do right to Nature, I hope I have not any ways injured
Divine Grace: for I count him not worthy to partake of the benefits thereof,
who speaks the least word to derogate from the excellency and necessity of
Divine Assistance.

How far Virtue, Reason, or Philosophy (for they meant much what the same thing
by them all) was or is available to the Heathens in order to their future
Happiness, I shall not here particularly enquire, or positively determine, this
being a Question wherein Scripture is much what silent; and Modesty here
teaches us not to be wise above what is written, nor curiously inquisitive in
things wherein we have no certain Rule to guide us.

Only here give me leave barely to relate their Reasons, who are willing to
entertain as favorable thoughts, as they can, concerning the possibility of
the Salvation of some Heathens: and here first to prevent mistakes, they lay
down this as an undoubted Principle, and a certain Truth, that there is no name
given under Heaven, by which any can be saved, but only the name of Jesus. So
that none was ever saved, but with a respect to Christ's Death, and by the
benefits they receive thereby: nor do they here hold an indifferency of
Religions, as if it was equally possible and easy to be saved in any: for though
some Heathens may be saved, yet the advantage on the Christians part above them
is much every way, both in respect of the means in order thereunto, and also in
respect of the certainty, that God will certainly accept of such conditions as
he has required in the Gospel. So that a Christian, if he be not wanting to
himself, is not only sase, but certain, sree not only from danger, but from
doubt, which an Heathen cannot be: nor do they frame such notions of God, as if
he was composed wholly of Mercy, and that Justice was only an empty Title; for
they assert, that as mercy appears in the Salvation of a Christian, so likewise
the Salvation of Heathens, if any such thing be, will not be in a way or method
inconsistent with the Divine Justice: they do not here go about to describe the
particular way how it is to be done, only they charitably conceive, that it is
not any thing contrary to the Divine Nature, nor to any Declaration that he has
made in Scripture.

CHAP. VIII. Some short Observations upon Mr Hobs his first Chapter of his
Kingdom of Darkness.
HE begins this Part of his Leviathan with a pleasant description of the
Kingdom of Satan, which he makes altogether as fantastic as that of Oberon,
or the Fairy Land, making the notion of Spirits and Immaterial Substances to be
as groundless, as the Dreams of Madmen, and indeed the mere results of the
timorous apprehensions of Children or Fools. There is mention made in Scripture
of the Principality of Beelzebub over Demons, that is to say, over Phantasms,
that appear in the air; and since Beelzebub is the King of these Phantasms, the
Sons of Darkness, Phantasms and the Spirits of illusion signify the same thing:
the bare repeating hereof seems a sufficient Answer, it being too sancisul to
require a serious consutation.

And yet he makes this one great instance of the Churches being not yet fully
emerg'd out of the Territories of Darkness, or not yet inserted into the
glorious light and liberty of the Sons of God, because it believes Spirits to
be Immaterial Beings, subsisting by themselves, and not mere Phantasms; as if
the Church could never arrive at a perfect purity of Doctrine, till it became a
Company of Men openly prosessing that, which either immediately borders upon,
or naturally tends to Atheism.

But then in the beginning of his next Chapter, he tells us the manner how
Phantasms are produced, which in short is this, by the impression which visible
objects make upon the Senses: which motion being continued to the place of
perception, does there beget in the Mind or Soul the Conception or Phantasm of
the object thus communicated to the mind. So that a Phantasm according to this
way of explaining it, is not, and cannot be any where existent, but in the mind
of the Perceiver. But then how will this agree with what he had said before
concerning Belzebub's being the Prince of Phantasms, that inhabit the air. But
perhaps it would sometimes be as hard a matter to reconcile Mr. Hobs to
himself, as it would be to reconcile his Opinions to Truth. How is Satan Prince
of those Phantasms which every Man frames to himself? May not every one rather
create his own Subjects, and become himself Prince of his own Phantasms? but
when he calls Satan or Beelzebub Prince of these Phantasms, he seems to grant a
greater reality of Existence to him, than to them: Now I do not see, according
to his Principles, but that Beelzebub himself is as great a Phantasm, as any of
the other. Now the first way he assigns, by which this Kingdom of Darkness is
promoted among Men, is by extinguishing the light of Scripture by false
Interpretations; and I could wish Mr. Hobs was not thus guilty himself of
promoting this Spiritual Darkness.

The first instance he gives of this false interpretation of Scripture, is of
those, who make the Church, now in the World, the Kingdom of God, so often
mentioned in Scripture; whereas, says he, it is manifest to the contrary, that
the Kingdom of God was instituted by God by the Ministry of Moses over the Jews
only, who for that reason are called The peculiar People of God: which Kingdom
ceased at the Election of Saul, and that there never was any Kingdom of God
properly so called, since that, on Earth.

Two things there are generally required to the founding of an Hypothesis. 1.
To show the reasonableness of it in it self. 2. The agreeableness of it to all
other Observations, relating to such a matter. Accordingly Mr. Hobs, in his
former part of his Leviathan, had been laying down the reasons and foundations
of his Political Hypothesis: and now because he does not altogether deny the
truth of Scripture, but that some respect is owing to it; therefore he thought
himself concerned, to suit it, as near as possible, to the Scripture also:
hence he endeavors, if he cannot bring his Principles to it, he will, by
forced Interpretations, bring the Scripture to them.

This premised in general, it is easily discernable why Mr. Hobs would not
grant now God any Kingdom upon Earth, truly so called because if he had, it
would contradict that notion which he has framed of a Kingdom, as to its first
Constitution, which must be by conferring Rights, by mutual Compacts, and
Covenants, being an acquisition of power over their Subjects by their own
consent. Now he fancies, though without any good grounds, that the People of
the Jews, under Abraham and Moses, were such a Kingdom, wherein the People did
transfer their Rights, and did mutually Covenant with God for the Constitution
of a Kingdom, according to his own Notion; whereas indeed there was no more
drawing of Articles, whereby God did acquire any more new right over them then,
than there is now under the New Testament. 2. Supposing that this formal
transferring of rights was necessary to the constituting of a Kingdom amongst
Men; yet it will not follow hence, that God too must acquire his right of
Government the same way: for certainly God's right of Commanding does not
depend upon the Peoples Choice and willingness to obey. 3. Though Christians do
not go about to choose God their Sovereign, as they do a King in Elective
Kingdoms, by majority of Votes; yet their very taking upon them the profession
of Christianity, and expecting Salvation upon its own terms, does imply a
tacitCompact. Thus the New Testament is (...), a Covenant too. So that the
Church on Earth may as properly be called the Kingdom of Christ now, as the
People of the Jews the Kingdom of God then: and Mr. Hobs himself tells us, Chapter
31. Levi. that to reign in the proper acceptance of the word, is to rule by
commanding, threatening and promising. Now why may not Christ be now said
properly to rule by his word and laws? that is, by commanding, threatening and
promising. But let us examine the reasons why the Church upon Earth cannot be
called the Kingdom of Christ: All that is there offered is, Errori huic, quod
Ecclesia, qu. e nunc est in terris, etc. Here he calls it an error, supposing
that he had proved it so in his 35 Chapter Where he purposely insists upon this
Argument: There he tells us, that the Kingdom of God by Divines is sometimes
taken for that Eternal Happiness which the Blessed shall enjoy in the Kingdom
of Glory. Sometimes it is taken for the Kingdom of Grace here on Earth. But
here he does not prove, which he ought to have done, that these are false and
improper Interpretations of the word, or inconsistent with the true sense of
those places, where the Divines so interpret them: only he says, contra in
Scripturis Sacris invenio regnum. Dei ubique fere significare regnum proprte
dictum, etc. Now this one word fere, almost, does quite invalidate the force of
all his Argument: for granting that the Kingdom of God is sometimes taken in
that sense of his beforementioned (which yet will be very hard for him to
prove) yet if there be other places, wherein that word occurs, which cannot so
be interpreted; then that is not the necessary and constant sense and meaning
of it.

I shall here briefly examine those places of Scripture, which he draws, rather
than leads to the confirming his own Notion, Genesis 17. 7. And I will establish
my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations
for an Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee.
Here, he says, Abraham promised to obey God, for himself and his Posterity; but
indeed he does not mention one word to any such purpose: so that there was no
transferring of rights, no inducing obligations per verba in praesenti: but all
the reason that Mr. Hobbs had to cite this place in favor of his Opinion,
seems only this, because there is mention made of a Covenant, and he supposes
all Covenants must be made according to his own Model: but I might as well cite
Ier. 31. 31. where God promises to make a new Covenant with the House of
Israel, after those days, etc. Which is to be understood of the coming of the
Messiah in the Flesh, to prove a Kingdom of God, properly so called, now under
the Gospel, as this of Genesis is cited to prove it then. Another place is Exodus
19. 5. If ye will hear my Voice, and keep my Covenant, ye shall be to me a
peculiar people, etc. these are the words, that thou shall speak to the People.
And Moses called the Elders of the People, and laid before their Faces all
these words which the Lord commanded him: and all the People answered together
and said, All that the Lord has spoken, we will do. Here God seems to require
the consent of the People, for the ratifying of his Covenant. To this I Answer,
1. That these and such like Covenants, though they have so much of the nature
of a Compact, as that the Blessings therein promised are conditional, and to be
obtained only by the performance of the Conditions; yet upon the whole, they
seem rather conferring of benefits, than severe stipulations: so that the
conditions being proposed, no one, that has the use of reason, will refuse to
comply with 'em.

2. Though God commanded Moses to declare his Covenant to his People, yet it
cannot be supposed that the obligation did depend merely upon their acceptance:
for God had right to command what he there required, though he had not joined
to the observance of his Laws such particular Rewards.

3. God might have particular Reasons to deal in this more sensible manner with
the Jews, in compliance with their imperfections, out of tenderness of
affection to 'em, to let 'em see that he required their own consent to what he
enjoined 'em, hereby to lay a great sense of obligation upon 'em; because if
they now rebelled, they would not only break their natural Laws of duty to him,
as God, but also violate their own Promises.

Consequent upon this error, that the Church now on Earth is the Kingdom of
Christ, and that there ought to be one Man, or a Company of Men, by whom our
Savior, now in Heaven, speaks to Men on Earth; consequent to this it is, that
the Pope challenges an Universal Power, etc. That which I here first observe
is, his artificial sliding of these two Propositions together, viz. That the
Church on Earth is the Kingdom of Christ, and that there ought to be one Man,
or one Company of Men, which should rule the same, as universal head under him,
hereby to impose upon the unwary Roader, as if they were Propositions
altogether of the same import: whereas the one is only a false consequence
drawn from the other; but it is no unusual Artifice with Mr Hobbs, to charge
false Inferences upon true Principles, thus, if possible, to disparage what he
is not able otherwise solidly to disprove: but by the same way of arguing, he
may prove that there is no God, from those Superstitious and Idolatrous
Practices, which are accidentally consequent upon, and occasioned by the belief
of a Deity; for if there were no Opinion of a God, there would be no Idolatry
nor Superstition. But this Argument, as it is deficient in other respects, so
also is it in respect of time: for the Church on Earth might have been the
Kingdom of Christ for the first four or five hundred Years after his Appearance
in the World, notwithstanding the force of this Argument. For it then only
began to be an Argument when the Pope began to arrogate so much Power to
himself. And indeed Mr. Hobs had great reason to thank the Church of Rome, for
affording him so much Sophistical matter to stuff his Kingdom of Darkness
withal. Another Artifice, by which Mr. Hobs would disparage a truth, that he
has a mind to oppose, is, with a Philosophical Gravity, to feign an idle and
ridiculous original, to which judiciously to ascribe it: thus he fancies, that
Aristotle, from the consideration of this or such like Propositions, Homo est
animal; from the Copula in this Proposition he took occasion first to assert
separate Essences, Celestial Intelligences, and humane Souls. Leviat. Latin p.
320.

Another instance he gives of the false interpretation of Scripture, is the
asserting the immortality of the Soul, and its being really distinct from the
Body; but now one would scarce desire a better Argument for the proof thereof,
than the very Answers he gives to those places of Scripture, which are commonly
alleged for it, so weak and frivolous many times are they: Eccles. 12. 7. The
Spirit returns to God that gave it; which words, says he, may suffer this
interpretation, but then they must undergo a great deal of pain, and have a
great deal of Patience, if they suffer it: One great defect, which seems to run
through all Mr. Hobs his Interpretations of Scripture, is this, that he
supposes himsels on the defensive part, and that all that he had to do, was
only to invent some frivolous Evasion, or put some forced Interpretation upon
the place, and then all was done: whereas he ought positively to prove, that
that of his was the only true and genuine sense and meaning of the place, both
from the generally approved concurrent Testimonies of the best and purest Ages,
from the just and proper acceptance of the words, by the best and most
approved Authors; from the general scope and design of the Context, and from
the natural tendency that his Sense and Interpretation has, to promote those
noble ends of Virtue and Piety in the World, which God and Christ designed to
carry on by the Scriptures. None of which things Mr. Hobs has as much as
attempted to do: The Spirit returns to God that gave it; that is, says he, God
only knows whence it comes, and whither it goes: And I could wish that he had
been true to his own Interpretation. But then how comes he so positively to
assert its Mortality at present, and at what Periods it must return again to
Life, etc.

Another place, he says, which seems to make for the immortality of the Soul,
is Matt. 22. 32. Where our Savior affirms Abraham, Isaac and Jacob to be
alive; to which he answers, That they were indeed alive, but not actually, but
as by the promise of God they were sure of Eternal Life: but he also tells us,
That the wicked are sure of eternal Death; and thus, why may not the wicked be
as properly said to be dead, even whiles they are alive, by virtue of the
threatening; as the Righteous can be said to be alive, by virtue of the promise,
even then, when they are supposed not to be at all.

The sum of Mr. Hobbs his Opinion herein, is this; he supposes the Soul not to
be any thing really distinct from the Body, but that it is composed of the
purer parts of the Spirits, and by consequence it dies with the Body; not that
it is annihilated, for matter in this sense is immortal; that is, not naturally
capable of annihilation, but that upon such grand indispositions of Body, which
is called Death, the Soul is rendered incapable of such agitations, and such
reactions, in which the nature of a living Creature does consist: So that
according to this Opinion, a Man can no more properly be said either to be
alive or dead, than Quicksilver may; for though it be not so Organized, as Man's
Body is, though it has neither heart nor brain to transmit Spirits to each
other, and though it has not the use of Speech, yet may it have a Soul as
really intelligent as that of ours. The greatest part of the rest of this
Chapter is employed in confuting or exposing some Opinions of the Church of
Rome; yet we may observe, that notwithstanding his severe handling that Church
in some respects, yet her Authority is then valued by him, when she seems any
ways to favor his Opinions: thus he cites her Authority to confirm his
assertion, That Spirits are mere Phantasms, because she in her Exorcisms calls
'em so. I shall here only further observe, how he has transformed all the
Subjects of Satan into Phantasms, in the beginning of his Kingdom of Darkness,
and in the latter end thereof has allegoriz'd all the Officers and Ministers of
the Pope into mere Hobgoblins.

That which gave the first occasion of employing my thoughts this way, was
those false Opinions concerning God, those various modes of Theism, which now
prevail in the World, which seem to be nothing but Epicurism and Hobbianism
transformed into other (I know not whether I may say into better) shapes. Now
if what I here write, may but give occasion to some abler Pen more fully to
examine and confute those fatal Principles (and I hope it will, rather than a
good Cause should suffer by my ill management.) If these Papers, I say, have
this good effect, I shall not then need to make any other Apology, but think my
Pains very well bestowed.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE Seventh Chapter.
I Would not there be thought in the least to favor that false and foolish,
that dangerous and destructive opinion of Theism, an Opinion, which grants
indeed the Being of God and natural Religion, but denies all Divine Revelation
made to Mankind afterward: and thus it seems a composition of the worst
ingredients incident to humane Nature, Pride, Ignorance, and Ingratitude; of
Pride, as not duly acknowledging the frailties of humane nature; of Ignorance,
as not fully understanding the true state and condition of lapsed Mankind; of
Ingratitude, as not thankfully acknowledging the benefits of Divine Grace. But
Secondly, besides these, there are others, who granting a Divine Revelation
made to Man, do yet so melt it down, as it were, below it self, till it come to
an equal temper with, or very little exceed mere natural Religion. 3. Others,
who in words acknowledge a God, but denying the common Principles of all
Religion, the immortality of the Soul, and a future State, seem perfectly to
entertain the Doctrine of Epicurus. -- As for the light of Nature, which these
Men so much Idolize, I shall grant to it as much, as in reason it can desire,
and so satisfy its own just demands. 1. The Law of Nature is a Divine Law, and
brings us under the obligation of its Commands, so that whatever is directly
contrary hereunto, cannot be made part of any suture Revelation, because one
Divine Light is not contrary to another. 2. The rational exercise of their
Faculties might be, and probably was made use of by the Prophets and Apostles
in their revealing the Will of God to Man, yet still under the Influence and
Superintendence of the Holy Spirit, guideing and directing them in such a
measure, as was necessary in order to such an end. 3. This light of natural
Reason, together with the concurrence of those other means, designed by God in
order thereunto, may be made use of for the better understanding of God's
revealed will in Scripture: now after such fair Concessions made to it, it
ought not to exalt it self above, or make it self equal to that of Divine
Revelation.

Theism in a Christian state, where Men have not only all the Opportunities of
knowing and understanding the Christian Religion, but also live in the outward
profession of it, this of all things is the most unreasonable, for even the
best and wisest Asserters of the Light of Nature and Human Reason, do grant,
that in those places where Christianity is known, Reason it self will find
more, and much stronger, Arguments for the Christian, than for any other Belief
what soever. -- These Theists must also prove one of these two things; either,
1st, That there never were any such persons as the Prophets, our Blessed
Savior, and his Apostles, in the World; which is contrary to the universal
Consent and Confession of all, both Friends and Enemies: Or else, 2ly, That
they never made any new revelation of God's Will to Mankind; which they can
never be able to do. As for the practical Duties of Religion, we grant they are
founded in Nature, and agreeable to Reason; but then withal we say, That
Revelation has both added to the clearness of the Truth, and to the necessity
of the Obligation of those Duties.

But here they tell us, That Natural Reason has discovered enough; and that
there is no need of any farther Revelation to be made to Man; but it is a very
weak and illogical way of arguing against a Matter of Fact, from a supposed
needlesness, that there should be any such thing; we ought rather in this case
to argue thus: It does sufficiently appear, That God has made such and such
Declarations of his Will to Man; therefore it was not needless, because God
does nothing in vain. Farther, It is disingenuous and ungratesul for Natural
Reason thus to boast it self upon its own sufficiency, and not acknowledge its
Benefactor, seeing it now owes its present improvement, in a great measure, to
the Benefits and Advantages it has received from Divine Revelation. -- The
Author of the Discourse of Human Reason, with relation to matters of Religion,
printed 1690. tell us, That the whole Substance of Christianity it self,
according to St. John's account of it, is most certainly founded upon that
universal light, which enlightens every man that comes into the World. Pa. 4.
of his Presatory Letter. But to this I answer, 1. That St. John there does not
speak of the Light of Nature, but of Christ; and though Christ be the Author of
that Light, yet his thus enlightening every one that comes into the World, does
not supersede the necessity, or lessen the excellency of Divine Revelation. 2.
The whole Substance of Christianity cannot be founded therein, because
Christianity contains in it Articles of Faith, above the natural power of
Reason to find out, as well as matters of Practice. 3. Though the practical part
be founded in this universal Light of Nature, yet Christianity may carry on the
Superstructure higher than mere Nature was ever able to do. 4. It is not most
certain, that that is the right Translation of that place of St. John; it may
be also rendered thus, He was that true Light, which coming into the World,
enlightens every man; that is, every man that has the Happiness to hear the
glad tidings of the Gospel.

The said Author, page 92. having before made an exact and full enumeration (as
he thinks it) of the Principles of all, or rather of mere Natural Religion, In
the Belief and Sense, says he, of these general Traths, and in the practice of
the Duties that result from 'em, according to their full extent and tendency,
consists all true Religion, and whatever else is introduced into any Religion,
either notional or practical; I say, what either does not necessarily flow from
some of these Branches, or tend to enforce the observance of 'em; is no
essential part of true Religion, but the mere Product of Superstition, Folly,
or Design. But according to his Scheme of Principles, what shall we think of
those Articles of the Christian Faith the Trinity, the Incarnation and
resurrection of the Body, for these are neither included in that Enumeration,
nor do they necessarily flow from any Branch thereof. If he say, that these may
tend to enforce the observance of those Duties beforementioned; this I grant,
but it seems a preposterous way of proving Articles of Faith, to bring 'em in
only by the by, because the belief thereof may enforce the practice of
Christian Duties; though this also is true, that they do so, yet the true
reason of our belief of 'em, is, because they are revealed in Scripture.

What Monsieur le Clerk's design (or whoever else was the Author of those five
Letters concerning the Divine Inspiration of holy Scriptures, lately translated
into English) was, I shall not here enquire: Truth indeed forbids me to think
him a Deist, in the first sense before mentioned; but Charity it self does not
forbid to think him one in the second; that is, one who would bring Divine
Inspiration into as narrow a room as he could, and believe as little of it in
Scripture as possible. Yet we ought not to be too severe, in charging the
consequences of an Opinion upon its Author, especially when he disowns 'em to
be his Opinions; but on the other side we ought to be very watchful over our
selves, that we do not broach or defend any Opinion, that may any ways tend to
unhinge the Principles, and undermine the Foundations of Christianity, and we
ought the more to suspect and carefully examine such, from whence men generally
draw dangerous consequences.

That a Papist should industriously set himself to lessen the Authority of holy
Scripture, and upon all occasions seek advantage against it, is not so much to
be wondered at, because hereby he serves a turn, and by this means endeavors
to advance the Authority of his own Church, that what is pretended to be
wanting in Scripture, may be supplied by Roman Tradition. But then, why they
who call themselves Protestants should join in such a Design, and pick up all
the little Arguments of ill-designing Men against Scripture; this is not so
easy to give an account of.

Scripture does not go about merely to beg a favorable reception in the World,
as if it stood in need of such mean methods of proceeding; seeing it may justly
challenge a due regard and veneration from all sober and considerate persons,
it does not desire to make use of any precarious Principles in its own defense,
nor refuses to join issue with its Adversaries in the most severe method of
Raciocination.

It Is true indeed, as the Translator tells us in his Preface, that it is
unbecoming the dignity of such sacred Truths as the Christian Religion teaches
us, to build them upon unsound Principles, or defend them by Sophistical
Arguments. If this be applied to the following Letters, designing thereby to
reflect upon the contrary Opinion, and to magnify the soundness of the
Principles and Cogency of the Arguments contained in these; I doubt not but Mr.
Lowth's Answer is sufficient to convince any considerate person to the contrary.

The sum of the Author's Hypothesis in the five Letters, seems to be this; he
absolutely rejects some of the Books of the Old Testament, and very much
questions the Authority of others of the new: He does not allow Scripture in
general, either as to the matter, or as to the words, to be inspired by the
Holy Ghost, excepting only some few particular Instances: And as for the
Difficulties that occurr therein, he does not much concern himself about 'em,
but takes this more easy way of solving all, by acknowledging, when any thing
of that nature is objected, that the holy Penmen were there mistaken, and
contradicted themselves. And as the Translator, in his Preface, p. 6. tells us,
the use of all this is, to settle our Christian Religion upon a basis not to be
shaken by the Difficulties about the Scripture, which the Learned are forced to
acknowledge to be insuperable. But I am apt to believe, that too little reading
and considering the best Authors, and too great a Tincture of Prejudice upon
the Minds of Men does sometimes make that seem an insuperable difficulty, which
is not so in it self: Or, suppose there were some such in Scripture, must we
therefore reject the Divine Authority of the whole, because we do not
understand some parts of the Bible. Vid. Letter to a Deist.

But I do not see what sufficient Answer he returns to that place, 2 Pet. 1.
17. The holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: (...),
acted or carried by the Holy Ghost. Here Beza gives this seasonable Caution;
Dextre hoc intelligendum est, ne quis divini spiritus recte compositos and vere
divinos afflatus comparet profanorum, Vatum furoribus, etc. But the aforesaid
Author comes short of the true import of the Phrase, when he makes this Impulse
or Influence of the Holy Ghost to be nothing more than the mere result of a
pious and well-disposed Mind, acting only by the strength of Memory, and a
well-inform'd Understanding. But for a man to espouse such a dangerous and
unwarrantable Opinion, and when he is urged with plain and express places of
Scripture (such as seem non sine numine, and, as it were, purposely so worded,
as if designed to obviate such a Tenent) for him then to tell us, as this
Author does, p. 146. That no Doctrine which we esteem important, ought to be
grounded barely on certain manners of speaking, which we cannot be sure they
were exact, because the Sacred Writers, not affecting exactness of Style, may
have used that manner of expression without any design. This is only to study
Evasions, and to lay a Foundation of something like Sceptism in Religion; for,
after this way of arguing, a man may assert or deny any thing, having first
thus taken off the edge of the Scripture so, as that he need to fear no danger
thence.

But he tells us, p. 34. That St. Luke confesses himself, in the beginning of
his Gospel, That he learned not that which he told us by inspiration, but by
information from those that knew it exactly. To this I answer, 1. Divine Grace
is very well consistent with the sober and rational use of our Faculties, though
perhaps it is not very easy to explain the way and method how it is done: Nor
is such an Inspiration (as is here asserted) any ways contrary to those
subordinate means which St. Luke might make use of in that case; Dubitandum non
est, quin piam diligentiam Deus direxerit. 2. St. Luke does not say, that what
he there writes he had only by Information; It seemed good also to me, who
having had perfect knowledge of all things, ab initio, from the beginning; the
word is (...), superne, coelitus, from above. Thus Ia. 1. 17. Every good and
perfect Gift is from above; (...). Io. 19. 11. And this, the Critics say, is
the proper and usual signification of the word, Vt sit adverbium loci, a qua
significatione non temere recedendum, illua autem a principio sensum
angustiorem reddit, and includitur, in eo, quod se omnia consecutum esst and
scripturum ordine, dicat.

The said Author is much offended at those expressions in Psalm. 109. which, he
says, are all Curses and Imprecations: But he may as well say, that those Woes
which our Savior denounces against impenitent Sinners, Matt. 23. 14. are all
Curses too; whereas they are rather tenderhearted Expressions and
Commiserations, for those Evils which he foresaw they would bring upon
themselves by their wilful Wickedness. And what he says further, in
confirmation of his Opinion, is only this; That if all these words were
rendered in the future tense, to avoid making the Psalmist pronounce such
Curses, there are a great many more places in the Psalms, where the Version
would need to be reformed. But what if this were granted, would any thing of
absurdity or inconvenience follow thence?

It Is further observable, that he boldly advances his own Opinion many times,
without ever taking the least notice of those Answers that have been returned
to it both by ancient and modern Writers. Thus, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is
given by inspiration os God, and is profitable, etc. But, p. 189. he says, this
may be very well thus translated, All Scripture that is divincly inspired is
profitable; but it cannot well be translated thus, unless he can prove, that
St. Paul did suppose some of the Books of the Jewish Canon not to be inspired:
Otherwise Theophylact's Confutation of this very Opinion will still hold good,
where in answer to his way of reading the words, Omnis scriptura, que divinitus
inspirata est, illa est etiam utilis, (...), etc. oportebat eos novisse, quod
cum supra dixerit, sacras literas nosti, nunc ait, omnis scriptura qualis? de
qua disserehat, and de qua dixit, quod sacra est: omnis igitur hujusmodi
divinitus inspirata est, and utilis.

He tells us, p. 48. That the Discourses which the Apostles made before their
Judges did not contain any thing which one might not as well say without
inspiration. But to prove the Apostles divinely inspired, we do not only
consider what they said, but also what they did upon those occasions. I do not
here speak of the Miracles done by the Apostles; but those practical
Resolutions and pious Performances consequent upon theirinward Persuasions and
Convictions. 2. What the Apostles said and did in those Circumstances then,
were greater and stronger Arguments of their being inspired, than any thing of
the like nature would be to us now; and the Reason is, because the Gospel was a
Religion then newly revealed, and not grown, as it were, habitual to 'em by a
long-continued Belief of it; they acted not only against all the Power and
Authority of the World, which was then vigorously set against 'em, but also
against their own late Principles and Practices of a different Religion, and
they successfully attempted and performed such things, which nothing but a
Divine Impulse could prevail with a prudent man to undertake.

Upon the whole, this Author seems very much to resemble Mr. Hobbs in his
Arguings; he would have the liberty of putting what Interpretations he pleases
upon places of Scripture, and then puts his Adversary to disprove 'em; and this
is that wherein the strength of his Plea does generally consist. But I humbly
conceive, that whereas he goes about to advance a novel opinion, he ought first
by positive Arguments to consute the sormer, and prove, that those
Interpretations formerly put upon those, places of Scripture, are neither
agreeable to the true sense of the Words, nor to the analogy of Faith; and not
think it sufficient for him, in this case, to tell us, That such or such a
place may be interpreted so or so.

Thus, p. 177. it is remarkable how industriously he labors to put the Proof
upon Mons. Simon, it being Mr. N's (as this Author is called) usual way, rather
to suppose than prove any thing. Thus, in the very next Page, 178. he
vigorously supposes these two things; 1. That St. Paul, Acts 23. speaks not
there as a Prophet, but as a mere private Person. 2. That he confesses himself
to blame, in giving such Language to the High Priest, but offers not the least
thing in proof of either, only makes the one Supposal to prove the other; the
latter to prove the former. But if St. Paul spoke as a Prophet, as the
generality of Interpreters do assert, and nothing here offered to prove the
contrary, then we cannot in reason suppose him to beg Pardon for what he spoke,
as such; and therefore some other Interpretation ought to be put upon that
place.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 6. for aed read and; p. 6. l. 22. a comma only; p. 11. l. 22. r.
effectual; p. 17. l. 28. for dispose r. depose; p. 18. l. 26. for the r. their;
p. 19. l. 28. make a comma at Service, l. 29. dele Semicolon; p. 33. l. 1. for
motions r. motives; p. 42. l. 15. for they r. thus; p. 44. l. 25. for it is r.
is it; p. 55. l. 26. dele his; p. 86. l. 26. for and r. but; p. 89. l. 14. dele
Colon; p. 107. l. 12. after God and says he; p. 145. l. 19. for it r. this; p.
160. l. 28. for awfully r. lawfully; p. 184. l. 20. for now r. more; p. 188. l.
6. add what to the beginning of the line; p. 189. l. 14. r. Martyr; p. 190. l.
26. r. contradistinctions; p. 194. l. 15. for principal r. principle; p. 196.
l. 2. after Kingdom add or; p. 103. l. 23. for viz. that r. and p. 196. l. 26.
add to in the beginning of the line; p. 57. l. 12. for we r. he; in the running
Title of Chap. 8. for of r. upon; p. 141. l. 5. add, For if Arguments drawn
from Natural Reason have no force of themselves to prove a God, antecedent to
Divine Revelution, I do not see how they can have any afterward; and if they
be such as any ways depend upon Divine Revelation, so far will they be of less
force to convince an Atheist.


