THE Loyal Observator: OR, Historical MEMOIRS of the Life and Actions of Roger
the Fiddler; Alias, The Observator.
Ralph. Here Is a clutter with Observators three or four times a week! And an
everlasting Din about Whiggs and Trimmers, and the Devil and all of Business!
Prithee, Nobbs, let thee and I set up an Observator; It Is a pretty Trade, and
next to that of an Informer, one of the most Thriving in these dull times.
There Is an Old Fellow in Holborn gets (they say) Forty Shillings a Paper
certain Pension, besides By Jobbs of two or three Hundred Guineys at a lump:
And yet frets, and foams, and raves, because he is no better Rewarded.


Nobbs. When all the swarming Intelligencers were silenced, and Thompson
muzzl'd, and Care run away, and Curtis and Janeway (Poor Snails!) had pulled in
their Horns, and were crept into their Original Shells, I was in hopes the
Nation should no more have been pestered with this Make-bate-Trumpery; But
since the Incorigible Squire scribbles on as eagerly as ever, I see no reason
why we may not put in for a Snack; For a Pamphlet's a Pamphlet, whether it be
writ by Roger the Fiddler, or Ralph the Corn-Cutter.


Ralph. But I bar all discourse of Religion or Government, and Reflections on
particular Persons.


Nobbs. Prithee have thou got a new Invention to make Butter without Cream? Or
the Apothecaries Trick, to give us Oxycrocium, and not a dram of Saffron in it?
Alas man! it is the very Essence of an Observator to be full of Mysteries of
State, and its Privilege to fall foul on any Body. How many hundreds have been
Libelled that way? Nay, Persons of highest Honor and Office have scarce
escaped him of late. Suppose I have a mind to a good warm Place of Credit and
Profit, (and for such Dainties Old Men may Long, as well as Young Women) what
have I to do, but Print an Observator, upbraid the Government with my Services
and Disappointments, acquaint the World what Preferments I would be at, and put
my Superiors roundly in mind on it; As much as to say, Sirs! You are
ungrateful, and neither understand your own Interest, nor my Merits. Then
suppose I receive a Rub from some Persons of Quality that don't think me
worthy; Straight I at 'em with another Observator, and Expose 'em as Trimmers
and Betrayers of the Government; and so Revenge my self, that no body for the
future shall dare Oppose my Pretensions.


Ralph. A clever Course! But methinks somewhat saucy; and he that practices it
deserves no other Advancement but to the Pillory or Whipping-Post. However,
since there is an Old Proverb -- That One may better steal a Steed, than Another
peep over the Hedge; I know not whether every Observator may be allowed the
like Prerogative: Therefore still I say I Will not meddle with Edg-Tools.


Nobbs. What then shall we talk of nothing at all?


Ralph. No, but of something next to Nothing, that is, the Ovservator Himself:
I go sometimes to SAM's, where People cry him up as the Atlas of the Church,
the Argus of the State, the very Buckle-and-Thong of Loyalty: And you see how
he vapors of his Forty Years Service to the Crown: Therefore I would gladly be
informed what Mighty Exploits he performed during the Old Rebellion, what
Commands he had, how many. Thousand Pounds he expended, what Scars of Honor he
received.


Nobbs. You must note, The Gentleman was a Younger Brother, (the Scandal of a
worthy Family, who have long been ashamed of him) and so far from being able to
Contribute to the Royal Cause, that during his Youth, Phill. Porter's Plow was
his best Maintenance; and it is observed, That he lived more splendidly under
the Usurper, than ever before or since: Whence some have thought, that the same
Wind which hurried Old Noll to Old Nick, might also puff away this Gallant's
Coach and Horses: For though he kept such an Equipage before, they were never
afterward visible.


Ralph. This is nothing to his Personal Gallantry; Perhaps he Rescued the
Standard at Edg-hill, stormed Towns (as Mountebanks draw Teeth) with a Touch,
or Routed whole Armies of the Rebels, like Almanzor.


Nobbs. No, no; Valor is none of his Tallent: He has more Wit then to hazard
his Precious Person with any Gun but Joan's; wisely considering, that if a man
happen to be Spitted through the Lungs, or have his Brains dulled with a Lump
of Lead, 'twould go near to spoil his writing of Observators for ever, and then
what would become of the Government? He marches, indeed, equipped with a Sword,
but it is only for Ornament: for he has not so much Courage as a Guinney-Pig; a
Boy of Fourteen may at any time dis-arm him with a Bean-Stalk. Did you never
hear how Captain C. of Richmond Observator'd him? Or how the Life-Guard-Man
wrought a Miracle, and (for a moment) made him honest.


Ralph. Of the first I have had some inkling; he had Libelled some of the
Captains Relations, who thereupon gave him the Discipline of the Battoon, and
made him Dance without his Fiddle; which he received as became a Philosopher:
And it is the best Argument he has to prove him a Christian, because Preces and
Lachrymae were all his Defense. -- But for the Adventure of the Liseguardman, I
am in the dark.


Nobbs. The Business was thus, -- About the year 1677. One Cole having a Sheet
against Popery, called, A Rod for Rome, (or some such like Title) bearing hard
upon the Jesuits, sent it up for a Passport, Mr. Observer refused it, (as he
generally did things of that Nature) yet could give no reason; (For he was not
so Ungenteel as to boast the Kindnesses he did the Romans.) Thus it lay by,
till after the Discovery of the Plot, when the Old man sent it again by Mrs.
Purslow a Printer: who having made 40 Jaunts in vain, at last sent: her Maid
for his Positive Answer, but she not being so much in his Favor as the Lass
(once) in Duck-lane, (to whom he never denied any thing,) he returned it,
swearing most Bloodily that he would not Allow it; As the Wench came forth, who
should she meet with but a Gentleman of the Guard, her Acquaintance; who
understanding what she had been about, read the Copy, goes back with her, and
as soon as he came into the room, displaying the Paper by one corner, as an
Ensign of War, begins -- D -- me, do you deny such an Honest Thing against the
Papists, ha? The Observator was just ready to Atkinize his Breeches, and with a
thousand French Cringes and Grimaces, Cries -- Good Sir! Noble Sir! As I Am a
Gentleman, I never refused it, only the Maid importuned me when I was busy, --
and presently B^scrawl'd the Paper with his Licentious Fist; The Wench was
fumbling for the Half-Crown, but her friend plucked her away abruptly, and our
Observator was glad he was so well rid of him, though with the loss of his Fee.


Ralph. But still where are the Instances of his Atchievments for Charles the
Martyr? He boasts in twenty of his Pamphlets, how near he was to the Honor of
the Gallows; What was he to be Hanged like Mum-Chance, for doing nothing?


Nobbs. No, but for doing nothing to the purpose. Did you never see a little
Hocus by slight of hand popping a piece several times, first out of one Pocket,
and then another, persuade Folks he was damnable full of money, when one poor
Sice was all his Stock: Just so the Iliads of our Observators Loyalty, when
Examined, dwindle into one single, sorry, ill-manag'd Intrigue at Lynn. Which
was nakedly thus.

About November. 44. The Town of Lynn being in the Rebels hands, the Gentleman
you wot on, pretending abundance of Interest there, when indeed he had none at
all, procured a Commission from His Majesty to Reduce it, graciously promising
him the government of the Town, if he could effect it, and payment of all
Rewards he should promise, not exceeding 5000 l. etc. The Hair-brained
Undertaker could think of no other way to Reduce it, but by sending for one
Captain Leamon of Lynn, (one that had taken the Covenant, and a known Zealot
for the Rebels Cause) to a Papists House two or three miles off, and very
discreetly blunders out the Business; shows him his Commission, promises him
1000 l. and other preferments if he would betray the Town, adding, That the
King did value the surprising that Town as half his Crown. [A very likely
Tale!] Leamon perceiving what a weak Tool he had to deal with, seems to comply,
but the same night acquaints the Governor, Colonel Walton, and (according to
promise) meets our Skulking Town-taker next day, but carried with him a
Corporal in Seamans Habit; To whom he also very frankly showed his Commission.
In the mean time, Lieutenant Stubbing, and five Soldiers habited like Seamen,
came from Lynn to the house, and then the disguised Corporal seizes our Gallant
Undertaker, who tamely surrenders both his Person and Commission; and so being
brought to London, it being proved at a Court Martial at Guild Hall, and by
himself Confessed, That he came into the Parliaments Quarters not in an hostile
manner as a Soldier, but without Drum, Trumpet, or Pass, as a Spy, and had
tampered with their Officers to betray the Garrison, he was for the same
Sentenced to be Hanged, December. 28.44, and passing from the Court through the
Crowd, uttered these Heroic words -- I desire all people would take warning by
me, that there may be no more Blood shed in this kind. However by Appealing to
the Lords he shuffled off present Exeeution, and having lain some time in
Newgate, obtaind his Liberty; but upon what valluable Considerations, must
remain a Riddle, unless his after Familiarity with Cromwell, and the
unaccountable Port that he afterward lived in, during those times, help to
explain it.


Ralph. The Total of the Account then stands thus, -- 1. That the Gentleman
abused the good King with a false Story; It seems he thought it as easy a
matter to Surprise a Town, as to overrun the Printers Wife; but was shamefully
defeated in both. 2. He managed the Affair like a rash Coxcomb, and was
outwitted by a dull heavy Roundhead. 3. Had it succeeded, though acknowledged
Justisiable, (such practices being often used in Wars, much more in the Case of
Rebels, where the seeming Treachery is but Duty) yet there is little of Glory
to be derived from such a pitiful Tampering Employ, only it seems he was not
judged Capable of any more Brave and Honorable, and therefore must make his
most of this. 4. When he was in Danger of the Nooze, he Repented even of this
his Loyal undertaking, and Sneaked most pitifully, and at last got off
Suspiciously. -- So much for his Old Services. Now let us hear of his Exploits
since the Restoration.


Nobbs. -- No sooner was that Blissful Change, but our Observator first
endeavored to set the old Cavaliers at Variance, and wrote against that
faithful Servant to the Crown, the Learned and Loyal Mr. James Howel, and as
far as he durst snarl'd at the Court and Chief Ministers for not preferring
himself (forsooth) as well as others. And to be taken notice of, In Defiance to
the Act of Indemnity, and of his Majesty's most excellent Declaration touching
Ecclesiastic Affairs, (A Sovereign Balm that was like to heal all our Wounds,
and Mortify for ever the Designs of Rome) he began to ripp up old Sores, and
blow the Coals of Division amongst Protestants under pretense of Exposing the
Presbyterians; yet still the Devil of Self-Interest Jogged his Elbow: for the
man is known, who being newly come from Lambeth, and having received only
Thanks and Benedictions instead of money, swore -- Damme! Let the B -- s,
henceforwards write for themselves. After this, dispairiug of higher place, he
aims at the supervisal of the Press (for which his scribbling humor had
somewhat adapted him) then gives the Government perpetual (false) Alarms on
that side; but having once gained the Point, soon learnt the faculty to wink as
often as his Spectacles were Enchanted with the dust of Peru. How that Affair was
managed, Let the Booksellers Guinies near Mercers-Chappel, The Books seized,
afterward privately sold from Cambray-house, to be Published, etc. be
Instances; but especially the known Story of the Printers Wife (before
mentioned) in Bartholomew-Close, to whom he prostituted the Interest of Church
and State, offering to connive at her Husband's Printing Treason, Sedition,
Heresy, Schism, any thing, if she would but gratify his brutish Lust.


Ralph. But still he was tight to the Church of England.


Nobs. Of his Zeal therein, there are these undeniable Testimonies.

1. His having been forty times at Mass by his own Confession in Print.

2. His not Receiving the Sacrament, or so much as coming to his Parish Church
12 long years and upwards.

3. His approving Books destructive to all Christianity, As one Entitled,
Anima mundi, burnt afterward (with his hand to it) by order (if I mistake not)
of the Reverend Bishop of London: Another called -- A Treatise of Humane
Reason, that deserved the same Fate, as making every man's private Fancy Judge
of Religion, the grand Scandal which Papists have these 100 years falsely cast
on Protestantism.

4 By Connivance at Popish Pamphlets all the time of his Dictatorship; Not one
having been during those many years honestly Prosecuted by him, though it is
computed above 100 thousand of them were in that space dispersed, to poison His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects; Nay on the contrary, as often as that Active
Loyal Gentleman, Mr. M. of the Company of Stationers, or any other of the
Masters or Wardens, or Mr. Stephens, Messenger of the Press, had discovered any
of the Papists Pamphlet-Magazines, this Observator either by secret
Intelligence prevented the Seizure, or afterward shuffled off both Book, and
Prosecution, pretending the same appertained to his immediate care, and so no
more was heard on it.


Ralph. But all the Loyal-world commends his Observators as witty and highly
serviccable to the Government.


Nobbs. As to the Wit, (no great praise in a Blade of threescore and twelve)
it is the Observation of Judicious Raleigh, Nihil est Sapientiae Odiosus Acumine
Nimio, Nothing is more an Enemy to Wisdom than Drollery and Over-sharpness of
Conceit; Hotheaded Youths, Unthinking shallow People, are easily taken, (as
Larks are by Low-Bells) with a Gingle of words; and perhaps some
She-Politicians may admire him; But the Graver and more Considerate Loyalists
judge no Papers have really been more Prejudicial to his Majesty's Interest;
His design therein is Evident, The Act that formerly gave him Bread, being
Expired, something must be done for a Livelihood; His Acquaintance, his
Interest, lay on the Red-Letter'd Side: who quickly Engage him to Ridicule that
Plot which his Majesty and four several Parliaments, (after strictest
Inquisition) had declared Horrid and Damnable; Hence started up the Brass
Screws, the Salamanca Certificate, and twenty other Crotchets, which neither
Secretary Castlemain, nor Sing, nor any of their St. Omers Pupils had the luck
to think of, and yet altogether as empty, Incoherent, and Nonsensical as their
Oaths and Allegations; But his feeders still not thinking this enough, have of
late put him upon another Jobb; To expose not only Fanatics and Whiggs, but
all Sober Churchmen and Moderate Loyal Protestant Subjects under the foolish,
but odious Name of Trimmers.


Ralph. -- But still he avows he writes for the Government.


Nobbs. Nothing more false; he writes only for his Belly; It Is the Crust not
the Cause he leaps at; As long as he Scribbles with such Provocations, it is
impossible to stop the other Pamphleteers; Nay he has done The Faction the
greatest Service of any man living; being the General Publisher of their
Clandestine Pamphlets, and sets People agog to inquire after, and buy them;
That Lewd Impudent and Traitorous Libel, The Second part of the Growth of
Popery and Arbitrary Government, scarce saw the Light, before he proclaimed and
repealed it; And if Hunts saucy Book have Sold 10000, He is beholden at least
for putting off 8000 of them, to the Observator. Some affirm, that for this
(Secret) Service he has a Pension from the Whiggs, equal to his Presents from
the Tories; but it is certain when any body Prints an obnoxious Pamphlet, they
first send it to him by the Penny-Post, to save 10 s. Charge of putting it in
the Gazet.


Ralph. -- I could not before guess at the Reason why he has of late expressed
so much Malice against the honest Messenger of the Press, that according to his
Duty faithfully and Impartially discharged his Office toward suppressing all
Pamphlets, both Phanatical and Popish; But if this Gentleman gets Friends by
the one, and money by the other; t^ wonder, if he have a spite at every body
t^^ would Damm up both his Mills at once -- But it grows late, and I am to meet
a Friend at Sam's, so Farewell till I see you next.


LONDON: Printed for W. Hammond. 1683.


