LOVES EMPIRE; Or, The AMORS Of the FRENCH COURT.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry. 1682.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL OF THANET, etc.
My LORD,
THE present Times being pestered with nothing but Narrative and Narrative,
Evidence upon Evidence; one to strengthen, and another to invalidate the Truth
of a Plot: The Papists Libelling the Presbyterians, and the Presbyterians
zealously Answering them, and both disturbing the Public Peace: Insomuch that
Mr. Stationer has now nothing to Entertain his Customer with but some rare
Pamphlet, which he is ready to commend as excellently penned, and learnedly
handled. St. Austin 's City of God, The Practice of Piety, The Whole Duty of
Man, etc. are grown even moldy upon their Shelves; and none but the Advising C
--, and Intelligent V --, (the former furnishing us with News from the Pope,
and the latter with strange Stories of Things which never were) can merit their
Favor, or be vouchsaft an Acceptance: And therefore for me to intrude into his
Shop, and desire a Place in his Classes, under the Notion of a Lover; is looked
upon as the Superlative Degree of Boldness and Impudence, and I am immediately
commanded to Retire; or if I persist Entreating, I am thrust out of Doors, and
called an Idle Fellow, a To^y, an Enemy to the Good Old Cause, and I know not
what. Forgetting that Love ought at this time especially, to have the greatest
Empire in Men's Hearts, to Unite the Dissentingly Reformed to the Truly Reformed
Opinion; and thus like Ephraim and Manasseh, both would agree against Judah
(the Papists).

And now, my Lord, being likely to be kept in Silence and Obscurity, and
incapable to appear abroad without a PROTECTION, I made bold to enter into your
Lordships Presence, and casting my self at your Feet, humbly implore your
Honorable Patronage.

Your Lordship will perchance be apt to ask me if this be a Time to talk of
Love; To which I believe I need not study for an Answer, when the high Station
your Lordship has in the World, gives you the affrighting Prospect how little
room Love takes up now among Men; Nay, it is almost forgot, and therefore to
give them this Memento of it, will not altogether be inseasonable.

My Lord, the Stage whereon Our Gallants acted their several Parts was France,
and having met with a General Acceptance and Favor in their French, I ventured
to Equipp them in our English Garb. I hope they may give your Lordship some
agreeable Diversion, when your vacant Hours from more serious Affairs shall
permit you.

Your Lordships Favor and Encouragement is the sole Azyle to which I shall
have Recourse, with which if I am honored, I shall not value the severe
Scrutinies of of the nice Critic, nor the Opprobrious Censure of the Sedate
Phanatick, whilst I think it my Duty to write my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and devoted Servant, R. H.

Loves Empire; Or, The GALLANTRIES Of the FRENCH COURT.
NOtwithstanding that in the Reign of Lewis the Fourteenth the War had
continued above Twenty years, yet it did not hinder Love from causing some
Amourous Intrigues; but as the Court was only filled with old insensible
Gentlemen, and young Sparks bred up in Armies, and whom that Profession had
rendered Brutal, most of the Ladies were become less modest than formerly; and
seeing they should have languished in Idleness if they had not made Advances,
or at least if they had been Cruel, a great many grew tender hearted, and some
very Confident.

Of this last Tribe was Madam d' Olonne: She had a round Face, a pretty Nose, a
little Mouth, fine sparkling Eyes, and delicate Features, yet smiling, which
embelishes most people, had in her a quite contrary effect; her Hair was a
bright brown, her Complexion admirable, her Neck, Hands and Arms were well
made, her shape was not to be commended, nor would she have been thought
Charming had it not been for her Face: This much her Flatterers say, That when
she first appeared at Court she had a handsome Body; which is the usual plea of
those who would excuse Women who are too Corpulent. However this Lady was too
sincere in this case to leave people in an Error, for every one that had a
mind might be informed of the contrary, and it was not her fault she did not
undeceive all the World.

Madam d' Olonne had a quick and pleasant Wit when she was free; yet she was
something false, inconstant, bold, malicious, loved pleasures even to Debauch;
and there was excess in her least Divertisements: Her Beauty rather than her
Estate, which was but small, obliged the Count d' Olonne to endeavor the
making her his Wife: Which he quickly effected, for being a Person of Quality,
and having a great Estate, he was agreeably received by Madam de la Louppe her
Mother, and had not the leisure to sigh for Charms which for two years had
inflamed the desires of all the Court: This Match being consummated, those
Lovers withdrew who pretended to Marriage, and others came who only aimed at
being beloved. One of the first who offered himself was Beuvron, whom the
Neighborhood of Madam d' Olonne gave the more convenience of seeing; and by
this means loved her a pretty while without being discovered; and I fancy this
Amor would have still been concealed, if Beuvron had never had Rivals: But the
Duke of Candale being fallen in love with Madam d' Olonne, quickly perceived
what had thitherto remained concealed for want of interessed People: Not but
that d' Olonne loved his Wife extremely, but Husbands are stupid, and so are
never Lovers, and the jealousy of these is much more piercing than that of the
others: So that the Duke of Candale saw things that d' Olonne did not, and
never has seen, for he is still ignorant that Beuvron has had an Intrigue with
his Wife.

Beuvron had black Eyes, a handsome Nose, a little Mouth, a long Face, very black
long and thick Hair, a fine Shape, and Wit enough; He was not one of those who
talk all in Company, but was a Man of good sense and honor, tho he had
naturally an aversion for War, so that being fallen in love with Madam d'
Olonne, he sought for an opportunity to discover to her his Passion: Their
Neighborhood at Paris gave him occasions enough, but her Inconstancy made him
apprehend an Intrigue with her: At length happening one day to meet with her
without other Company, If I only designed, Madam, said he to her, to let you
know that I love you, words would be altogether unnecessary, my cares and my
looks have told you sufficiently what effect your Charms have had upon me; But,
Madam, as I expect you should one day make returns to my flames, it is
requisite that I discover 'em, and assure you at the same time, that whether
you love me or not, I am resolved to be your Votary as long as I live.

Beuvron having ceased speaking, Sir, answered Madam d' Olonne, This is not the
first time I perceived you loved me, and tho you did not acquaint me with it, I
did not fail to think my self obliged to you for all you have done for me since
the first moment you saw me, and this ought to be my Excuse when I confess I
love you: Therefore do not esteem me the less, having long understood your
sighs, and tho I should be something blamed for my little resistance, it would
be a mark of the force of your merit rather than of my easiness. It is easy to
imagine that after this Confession it was not long before the Lady delivered up
her Fort to her Gallant: This Intrigue lasted four or five Months without
disturbance to either Party, but at length the Beauty of Madam d' Olonne was
too much talked of, and that Conquest promised too much Glory in appearance to
him who should make it, for Beuvron to be at rest. The Duke of Candale, who was
the handsomest man of the Court, fancied that nothing was wanting to his
Reputation, but the being beloved by the most beautiful Woman of the Kingdom:
Wherefore he took a Resolution at the Army, three Months after the Campaigne,
to be in love with her as soon he should see her; and made appear by a great
Passion he had afterward for her, that Love is not always the work of Heaven
and of Fortune.

The Duke of Candale had blew Eyes, a handsome Nose, irregular Features, a
great and disagreeable Mouth, but very fine Teeth, light yellowish Hair both
long and thick, his Shape was admirable, and he dressed so well, that the
greatest Sparks endeavored to imitate him; he had the air of a Person of great
Quality, he held one of the first Ranks in France, was Duke and Peer, Governor
of Burgundy jointly with his Father, and sole Governor of Auvergne, and
Colonel General of the French Infantry: His Genius was mean, but in his first
Amors falling into the hands of a Lady who had an infinite deal of Wit, and as
they had loved one another extremely, she had taken so much care to polish him,
and he to please that fair One, that Art had surpassed Nature, and he was a
much better bred man than a thousand others who have more sense than he.

Insomuch that being returned from Catalonia, where he had commanded the Army
under the Prince of Conty, he begun by a thousand eagernesses to acquaint Madam
d' Olonne with the love he had for her, thinking she had never had an Amourous
Intrigue: But seeing she made no returns to his Passion, he resolved to
acquaint her with it after such a manner as that she might not seem to be
ignorant of it; but as he had a kind of bashful respect for all Women, he chose
rather to write than speak to Madam d' Olonne, and his Letter was in these
terms.

I Am grieved, Madam, that all Delarations of Love are alike, and that there is
sometimes so much differences in Sentiments. I am very sensible that I love you
more than all the World is used to love, and yet I cannot express it otherwise
then is done by all the World: Wherefore do not take notice of my words that
are weak, and may be deceitful, but be pleased to make reflection on my Conduct
toward you, and if you find that to continue it with the same force, I must
needs be deeply struck; yield to these testimonies and be assured, that since I
love you so much, not being beloved by you, I shall adore you, when you oblige
me to have acknowledgment.


Madam d' Olonne having read this Letter, made this Answer:

IF any thing hinders you from being believed when you talk of Love, it is not
that it is importunate, but that you tell it too well: Great Passions are
usually more disordered, and me thinks you write like a very witty Man, who is
not in love, but would fain be thought so; and since it seems so to me, who am
infinitely desirous that what you say were true, judge what People would
imagine to whom your Passion should be indifferent, they would presently think
you had a mind to railly; For my part, I Will never make a rash judgment, but
will accept the Offer you make me, and am willing to judge by your Conduct of
the Sentiments you have for me.


This Letter which grateful People would have thought very kind, did not seem
so to the Duke of Candale; As he was very vain, he had expected less intricate
Favors: and this obliged him not to press Madam d' Olonne so much as she was
willing he should have done, and made her a hard task in spite of her self;
and the thing had lasted a long time, if the Fair One had not gained upon her
Modesty to make him so many advances, that he fancyed he might make an attack
without being exposed to a Repulse. The business being done, he quickly
perceived Beuvron's Commerce. Usually a Pretender looks only before him, but a
Lover well treated, looks on the right and on the left, and is not long without
discovering his Rival: Hereupon the Duke complains; His Mistress calls him
Caprichious and Tyrant, and takes him up so roundly, that he asks her pardon
for his suspicions, and fancies himself too happy in having appeased her. This
Calm did not long continue, Beuvron for his part reproached her to as little
purpose as the Duke did, and seeing he could not destroy his Rival himself, he
caused notice to be given under hand to Olonne that his Wife entertained the
Duke of Candale for her Galant. D' Olonne forbids her to see him, that is to
say, redoubled the Passion of those two Lovers, who having the more desire to
see one another since it was forbidden, found a thousand more convenient
oppurtunities than those they had before; However Beuvron remaining Master of
the field of Battails, the Duke of Candale renewed, his Complaints against him,
and used all his endeavors to have him Cashiered, but all to no purpose; Madam
d' Olonne told him that she perceived he only considered his own Interest, and
that he cared not if he ruined her, since that if she should forbid Beuvron to
see her, her husband and all the world would not doubt but that she made that
sacrifice to him; Madam d' Olonne did not love Beuvron so much as she did the
Duke, yet she was not willing however to lose him, and as well because One and
One make Two, as that because Cocquetts fancy they can retain their Galants
better by a little Jealousy than a great Tranquillity.

In the mean time Paget a man pretty well stricken in years, meanly born, but
very rich, fell in love with Madam d' Olonne, and having discovered that she
loved the sport, he fancyed that his Money would serve him instead of Merit;
and founded his greatest hopes upon the sum he resolved to offer her; He had
access enough to her house to have spoke to her himself, if he had durst; but
he had not the boldness to begin a discourse, which might be of ill consequence
if it was not kindly received, so that he thought the best course would be to
write to her, which he did in these terms.

I Have often in my life been in Law, Madam, but I never loved any thing so
much as I do you: and what makes me think so is, that I never gaveth any of my
Mistresses above an hundred broad Pieces to purchase the Fruition of them; but
to enjoy you I am willing to exceed to two Thousand: Think of it I beseech you,
Madam, and be mindful that Money was never so scarce as it is at present.


Quentine, Madam d' Olonne's Waitingwoman and Confident, delivered her this
Letter from Paget; and immediately after this Fair One made him he Answer that
follows.

I Had already perceived you had a great deal of Wit by the conversation I had
with you; but I knew not that you could write so well as you do; I never saw
any thing so pretty as your Letter, I should be overioyed if I might but
receive often such, and in the mean time shall be very glad to discourse you
this Evening at six a Clock.


Paget did not fail to be at the Assignation, and went thither in a Habit, that
is to say, with his Bag and the appurtenances. Quintine having introduced him
into her Mistrisses Closet, left them together: See here, Madam, said he to
her, showing what he brought, this is what is not daily met with: will you
receive it? I am willing, said Madam d' Olonne, and it will help to amuse us.
Whereupon having counted the two Thousand broad Pieces they had agreed for, she
shut them up in a little Trunk, and placing her self by them upon a little
Couch, which did not last her long, Sir, said she to him, there is not a Man in
France wrights like you; what I am going to say, is not to show my self a
Critic, but it is certain that I find but few people that have so much Wit as
you have. Most men entertain us only with Fopperies, and when they would write
to us kind Letters, they think they have done Miracles in telling us that they
adore us, that they shall dye if we do not Love them, and that if we will be so
gracious to them, they will serve us as long as they live: we have much need
indeed of their Services. I am overioyed, said Paget, that my Letters please
you; I should not say this elsewhere, but to you, Madam, I shall not mince the
matter, my Letters cost me nothing. This is hard to be believed, answered she,
you must then have a very great Stock. After some other Discourses, which Love
interrupted two or three times, they agreed of an other Interview, and at that
of another: Insomuch that those two thousand Broad Pieces procured Paget three
Assignations.

But Madam d' Olonne being willing to make advantage of the Love of this
Citizen, and of his Riches, desired him at the fourth Visit to begin again to
write to her such Letters of Gallantry as that she had received from him: But
he seeing that this would come to be of Consequence, he fell to reproaching
her, which did him no good; and all that he could obtain was, that he should
not be drove from her House, and that he might come and play when she should
send for him.

Madam d' Olonne fancied that by letting Paget see her, she should inflame his
desires, and that perhaps he would be again so simple as to satisfy them at
any rate; but tho he was so much in love as not to be able to forbear seeing
her, yet he was not charmed to the degree of buying her Favors daily.

Things being in these terms, whether spite made Paget blab, or that his
frequent Visits and the Money that Madam d' Olonne had played away, caused the
Duke of Candale to make reflections, he desired his Mistress, when he departed
for Catalonia, not to see Paget any more, whose Commerce was injurious to her
Reputation; which she promised him, but did not keep her word; Insomuch that
the Duke being informed by those who sent him News from Paris, that Paget went
oftener then ever to Madam d'Olonnes House, he wrote to her this Letter.

WHen I took my leave, I desired you, Madam, not to see that Rogue Paget any
more, and yet he is ever at your Elbow; are not you ashamed to give me reason
to be Jealous of a wretched Citizen, who could never be feared, were it not
that you your self did make him Confident? If you do not Blush, Madam, I blush
for you and my self, and for fear of meriting that Scandal you would heap upon
me, I shall make an Effort upon my love to consider you only as an infamous
Woman.


Madam d'Olonne was much surprised to receive so rude a Letter, but as her
Conscience reproached yet more sharply then her Lover, she did not seek reasons
for her excuse, and contented herself with answering in these terms.

MY Conduct hitherto is so ridiculous, my Dear, that I should despair of being
ever loved by you, if I could not redeem my Credit by the Assurances I give you
of a more honest civil Carriage in the future; but I swear by you your self,
which is what I have most dear in the world, that Paget shall never enter my
House; and that Beuvron, whom my Husband forces me to see, shall see me so
seldom, that you shall know, that you alone are in stead of all things to me.


The Duke of Candale was so fully assured by this Letter, that he resolved not
to condemn his Mistress any more upon appearances, which he judged to be all
deceitful. And for having been, as he thought, without reason suspicious, he
fell into the other extremity of Confidence, and took in good part all the
Cocquetry and Infidelity that Madam d'Olonne committed for six Months together;
for she continued to see Paget, and to give Favors to Beuvron; and tho the
Duke of Candale had notice given him of it from several parts, he fancied that
it proceeded from his Father or his Frinds, who were desirous to divert him
from loving Madam d'Olonne, believing that this Passion would hinder him from
thinking of Marrying.

So that he returned from the Army more in love than he had ever been; Madam d'
Olonne likewise, with whom so long an absence made the Duke of Candale pass
for a new Galant, redoubled her eagerness for him, even in the sight of all the
Court; this Lover took the Imprudences she committed to see him, for marks of a
passion she was no longer Mistress of, tho they were only Testimonies of the
natural Irregularity of her reason; when she did any Passionate act that made a
Noise, he thought her deeply in love and yet she was only silly. And he was so
persuaded of the kindness she had for him, that tho he should dye for her sake,
he apprehended he should be still ungrateful.

It is easy to imagine that the Carriage of these Lovers made a great Noise;
they had both of them Enemies; but the Fortune of the One and the Beauty of the
Other made-a great many envy them: tho all the world would have served them,
they would have destroyed all by their Imprudence, and all the world would have
done them hurt: They made Assignations every where, without having taken any
measures with any Body. They saw One another often in a house, that the Duke of
Candale kept in the name of a Country Lady whom Madam d' Olonne pretended to
visit most commonly by night at her own House: all these Rendevouzes did not
take up all the time of this perfidious One, for when the Duke left her she
went to the conquest of some new Lover, or at least to reassume Beuvron by a
thousand kindnesses for the fears the Duke gave him.

The Winter passed thus without the Duke of Candales suspecting the least ill
in all she did, and he left her to return to the Army as well satisfied as he
had ever been: he had not been there two Months but that he learnt news which
troubled his joy: His particular friends who took strict notice of his
Mistresses Conduct did not dare to say any thing to him as long as they found
him prepossessed by that faithless One; but something very extraordinary having
happened since his absence, and not fearing a sight of her should destroy the
impressions they would give him, they altogether hazarded, without making
appear any design or concert, to acquaint him with her behavior. Whereupon
they each of them singly sent him word that Ieannin was deeply engaged with
Madam d' Olonne, that his assiduities gave cause to believe, not only a design,
but a happy success; and in a word, that tho she were not culpable, he ought
not to be satisfied with her, seeing she was suspected by all People.

But while these News are going to put the Duke of Candale in a rage, it is fit
I should speak of the birth, progress, and ends Jeannin's Passion.

Jeannin de Castille was well shaped, had a pleasing Countenance, was very
spruce, but had little Wit; his Quality and Profession were the same that
Pagets, and was very rich as well as he. He was handsome enough to have it
believed that in case he had worn a Sword, his Merit alone might have procured
him the Ladies Favors, but his Profession and his Riches made it suspected,
that all the Women he had had Intrigues with, were interessed, insomuch that
when he was seen to be in love with Madam d' Olonne, it was not doubted but
that he would be beloved for his Money.

The King after having passed the Summers upon the Frontiers, usually returned
to Paris in the Winters, and all the Divertisements of the World possessed his
Mind by turns; Billiards, Tennis, Hunting, Plays, and Dancing had each their
times with him: At that time Lotteries were so much the mode, that every one
had them; some of Money, others of Jewels and Movables. Madam d' Olonne
resolved to have One of Money; but whereas in the most part of them all the
Cash was employed they had received, and that Fortune shared it, in this, which
was of Ten thousand Crowns, there was not Five employed, and those Five too
were distributed according as Madam d' Olonne thought fit. Jeannin was present
when she made the first Proposals of the Lottery, and as she asked a Sum of
every one according to their Abilities, and that she told him he was to give an
Hundred pound, he made Answer, That he was willingly, and moreover promised her
to procure amongst his Friends wherewith to make it up a Thousand. Presently
after, all the Company being gone except Jeannin, I know not, Madam, said he to
her, whether you are yet acquainted with my Passion, for I have loved you a
long time, and my sighs already mount to a very great sum; but after having
given my self entirely to you, I must needs ask the confirmation of my Bail,
which I beseech you to sign, Madam; and observe, that besides the Hundred pound
you taxed me, I give you Nine hundred more for the having your Affection; for
what I said of my Friends was only to deceive the People that were here when I
spoke to you of this Affair. I confess, Sir, answered Madam d' Olonne, I never
thought you in love till now, not but that I have observed by certain Meenes in
you, what made me suspect some things, but I am so disgusted with those kind of
ways, and sighs and languishings are in my mind so poor a Galantry, and such
feeble Testimonies of love, that if you had not taken a more gentile Course
with me, you had lost your pains all your life time. Now as for Acknowledgment,
you may believe that People are not far from loving, when we are well assured
of being beloved: There need no more to make Jeannin believe that he was at the
Critical Minute. He cast himself at Madam d' Olonne's feet, and as he would
have made use of that Action of Humility for a pretext to higher Enterprises,
No, said she, you are mistaken, Sir; In what Country have you heard say that
Women make Advances? When you shall have given me real marks of a great
Passion, I shall not be ungrateful. Jeannin, seeing that with her, Money was to
be delivered before the Commodity, told her, That he had two Hundred broad
Pieces, and that he would give them her if she pleased: She consented, and
having received them; If you think fit, Madam, said he to her, to grant me some
favor upon the account of this Money, you will extremely oblige me; or if you
will stay till you have received the whole Sum, give me a Note under your Hand
of the value received. She chose rather to kiss than write; and a Moment after
Jeannin went away, assuring her that he would bring the rest on the morrow,
which he did not fail to do; and the Moment was no sooner counted, then that
she kept her word with him with all the Honor that can be expected in such a
Treaty.

Tho Jeannin came in through the same Door that Paget did, she used him much
better; whether she hoped to draw greater Advantages from him at length, or
that he had some concealed Merit that served him instead of Liberality; she did
not ask him new Proofs of Love for the giving him new Favors. The Thousand
pounds made her love him three Months together, that is to say, treated him as
if she had loved him.

In the mean time the Duke of Candale having received Advice of his Mistresses
new Intrigues, he wrote her this Letter.

THo you would justify your self to me of all the things you are Accused of, I
can no longer love you, tho all that is said of you was done only out of
Malice: All Lovers are usually overjoyed to hear their Mistresses named, as for
me I tremble as soon as I hear or read your Name, I ever fancy in these
Occasions, that I shall learn some Story worse, if possible, than the former:
And yet I need not know more to have the utmost Contempt for you, you cannot
add any thing to your Infamy; Wherefore expect all the Resentment that a a
Woman without Honor deserves, from an honest Man that has loved her extremely.
I shall not come to particulars with you, because I do not seek for your
Justification, for you are Convicted in my Opinion, and I will never have more
to do with you.


The Duke of Candale wrote this Letter just as he was upon returning to Court;
he had newly lost a Battle, which did not a little contribute to the
bitterness of his Letter: He could not suffer being beaten every where, and it
would have been some Comfort to him in the Misfortunes of the War, if he had
been more happy in Love. So that he began his Journey under a terrible
Melancholy: At another time he would have come Post, but as if he had had some
foreknowledge of his ill Fortune, he came as slowly as possible; he began to
find himself something Indisposed upon the way. At Vienna he fell very ill, but
being but a days Journey from Lions, he resolved to go thither, knowing he
should be better looked to. But the Fatigues of the Campagnia having brought
him very low, his Troubles made an end of him; for notwithstanding he was
young, and had the assistance of the best Physicians, yet they could not save
his Life: But as his greatest Sufferings could not make him forget Madam d'
Olonne's Infidelity, he wrote to her this Letter just before his Death.

IF I could preserve any kindness for you upon my Deathbed, I should be very
loath to dye; but not being able to esteem you any longer, it is without Regret
that I leave the World; I only loved it that I might pass it the more sweetly
with you: But since some little Merit I had, and the greatest Passion
imaginable, could not procure me your Affection, I do not desire to live any
longer, but perceive that Death will free me from a great many Troubles. If you
were capable of any tenderness, you could not see me in the Condition I am in,
without dying for grief: But God be thanked, Nature has done the business, and
since you could daily torment the Man of the World who loved you the most, you
may well see him die without being concerned.

Adieu.

The first Letter that the Duke of Candale wrote to Madam d' Olonne about
Jeannin, had made her so much afraid of his Return, that she dreaded it like
Death, and I fancy she wished she might never see him more. And yet the rumor
of his being in that Extremity grieved her to the heart, and the News of his
Death, which her Friend the Countess of Fiesque brought her, had like to have
made her dye her self. She lost her Senses for some moments, and came only to
herself at the Name of Merillus, whom she was told asked to speak with her.

Merille was the Duke's principal Confident, and brought Madam d' Olonne the
Letter from his Master that he had written to her as he lay a dying, and the
little Trunk wherein he put his Letters, and all the other Favors he had
received from her. After having read this last Letter, she fell a Crying more
bitterly than before. The Countess not being willing to leave her in so
deplorable Condition, proposed the opening that Trunck for the amusing her
grief. The Countess found at first a Handkerchief stained with blood in several
places. Ah! my God, cried Madam d' Olonne, how has that poor Man, who had so
many other things of greater Consequence, kept this Handkerchief till now; is
there any thing in the world so kind! And thereupon she related to the
Countess, that having cut her Finger as she was working by him some years ago,
he had asked that Handkerchief of hen, with which she had wiped her hand, and
had kept it ever since. After that they found Bracelets, Purses, Hair and
Pictures of Madam d' Olonne, and coming to the Letters, the Countess desired
her Friend that she might read some of them. Madam d' Olonne having given her
Consent, the Countess opened this first.

IT is reported here you have been beaten; this is perhaps a false Rumor, and
set on foot by those who envy you: But perhaps it is a Truth. Ah! My God! in
this uncertainty I require my Lovers life of you, and I abandon to you the
Army, yes, my God, and not only the Army, but the State and all the World
together. Since I have been told this sad News without particularizing any
thing of you, I have made twenty visits a day; I fell to talk of the War, to
see if I could learn any thing that might give me ease: I am told every where
that you have been beaten; but they donot speak particularly of you, and I dare
not ask what is become of you, not that I am afraid of making appear thereby
that I love you; I am in too great a fright to take care of my Reputation; but
I fear to learn more than I am willing to know. This is the state I am and
shall be in till the arrival of the first Post, if I am able to expect it. What
redoubles my disquiets is, that you have so often promised to send me express
Couriers upon all extraordinary Affairs, that I take it ill I have had none in
this.


While the Countess was reading this Letter with motions of Concern and Pity,
Madam d' Olonne was melting into tears; after having perused it, they were both
some time without speaking: I Will read no more now, said the Countess, for since
it puts me in pain, it must needs trouble you much more. No, No, replied Madam
d' Olonne, continue, I beseech you, my Dear, it makes me weep, but it puts me
in mind of him. The Countess having opened a Letter, found it in these terms.

HOw! Will you never leave me at rest: Shall I always be in fear of losing you,
either by your Death or Inconstancy: As long as the Campaigne lasts, I am in
perpetual Alarms, the Enemies do not fire a Shot but what I imagine is aimed at
you; and then I hear you have lost a Battle without knowing what is become of
you, and though after a thousand mortal Apprehensions, I know at length my good
fortune has saved you, (for you know by Experience you are not at all obliged
to your own) I am told you are at Avignon in the Arms of Madam de Castillanne,
where you comfort your self for your Misfortunes. If it be so, I am very
unhappy you did not lose your Life with the Battle: Yes, my Dear, I should
choose rather to see you Dead than Inconstant; for I should have had the
pleasure to believe that had you lived longer, you would have still loved me,
whereas my Heart is only filled with rage to see my self abandoned for another,
who does not love you so much as I do.


Is it true, Merille, said the Countess, that the Duke of Candale was in love
with Madam de Castillanne? No, No, Madam, said he to her, he was two days in
Avignon at his return from the Army, to refresh himself, and there he made two
Visits to Madam de Castellanne; judge if this can be called Love. But, Madam,
added he, addressing himself to Madam d' Olonne, Who has given you such good
Information of all my Master did? Alas! answered she, I only know the public
report; but it is so common, that this Amor is even said to be partly Cause of
his Death: And then she fell a crying again more than ever. The Countess, who
only sought to make a Diversion to her Grief, asked her if she knew not the
Hand of a Superscription of a Letter she showed her: Yes, answered Madam d'
Olonne, it is a Letter from my Steward. This must be something very Curious,
said the Countess, I must see what he writes; and thereupon opened this Letter.

LEt my Lady tell you what she will, her House is never empty of Normans; those
Devils would be much better in their Country than here; I am mad, my Lord, to
see what I see, which I do not send you the Particulars of, because I hope you
will be here very suddenly, where you will take order for all your self.


By these, Normans the Steward meant Beuvron and his Brothers, Jarry and the
Chivalier de Saint Earemond, and the Abbot de Villerceaux, who were very
assiduous at Madam d' Olonne's House. The plainness with which this poor Man
sent this News to the Duke of Candale, did so move that foolish Woman, that
after having looked upon the Countess to see how she took it, she burst out a
laughing; the Countess not having so much reason to be afflicted as she had,
did the like: But poor Merille not being able to bear with so unreasonable a
Joy, redoubled his Fears, and went out of the Cabinet in a pet. Two or three
days after Madam d' Olonne being perfectly comforted, the Countess and her
other Friends advised her to mourn for her Honors sake, her Intrigue with the
Duke of Candale having been too public, to make a Mystery of it: So that she
constrained her self four or five days, after which she followed her old
Course, and that which hastened her laying by her Mask of Mourning was the
Carneval, which by giving her an opportunity to satisfy her Inclination,
helped her likewise to content her Husband, who had great suspicions of her
Correspondence with the Duke of Candale, and thought himself very happy in
being freed from him. Wherefore to make him believe she was no longer
concerned, she masked herself four or five times with him, and being willing to
regain entirely his Confidence by a great sincerity, she not only confessed to
him her love for the Duke, not only that she had suffered the Fort to be taken,
but the particulars of their Enjoyments: And as she specified the number, He
had but little love for you, Madam, said he, insulting the memory of the poor
deceased, since he performed so seldom with so beautiful a Woman as you are.

She had left her Bed but a week, which she had kept above four, by reason of a
great hurt she had in her leg, when she resolved to mask herself. And this
desire advanced her Cure more then all the Remedies she had used of a long
time: So that she went in Masquerade four of five times with her Husband; but
as these were only little private Masquerades, she resolved to have a great and
famous One that might be talked of; and to that intent she, and three more,
disguised themselves like Capuchins, and caused two others of her Friends to be
diguised like Nuns: The Capuchins were she herself, her Husband, Jarry, and the
Abbot de Villerseaux: The Nuns were my Lord Crofts an Englishman, and the
Marquess de Sillery. This Troop run into all Companies on Shrove-Tuesday Night.
The King and Queen his Mother having been informed of this Masquerade, were
extremely displeased with Madam d' Olonne, and said openly that they would
revenge the Injury and Contempt that had been had of Religion in that Occasion.
Some time after their Majesty's were pacified, and all these Threatenings ended
in their having no more esteem for Madam d' Olonne.

During all these passages, Jeannin peaceably enjoyed his Mistress. When she
caused the Lottery to be drawn, I have already said that of Ten thousand Crowns
she had received, she had employed but the half at most, and the greatest part
of this half was distributed to the Capuchins, to the Nuns, and others of the
Cabal. The Prince of Marsillac, who was young, to act the chiefest part upon
this Stage, had the greatest Lot, which was a Silver Cestern. Jeannin, with all
the Favors he received; had only a Jewel of very small value: The great Rumor
that run of the deceit of this Lottery, vexed him to see that he was no better
treated than the most indifferent. He complained to Madam d' Olonne, she not
thinking fit to acquaint him with her Roguery, received his Complaints very
ill, insomuch that before they parted, they both fell to Reproaches, the one
for his Money, the other for her Favors. The Conclusion of which was, Madam d'
Olonne's forbidding him her House, and Jeannin told her that he had never
obeyed her so willingly as he should do in that Occasion, and that this Command
would save him both Trouble and Expense.

In the mean time Beuvron's Commerce with her, lasted still; whether the Spark
was not much in love, or that he thought himself happy in having her Favors at
any rate, he tormented her a little about her Behavior, she also treated as
one she made use of when others failed her, and her love for him was as little
as nothing.

Shortly after her falling out with Jeannin, Marsillac who had Friends who were
much brisker than he was himself, was advised by them to apply himself to Madam
d' Olonne, and told him that he was of an Age to make himself talked of, that
Women procured Esteem as well as War, that Madam d' Olonne being one of the
greatest Beauties of the Court, besides the great Pleasures, would likewise be
an Honor to him she should love; and that it was very glorious to fill the
place of the Duke of Candale. With all these Reasons they egged on Marillac to
make his Visits to Madam d' Olonne; but because he was naturally very
distrustful of himself, his Cabal being also very distrustful of him, judged it
was not fit he should be left upon his word with her; and it was concluded that
Sillery should be appointed for his Governor, and to assist him upon occasion.
Marsillac had made great Application to her for two Months for this, without
having spoke to her of Love, otherwise then in general terms: He had however
told Sillery, that it was above six Weeks since he had made an Amarous
Declaration to her, and had likewise invented a very harsh Answer, that he said
she made him, that he might not think it strange he was so long without
receiving Favors. Whereupon this Governor, to serve his Pupil, spoke thus to
Madam d' Olonne: I know very well, Madam, that nothing is so free as Love, and
that if the heart is not touched by inclination, the mind will never be much
persuaded by words; but I must however tell you, that when a Person is young
and unmarried, I do not comprehend why a young amorous Gentleman is refused,
who is as well provided, or I am much mistaken, as any man about Court; it is
poor Marsillac I speak of, Madam, since he is desperately in love with you, why
are you ungrateful? Or if you find you cannot love him, why do you amuse him?
Love him or dismiss him. I know not since when, answered Madam d' Olonne, that
Men pretend we should love them, without their having made it their Request;
for I have heard say, it was they who formerly made Court. I know very well
that in these latter days they treat Gallantry after a strange manner; but I
knew not that they had reduced it to the point of requiring that Women should
be their Votaries. How, answered Sillery, has not Marsillac declared he loved
you? No, Sir, said she to him, it is you who first tell it me. Not but that his
Assiduities have made me suspect he had some design; but till we are spoke to,
we do not understand the rest. Ah Madam, replied Sillery, you are not then so
much in fault as I thought, Marillac 's Youth renders him fearful; but the same
Youth makes Women excuse several things: Persons of his Age are seldom faulty,
and men but Twenty years old always meet with Compassion. I grant, replied
Madam d' Olonne, that the Bashfulness of a young Man raises Pity, and never
Anger; but I likewise pretend he should be respectful. Do you call respect,
Madam, said Sillery to her, the not daring to say we are in love? It is all
mere folly, I say, in regard of a Woman who would not make Returns: For in that
Case the Gallant would not lose his time; and would quickly know what he was to
trust to: But this respect which you require, Madam, is only of advantage to
you with those you have no inclination for; for if the Man you are inclined to
love should have too much of it, you would be very much perplexed. As he had
done speaking, Company came in, whereupon he took his leave, and went to seek
out Marsillac, to whom having made a thousand Reproaches for his Timidity, he
made him promise that before that day was at an end, he would make an amorous
Declaration to his Mistress: He likewise told him part of the things it was
requisite he should say, which Marsillac had forgot within a Moment after; and
having encouraged him as much as he could, he saw him set out for this great
Expedition.

However Marsillac was under strange disquiets, sometimes he thought his Coach
went too fast, sometimes he wished he might not find Madam d' Olonne at home,
or that he might find some body with her: In a word, he feared the same things
that a brisk Man would have desired with all his heart. However, he was so
unhappy as to meet with his Mistress, and to find her alone. He came up to her
with so disordered a Countenance, that if Sillery had not already acquainted
her with his Love, she would have discovered it by seeing him only that time.
This Disorder helped to persuade her more then all he, or the Eloquence of his
Friend could have said to her: And it is for this reason that Fools are more
happy than the Wise in Love.

The first thing that Marsillac did after being seated, was putting on his Hat,
so little was he himself; an instant after perceiving his folly, he took off
his Hat and Gloves, then put on one again, and all this without saying a Word.
What Is the matter, Sir, said Madam d' Olonne, you seem to be concerned at
something. Do not you Divine it, Madam, said Marsillac? No, said she, I do not
comprehend it; How should I understand what you do not tell me, being hardly
able to conceive what I am told? I shall tell you then, what it is, replied
Marsillac simpering, I am in love with you. But why so much Ceremony, said she,
for so small a thing: I do not see there is so much difficulty in loving, there
appearing much more in loving well. Ah Madam! I find it much harder to tell it
than to do it; I find none at all in loving you, and I should find it so
difficult to cease loving you, that I should never be able to forbear, tho you
should order it me a thousand times. I Sir, replied Madam d' Olonne blushing, I
have nothing to Command you. Any other than Marsillac would have understood the
cunning way that Madam d' Olonne made use of to permit him to love her: But his
Wit was gone a Wool-gathering, and all Delicacy upon him was lost. How Madam,
said he to her, do you not esteem me enough to honor me with your Commands.
Well, said she to him, should you be glad I ordered you not to love me any
longer? No, Madam, replied he bluntly. What would you be at then, said Madam d'
Olonne? Love you as long as I live, said he. Well, said she, love me as long as
you please and hope. This had been sufficient for a more pressing Gallant than
Marsillac to have pretended to enjoyment immediately; and yet notwithstanding
all that Madam d' Olonne could do, he made her wait two Months, and at length,
when they came to the point, she was forced to make all the Advances. The
establishing: this new Commerce did not make her break that she had with
Beuvron: The last Lover was ever the most beloved, but he was not so much in
her Favor as to drive away Beuvron, who was a second Husband to her.

A little before the Repture of Jeannin with Madam d' Olonne, the Chevalier of
Grammont was fallen in love with her, and he being a very extraordinary Person,
it is fit I give a Description of him.

The Chevalier had brisk Eyes, a handsome Nose, a pretty Mouth, a dimple in his
Chin, and I know not what of sine in his Phisiognomy, his Shape had been
comely, had he not stooped, his Wit was delicate and gallant. However, his Mien
and his Accent gave a Grace to what he said, that became nothing in the Mouth
of another. A mark of this is that he writ the worst of any Body, and he writ
as he spoke. Though it be superfluous to say that a Rival is incommode, the
Chevalier was to that point, that it would have been better for a poor Woman to
be troubled with four others then he alone. He was so sprightly that he hardly
ever slept, he was liberal to Profusion, and by that means his Mistress and his
Rivals could not have Servants nor Secrets but what he knew, otherwise the best
Man in the World. It was twelve years since he began to love the Countess of
Fiesque, a Woman as extraordinary as he was a Man, that is to say, as singular
in Merits as he was in ill Qualities; but as of those twelve years she had been
banished, five from Mademoiselle d' Orleans, Gaston's of France's Daughter, a
Princess whom Fortune persecuted, because she had Virtue, and could not reduce
her great Courage to the basenesses that the Court demands. During their
absence the Chevalier had tied himself to a very regular Constancy; and tho the
Countess was very lovely, he merited some excuse for his Lightness, being he
had never received any favor from her. He had however caused several to be
jealous; Rouville was one of those who were so: As he was one day reproaching
the Countess that she loved the Chevalier, that fair One told him that he was
mad to believe she could love the greatest Cheat in the World. This is a
pleasant reason, Madam, which you allege, I know you are a greater Cheat than
he, and yet I cannot forbear loving you.

Tho the Chevalier was in love with all Women, the Countess however had that
power over him, that what engagement soever he had elsewhere, so soon as he
knew that any One visited her oftener that ordinary, he quitted all to return to
her: And he was in the Right, for the Countess was a lovely Woman, she had blew
and sparkling Eyes, a handsome Nose, an agreeable Mouth, of a fine Color, and
white and smooth Skin; the form of her Face was long, and never any One but
she in the world was embelished with a long Chin; her hair was brown, and she
was ever Gallantly dressed, but her finery proceeded rather from Art than the
magnificence of her Clothes; her Will was free and natural, her Humor cannot
be described, for it was with the Modesty of her Sex of the Humor of all the
World. People by much thinking of what they have to do, think usually better at
the end than at the beginning. The contrary happened usually to the Countess,
her Reflections spoiled her first Motions. I know not if the Confidence she had
in her Merit made her careless of seeking Lovers, for she took no pains at all
to have them. And indeed when any One of himself made his addresses to her, she
neither affected Rigor to be rid of him, nor Kindness to retain him, he left
of his Courtship if he pleased, if he pleased he continued it: and what course
soever he took he did not subsist to her cost. So that the Chevalier as I have
said, had not visited her in five years time, and during that absence that he
might not lose time he had had a thousand Mistresses, amongst others Victoria
Manciri, Duchess of Mercoeur, and three days after her Death, Madam de
Villars, and it was for this reason that Benserade, who was in love with her,
made this Sonnet upon the Chevalier.

Can you rejoice after the Mortal stroke
That killed the loveliest Object e're was seen?
A real Lovers heart would have been broke,
In the same Tomb he would have buried been.
A Heart so Charmed can it new flames receive?
? I is an unheard of infidelity!
When a fair Mistress's death you ought to grieve,
You turn Gallant and at new Game would fly.
For this unworthy weakness you will smart;
You love have failed, and love will fail your heart,
And you're already fallen into the Snare.
I. know the Beauty who does you decoy
I love her, and that all I may declare;
What gives you ease, alas! does me destray.
The Countess returning some time after to Paris, the Chevalier not being tied
to Madam Villars by any favors, quitted her to return to the Countess; but as
he was never long in the same state, and being tired with her, he made his
addresses to Madam d' Olonne, at the same time that Marsillac entered into an
engagement with her, and tho the Chevalier was less Modest than Marsillac with
the Ladies, he was not however the more pressing; on the contrary provided he
might toy with 'em, have it said in the world that he was in love, find some
People of easy belief to flatter his vanity, put a Rival in pain, be better
received than he, he was not at all fond of a surrender. One thing he did that
made it more difficult for him to persuade than it was for another, was that he
never spoke seriously. Insomuch that a Woman must needs flatter her self
extremely, to believe he was in love with her.

I have already said that never any Gallant that was not beloved was more
incommode than he, he had ever two or three Lacquies without Liveries, whom he
called his Bloodhounds, whom he caused to dog and observe his Rivals and his
Mistresses. Madam d' Olonne being in pain One day how she should go to an
Assignation she had made with Marsillac, without being discovered by the
Chevalier, resolved for her pleasure to go hooded up with her Chamber Maid, and
to Pass the River in a Boat; after having given orders to her servants to go
wait for her at Fauxbourgs Saint Germain, the first Man who gave her his hand
to help her into the Boat, was the Chevaliers Bloodhound, before whom, without
knowing him, she had been merry with her Chamber Maid, for that she had
deceived the Chevalier, and talked of what they were going to do that day; this
Bloodhound went immediately to acquaint his Master, who strangly surprised
Madam d' Olonne the next day, when he acquainted her with the perticulars of
her Rendevouz of the Evening before.

An honest welbred Man having convicted his Mistress of loving another than
himself, withdraws immediately and without noise, particularly if she had not
made him any promise; but the Chevalier was not of that humor; when he could
not procure being beloved, he would rather chose to have been stabbed than
leave his Mistress and Rival in repose. Now Madam d' Olonne having reckoned for
nothing the Assiduities that the Chevalier had paid her for three Months
together, and turned into Raillery all that he had told her of his Passion, and
the more for that she was persuaded, that he had as great an one for the
Countess as he could have for her, she hated him as the Devil. Then this Lover
fancying that a Letter would do his buisness much better than all he had done
or said thitherto, in that Opinion he writ to her in these terms.

IS it possible, my Goddess, that you should be ignorant of the love, that your
fair Eyes, my Suns, have kindled in my heart? Tho it be useless to have
recourse with you to those Declarations which we are forced to have with mortal
Beauties, and that mental Prayers, ought to suffice you, I have told you
athousand times that I loved you; yet you laugh and make me no answer; Is this
a good or an ill sign my Queen, I conjure you to explain your self therein,
that the most passionate of mortals may continue to adore you, and cease to
displease you.


Madam d'Olonne having received this Letter, carried it immediately to the
Countess, with whom she fancyed it had been concerted, but did not seem to
believe any such thing at first. As there was always a seeming kindness
between them, she smiling valued at a high rate her refusing her Lover, and the
notice she gave of the infidelity he would have committed. This vexed the
Countess, tho she did not love the Chevalier: most Women are no more willing to
lose their Lovers whom they had no kindness for than those they favor, and
particularly when they abandon them to give themselves to others, and their
Vexation does not so much proceed from the loss they have as from the
preference of their Rivals: which was the Countesses case in this encounter.
However she thanked Madam d' Olonne for the intention she had to oblige her,
but protested she had no engagement with the Chevalier, but that on the
contrary she should be obliged to those who would rid her of him. Madam d'
Olonne did not content her self with showing that Letter to the Countess, she
likewise vapoured with it to Marsillac; and whether she or the Countess spoke
of it to others, every body knew that the Poor Chevalier had been sacrificed,
and he himself was quickly acquainted with the jeasts that were made upon his
Letter. Contempt offends all Lovers, but when Raillery is joined with it they
are netled to the heart: The Chevalier seeing himself Casheired and laughed at,
kept no longer any measures, he said all manner of ill things of Madam d'
Olonne, and it was perceived in this Occasion, that this foolish Woman had
found the secret of losing her reputation by preserving her Honor of being
Cruel, and cried out upon for a Gilt.

The Chevalier hated none of his Rivals so much as he did Marsillac, as well
because he thought him better treated, as for that he fancyed he the least
deserved it: he called Madam d' Olonne's Lovers, the Philistines, and said that
Marsillac by reason he had but little Wit, had defeated them all with the Jaw
bone Bone of an Ass.

In this same time the Count of Guiche, the Marshall of Grammont's Son, as
beautiful as an Angel, and full of Love, fancyed that the conquest of the
Countess would be both easy and honorable to him; insomuch that he resolved to
undertake it out of motives of Glory; he mentioned it to Manicamp his saithful
and necessary Friend, who approved his design, and offered to serve him in it.
The Count de Guiche and Manicamp have so great a part in this story, that it is
necessary to speak of them en passant, and make them perfectly known; and in
order to that it is fit I begin with the description of the former.

The count de Guiche had great black Eyes, a handsome Nose, well made, his
Mouth was something wide, the form of his Face round, his Complexion was
admirable, had a great Forehead and a fine Shape: he had Wit, was very knowing,
addicted to raillery, light, presumptuous, brave, hasty and without friendship:
he was Colonel of the French Gards, jointly with the Marshall of Grammom his
Father.

Manicamp had sweet blew Eyes, a Hawk's Nose, a wide Mouth, his Lips were very
red and full, his Complexion was something yellow, his Face was flat, his Hair
thick long and white, his Shape was fine if it had not been too much neglected:
As for Wit she had enough of the Count de Guiche's sort; he had not acquired so
much, but his Genius way at least as good; his Fortune not being so well settled
as the others, made him something the more cautious; but they had naturally
both the same inclinations to the hinder parts and to raillery; and indeed they
loved one another as ardently as if they had been of different Sexes.

At the same time Madam d' Olonne showed all the World the Chevalier de
Grammont's Letter, he discovered the love the Count de Guicke had for the
Countess of Fiesque, this was of no small use to him for the making her fall
out with Madam d' Olonne, fancying his Reconciliation would be the more easy
with the Countess, the less he kept measures with the others: but while he is
endeavoring to make Peace for himself, let us se what the Count de Guicke did
to render himself lovely. First you must know then that the Count had a very
great passion for Mademoiselle de Beauvais, a Maid of mean Birth, but of a
great deal of Wit; it must likewise be known that he had been so traversed by
his Relations in that Amor, that they feared she would make him commit the
same folly, that his Sister had caused the Marquess of Richilieu to do, whom
that Consideration, as well as the Rigours of the fair One, had very much
disgusted, and had the deeper engaged him in the design of Loving the Countess;
but he had not for this fair One, all the inclination she deserved, and it was
less a second passion than a Remedy to the former. But he got little ground,
and all that he could do was to move the Countess and to put the Chevalier into
despair; and for that end he kept to Looks and Assiduities, without caring to
spur on faster. The Countess, whose heart, as is believed, was never smitten
with any thing but the merit of Guistand, the Prince of Conde's Favorite, whom
she had not seen in four or five years, but with whom she had kept a commerce
of Letters, felt her Constancy shaken by the Count de Guiches addresses, and
notwithstanding all that Gerse, Guistavel's friend, could say to her, for the
obliging her to chase away the Count, she would not at first yield to it, but
seemed to ridicule that Amor, and a long time eluded the Counsels of all her
friends: yet at length she her self perceiving that the Count took no advantage
of it, she resolved to procure her self honor by making a Virtue of the
necessity she believed her self in of loving her, and that this might not seem
a Sacrifice to the Chevalier, who had bragged he could cause his Nephew to be
Cashiered, she turned them both off, yiedling at that time to the advice of
Gerse, as she told him; and hereupon was made this jest, that the Countess was
going to sign the Discharges and Passports of her Lovers, but the Chevalier
caused her to be so entreated by her best Friends, that he obtained leave to
see her at a fortnights end, and it was upon this that this Song was made to
the tune of Saraband.

So zealously old Gerse played his part,
With such success he served his Flemmish Friend,
That the fair Lady, who has still my Heart,
Never to see her did me Orders send.
He fancied then, and I was much afraid,
An everlasting Doom on me was laid;
In a short banishment yet all will end.
Five or six Months being passed, during which the Chevalier was too happy, he
was not troubled with his Nephew, had enjoyed the pleasures of solely loving
the Countess; some friends of the Count de Gutche represented to him that being
the handsomest Man of the Court, it was a shame for him to find any Lady cruel,
and that the success he had had with the Countess had done him any injury in
the world: these reasons made him resolve to reingage himself: He returned from
he Campaign wounded in his Right Hand, but his Wound, tho great, not having
hindered him from going abroad some times, he met the Countess One day in the
Tuilleryes: He had the Abbot Fouequett with him, who was that Lady's particular
friend, who thinking to do them a pleasure, engaged them in discourse, and left
them together a pretty long time. The Count said nothing at all of love, but
his ways and his looks made the Countess understand but too much, nay more than
he designed she should: This Conversation was quickly ended by the Count de
Guiche's sainting away, out of which he was recovered by the help of the
Countess and the Abbot.

Their Opinion of the cause of his sainting away were diverse, the Abbot
attributed it to the Counts wound, and the Countess to his passion. A Woman
believes nothing more willingly than that she is beloved, because Love makes
her believe that she ought to be beloved, and because One is not hard to be
persuaded of what One desires. These reasons made the Countess not at all doubt
of the Count de Guiche's Love. At that time Madam de Olonne not being willing
that a young spark so well made should escape her, desired Vieneuil to bring
the Count de Guiche to her, but this Gentleman's time was not yet come, he went
from thence as free as he came thither. He continued his Design for the
Countess, his Assiduities having renewed the Chevaliers jealousy; he to inform
himself how his Nephew stood with his Mistress, wrote with his left Hand the
following Letter to that fair One.

IT is no small trouble to have only a poor left Hand; I beseech you, Madam, to
grant me the honor of seeing you some time this day, but my dear Uncle must
know nothing of it, for I should run a risque of my Life, and perhaps you your
self would come off but little better.


The Countess having read this Letter, gave charge to her Porter to bid him who
should come for an Answer, that he should tell his Master, That he should send
Manicamp to her at Three a Clock in the Afternoon. When the Chevalier had
received this Answer, he fancied he had wherewith to Convict the Countess of
being in the deepest Engagement of an Amorous Intrigue with his Nephew; and in
that Opinion he went to her House: The Rage he was in had so changed his
Countenance, that had the Countess ever so little distrusted him, she had
discovered all at the first sight; but not suspecting the least, she took no
notice of his looks. Madam, said he to her, is it long since you saw the Count
de Guiche? Not these five or six days, answered she. But, replied the
Chevalier, It is not so long since you received Letters from him. I, Letters
from the Count de Guiche? said she; Why should he write to me? Is he in a
Condition to write to any Body? Take care of what you say, Madam, replied the
Chevalier, for it is of moment. The truth is, said the Countess, that Manicamp
has newly sent to ask me if the Count de Guiche might come and see me to day;
and I sent him word, he should come without his Friend. It is true, replied the
Chevalier hastily, that you just now sent word to Manicamp that he should come
without the Count de Guiche, but it was upon the Count's Letter that you sent
him that Message, and I come to know it, Madam, because that it was I that writ
it, and had your Answer delivered to me. Is it not sufficient that you do not
make Returns to the Passion I have had these Twelve years for you, but you must
prefer a young Boy before me, who does not love you, nor has seemed to love you
above a Fortnight? After this Discourse he was like a Madman for a Quarter of
an hour together. The Countess seeing herself Convicted, would turn the thing
into Raillery: But since you suspected an Intrigue between me and your Nephew,
said she to him, why did you not ask me things of greater importance than an
hour to see me? Ah! Madam, replied he, I know but too much to make me believe
that you are the most ungrateful Woman in the World, and I the most unfortunate
of all Men, Manicamp came in just as he had spoke these words, whereupon he
went away to conceal the disorder he was in. What Is the matter, Madam, said
Manicamp, I find you in a strange perplexity? The Countess related to him all
the Chevaliers Deceit, and their Conversation thereupon; and after some
Discourses upon this Subject, Manicamp went away, and within an hour brought
this Letter from the Count de Guiche.

For fear Forgers should injure me by acting my part, and lest you should be
mistaken in the Character and the Style, I was desirous to make known to you
both the one and the other; the last is more difficult, being dictated by
something above their Sentiments.

The Countess having read this Letter, My God, said she to him, how silly is
your Friend! I am afraid he will bring trouble both upon me and himself.
Provided, Madam, answered Manicamp, that you understand one another, you cannot
come to trouble. But, answered the Countess, can he only act with me the part
of a Lover? Yes, Madam, said he, it is impossible for him to change; and what
ought to persuade you, is that he returns to the Charge after having been
routed: This shows a furious necessity in him of loving you. As they were going
to continue this Conversation, Company came in who interrupted it, Manicamp
taking leave, went immediately to his Friend to acquaint him with what had just
passed between the Countess and him. The Count de Guiche not believing that the
Letter he had written to the Countess, was sufficient to persuade her perfectly
of his Passion, he wrote another, which expressed it more clearly, and gave it
Manicamp in charge; who carrying it the next day to that fair One, lost it by
the way, insomuch that he returned immediately to acquaint the Count with the
Accident that had befallen him; whereupon that Count writ this Letter to the
Countess.

IF you were persuaded of my Sentiments, you would easily comprehend, that I am
ill satisfied with so careless a Man as Manicamp; you are going to see the
greatest quarrel in the World, if you do not prevent it; think but what I do
for you, since I break with the best of my Friends without Return on my side;
but, as he has still other Assistance, and that you are not so much displeased
as I am, I fear he will force me to pardon him through your Intercession.


Manicamp went and sought every where for the Countess, and having at length
found her at Play at Madam de Bonnelle's, I bring good luck, Madam, to People I
approach, said he to her; and having placed himself by her, he neatly slipped his
Friends Letter into her Pocket, and went away. The Countess withdrawing some
time after to her own House, having left off Play, in taking out her
Handkerchief, she sound the Count de Guiche's Letter, sealed and without
Superscription; if she had thought what it was, she would not have opened it,
but for fear she should be obliged not to break it open, she was not willing to
spend thoughts upon it, and opened it immediately without the least reflection:
All the Countesse's vivacity could not make her imagine what the Count de
Guiche meant by his being dissatisfied with Manicamp; insomuch that she ordered
one of her Servants to go tell him, he should come and see her on the Morrow,
being resolved to rattle him for the Letter he had given her from the Count de
Guiche, and to forbid him to charge himself with any more for the future. As he
entered the Chamber the next day, her Curiosity made her forget her Anger: Well,
said she, tell me your quarrel with your Friend. It is, Madam, said he to her,
that as I was bringing you a Letter two days ago, I lost it, and he is enraged
against me, and I know not what to say to him, for I am in the fault. The
Countess fearing this lost Letter might be found by some one who might make a
Story of it, to make the public Sport; Go, said she to him, go seek it every
where, and do not return till you have brought it me back. Manicamp went away
immediately, and returned in the Evening to tell her, that he could not find
it, that the Count de Guiche would no longer see him, and that he came to
beseech her to reconcile them. I will, said she, tho you do not deserve it: And
I shall go to morrow to Mademoiselle, bid your Friend be there. I have no more
Commerce with him, said Manicamp to her, and nothing can appease him but a
Letter from you. I write to the Count de Guiche! replied the Countess, you are
a pleasant Man to make such a Proposal. Tho we are fallen out, Madam, answered
Manicamp, I cannot forbear telling you still that he deserves that favor. Do
not think of him in this Occasion, give this Letter to the Friendship you have
for me, and I promise that when it has done the business, I will return it into
your hands. The Countess having made him engage his word he would bring back
her Letter, she writ to him the day following in these terms.

THe intention of these Lines are only to ask Manicamp 's pardon, and if it is
necessary to say anything more to oblige you to grant it me, give credit to
what he shall acquaint you with from me; he is so much my Friend, that I cannot
refuse anything that may be useful to him.


The Count of Guiche having received this Letter, sound it too hard to restore
it; he fancied he should get quit by disavowing Manicamp, and in the mean time
he encharged him with this Answer.

I Could infinitely desire you were as much inclined to grant me what I should
desire of you, as it was casie for me to grant pardon to the Criminal: I avow
to you, that with such a Recommendation it was impossible to refuse any thing:
If I was so happy as to be able to give you proofs thereof by something more
difficult, you would know that you did me an injustice, when you doubted of the
truth of my Sentiments: They are, I assure you, as passionate as so lovely a
Person as you are can inspire, and shall ever be as midst as you can desire
them. Notwithstanding all what our Governors say, I conjure you to follow the
advice of the Criminal; for tho he is something careless, his zeal for our
Service deserves to be Commended.


That advice was to be very distrustful of the Chevalier, who did all he could
to traverse his Nephew, and to make him appear indiscreet and unfaithful to the
Countess. After that Manicamp told her that the Letter she had written to the
Count de Guiche, had so transported him with joy, that it was impossible to get
it from him, but that she should not be in pain, for that it would be as safe
in his Friends hands as in the fire; and moreover, that he had never seen a Man
so much in love as the Count was, and that he would certainly love her as long
as he lived. But, interrupted the Countess, what is the meaning of so many
Visits that your Friend makes to Madam d' Olonne? Does he go to desire her to
intercede with me for him? He does not visit her at all, Madam, answered
Manicamp, that is to say, he has been there but once or twice; but I discover
the Chivaliers Malice in what you tell me, and I am certain the Count de Guiche
will know this Knavish trick to be of this Uncles stamp. But, Madam, hear my
Friend before you Condemn him. I am of your Opinion, said she to him; and
indeed Manicamp guessed right: For the Chevalier had told the Countess that the
Count de Guiche was in love with Madam d' Olonne, that she only served for a
Pretext, and a thousand other things of that Nature, that appeared to her so
likely, that though she distrusted the Chevalier in what concerned the Count de
Guiche, she could not forbear giving Credit to him in this Encounter. The next
day a Lady of her Acquaintance being come to press her to go into the Country,
she let herself be persuaded: And really fancying the Count de Guiche false,
she would not come to any Explication with him; and not to break off all, she
thought it convenient to prepossess Guitand by a false Confidence, for fear he
should learn by other means the truth of all; Wherefore she sent him a Copy of
the Count de Guiche's last Letter, and after that her Friend and she went out
of Town. The Chevalier, who had an Eye upon all the Countesses Actions, and had
bribed all her Servants, had the Packet she sent to Guitand two hours after it
was made up. He took a Copy of the Count de Guiche's Letter, and cast the
Packet into the Fire. Two days after, having learnt that the Countess was
gone, he wrote to her this Letter.

IF you had had as much desire to inform your self of things you seemed to
doubt of, as I had by a thousand true reasons to take from you all manner of
Scruples, you would not have undertaken so long a Journey, or at least you
would have been sorry to have appeared so good a Friend. I would not forbid
your having a kindness, but I should extremely desire to have some part in the
Application, and I avow to you, that if I was happy enough to compass it by the
same means, I should endeavor to render my self worthy of it by my Conduct.


While this Letter was a carrying to the Countess, the Chevalier went to seek
out his Nephew, with whom he found Manicamp. After a Prologue of Raillery upon
the good Fortunes of the Count de Guiche in General: Faith, my poor Friends,
said he to them, I confess you are younger and genteeler than I am, and I shall
never dispute with you a Mistress I have not been a long time acquainted with:
But however, you must yield the Countess to me, and all those I have any
Engagement with. The Vanity Women take in a great number of Galants may oblige
them to give you some hopes. There are few who at the first onset will stifle
the Vows of their Adorers: But sooner or later they return to reason; and it is
then that the new Comer passes his time very ill, and that the old Gallant
jointly with his Mistress cry, Farewell you Gentlemen Serenaders. You promised
me, Count de Guiche, never to torment me more, as to what concerns the
Countess; you have broke your word, and committed an infidelity that has done
you no good: For the Countess has given me all the Letters you wrote to her;
I Will snow you the Originals when you will: In the mean time here is a Copy of
the last Letter you sent her; and saying that, he took out a Letter of the
Count de Guiche's, and having read it; Well! my Dears, said he to them, you will
hunt upon my grounds again, will you?

While the Chevalier was speaking, the Count de Guiche and Manicamp looked
amazedly upon one another, not being able to comprehend that the Countess had
so basely deceived them. At length Manicamp broak silence, and addressing
himself to the Count, You are treated, said he to him, as you deserved; but
since the Countess has not had any Consideration for us, added he, turning
toward the Chevalier, we are not obliged to have any for her: We easily
perceived we have been Sacrificed, but there was a time, Chevalier, that you
was so too; We have indeed great reason to complain of her, but you have none
at all to be satisfied with her: When we some times rejoiced and were merry at
your Costs, the Countess went halves with us at the least. The truth is, said
the Count de Guiche, that you would not have, reason to be satisfied with the
Countesses preference in your Favors, if you knew the esteem she has of you;
and this makes me draw infallible Consequences that she is deeply engaged with
you, since after all the things she has told me, she only betrays me to give
you satisfaction. Thereupon being all three really reconciled, and having given
one another a thousand Assurances of Friendship for the future, they parted.

The Count de Guiche and Manicamp shut themselves up to make a Letter of
reproaches in Manicamps Name to the Countess, to which the poor Countess being
innocent, made answer, that he and his Friend had been taken for Cullies, and
that the Chevalier was cunninger than they; that she could not tell by what
means he had got the Letter he had showed them, but that they One day should
clearly see that she had not made a Sacrifice of them. This Letter not finding
Manicamp any longer at Paris, he being gone out the day before with the Count
de Guiche to follow the King in his Progress to Lions, he did not receive it
till he arrived at Court, and thought neither the more, nor the less
advantageously of the Countess: during all these passages, Marsillac's Intrigue
with Madam d' Olonne jogged on; that Lover seeing her with the greatest
convenience imaginable by night at her House, and by day at Mademoiselle de
Cornuelle's, a lovely Creature, and of a great deal of Wit. Madam d' Olonne had
by her Bedside a Closet, in a corner of which she had caused a trap Door to be
made, which went into another Closet underneath, wherein Marsillac entered when
it was night; a Foot-Carpet concealed the Trapdoor, and a Table covered it.
Thus Marsillac passing the Night with Madam d' Olonne, according to the common
report, did not lose his time: This lasted till she went to the Waters, in
which time Marsillac, who wrote to her a thousand Letters that are not
mentioned here, because they are not worth the pains; wrote this Amourous
Ticket to her one day, before bidding her Adieu.

I never felt so lively a Grief as that I am sensible of at present, my Dear,
because I never yet parted from you since we have been in love with one
another. Nothing but absence, and that too the first absence of what a person
infinitely loves, can reduce one into the lamentable Condition I am in. If any
thing could lessen my trouble, my Dear, it would be the belief that you would
suffer as much as I do. Do not take it ill that I wish you in pain, since it is
a mark of your love. Farewell my Dear, be well assured that I love you, and that
I shall love you ever; for if you are once really persuaded of this truth, it
is impossible but that you must love me as long as you live.


Her Answer was:

COmfort your self, my Dear, If my Grief gives you case, it is as great as you
could desire it; I cannot explain it better, than by telling you that I suffer
as much as I love you: If you doubt it, my Dear, come to me, but come early,
that I may be a long time with you, and that I may in some manner recompense my
self for the absence I am going to suffer. Farewell my Dear, be assured of my
passion, it is at least as great as yours.


Marsillac did not fail to be at the Assignation much sooner than ordinary; In
accosting his Mistress he flung himself upon her Bed, and was thus a long time
melting into tears, and all his words were interrupted by sobs. Madam d' Olonne
for her part appeared no less concerned, but as she was desirous to receive
other Marks of Love from her Galant than those of Grief; How! my Dear, said she
to him, you sent me word a little while a go that my Grief would case yours,
and yet the affliction you see me in, does not render you the more capable of
Comfort. At these words Marsillac redoubled his sighs, without making her an
answer, the dullness of his Soul had caused the same effect in his Body; and I
fancy that this Lover deplored at that time more the absence of his Vigor,
than that of his Mistress. However as young People recover easily, and he being
of a good complexion, he began to come to himself, and recovered his strength
in a little time: Insomuch that Madam d' Olonne could hardly discover he had
been so lately ill. After he had given her so many testimonies of his good
health, she recommended to him to have care of it above all things, and told
him that he should judge thereby of the Love he had for her. Thereupon they
made a thousand Protestations of loving one another all their lifetime; they
agreed of the means of writing, and then took leave, the one to go to Court,
the other to the Wells. Prince Marsillac went the next day to take his leave of
Mademoiselle. Cornuelle, his good Friend, he desired her to persuade his
Mistress to be more circumspect in her Carriage than she had yet been. Rely
upon me for that, said this young Lady to him, she must be very incorrigible if
I do not keep her within bounds. Two days after Mademoiselle Cornuelle went to
Madam d' Olonnes, and having prayed her to order her Porter to say she was gone
out: I am too much your friend, Madam, said she to her, not to speak franckly
to you in all that concerns your Carriage and your Reputation; you are
beautyfull, young, you are of Quality, you have Riches and will, you have
infinitely Charmed a Prince who loves you extremely: All this ought to (...)
you happy, however you (...) not so; you know what Reports run of you, we have
talked of them sometimes together, and this being so, you are mad you are not
(...): I do not pretend to consider your weaknesses, I am a Woman as well as
you, and I know by my self the want of our Sex: Your Manners are insupportable,
you love pleasures Madam, and I allow them, but you take delight to set People
a talking, and it is that I condemn you for; Can you not leave off your
Extravagances? it is impossible but that you must be in a Rage, when you hear
of the Reputation you have in the world, and Men conceal the love they have for
you more out of Shame than Modesty. Well my Dear, said Madam d' Olonne, do you
here any thing new? does the World renew its Satyr's against me? No, Madam,
said Mademoiselle, it does only continue them, because you still continue to
give it new matters. I know not what I must do then, replied Madam d' Olonne,
all the Prudence that one can have in love, I fancyed I had; and that since I
have been concerned in loving, I never fruitlesly delayed nor spun out any
Intrigue, well knowing that the greatest Noise is usually made before the
business is agreed on; and when Lovers act not in Concert together. Pret he
tell me exactly my Dear, added she, what I must do to love well, and entertain
a Gallantry, that shall do me no injury in the world, tho it should be
suspected: For I am resolved to do my Devoir in the future with the utmost
Regularity. There are so many things to say upon that point, said Mademoiselle
Cornuelle, that I should never have don, if I would neglect nothing, however I
shall tell you the principal as succinctly as possible.

First you must know Madam, that there are three sorts of Women who make love,
The Debauchees, the Cocquets, and the honest Mistresses. Tho the first are
abominable, they certainly deserve more compassion than hatred, because they
are hurryed away by the force of their Temper, and that almost an impossible
application is required to reform Nature; however if in any encounter we ought
to conquer our selves, it is in that, wherein no less is concerned than our
honors or lives.

As for Cocquets, the number being much greater, I shall enlarge more upon that
point: The difference between Debauchees, and them, is, that in the Ill the
former commit, there is at least sincerity, and in what the Cocquets do there
is Treachery: The Cocquets tell us to excuse themselves when they give ear to
the Courtship of all Comers, that how honest soever a Woman is, she never hates
a person who tells her he loves her.

But one may answer them that distinctions are to be made: either that Lover
addresses himself to a Woman, who will be either honest for her self or for a
Lover: allow that she cannot hate a Man for the Sentiments he had for her, yet
this will not hinder her from being careful of not having so much Complaisance
for him as for another, who had never declared any thing to her, for fear she
should thereby entertain his hopes, and that at length it might make a noise,
and be injurious to the reputation she would preserve.

If the Woman be prepossessed that the Man declares love to her, she will have
the same precautions as the other to hinder it from continuing, but if he
persists, I maintain that she shall hate him as much as she shall love her true
Gallant: it being natural to hate the Enemies of the person we love, because
love will not allow love to be importunate, and because that a Lover well
treated may suspect that a Passion that continues in his Rival, is atleast
nourished by some hopes; an honest Mistress considers his Rival as her mortal
Enemy, who maks her run the risque of losing her Lover whom she loves more than
her life. This being plain, you must likewise know that there are several sorts
of Cocquets; some take a pride in being beloved by a great many People, without
ever loving any of them, and do not perceive that it is the advances themselves
make which invite men, and which retain them rather than merit. Besides as it
is not possible they should dispose their Favors so equally, but that some one
will seem better treated than others, and there being some who will not content
themselves with equality, but pretend to preference; This gives jealousy to the
Malcontents, and makes them say in quitting them, all, nay more than they know.

There are other Cocquets who manage several Lovers, that they may save the
real one in the multitude, and cause it to be said, they have no amorous
Intrigue, since they treat equally all those who visit them; but the best luck
that can happen to them is to have the truth discovered; or at least, it is
better than by believing they love no Body, every one sancies they love All.

There are others who by managing several Gallants would fain persuade, that if
they should love any one of them, they should hazard the vexing him, In the
mean time they vex and lose him by these means. For to imagine that it is in
the absence of their true Lover that they make love, he will know nothing of
it; or if it is in his presence, by acting in concert together, he will easily
see that is nothing, since he is taken for a Witness of what is done, or at all
hazards if he is troubled, their Caressing him, and their Promises to do so no
more, will oblige him to be satisfied. All this is very subject to caution, a
Lover is not long deceived, and if he does not discover it to day, he will
discover it to Morrow.

And crying it is well, adieu my Dear,
I find no longer pleasure here.
And tho his Passion should be so strong, that he could not get rid of it, the
reproaches and noise he would make, would occasion more vexation to the Cocquet
Mistress than all those managements could have procured her Pleasure. There are
Cocquets who fancy they have so ill a repute in the World, that they dare not
be cruel and rigorous to any man, for fear it should pass for a Sacrifice to
some other, and never think that it would be better for their Honor that they
were convicted of Sacrifice: This is, Madam, the Course the Coquets take. I
must let you see that of honest Mistresses.

As for them, they are either satisfied with their Lovers, or they are not: If
they are not, they endeavor to reduce them to their Devoir by a tender and
civil Carriage: If this cannot absolutely be, they break off without noise,
upon a pretext of Devotion, or the Jealousy of a Husband, after having got
from them, if they can, their Letters, and all that could Convict them: And
above all things they so contrive it, that their Lovers do not fancy they
abandom them for others.

If they are satisfied with their Lovers, they love them with all their hearts,
they are continually telling it them, and they write them the kindest Letters
they can: But as this does not prove their love, because Coquets say as much,
or more every day, their Actions and their Carriage does sufficiently justify
the meaning of their Hearts, because there is only that insallible. We can
indeed say, We love tho we do not, but we cannot seem kind to any one long
without having an affection for him.

An honest Mistress is more afraid of giving Jealousy to her Gallant than of
Death, and when she sees him alarmed with any Suspicion that the obstinacy of
his Rival might give him, she does not content herself with the testimony of
her Conscience, she redoubles her Cares and Caresses for him, and her rigours
for the other; she does not defer the extremest Severity till another time,
fancying she could never be soon enough rid of an importunate Person. She knows
that as many Moments as she defers the chacing away this Rival, she should give
as many stabs in his Heart she is in love with. She knows that as soon as her
Lover begins to have Suspicious, the least care she should take to remove them,
would preserve in him the esteem and love he has for her; whereas if she
neglected to satisfy and cure him, he would come again to have so little
Confidence in her, that she should not be able to recover his good Opinion, tho
she even offered him to lose her Reputation for his sake. She knows that a
Lover would ever believe, that it would be the fear she was in of him, had
forced those Sacrifices from her, that at another time he would have took for
great Marks of love. She knows that in the Woman a Man confides in, all is
excused, and that nothing is pardoned in her that is distrusted. She knows that
at length a Man comes to be fatigued with the trouble a Mistress gives him, and
the reproaches that he has made her after having pardoned her a thousand
considerable Faults, that he breaks off upon a Trifle, the measures being
plain, and he not able to suffer any longer so much vexation.

There are Women who love their Gallants extremely, and yet make them jealous
by their ill carriage, and this proceeds from their slattering themselves too
much with the assurance they have of their good Intentions, and for that they
do not sufficiently quash the hopes of those men, who make Court to them, or
who only seem to love them by their Cares and their Assiduities; and they are
ignorant that the Civilities of a Woman one loves, are such Favors as all
Lovers flatter themselves with sometimes, because they have Merit; or often
because they think they have so: Sometimes because they have no good Opinion of
the Persons they make their Addresses to, and who fancy that the resistance
that they make is only to set a greater value upon themselves. Insomuch, that
if a Woman, who has never given occasion to be talked of, is still very jealous
of her Reputation, she ought to take care, as I have already said, not to
entertain in any manner the hopes of all that has the Air of a Lover, and if it
is a Woman who has not thitherto been careful enough of her Carriage, but
designs to be so for the future, which is your case, Madam, it is requisite
that she be more rude than another, and especially that she be impartial in her
Severity, for the least favor she shall let herself loose to, does more
reingage a Lover than a thousand Refusals does disgust him.

An honest Mistress has so much sincerity for her Lover, that rather than fail
to tell him things of consequence, she tells him even what are trifles: Well
knowing, that if he came to be informed by other means of certain indifferent
things, that are rendered Criminal at their being told again, it would have the
worst effect imaginable. She keeps no Measures with him in point of Confidence,
she tells him not only her own secrets, but even those she knew before, or what
she learns elsewhere every day. She calls those people ridiculous, Who say,
that being Mistress of another Secrets, we ought not to tell it our Lovers:
She answers to that, that if they still love us, they will never say any thing
of it: And if they happen to abandon us, we should have much more to lose than
our Friends secret; but she fancies, we ought never to consider them, as such
as will one day leave off loving us, and that otherwise we should be Fools to
grant them Favors.

In a word, her Maxim is, That who gives her heart has nothing more to manage;
she knows that there are only two Encounters that can dispense her from telling
all to her Lover; the one if he was indiscreet, and the other if he had any
Gallantry before hers. For it would be imprudence in her to speak to him in
that case, at least without he pressed her extremely, and then it would be he
himself that occasioned his own Vexation.

Finally, an honest Mistress believes that what justifies her Love even with
the most severe Men, is, when she is deeply smitten, when she takes pleasure in
making it appear to her Lover, when she surprises him by a thousand little
favors, that he did not expect; when she has no reserve for him; when she
applies herself to procure him esteem amongst all People: and that in a word,
she makes of her Passion the greatest business of her Life: Without this,
Madam, she holds Love for a Debauche, and that it is a Brutal Commerce, and a
Trade by which ruined Women subsist.

Mademoiselle de Cornuelle having left off speaking, Good God! said Madam d'
Olonne, what fine things have you now said; but how difficult are they to be
put in practice? I even find therein some injustice; for in a word, since we
even deceive our Husbands, whom the Laws have made our Masters, why should our
Gallants come off at a better rate? They whom nothing obliges us to love but
the choice we make, and whom we take to serve us as long, and as little as we
please. I did not say, answered Mademoiselle de Cornuelle, that we ought not to
abandon our Gallants, when they displease us either by their own defects, or
our weariness; but I have shown you the nice manner by which you ought to
disengage your self from them, not to give them any reason to cry out upon you
in the world: For in a word, Madam, since they have imposed that tyranny upon
the Honor of Ladies, not to love what they find lovely, we must comply with
Custom, and conceal our selves at least when we will love. Well! my Dear, said
Madam d' Olonne to her, I am going to act wonders, I am fully resolved of it,
but withal I ground the greatest hopes of my Conduct upon avoiding Occasions.

Whether it be by avoiding, or resistance, said Mademoiselle de Cornuelle, it
is no matter, provided your Lover be satisfied with you; and thereupon having
exhorted her to remain firm in her good Intentions, she took her leave.

During Madam d' Olonne's separation from Marsillac, they wrote to one another
very often, but as there was nothing therein remarkable, I shall not mention
their Letters, which spoke of their love, and of their impatience to see one
another again, but in a very common manner. Madam d' Olonne was the first who
returned to Paris; the Count de Guiche during the Progress to Lions, persuaded
Monsieur, the King's Brother, with whom he was much in favor, to have a
Gallantry at his return to Paris with Madam d' Olonne, and had offered himself
to serve him in it, and to procure him content in a short time. This Prince had
promised the Count de Guiche to make the necessary Paces to engage that
Cocquet, insomuch that in the Conversations he had with Madam d' Olonne, he
only spoke to her of the love that Prince had for her: He told her that he had
declared it to him more than an hundred times upon the Journey, and that she
would certainly see him sigh as soon as he was returned. A Woman who had
Citizens and Gentlemen her Gallants, some handsome, others ugly, might well
love a comely Prince, Madam a' Olonne received the Count de Guiche's
Proposition with an unexpressible joy; and it was so great, that she did not so
much as make those Excuses which Coquets make in such like Encounters. Another
would have said that she would not love any one, but less a Prince than any man
soever, because he would not have so much application. Madam d' Olonne, who was
the most natural Woman in the World, and the most passionate, kept no bounds of
Modesty, but answered the Count de Guiche, That she esteemed herself more than
she had yet done, since she pleased so great and so rational a Prince. When the
Court was returned to Paris, the Duke of Orleans did not answer the
eagernesses, the Count had prepared Madam d' Olonne for, who delivered herself
all entirely. All this produced nothing, and made her but the more know how
indifferent she was to that Prince. The Count de Guiche seeing that the Duke of
Orleans did not bite at the Hook, changed his Design, and was desirous at least
that the Services he would have rendered to Madam d' Olonne, should be of some
advantage to him. Whereupon he resolved to act the part of a Lover himself, and
being the Commerce he had had with her upon the Amors of the Duke of Orleans,
had made him very familiar, he did not balance to write to her this Letter.

WE have labored hitherto in vain, Madam, the Queen haters you, and the Duke
of Orleans apprehends displeasing her, I have reason to be in despair, Madam,
but you can comfort me if you please, and I do Conjure you to do it, since the
natural sharpness of the Mother, and the weakness of the Son, have ruined our
Projects, other Measures are to be taken. Let us love one another, Madam, it is
already done on my part; and I easily perceive, that had the Duke of Orleans
loved you, I should quickly have fallen out with him, because I should not have
been able to have resisted the inclination I have for you. I do not question
but that at first you will be shocked at the difference, but lay aside your
Ambition, and you will not find your self so miserable as you imagine. I am
certain that when Spite shall have cast you into my Arms, Love will there
retain you.


Let People say what they will against Women, there is sometimes more
imprudence than malice in their Conduct: Most of them no longer think, when
they are courted, that they ought never to love: In the mean time they proceed
further than they imagine, they do things sometimes, thinking they shall be
always Cruel, which they extremely repent of, when they are become more Humane.
The same thing happened to Madam d' Olonne; she was stung to the quick that she
had failed of the Prince's Heart, after having reckoned it amongst her
Conquests; in seeking some one to apply herself to for the amusing her grief,
she found nothing more likely to believe, than that the Count de Guiche for his
own Interest had hindered him from loving her. Insomuch that as well to revenge
herself of him, as to reassure Marsillac, whom this Intrigue had alarmed, she
sacrificed to him the Count de Guiche's Letter, without considering that Love
would perhaps oblige her to do the same with those of Marsillac, and he whom
Madam d' Olonne gave a thousand Favors to, made the use of them that is
common, when one is satisfied with his Mistress, he rendered her a thousand
thanks for her Sincerity, and contented himself with triumphing over his
Rivals, without showing any indiscreet Pride.

In the mean time the Count de Guiche not knowing the Destiny of his Letter,
went the day after to Madam d' Olonne's House; but so much Company was there
that day, that he could not speak to her about business at that time. He only
observed that she had eyed him very much, and from her House he went to
acquaint Fiesque with the state of his Affairs, who since his return from
Lions, he had made his Consident; he went likewise to tell the same to Vinevil;
and they both judged by the weakness of the Lady, and the Gentleness of the
Spark, that his pursuit would neither be long nor in vain: And the truth is,
Madam d' Olonne had found the Count de Guiche so handsome, and so much to her
mind, that she repented the Sacrifice she had newly made to Marsillac. The day
after the Count de Guiche returned to her House, and having found her alone, he
spoke to her of his Passion, the fair One was pleased, and received that
Declaration the most agreably imaginable; but after having agreed upon loving
one another, as they were upon certain Conditions, People came in; which
obliged the Count de Guiche to go out a Moment after.

Madam d' Olonne having disingaged herself from her Company as soon as she was
able, took Coach, being desirous to discover if the Countess de Fiesque took no
Interest any longer in the Count de Guiche: She went to her, and after some
Conversations upon other subjects, she asked her advice in the Designs she
told her the Count de Guiche had for her. The Countess told her that she was
only to consult her Heart in such Occasions: My heart does not say to me much
in favor of the Count, replied Madam d' Olonne, and my Reason tells me a
thousand things against him: He is a Spark I can never love. In saying these
words, she took leave of the Countess, without waiting for her Answer.

On the other side the Count de Guiche being returned to his House, he met with
Vinevil, who waited for him with great impatience to know what posture his
Affairs were in; the Count de Guiche told him something coldly, that he
believed all was broaken off, considering how Madam d' Olonne treated him; and
Vinevil desiring to know the particulars of the Conversation, the Count de
Guiche not being willing to discover what passed, changed discourse every
moment; this gave some suspicions to Vineuil who was cunning and in love with
Madam d' Olonne, and only concerned himself in the affairs of the Count de
Guiche, that he might prevail with his Mistress by the things he should have
learnt. He went away seeing he could not make any discovery, and was for three
days in mortal disquiets, not being able to learn the certainty of what he
suspected, and what he would know. He went to Fiesque's House with the
Countenance of a disgraced Favorite, since he saw he had no longer any share
in the Count de Guiche's confidenc, he said nothing of it to that fair One, not
to discredit himself in showing his Misfortune,

At three days end he went to the Count de Guiche's House. What have I done my
Lord, said he to him, that obliges you to treat me thus? I easily perceive that
you hide from me your intrigue with Madam de OOlonne, learn me the reason of
it, or if you have none, continue to tell me what you know as you used to do I
ask your pardon my poor Vinevil, said the Count de Guiche to him, but Madam d'
Olonne upon granting me enjoyment, exacted from me not to speak thereof to you
nor to Fiesque, much less then to any others, because she said that you are
malicious, and Fiesque jealous. How indiscreet soever a person is, there is no
Intrigue but what is kept secret in the beginning, if there be no need of a
Confident: This I have had experience of in this Occasion, for I am naturally
enough inclined to tell an amourous adventure: And yet I have been three days
without acquainting you with this, tho you know all my secrets; but have
patience, my Dear, I am going to tell you all that passed between Madam d'
Olonne and me, and by the exactest Relation in the World, in some manner
requite the offense done to the friendship I have for you.

You know then that the first Visit made her, after having written to her the
Letter you have seen, I did not sind in her looks any aversion or kindness; and
the Company that was at her house hindered me from having any further
information. All that I could remarke was, that she observed me from time to
time; but returning thither the day after, and having found her alone, I
represented my love to her so well, and so eagerly pressed her to make returns
to it, that she Confessed she loved me, and promised to give me marks thereof
upon Condition I have newly told you. You know very well that I would promise
her all in those moments; we heard a noise, insomuch that Madam d' Olonne bid
me come again the next day dressed in Women's Clothes, and as one who brought
her Lace to fell; whereupon being returned to my House, I found you there, and
you might easily perceive by the cold reception I made you, that all the World
importuned me at that time, and particularly you, my Dear, whom I was more
jealous of than any one; you likewise perceived it, and it was that which made
you suspect I did not tell you all: when you was gone, I gave order that my
Porter should say I was not at home, and prepared my self for my Mascarade of
the Morrow: All the pleasure that imagination can give beforehand, I had for
four and twenty hours together: The four or five last hours were more tedious
than all the others; at length that which I expected with so much impatience,
being come, I caused my self to be carried to Madam d' Olonne's House, I found
her in a Cornet upon her Bed, in a Rose Color Undress. I cannot express to you
my Dear, how beautiful she was that day, all that can be said, comes short of
the Charms she had: her Neck was half uncovered, she had more Hair loose than
usual, and all in rings and curles, her Eyes were more sparkling than the
Stars. Love and the color of her Face animated her Complexion with the finest
Vermillion in the World. Well, my Dear, said she to me, are not you full of
acknowledgment that I spare you the pains of sighing a long time? do you find
that I make you pay too dear for the Favors you receive? Tell me my Dear,
added she, but you are mute. Ah! Madam answered I her, I should be insensible
were I in cold Blood, seeing you in this posture. But may I assure my self,
said she, that you have forgotten little Beauvais and the Countess of Fiesque?
yes said I to her, Madam, you may; and how should I remember others, added I,
since you may perceive I have almost forgot my self? I only fear, replied she,
the future; for for the present, my Dear, I am much mistaken if I suffer you to
think of any Body besides myself; And in finishing these words she took me
about the Neck, and pressing me you know how with her Arms, she pulled me upon
her; Both of us lying in manner, we kissed ill one another a thousand times:
But not willing to stop there, and this seeking for something more solid; but
on my part in vain. We ought to know our selves, and what we are fit for: For
my part I perceive I am no Woman's man. It was impossible for me to come off
with Honor, what effect soever my fancy made, and the Idea and the presence of
the most beautiful Object in the World. What Is the matter said she to me, My
Lord, What ales you, What is it that puts you in so sad a Condition? Is it my
Person that disgusts you, or do you only bring me the leavings of an other?
This Discourse made me so ashamed and out of Countenance, my Dear, that it
quite deprived me of the forces I had left. I beg of you, Madam, said I to her,
not to ruin a wretch with reproaches! Certainly I am bewitched. In stead of
giving me an answer she called her Chambermaid, Prithee tell me Quentine how
do I look to day? am not I very ugly? Do not deceive your Lady, there is
something about me that does not sit well? Quentine not daring to answer seeing
her in that rage, Madam d' Olonne snatching alooking-Glass from her she held in
her hands? After having made all the gestures she used to do when she designed
to Charm any one to judge if my insufficiency proceeded from her fault or mine.
She got up and shaked her Petticoat that was something ruffled, and went in a
fury into her Closet that stood by her Bedside. For my part, I was like a
Condemned Man, I asked my self if all that had passed was not a Dream, with all
the reflections that one can make in such an Encounter; I went to Manicamps
House, where having related to him all my adventure. I am mightly obliged to
you, my Dear said he to me, for certainly it was for the love of me that you
were so insensible near so pretty a Woman. Tho perhaps you may be the Cause of
it, said I to him, I did it not to oblige you; I love you extremely, and I do
confess it; but with all that I had forgot you in that occasion; I do not
Comprehend so extraordinary an Obligation by quitting the habit of a Man: I had
quitted you before, but that part is dead in me, by which I have been hitherto
a kind of Chancellor. As I had done speaking, one of my Servants brought me a
Letter from Madam d' Olonne that one of hers had given him, here it is in my
Pocket; in saying that the Count read this Letter to Vinevil.

IF I was a lover of Venereal pleasures, I should lament my having been
disappointed, but far from complaining; I am obliged to your insufficiency, it
is the cause that in the expectation of delights you were not able to give me,
I enjoyed others by imagination that lasted much longer than those you could
have been capable of furnishing, tho you had been as well provided as an other
Man. I send at present to know how you do, and if you were able to get a foot
to your Lodgings: It is not without reason that I make this inquiry, for I
never saw a Man under such sad Circumstances as you were when I left you. I
Counsel you to settle your Affairs with more natural heat than you had when I
saw you; for you cannot live much longer. Really my Lord, you raise my pity,
and what outrage soever I have received from you, I shall not forbear giving
you good advice. Avoid Manicamp if you are wise, you may recover your health,
if you leave off seeking him for some time, it is certainly from him that your
impotence proceeds: for my part neither my Glass nor my looks belying me, I do
not fear being either accused or reproached.


I had no sooner made an end of reading this Letter, than that I made her this
answer.

I Confess, Madam I have had failings in my lifetime, for I am a man, and still
young; but I never had a worse than that last Night. It is not to be excused
Madam, and tho your sentence be never so severe, it can be but what I have
deserved: I have killed, I have betrayed, I have committed sacrilege; for all
these Crimes you need only seek out punishments, if you please, my Death, I
will bring you my sword; if you only condemn me to be whipped, I will come naked
to you in my shirt; Remember Madam, that I failed in Power, not in Will; I was
like a Brave soldier who finds himself without Arms when he should engage: I
should be extremely puzzel'd Madam, to tell you from whence this proved;
perhaps it happend' to me as it does to those whose stomach is gone when they
expect to eat most, perhaps the force of Imagination consumed the force of
Nature. See what it is, Madam, to be so Charming. An Ordinary Beauty who should
not have troubled the Course of nature, would have been better entertained.
Adieu, Madam, I have nothing more to say to you, but that perhaps you would
pardon me what is past, if you would give me the opportunity of doing better
herafter, to which purpose I only demand till to morrow at the same hour as
yesterday.


After having sent by one of my Footmen these fair promises to Madam d'
Olonne's Lacquis, who waited for an answer at my House, I went home, and not
doubting, but that my offers would be kindly received, I resolved to take all
imaginable Care of my self: I bathed and was rubbed with Essences, I eat new
laid Eggs and Artichoaks, and then drunk some Wine; I walked a while in my
Chamber, and then went to Bed without Manicamp. My Head was so full of the
design of repairing my fault that I shunned my Friends as I would have done the
Plague. I got up the next day brisk both in Body and mind, I dined betimes, and
eat what was Provocative, but as little as I had done at Supper; and having
spent the Afternoon in preparing my little Equipages of Love, I went to Madam
d' Olonne's House, at the same hour as the time before. I found her upon the
same Bed, which made me immediately apprehend that it portended me some ill
Fortune; but in a word, having encouraged my self as much as I could, I cast my
self at her Knees. She was half undrest, and held a Fan she played with. So
soon as she saw me she blushed a little, without doubt remembering the late
affront she had received and Quentine being retired, I placed my self by her
upon the Bed. The first thing she did was to put her Fan before her Eyes, and
that having rendered her as bold as if there had been a Wall between us both.
Ah! Well, said she to me, poor Paralitick, are you come here a complete Man to
day? Ah! Madam answered I to her, let us talk no more of what is past: And
thereupon thundering into her Arms, I kissed her a thousand times, and begged
she would let me see her naked: after a little resistance that she made to
augment my Desires, and to affect Modesty, which becomes a Woman so well,
rather than out of any distrust she had of her self, she let me see all I had a
mind to. I saw a curious, white, plump and the best proportioned Body in the
world. After that I fell again to embracing her, we already made a noise with
smacking and Bussing, our hands already clasped in one another, expressed the
utmost tendernesses of love; already the mixture of our loves had made the
union of our Bodies, when she perceived the sad pickle I was in. It was then
that seeing I continued to outrage her, she thought of nothing but vengeance;
she called me all manner of ill names, she there attended me with the greatest
violence imaginable. For my part without making either Prayers or Complaints,
knowing what I had deserved, I went home in a fury and having put my self to
Bed, I turned all my choler against the cause of my Disgrace.

Fury then seized me, patience me forsook
A Razor in my hand, enraged I took,
But my design I found was all in vain,
Being the Author of my shameful pain.
All in a fright, and quite froze up with fear,
Some wrinckles of it only did appear.
And toward it is Center seemed to crow'd, I thought,
And thus for refuge in my Belly sought.
So that not being able to do any thing, the rage I was in made me talk to my
self much to this purpose. Ah! Traitor, what have thou to say, infamous part of
my self, and really shameful Member, for it would be very ridiculous to give
thee an other name? Tell me, have I ever obliged thee to use me in this manner?
and make me receive the cruellest Affronts in the World? to make me abuse the
favors that are done me? and being but two and twenty make me have the
infirmities of old Age? while that Choler made me speak thus.

My Eyes toward Heaven I then did ghastly turn,
My cruel Fate I did lament and mourn;
I saw that all reproaches were in vain
To talk to it, to rocks was to complain.
I spent the Night in mortal Agonies, I knew not if I ought to write to Madam
d' Olonne, or surprise her by an unexpected Visit: at lenght after having been
a long time considering, I chose to do the last, at the hazard of finding an
obstacle to our pleasures; but I was so happy as to find her a lone; just as it
grew dark. She had put her self to Bed as soon as I was gone from her; At my
Coming into her Chamber I told her, Madam, I come either to die at your feet or
give you satisfaction, I beg you would not be in a rage, I know what I have
merited.

Madam d' Olonne, who feared as much as I did such an other mischance as those
that had happned to me, took care not to daunt me with reproaches; on the
contrary she told me all that might re-establish in me a good opinion of my
self which I had almost lost; and faith, if I was enchanted, as I told her, two
days before I break the Charm, the third time you may imagine, added the
Count de Guiche, that she called me no ill names at parting, as she had done
the other times: This is the state of our Intrigue, which I beg you would seem
to be ignorant of: Vinevil having promised him he would, they parted, the Count
de Guiche went to the Countess of Fiesque's House, to whom amongst other things
he said he had no thoughts of Madam d' Olonne.

This Gallant's Intrigue had not continued long with his new Mistress when
Marsillac discovered it, tho he had so little sense, and she had taken all
imaginable care to deceive him; but jealousy that serves in stead of cunning,
made him discover in her less eagerness for him than was usual. Insomuch that
having made her some Modest Complaints in the beginning, and afterward more
sharp ones, seeing at length they did not at all restrain her, he resolved to
revenge himself at one blow, both of his Rival and his Mistress. Whereupon he
gave his friends, Madam d' Olonne's Letters, and desired them to show 'em in
all Companies. Mademoiselle d' Orleans hated the Count de Guiche extremely. He
gave her the Letter the Count had written to his Mistress, in which he had
spoken ill of the Queen and the Duke of Orleans. The first thing the Prince did
was to show the Duke of Orleans the Count de Guiche's Letter, thinking to
animate him so much the more against him, for that she knew that Prince had had
a great kindness for him: however that Prince was not in so great a passion as
she hoped he would have been, and contented himself with telling Pequelain that
his Cousin was ungrateful that he had never given him reason to talk of him as
he did, and that all the resentment he should have of it was, to have no longer
the same esteem for him he had had; but if the Queen knew after what manner he
had talked of her, she would not certainly have so much moderation as she had.
The Princess not being well pleased to see his Royal highness so favorable,
to the Count de Guiche, resolved to tell the Queen, and having acquainted one
of her Confidents with her design, the Marshal of Grammont came to hear of it.
He went and beseeched her not to ruin his son; she promised him she would not,
and kept her word. This Princess was haughty and did not easily pardon People,
who had not for her all the respect her illustrious Birth and extraordinary
Merit obliged all the World to; but when she was once persuaded they loved her,
nothing was so good natured as she.

While that the Marshall and his Friends were endeavoring to stifle the Noise
that Marsillac had made with the Count de Guiche's Letter, Madam d' Olonne was
known to show this for the breaking of a Marriage that made Marsillac's fortune.

You do not think, Madam of the constraint I am in, I am sorced to go two or
three times a Week to visit Mademoiselle de Rochegayon, to talk to her as if I
loved her, and to this purpose must spend that time I ought only to employ in
seeing, writing and thinking of you: and in what Condition soever I may be, it
would be a great trouble to me to be obliged to keep company with a Child: but
now that I live only for your sake, you may very well imagine that it is to me
the cruellest of Tortures: that which makes me take patience in some manner, is
that I hope to revenge my self on her by marrying her without loving her, and
after that seeing more nearly the difference there is between you and her I
shall love you all my life time, yet more if it was possible than I do at
present.

This at first surprised all the World: Thitherto indiscreet Gallants had only
been found, and never Mistresses: They could not imagine that a Woman to
revenge her self of a Man she no longer loved, would help one in that manner to
convict herself. This indiscretion had not however the effect that Madam d'
Olonne had promised herself: Monsieur de Liancourt, Mademoiselle de la
Rochegayon's Father, knowing that Madam d' Olonne was desirous to incense him
against Marsillac, answered those who spoke to him of that Letter, That were it
not for offending God, Marsillac could not do better than apply himself to gain
the Heart of so beautyful a Lady as Madam d' Olonne; that this was not the
first time that Wives were spoke ill of at Mistresses Bedside: But as the
passion Men had for her, was more violent than that they had for others, it did
not usually last so long: As for example, that of Marsillac was not so fixed to
Madam d' Olonne, and he still loved Mademoiselle de la Rochegayon. So that
Madam d' Olonne did not spoil Marsillac's Fortune, as she hoped to have done;
and only confirming what he had said of her; she deprived her friends of the
means of vindicating her.

Things being in these terms and the Count de Guiche remaining Master in
appearance, Madam d' Olonne went one Evening to the Countess of Fiesque, she
prayed her to make her acknowledgments to the Abbot Foucquett for some service
she pretended to have received from him, and to exaggerate very highly the
obligation she had to him: But the Abbot being one of the principal Personages
of this History, it is requisite to describe how he was made.

The Abbot Foucquett, the Treasurers Brother, was originally of Anjou, his
Family were Gown-men till this Man made his Fortune, and then as Noble as the
King. His Eyes were blew and lively, a handsome Nose, a great Forehead, a
pointed Chin, the form of his Face was flat, his Hair was a bright brown, his
shape was ordinary, and his mien base; his Conduct in the World was quite
contrary to his profession, he was active ambitious, and haughty toward
People; he did not love, but the most ardent and best Friend that ever was; he
had engaged himself in an Amourous Intrigue more out of Pride than out of love;
but afterward Love became Master: The first Woman he had made love to was
Madam de Chevruese, of the House of Lorraine, by whom he was entertained with a
very great Passion, the other was Madam de Chastillon, who in the Favors she
had granted him, had more considered her Intrests than her Pleasures: she being
one of the most Beautyfull and extraordinary Women of France, it is Convenient
to make here the Description of her Life.

The End.
LOVES EMPIRE; Or, The GALLANTRIES Of the FRENCH COURT. The Second Part.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman. 1682.

LOVES EMPIRE, etc.
THE HISTORY OF Madam de Chastillon.
HER Grace, the Duchess de Chastillon, Monsieur de Bouteville's Daughter, who
was Beheaded for having fought a Duel, contrary to the Edicts of the late King,
Lewis the Fourteenth's Father, Wife of Gaspard Duke of Chastillon, had black
and lively Eyes, a little Forehead, a handsome Nose, a red Lip, and full Mouth,
her Complexion was as she thought fit, but she had usually white and red, she
was so Charming when she smiled, that she set all hearts on a flame; her Hair
was very black, she was tall, had a good Air, but long, dry, and black hands,
her Arms were flat, and of the same color, which made People draw ill
Conclusions of those parts they did not see: She had a loft and agreeable Wit,
was insinuating and given to flattery, was faithless, interessed and incapable
of Friendship; and yet what Experience soever Men had had of her ill Qualities,
when she had a mind to Charm, it was impossible for them to forbear loving her;
she had some ways with her that were very tempting, and others that made her be
despised by all People; for Money and Honors she would have dishonored
herself, and have sacrificed Father, Mother, and Lovers.

Gaspard d' Coligny, and since Duke of Chastillon, after the Death of the
Marshal his Father, and of his eldest Brother, fell in Love with Mademoiselle
de Bouteville; and being the Prince of Conde fell likewise in love with her,
Coligny desired him to break off his Amor, since his Highnesses design was
only Gallantry, and he intended Marriage. The Prince being Coligny's Relation
and Friend, could not civilly refuse him his demand; and as his Passion was of
a very fresh date, he did not find it difficult to get rid of it: He not only
promised Coligny that he would think of her no more, but that he would serve
him in this Affair against the Marshal his Father, and his Relations who
opposed it; and indeed notwithstanding all the Orders of Parliament, and all
the Obstacles that the Marshal his Father was able to raise against it, the
Prince assisted Coligny so well, then of that Name, but since the death of his
Father called Chastillon, that he made him carry away Mademoiselle de
Bouteville, and lent him Twenty thousand Francks for his Maintenance. Coligny
carried his Mistress to Chasteau-Thierry, where he Consummated the marriage:
From thence they proceeded farther, and went to Steny, a Town of Safety, which
the Prince, whom it belonged to, had given them, for their abode. Whether that
Coligny did not find his Mistress so full of Charms as he had fancied in her,
or that Love being satisfied, he had time to reflect on the ill Condition his
Fortune was in, or that he feared he had given his Wife the Disease he had, he
fell into a terrible Melancholy on the Morrow after his Marriage: And while he
was at Steny, his Melancholy continued upon him to that degree, that he was as
constant to the Woods as a Savage. Two or three days after he went to the Army,
and his Wife into a Convent of the Religieuses, two Leagues from Paris. It was
thither that Roquelaure, knowing the Necessity she was in, sent her a Thousand
broad Pieces, and Vinevil two thousand Crowns, which Sums are still owing to
them, tho the Duchess is very rich, and that Money was employed to her own use.

Coligny being under Age when he married his Wife, it rendered his Marriage
invalid, but being of Age at his Return, a Contract of Marriage was made in the
Hostel of Conde before all the young Ladies Relations, and they were afterward
married in Nostre Dame by the Coadjutor of Paris. Sometime after Madam de
Chastillon being indisposed, went to the Wells, where she met with the Duke of
Nemours, who fell in love with her.

The Duke of Nemours had very white Hair, a handsome Nose, a little Mouth, and
of a fine Color, and was the prettiest shape Man imaginable: The least of his
Actions was attended with an unexpressible Grace, his Humor was gay, wanton
and toying, and his Will was admirable brisk and quaint. The liberty of seeing
one another at all hours, which Custom has introduced in Places where the
Waters are taken, gave a thousand opportunities to the Duke of Nemours of
acquainting his Mistress with his Passion: But knowing that an Amorous Intrigue
was never better regulated, at least with Ladies we have some esteem for, than
by making a Declaration by word of Mouth or by Writing: He resolved to speak;
and being one day alone with her at her Lodgings, I have been above three
weeks, Madam, said he to her, considering whether I should tell you the
impression your Charms have made upon my heart; and when I determined at length
to acquaint you with it, it is after having seen all the Difficulties that I
can find in this Design: I do my self Justice, Madam, and for that reason I
ought not to entertain any hopes. Besides, you have lately married a beloved
Lover, and it is a difficult Enterprise to remove him out of your heart, and to
put my self in his place. However I love you, Madam, and tho you should not to
be ungrateful, make use of that reason against me, I confess that it is my
Star, and not my Choice that obliges me to love you. Madam de Chastillon never
had had so much joy as this Discourse gave her. Monsieur de Nemours appeared to
her so lovely, that if it had been the Custom for Women to have made
Declarations of Love first, she would not have deferred it so long as her
Gallant did. But the fear of not seeming modest enough perplexed her so
extremely, that she was sometime without knowing what Answer to make. At length
forcing herself to speak for the concealing the disorder that her silence made
appear; You are in the right my Lord, said she to him, with all imaginable
postures, to believe that I love my Husband very much; but give me leave to
tell you, that you do your self wrong in being so Modest as you are: And if I
was in a Condition to acknowledge the kindness you have for me, you would see
that others esteem you more than you do your self. Ah! Madam, replied the Duke
of Nemours, it is in your power, Madam, and only in yours, to make me the most
happy and most esteemed Man in France. He had hardly finished these words, then
that the Countess of Maure came into the Chamber, before whom it was requisite
to change Conversation, tho these two Lovers did not change their thoughts;
Their distraction and disorder made the Countess of Maure judge that their
Intrigue was much more advanced than it really was, and for this reason she was
preparing to make a very short Visit, when the Duke of Nemours prevented her.
The amorous and discreet Prince well knowing that he acted but an ill part
before such a sharp-sighted Woman as the Countess of Maure was, went out, and
being got home, he wrote this Letter to his Mistress.

I Leave you, Madam, that I may be more with you then I was; the Countess of
Maure observed me, and I durst not look upon you; and she being cunning, I was
even afraid that my Affection would discover me; for in short, Madam, it is so
well known that People must eye you when they are in the same place, that those
that do not are suspected of some Design. If I do not see you at present,
Madam, at least it is not perceived that I am in love, and I have the liberty
of acquainting you only with it. How happy should I be, Madam, were I able to
persuade you, to the point it is, and how unjust would you be in that case,
Madam, if you had not some kindness for me.


Madam de Chastillon was very much perplexed at the receipt of this Letter; she
knew not whether she had best be cruel or kind. Kindness might gain the heart
of her Lover, and Severity his esteem, and both might disgust him. At length
she resolved to do what was most difficult, as being most honest: And
notwithstanding all that her heart inspired her with, she chose rather to
follow the counsel of her Reason: Wherefore she made the Duke no Answer; and as
he came on the Morrow into her Chamber, Are you come again my Lord, said she to
him, to commit some new Offense? because my humor and looks are easy and
soft, you think there is no more to do than falling on: And if your esteem is
only to be purchased by rudeness, set that value on it as to constrain my self
for some time: Yes, my Lord, I shall be angry, and I perceive I must be so with
you. These last words were as a Thunderclap fallen upon this poor Lover; tears
came into his Eyes, and his tears spoke much better for him than all he could
have said. After having been a moment without speaking, I am infinitely
grieved, Madam, answered he her, to see you thus in anger; and I wish I was
dead since I have displeased you. You shall see, Madam, that in the Vengeance I
am resolved to take of the offense you have received, that your interests are
much more dear to me than my own; I am going so far from you, Madam, that my
Love shall no longer importune you. This is not what I require of you,
interrupted that fair One, you may still stay here, without displeasing me.
Cannot you see me without telling me you love me, or at least without writing
me it? No, no, Madam, replied he, it is absolutely impossible. Well then, my
Lord, I consent that you see me, replied Madam de Chastillon; but observe well
all that I do for you. Ah! Madam, interrupted the Duke, throwing himself at her
feet, if I have adored you when you were so cruel, judge what I shall do when
you are kind: Yes, Madam, be pleased to guess at it, for it is impossible for
me to express the sense I have of it. This Conversation did not end as it
began: Madam de Chastillon dispensed herself from keeping all the rigor she
had promised herself, and if the Duke of Nemours had not great Favors, at
least he had hopes of being beloved. In confidence of this he was no sooner got
home, then that he wrote this Letter to his Mistress.

AFter having told me, Madam, that you consented I should see you, since it was
impossible for me to see you without telling you that I love you, or at least
without writing it, I ought to write to you in confidence that my Letter will
not be ill received: However, I tremble, Madam, and Love that is never without
fears of displeasing, makes me imagine, that you may have changed your mind
within these three hours: Do me the favor, Madam, to inform me by two Lines.
If you knew with what ardour I desire it, and with what transports of joy I
shall receive it, you would not judge me unworthy of this Grace.


Madam de Chastillon had no sooner received this Letter, then that she made
this Answer.

WHy should I have changed my Mind, my Lord? but my God, how pressing you are!
Are not you satisfied with knowing your power, and must you needs triumph
likewise over another weakness?


The Duke of Nemours received this Letter with such a joy, as put him almost
out of himself, he kissed it a thousand times, not being able to forbear
reading of it. In the mean time the Passion of these two Lovers augmented every
day; and Madam de Chastillon, who had already yielded up her heart, no longer
defended the rest, but only to render it the more considerable by the
difficulty. In short, the time of taking the Waters being passed, they were to
part, and tho they both returned to Paris, they both imagined they should not
see one another again with so much Convenience as they had done at Bourbon: In
the view of these Difficulties their Farewell was very moving! The Duke of
Nemours assured his Mistress more by his tears that he should ever love her,
than by the things he said to her; and the constraint that Madam de Chastillon
used not to weep, had the same effect in her Lover: They parted very sad, but
deeply persuaded that they would love one another passionately, and that they
should ever do so. They seldom met the rest of the Autumn, because they were
observed; but Letters passed often between them.

In the beginning of Winter, the Civil War which begun to break forth, obliged
the King to leave Paris something surprizeingly, and retire to St. Germains. At
that time, the Marshal, Coligny's Father, happened to dye, and the Prince of
Conde, who was then the Cardinal of Mazarine's right Arm, obtained the Patent
of Duke and Peer for his Cousin de Coligny. The Troops coming from all parts,
the City was blocked up; the Court however did not seem very sad, and the
Courtiers and Soldiers were over-joyed at the ill posture of Affairs; the
Cardinal only, whom they might ruin, concealed part of them from the Queen, and
all from the young King, whom when they talked to of War, it was only to
acquaint him with the defeats of the Enemies, and the rest of the time they
amused him in Plays that were suitable to his Age: Amongst other Persons with
whom he loved to play, the Duchess of Chastillon held the first rank; and
hereupon Benscrade made this Sonnet under her Husband's Name.

Chastillon keep your Charms
For another Lover,
Tho you stand with open Arms,
And keep a mighty Pother.
The King's too young to quench the Fires
Of such an eager Beauty.
How can such raging hot desires
Be stilled by Minority.
In these little Plays the Duke of Nemours did not lose his time, they ever
furnished the Duchess and him with occasions of giving one another testimonies
of their love; and by the same degrees that the passion of these two Lovers
augmented, their prudence did the Contrary: it was observed that at a Play
called the Bohemien they placed themselves opposite to one another, and were
always whispering, and that when one was blind-folded, the other stood so as to
be caught; to the end that the hand in seeking to know who it was that was
taken might have a pretext to feel every where: In short there was not one of
these Plays but what furnished them with the means of tickling their amourous
fancy.

The Duke of Chastillon, whom the knowledge of his Wife's humor obliged to
observe her, saw something of an Intrigue between the Duke of Nemours and her;
Glory more than Love made him receive this discovery with an extreme
Impatience. He spoke of it to one of his best Friends, who sharing his grief as
deeply as possible, went and told the Duchess of it. The service that I have
devoted, said he, to the Family of his Grace your Husband, obliges me to come
and give you an advice which is of Consequence. Beautyfull as you are, Madam,
it is impossible but that you must have adorers, and as certainly your
intentions being good, you have not so strict a rain over your own actions;
most Women who envy you, and Men jealous of the Glory of the Duke your Husband,
give an ill interpretation to all you do. My Lord your Husband, himself has
perceived that your Conduct, which tho it were more imprudent than Criminal,
does not fail however to do you an injury in the World, and trouble him: you
know how haughty he is, Madam, and how much he would fear to be ridiculed upon
that point: I give you notice of it, and humbly beseech you to take care; for
if by relying too much upon the clearness of your Conscience, you should be too
negligent of your Reputation, his Grace may come to such Violences against you,
as would not leave you in a Condition to make appear to him your innocence.
What you tell me, Sir, answered Madam de Chastillon, ought not to surprise me;
my Lord Duke began betimes to accustom me to his Caprichio's: On the day after
our Wedding, he fell into so furious a jealousy of Roquelaure, who had helped
him to carry me away, that he could not conceal it; and yet he could never have
had less reason than at what he gave him; and now again I find that he renews
his suspicions, and yet I cannot devine of whom it is: All that I can say is,
that I doubt whether his mind would be at rest, tho I were in the Country and
saw none but my Domestics. I shall not come to further particulars with you,
Madam. I even know not whether my Lord Duke aims at any one, when he tells me
he is satisfied with you; but you may upon what I have told you take measures
for your Conduct. And thereupon having taken leave of her, he left her under
terrible disquiets. She immediately gave notice of all this to the Duke of
Nemours, and they resolved together that they would constrain themselves more
than they had thitherto done.

In the mean time the Prince of Conde, was wholly taken up in Contriving how to
reduce the People of Paris by Famine, to deliver the Parliament, that had
promised a sum to those who would bring the Cardinals Head, fancyed that the
taking of Charenton would much advance this Success, which Clanle guarded with
five or six hundred Men: he reassembled part of the Quarters, and with a
thousand Men, at the head of whom Gaston of France, the King's Uncle, and
Lieutenant General of the Regency, would needs place himself, he came to Attack
Charenton in three places. As the Retrenchments at the Avenues were but bad, it
was not difficult for the King's Troops to force them. But the Duke of
Chastillon, who commanded the Attacks under the Prince was wounded in the belly
with a Musket shot in the Borough, of which he dyed the Night after. The
Prince regretted him extremely, and his grief was so violent that it could not
last. By what had passed you may judge that the Dutchesses Affliction was not
very great, and you may judge it much better by what shall happen in the
sequel; however she wept, she tore her Hair, and made appear the Appearances of
the greatest Despair imaginable, the Public was so deceived, that this Sonnet
was made upon his death.

Just as the Court the Honors did prepare
That Chastillon had merited by his Arms,
Death did deprive us of this Conqueror,
And snatched him from the midst of great Alarms.
How great was, fairest Duchess, your Despair,
When you had lost all hopes of his return,
All must have wept who saw you tare your Hair,
Or else their Hearts with Love did ever burn.
In such a sad Estate, so strange surprise
Never Alcionne, nor Artenise
Of Fate with so much reason could complain:
You sigh, you weep, but all is, alas in vain.
The Duke of Nemours, who was better informed than the rest of the World, was
not astonished at Madam de Chastillon's affliction: He timed his business so
well, that the excess of grief had altered in that poor despairing fair One,
and was so earnest with her to grant him Enjoyment, that the fear she had had
of her Husband, had hindered her from allowing him during his life, that she
made an Assignation with him on the day of his Burial. Bordeaux, one of her
Women, who sancied that the Duke's death would ruin the Fortune of Ricoux, who
sought her in Marriage, was under a real Affliction; insomuch that when she saw
the Duke of Nemours upon the point of receiving the least Favors from her
Mistress, on a day that the most dissolute constrain themselves, the horror of
this action redoubled her grief, and without going out of the Chamber, she
disturbed the pleasure of those Lovers by her sighs and by her tears. The Duke
well-seeing that if he did not appease this Woman, he should not have for the
future in his Amor all the sweetness that he wished for, took care to comfort
her, at his going out, and told her that he was sensible of the loss she had of
the Duke; but that he would be a Friend to her, and take care of her Fortune as
the deceased had done; and that she should find as much good will in him as she
had done in the other, and perhaps more power; and that till he could do
something considerable for her, he desired her to receive Four thousand Crowns
that he would send her on the morrow. These words had so much virtue that
Bordeaux wiped away her tears, and promised the Duke to enteresse herself for
him as long as she lived; and told him that her Mistress had all the reason in
the World not to spare any thing for the giving him marks of her Love. On the
Morrow Bordeaux had the Four thousand Crowns which the Duke had promised her,
and since that time she served him preferably to all those who would not give
her so much.

The Peace being made, in the beginning of the Spring, the Court returned to
Paris. The Prince, who had newly freed the Cardinal out of a dangerous
business, sold him his Services at a very dear rate, that he had done him in
that War. The Cardinal was not only unable to perform what he daily demanded of
him; but was not able to support the Insolence with which he demanded Favors:
The Government of Pont de Letreht, that the Prince had forced from him for his
Brother in Law the Duke of Longueville, contrary to the intention of the Court,
and the boldness with which he had exacted from the Queen that she should see
Gerse, after the confidence he had had to write an Amorous Ticket to her
Majesty, made the Cardinal at length resolve to free himself from the tyranny
he was under, under pretext of revenging the Contempt that was had of the Royal
Authority; he communicated this Design to the Duke of Orleans, who remembered
his Exempt's broken Staff by the Prince, and who for that and the jealousy of
his great Merit, had reasons to hate him; and the Cardinal letting him know
that Riviere, who governed him, was the Prince's Pensioner, he made him give
his word that he would conceal this Affair from his Favorite. The Prince of
Conde, the Prince of Conty, and the Duke of Longueville their Brother in Law,
were took into Custody in the Palace where the King then lodged: In the mean
time Monsieur Thurenne, who for the Engagements he had with the Prince of
Conde, had reason to fear being taken, and who besides was enraged against the
Court for the Principality of Sedan, which his Family was deprived of, withdrew
to Sthney, where Madam de Longueville arrived presently after, and the Prince's
Officers cast themselves into Bellegarde; Madam de Chastillon applied herself
to the Princess Dowager, and engaged the Duke of Nemours her Lover in her
Interests.

Sometime after that the Princes were in Prison. The Princess Dowager had leave
to go stay at her Cosins Madam de Chastillon's. A Priest called Cambiac, who
had introduced himself to Madam de Bouteville's, by the means of Madam Brienne,
was sent to Madam de Chastillon by her Mother; he had not been there long, but
that he governed her, insomuch that he interposed between her and the Duke of
Nemours. This Commerce giving him occasion of having great Familiarities with
Madam de Chastillon, he fell in love with her, and to that degree, as to saint
away as he was saying Mass. The Princess Dowager falling into that fit of
Sickness, which she died of, Cambiac, who had acquired great Credit with her,
employed it in favor of Madam de Chastillon: He procured her a hundred
thousand Crowns worth of Jewels, and the Lordship of Marlou for her life, which
was worth two thousand pounds a year. The Duke of Nemours, whom the cares of
Cambiac for Madam de Chastillon had something alarmed, was quite jealous at the
News of the Princesses Will. He did not believe that it was easy to resist
such considerable Service; and though he could not blame his Mistress for
having received them, he was enraged that she was obliged for them to a Man
whom he considered as his Rival. And he was not mistaken; for what Cambiac had
done had cost that fair One Favors; for though she loved the Duke of Nemours
best, she loved Riches best of all. However, as she had no longer occasion for
Cambiac after the Princesses death, it was not difficult for her to set her
Lovers mind at rest, by turning off that poor Priest.

The Coadjutour of Paris, and Madam de Chevreuse, who had been in the Plot of
seizing the Princess, finding that the Cardinal became too insolent, caused the
Duke of Orleans to take it into consideration, and represented to him that if
he contributed to the Liberty of the Princess, he would not only be reconciled
with them, but would engage them altogether in his Interests, besides the
design of weakening the Cardinal's Authority, which gave ombrage to the Party
called la Fronde, every one had still his particular Interest. Madam de
Chevreuse would have had the Prince of Conty, for whom the Court had demanded a
Cardinals Cap at Rome, to have married her Daughter; and the Coadjutour would
be subrogated to the nomination of the Prince. It was upon this promise that
the Princess of Conde and Conty gave under their hands to Madam de Chevreuse,
that she and the Coadjutour endeavored to free them out of Prison. The thing
having succeeded as they had projected; and the Cardinal himself having been
constrained to leave France, the Prince had no moderation in his new
Prosperity, and this obliged the Court to entertain new Designs upon his
Person. He withdrew immediately to his House at Saint Maure, and sometime after
to Monrond, and from thence to his Government of Guyenne. The Duke of Nemours
followed him, and Madam de Longueville, who was with her Brother, being taken
with his Merit, had so much Complaisance for him, that this Prince, tho very
much in love elsewhere, could not resist her; but yielded through the weakness
of the Flesh, rather than the inclination of the heart. The Duke of
Rochefoucault, who had been for three years the beloved Gallant of Madam de
Longueville, saw the Infidelity of his Mistress with all the rage that can be
had in such like Occasions. But she being full of a great Passion for the Duke
of Nemours, was not at all careful to please her ancient Lover. The first time
that she saw the Duke of Nemours in private, she asked him in the most
passionate moment of the Assignation, what had passed between him and Madam de
Chastillon: The Duke having answered her that he had not had any Favor: Ah! I
am undone, said she to him, since in the Posture we are in at present, you have
the power to conceal the truth. This Commerce did not last long, and the Duke
of Nemours not being able to force himself to pretend love where he had none;
and you may imagine that the Princess, who was nasty, and had an ill smell with
her, could not conceal her ill Qualities from a Man, who was infinitely in love
elsewhere. These Disgusts did likewise further the Journey that the Duke of
Nemours was to make into Flanders, to bring a Succor of Strangers to the
Princes Party: But the real cause of his impatience was, to see Madam de
Chastillon again, whom he ever loved more than his life; whereupon he passed
through Paris, where he saw her again, and put her into that wretched Condition
that may be called the Shipwreck of Widows. When she perceived her misfortune,
she sought for the means to be freed from it. Des Fougerets, a famous
Physician, undertook this Cure, and while he had her in hand, the Prince of
Conde, returned from Guyenne to Paris, and brought la Rochefoucault with him.

The Prince had lively Eyes, a Hawks and sharp Nose, hollow lean Cheeks, a long
Face, and the Physiognomy of an Eagle, frizled Hair, his Teeth were ill set and
nasty, a careless Air, had but little care of his Person, but was well shaped;
his Wit had a great deal of flame, but was not exact, he laughed much and
disagreably, his Genius was admirable for War, and particularly for Battails.
On the day of Battle he was mild to Friends, and fierce to Enemies: He had an
unparalled neatness of Wit, force of Judgment, and easiness of Expression; he
was Roguishly inclined, but had Faith and Probity in great Occasions: He was
naturally insolent and without regard, but Adversity had taught him how to
live. This Prince finding himself disposed to fall in love with the Duchess,
La Rochefoucault helped still to inflame him by the great desire he had of
being revenged on the Duke of Nemours. Rochfoucault persuaded him to give her
the Propriety of Marlou, which she had only the usu-fruit of, telling him that
Madam de Chastillon was younger than he, and that this Present would only
injure his Posterity; and that a Lordship of two thousand pounds a year, more
or less, would neither render him richer nor poorer.

When the Prince fell in love with Madam de Chastillon, she was in the hands of
Des Fougorests, who made use of Vomits to free her of those ill Circumstances.
The Prince, who was continually at her Bedside, asked her what her Sickness
was; she told him that she believed she was poisoned. This Lover being
extremely grieved to see his Mistress in danger of her life, told the
Apothecary, who served her, that he would cause him to be hanged: This poor man
not daring to justify himself, went and told Bordeaux, who was married to
Ricoux, that if he was pressed too much, he would tell all. In short, the
Remedies had the effect that they had promised themselves: And shortly after
this Cure, the Prince having given her Marlou, Madam de Chastillon was not
ungrateful, but she only gave him the usu-fruit of what the Duke of Nemours had
the Propriety. However, Rochefoucault took full Vengeance of the Duke of
Nemours, and gave him displeasures by so much the more cutting, that he had not
the power to cure himself of his Passion, as Rochefoucault had done of that he
had had for Madam de Longueville. Besides Rochefoucault, Vinevil was likewise
the Prince's Confident, who in serving him with his Mistress, endeavored
likewise to be beloved himself. Vinevil was the President d' Ardiers Brother,
of a pretty good Family in Paris, had a pleasing Face, much Learning, and was a
well-bred man: His Humor was pleasant and Satirical, tho very fearful; this
had often brought him into trouble; he was undertaking with Women, and that
made him almost always successful, he had had an Intrigue with Madam de
Montbazon, Madam de Movy, and likewise with the Princess of Wittembergh: And
this last Gallantry had so embroiled him, with the late Duke of Chastillon,
that without the Prince's protection he would have suffered some Violences, and
Chastillons hatred for him, had sufficiently disposed his Wife to love him. But
let us leave Vinevil for sometime, and return to the Duke of Nemours.

His Jealousy so transported him, that having one day found the Prince at
Madam de Chastillon's whispering with her, he all scratched his hands without
perceiving what he did; and it was one of his Servants who made him take notice
of the Condition he had put himself in. At length, not being able to suffer the
Prince's Visits to his Mistress, he desired her to go for some time to her
Country House. She loving him extremely, and not thinking that a short absence
would cool the Prince's Passion, granted him his request; and likewise promised
him to turn off Bordeaux, who had quitted his Interests for to be for those of
his Rival. Madam de Chastillon was not long in the Country; and at her Return,
the Duke of Nemours was jealous to that degree, that he was twenty times upon
the point of causing the Prince to draw; and he would at length have been
overcome with this Temptation, had it not been for the Duel he fought with his
Brother in Law, in which he lost his Life.

Madam de Chastillon, who of twenty Lovers she had favored in her life time,
had never loved any so much as the Duke of Nemours, was really grieved for his
death. One of her Friends, who brought her the News of it, told her at the same
time, that it was requisite that she should get out of one of Monsieur de
Nemours his Valet de Chamber's hands, a Cabinet full of her Letters. She sent
for him, and upon the promise she made him of giving him five hundred Crowns,
she got the Cabinet from him, but the poor Fellow could never get any of the
Money.

As for the Prince, what obligation soever he had to the Duke of Nemours,
jealousy had so disunited them, that he was very glad of his death. Glory as
well as Love had caused so much Emulation between them, that they could not
bear with one another; and this is so true, that if the Prince had had a mind
to have taken all the Precautions necessary to hinder the Duke of Nemours from
fighting, he might have prevented the Duel. One thing more which made appear
that there was more of Glory than of Love in the Prince's Heart, was that a
moment after the death of his Rival, he hardly loved Madam de Chastillon any
longer, and contented himself with keeping measures of Civility with her, to
make use of her upon occasion, and when he should think convenient.

And indeed at that time, the Cardinal thinking that she governed the Prince,
sent the Great Provost of France to her, to offer her from him an hundred
thousand Crowns ready Money, and the Place of Superintendant of the future
Queens Family, in case she would oblige the Prince to grant the Articles he
desired, and abandon the Count d' Oignon, the Duke of Rochefoucault, and
President Viole. During the Negotiation of the Grand Provost, an Officer of the
Guards, called Mouchette, negotiated likewise on the Queens part with Madam de
Chastillon; but she, seeing that she could not persuade the Prince to do the
things that the Count desired, sent the Queen word that she counseled her to
grant the Prince all that he should desire of her, and that afterward her
Majesty would know well enough how to deal with a Subject, who taking advantage
of the disorder of the Affairs of his Master; had forced from her shameful
Conditions, and such as were prejudicial to her Authority.

At that time, the Abbot Foucquett having been taken by the Enemies, was
brought to the Palace of Conde; he had a very sharp Conversation with the
Prince, but on the morrow things began to cool, and some days after the Treaty
of Peace was renewed with him. As he was a Prisoner upon parol, and that he
went every where he had a mind to, he made some Visits to Madam de Chastillon,
believing that nothing could be done with the Prince but by her interposition;
and it was in those Visits that he fell in love with her.

Vinevil governed then Madam de Chastillon pretty peaceably; Cambiac was
retired since that the Prince was in love, and that the Duke of Nemours was
dead, and this had very much diminished the Prince's Passion; insomuch that
some days after having been constrained to retire into Flanders by the
accommodation of Paris, he was upon the point of departing without taking leave
of Madam de Chastillon, and when at length he went to see her, he was but a
moment with her.

The King being returned to Paris, the Abbot Foucquett fancied that if Madam de
Chastillon stayed there, he should have Rivals upon his back, who might be
preferred before him; insomuch that he persuaded the Cardinal to send her away,
saying that she would every day set on foot a thousand Intrigues against the
Interests of the Court, which she could not do elsewhere; and this obliged the
Cardinal to send her to Marlou: The Abbot Foucquett went thither as often as he
could; but there were in her neighborhood two men who made her yet more
frequent Visits; The one was my Lord Crofts an Englishman who had hired a House
near Marlou, where he usually kept his Equipage, and where he came to ly
sometimes, and the other was Digby Earl of Bristol, Governor of the Isle of
Man: These two Noble men fell in love with the Duchess; Crofts was a peacable
Man and addicted to Pleasures, and Bristol was haughtly, brave and full of
ambition,

When that Cambiac had seen the Prince go out of France, he had made his
applications to Madam de Chastillon; insomuch that he stayed with her at
Marlou; and as he was not so much afraid of the Abbot Foucquet or of Bristol,
as of the Prince, he freely told Madam de Chastillon his Sentiments of her
carriage with all her Lovers. She, not being willing to be contradicted in her
new designs, and particularly by a Party concerned, took his Remonstrances very
ill; insomuch that things growing daily worse and worse between them, Cambiac
at length retired grumbling, and as a Man that ought to be seared. Sometime
after he wrote a Letter without a Name, and with a forged Hand, in which he
gave her notice of the ill they talked of her in the World. She suspected
however that this Letter came from him, because he sent her word of things,
that no body but she could know of. At length Madam de Chastillon learning from
several parts that Cambiac railed against her, she desired madam Pisieux, whom
she was very well acquainted with, and who had a power over him, to withdraw
some Letters of Consequence that he had of hers, which Madam de Pisieux
promised her to do, and at the same time sent word to Cambiac to come to her at
her House at Marins near Pontoise. It is to be observed that since that Cambiac
was gone from Madam de Chastillon, she had made a thousand Complaints against
him to my Lord Digby. This Lover, who only thought of pleasing his Mistress,
and who ruined himself in expenses for her sake, did not stick at promising her
a Vengance that should cost him nothing, and wherein he would find his
particular interest: He took the time that Cambiac being at Marine, was one day
on Horseback to go abroad, and having seized him with five or six Troopers, he
sent him to Marlou. Madam de Chastillon knowing that Lovers that had been well
treated ought never to be offended by halves, was much perplexed at the manner
that Cambiac was now used, and perceived that no Body would be suspected but
her; she was very ill satisfied with Digby, and would have sooner pardoned him
the Death of Cambiac than the seizing him after this manner: But in short, not
being able to undo what was done. I am extremely grieved, said she to him, at
what has now happened to you, I perceive that the Impertinent who has done you
this Affront, would make you suspect me, by sending you to my House; but you
shall see by the resentment I shall have of it, that I have no share in this
Voilence; In the mean time, Sir, if you have a mind to stay here, you are
Master; if you think fit to return to Marine, you shall have my Coach, you need
only Command it. I know, Madam, answered Cambiac to her coolly, what I ought to
think of all this, I give you thanks for the offers you make me; I shall return
on Horseback if you think fit: God, who will defend me from the attempts of the
wicked, will have care of me to the end. And having spoke these words he went
away in a pett, and returned alone to Marine. He was no sooner arrived there
than that he and Madam de Pisieux wrote these two Letters to one of their
Friends at Paris.

A Letter from Cambiac to Monsieur de Brienne.
YOu will be much surprised when you shall have learnt the adventure that has
happened to me; but to tell you the occasion of it, I must acquaint you with
several particulars that happened before, as that Madam de Chastillon sent
hither to oblige Madam de Pisieux to come to her House, in order to the
obtaining of me certain things she was desirous having. Madam de Pisieux, as
you know, wrote to me; and you likewise know that I undertook the journey the
same day that I arrived; Madam de Chastillon sent la Fleur, to know if I was
here, and on the Morrow a Man unknown under false Colors, came to ask me, and
know if I would return seddenly to Paris. Yesterday I departed from bence at
four a Clock; being an hundred Paces from Pontois, after having passed the
River, I was invested by six Horsemen, with their Swords in their hands, at the
head of whom was my Lord Digby. He told me immediately, that if Madam de
Chastillon would have done me justice, she should have caused me to receive a
hundred stabs, but that I should fear Nothing. I shall tell you without any
Bravado, that I acted very briskly in this encounter, and that I did nothing in
this Affair that was unworthy; he used me very civilly, and after having
dined, be conducted me himself to the foot of Marlou, and then sent me with
four Horsemen to make satisfaction to that worthy person; she seemed to be
displeased at this accident, and was really so at the haughtiness with which I
spoke to her, which made her comprehend that it was the worst thing she had
ever done. I returned to Marine, to tell Madam de Pisieux the treachery that
Madam de Chastillon had done her as well as me. She has all the resentment that
a person of her Qualisy, Honor and Courage ought to have. You see this is
something an extraordinary accident, I conjure you let me know your opinion of
it, and what course you think I ought to take; you perceive I suppose that I
ought not to rest satisfied, since that this base person has written to Madam
de Pisieux, to conjure her to obtain of me to stifle my resentment, by assuring
me that she knew nothing of all this. The answer that has been made her, is
worthy of the generosity of Madam de Pisieux. I am resolved to stay three or
four days here, to have leizure to think of what I have to do, and to hinder my
self from attempting any thing that I may repent of: Besides, to vent One's
self in Complaints, is but a feeble revenge, and I have a design to do
otherwise if I can. I impatiently long to hear from you, and am wholly yours. A
Letter does not permit me to give you a very particular account; I shall do it
when I see you. Farewell.

July the 18th, 1655.

Madam de Pisieux's Letter to Monsieur de Brienne.
I Have too great a share in the Adventure of Monsieur de Cambiac, not to add
one word of my Hand to the Relation he has given you by his; there is not a
Circumstance but what is surprising, and the best that can be thought of me in
this occasion is, That they have had but little Consideration for me; for
according to all appearances, I ought to have a share in so worthy an Action:
The truth is, that the offended justifies me sufficiently, since he retired
into the same place where the Snare was laid for him. All my study is at
present so to carry my self, that I may not be transported with a just Anger,
which I shall entertain all my life time, to make appear that I was a Friend
sufficiently useful to Madam de Chastillon. You know my Name and my Courage, I
have ever spoke to you with sincerity enough; I moreover add, that I make
profession of a very austere Christianity, and that I design to serve my God
and my Master without Art and without Deceit. These Foundations laid, I shall
not be wanting in any thing that Resentment and Justice can permit me. Oblige
me with imparting this to Monsieur de Aubigny, and to no others: This will be
no ill Entertainment for the Princess Palatine, which I give you leave to tell
it to. I do not believe that Cambiac 's Crime of returning to his Duty, by the
means of the Bishop of Amiens, nor mine for having concealed him, were great
enough to occasion so ill an Accident. I shall come on purpose to Paris to
discourse my Friends in particular, and you in the first place. I cannot hold
in this little word of Revenge, Madam de Chastillon is not forgotten when an
occasion is offered to speak of her: I wish you happiness, I am too angry to
have any to day.


In a short time after these two Letters were sent, Cambiac returned to Paris,
and no longer kept any measures with Madam de Chastillon; he railed at her in
all Companies, and that he might fully glut his Vengeance, he snowed the Queen
all the most extravagantly passionate Letters of Madam de Chastillon, the
modesty of the History does not permit them to be repeated; but by the most
civil Fragment we follow, the rest may be judged of.

In several parts she let Cambiac know, that he might talk of her as he
pleased, but that it was more generous in him to speak well of her than
otherwise; that when a Woman lay at the mercy of People, as she did at his,
they might make an ill use of the opportunity; and that what a poor Woman had
to do in those Encounters, was to suffer and to be silent. In another place she
let him know, that notwithstanding all she did, she still loved him, and that
though she was preparing to make a general Confession at Easter, there was
nothing therein which concerned him.

The Queen was much surprised at Madam de Chastillon's Extravagancy in her
Letter, however she was not sorry at the contempt it brought upon her; and when
that she had learnt the Insult that had been done to Cambiac, she made a great
noise of it, and said publicly, That since People were so ill treated, who
returned to do their duty, the King would know how to do them justice.

When my Lord Digby came to see Madam de Chastillon, after what had been done
to Cambiac, he was astonished that he only received reproaches from her,
instead of the thanks that he expected. When I let you know, said he to him, my
being displeased with Cambiac, it was not meant that you should use him as you
did: And it is easy to see that in this fine Action you considered your self
more than you did me; but I shall now be careful of my Interests, and neglect
yours. Digby would have excused himself upon his Intentions, that had been
good, and seeing that notwithstanding all that he said to her she was not
pacified, he likewise fell into a pet; and Madam de Chastillan fearing by
losing him to lose a Protector and a Lover, soothed him up, and desired him to
consider at another time, that he ought to ruin quite, or dissemble Injuries
with such people as Cambiac.

While that Digby began to fall in love with Madam de Chastillon, my Lord
Crofts, who in the time the Disorders of England, had followed Charles into
France, had taken a House in the Neighborhood of Marlou; and leisure,
convenience, and the insinuating ways of Madam de Chastillon, had inflamed this
Lord's heart with love; but as he was of a milder disposition than the Earl,
his Passion had not made such progress as the Earl of Bristol's.

Things were in these terms, when that the Abbot Foucquett, seeing that his
Affairs did not advance with Madam de Chastillon, made use of this Stratagem to
hastem them: He had learnt that Ricoux, Brother in Law to one of Madam de
Chastillon's Women, was concealed in Paris, where he had Correspondence with
them for the Prince's Interests; he sent so many People in quest of Ricoux,
that he was taken and carried to the Bastille. The Abbot Foucquett having
caused him to be examined, he accused Madam de Chastillon of several things;
and amongst others, of having promised him ten thousand Crowns to kill the
Cardinal, and said that she had already given him two thousand beforehand upon
that account. The Abbot Foucquett suppressed these Informations, and caused
others to be given, by which Ricoux still confessed that he was at Paris with
design to kill the Cardinal; but did not accuse the Duchess of having any hand
in this Conspiracy: And all that he said against her was, That she kept
Correspondence with the Prince, and received a Pension of Four thousand Crowns
from the Spaniards. He showed these last Informations to the Cardinal, and the
first to Madam de Chastillon, by which having, as may be imagined, extremely
terrified her, He told her he would save her, if out of acknowledgment she
would give him the least marks of Love: Madam de Chastillon, who feared death
more then all things, did not stick to satisfy the Abbot Foucquett, but
resisted just as long as was necessary to make him value this last Favor. The
Abbot Foucquett his whole thoughts were now, how to love his Mistress; and to
that end he caused her to leave Marlou one night, and carried her into
Normandy, where he made her change her Abode every day, disguised sometimes
like a Gentleman, sometimes like a Religious, and sometimes like a Friar. This
lasted six Weeks, during which the Abbot Foucquet went and came from Court to
the place where Madam de Chastillon was: At length he procured her an Amnesty,
when Ricoux had been Executed, and caused her to return to Marlou, where she
was not long in repose; for she cast her Eyes upon the Mareshal d'
Hocquincourt, as well for the Advantages she might draw from him by the Posts
he held upon the Sum, as to free her from the tyranny of the Abbot Foucquett,
who began to become insupportable to her.

Charles Marshal d' Hocquincourt had black sparkling Eyes, a handsome Nose, a
little Forehead, a long Visage, and black frized Hair, and his Shape was very
fine: He had but little Wit, and yet was cunning by being very distrustful; he
was brave and ever in love, and his Valor served him instead of Wit and good
Carriage amongst the Ladies. Madam de Chastillon knowing him by Reputation,
fancied that he was a proper Person to commit the Follies she had occasion for.
Monsieur de Vignacourt, a Gentleman of Picardy, her Neighbor, was the Person
she employed to him. Whereupon the Marshal having agreed with Vignacourt, that
at his going to Command the Army of Catalonia, he would see her as he passed
through Marlou, as if Chance had occasioned this Interview. The thing happened as
it had been projected, and Madam de Chastillon took Horse to go to Conduct the
Marshal two Leagues from Marlou. On the way, she related to him the sad
Circumstances of her Fortune, desired him to be her Protector, flattered him
with the Title of the Refuge of the Afflicted, and the Resource of the
Miserable. In short, she so inspired him with Generosity, that he promised to
serve her with and against all, and even gave her his Table Book, in which he
gave order to the Governors of Towns and Places to receive her and hers, as
often as she had occasion. This Interview was discovered by the Abbot
Foucquett, who seeing the Marshal d' Hocquincourt upon the point of returning
to Court, judging his and Madam de Chastillon's Neighborhood dangerous for his
and the Courts Interests, persuaded the Cardinal to remove her to the Frontiers
of Picardy, and caused an Order to be sent her to go to her Duchy. As Madam de
Chastillon was on her Journey, she met with the Marshal d' Hocqiuncourt at
Montarquis, with whom she renewed the Measures she had taken six Months before,
and after having mutually given one another, he positively words to protect her
against the Court, and she hopes to grant him one day marks of her Passion.
They parted, The Marshal went to find out the King, and she to her Duchy,
where she passed the Winter, during which the Marshal d' Hocquincourt, and the
Abbot Foucquett, who being the most difficult Patron to be satisfied,
impatiently supported the Interviews that passed between the Marshal d'
Hocquincourt and Madam de Chastillon, and the Commerce she kept with him. To
excuse herself, she told him that the Marshal used his endeavors with the
Cardinal that she might have Bordeaux again, who was taken from her, and to
obtain of him for herself, leave to return to Court: She added, That she could
have wished she might not have been indebted for those Favors to any other
than himself, but that she was willing to spare his Credit for Affairs of
greater moment. What persuaded the Abbot Foucquett that the Intrigue between
the Marshal did only concern the Court, was that in the Spring she returned
through his Intercession, first to Marlou, afterward to Paris and Bordeaux
with her. During the Mareshal's Campaign in Catalonia, the King of England,
whom the misfortunes of his Family obliged to stay in France, and who had found
the Duchess much to his mind, saw her at Marlou in the little Journeys he made
to my Lord Crofts's his House; and this Commerce had inspired this Prince with
so much love for her, that he resolved to marry her: Crofts persuading his
Master to satisfy her at any rate, upon the promises that Madam de Chastillon
had given this Lord that he should enjoy her, in case he would contribute to
the making her Queen: And indeed she had been so, if God, who took care of the
Fortune and Reputation of that King, had not amused Madam de Chastillon with a
foolish hope, which made her fail of so fair an Occasion.

Charles King of England had great black Eyes, his Eyebrows were thick, and
met together, was of a brown Complexion, a handsome Nose, a long Visage, his
Hair was black and curled; he was tall, and finely shaped; he had an austere
Presence, and yet loft and civil more in good than in ill Fortune: He was
brave, that is to say, that he had the Courage of a Soldier, and the Soul of a
Prince: He was a great Wit, and loved Pleasures, but yet he loved his Duty
more: In short, he was one of the greatest Kings in the World: But however, tho
Nature had gifted him with admirable Advantages, Adversity, that had been his
Governor, was the principal Cause of his extraordinary Merit.

The Prince at his leaving of France, had shown, as I have already said, very
little consideration for Madam de Chastillon; but having known the value that
the Spaniards set on her, by the Pension they had given her, and the Credit
that she had at the Court of France, by the means of the Abbot Foucquett, was
reinflamed for her: And his Passion was so violent, that he wrote to her the
most passionate Letters in the World, and amongst others, this was intercepted
that he wrote to her in Ciphers.

THo all your Charms should not oblige me to love you, my dear Cousin, the pains
that you take for me, and the persecutions you suffer for being in my
Interests, and the hazards wherein this exposes you, would oblige me to love
you as long as I live; Judge then what all this together can do upon a heart,
which is neither insensible nor ungrateful; but judge likewise of the alarms
that I am continually in for you. The example of Ricoux makes me tremble, and
when that I consider that what I have most dear in the World is in the hands of
my Enemies, I am in disquiets that never give me rest. In the name of God, my
poorest Dear, do not longer hazard your self as you do; I should choose rather
never to return into France, than be the cause of your having the least
apprehension: It is for me to expose my self, and by a War put my Affairs in
such a posture, as that they may treat with me; and then, my dear Cousin, you
may aid me with your Intercession; and in the mean time, as events are doubtful
in War, I have one sure way to pass my life with you, and yet engage our
Interests to one another more than they have hitherto been. Do not believe that
the Princess is an invincible obstacle to this; people break through much
greater, when they are as much in love as I am. In this part, my dear Cousin, I
give no bounds to my Imagination, nor to your Hopes: You may push them as far
as you please. Farewell.


The hopes that Madam de Chastillon had upon this Letter of marrying the
Prince, made her think of refusing the offers of the King of England; hereupon
she consulted one of her female Friends in Bordeaux's presence. She, whose
Husband was with the Prince, told her Mistress that she was mad once to think
of marrying a shadow of a King, a Wretch who had not wherewith to live, and
who in making her to be laughed at, would ruin her in a little time, that if it
was possible, contrary to all appearances in the World, that he should one day
recover his Throne, she might very well believe that being weary of her, he
would be divorced from her upon the pretext of the inequality of Condition: Her
Friend told her on the contrary, that her madness was to marry the Prince who
was married, and whose Wife was in health, that persons of the Quality of the
King of England might be sometimes under ill Fortune, but that they could never
be in that extreme necessity so common to private Persons: That it was fine for
a Lady to live a Queen, tho she should live unhappy; and that she ought never
to refuse an honorable Title, tho she was only to bear it upon her Grave. As
for you Mademoiselle, turning toward Bordeaux, you have reason to talk as you
do to her Grace, considering only your own interest; but for my part, who only
consider her Graces, I tell her what I ought to say. Madam de Chastillon gave
them thanks for the kindness they showed her, and told them that she would take
time to think of their Reasons before she came to a Resolution. She was not
willing to give a more positive Answer before her Friend in an Affair she was
ashamed she should choose what was contrary to her advice; In the mean time
there came Notice from several parts to the King of England of the Life of
Madam Chastillon, and of her present Conduct with the Abbot Foucquett. Never
any Man that had the least sense of Honor, did lose his Reason so much as in
the beginning of his Passion to marry a Woman without Honor.

The King of England went from the Neighborhood of Marlou as soon as He had
learnt all these news, and would not hazard, by seeing Madam de Chastillon, a
Conflict that might be doubtful between his senses and his Reason. Madam de
Chastillon was not then sensible of the loss she had: the desires and hopes she
had of marrying the Prince rendered all other things indifferent to her.

Madam de Chastillon being returned from her Duchy to Marlou in the beginning
of the Spring, through the intercession of the Marshall d' Hocquincourt, and
sometime after to Paris, he did not find her ungrateful for this favor. This
little service and the promises he gave her of killing the Cardinal and putting
his Places into the Princes hands, touched Madam de Chastillons Heart to that
point, that she granted enjoyment to the Marschal. The Summer passed in this
manner during, which the Abbot Foucquett who perceived this Commerce, was often
under strange disquiets; and he had done at that time what he did afterward,
if Lovers did not love to deceive themselves, when they are either to quit or
condemn their Mistresses.

The Winter after, the Duke of Candale at his return from Catalonia, seemed to
be in love with Madam de Chastillon; The Abbot Foucquett allarum'd at so
dangerous a Rival, caused Boligneux to desire him to cease his persuit. The
Duke of Candale being at that time really in love with Madam d' Olonne, and had
only engaged himself with Madam de Chastillon to make her serve for a pretext,
easily granted the Abbot Foucquett's Request. But as with this Mistress Lovers
were as an Hydra, of whom one head was no sooner cut off, but that an other
sprung up in the room, la Feuillade took the place of the Duke of Candale; The
Abbot Foucquett who knew it immediately, spoke himself pretty sharply of it to
la Fuillade, who whether that he fancyed that his Rival being beloved he
should not succeed in his Enterprise, or whether that his blooming Passion left
him all his Prudence, he did not judge it Convenient to incurr the hatred of so
violent a Man; wherefore he did not persevere in that Amor. The Marquess de
Cozuvres had not so much Complaisance as Feuillade had, he continued to see
Madam de Chastillon maugre the Abbot Foucquett; but as he had neither Fortune
nor Merit enough to touch her Heart, she only made a Conquest of him, and only
kept him in play to inflame the Abbot Foucquett, and oblige him to renew his
Presents, and let him know that she had Persons of Quality on her side who
would not suffer her to be misused. Wherefore the Abbot was forced to bear with
this Rival but he vented his Choler upon poor Vinevil; who was one of the
first Lovers of Madam de Chastillon, beloved, a Man of good Sense, and whose
Wit was to be feared. The Abbot Foucquett gave the Cardinal to understand that
it was dangerous to leave him at Paris; insomuch that the Cardinal seeing only
through the Abbots Eyes, sent an order to Vinevil to go to Tours till further
order; and he not being suffered to take his leave of Madam de Chastillon,
wrote her this Letter on the last of October 1651.

HOw desirous soever you seem to be that I should make you a Visit, I fancyed
that the little pleasure you took in the last, I should do much better to
abstain; since that indeed your coldness deprives me of the joy, that I
received at other times in seeing you: for the truth is, I am persuaded that I
ought not to pretend to any share in your Favor, nor your Confidence; the
engagement you are under, does not permit you to consider any thing besides,
and that you are necessitated to be wanting in what you owe by essential
obligations; I am likewise of Opinion that you would take it more kindly to
forget you altogether, than to remember you on this occasion; and that you
willingly approve of my abandoning your person and your Interest. And yet
Madam, I do not pretend that you should lose me quite, because I am very sure,
you will be very glad to find me again one time or other, tho you despise me at
present: I will serve my self as much as the knowledge of the present
Circumstances you are under will suffer, preand the Friendship I have promised
you, which makes me that I cannot dissemble that all human kind talk most
disadvantageausly of your Conduct, and that you are become the perpetual Theme
of all the Conversations of the time. They describe your Engagement to be the
most pittyful and abject that a person of your Quality was ever Concerned in;
and your friend is said to exercise over you a tyrannical Empire, and more
especially that he causes all to be discarded that come near you, and that he
even threatens those whom he is told are his Rivals, as he has done Feuillade;
and I pass over in silence several particulars of his private Visits which are
sufficiently known. Do but consider, Madam, of the prejudice that your
Reputation receives from this Commerce; and make reflection upon what you are,
and upon what he is who has deprived you of your Honor; for the Credit and
Consideration he procures you are not very honorable, and they are false lights
which reflect upon you, rather to offend you than to give you a luster. Ah!
Madam, if the poor deceased had but the least sense, they would scratch their
way out of their Graves, and come and approach you with so shameful a
dependence, but I do not believe that you are concerned for the memory of them,
fear the living, who sooner or later will be informed of your Conduct and will
doubtless behave themselves accordingly. I do not represent all these things to
you out of a motive of jealousy; for I assure you I am not infected with a
Passion so afflicting and so useless as that. If I was transported with love
for you I should vent my self in Invectives, which would do you irreparable
Injuries, and I should revenge my self of the wrongs you do me with so much
Ingratitude. If I had no love for you, I should railly as well as others: but
in what concerns you I keep my self in a Mediocrity, which gives me a mute
grief for the blindness of your Conduct, which at length will bring you into
the worst of troubles, if you have not a care, and let your self be governed by
your prudence without expecting events. To morrow I shall go toward Tourraine,
wherefore I take my leave of you, Madam; If you take kindly the advice I give
you I shall continue to love you; if ill, I shall endeavor to get rid of a
Principle that is the cause of it: In the mean time I do not demand any good
Offices for my Concerns, but only that you would hinder ill ones from being
done me, and you will oblige me in so doing.


Notwithstanding Vinevil's Banishment, The Abbot Foucquett was no more at ease
than he was before, Madam de Chastillon making him mad every moment; but that
which disquieted him most was the Intrigue between her and the Marshall d'
Hocquincourt. This had rendered her so haughty that she had often treated the
Abbot Foucquett as if she had not known him.

During these passages the Marshal de Hocquincourt finding himself pressed by
Madam de Chastillon to perform the promises he had made her, which not being
willing to do, he gave notice to the Cardinal of all that he had promised Madam
de Chastillon, by one of his Gentlemen, who seemed to betray him, and at the
same time caused the same notice to be given to the Abbot Foucquett by Madam
Calvoisin, the Governor of Roye's Wife. This piece of Cunning had the effect,
that the Marshall had promised himself; the Cardidinal was alarmed, and to
break of so dangerous an Intrigue caused the Marshal d' Hocquincourt to be
treated with. The Abbot Foucquett for his part, having had the information from
Calvoisin, desired the Cardinal that he would cause Madam de Chastillon to be
took into Custody, and put in such a place where she might not have any
Correspondence till that he should think fit to restore her to her liberty. The
Cardinal having given his consent, the Abbot Foucquett caused Madam de
Chastillon to be seized on at Marlou, and conducted with one of her Women to
Paris, where he caused her to be brought in by Night, and lodged her at one de
Vaux's House in Poitow-stret. On the morrow after her arrival, the Abbot
Foucquett took a Note under her hand by order from the Cardinal, and directed
to the Marshal d' Hocquincourt, by which she desired him to come to an
accommodation with the King, and not to think any longer of the Prince or of
her, because it might endanger his Life; and as some days before she was taken
she had agreed with the Marshal, that in case they happened to be taken into
custody, and that Letters were exacted from them, contrary to the measures they
had taken together, they should give no Credit to them if they were not written
with a double C. Which she did not do in this Letter, but she did in an other
which she wrote at the same time to the Marshal; by which she let him know that
he should remain firm in the first resolution that he had taken of serving the
Prince, and of delivering up his Places to him; which the Marshal never
intended, and had only promised Madam de Chastillen that he would, that he
might obtain favors from her, and to procure advantages from the Cardinal,
which he could not have without making himself be feared; he suppressed the
Letter of intelligence, and sent that to the Prince which the Abbot Foucquett
had caused Madam de Chastillon to write to him, by which knowing that she was
in danger of her life, he sent him word to make his peace with the Court,
provided he got Madam de Chastillon released out of Prison. The Cardinal
believing the Marshal to be really in love with Madam de Chastillon, and that
he would give all that he should demand of him to set her at liberty, would
have deducted upon her account an hundred thousand Livers, out of the hundred
thousand Crowns they had agreed of together: But the Marshal would not consent
to it, and yet that she might not think him a cheat, and to keep some measures
with her still, he would not put his places into the Cardinals hands, til he
knew that the Duchess was set at liberty; insomuch that to satisfy him in that
point, they deceived him, and sent the Duchess to the fathers Oratory to show
her self to a Gentleman he had sent on purpose for that end; with whom she was
free, after which she returned to her prison, where she was eight days longer.
During the three weeks that she was a Prisoner in Poitoustreet, the Abbot was
not so free as she, he became daily more and more smitten; for as with the
liberty of going and coming he likewise deprived her of that of deceiving him;
he found her a thousand times more lovely than before. Besides the Duchess
being willing to recover his esteem that she migh procure being set at liberty,
used him after such a manner as was capable of melting the heart of a
Barbarian, and had a thousand kindnesses and Complyances for him: and she
seemed to put so entire a Confidence in him, that he could not forbear
beleiving that she would never depend again on any Body but him.

Things being in this Posture, the Abbot surprised a very kind Letter, that the
Duchess wrote to the Prince of Conde. This grieved him so extremely, that in
reproaching her, he would have poisoned himself with Quicksilver from behind a
Looking-glass; but beginning to find himself ill, he lost the desire of dying
for a faithless one, and took Theriaque which he usually carried about him to
secure himself from Enemies, which the employ he had about the Cardinal
procured him daily. Except going where she pleased, the Duchess passed her
time very pleasantly in the prison; The Abbot treated her with all manner of
Delicacies, and made her daily very considerable Presents in Knacks and Jewels;
he went from thence at two a Clock in the Night, and came again at eight in the
Morning, thus was he with her eighteen hours in four and twenty.

It was impossible but that the Cardinal must know where the Duchess was, and
this is pleasant that this great Man, who decided the Fate of Europe, should go
halves with the Abbot Foucquett in an amourous secret: I believe that the
reason he had to approve this Commerce was, that knowing the Duchess to be
Intriguing, he chose rather she should be in the Abbots hands, whom he was sure
of, than in an other; and besides the Abbot keeping her in a Chamber, and
absolutely dishonoring her thereby, he was glad that the Prince of Conde her
Cousin and lover, might receive thereby an extraordinary mortification. But at
length the Marshal d' Hocquincourts' accommodation being made, upon Condition
that the Duchess should be released out of prison, she was to be let at
liberty. They sent her to Marlou, where some time after the worst accident
imaginable happened

The Abbot Foucquett and she had agreed together, that every Saturday they
would mutually return the Letters they had written to one another all the week
long, and that he would send for them by a Man who should say that he belonged
to Mademoiselle Vertus. This Man being one day at Marlou, a footman came
thither from the Marshal d' Hocquincourt, with a Letter for the Duchess, who
having writ her answers, and given them to a Chambermaid to deliver them to the
Bearers, this Woman mistook, and gave the Abbot's Man the answer that her
Mistress sent the Marshal, and to the Marshal's Lacquie the Packet designed
for the Abbot. It is easy to imagine in what allarms the Duchess was so soon
as she knew the Mistake, and particularly when it is known that in the Letter,
which she wrote to the Abbot, besides a thousand kind things, there was also a
long Chapter against Madam de Bregi, whom she hated, because she had naturally
the Charms of Body and of mind which the Duchess had only by Art. It is
certain thet the Duchess had ever envied her and was never able to pardon her
Merit. In an other place, she railed against my Lord Mountague, and almost in
every part of it made the most biting railleries imaginable upon the Marshal.
And when she thought of the Abbot's Letters which she had sent to him, wherein
there were tendernesses and transports of love, which might be good to a
Mistress, but which usually appear very ridiculous to the indifferent, and that
all this was in the hands of a haughty and a laughed at Rival, she was almost
mad: The Abbot for his part was in no less pain. As for the Marshal so soon as
he had seen all the Abbot's Letters, and those that the Duchess wrote to him,
he judged that he might be one day obliged to restore them her out of his
weakness to her, or through the desires of her Friends, insomuch that he might
be in a capacity to take his revenge on her when he pleased: He caused copies
to be taken of them all, and then went and showed the originals to the Duke of
Rochefoucault, to Madam Pisieux, whom he knew to be the Dutchesses Enemies.
After that the Abbot had been one Night at Marlou, he returned to Paris to the
Mershals House, of whom he demanded his Letters. The Marshal did not content
himself with refusing him them, but added all the raillery after his way that
he could bethink himself of; while the Marshal was thus drolling he held the
Duchess, Letter open to the Abbot, who had liever have been killed, than have
suffered his Mistress to have lain at his Rival's discretion, as she did by
this Letter, caught hold of it, and tore half of it off, which he went to show
to the Duchess, telling her that the Marshal had burnt the other half; but
the Marshal being enraged at this enterprise of the Abbots; bid him be gone
immediately out of his House, and that if some respects did not withhold him,
he would cause him to be thrown out of the Window.

The Duchess being sometime after returned to Paris, fancied that to undeceive
the Public of a thousand Particulars, that the Marshal had said of her, it was
requisite that she should let People of Merit and Virtue see after what manner
she would treat him. In order to which, she made choice of the House of the
Marquess de Souches, Great Provost of France, to whom and his Wife she had a
mind to justify herself more particularly: The Assignation being made with the
Marshal, he perceived her design. God keep thee, my poor Child, said he
accosting her, How does my little Buttocks do, are they still very lean? It is
impossible to imagine the sad Condition this discourse put the Duchess in! she
was as if she had been stund with a blow upon her head, it made her forget to
call the Marshal Fool and Insolent; but she fancied that having begun as he
did, he would proceed to the most shameful particulars imaginable for her, if
she displeased him never so little. The Grand Provost and his Wise looked upon
one another, and turning toward the Duchess, found her with her Eyes toward
the ground, but indeed she did not change her Color; but those who knew her
did not believe her perplexed. At length the Great Provost breaking silence,
You do ill, said he, my Lord Marshal; Gallant men ought never to quarrel with
Ladies, they ought to be thankul to them for the Presents they make them of
their Hearts, and ought not to offend them when they refuse it. I grant that,
said the Marshal, but when their Hearts are once given, if they change after
that, it is requisite they use civilly those they have loved, and when they
droll upon them, they expose themselves to great Affronts. You understand me,
Madam, added he, turning toward the Duchess, I am sure you believe that I
have reason for what I say, but you surprise me with your disorder; you ought
to be prepared for such Accidents, since you lay Snares for people who revenge
themselves. I vow I would not have believed that you had so much Modesty as you
have. And in ending this Discourse he went away, and left the Duchess more
dead than alive. The Great Provost and his Wife endeavored to bring her to
herself; telling her, That what the Marshal had said, had not made any
impression upon their minds; however from that day they had no great Commerce
with her.

A fortnight after the Abbot was obliged to go to the Court, which was at
Compeigne; The Duchess foreseeing the Prince of Condes return into France by
the general Peace that was much talked of, and not being willing that he should
find her in so shameful an Intrigue for her, resolved to break off after such a
manner, as that there might not remain the least appearance of it. In this
design she went to the Abbots House, where having found one of his Servants in
whom he put most confidence, and asked him for the Keys of his Master's
Closet, saying she had a mind to write him a Letter. This Fellow without
penetrating further, and only considering the Abbots Passion for the Duchess,
he gave her immediately what she demanded. Seeing herself alone, she broak the
lock of the Cabinet where she knew that the Abbot kept her Letters, and not
only took them all, but likewise others from the Prince of Conde, which she had
sacrificed to them, and went and burnt them at Madam de Sourches House. The
Abbot having sound this disorder at his return home, went to the Dutchesses
House, and began to threaten to cut off her Nose, and then broke a Crystal
Candlestick, and a great Looking-glass that he had given her, and went away
after having called her a thousand Names. During all this bustle, one of the
Dutchesses Chambermaids fancying that the Abbot would take away from her all
that he had given her, laid hold upon her Mistresses Cabinet of Jewels, and
carried it to Madam de Sourches House, from whence she sent for it again the
same Evening, and gave it to a devout Relation of her Mothers to keep. The
Abbot having notice of it on the Morrow, went to that Devout Woman's House, and
took it away by force. The Duchess being informed of the loss she had, was
extremely grieved; but she did not lose her judgment, she employed people to
the Abbot, who had so much credit with him, that he restored the Cabinet; and
by the means of this restitution they were as well reconciled as they had ever
been; and this reconciliation was so sudden, that Madam de Bouteville coming
the morrow to comfort the Duchess her Daughter for the accident that had
happened to her, the Abbot was already with her, who concealed himself in a
Closet during the Visit, and heard all the Comedy.

Some time after, the Duchess not being willing to take always the pains to
conceal that she saw the Abbot again; and fancied that since their quarrel was
known abroad, their reconciliation ought likewise to be public: Wherefore she
caused all her friends to desire her to pardon the Abbot upon his
solicitation, and at length having made it a point of Conscience, the Mother
Abbess, of the Convent of Mercy, a Woman subject to beatifical Visitations,
made them see and embrace one another. This Mediation brought the Reverend
Mother into some discredit with the Queen and the Cardinal: They fancyed that
that she had not so particular a Commerce with God, since she suffered her self
to be so easily deceived by Men.

However this reconciliation lasted but six Months; The Prince of Conde's
return into France coming on daily made the Duchess apprehend that he would
find her under the Abbots Tutorship, and the Ladies de Saint Chaumond and de
Feguiers made her so much ashamed of him, that she broak with him upon a
pretext of Devotion. It was very difficult for the Abbot to consent to the
Dutchess's design, and would not have done it at an other time; but seeing his
Credit very much diminished with the Cardinal, and fearing that the Prince of
Conde, who hated him besides, and Bouteville, who would revenge the dishonor
he had done to his family, might cause him to be stabbed, if he gave the
Duchess the least new Reason of Complaining, he left off Visiting, but not
loving her.

The End of the Second Part
LOVES EMPIRE; Or, The GALLANTRIES Of the FRENCH COURT. The Third Part.

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman. 1682.

LOVES EMPIRE, etc.
AT that time Madam d'Olonne was gone as I have said, to desire the Countess of
Fiesque, to thank in her name the Abbot Foucquett for some pretended Obligation
which was properly nothing; but she had a mind the Abbot Foucquett should make
Reflections upon the Compliment, and make him Comprehend that when people have
thanks returned them for such small things, they are willing to be indebted to
them for the greater Obligations. The same day that Madam d'Olonne saw the
Countess, she found the Abbot at Madam de Bonelles, and there she herself made
him the same Compliment: The Abbot, being very desirons to have an Intrigue
with Madam d' Olonne, to endeavor the curing himself of the Passion he had
still for the Duchess of Castillon, returned her Civilities as obligingly as
he was able; and on the Morrow the Countess having sent to seek him, and
telling him what Madam d' Olonne had desired her to say: I know more than you
of that, Madam, said he to her, and I received yesterday Evening marks of
acknowledgment from herself: But I would willingly know of you one thing, added
he, Whether the Count de Guiche is not in love with Madam, d' Olonne; for if he
is, I will avoid the Occasion of being so: He has had so much respect for me
upon all Occasions, that I should be ridiculous should I play him such a prank.
No, said the Countess, at least Madam d' Olonne and he have each of them told
me, that they had not any thoughts of one another. If this is true, replied the
Abbot, I beseech you Madam, to let Mad. d' Olonne know that you have seen me,
and that upon what you have told me in her Name, I appeared to you so
transported with joy, to see how she received what I did for her, that you do
not doubt but that I shall be infinitely in love; and thereupon, Madam, ask
her, I beseech you, what she would do in case I should be so. The Countess
having given her word that she would, the Abbot went away; and on the Morrow
Madam d' Olonne having received a Letter from the Countess, made her this
Answer.

YOu desire to know what course I would take in case the Abbot Foucquett was in
love with me; I am not so mad as to tell you; for I am still as much taken with
him as I was two days ago. Farewell, la Chastillanne.


The Chevalier de Grammont, being come to the Countesses a moment after she had
received this Ticket, found her in Bed, and seeing a Paper lying by her, he
took it. The Countess having redemanded this Paper, the Chevalier restored her
another much of the same bigness. The Company that was then in her Chamber, so
took her up, that she did not perceive the Chevaliers roguery, who went away
almost as soon as he had done. Seeing what it was, it is not to be questioned,
but that his joy was extreme, to have in hand wherewith to injure Madam d'
Olonne, and put the Count de Guiche in a rage. He remembered, he had been
sacrificed to Marsillac, and the disquiets that his Nephew had given him upon
the Countesses account, and was very glad he had now an Occasion to torment
him. The noise that this Letter made, had all the effect that he could desire;
the Count de Guiche was alarmed, and consulted Vinevil; they resolved
together, that he should speak himself of it to the Abbot, and in the mean time
he wrote this Letter to Madam d' Olonne.

YOu make me mad, Madam, but I love you too much to fall out with you; and
perhaps this Carriage may move your Heart more than reproaches; however my
resentment must fall upon some body, and I see not one that has incurred it
more than the Countess; It was certainly she who engaged the Abbot Foucquett to
think of you, to reclaim me to her, or be revenged on me for changing, being
in despair that I had abandoned her; and therefore has raised me up a Rival,
who should cause me to be discarded or disgust me from loving you. I cannot
think Madam, she will effect either of her designs, and yet I think my self as
much obliged to her as if she had brought them to pass, and she is to expect
that I will have no longer any regard for her, and that I will use all means
imaginable to be revenged.


Madam d' Olonne, not being so secure of the Count de Guiche, but that she
apprehended the Countess might reclaim him, was willing to embroil them to such
a point, as that in all appearance they could not be reconciled; and for that
end she had no sooner received this Letter, then that she sent it to the
Countess: Which putting her in a rage against the Count de Guiche, she sent for
Vinevil to come to her. I desired your company, to tell you that your Friend is
an impertinent Fool, and whom I will have nothing more to do with. See the
Letter he has newly written to Madam d' Olonne; he complains that I persuade
the Abbot Foucquett to engage in an Intrigue with his Mistress, and does not
remember that he told me, that he had no longer any thoughts of her. I ask your
pardon for him, answered Vinevil, excuse a poor Lover, who seeing they design
to deprive him of his Mistress, knows not what he does, nor whom to have
recourse to: As soon as I shall have him recollect himself, he will come and
cast himself at your Feet. After some other Discourses, Vinevil went away, and
within an hour after returned with the Count de Guiche, who told the Countess
so many things, that she promised to forget his rudeness. On the Morrow the
Count having resolved to speak to the Abbot, went to him, and having taken him
aside, If we had both begun at the same time, said he to him, to be in love
with Madam d' Olonne, it would be ridiculous to think it strange that you
should dispute her with me, neither should I do it; and I would leave it to
herself to decide by Favors the good Fortune of us both. But since you come to
disturb me in an Intrigue, I have been long engaged in before you, give me
leave to tell you, that this is not civil, and I desire you to leave me at
quiet with my Mistress, without giving me other troubles than those which
proceed from her rigours. I am a Friend of Madam d' Olonne 's, and nothing
else, answered the Abbot, thus you have no reason to complain of me; However,
if I thought the Discourse you have now held to me, was by the advice of
People, who had a mind to bring me into trouble, I declare to you I would
become your Rival from this moment. I know why I talk to you after this manner,
and you may understand me. The Abbot pretended to speak of Varde his mortal
Enemy, and the Count's Friend. No, answered the Count, I know not what you
mean; but what I have to say to you is, that being jealous, that Humor has
advised me to desire you not to make me any longer so. The Abbot having given
him his hand, they parted the best Friends imaginable. Some time after the
Abbot finding Madam d' Olonne at a place where he made a Visit, she took him
aside, to impart to him some secrets of small moment, and the Abbot not knowing
what to say to her, told her his dispute with the Count. I am very glad, said
she to him, to see that you, Gentlemen, dispose of me, as if I was your own:
Thus I find I am at present the Count de Guiches, since you have made him your
declaration that you have no pretenses to me. Ah! Madam, answered the Abbot, I
would not give you to any Body, if it was in my power to do it; as I love my
self better than any one in the World, I would keep you for my self; but upon
the suspicions that the Count de Guiche has, that I have a Passion for you, I
declare to him that I have no such thoughts, and this betwixt you and me,
Madam, because I trust my good Fortune, for -- No, no, interrupted Madam d'
Olonne, do not continue talking to me contrary to what you think; you know well
enough that you are not so unhappy as you say. The Abbot finding himself so
pressed, could not forbear answering, That she knew him better than he did
himself; that it being in her power to make King's themselves happy, he should
think his Fortune made, if she would assure him of it; and moreover, that the
Promises he had made the Count, should not hinder him from loving her, when he
should see any likelihood of being beloved. This Conversation ended with so
many Favors from Madam d' Olonne, that the Abbot forgot that he was still in
love with Madam de Chastillon, insomuch that he resolved to engage himself
without inclination with Madam d' Olonne; he fancied that by enteressing the
Body by Pleasures, he might disengage the Mind, whose Interests are so
interwoven: And indeed, Madam d' Olonne, whom time was very dear to, did not
let the Abbot languish; but as their Correspondence could not last long without
the Counts perceiving it, he went to her House to make her his Complaints:
Being at her Chamber door, he heard a noise, which obliged him to listen to
what it was. He heard Madam d' Olonne saying a thousand kind things to some
Body, which increasing his Curiosity, he looked through the Keyhole, and saw
his Mistress making as tender Caresses to her Husband, as if he had been a
Lover. This did not a little disgust him; he went home in a pet, where having
taken Ink and Paper, he wrote this following Letter to Vinevil,

YOu are ignorant that I have discovered a new Lover of Madam d' Olonne's; but
what a new Lover, good God! a Lover kindly used, a Domestic Lover: I am not
able to bear with it any longer; I newly caught d' Olonne upon his Wife's
knees, receiving a thousand Caresses from that faithful One.

Happy should I my self betide,
If the Beauty I adore
Could at length rest satisfied
With a thousand Gallants; nay more,
I am willing she should have a Friend
If there her Lechery would end.
But she her Husband does likewise love,
It Is this that does my Anger move.
For in short, my Dear, he is no Husband, he has all the Favors of Gallants;
he receives other Caresses besides those which proceed from Duty, and he
receives them by day; which is a time peculiar to Lovers.


The Count de Guiche being returned on the morrow to Madam d' Olonne's House,
referred his reproaching her upon her Husbands account till another time, and
thought sit to speak then only of the Abbot Foucquett. Madam d' Olonne being
ever full of Consideration, when she was to lose a Gallant, not so much out of
fear of his Vexation, as because she lessened the number, told the Count de
Guiche that he was Master of her Conduct, that he might prescribe to her what
manner of life he pleased; that if the Abbot gave him umbrage, she would not
only see him no more, but if he was willing he should be witness after what
rate she would rattle him. The Count, who never durst have asked her so great a
Sacrifice, accepted the Offers she made him: The Assignation being made to be
at my Lord Croft's House the next day; where Madam d' Olonne having no other
Company than the Count and the Abbot, spoke to the last after this manner,
after having concerted all the Evening before. I desired you, Mr. Abbot, to
come hither, to tell you in the presence of my Lord the Count de Guiche, that I
do not love you, and that I can never love any Body but him; we were both very
willing that you should know it, that you might not plead ignorance: Not that
you have hitherto carried your self toward me otherwise than as a Friend; but
as you had no design, you have not perhaps taken notice that your Visits were
something too frequent, and you know that that is not usually very pleasing to
so amorous a Man as the Count, what confidence soever he has in his Mistress.
For my part I shall spend my whole life in thinking how to please him: I was
willing to make you this Declaration, lest that you without thinking, should
bring your self into trouble; I shall be overjoyed to have you for my Friend,
but the less commerce we have together, the better it will be. 'Yes, Madam, I
give you my word, said the Abbot to her, I am very much of the Count de Guiches
Opinion, I have passed through all the degrees of Jealousy, and this is not
the first time that he and I have discoursed upon this point. I know the
promises I made him, and I am sure I have not broken them. 'The truth is,
interrupted the Count, that I cannot complain of you; but as her Ladyship has
said very well, that as you have no design, you did not think you did contrary
to what you promised me, and appearances are only against you. 'Well, replied
the Abbot to him, let not this hinder you from being happy, for I give you my
word that I will not. Her Ladyship designedly but once a Month, but for
incounters I cannot answer for them; but it is your part to take securities in
that case.

After a thousand Civilitiess on all sides, they parted.

It will be perhaps wondered at, that the Abbot suffered Rivals so impatiently
in his Intrigues with the Duchess of Chastillon, and was so tractable with
Madam d' Olonne; but the reason is, that with the former there was love in the
case, and with the latter nothing but Debauche; and that the Body can bear with
Associates, which the Heart can never do.

Sometime after d' Olonne being informed of the ill Conduct of his Wife,
resolved to send her into the Country, as well to hinder her from committing
new Follies, as to stifle the Reports which her Presence daily renewed: And
indeed, so soon as she was departed, there was no more thoughts of her; and a
thousand other Copies of Madam d'Olonne, which Paris is full of, caused that
great Original to be forgotten in a short time.

There likewise happened an Intrigue, which without being of the nature of Madam
d' Olonne, did however suppress them for a time.

The Count Vivonne, first Gentleman of the King's Chamber, and for whom his
Majesty had naturally an inclination, being retired to a House he had near
Paris, to spend the Easter Holy days with two of his Friends, the Abbot le
Camus and Manchini this last Cardinals Nephew, and the other one of the Kings
Almoners; and having passed there three or four days, if not in a great
Devotion, at least in very innocent Pleasures, the Count of Guiche and
Manicamp, being weary of Paris, went to him. As soon as the Abbot le Camus saw
them, knowing them to be very dissolute, he persuaded Manchini to return to
Paris, and that the next day, for that the World would say there had passed
strange things amongst them: And Manchini that very evening declaring this
design, Manicamp and the Count de Guiche, proposed to Vivonne to desire Bussy
to come and pass two or three days without them, telling him that he was very
capable to fill the place of the other two: Vivonne having given his Consent,
wrote a Letter to Bussy in all their names, that he was desired to quit for
some time the hurry of the World, to come to them, that they might with the
less distraction, give them selves up together to the thoughts of Eternity. But
before I pass further, it is fit I describe Vivonne and Bussy.

The first had great blew Eyes even with his Head, whose Balls were often half
hid under his Eyelids, and contrary to his intention, made him look
languishingly; he had a handsome Nose, a little and full Mouth, a fine
Complexion, a fine, great and fair head of Hair; He was indeed something too
fat, he had a quick Wit, and a good Fancy; but he studied too much how to be
pleasant; he loved to speak Equivoques, and words with a double sense; and that
he might be the more admired, he often made them at home and started them in
the Companies where he came, as if they had been fresh thoughts; he was quickly
engaged in Friendship with people without any discretion; But whether he found
them persons of Merit or no, he as suddenly abandoned them; What made his
inclination last longest was flattery, but it was to no purpose for a person to
be extraordinary, if he did not admire him, he would have had no great esteem
for him. As he fancyed that a sign of a good will was a niceness for all
works, he found nothing to his mind of all he saw, and usually he judged of
Books without knowledge and reason: In short, he was so blinded with his own
merit, that he saw none in any Body else; and to speak like himself, he had
both a great deal of sufficiency, and a great deal of insufficiency; he was
Bold in War, and fearful in Love: And yet if any body would have believed him,
he had his will of all the Women he had attempted; but the truth is he had been
denied by certain Ladies, who, till then had never refused any Man.

Roger de Rabutin, Count of Bussy, Major General of the light Horse, had great
sweet Eyes, a handsome Mouth, a something hawkish Nose, an open Face, and a
happy Phisiognomy, fair, clear light Hair; His Wit had delicacy and force,
Gaity and Mirth; he talked well; he writ exactly and agreably; he was of a soft
disposition; But those, whom his Merit had caused to envy him, had netled him,
insomuch that he willingly made merry with people he did not love; He was a
good and regular Friend; he was brave without ostentation; he loved Pleasures
more than Fortune, but he loved Glory more than Pleasures: He was Gallant with
all Ladies, and very civil, and the familiarity he had with his best Friends,
never made him wanting in the respect he owed them. This kind of behavior made
it thought that he had a passion for them; and it is certain that he had ever
some sense of love in all the great intrigues he had had, he had been long in
the Wars and had done good service, but as in this Age it was not sufficient to
be of a good Family, to have Wit, Courage, and have done great Services to
procure Honors, with all these Qualities, he was got but half way of his
fortune; he had not the baseness to flatter those people, whom Mazarine, the
Sovereign Dispensour of Favors, put Confidence in, or had not been in a
Condition to force them from him, by making him afraid, as most of the Marshals
of his time had done.

Now Bussy, having this Letter from Vivonne, took Horse immediately, and went to
his House: he found his friends very much disposed to mirth, and he, not being
usually a Disturber of Feasts, ordered it so that their joy was altogether
Complete: and accosting them, I am very glad my Friends, said he, to find you
disengaged from the World as you are, a particular Grace from God is necessary
to work out our salvation: In the hurreis of Courts, Ambition, Envy,
Buckbiting, Love, and a thousand other Passions; do usually engage the best
People in Crimes, which they are encapable of in such Retreats as this, let us
save our selves then together, my friends, and as to be pleasing to God, it is
neither necessary to weep nor to dye of Hunger; let us be merry, my Friends,
and make good Cheer. This Sentiment being generally approved of, they prepared
themselves for Hunting in the afternoon, and gave order to have Consorts of
Instruments for the next day: After having hunted four or five hours, these
Gentlemen having got themselves a great stomach, eat as heartily as is
imaginable: supper being ended, which had lasted three hours, during which the
Company had been in that Mirth which always accompanies a good Conscience,
caused Horses to be brought to walk in the Park: where these four Friends
finding themselves at liberty, to encourage themselves to have the more
contempt for the World, they proposed to rail against all human kind; but a
moment after Reflection made Bussy say that they ought to except their true
Friends from that general proscription; this advice having been approved of by
them all, Every one demanded of the rest of the assembly Quarter for what he
loved: This being done, and the the signal given for the contempt of things
here below these good souls begun a Canticle. You may judge that having took
this Course, all was comprehended in the Canticle, except those four Gentlemen's
Friends, but as the Number were but small, the Canticle was great and sharp,
insomuch that should nothing be forgot, it would make a Volume: Part of the
Night being spent in these rural Pleasures, they resolved to go to rest;
Wherefore they left one another very much satisfied to see the progress they
had begun to make in Devotion. Vivonne and Bussy being got up earlier the next
morning than the others, went into Manicamps Chamber; but not having found him,
and thinking he was gone a Walking in the Park, they went into the Count de
Guiches Chambers, with whom they found him in Bed: You see My Friends, said
Manicamp to them, that I endeavor to make good use of the things you spoke of
yesterday touching the Contempt of the world, I have already Won my self to
despise the half, and I hope in short time, except it be my particular Friends,
to have no great inclination for the other; we often Compass the same and by
different methods, answered Bussy to him; for my part I do not Condemn your
manners; Every one is saved after his own way; But I shall never take that
course to be happy that you do. I am amazed to hear you talk after this rate,
said Manicamp, and that Madam de Savigny has not disgusted you from loving of
Women; But now you talk of Madam de Sevigny, said Vivonne, pray you tell us why
you broak off with her, for they talk differently; some say that you were
jealous of the Count of Lude, and others that you sacrificed her to Madam de
Monglas; and no Body has believed what you both have said, that it was a reason
of interest. When I shall have made appear replied Bussy, that I have been
these six years in love with Madam de Monglass, you will believe that there was
nothing of love in the falling out that was last year between Madam de Sevigny
and me. Ah! My Dear, interrupted Vivonne, how should we be obliged to you, if
you would take the pains to relate to us an amourous History; But first of all
be pleased to give me an account of this Madam de Sevigny; for I never saw two
persons agree in their Opinions of her. What you say is defining of her in a
few words, answered Bussy, peoples opinions of her do not agree because she is
unequal, and that one person alone is never long enough in her favor, to
observe the change of her humor; but having known her from her Infancy I will
give you a faithful relation.

The History of Madam de Sevigny.
Madam de Savigny, continued he, has usually the finest Complexion imaginable,
little sparkling Eyes, a flat Mouth but of a fine Color; a lofty Forehead, a
Nose only like it self, neither long nor little, broad at the end, and the same
at the Middle, and all this which in particular is not handsome, take it
altogether is very agreeable: she is finely shaped and yet has no good Air, she
has a handsome Leg, her Neck her Arms and Hands are not well formed, her hair
is white and thick, she has danced well, and has still a good Ear, she has an
agreeable Voice, and understands singing pretty well: as to the outside she is
such as I have described her, no Woman has more Wit than she, and very few have
so much: she has a diverting way with her, some say that for a Woman of Quality
her Character is something too Wanton: In the time I saw her, I found this
judgment ridiculous, and I know her Burlesque under the name of gayety; not
seeing her at present, her Charms do not dazzle me; and I grant that she is too
pleasant: If a Person has wit, and particularly of that kind of wit which will
be free and merry, there needs no more than to see her, there is nothing lost
with her: She understands you, comprehends exactly your meaning, she divines
you, and usually leads you much farther than you think of going; sometimes you
give her a mighty prospect, the heat of pleasantry hurries her away, and under
those Circumstances she receives with joy all libertine expressions, provided
they be finely wrapped up, and keeps pace with her answers, and thinks it for her
honor to surpass all that can be said to her. It is no strange thing that you
find not much discretion in a Person of so much fire; those two things being
usually incompatible, and Nature cannot work Miracles in savor of her: A brisk
Fool takes more with her than a wel-bred serious Man; the gaiety of People
prepossesses her, that she shall be judge whether you understand what she says;
the greatest mark of wit that can be given her, is to admire her. She loves
Incense, she loves being beloved, and in order to that she loves that she may
reap, she gives praise that she may receive it; she generally loves all men, of
what Age, of what Birth, of what Merit, and what Profession soever they are,
from the Royal Robe to the Frock, from the Scepter to the Inkhorn; amongst Men
she loves a Lover better than a Friend, and amongst Lovers the merry more than
the sad; the Melancholy flatter her Vanity, and the Brisk her Inclination; she
diverts herself with these, and flatters herself with an opinion that her Merit
must be great, since she is able to make those others languish.

She is of a cold temper, at least if we might believe her deceased Husband,
and it was to it that he was obliged for her Virtue as he said; all her heat is
in her will. The truth is it makes full recompense for the coldness of her
temper; I believe that Conjugal Faith has not that violence if we consider the
intention; it is another thing to speak freely, I believe her Husband clear
before Men, but I take him for a Cuckold before God. This fair One being
willing to share in all divertisements, has found a sure means, as she thinks,
to take her Pleasures without injuring her Reputation in the least: She has
contracted Friendship with four or five pretended Lucretia's, with whom she
goes into all places imaginable; she does not so much consider what she does,
as with whom she is: By thus doing, she persuades herself that the civil
Company rectifies all her actions, and for my part, I fancy that the critical
Minute, which is usually found with all women when only a Man and a Woman is
together, would soonest be met with her in the midst of her Family. Sometimes
she openly refuses a match of public walking to establish herself in regard of
the World in an Opinion of great regularity, and sometime after thinking
herself safe by so public a refusal, she will make four or five matches of
private walks; she has naturally a love for Pleasures; two things oblige her
sometimes to deprive herself of them, Policy and Inequality; and it was for one
of those two reasons that she goes sometimes to a Sermon, the nex day after an
Assembly. With some such public Actions she thinks to prepossess all the
World, and imagines that in doing a little good, and a little ill; all that can
be said is, that one producing the other, she is a Civil Woman. The Flatterers,
which her little Court is full of, entertain her after another rate, they never
fail to tell her, that it is impossible to reconcile Wisdom with the World, and
Pleasure with Virtue, better than she does. To have Wit, and be of Quality, she
suffers herself to be too much dazzled with the grandeurs of Court; the day the
Queen has spoken to her, and perhaps only asked whom she came with, she will be
so transported with joy, and a long time after she will find means to acquaint
all those, whose respect she has a mind to procure, how obliginly the Queen
spoke to her. The King having one Evening caused her to dance, and being
returned to her place, which was near me; It must be confessed, said she to me,
that the King has great Qualities, I believe, he will obscure the Glories of
all his Predecssors. I could not forbear laughing in her face; and answering
her, There is no doubt to be made of it, Madam, after what he had now done for
you. She was then so satisfied with his Majesty, that I saw her upon the point
of declaring her acknowledgment by saying, God bless the King.

There are people who only let holy things put bounds to to their friendship,
and who would do all for their Friends except offending God. These people call
themselves Friends to the very Altars: the friendship of Madam de Sevigny has
others Limits, that fair one is only a friend as far as the purse; There was
never any pretty Woman but she in the World, that dishonored her self by
ingratitude; she must needs be much afraid of necessity, since to avoid only
the shadow of it, she is not apprehensive of shame. Those who would excuse her
say that she has too much regard to the Counsel of people, who know what
hunger is, and who still remember their poverty: Whether this humor proceeds
from others or from her self, nothing is so natural as what appears in her
Economy.

The greatest application that Madam de Sevigny has is to seem what she is not;
since she has studied that Course, she has already learnt to deceive those who
had no great acquaintance with her: but as there are people who have interessed
themselves in her more than others, they have unfortunately for her perceived
and discovered, that all is not Gold that glisters.

Madam de Sevigny is unequal to the very Balls of her Eyes and to her Eyelids;
her Eyes are of different Colors, and the Eyes being the mirours of the Soul,
these irregularities are as a mark that nature gives to those who come near her
not to rely much upon her kindness.

I know not if it is that her Arms are not very handsome, that she is not very
tender of them, or that she does not think it a favor, the thing being so
general; but in short who will may take and kiss them, I fancy that it is
sufficient to persuade her that there is no ill in it, that she belives they
take no pleasure in it. Nothing but Custom can now constrain her, but she will
not stick to show it rather than Men well knowing, that having made modes when
they pleased Civility is no longer included in such narrow Bounds,

This is, my Dear, the Picture of Madam de Sevigny: her estate which would have
been a great help to mine and had belonged to our family, obliged my Father to
design I should marry her; But tho I was so well acquainted with her then, as I
am at present, I did not answer my Fathers design, certain loose Courses I saw
her take made me apprehensive; And I found her the prettyest Creature
imaginable to be the Wife of another. This sentiment helped me mightily from
marrying her; But as she was married a short time after me, I fell in love with
her, and the strongest reason that obliged me to make her my Mistress, was that
which had hindered me from desiring to be her Husband.

As I was her near Relation, I had a very great access to her House, and I saw
the vexations her husband daily gave her, she complained thereof very often to
me, and desired me to make him ashamed of a thousand ridiculous inclinations he
had: I served her in this very happily for some time; but at length her
Husbands nature being too strong for my Counsels, after some deliberation it
came into my head to be in love with her, more through the Convenience of the
Coniuncture, than through the force of my inclination. Insomuch that Sevigny
having one day told me that he had passed the Night before the most agreeable
imaginably, not only as to himself, but the Lady with whom he had spent it. You
may believe, added he, that it was not with your Cousin; it was with Ninon. So
much the worse for you, said I to him; my Cousin is a thousand times a finer
Woman than she, and I am sure if she was not your Wife, you would make her your
Mistress. All this may be, answered he: I had no sooner left him then that I
went to give him an account of all to Madam de Sevigny. This is a fine thing to
brag of, said she to me blushing for vexation. Do not you seem to know any
thing of it, answered I, for you see the Consequence? I think you are a fool,
replied she, to give me that advice, or that you take me for one. You would
certainly be so, Madam, replied I, if you do not pay him in his own Coin, or if
you should tell him again what I have told you: Take revenge, my fair Cousin, I
will go halves with you in your Vengeance; for in short, your Interests are as
dear to me as my own. Hold, good my Lord, said she to me, I am not so vexed as
you imagine: Having met with Sevigny the next day at the Court, he came to me
into my Coach; as soon as he was in, I fancy, said he to me, that you told your
Cousin what I yesterday acquainted you with of Ninon, because she has hinted
something of it to me: I, replied I, I have not spoke to her; but as she has a
great deal of Wit, she has said to me so many things upon the point of
jealousy, that she sometimes hits at the truth. Sevigny being satisfied with
so good a reason, fell to discourse of his good fortune with the Ladies, and
after having told me of a thousand advantages that there was in being in love,
he concluded with telling me, that he was resolved to be so as long as he
lived; and likewise that he was so at that time with Ninon, as deeply as it was
possible for a man to be; that he was going to spend the Night at Saint Clouds
with her, and with Vasse, who gave them a Feast, and which they laughed at
together. I repeated to him what I had told him a thousand times, that tho his
Wife was discreet, he might at length, by the continuation of his actions, so
provoke her, that some welbred Man coming to fall in love with in the time he
played her such pranks, she might perhaps seek for in the sweets of Love and in
Vengeance, what she would not have thought of in love alone; and thereupon
being parted, I went home, and wrote this Letter to his Wife.

I Had reason yesterday, Madam, to distrust your imprudence, you told your
Husband what I said to you; you may easily perceive that it is not for my own
interests that I make you this reproach; for all that can happen to me is to
lose his Friendship; and you have Madam, much more to fear. I have however been
so happy, as to undeceive him; moreover, Madam, he is so persuaded that one
cannot be an honest welbred man without being in love, that I despair of ever
seeing you satisfied, if you do not learn to be beloved by others than himself;
but let not this allarm you, Madam, as I have begun to serve you, I will never
abandon you in the Condition you are in. You know that jealousy has some times
more virtue to reclaim a heart than Charms and Merit; I advise you to make your
Husband jealous, my fair Cousin, and to that end I offer my self: I have so much
love for you, as to act over my former part of your Agent to him, and to
sacrifice my self likewise, to render you happy; and if he must needs escape
you, love me, my Cousin, and I will help you to take your revenge on him by
loving you as long as I live.

The Page I gave this Letter to, carrying it to Madam de Sevigny, found her
asleep, and as he waited till she was awake, Sevigney arrived from the Country:
He having known from the Page, whom I had not given instructions therein, not
foreseeing that the Husband was to return so suddenly; having known, I say,
that he had a Letter to deliver from me to his Wife, asked him for it, without
suspecting any thing, and having read it at the same time, he bid him be gone,
and that there was no Answer to be made to it. You may judge how I received
him, I was upon the point of killing him, seeing the danger he had exposed my
Cousin to, and I slept not an hour that Night. Sevigny for his part was no more
at case than I; and on the Morrow after the great reproaches he made his Wife,
he forbid her to see one, she sent me word of it, and that with a little
patience all this would be shortly reconciled.

Six Months after Sevigny was killed in a Duel by the Chevalier d' Albert, his
Wife seemed inconsolable for his death; the reasons she had to hate him being
known by all the World, they fancied that her grief was only feigned. For my
part, who had more familiarity with her than others, I did not wait so long as
they to speak to her of agreeable things; and presently after I made love to
her, but without Ceremonies, and as if I had never done nothing else: She made
me one of her Oracle answers, which Women make usually in the beginning, that
my Passion was so much at rest, that it made me appear but little favorable,
and perhaps it might be so, I know not. Tho Madam de Sevigny had no intention
to love, it is impossible to have more Complaisance for her than I had in that
Encounter. However, as I was her near Relation on the most honorable side, she
made me a thousand proffers to be her Friend, and for my part, finding in her a
sort of Wit which diverted me, I was not sorry to be so. I saw her almost every
day, I wrote to her, I made love to her after a raillying way, I fell out with
my nearest Relations, to serve with my Credit and Estate those persons she
recommended to me. In short, if she had occasion for all I have in the World, I
should have thought my self extremely obliged to her if she would have given me
an occasion of assisting her. As my Friendship was pretty like love, Madam de
Sevigny was very well satisfied as long as I did not love elsewhere: but
Chance, as I shall tell you in the Sequel, having made me fall in love with
Madam de Preey, my Cousin, she did not show me so much affection as she had
done, when she thought that I loved nothing but her. From time to time we had
little quarrels, which indeed were made up, but which left in my heart, and I
believe in here, such seeds of Division for the first occasion we should both
have, and which were even capable to imbitter indifferent things. In short, an
occasion being offered, wherein I had need of Madam de Sevigny, and wherein
without her assistance I was in danger of losing my Fortune, this ungrateful
Woman abandoned me, and did me in Friendship the greatest infidelity in the
World. This, my Dear, made me fall out with her, and far from sacrificing her
to Madam de Monglas, as was reported: This Lady whom I had long been in love
with, hindered me from having all the resentment which such an ingratitude
deserved. Bussy having done speaking, Vivonne told him all that was said of the
Count de Lude, and of Madam de Sevigny; Was he ever much in her favor? Before
I answer to that, replied Bussy, it is necessary I give you an account of this
Count de Lude.

He has a little ugly Face, a great head of Hair, a fine Shape; he was not born
to be sat; but the fear of being incommode and disagreable, makes him take such
extraordinary care to be lean, that at length he has effected his design; his
fine Shape has indeed cost him something of his health, he has spoiled his
stomach in the Summer by the Dyets he has taken, and the Vinegar he has made
use of. He is active on Horseback, he dances and fences well, which is brave;
he fought very well with Vardes, and they do him injury, when they suspect his
Valor, the ground of this slander is, that all the Sparks of his
Circumstances, having engaged themselves in the War, he would needs make one
Campaign as a Voluntier; but the reason of this was, that he is idle, and loves
his pleasures; In a word, he has Courage and no Ambition, he has a soft Wit, he
is pleasing with Women, he has ever been well used by them, but does not love
them long; the reasons that he is so happy in their savours are, besides the
reputation he has of being secret, his good Mien, and his being well provided
for love Engagements; but that which makes him so successful every where is,
that he cries when he will, and nothing persuades Women so much that we are in
love as tears. However whether some mischance has happened to him in his
intrigues, or that these who Envy say that it is his sault they have no
Children, he does not much dishonor the Women he has to do with. Madam de
Sevigny is one of those for whom he has had a love; but his passion ending then
when that fair one begun to make returns to it; Thus Cross accidents have
saved her, their passions could never meet. And as he has ever visited her
since, tho without applications, it has occasioned the report that he has had
to do with her. And tho it is not true, there is great likehood it was so. He
has however been the weakside of Madam de Savigny, and the Man for whom she has
had the most inclination, notwithstanding the jeasts she had made of it: this
puts me in mind of a Song she made wherein she causes Madam de Sourdis who was
with Child to speak after this manner.

That you have both, I heard it said,
Wherewith a Man to Charm and lure;
I mean a Man that is well bred
And for our Drudgery fit and sure;
Not like Him whom I do know,
Who never yet the Feat did do,
Nor cause the pain I undergo.
No Body in the World is more gay, has more Wit, nor a more-agreeable Wit than
she; Menage being fallen in love with her, and his Extraction, his Age and his
Figure obliging him to Conceal his passion as much as he could, he happened to
be one day at her House just as she was going out about some business. Her
Woman not being ready to attend her, she bid Menage come into the Coach with
her, and that she was not afraid people should talk ill of it, Menage jeassted
in appearance, but indeed was angry; made her answer that he found it very
severe to see that she was not satisfred with rigours she had so long treated
him with, but that she likewise despised him to the point of beleiving that
nothing could be said of her and him. Come in said she to him, Come into my
Coach; If you are angry I will make you a Visit at your own house. As Bussy
finished these last words, word was brought this Gentleman that the meat was
upon the Table. They went to dinner, which having done with the usual merriment
they went into the Park, where they were no sooner come, that they desired
Bussy to relate to them the story of Madam de Monglas and his Amors, which
having granted them, he begun after this manner.


The History of Madam de Monglas and of Bussy.
FIve years before Madam de Sevigny's and my falling out, being at Paris in the
beginning of Winter, and much a friend to Feuillade and Darcy, it came into all
our heads to be in love, and because that we were not willing that our affairs
should part us from one another, we cast our Eyes upon all the pretty Women, to
see if we could find three who were as much friends as we were, or who might
come to be so: we sought a long time without meeting with what we wanted. The
Ladies of Monglas, Precy and L' Isle were very much friends and very lovely;
but as perhaps we should have been troubled to have agreed upon the the Choice,
and that the Merit of those Ladies was not so equal, that our inclinations
should Carry us to love them equally, we agreed to make three tickets of their
three names, and to put them into a purse, and to keep to her that fate should
give us in drawing them. Madam de Monglas fell to Feuillade's share Madam de L'
Isle to Darcy and Madam de Precy to me: Fortune in this occasion showed how
blind she is; for she did a favor to Feuillade which he knew not so well the
value of as I did; but I was forced to be contented with what she had given me:
And as I had seen Madam de Monglas but five or six times, I fancyed that the
applications I was going to make to Madam de Precy would efface out of my mind
the beginning of a Passion.

We thereupon made our Addresses to our Mistresses, la Feuillade having for a
Fortnight or three Weeks, made love to Madam de Montglas by assiduities,
resolved at length to make her a Declaration. At first he found her a Woman,
who without being too severe, seemed to him so natural an Enemy of Engagements,
that he almost despaired of effecting his designs with her, or at least of
effecting them suddenly: Yet he was not quite disencouraged, and sometime after
he found her more uncertain, and in short he pressed her so much, and seemed to
her so much in love, that she gave him leave to hope being beloved one day: But
before I speak further, it is convenient that I describe to you Madam de
Monglas and Feuillade.

Madam de Monglas has little black sparkling Eyes, an agreeable Mouth, a Nose
something turned up, fine white Teeth, a too lively Complexion, fine and
delicate Features, and a pleasing turn of Countenance; her Hair is black, long
and thick; she is extreme neat, and the Air that comes from her is purer then
that she breathes; she has the finest Neck imaginable, her Arms and Hands
delicately shaped, she is neither great nor little, but of so easy a shape,
that it will be ever agreeable, if she can save it from the inconveniency of too
much fat. Madam de Monglas has a quick and penetrating Wit, like her
Complexion, even to excess; she speaks and writes with a surprising Facility,
and the most naturally imaginable; her thoughts are often diverted elsewhere in
Conversation, and you cannot say to her things of so great Consequence, as to
take up all her attention; she desires you sometimes to tell her something she
had then a mind to know; and as you begin your Relation, she forgets her
Curiosity, and the fire, she is full of, makes her interrupt you to speak of
something else.

Madam de Monglas loves Music and Verses, she makes very pretty ones her self,
she sings the best of any Woman in France, of her Quality; no Body dances
better than she, she fears Solitude, she is a true Friend, even to take the
part of those she loves with indiscretion, and to the very giving them all her
Estate, if they have occasion for it: She keeps their Secrets, religiously; she
knows very well how to converse with the World; she is as Civil as a Woman of
Quality ought to be: And tho she is not willing to displease any Body, her
Civility has more of Pride than Flattery; for which reason she does not gain
hearts so soon as several others that are more insinuating: But when they know
her stedfastness, they apply themselves much more earnestly to her.

La Feuillade is not altogether for a Man what Madam de Monglas is for a Woman;
their Merits are different; he has however some false Charms, with which the
weak are at first dazzled, but which never deceives such People as make
Reflections; he has blew lively Eyes, a great Mouth, a short Nose, frizled
Hair, and something reddish; his Shape is pretty good, his Knees turn inwards,
he has too much vivacity, he speaks much, and will always be pleasant, but he
does not always do what he has a mind to, that is to say, with civil Persons,
fancy to the populace and meanest Wits, with whom there needs no more than to
have always the Mouth open to laugh orto speak; he is admirable; he has a light
wit, and a hard heart, even to ingratitude; he is envious, and it is to him an
affront, to be in prosperity; he is vain and haughty, and at his first coming
to Court, he had so often told us that he was brave, that he made a Conscience
of suspecting it; however at present we make a Conscience of believing it.

I have told you that Madam de Monglas being persuaded that he had a violent
Passion for her, gave him hopes of being beloved. Any other than Feuillade
would have made of this business the most agreeable Intrigue imaginable; but he
was lodged as I have told you, and only loved by starts; he did enough to heat
his Mistress, and too little to engage her. When I told that fair One that he
loved her extremely, because that Feuillade had desired me before her to speak
for him in his absence, she drolled upon me, and made me observe some parts of
his procedure, which destroyed the good Offices I would have done him. I did
not fail to excuse him, and not being able to save his Conduct, I justified at
least his intentions. We were much upon these terms, Darcy and I with the
Ladies of Precy and L' Isle, that is to say, they were willing that we should
love them, but indeed we did our Devoir better with them, than Feuillade did
with Madam de Monglas; in short, three Months being spent, during which that
fair One found herself more engaged by the things I had said to her in favor
of Feuillade, than by the love he had shown her; this Lover was forced to go
serve in the Army with a Regiment of Foot he had. This Farewell made her
sensible that she had something more kindness in her heart for la Feuillade
then she had thitherto believed; She let him perceive something of it; but tho
it was enough to render a welbred Man happy, it could not shock the severest
Virtue. Feuillade at parting made her a thousand Protestations of loving her as
long as he lived, tho she should even continue ever obstinately resolved not to
make any returns to his Passion; and he and I pressed her so much to give him
leave to write to her, that she gave her consent.

Sometime before his departure, perceiving that the Commerce I had had for my
Friend with his Mistress, had the more touched my heart for her, in making me
the better acquainted with her, and that the efforts I had made to love Madam
de Precy, had not cured me of my budding Passion for Madam de Mongl as. I
resolved not to see her so often, that I might not be divided between Honor
and Self-love. As long as Feuillade was at Paris, his Mistress did not take
notice that I did not visit her so often as I used to do; but when he was gone,
she perceived a Change in my way of living, and this put her in pain, thinking
that my retreat was a sign of Feuillade's being become indifferent, and of whom
likewise she had not had any tidings since his departure. Some days after
having sent to desire me to come to her; What have I done to you, my Lord, said
she to me, that I see you no oftener; has our Friendship any share in your
absence? No, Madam, said I to her, it only respects my self. How, said she,
have I given you any reason to Complain? No, Madam, replied I, I can only
complain of Fortune. The disorder with which I said this, obliged her to press
me to tell her more. How! added she, do you conceal your Affairs from me, whom
I let see all I have in my heart? if it be so I should complain of you. Ah! how
pressing are you, answered I her, is it discretion to force a Secret from ones
Friend? ought not you to believe that I should not tell you mine; since I do
not tell it you in the Circumstances I am in with you, or rather ought not you
to divine it, Madam, since -- Ah! do not proceed, interrupted she, I am afraid
to understand you, I am afraid of having reason to be angry, and of losing the
esteem I have for you: No, no, Madam, said I to her, be not afraid, I am under
those Circumstances you are not willing I should be, and yet I shall not be
wanting in my Devoir; but since we are come so far, I will tell you all the
rest: As soon as I saw you, Madam, I found you very amiable, and every time I
saw you afterward, I thought you more beautiful than the time before; however,
I was not yet sensible of any thing so pressing as to oblige me to follow you
up and down, but I was very much pleased when I met with you. The first thing
which made me perceive that I was in love with you, Madam, was the trouble your
absence gave me; and as I was upon the point of abandoning my self to my
Passion, and of thinking of the means of making it known to you, Darcy,
Feuillade, and I, drew lots, whom we should each of us make our address to, of
you. Madam de Precy, and Madam de L'Isle, tho what my heart was sensible of for
you, Madam, was yet very weak, I should not have left to chance a thing of that
Consequence, if I had not been thitherto very lucky; but in short, my Fortune
changed in that occasion, for you fell to Feuillade 's share, and I should have
gained more by having lost all my life time, than in that unhappy moment, all
my Comfort was, as I have said, that the application that I was going to make
to Madam de Precy, whom I had formerly loved, would root out of my heart what
was budding there, but all to no purpose, Madam; you may judge that the
Commerce that the interest of my Friend obliged me to have with you, giving me
the opportunity of knowing you more particularly, and of observing in you
admirable principles for Love, I could not get rid of a Passion which your
Beauty alone had produced, when Feuillade desired me to serve him; I felt
something beyond the joy we have usually in serving our Friends, and I quickly
perceived afterward, that without designing to betray him, I was overjoyed
with being concerned in his Affairs, to have only the pleasure of seeing you
more nearly, but at length it put me into terrible pains; this, Madam, has
obliged me to see you less frequently, and tho you did not take notice of it,
but since Feuillade 's departure, it is above a fortnight since I retrenched my
Visits. Not but that you must have observed, Madam, that I have served my
Friend as I would have served my self, I have sometimes justified him when he
was apparently Culpable, and I might if I had had a mind, have ruined him with
you without seeming unfaithful, leaving it to be done by the resentment of a
thousand Faults which you pretended he committed against the Love he showed
you. But I confess that my Duty makes me suffer extremely in seeing you, and
were I out of your sight, it would spare me a great many efforts I make upon
you my self: besides, Madam, I would never have told you the reasons of my
retreat, if you had not asked me them. Nothing can be more civil, my Lord,
Madam de Monglas replied to me, than what you now do; but you ought to complete
your Duty, and send your Friend an account of all things; that he may not be
surprised when he shall learn perhaps by other means, that you hardly ever see
me, and that he may not to no purpose rely on your good Offices to me: And
thereupon Madam de Monglas having caused Ink and Paper to be brought, I wrote
this Letter.

SInce, considering the course I take, the Passion I have for your Mistress
neither offends my honor nor the friendship I owe you, I may well without
shame acquaint you with it; and on the contrary, I should dishonor my self by
concealing it from you. Know then that I have not been able to see Madam de
Monglas any longer without loving her; and that sending for me to day to know
the reason of a Retreat, I told her she had Charmed me, but that I might not do
any thing that was contrary to my duty, I would see her no more; I thought my
self obliged to give you notice hereof; that you might take other measures as
to her, and that you might see by the misfortune that has happened to me of
becoming your Rival, that I am not unworthy of your friendship, nor your esteem.

Having read this Letter to Mad. de Monglas, Well, Madam, said I to her, is
this fair dealing: Ah, my Lord, replied she, nothing can be more handsome; but
tho I believe you have the best Soul in the world, it would be very difficult
for you, having a hand in your Rivals Intrigues, finding a thousand reasons to
do one another ill Offices, and thinking to take advantages of our fallings
out, that you should resist, considering the passion you have for me, the
temptation of breeding quarrels between us: And as you are a witty man, you
would not find it difficult so to order your business, as that one of us might
seem to be faulty, and to lay upon one of us, or upon Fortune, the mischance
you only were the cause of; and though your Friend should leave off loving me
through his own Inconstancy, after what I know of you, I should ever believe,
if you concern your self in our Intrigue, that it was by your Artifices: So
that you have great reason, my Lord, not to see me any more, and tho I should
lose infinitely thereby, I cannot forbear commending that Action. After some
other Discourses upon this Subject, I went away to dispatch the Letter I had
written to Feuillade, and ten days after I received this Answer.


YOu have done your Devoir, my Dear, and I am going to do mine; I have more
confidence in you than you your self; wherefore I desire you to continue your
Visits to Madam de Monglas, and to serve me with her: When persons are so nice
upon interest, as you seem to me, they are certainly incapable of treachery;
but tho the Merit of Mad. de Monglas shall have so blinded you, they you should
be no longer able to retire, I should willingly excuse you, upon the
necessities there are of loving her when we know her perfectly.


With this Letter there was the following one enclosed for Madam de Monglas.

I Am not at all surprised, Madam, to learn that you have charmed my Friend, my
wonder would be the greater if a wel-bred Man, who daily sees and converses
with you, should defend his heart against so much Merit. He sends me word that
he will see you no more, for fear he should yield to the inclination he has for
you; and for my part I desire him not to retire upon the assurance I have that
he has more force than he imagins, and tho he should not be able to resist any
longer, you would not give your heart to a Traitor, having refused it to the
most faithful Lover in the world.


As soon as I had received these two Letters I went to carry them to Madam de
Monglas; but not to injure my friends whose Mistress was very Nice, I efforced
all the end of the Letter he wrote to me, from that part where he tells me,
that tho the Merit of Madam de Monglas should have so blinded me that I should
not be in a Condition to retire, upon the necessity there was of loving her:
When she was well acquainted with, I was afraid she would think, as well as I,
that that part was very gallant, but not very passionate. You are in the right
answered the Count de Guiche, and not only that part but both the Letters seem
to me well written, but show the person indifferent: The sequel, replied Bussy,
will not undeceive you.

You must know then, continued he, that Madam de Monglas seeing this
scratching, asked me what it was: I told her, that evillade spoke to me of an
affair of Consequence which Concerned me. Since he is desirous, said she to me,
that you continue your Visits to me, I give you my Consent; but my Lord it is
upon Condition you never speak to me of the sentiments you have for me. I will
not, since you are so pleased, replied I; Not but that I ought to speak of it,
without being suspected by you; for tho I love you more than I do my life, if
to a knowledge my love you should despise that of my friend, in ceasing to
esteem you, I should likewise cease loving you; The reason why I love you,
Madam, is I assure you, not for that you are beautiful, but because you are
also no Cocquet. I believe you, my Lord, said she to me, but since you neither
desire nor pretend nothing, love me no longer; for what is a love without
desires and hopes? I pretended to Nothing, said I to her, but I hope and I
desire: And what can you desire, replied she? I desire, replied I, that la
Feuillade should leave off loving you; and that it should be indifferent to
you. And in case that should be, said she, should you think to be the more
happy? I know not if I should be so, Madam said I to her, but at least I should
be nearer happiness than I am. And thereupon I made this Song.

Since only loving you I find
Does so much pain procure,
Me thinks you should be something kind,
And moan what I endure,
My Rival does all to me disclose,
And me his Confident has chose.
What gave me some Comfort in the Prospect of all the pains that an Amor
without hopes is attended with, is that I was upon the Point of having the
charge of Major General of the Horse, and that this Charge obliging me to go
suddenly to the Army, honor would Cure me of an unfortunate passion. Some
days before my departure, I was willing to do divert the trouble I had through
the violence I used upon my self to Conceal my passion, and for that end I gave
Madam de Savigny a very fine and extraordinary treat which you will certainly
be well pleased to have the description of.

First, sigure to your self in the Gardon of the Temple which you know, a Wood,
wherein two Allies cross in the place they meet, there was a great Oval of
Trees, on whose Branches a hundred Crystal Candlesticks were tied; on one side
of this Oval was a magnificent Theater raised, whose Decoration well deserved
to be so lighted as it was, and the luster of a thousand Wax Candles, which the
leaves of the Trees hindered from spreading, rendered so bright a light in that
part, that the Sun could not have given more, and for the same reason all about
was so obscure that your Eyes were of no use: The Calmest Night imaginable; as
soon as the Play was begun it was found very pleasant: After this
Divertisement, four and twenty Violins having played a Consort, played likewise
Brawls, Courants, and Country Dances; the Company was not so great as it was
well chosen; some danced, others looked upon the Dancers, and others, whose
Intrigues were more forward, walked with their Mistresses in the Allies, where
they sported without seeing one another. This lasted till day, and as if Heaven
had acted in Concert with me, the morning began to appear when the light went
out: This Feat succeeded so well, that Letters were sent to all places of the
particulars of it, and it is still talked of with admiration; some fantied that
Madam de Sevigny was in that Occasion only the Pretext of Madam de Precy; but
the truth was, I gave that Treat to Madam de Monglas, without daring to tell
her so; and I believe that she suspected, without letting me know her thoughts.
In the mean time I toyed with her before people, I was ever saying to her a
thousand kind things in a drolling way; and I made this Song to Sarabrand Tune,
which you have certainly heard Sung.

All those who see you, do you adore,
But tho your Eyes do all things that me,
It is required you should deplore,
And of your Coyness your self disarm.
Designs upon your heart I laid
To lose my own, I thought was fine;
But fair Besiza, I me afraid
Your heart is harder much than mine.
You may judge, that having these Sentiments for Madam de Monglas, my Addresses
to Madam de Precy, were not very extraordinary: I lived with her with the
greatest case imaginable, and my little eagerness suited extremely well with her
lukewarmness. However, when she begun to suspect that I was in love with Madam
de Monglas, her Passion for me begun to be inflamed: I thereupon admired the
Caprichio's of Ladies; they are vexed to lose a Lover, tho they are not willing
to love them; but notwithstanding all this, what Madam de Precy did was not so
surprising, as the Actions of Madam d' Le Isle; I had made love to the first,
and it was not strange that she took some interest therein; but for Madam d'
Olonne, whom I had never shown any thing but a Friendship to, I cannot
sufficiently wonder at the course she took, which was thus: So soon as she
suspected my Passion for Madam de Monglas, she used all manner of Artififices
to be perfectly informed of it; she told me sometimes after a drolling way,
that I was in love with her; sometimes she spoke well of her; and because I
feared she would thereby discover the secret of my heart, I was sufficiently
reserved in my Commendations; at other times she would speak ill of her, and
for my part, being willing to acquaint Madam de Monglas, that she was not to
rely upon the Friendship of Madam de' L' Isle, having found her in a thousand
other Occasions betraying Madam de Monglas, I let her talk, and gave her a very
favorable Audience, to make her believe I took pleasure in it: At length, not
being able one Evening to suffer the Rage she was in against her, I gave Madam
de Monglas notice of it, which ^casioned their falling out; and in the Sequel,
this fai^ One had all the reasons imaginable to believe I had a real Passion
for her.

The End.

