OF THE SUBJECT OF Church Power, In whom it Resides.

Its Force, Extent, and Execution, that it Opposes not Civil Government in any
one Instance of it.

Nec sic tamen, quamvis novissimis temporibus, in Ecclesia Dei aut Evangelicus
nigor cecidit, aut Christianae virtutis, aut fidei robur, elanguit, ut non
supersit portio Sacerdotum quae minime ad has rerum ruinas aut fidei Naufragia
succumbat, sed fortis and habilis, honorem divinae Majestatis and Sacerdotalem
dignitatem, plena timoris observatione, tucatur. Cypr. Ep. 68.

(...). Theodos Imperator. apud Theodoritum, Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 18.

By SIMON LOWTH, Vicar of Cosmus Blene in the Diocese of CANTERBVRY.

London, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

TO THE READER.
IT IS now full two years, and upward, since that huge din and noise, Pannick
almost and universal, has been in London, and elsewhere, occasioned by this
Treatise; and it has with a forcible hand, by threats and awes, from thence to
this day been either withheld from, or in, the Press, insomuch that tho
actually conceived and come to the Birth, there wanted strength to bring forth;
my purpose is not to make much Apology in its behalf, it comes abroad of Age,
natus cum barba, as the Jews say of Esau; after a course of Studies upon full
Thoughts, and a through Consideration (though hastened as thus digested by a
Sermon I met with Preached by John Tillotson Doctor of Divinity and Dean of
Canterbury) and is to speak for it self; and, if upon a due perusal, the
usefulness and seasonableness of the Subject matter, together with the
integrity of the Collector (and which is here professed) will not avouch it,
what can, or why should I say any more? I am content to fall, and shall submit.
I do not pretend to be the best Composer in the World, or above the reach of an
Aristarchus, and so let the Hypercritical, and overnice pick a Quarrel with it
if they please. I hope the best, and that, as in those fears called Pannick,
and where the Jealousy and Passion is vehement and subitaneous; so here, the
Grounds, on which some have already excepted against it, will appear rather
assumed than real, an effect only of the Imaginative faculty, and which is many
times dismal, till by reason corrected.

It Is that which St. Jerome urges and aggravates against John Bishop of
Jerusalem, in his Epistle ad Pammachium adversus errores Johannis
Hierosolymitani, that when accused of the Errors of Origin and Arius, and was
expected to have Purged himself, he Preached only against the
Anthropomorphites, a certain sort of obscure ignorant Monks, who out of a
Rustic Simplicity, believed God to have the Parts and Members of a Man,
accordingly as spoken sometimes in Scripture, who influenced none, and perished
within themselves. I may here safely conclude my self secure against such an
impertinency and indiscretion; the Adversary I now engage against, is neither
ignorant nor obscure, his repute for Knowledge is the same as his Conspicuity;
and that is, with Absalom and his Fathers Concubines, on the House top, in the
sight of all Israel and the Sun, has passed both Press and the Pulpit, and is
now in each almost Gentleman's Parlour, and Tradesmens Shop, and in the Mouths
of all Men, and he were to be wished to be less in our Divines Studies; And
after those hotter Controversies, in these Western Parts of the Christian
World, As whether Church Power be originally lodged in the Person of the Bishop
of Rome? or, in all and each of the Bishops of Christendom? or, in each single
Presbyter? or, as the less considerable, in every Believer? it is now concluded
to be purely Secular, men roundly, and making no Bones, run away with it, and
no more than the Prince's Pleasure is to be enquired after, nor are any Persons
or Functions to be accounted Sacred, in order to the things of Heaven, but by
his Separation; or is there any visible Power on this side Heaven, but by his
collating. Nor is the Subject trivial or inconsiderable, and without influence
upon Mankind: it is that Christ Jesus had a Power, all Power in Heaven and
Earth, once given him of the Father, for the bringing Souls to Heaven, this
very Power first in him, after descended to his Apostles, and from them to
their Succession, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, and is to remain in
and with them and their Persons, apart and separate from all other Power,
Government and Jurisdiction, till the end comes, and this Kingdom is delivered
up to the Father, so long is it to be visible and in force, under what frowns
and oppositions soever, tho the Kings of the Earth stand up, and the Rulers
take Council against it. And this is all I here represent to the World, and
which, not by any Public Authority; God be thanked the case is not so with us,
but by a set of Men has been thus opposed, and who seem to be somewhat,
whatsoever they be it matters not to me; I have always learned Obedience, but
it is to them that are my Governors: but who are these? neither shall I give
place by Subjection to them, no not an hour; so peculiar is my case, in an Age
of Liberty, when the Statute for Printing is expired, and the Government has
not thought fit to reenforce it, when every Sect and Party Scribbles and
Publishes; and a Treatise purely and solely stating and defending our Religion
established by Law, is brow-beaten, and a total Suppression, is to the utmost
endeavored.

I know they say it is not the subject in general, but my Animadversions upon
the two Deans, Doctor Stillingfleet and Doctor Tillotson, they set themselves
and contend against; and pray how does this mend the matter? or is not these
Men's Zeal for the Church of England bulky and active to the purpose, when its
issue is this, that the Names and Writings of two particular Men, and which
must be in so much less esteem, and as false, as they discountenance, and are
against our Church, and whose Tenants, so far as here impleaded, they dare not
openly Plead for must be untoucht and uncanvassed, or else the state of the
Church not meddled with, its Power and Authority be diminished and exposed by
others, by who so pleases, and no Man defend it; it is not to be duly and
fairly represented to the World, for their Information or Instruction, unless
there be an exempt and indemnity to such those two, to thwart and oppose it as
they shall think fit, or give themselves advantages thereby from their Party,
and such their Autorities stand unquestioned, as in Capital Letters, to affront
and confute all so soon as Published? the Proposal must be both ridiculous and
unreasonable at once; or how can any man undertake, (to make but this one
instance at present) to vindicate our Church from Erastianism, and that her
Reformation did not enstate all Church Power, even in Edward VI. and when but a
Child (and which I remember is objected by Parsons the Jesuit in his Three
Conversions of England, and we are risked sufficiently for it, nor without
cause, if true) without rejecting Doctor Stillingfleets M SS. and which tells
us, that both State and Church met at Windsor in his days, and determined it
otherwise, and that the original and full Power of the Priesthood was in him
the Prince, as now abiding upon Earth, next under Christ?

But how is it that I have really dealt with these two Doctors? being engaged
in a Treatise, the result of the course of my Studies, I met, among several
others, them my Adversaries; as I did those others, so also I detected their
Errors, refuted their Reasons, repelled their Arguments, and voided their
Autorities in that particular, as well as I could; and is not this what every
Body does under these like Circumstances? or did ever any Man engage upon a
Subject, and not take notice of the known and obvious opposers and thwarters of
him? surely never: and I have this to say for my self, that I have never made
one reflection upon either of them, but where my subject directly engaged me to
it; nor is there any thing that is Personal and Foreign that I have meddled
withal. As for their Eminency in the Church, and Controversies that are of high
concern among us, and which they have discharged with a general applause, I
have not, any ways, endeavored an abatement of their Merit, but this was so
far from being an Argument, or but Motive to me, that I was not to encounter
them on this Subject, that it mostly prevailed with me to do it; does the King
of Israel go out as against a Flea? nor do those of meaner Order and Quality
undertake that Authority which is in it self none, falls of it self to the
ground, nor was ever influential upon any? and had I had no sense of the
mischief in points of so great concern that must necessarily accrue to the
Church of God, under such their Autorities in future ages especially, I had
wholly passed them by, untouched and uncanvassed, as the Combination expected
and require.

What is farther urged, that we are not to create differences among our selves,
and that we have Enemies enough abroad, is most true; but that which makes our
Enemies abroad, is that we do not unanimously assert and vindicate the one
Faith and Truth, that we countenance those among our selves which violate it;
where divisions already made, and other Doctrines brought in, this is the rule
of St. Paul, Mark such, and his Practice is the same upon the Rule; and James,
and Cephas and John, who seemed to be somewhat, and Pillars were withstood to
the face by him; and the same Practice is every where in the Christian Church
apparent.

I Will only add this one thing more, Whatever my first Error was, in designing
this my Collection for the Press, without their Approbation, and it appears
they thought it my Duty to do otherwise; they had my Copy a full quarter of a
year in their hands, and I am informed did Transcribe what seemed for their
advantage, but never had I any notice any ways of my great mistake, that it
might be Corrected, or not Printed; and whether what I have answered be of
force that I burn my Papers, I durst appeal to an easy Consideration: or why
did not the two Deans themselves, inform me better, when I addressed my self to
each of them in a distinct Letter, and begged the favor that I might know what
my fault was, and which the Injury that I had done? I have been credibly told
that they said my style was rough and haughty, and therefore they would not
answer; I confess I did not consider them in their stalls, and where I always
pay that regard the Secular Power requires, and which alone places them there,
but as stating to them a Point of Divinity, or which is more a Case of
Conscience, where Truth only is to be respected, and with a through Severity,
and any thing but like a Complement is not to have place. But whatever my
Letter was, and however they scorn to answer it, I am not ashamed here to Print
it, in the very words I sent it to each of them apart, only the Site of their
Names is changed as was the particular Address.

Reverend Sir,
I Am very well assured that you are not Ignorant (nor indeed can you be) of
some Papers of mine that have been in so many Men's hands and more Months in
London since the beginning of last Winter, and designed for the Press, as also
of the Reasons why they are not yet Printed; viz. Some Reflections upon your
Self and the Dean of St. Paul's; I am mightily satisfied with mine own
Integrity in that Design and Action; and besides it was never yet objected by
any of those worthy Persons who have read the Discourse, that the Cause was not
useful and seasonable, or that I had betrayed it in general, or any one ways
injured you in any one relation, and yet it is you two that are Pleaded as the
very occasion that they remain still in the M SS. I do therefore once more deal
with you plainly and sincerely, (tho with a due regard to your accidental
Dignities, and in which you are my Superiors), as a Christian Brother and
fellow Presbyter, and whose Conscientious Zeal for the Cause of God's Church
Catholic, and this its particular live Member here in England, may be supposed
as much and as duly bottomed as another Man's, or Member of it, and thus with
all Humility address my self unto you: Either I have done you Injury, or I have
not: if I have, condescend but in Charity to give me the particulars and you
will oblige me in abundance. I Will be so hold to say, you never obliged any man
more, and my Acknowledgment and Submission shall be equally real and hearty: if
I have not, and all is said of you be true, i. e. your own Words and Sense; you
to this day own and assent to it, or you do not: if you do, what Injury can I
now have done you in Publishing your own Words and Sense? if you do not, you
ought to have satisfied the Church of God by a Recantation as Public as your
Error, Scandal and Offense, the alone way to prevent such Reflections from those
with whom you converse only in your Writings; nor can any man otherwise be
blameworthy that makes them; Be pleased to consider, you have not erred in the
Leniora Evangelii, and the Point is, Whether God has a Church on Earth, with
its peculiar appropriated Power or not; and the Laws of God, his Church, and
all Christian Kingdoms require of you at once its Acknowledgment.

You are not Ignorant what Pleas are made for Errors against the Church, and of
the Damages accrue to her, by haling in particular Doctors, if but leaning
that way and seeming such, as their Abettors and Avouchers, and this by how
much greater such Doctors are of, or are esteemed, in such the Church: and then
what astonishment must it be to good minded Men, what even Epicurism to Evil,
that do now, or shall hereafter read or hear the great and received Names of
Tillotson and Stillingfleet, these following Positions, That all Church Power
as from Christ has ceased with Miracles, and is to be accounted so to have
done. That Christ Jesus is not to be Preached if the Magistrate and Law forbid
it. That to pretend a Power to Preach as from Christ, and not to go into Spain
or Turkey, and there Preach, is gross Hypocrisy. That 'twas the Sense of Bishop
Cranmer, etc. and the Bottom and Principle on which he and the other Bishops
proceeded on in the Reformation, and was after made Law in the Kingdom. That
the King has a Power to Ordain Bishops, to Baptize, to Excommunicate, and do
all Pastoral Offices in his own Person, or devolve it on others, and this is
not only from a mistaken M SS. but by unfaithful Copying it out, and
representing it to the World, and, which brings more guilt, occasioning it to
be Printed thus Imperfect among the Records of the Church in Doctor Burnet's
Church History, and abusing the House of Commons to a Public Approbation of
it, giving to the Church of Rome, what their Emissaries have all along been
still gibing us with, and fathering upon us, but till by you, repelled with
Scorn. That it has been the continued Judgment of our succeeding Bishops ever
since. That a Bishop's Power is not solitary and apart from that of a
Presbyter, with many more of the like Nature.

And for the severing these your private Opinions and particular Errors from
the Doctrines of the Church of God, and rescuing her from the great Scandal of
them, she must, or may undergo; I have engaged in that so laborious a Work,
began at our Savior and his Apostles, descended by the Bishops, Doctors and
Fathers of the Church Catholic, the Church Historians, Councils, and Laws
Imperial, our own particular Church Canons, Rubricks, Book of Ordination, our
own Doctors and Writers in their times, the Injunctions and Declarations of our
Princes, the Statute-Book of our Kingdom, all which come in as one Evidence
against them, you have still time to do it and right your selves, and satisfy
the Church of God in your own Persons, removing the reproach occasioned by you,
in an acknowledgment of the Error, for my Book is not yet in the Press, and
which if you will engage to do, I do here indent back again, to expunge whatever
concerns or but mentions you in it. If not, I must do you and the Church of God
right, and will; but if upon this fair and Christian notice you shall not think
meet to retract these your Assertions, that I have animadverted upon, yet I
shall acquit my self to the World, that I have done what my Conscience and
sense of Duty, and Obligation arising from my Profession has engaged me to. I
cannot think a concern for the Honor and Reputation of one or two Persons,
though seeming to be somewhat, and Pillars, ought to be esteemed as that of the
whole Church of God, or that I ought to put their private concerns into the
bottom with it. I am Sir,

Your humble Servant Simon Lowth.
May 1. 1683.

THE CONTENTS.
The Introduction.
THe Occasion of this Discourse, Sect. 1. Not the Power and Offices of the
Church, but their Subject is what mostly exercises the Age, Sect. 2. Whether
the Power be originally, in Believers in Common, or in the Secular Prince in
Particular, or in a certain Definite Number of Believers, the Bishops and
Pastors of the Church, Sect. 3. The Design of the Whole, and its Three General
Heads, Sect. 4.
CHAP. I.
CHurch Power is not in the People, either as a Body in General, or as one
Single Congregation. Sect. 1. This Power must first evidence it self to be
given from God e're executed on, or derived to others. Holiness in its Nature
does not infer it. The Priesthood not made Common before the Law, under it, or
the Gospel. Admit that first Right by Nature to all Things and Offices, 'twas
to be sure afterward limited, and those that lay it open again, must show by
what Authority they do it. Otherwise Fanatics in the sense of St. Jerome. Sect.
2. The word (...) infers no such Power. Sect. 3. The Peoples concurrency gives
no Power, even where their Votes are pretended to in the New Testament. Sect.
4. Election and Vocation differ from Ordination, in the Practice of our
Savior, and first Ages of the Church, still expressed by several words. Sect.
5. The Votes of the People give no Power, but yet are necessary because none is
given without them, both the People and Pastors are Christ's Vicars in the
Case. So Beza, Blondel. Sect. 6. Our Savior's Practice and the Apostles are
against them. Sect. 7, 8. That the People were not always at Elections, Blondel
allows. He is contrary to himself. Their Votes never reputed necessary; and at
last excluded quite, by reason of the Riots and Disorders in them. Sect. 9. The
concurrency of 12 Centuries down from the Apostles, amount to a Divine Right.
Blondel's failure of it. His injury to his Friends. In what case Apostolical.
Ecclesiastical Practice is not immutable. The ill Consequences attending his
Power given to the People. His Malice to the Order of Bishops; Disreputing
Christianity it self. It Is unpardonable in the French Reformation, imposing
their present harder necessity for our pattern. The Deacon and Presbyter under
the Bishop; but neither in Subordination to the People. Sect. 10. And this they
do in point of Episcopacy also: And we must have no Bishops in England, because
they have none in France, and which is promoted by the advantage of the
Rebellion and Schism among us. Blondel offered his Service before to the
Bishops of England; but then he Prints his Apologia pro Hieronymo, Dedicates it
to the Rump Parliament, and Assembly-Men, Is nauseous in his Flatteries of
both. Commends the Scotch Covenant. Is rude upon Bishops, Soliciting their
Ruin. This the Sense of the Divines on that side the Sea. Salmasius raves just
so. The Independents murdered the King. The Bishops not the Authors of all
Heresies, as blackmouth'd Baxter, Andrew Rivet, and so does Dailee. Ignatius
suffers for it. He and Marcian and Valentinius compared. Their few Complements
does not acquit them. We only lose by our Charity toward them. The
disadvantage thereby from our own Members. The late Replyer upon Bishop Pearson
and Doctor Beveridge is the same. The late Letters from Paris, Sect. 11. The
People are only Witnesses of the good life's of the Ordained. Blondel's own
Collection, and the Authority of Cyprian is all along against him. The Church
Canons. Our Ordinations at home. The nature of the thing it self. Sect. 12, 13.
The People are not to choose or refuse their Pastor, as Blondel rudely and
unreasonably contends, with his usual Malice against Bishops, and our Church.
It Is his Proposal is so fatal to Christianity. Sect. 14. Laymen no Judges in
Matters of Faith, and the Determinations of Indifferencies. The first Council
at Jerusalem. No Lay Elders. Sect. 15.
CHAP. II.
THis Power is not in the Prince. The Child Jesus is Anointed Lord and Christ,
with all Power given him in order to Heaven, to continue in the
Gospel-Priesthood to the end of the World. Sect. 1. These two Powers have, and
may reside again in the same Person, are both for the general good of Man.
Emperors how called, Apli. Epi. Sect. 2. Their particular Power necessarily
infer not one another: The Priest as such, is no more a King, than the King as
such, is a Priest, than a good Man is always knowing, or the Despotical and
Regal Power go together. The mixing these several distinct Gifts and Powers, is
the inlet to all disorder. The King and Priest have been brought to a Morsel of
Bread by it. Sect. 3. Kings have no Plea to the Priesthood by their Unction,
the Jewish Custom and Government no example to us; if so, the consequent would
be ill in our Government. Our Kings derive no one Right from their being
Anointed. Blondel's Account of this Unction. The Error and Flattery of some
Greeks herein. Sect. 4. The Church how in the Commonwealth, and the
Commonwealth how in the Church? and both independent and self-existent. Sect.
5. The Church founded only, and subsisting in and by Christ and his Apostles.
Sect. 6. Proved from Clemens Romanus, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian,
Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Minutius Foelix. Sect. 7. A distinct Power is in
the Church all along in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. Socrates, etc. Opposed to the
(...), or the Power of the Prince so called all along in those Writings. Sect.
8. This was not from the present Necessity, when the Empire was Heathen, if so
the Christians had understood and declared it. The Apostles, God himself, had
forewarned and preinformed the World of it. It continued the same when
Christian, only with more advantages by the Princes Countenance and Protection.
Sect. 9, 10. In Athanasius, Hosius, St. Jerome, Austin, Optatus, Chrysostom,
Ambrose. Sect. 11. In Eusebius History from Constantine, and other Historians
downward, the Emperor and Bishop have alike their distinct Throne and
Succession independent, as plain as words and story can report it. Sect. 12.
And the same do the Ancient Councils all along; separating themselves from
(...), the (...). Sect. 13. This is not the Sense of the Bishops only in their
own behalf; and which is the Atheistical popular Plea and Objection, the
Cruelty of the French Reformers. Sect. 14. The Emperors own and submit unto it,
as Constantine, though misunderstood by Blondel, Valentinianus, Justinian,
Theodosius, Leo, etc. Sect. 15, 16. Blondel owns all this, and yet does not
understand it, Sect. 17. All this farther appears from the Laws and Proceedings
of the Empire and the Church; as in the two Codes, Novels and Constitutions,
from our Church Histories. Photius Nomocanon. Sect. 18. This farther appears
from the Power of the Empire in Councils; and particularly that so much talked
of Instance in Theodosius. Sect. 19. From their Power exercised on Heretics.
Heresy is defined to be such by the Bishops. Sect. 20. In Ordinations. Sect.
21. Church Censures. Mr. Selden's Jus Caesareum, relates only to the outward
Exercise of the Jewish Worship, and comes up exactly to our Model. The state
then of the Jews answers this of Christianity. Sect. 22. The Christian Emperors
never Excommunicated in their own Persons, or by their own Power. Mr. Seldom
says they did. His Fergeries detected. His ridiculous account of Holy Orders
from Gamaliel. He was a Rebel of 1642. Designed a Cheat on the Crown, when
annexing to it the Priesthood. Sect. 23. What the Empire made Law relating to
Religion, was first Canon, or consented to by the Clergy. Nothing the Empires
alone but the Penalty. So Honorius and Theodosius, Valentinian and Marcian,
Zeno and Leo. Sect. 24, 25. No need of present Miracles to Justify this Power;
to Assert it does not affront Magistrates. It Is always to be owned before them,
Dr. Tillotson's Sermon on this bottom, Arianism was of old opposed against
Constantius; That this Power ceased when the Empire became Christian, is a
tattle. It received many Advantages, but no one Diminution thereby, Sect 26.
CHAP. III.
Church Power is a Specific, constituted by Christ, in order to a Succession;
the erecting a new and lasting Government upon Earth; a Community of diverse
Orders, Offices, Acts, Stations, every ways peculiar, the Body of Christ, Sect.
1. A Government to Rule, and defend it self, and Independent, Sect. 2. The main
Objection, that it is against the Civil Power. Common Sense and Experience
confutes it. The more a Christian the better Subject. The Christians supported
Constantine's Crown. Sect. 3, 4. They did not want Power to do otherwise; nor
consequently Integrity, as is objected, Sect. 5. To say they were Fools, is
more plausible to the Age, but then the Empire must be so too; who were equally
ignorant of these destructive Consequences to their Government, Sect. 6. The
reason of the present Misunderstandings, and that we do not see as the Ancients
did; because no Government owned but that which is Temporal and outwardly
Coercive, Sect. 7. So 'twas stated by an Anonymous Author, 1641. All Power and
Punishment was outward and bodily among the Jews, and so it must be among
Christians. Sect. 8. So Mr. Seldom, allowing no Punishments but what are
outwardly Coercive, because none other; as not under, so nor before the Law,
Sect. 9. Erastus went the same way before him, Sect. 10. And Salmasius, and
says, the Apostles had no Power, because without Whips and Axes; Concludes
against all Church Power upon these terms, and that he may surely take it from
Bishops. So does a French Reformer usually lose his Senses, when running his
Forehead against our Prelacy, Sect. 11. Grotius is in this Error, but often
corrects himself. His Inconstancy is to be lamented; He imputes it to his
Education. He fights with the very same Weapon against Church Power in general,
the Jesuit does against the Supremacy in the Church of England, Sect. 12.
CHAP. IV.
THe Objections answered. Selden's Error, that there are to be no other
Punishments by Christ, than was before and under the Law; the Query is to be
what Christ did actually constitute; He mixes the Temporal Actions of the
Apostles, and those designed for Perpetuity. Adam and Cain might have more than
a Temporal Punishment, Sect. 1. The great Disparity betwixt the Jewish and
Christian State considered, no Inferences to be drawn from the one to the
other, but what is on our side, Sect. 2. Theirs is the Letter, ours the Spirit;
They Punished by Bodily Death, we by Spiritual, Sect. 3. If Government was
judged so absolutely necessary by the dispersed Jews, that they then framed one
of their own for the present Necessity, and whose Wisdom in so doing, Mr.
Seldom so much admires, it must blemish our Savior much to say he purposely
called together a Church and designed it none of its own, to preserve it, Sect.
4. The Jews Excommunication, was not bodily Coercive, and then there may be
such a Punishment, an Obligation to Obedience, without force, and that is not
outward; and this much more in the Christian Society, Sect. 5. And this their
Government abstracted from the Civil Magistrate, is an Essay of Christ's
Government; so far of the same Nature, to come into the World, Sect. 6. The
Christian Church might be both from Caesar and Christ, as was the Jewish, from
God and Caesar, and there is no thwarting. The Jews and Christians distinct,
Sect. 7. In answer to his main Objection, That all Government must be of this
World, Sect. 8. It is replied, To assert Christ to have such a Kingdom, is to
thwart his design of coming into the World, the whole course of his Actions and
Government; and those Ancients that expected him to come and Rule with them on
Earth; yet did not believe it to be accomplished, till after the Resurrection,
Sect. 9. To say he therefore has no Power at all, is as wide of Truth, the way
of Men in Error, to run from one extreme to another, and of Mr. Seldom here,
Sect. 10. The Church is a Body of a differing Nature from others, Sect. 11.
With differing Organs and Members of its own, in Subordination to one another,
Sect. 12. With different Offices and Duties, Gifts and Endowments; these either
Common to all Believers, or limited to particular Persons, Sect. 13. As
Christians in common, they had one Faith, into which Baptized, and of which
Confession was made; the Apostles Creed, and other Summaries of Faith and sound
Doctrine. Interrogatories in Baptism. How Infants perform it, Sect. 14. They
had one and the same Laws and Rules for Obedience for which they Covenanted,
which is their Baptismal Vow, the Abrenunciation of the World, the Flesh and
Devil, Sect. 15. One Common Worship and Service, and Religious Performance to
God, in their Assemblies, the particular Offices and Duties there, the Priest
and People officiate interchangeably; as in Tertullian, Justin Martyr, etc.
Sect. 16. Common Duties and Services as to God, so to one another; in supplying
one another Necessities as occasion, Sect. 17. In the supply of such as
attended at the Altar, by a Common Purse deposited in the hands of the Bishop,
Sect. 18. Of the Poor and Indigent, whose Treasurer was the Bishop, Sect. 19.
The Power, Offices, and Duties not promiscuous, but limited to particular
Persons, are those of the Ministry, distributed into the three standing Orders
of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, and which make up that (...), that Gospel
Priesthood to remain to the Restitution, Sect. 20. This Power and Jurisdiction,
though limited to and residing in these three, yet it is not in each of them
alike, in the same degree, force, and virtue; the Deacon is lowest, the
Presbyter next; the Bishop, the full Orders and Uppermost, Supreme and
including all, Sect. 21. Against this Primacy of Bishops, that of
Metropolitans, Exarchy, Patriarchy, and the Supremacy of Rome is objected,
Sect. 22. The Metropolitan, etc. is in some Cases above the Bishop, but not in
the Power of the Priesthood; it is the same Power enlarged. No new Ordination in
Order to it, Sect. 23. The Universal Primacy of the Bishop of Rome is but
Pretended, not bottomed on either the Scriptures, or Fathers, or Councils,
Sect. 24. 25, 26. The Bishops Superiority, or full Orders and Power in the
Church is reassumed, and farther asserted. He with his Presbyter or Deacon, or
some one of them are to be in every Congregation; for the Presbyter or Deacon
or both to assemble the People and Officiate, and not under him, is Schism. The
several instances of this Power of the Priesthood, Sect. 27. To Preside in the
Assemblies, Pray, give Thanks for, Teach and Govern there. No Extempore Prayers
in those Assemblies, Sect. 28. To Administer the Sacraments, the Consecration
of the Lords Supper, by Prayer and Thanksgiving and Attrectation of the
Elements. Baptism by Lay-Persons. Rebaptizations on what terms in the Ancient
Church Confirmation, Sect. 29. To Unite and Determine in Council. The use of
Councils and Obligation. Their Authority Declarative, Autoritative, Sect. 30. To
impose Discipline, the several instances and degrees of it, in the Ancient
Church. Indulgencies and Abatements, Sect. 31. To Excommunicate or cast out of
the Church, a Power without which the Church as a Body cannot subsist; a
natural Consequent to Baptism, Priests not excommunicated, but deposed, Sect.
32. To Absolve, and Re-admit into the Church, this the design of
Excommunication, which is only a shutting out for a time, in order to Mercy, on
whom to be inflicted. Its certain force in the Execution, Sect. 33. To depute
others in the Ministry by Ordination; the Necessity of it. An instance in St.
John out of Eusebius, St. Clemens Romanus, Calvin and Bezae's Opinion and
Practice. Its ill Consequences. Only, those of the Priesthood can give this
Power to others, Sect. 34. The Objection answered, and it is plain the Church is
an Incorporation, with Laws, Rewards and Penalties of its own, not of this
World, nor opposing its Government, Sect. 35. The outward stroke is reserved to
the Day of Judgment, but the Obligation is present. If the Church has no Power
nor Obligation, because not that present Power to Punish, or any like it;
neither has any Law in the Gospel. Mr. Hobbs the more honest Man, says neither
the Ecclesiastical, or Evangelical Law obliges. His and their Principles infer
it, Sect. 36. The Power of Christ and his Church cannot clash with the Civil
Power, because no outward Process till the Day of Judgment, and then civil
outward Dominion is to cease in its course; the present Union and Power to be
sure cannot: this is clear from the several instances of it, already reckoned
up, Sect. 37. Their Faith is an inward act of the Soul, acquitted by Mr.
Hobbes; and that which is more open, Confession, obliges, if opposed, but to
dye, and be Martyrs, Sect. 38. That they Covenant against Sin, makes them but
the better Subjects, Sect. 39. No Man that says his Prayers duly can be a
Rebel; because first of all to own his Prince and Pray for him. The first
Christians Innocence defended them, when impleaded for Assembling without
leave. If this did not do, they suffered; Their Christianity did not exempt
them from inspection, Sect. 40. Charity, not obstructive to Government, when on
due Objects; a common Purse without leave, dangerous, not generally to be
allowed. These Christians innocence indemnified them. The Divine Right of
Titles how asserted. Nothing can justify those Practices, but their real Case.
The Profession of Christianity must otherwise cease, Sect. 41, 42. Presiding in
the Church, rises no higher than the Duties exercised. It Is Dr. Tillotson alone
ever said, -- To Preach Christ, is to Affront Princes; If the Jesuit do, let
him look to it. Christianity is not in fault. An entering into, or renewing the
Covenant, at the Font or Altar, is no Encroachment on the but Justice of Peace
in the Neighborhood, Sect. 43. Excommunication and other Censures change no
Man's Condition as to this World; they have no force, but in relation to known
Duties. Prudence is to rule in the Execution, particular regard to be had to
Princes. Whatever is Coercive annexed, is from the Prince. Lay-Judges,
Chancellors, etc. when first granted by the Empire upon the Bishops Petition.
The same is Absolution, neither innovate in Civil Affairs, Sect. 44. Conciliary
Acts, invade no more than does the Gospel it self. That Canons have had the
precedence of the Law, is by the savor of Princes; a Council without local
meeting. Letters Missive, Sect. 45. Ordaining others, no more prejudicial to
the Crown than the former acts. This is Mr. Hobbe's Misapprehension, Sect. 46.
CHAP. V.
THe grand Objection out of Mr. Hobbes, If these two Powers command the same
Person at the same time inconsistent Performances; it arises from that false
Principle, that all Power is outward, Sect. 1. This infers equally against the
Laws of God, and which may and do sometimes thus interfere, are as difficultly
reconcilable with the State Acts. No Church Laws oblige against Natural Duty.
The Laws of Religion considered at large, in order to a clearer Solution, Sect.
2. Mr. Hobbe's Rule will Answer all; Consider what is, and what is not
necessary to Eternal Salvation, Sect. 3. The same is the Rule of the Ancient
Fathers, Sect. 4. If Mr. Hobbes his Faith and Obedience be all that is
Necessary, it is then easily determined; because to obey only the Sovereign,
Sect. 5. Dr. Tillotson his Sermon of Love and Peace to his Yorkshire
Countrymen, not to be Vindicated from being herein of Hobbe's Judgment, in
what he Dissents from him. No Church Power, since Miracles, ceased; according
to Mr. Dean, Sect. 6. The Gospel calls for Confession and Obedience, in
Opposition to, though not in Contempt of, Princes; to the hazard of all. So the
best Christians, the worst of Heretics; only Simon Magus, Basilides, etc. did
otherwise, Sect. 7. For a full Answer, the Laws of Religion are to be ranked
under Three general Heads; They are Arbitrary and Humane, Arbitrary and Divine,
Necessary and Divine, Sect. 8. Laws Arbitrary and Humane, though never losing
their Sanction; yet cease in some Cases in the Execution. As when the Empire
gave Indulgencies beside the Canon, Sect. 9. The Civil Injunction does not
immediately oblige the Christian in these Cases. The Church has her own Power,
never to be yielded up; Ceremonies not the main thing, Sect. 10. Not to be
changed with our Clothes. That Worship which is best not to be foregone; only
to yield to what is always Necessary. The Case of the Asiaticks about Easter,
Sect. 11. Especially in our Church of England, Sect. 12. Least of all are our
Mutinies and Factions, our even weakness, a Ground for Change, Sect. 13. Laws
Arbitrary and Divine, cease in some instances, as to Practice; the Advantage of
Afflictions. A good Christian always a good Subject; the Empire still gave
Rules and Limits in the Exercise of these Positive Duties, Sect. 14. To submit
and cease as to particular Practice, upon the lawful Command of the Magistrate,
is not, the Case in Doctor Tillotson's Sermon, to give up the Institution to
him. If commanding a false Worship I am to withstand him. It Is no Hypocrisy,
though I go not into immediately, and there Preach the same in Spain. Mr.
Dean's unheard of Notion of Hypocrisy, in what Case the Magistrate is
serviceable, to promote the Faith, Sect. 15. The last sort of Laws, both
Necessary and Divine, are never to cease in any one Instance, or under what
Circumstances soever; either as to their Right or Practice. I am never to do
any one Immorality, always to own and profess the Cross of my Savior, Sect.
16. The great Goodness of God in giving such a Subordination of Duties, that
the end of each may be answered; in enjoining nothing absolutely necessary to
Heaven but what is in our Power; that no Contingencies of this World can take
from us our Eternity; a Reward we can never miss of without our own Faults,
Sect. 17.
CHAP. VI. The Contents.
The last general of the Discourse, Sect. 1. What the Authority of our
particular Church and Kingdom is in this Controversy; where not Apostolical,
and Primitive, there not obliging. Their Doctrine, Laws and Practice all along
on our side, Sect. 2. The People are only Testimonies of the Manners of such as
are to be Ordained, in our Book of Ordination, Sect. 3. No Authority in any but
those of the Priesthood, to Ordain, Excommunicate, etc. as in our Rubricks,
Articles, etc. Sect. 4. Our Kings claimed it not, in their Acts, Declarations,
etc. in the days of Henry VIII. in the Act of Submission. He is declared a
Layman, nothing in Religion made Law but by him. He defends Religion. His Power
as the Supreme, Governor of the Church. Is called Worldly and Secular, Sect. 5,
6, 7, 8. Of King Edward VI. That the Bishops were to use not their own, as
formerly, but his Name and Seal in their Processes, etc. implies no such thing.
Sect. 9. Of Queen Elizabeth. King James, Sect. 10, 11. The King and Church
distinct Powers in our Statute Book. Our Kings now have but the same Power the
Empire of old, and their Predecessors before the Reformation had. If our
Religion be Parliamentary, that anciently was Imperial, Sect. 12. Mr. Seldom
says, the Parliament of England both can, and has actually Excommunicated, and
the Bishops Power is derived only from them, Sect. 13. The Acts of Parliament
he produces, V. VI. Edw. VI. Cap. IV. III. Jacobi. Cap. V. infer it not, Sect.
14. Nor do those of II. III. Edw. VI. Cap. 1. Elizabethae Cap. II. that the
Prince limits Excommunications in the Execution, is not against the Divine
Right of them. His Instances in the Rump Parliament. Geneva. The Parliament of
Scotland, III. Jacob. VI. Cap. XLV. are all against him, Sect. 15. Archbishop
Whitgift is not proved to have Licensed Erastus his Works for the Press; that
they were found in his Study, is no Argument he was an Erastian; if Licensed by
the Authority of the Nation, no Evidence that his Doctrines were then owned.
Sect. 16. Our own Doctors of the same Opinion with us, instances in two of
them, Sect. 17. Bishop Bilson, St. Ambrose, one of Doctor Tillotson's
Hypocrites. A private Liberty of Conscience not enough, a false Religion to be
declared against, though by Authority abetted. Mr. Dean gives advantage to the
Papists Calumny, That our Religion is only that of our Prince, Sect. 18. Bishop
Sanderson, his particular Judgment concerning the Divine Right of Episcopacy.
Sect. 19. Mr. Seldom objects again, that our own Doctors and Writers are all on
the other side. The particular Authors each reckoned up. He perverts and abuses
them all, Sect. 20. The two Universities in their Opus Eximium, etc. in the
Reign of Henry VIII. 1534. altogether against him, Sect. 21. Stephen Bishop of
Winchester, Orat. de vera Obedientia, is of the same Mind, and so is Richard
Sampson, Dean of the Chapel to Henry VIII. in an Oration to this purpose.
Sect. 22. The Papers in the Cottonian Library seem the same with Dr.
Stillingsleet's M. SS. in his Irenicum. Both he and Dr. Burnet unfaithful in
the Printing of it. Dr. Durell's account of it. Archbishop Cranmer, with the
Bishops and Doctors engaged in our first Reformation were not Erastians, from
the account given of them, in his Church History, by Dr. Burnet. Less
Discretion in Printing such Papers; nor is their Authority really to be any
thing, Sect. 23. Mr. Seldom is shameless in quoting Bishop Andrews, who
determines all along against him. Those Laws that Protect the Church, must in
course inspect their Actions. The Bishop dissuaded Grotius from Printing his
Book De Imperio summarum Potestatum in Sacris. Have y' any Work for a Cooper, is
indeed of Mr. Selden's side, and the Lord Falkland. His very ill Speech in the
House of Commons, 1641. His Pulpit Law, and Derision of the Divine Right of
Kings, as well as of the Church. He, and such like Speech-makers, Promoters of
the late Rebellion, affronts both to King and Priest designed at once, when the
Crown is entitled to the Priesthood, Sect. 24. Archbishop Bancroft, Archbishop
Whitgift, and Bishop Bilson under the Suspicion of Erastianism. Accused as such
by Robert Parker de Politeia Ecclesiastica, a Malicious Schismatic, made use
of still against our Church by Dailee against Ignatius his Epistles, by Doctor
Stillingfleet in his Irenicum. Our Bishops and Doctors are not against the
Divine immutable Right of Bishops; as Doctor Stillingfleet mistook out of
Parker, and reports them to be. Satisfaction may justly be required of him for
it. Sect. 25. The Writings of the best Men, how they may be mistaken, as of
Justin Martyr. The first Council of Nice. St. Jerome concerning Chastity, and
Episcopacy. Bishop Cranmer and our first Reformers. Bishop Whitgift, Bancroft,
and Bilson. The Point was at first only the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy. A
secular title only, no Characteristical mark then betwixt the Protestant, and
Papist. The Lay Elders in their Consistory set up after this, as Popes in his
room. These our Bishops warmth was exercised against whatever indiscretion in
laying the Argument. The Power of the Prince and the Priest, are still
contra-distinguished. Kings are not Governors next and immediately under
Christ, as the Mediator. The mistake of many in their Pulpit Prayer. Our Kings
and Church do not thence derive their Power, nor so claim it in their Acts,
Statutes, Declarations, Articles, etc. in the forms of bidding Prayer, by Queen
Elizabeth and King James, etc. of ill consequence if they do. Doctor Hammond's
Authority, Sect. 26. Particular Doctors, not the Rule in Religion, The several
ways by which Error comes into the World. Julian's Plot to destroy
Christianity. How Pelagius managed his Heresy, by Rich and Potent Women, by
feigned Autorities of great Men. Liberius of Rome and Hosius, comply with
Arianism wearied with Persecutions. Theodosius his Doctores Probabiles, Cod.
16. Theodos. Tit. 1. l. l. 2, 3.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
Folio.
HErodoti Halicarnassei Historiarum Libri ix. Gr. Lat. Suarez de Legibus ac Deo
Legislatore. Bishop Bramhall's Works. Walsh's History of the Irish
Remonstrance. A Collection of all the Statutes of Ireland. Wiseman's
Chirurgical Treatises. Baker's Chronicle of England with the Continuation.
Judge Winche's Book of Entries. Skinneri Etymologieon Linguae Anglicanae. M. T.
Ciceronis Opera notis Gruteri cum Indicibus, 2. Vol. Heylyn's Cosmography in
Four Books. Mathaei Paris. Historia. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons. The Parallel,
or, the New Specious Association an Old Rebellious Covenant. A Vindication of
the Loyal Abhorrers. The Trials of the Lord Russell, etc. And, of Algernon
Sidney, Braddon and Speak, John Hamden Esquire Sir Sam. Bernardiston, Titus Otes,
the Rioters at Guildhall. Daniel's History of England with Trussell's
Continuation.
Quarto.
A Brief Account of Ancient Church Government. The true Widow, a Comedy by T.
Shadwell. Dumoulin's Vindication of the Protestant Relegion. Phocena, or the
Anatomy of a Porpess. Wroe's Sermon at Preston, Sept. 4. 1682. -- at the
Funeral of Sir Roger Bradshaigh, 1684. Allen's Sermon of Perjury. Gregory's
Works. Dodwell of Schism.
Octavo.
Dodwell's two Letters of Advice. -- Considerations of Concernment. -- Reply to
Mr. Baxter. -- Discourse of One Priesthood and One Altar. Descartes
Metaphysics, English. Evelyn of Navigation and Commerce. Wetenhall of the
Gifts and Offices in the Worship of God. -- Catechism. Langhornii Chronicon
Regum Anglorum. The French Gardener. The Country Parson's Advice. Boyle's
Noctiluca. Dodwell's two Discourses against the Romanists, 12o. Aesopi Fabulae,
Gr. and Lat. 12o.
The Author's distance from the Press has occasioned some Errors in the
Printing, especially in the Pointing; which the Reader is desired to correct,
and the following Errata.

ERRATA.
Page 10. (...) for (...), p. 21. (...) for -- (...), p. 83. l. 22. (...) for
(...), p. 109. (...) for -- (...), p. 191. (...), for -- (...), p. 262. (...)
for (...), ibid. (...) for -- (...), p. 267. (...) for (...), p. 268. (...) for
(...), p. 277. (...) for (...), p. 288. (...) for (...), ibid. (...) for (...),
p. 304. (...) for (...), p. 378. (...) for (...). [pag. 43. in for ni, p. 163.
ausa for ausus, put out non ibid. p. 181. line last, [ Tit. 45.] deest, p. 253.
conserisse for comperisse, his for hi, ibid. p. 258. Amoybeyms for Amoybeums,
p. 478. Dominum for Dominicam, p. 500. Christiani for Christi.] page 28. [une
quarte] to be put out, p. 81. l. 12. Assent for assert, p. 187. l. ult. put
out, [but to Princes something is more due then at other times,] p. 190. l. 8.
put out [which] p. 231. l. 11. belief for unbelief, p. 287. l. 18. Episcopale
for Episcopate, p. 380. l. 23. decided for derided, p. 396. l. 6. so for to, p.
440. l. 12. inroding the [Errors] for inroding the [Crown] p. 350. l. 18.
titles for tithes.

OF THE SUBJECT OF Church Power In whom it Resides. Its Force, Extent, and
Execution; that it Opposes not Civil Government in any one Instance of it.
The Introduction.
The Contents.
The Occasion of this Discourse, Sect. 1.

Not the Power and Offices of the Church, but their Subject is what mostly
exercises the Age, Sect. 2.

Whether the Power be originally, in Believers in Common, or in the Secular
Prince in Particular, or in a certain Definite Number of Believers, the Bishops
and Pastors of the Church, Sect. 3.

The Design of the Whole, and its Three General Heads, Sect. 4.

WHEN I first considered that of Thomas Hobbes in his Leviathan, Part 1. Cap.
12. Of Religion, and which is in short to this purpose in several Paragraphs
there, That every one is free upon the ceasing, or discontinuance of the
Miracle, to Supersede or Change his Religion, once attested by that Miracle to
be from God, and upon which account it was received and owned, if the change of
the Climate and his Governors, his former Education, and the present Custom of
the Place he resides in, requires; and all that other Authority and Obligation
from Heaven, obliged only for that present instant in which the Miracle was
wrought and evidenced; I with less concern passed it by, reflecting on the
Person, a Man affected with, and designing Novelty and Singularity, filled with
a Conceit of his own worth and authority, and opposing it to all the World
beside. And in particular in this Chapter, declaring himself to be such an one
that believes an extraordinary felicity a sufficient Testimony of a Divine
Calling: but going on in my Thoughts, and finding by a sad Experience that it
went further than the Scheme or Systeme, that a great part of our Age is
thereby brought into this Opinion; and it is contended for, so frequently, as
their Faith, that the Church is nothing at all; but in the State, its Powers
and Offices, though once in the Apostles, and some of their Successors, for
some time, is now gone with those Miracles, that at that time abetted and
avouched them; nor is the Gospel it self to be Preached, or divulged upon other
terms, or a fixed, enjoined, false Religion opposed; nay farther, this very
same to be the stated professed Opinions of some, and those too, our highest
dignified Churchmen, and left upon Record, as the judgment of the greatest
part, and some of them the most remarkable, of our first Reformers, that the
Prince is invested with whatever belongs to a Churchman; then was my heart hot
within me, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled, and at the last I
spoke with my Tongue, I then set my self upon a particular immediate enquiry
into the Matter, and attaining to a more perfect knowledge of that way, I here
represent it to my Fathers and Brethren of the Clergy, to all good Christians
whatever, in this following Treatise, and only state the plain case as I find
delivered down from our Savior by his Apostles, the Bishops, Fathers and
Doctors of the Church Catholic, the Church Historians, Councils and Laws
Imperial, from our own particular Church Articles, Canons, Rubricks, our Book
of Ordination, and Homilies appointed to be read in the Churches in the time of
Q. Elizabeth, from our own Doctors and Writers in Divinity, in their several
times, and from the Injunctions and Declarations of our Princes, and even the
Common Law and Statute Book of our Kingdom, the Honor and Duty I owe to my
Jesus, to his Universal Church, to this particular Church of England, to my own
Profession as a Divine, and love to all Christians, is what have engaged to it;
other advantages I have none, nor are any proposed; these Considerations alone
are they which now makes the dumb Child speak, looses the string of that Tongue
that held its peace and said nothing, and brings him into public; otherwise,
by an universal Concurrency of all things, both Persons and Objects designed
for silence and obscurity.

Seldom himself, as our great Herbert Thorndike, in his Principles of Christian
Truth, tells us, usually said in his common Discourse, That all Church Power is
an Imposture; yet his First Book De Synedriis, designed and levelled against
this Authority. Upon this alone score, because presumed in, and limited to the
Bishops and Pastors of the Church, as the Successors of Christ and his
Apostles, makes it plain, his quarrel is because so assumed and limited by
them, because transferred from the Prince or Civil Power, in whose hands alone
he believes it placed, and in those in deputation by him; and for which he
contends all along in that Book (with what Success may be seen hereafter) and
therein places the Imposture.

THERE are three distinct Orders of Men, actu Primo, virtually and by a first
inherency, to be Priest and People equally as Prince, and by the Right of
Sovereignty, as chief Magistrate upon Earth, is instructed for all Offices and
Duties in relation to Heaven, with a Power for Deputation and Devolution, as
the Harvest may be great, or the Laborers few; upon each occasion requiring,
and as he is pleased by his secular Hand to mark out the Person. The Third
place it not in the Multitude in general, or in the Prince in special; but in a
certain indefinite number of Believers, called and empowered thereunto, not by
their Gifts and Abilities as Christians in common, but by a particular signal
Donation superadded, given and left, first by Christ to his Apostles, and from
them in Succession devolved on the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, in whom
it now remains, who alone have the Power of its conveyance, and on whomsoever
it is they shall lay their hands, together with the offices of Prayer, or by
any other outward Symbol, overt Act or Testimony, which they shall use to
evidence the Deputation, transfer it unto, these shall receive this Power of
the Holy Ghost, be thoroughly enabled for the transacting betwixt God and Man,
the things that belong to Man's Eternity.



1. That this Power is not in the People or Christians in common.

2. That it is not in the Prince or Secular Government.

3. That it is in the Bishops and Pastors of the Church of Christ, a Power and
Offices peculiarly theirs, as to the execution, with its special force and
Laws, reaching to all that come to Heaven by Christ Jesus, and as not derived
from, so no ways thwarting or interfering with the Civil Government. And all
this, as suitable to the received Faith and Polity of the Church in the best
Ages of it, down from Christ and his Apostles to us ward; so it agreeing with
the particular Establishments of the Laws of our Kingdom made for the owning
and defense of our Christianity, and also with the Religion of the same
received and professed in our Church since the Reformation.

CHAP. I.
The Contents.
Church Power is not in the People, either as a Body in General, or as one
Single Congregation. Sect. 1.

This Power must first evidence it self to be given from God e're executed on,
or derived to others. Holiness in its Nature does not infer it. The Priesthood
not made Common before the Law, under it, or the Gospel. Admit that first Right
by Nature to all Things and Offices, 'twas to be sure afterward limited, and
those that lay it open again, must show by what Authority they do it. Otherwise
Fanatics in the sense of St. Jerome. Sect. 2.

The word (...) infers no such Power. Sect. 3.

The Peoples concurrency gives no Power, even where their Notes are pretended
to in the New Testament. Sect. 4.

Election and Vocation differ from Ordination, in the Practice of our Savior,
and first Ages of the Church, still expressed by several words. Sect. 5.

The Votes of the People give no Power, but yet are necessary because none is
given without them, both the People and Pastors are Christ's Vicars in the
Case. So Beza, Blondel. Sect. 6.

Our Savior's Practice and the Apostles are against them. Sect. 7, 8.

That the People were not always at Elections, Blondel allows. He is contrary
to himself. Their Votes never reputed necessary; and at last excluded quite,
Chap. 1.
by reason of the Riots and Disorders in them. Sect. 9.

The concurrency of 12 Centuries down from the Apostles, amount to a Divine
Right. Blondel's failure of it. His injury to his Friends. In what case
Apostolical. Ecclesiastical Practice is not immutable. The ill Consequences
attending his Power given to the People. His Malice to the Order of Bishops.
Disreputing Christianity it self. It Is unpardonable in the French Reformation,
imposing their present harder necessity for our pattern. The Deacon and
Presbyter under the Bishop; but neither in Subordination to the People. Sect.
10.

And this they do in point of Episcopacy also: And we must have no Bishops in
England, because they have none in France, and which is promoted by the
advantage of the Rebellion and Schism among us. Blondel offered his Service
before to the Bishops of England; but then he Prints his Apologia pro
Hieronymo, Dedicates it to the Rump Parliament, and Assembly-Men, Is nauseous
in his Flatteries of both. Commends the Scotch Covenant. Is rude upon Bishops.
Soliciting their Ruin. This the Sense of the Divines on that side the Sea.
Salmasius raves just so. The Independents murdered the King. The Bishops not
the Authors of all Heresies, as black-mouthed Baxter, Andrew Rivet, and so does
Daulee. Ignatius suffers for it. He and Marcian and Valentinus compared. Their
few Complements does not acquit them. We only lose by our Charity toward them.
The disadvantage thereby from our own Members. The late Replyer upon Bishop
Pearson and Doctor Beveridge is the same. The late Letters from Paris. Sect. 11.

The People are only Witnesses of the good life's of the Ordained. Blondel's own
Collection, and the Authority of Cyprian is all along against him. The Church
Canons. Our Ordinations at home. The nature of the thing it self. Sect. 12, 13.

The People are not to choose or refuse their Pastor, as Blondel rudely and
unreasonably contends, with his usual Malice against Bishops, and our Church.
It Is his Proposal is so fatal to Christianity. Sect. 14.

Laymen no Judges in Matters of Faith, and the Determinations of
Indifferencies. The first Council at Jerusalem. No Lay Elders. Sect. 15.

Jews, designing it, devolved guilt on the head of our Savior, deposed him
from his holy Offices, took from him his Kingly Power, when crying out with
full throats, We'll have no King but Caesar, we will not have this man to reign
over us; or their hands stretched forth in Prayer, Isai. 1. did bring a
Blessing upon themselves, when full of Blood; but on the contrary, hateful and
abomination.

SUCH as pretend to this, plead this Power gratia gratis data, and the gratia
gratum faciens, the gifts of Sanctification and Edification, as they speak, as
in their own Nature and Extent, do not reach to and imply one another, always
place themselves together in one and the same Subject, by any one Necessity
whatsoever; every man is not wise in the same degree that he is good, nor Holy
according to his Knowledge; Power and Godliness do not still go together, no
more then do all those other Gifts and Charity mentioned and dislodged by Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 12.13. the honest report of those seven Men full of the Holy Ghost
and Wisdom, did not create them thereby, and in the immediate Power and Virtue
of it, Church Officers or Deacons, till set before the Apostles, and they
prayed, and laid their hands on them, Acts 6. and so in the Consecration of all
other Orders. So neither do we find under any one Dispensation since the World
was, that by any one positive superinduced Order and Constitution, these
Landmarks were removed, that the separate Power of the Priesthood was ever laid
common, promiscuously and indefinitely placed in all Subjects, in every one in
particular, all those that either owned its Use and Power, that either pleaded
or reaped any benefit by it. Before the Law God placed it in, and limited it to
the Primogeniture, the firstborn and chief of the Family. At the first giving,
and under the Law he brought it into lesser compass, and subjected it in Aaron
and his Family in Succession. And our Savior Jesus Christ ascending upon high,
and giving his Gifts unto Men, when to plant and propagate his Church
throughout the whole World; he had rent, indeed, the Veyl of the Temple in
sunder at his Death, taken down the Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile, the
enclosure was laid open, and the Aaronical Priesthood had an end; but there was
still to be Separates for the guiding and conducting Men to Heaven, and
officiating to that end before God, a Priesthood was still to be continued,
though settled by a new Commission and of another Nature; a Power devolved and
limited to select special Persons also, and not Universal, as was to be the
Believers, And he gave some Apostles: and some, Prophets: and some,
Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ; till we
all come in the unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we
henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they
lie in wait to deceive: But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in
all things, which is the head, even Christ, from whom the whole body fitly
joined together and compacted, by that which every joint supplyeth, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
body, unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.8. -- 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? are all workers of
miracles? have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all
interpret? 1 Cor. 12.29, 30. or could we admit of that absurder, precarious
state of Nature contended for by some, supposing once an equality in all men,
and that to all things, every one as coming into the world, had a right and
title to every thing, a share and interest in each Benefit, Office and Duty,
and suitably as their Maker was to be publicly served and worshipped, so could
each one officiate in and discharge the Performance, or devolve and transfer
his right on whom he please, or as occasion; a Mistake of the Learned Hugo
Grotius himself, in his Posthumous work, De Imperio summarum potestatum in
Sacris, cap. 2. sect. 4. though the fruit of his earlier and indigested Brain;
nor is Spalatensis to be acquitted in the point, De Repub. Christ. lib. 1. cap.
12. yet all this is superseded by an after-positive Institution, and which is
acknowledged by Grotius in the fore-quoted place; and it is the appointments of
our Savior that is to be our guide and rule, especially since himself has put
a perpetual Sanction in this our very case, and to endure all along with his
Kingdom, as above, Ephesians. 4. or if the obstinacy of some, and such there are,
will still persist, and tell it out, That this enclosure was notwithstanding
this, yet made common, and the Power resolved again into the Multitude, they
are to give Evidence both of the first Translation, and after Matter of Fact,
how it so descended. Church Power, nor indeed any other, is not a private
Presumption, secretly infused, whether on a Multitude or particular Persons:
it is what was once deposited in certain hands, the effect whereof is visible,
in the Succession of Persons, deriving the Authority which they claim, from the
visible act of those Persons, that are entrusted with it. There must be some
known Era, or public visible date of its issuing out, some distinctive mark
of its coming, some outward badge of its cognizance; that the Conscientious
Enquirer may receive Satisfaction when demanding in Sincerity, what Zedekiah
the Son of Chenaanah did of Micaiah in contempt, and with reproach, Which way
went the spirit of the Lord to speak unto thee? 1 Kings 22.24. thus to ask a
sign, had been no more to tempt the Lord, then it had been in King Ahaz, had he
done it, Isai. 7. but on the contrary a Duty; and St. Jerome gives the reason
in his Commentaries on that place, Tamen jussus ut peteret, obedientia debet
explere praeceptum; therefore because God had commanded, and expects it. And
St. Jerome there goes on, and therefore compares Ahab to the Idol-Worshippers,
who are led by their own fancies, that places his Altar in the corners of the
Streets, in each Mountain and Grove, Et pro Levitis habebat Fanaticos, non vult
signum petere quod praeceptum est; for Levites take Fanatiques to officiate in
God's Worship, such as were not sent, nor called, as was Aaron; a word as old
as St. Jerome's days, in the true sense of Fanaticism, when the visible beaten
way, set out by God himself (as was the Order of the Levites) is slighted and
deserted, and they take to them Levites of their own, Temulentos and fanaticos,
nescire quid dicerent, as St. Jerome farther in his Comments on Osea, Men
drunk, but not with Wine, not able to give a reason of their Profession to him
that asks it.

NOR is there that in the Greek word to undeceive such as generally lie under
the prejudice of its perverted Signification, than in the words of our learned
Doctor Hammond in his Query of Imposition of hands for Ordination; [(...), A
word that literally signifies to stretch out, or hold up the hand; but being
used among the Heathens for choosing, or any sort of Suffrage, or giving of
Sentence; which among them in popular Judicatures or Choyces was wont to be
done by that ceremony of stretching out or lifting up hands: it is in vulgar
use among Heathens, and Jewish, but especially among Christian Writers, brought
to signify, without any respect to giving of Suffrages (indifferently whether
by one or by more) constituting or ordaining,] and of which whosoever wants farther
satisfaction, may go on in that Excellent discourse, and have it, and also in
his Annotations on Acts 14.23. I Will only add here, as the word is used but
three times in the New Testament, in none is it appliable to what they design
from it. The one place is Acts 10.41. where a multitude in voting to be sure is
excluded, for it is said only of Gods Election and Ordination of the Apostles.
The other is Acts 14.22. (...). It Is rendered, when they had Ordained them
Elders in every City. Where nothing to do sure with the Multitude, the People
or Laity. The last is 2 Cor. 8.19. and will amount to no more than the former;
and whosoever was the particular person there said to be chosen of the
Churches, the meaning can only be, That the Apostles had assigned and appointed
him to go along in that particular affair.

AND it is farther observable, that wherever any Election by Suffrage or Vote,
is Matthias, Acts 1. (...), Communibus calculis annumerabatur, by common
Consent, Votes and Suffrage, he was added to that Number, to the Eleven
Apostles, i. e. the whole Multitude, the Hundred and twenty Disciples, or
Believers, all concurred in the choice and assignation; and which if granted,
though it needs not be, yet nothing is gained on their side, for that which
constituted and gave Matthias his Portion in the Ministry, and which Barsabas
had not, though he had his first Appointment by the whole Society as well as
he, was the lot falling upon him, by which God, not they are said to choose
him, i. e. to delegate unto, and invest him with the Order and Power of an
Apostle, by the sensible Medium or Determination by lots; and this the Prayer
makes plain. And they prayed and said, Lord, thou which know the hearts of
all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen, that he may take part of
this Ministry and Apostleship, from which Judas, by transgression fell, that he
might go unto his own place; and they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell
upon Matthias, and he was numbered among the eleven Apostles. They all with one
accord acknowledged him a Man separate for the Ministry. Another Ordination we
find Acts 6. though to a much lower Office and Order in the Church, when the
Seven Deacons received their first Constitution; where it is plain, the Apostles
called the Multitude together, told them the occasion of the designed Order,
such the People were to look out the Men, and see and enquire that they be sit
for the present Office, and so they did, they chose Stephen and Philip, etc.
but it follows, when they had done so, they set them before the Apostles, who
were to give them the Power designed, to accept and invest them; And when the
Apostles had prayed, they laid their hands on them: where the Multitude are
allowed to choose, and here they might have an especial reason for it; for
their Estates in part, so much as was assigned for the Poor, was to be
entrusted in their hands, and good reason that they approved of their personal
Integrity; yet had they not Power to constitute in the lowest degree of the
Priesthood; it is the Apostles alone who had received the Power from on high,
and on whose Persons it was enstated, could, and did, do it. And whatever Beza
supposes at the Ordination made by Barnabas and Paul, that they had the
joynt-suffrages of the People in order to it, Acts 14.23. and which he does in
the same precarious way, in all the Ordinations we meet with in Scripture,
though the Apostles and Presbyters are still alone mentioned, as here, yet it is
evident that they were the hands of Paul and Barnabas that were laid on them,
as of the Presbytery in other places, and by which, not the Votes and Elections
of the People, at least not without them, were the Ordinations performed; it is
not to be sure in the Believers in common to do it.

THAT not only Election, but Vocation, Andrew and Peter, etc. then elected and
chose them into the number of the Twelve; yet all this while, whatever of Power
was given in the mean time, the full to be sure and complete Power of an
Apostle was not given to any one of them, that was not devolved and
transmitted, till after his Ascension, and then only they received that Power
by the Holy Ghosts coming upon them at the Feast of Pentecost, Acts 2. and the
same has been the Sense and Practice of the succeeding Church in all Ages, that
the People had Votes in the choice of Bishops, all must grant, and it can be
only Ignorance and Folly that pleads the contrary; but this never was thought
to create the Bishop, and he must be as ignorant and stupid on the other side
that believes it, and run as cross to the practice of all Antiquity, that was
still the Clergies Province alone, the Work of Ordination; nor are the People
pleaded or ever mentioned to have a share in it: and though (...) be sometimes
used for Election and Choice. So Balsamon upon the first Canon of the Apostles,
and it is used at the entrance of Deaconesses by Justinian, Novel 3. 6. cap. 6.
and Hugo Grotius gives us many more instances of the like Natures, De Imperio
sum. Potest. in Sacris, cap. 10. sect. 6. yet when strictly speaking, it is
defined by Zonaras upon that first Canon, (...), and it is appropriated to the
Bishop, when stretching forth his Hand in the Office of Consecration; or when
Praying over the Person to be Ordained, and invoking the Holy Ghost, as by
(...) is farther declared, ibid. and so strict is Zonaras in this his
limitation of the Word, and its use to Ordination, that when speaking of the
assignation of under Church Officers, as Readers, Singers, etc. he changes it
into (...), using the former in the Ordination only of those of the Priestly
Catalogue, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and which he only Copies out of the
Church-Canons; as Can. 2. Council. 4. Genesis Chalced. Can. 6. and 14. Council. 6.
in Trullo, and the first Council of Nicea has still held to the distinction
betwixt Election and Ordination, and expresses them by several words; the
former by (...), the latter by (...), in the fourth Canon. And so again in the
sixth Canon, the care is the same of confounding these two, so far as the use
of different words will do it, (...) is the word used for the Power and Acts of
the People; and (...) of the Bishop; and which Zonaras there Paraphrases by
(...), none of which was ever assumed by the People or Laity, and the same
distinction is retained betwixt (...) and (...) by Aristenus in Can. 10. Sancti
Basilii ad Amphilochium apud Pandect. Can. Beverig. Socrates in his Church
History, lib. 1. cap. 9. uses different words but with the same design, and is
clearer yet, if possible, in the distinction; the Power of the People he speaks
of and expresses by (...), a word very fit and apt to prove the Primitive
Custom of Election preceding, the Act and Office of the Bishop, by (...),
laying on his hands upon the Consecrated; and so it generally goes on betwixt
the Clergy and the People, in the Offices of Ordination, the People choosing,
the Bishop consecrating, the Emperor assenting, and so also is the business of
laying on of hands still appropriated to the Bishop, not only as excluding the
Presbyter, who has not the Power, but also the People, as it is over and over
again in the Church Story, and which to transcribe were needless; the People
give nothing of that Power, about which we are discoursing, and is supposed in
those in Holy Orders.

AND to this all agree, that admit of the of the People in the constituting a
Churchman? And this say some, in the same order of necessity as the
Concurrency of the Clergy; that although the Suffrages of the People do not
confer and collate Church Power apart and solitary, and where the hands of the
Presbytery is not; yet the Presbytery cannot do it without them, it is neither
legal, just, nor duly performed if so attempted, something is wanting, not only
for outward Attestation, but for the real translation of Authority on the heads
of the Ordained. Thus Theodore Beza is express, Ordinatio seu impositio manuum,
certe nullos proprie creat ministros; sed legitime vocatos seu electos,
adhibitis precibus, mittit in sui muneris possessionem. De ministerii grad.
cont. Saraviam cap. 22. That Ordination or Imposition of Hands properly creates
no Ministers, but by Prayers, gives such as are called or elected (he means by
the People, as it is every where to be seen in his Writings) Possession of their
Office, a kind, it seems, of Mandate for induction, to what they had a right
before by another Hand collated. And David Blondel, the most Industrious of the
Presbyterian Order, in his Apology Pro Hieronimo, spends many Pages in the
latter end of that Treatise, in giving the Practice of the Church for Ten
Centuries, admitting this Power of the People in Ordinations, and that they
have equal right thereto, and are alike constituted by Christ, his Vicars in
the case, with the Clergy, Laicos fratres, equo cum clero jure, Christi hac in
part vicarios constitutos, page 471. and upon which he fixes a Divine right
immutable, and indispensable; and what Ordinations were made during these
Centuries, without the Peoples Choice, Suffrages and Approbations preceding,
aberrationes fuisse statuamus, page 542. ibid. were Anomala's, and Aberrations
from the Rule, for Correction, not Imitation. My design is not to examine all
the little Arguments Blondel there produces, or the numerous Quotations he
brings, it were tedious and to no purpose, because most of them are so, his
Zeal and Industry outrunning his Judgment, as throughout the whole Apology.
What is Truth and to be adhered unto, I shall as briefly and plainly as I am
able, lay down in the following Conclusions taking the liberty of Reflection, as
occasion.

THAT there is no Practice, much less Blondel in part grants, but first
insinuates, that it might be otherwise, though secret and not declared, and
then positively affirms that it was so, upon a bottom equally precarious;
because the Apostles practiced and delivered to us what they copied from
Christ, who still called in the whole Fraternity and required their Votes in
each Ordination, and thought themselves in Duty so obliged, Page 475. and which
how far true, and to what purpose, that it is no ways to the advantage of
Blondel's design, is already considered.

Timothy and Titus, on purpose wrote by St. Paul to instruct them in these like
Affairs of the Church, as to the Polity of it, that they might know how to
behave themselves in the Church of God, as he tells Timothy in particular,
1.3.15. where it is notoriously evident, that the Peoples Votes are no more
required to the constituting a Bishop or Deacon, then that their Hands are
there actually laid upon them. That the Hands of the Presbytery did consecrate,
we read expressly, and we read of none else; and such the Presbytery, Timothy
and Titus, have the alone Charge and Power delegated, to Inspect and Animadvert
upon their Life's and Manners, to receive or reject as their Prudence directs;
the Clergy are sole Judges, it is not required, that the People, so much as
present; every particular Man's inward desire, and private Motions (supposing
other due qualifications concurring) made known to such whose is the Power for
ordaining, seems sufficient, if any man desire the Office of a Bishop, 1 Timothy
3.1. and that these Epistles are to be followed, as the pattern in the Mount,
the Platform and Model of Church Government, these Men strenuously plead at
other times; and those other instances of Ordinations in Scripture brought by
Blondel, conclude nothing more. In that of Matthias, there is no such thing
express at all; the Believers being few -- were all together in one place, and
they were necessitated so to be; but that they otherwise concurred then by
their presence; or that St. Peter's Speech was directed to them and not to the
Apostles only, is not thence to be inferred; that in Acts 6. was chiefly, he
says only; to provide Deacons to look after their Poor; and good reason was
there, the People should approve of such in whose hands their Moneys was to be
deposited; nor can any inference be hence made on his side, unless the
consequence be good, that such as are fit and able to choose and depute in
whose hands their Money shall be entrusted, are for the same reason, instructed
to Skill and choose their Teachers; or that we set a lower price on men's Souls,
than we do on their Money; because we can allow the Laity to provide for the
latter; but we think there ought to be better provision made, and more care
taken for the former. What is argued farther from the parity of the Call and
Consecration of Aaron, Heb. 5. is full levelled against himself; where to be
sure all concurrency of the People was excluded, in every respect whatever.

WE'll go on from Scripture-instances to concur in Ordinations? but did they
always concur? He dares not say this, but he believes not above Ten Ordinations
to be made otherways, Page 541. which he supposes to be failures, and to be
occasioned by the inseparable accidents of the Church Militant; but no rules
for Succession. Though, by the way, it is the chief design of the Apology it
self, by fewer Examples, indeed not one, but what is by him industriously
forced and perverted, to cut off the Chain, and overthrow the concurrent
Testimony of all Ages in the point of Episcopacy; such is his slavery to his
present Cause. But such as consult Antiquity, and the Ordinals of Churches
impartially, and which we have reason to believe he never did, will find more,
and no one of them censured as failures; that Elections and Nominations were
made otherwise, and that oftener, than in his form. At least many times,
sometimes by the Emperors without the People, sometimes by the Emperors and
People, sometimes by the Emperor, Clergy, and People, sometimes by the Clergy
without either; and this in very good times of the Church, as instances are
every where in Church-Story; and particularly, that it is not inseparable from
the People, and but by Permission, and upon occasion, otherwise their Votes are
to be overruled, appears from the many Laws made by the Emperors, limiting
what Persons are to be Ordained, and what not, 16. Cod. Theodos. Tit. 2. Lex.
3. l. 19.32, etc. Sozomen. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 13. And if it be admitted, what
Melitius and his followers objected against Paulinus, That his Ordination was
not as it ought to be, because without the consent of all the People; as in
Sozomen, Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 13. yet the Ordination was not hereby voided, and
we have a certain Authority on the other side, and much about the same time too;
it is the 13th Canon of the Council of Laodicca, which expressly forbids, that
the Election of such as are to be Ordained be at all in the People, a certain
Argument that the Church placed it at the most under the head of indifferences,
what occasion and circumstances might enjoin or null, receive or reject;
otherwise it could not thus become limitable by Custom, or the Subject of
different Laws Ecclesiastical; and at last the numerous and turbulent Meetings
on the occasion of Ordinations and Factions in giving their Votes, even to
Riots and Tumults, to Bloodshedding and Murder, forced that the People were
excluded quite, and general Laws to that purpose were made, prohibiting their
appearance at such times, Quamdiu in Ecclesia Plebs partem habuit in Episcopis
and Presbyteris legendis, nunquam discordiis and factionibus civitates caruere,
donec res ipsa and pax Ecclesiarum docuit, Plebi hoc jus ademptum,
Magistratibus and Clericis relinqui primo debere, quod postea soli sibi Clerici
vindicabant. So Blondel's own Friend Salmasius gives account, and an end of the
Elections by the People, Defensio. Regia, cap. 7. And it may be farther
observed, that amongst the many Cautions and Restrictions concerning
Ordinations, the several Rules and Instances given, by and for which, they are
rendered void, and nulled if against or wanting in either, abundance of which
are to be found; as, That every Bishop is to be Consecrated by three other
Bishops, Can. 1. Apostol. That the Metropolitan be always one, or with his
leave, Can. 4. Conc. 1. Nic. Can. 19. Conc. Antioch. Can. 12. and Can. 6. une
quarte Genesis Conc. Chalcedon. That no foreign Ordinations are valid, Can. 2.
Conc. Constantinop. unless in those Churches in Heathen Countries, and no
Bishop is settled, or in case of Persecution. Sozom. Eccl. Hist. cap. 9. If a
Bishop deserts his Diocese, Can. 3. Council. Ephesians. Genesis All Ordinations
procured by Money, Can. 29. Apost. and Can. 2. Council. 4. Genesis Chalcedon. That
it be not by Secular Powers, Can. 30. Apost. If made only by Presbyters, as in
the Case of Colluthus, Athanas. Apol. page 784. 792. In case of some known and
notorious Scandal which the Bishop that ordained then lay under, Athanas. Ep.
ad Solitar. vitam agentes. In some Cases of Heresy in the Ordainer, 16. Cod.
Theodos. Tit. 5. Lex. 12.14.57. Yet amidst these and such like (...), illegal
Ordinations and defective, complained of by Eusebius, which were during the
Persecution of Dioclesian in his twelfth Chapter, De Martyribus Palestinae, and
against which the Church still provided for the future; there is no one Caution
concerning Ordinations by the People, such a thing being never presumed and
attempted, nor is there any one instance of but voiding any one Ordination that
was made without their but Votes, and Hands lift up, and concurring in order to
it, and which certainly there would have been, had the Church adjudg'd their
pre-elections or concurrency so necessary, especially upon so many failures; as
David Blondel acknowledges there were, one of which was enough to have awakened
the Church-Governors to alike care they used on such Occasions, or had she but
placed their concurrency with those but Circumstantials, of Orders, many of
which are just now mentioned, and the Church there made particular provision
relating to them.

SO that David Blondel's design of a Divine Magistrate, and limited to the
Bishops, Can. 3. Council. Sept. Genesis Niceae. and it may be much questioned,
whether his Brethren and Friends both in France, and Holland, and England;
especially such of them as have took up the Cudgels after him, have more reason
to be ashamed of his ill Success, then to be downright angry with him for the
Way and Method and Grounds he laid for proving the Divine and immutable right
of it. Surely if this be admitted, the disadvantage will be their own, in a
point of a higher concern, if Apostolical Ecclesiastical practice still amount
to a Divine immutable Law. And indeed it would be of real ill consequence, in
many considerable cases that would arise in the true Church of Christ; for
although the matter of Fact be evident, it has been received and practiced in
the Churches first and best Ages; yet it may be a doubt what the Obligation was
to them who then received it, and whose practice it was? whether as absolute
and immutable, and consequently, how it now reaches us? every Truth and Matter
of Fact, has not the same degree of Necessity in its Nature and Use, nor do his
Brethren more go against him here, than he against himself; I might refer to
his own Text, but the Irenicum has done it before me, ( p. 401.) joining him
with Bochart, and Amiraldus in the cause, of which his Triumvirate, as he calls
them, Blondel is there placed in the head, and all to make good that one great
Truth, by their Authority, which is vast and unquestionable, (and to defend
which is the great business of that Treatise of Church Government; nor has that
Author as yet declared his Judgment to be otherwise, or rather corrected that
his first and early Mistake there obtruded on the World) to pass a perpetual
Sanction upon it. That no form of Government or Polity in the Church is
immutable, though by the Apostles themselves recommended; and yet Apostolical
practice is here binding and eternal ( page 473. Apol.) and the Power of the
People is thus transmitted from Heaven, as the alone House and Pedigree of its
descent, and so immutably is it stablish'd, that no accident or ill
circumstance whatever, or with what ill consequences soever foreseen and
foreknown, no consideration of the Peoples ignorance, even duncery it self ( at
eos omnes, non modo imperitos sed and imperitissimos demus, page 501.) no
miscarriages or other seeming inconsistencies, are to be considered, or can
they weigh down against the Eternal antecedent Command, either abolish the
Power, or cease; but alter, in but one instance, the custom and practice of
their Votes and Elections to the Office of the Ministry, nothing can remain but
for common Prudence, for all was known at first to our Savior, whence the
Apostles received it, to the succeeding Church, who left no such reserve,
allowed not to us (nor have we reason to take it ill, for they did not to
themselves) any such Considerations ( page 51, 52.) and what Exceptions there
have been to this first and great Rule, as he tells us there was some few,
arose from the Pride and Usurpations of the Bishops, who so soon as they had
taken to themselves Titles and Power above the Presbyters, they engrossed the
Right of Ordaining them, and never required the concurrency of the Clergy, and
the People, spurred on by Fame, and Vainglory, and Secular Interest; and that
is the reason why there is no Canons express, and very few examples of the
Peoples choosing Presbyters and Deacons. Nor does it in the original right
diminish their Power, because wrested from them, ( page 469, 470.) and all
which is one, among the many Fictions and Romances, the whole Apology is
stuffed withal, and every ways like himself, who, according to his usual good
Nature, and Malice to the Order it self, still lays what dirt he can at the
doors of the most eminent Christians, the Bishops and Prelates of the Church of
Christ, not considering, or, rather not caring, what injury the common
Christianity thereby receives, through the sides of these its known Martyrs and
Confessors, so be he can but fill up his private Congregation; a guilt not
easily to be removed from too many of the French Reformation, especially from
Dailee in his Book of the Use of the Fathers; and the abundance of Irreligion
in general, in these parts of the World ows it self in a great measure to it.
And to see the unluckiness of it, and how his ill Nature returns unavoidably
upon himself, what he attributes to the Bishops Pride and Arrogance, and
Selfinterest, in assuming and engrossing to themselves a Power which was not
theirs, that they ordained Presbyters and Deacons without the People and
Clergy, that the dependency of both might be the surer upon them, and certainly
be their Slaves and Vassals, and which is the invidious design of his whole
Book, how easily is it all returned on his own pate? and to what else can any
one impute this his clawing with and condescending to the People to be, but his
own, and the other of his Brethrens dependence upon them, as it is at this day
in France? and it is wholly in the Power of the Congregation, both to Vote in,
and Eject their Minister at pleasure, to bestow what Maintenance upon them
their Wisdom directs; nor is it at all in the Power of the Clergy, as things
are now with them, straightened by the Civil Sword, to avoid or amend it; to
them indeed, in their circumstances, the good-liking and choice of the People
are necessary, otherwise they must change the Climate, their Churches and
Ministry must cease and fall together. And this I say, not to insult over and
upbraid them, for their case in general is really to be pitied; but thus do
outward accidents imbody themselves, and become as of the real Substance; and
too many Models and Systems, and Professions have some regard, too much
yielding and compliance with them; this one thing does it generally need a
Pardon, and to them in particular it cannot easily be granted, it may with
great justice be called their Pride and Usurpation, that what is their own
unavoidable Necessity; what the frowns and injuries of their Native Country
they live in, the want of Countenance and Protection from the Prince, and of a
due Provision by Laws, and which in reason ought to be otherways, lays upon
them, this they will obtrude upon us, upon all Churches, as the Pattern upon the
Mount, the Platform, not to be deviated from, every ways to be copied out, upon
no less a peril than the breach of an antecedent immutable Law, an Institution
from Heaven. What ought to be their care to represent as fairly as they can,
they magisterially command; other Churches are condemned for not obeying, a
fault the Churches of the French Reformation are no ways to be acquitted of.
That there is a Subordination among Clergymen, and a dependence as on one Head
and Superior in the several degrees of the Priesthood, this is most certain,
it is bottomed on as good and known Authority as our Religion it self, and which
will be made to appear by and by in this Treatise, though not as the business
of it. The Deacon is a Minister or Servant to the Bishop, and both Presbyter
and Deacon receive their Power and Deputation from him; but in any other sense
we own no Head or Master, Servants, Ministers we are but of God and Christ, of
the Gospel which we minister unto them, of which we are Stewards for their
advantage and relief, dispensing to every man his Portion, ministering in our
courses, as the Angels in theirs, for the good of all, a faithful Minister of
Christ for you; so the Apostle, Colos. 1.23. and in this alone consists our
(...) or (...), the work of our Ministry, and attendance at the Altar. Thus we
are to the People, as Governors, Rulers, Instructers, Teachers, and which last
Office, allowed us by all; so immediately implies Superiority and Prelation,
that it alone will not let us be their Servants, as Autorized and Commissioned,
empowered by and in Deputation from them.

NOR is this David Blondel's disingenuity, French Churches, an equality is now
fixed and settled among them; and in order to the surer, certain, compassing it
in our Church of England, they took the opportunity of a present Schism and
Defection from our present Bishops, abetted and heightened by a prosperous
Rebellion; they even insult over us as men that were down, and to rise up no
more; they pursue us as a vanquished Enemy, look upon the iron as red hot and
to be stricken, and their Presbyterian Model to be erected in our Kingdom, as
that Image once fallen from Heaven. To this purpose comes upon the Stage their
Triumviri, Blondel, Salmasius, and Dailce, Men thoroughly instructed by a vast
and unwearied Industry and Reading, and which they perverted to render
Episcopacy less acceptable, not to say odious in the World, as the effect of
Innovation and Ambition, contrary to the designs of Christ, and the Practice of
the Church in the best Ages of it; and herein their proficiency and advancement
was not inconsiderable, considering the badness and difficulty of their cause,
what St. Jerome has observed of Heretics in and before his time, in his
Comments on the First Chapter of Amos; Omnes enim Haeretici labor nimio ac
dolor quaerendi, ordinem aliquem and consequentiam heraeseos suae reperire
conati sunt, is evident in them, through abundance of toil and sore labor,
making pretense of Order, shows of Antiquity and Consequences, to advance and
effect it. And Blondel goes in the Front, or at least, has merited to be placed
there, with his renowned and much gloried in Apology Pro Hieronymo, which he
says he kept by him Three years, ready for the Press; but did not Print it by
reason of the Wars in England, or rather till the King and Church were both
ruined, easily then presuming of a fairer reception, and which Book it is more
than probable, he then Digested and Composed, when his offered Service to write
quite the other way, and in the Defense of our Episcopacy established in this
Church, was tendered to that great Prelate and Martyr of Blessed Memory
Archbishop Land, but rejected: what were the Reasons moving the Wisdom of that
excellent Prelate to refuse him, I cannot tell; he might suspect his Integrity,
or judge it less for the Honor of our Church, on purpose to imply a Foreigner
in the managery and defense of what is so near, and of so great a concern to
us; and he might not think the concurrency of one or two Doctors of the French
Reformation, so considerable, or perhaps of any weight, to turn the Scale for
or against the famous Church of England, as it now appears they are reputed, he
could not suspect his through Instructions and Ability for it; and that the
former mostly sweigh'd the wonted Sagacity of that excellent Person, giving him
no small Grounds for it, will appear, if we go on, and find him dedicating That
his Book Vniversis Dei optimi Maximi servis, occidente toto, maxim vero per
Britannias, ad Christiani populi Ecclesiasticum and Politicum regimen vocatis;
To the Houses of Parliament and Assembly at Westminster, both Usurpers; the one
of the Regal, the other of the Episcopal Power, whom they had Assaulted both
with Sword and Pen, to their then present Abolition, and whom he slatters with
the specious Titles of Supporters both of Church and State, Vobis viri maximi
in quos Ecclesia and Respublica inclinate recumbum, Britannorum (...), the
Choice Men and Supreme in our Land, Quibus inco^^um est generoso pectus
honesto; and for Episcopacy it self, (besides the whole Design of the Book
which is laid against it) he places it for time and quality with those first
Heresies which infested the Church, those Antichrists which were then in the
World, both in St. Paul's Epistles, and in St. John's, and in the Revelations,
with those Heretics that deny the Monarchy of God, and the Incarnation of
Christ Jesus, and that it was by Diotrephes devolved to after-ages, by
degenerate Men, who regarded not the institution from God, Per degeneres
plurimos, divinaeque originis immemores propagatum, by such only as consult
Ambition, to whom the Apostolical Humility enjoined by our Savior, was tedious
and nauseous; men affecting Tyranny and Usurpation against St. Peter's
monition, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Obtaedium Apostolicae humilitatis quam praecepit
affectantes Tyrannidem, etc. He approves the Scottish Covenant, and their
bringing it into England, fortissimum Communis concordiae pacisque vestrae
vinculum, as the most effectual way for Peace and Concord; of which Covenant
one part of its second Article is this, To endeavor the Extirpation of
Prelacy, i. e. Church Government, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and Exhorts
them by their Loyalty and Obedience to their Prince, to quit and vindicate
themselves of that Aspersion of Rebels they lie under, and through them may be
cast upon all Protestants, Christiana modestia pacificisque consiliis,
perpetuisque fidelis vestrae in regiam Majestatem observantiae exemplis,
asperas voces refellite; that the World convinced by Experience may confess,
that it is neither true now, nor ever shall be necessary, No Bishop, no King;
and that the one may be admitted and supported without the other, Fateaturque
continuis experimentis evictus orbis, nec verum nunc nec necessarium esse, vel
fuisse unquam, qui aegre Episcopos ferunt, aegrius reges serre, qui nullos
admittunt, nec regiam potestatem ex animo admittere, and assures them of the
concurrency of the Protestant Churches on their side the Sea, who have often
wished to see their own Simplicity in Government, to be restored and settled
among them, quam Disciplinam a cismarinis Protestantibus praeoptatam, etc. and
all which is to be seen, and more, by whosoever pleases to read over but his
Preface to the Apology. Claudius Salmasius goes the same way, or worse, if
worse can be; he argues indeed for the Episcopacy in England, because continued
with the Reformation, and what prevented many Pestiferous Sects, which after
the Seclusion of Bishops arose, Quod quamdiu fuerat Episcopatus, mill
pestiferae Sectae and Haereses in Anglia pullularunt. Praefat. ad Defens.
Regiam; and aggravates it against the Independents, whom he supposes to have
Murdered the King, and removed the Bishops without his Assent, Defens. page
358. it seems it was concluded in France what Party brought the King to Death;
nor did they then believe the Bishops to be the Authors of all the Heresies in
the Christian World. Though Mr. Baxter tells us, It is not agreed here in
London, and that all Heresies sprang thence, in that his black Book, called
Church History abbreviated; then which, a Lucian has not been more rude, in his
language and scurrilous Imputations to our common Christianity; and all Parties
of but common apprehension, that read that his Book or hear of it, must agree
that he is indeed a Hater, as he in the Title Page terms himself; but not of
false History, but of the truth of Christian Religion; to the baffling of
which, representing it effectually to the Age, inclined enough to believe it,
as a Cheat and Imposture, what more could have been done, then by exposing, in
that odious way, so many Successions of the Bishops and acknowledged Governors
in the Church, the most eminent Professors there, and the great part of them,
to the Stake, and with their Blood? by such Follies and Impertinencies many
times, but oftener, by heavier guilts, reported of them, the Author's Impudency,
and his Falsities as to Matter of Fact, has already been given to the World by
an Ingenious Hand; and nothing but a decay of Discipline and Government in the
Church, can hinder that a farther censure does not follow, his Person be not
equally pursued, and he publicly Excommunicated the Body of Christians.
Perhaps James Naylor did not more deserve to have his Tongue bored through. But
to return to our Friend Walo, who in Comparison to Mr. Baxter is so indeed; but
his Spleen was now but low, it swells and grows bigger at other times, and our
Bishops are then its object, he speaks out in other places, he says, so long as
Episcopacy remains, which is the foundation and root of Papacy, little or
nothing is done; to cut off the Head is not enough, Quamdiu remanebat
Episcopatus, qui tanquam basis est ac radix Papatus, nihil am parum proficeret,
qui solum caput resecaret. App^rat. ad lib. de Primatu, page 169, 70. And he
goes to the same purpose, Page 197. that those Commonwealths or Kingdoms,
which have received the Reformation, Sworn against the Roman, both Court and
Church, and where there is now no Papacy; for what reason they can desire to
retain Episcopacy, he does not see, the Reformation seems not whole and full,
which is in that part defective; and that Episcopacy is become a degree above a
Presbyter, he imputes to the corrupt Manners, to Ambition and desire of Honor,
and to other evil Arts, and depraved Minds of Men, Walo. Messal. de Episcop.
and Presbyt. cont. Petavium, Dissert. cap. 6. and suitably did he lay his
design, and he did not think he could write to the purpose against the Primacy
of the Pope, without that his tedious and nauseous Apparatus or Preface,
levelled against the Government of the Church by Bishops, and indeed against
Church Government in general, (so unhappy were still those Men in their Plots
against Rome) as there will be occasion further to consider in this Discourse,
and which make up that bulky Volume the World is enriched withal, and to all
which Andrew Rivet has subscribed, applauding Salmasius in this particular and
according with him, and thinks it Crime enough in Grotius, that he differs from
him, Grotianae Discuss. (...), Sect. 1. 16. John Dailee his rage is nothing
less, but rather more this way; and so is his industry too, that eminent Martyr
Ignatius is discarded and turned out of the Catalogue of Church-Writers for
Asserting in so plain and positive words the Divine perpetual Right of
Episcopacy, and indispensable Subjection and Obedience of all Christians to
their Power and Jurisdiction, that all his profuser Criticisms and conjectural
Triflings cannot make a Pretense against, any ways bafflle or evade him; and
therefore his Epistles are rejected as spurious and counterfeit, are Condemned
to the Fire, as the Holy Martyr himself was to the Beasts; and which he
endeavors more than to Martyr, to annihilate, passes his Sentence of perpetual
oblivion and forgetfulness against them. So Heretics of old dealt with the
Scriptures themselves. Marcion blotted out with his Pen and wholly crased what
he could not evade or deny, what he could not by his Style and Expositions
overthrow, Machera non stylo usus est; as Tertullian tells us in his Book of
Prescriptions against Heretics, cap. 19. whereas Valentinus, another Heretic,
there spoke of; Non ad materiam Scripturas, sed materiam ad Scripturas
excogitavit, blotted not out, but brought the Scriptures to himself,
Proprietates verborum auferens, wresting and perverting of them; and which of
the two, took from, and really did more violence to the Scriptures, there is no
occasion at present to enquire; though Tertullian gives it to the latter; for
the Person we at present have to deal with, is guilty of both. Those two
notorious Heretics seem to survive in him at once, nor has he with less tricks
of words, evaded the sense of him and others, then with a resolved Contumacy,
at last quite blotted out the Writing of that most Holy and Apostolical Person;
nor will it abate much of his guilt, or can I be much accused in making the
Parallel betwixt him and two such notorious Heretics, and whose Objects were
the Scriptures themselves; for the Method is as natural, and the same Hand and
Pen is equally ready for the one as the other, and the Canonical Epistles
themselves have had the same usage, as had by him these of Ignatius, when
standing in the way, and this by some of his own design and complexion. And how
he has dealt with our own Church in particular, and much after the same
Nature, in many things not distinguishing her Practices, from the depraved
usages of Rome, and particularly in Point of Government, by Archbishops,
Metropolitans and Bishops, is to be seen in his Book De Cultu Romanorum; and
has been lately observed and reported to the World by a most Faithful and
Learned Hand in another Language. I cannot say, but sometimes, even these very
Men appear more civil toward us, and pass upon us high and mighty Complements,
and their Practice is not so rude as their Determinations are rigorus upon us;
nor do they approve our unruly Dissenters and Peace-breakers in point of
Government, though their Documents and Principles such our home-Schismaticks,
receive and Copy out from them, and whose Authority we are still urged withal;
though what they would do, were they as secure, as Blondel thought himself in
1646. when he dedicated his Apology to the then Rebellious Parliament, and
Assembly-men, is another question; what manner of Spirit his was then, has been
already declared; and what personal Aspersions, and loads of Calumnies he laid,
as upon the Cause it self, so upon the present Bishops, will appear from that
often-forced Apology of our learned Doctor Hammond, for their Innocence and
Integrity, in his Answer to him, Dissert. 1a contra Blondel, cap. 12. sect. 22.
In haec unica Hierarchicorum doctrina adeo totum Antichristum ebibisse
censeatur, ut in hoc unum erroris Pelagus alia omnia Acherontis ostia se
effudisse, aut quidquid in illius Seculi Ecclesia peccatum ab Haereticis fuit,
illud statim in Episcopis hujus aevi puniendum videatur; or whether it may
return again, God knows: All the Progress we have made yet, seems to be but
this; we have and still do pity and bemoan that state of theirs, as sad and to
be lamented, which they have, and do still account their Gospel-Simplicity, and
Perfection, Plead that Necessity for them, which they deny and wilfully persist
in, which provokes back again, only their Pity for us, not to say their Scorn
and Contempt; for so it has by some of them been returned upon us, and by the
most favorable we are beheld as well-meaning, but ignorant men; so Gersom
Bucer plainly tells Bishop Dounham, in his Answer to the Sermon, Page 594. our
own Pleas and Arguments, by Compliance and Condescensions to and for them is
managed and retorted upon our selves; and not by them only, but, and which is
the greater disadvantage has come to us by it, by our own Members, and within
the Pale of our Communion, and the great popular prevailing Argument, that
Episcopacy is not Essential to Church Government, is this, because our Charity,
hopes and concludes the best of them; that God's Mercy through their sincerity
and upright meaning, may supply the defect they are under, and endeavoring all
we can to justify them, we have been disabled to justify our selves: This
has been the plain case all along with us; the words of our Learned Bishop
Tailor are apt to this in his Treatise called Episcopacy Asserted, Sect. 32.
and may not unduly be here inserted, For we were glad at first of Abettors
against the Errors of the Roman Church; we found these Men Zealous in it, we
thanked God for it (as we had cause) and we were willing to make them
recompense, by endeavoring to justify their Ordinations, not thinking what
would follow upon our selves; but now it is come to that issue, that our
Episcopacy is thought not necessary, because we did not condemn the Ordinations
of their Presbytery. And even at this day, after so through a debate by Monsieur
Dail^e and Bishop Pearson, they may have abated somewhat of that rigorous
Practice in France, that just now named learned Bishop in that his Treatise,
tells us was once in use amongst them, That if any one returns to them, they
will re-ordain him by their Presbytery, though he had before Episcopal
Ordination; and for which he refers us to Danaeus, Part 2. Isagog. lib. 2. cap.
22. Perron. Repl. fol. 92. Impress. 1605. but the result on their side is only
this, and it is no further than Beza and Gersom Bucer had gone before,
insalubrior est, as Bucer speaks, in his Answer to Bishop Downham's Sermon,
Page 18. 255. 6. and tells us, That the same is the opinion of Beza, it is less
advantageous, that our Government, though but a mere Humane Invention, is what
may be born with; its yoke may be endured, by those that are under it, Et
quamvis Episcoporum eminentiam supra Presbyteros Institutionis esse mere
humanae firmissi^^ redam, praestat tamen meo judicio regimen illud Episcopale
patienter far, etc. So the late Replyer to Bishop Pearson, and Doctor
Beveridge, Dailee the Son, as it is thought, Observat. in Ignatianas Pearsonis
Vindicias, in (...); and after all their gilded Phrases, Pompous words, and
higher Eulogies, I never could find that any one of them ever has given us any
more; the late two Printed Epistles from Paris, I am sure, do not. But I cease
here, and return to my first Subject.

Justinian the Emperor's days, Novel. 6. cap. 1. Vt dicat si noverit an
Ordinandus conscius sit illicitorum, and de quibus inquisitio Public est
facienda; to declare what he knew of the Person to be Ordained, and as enquiry
shall be made of him, Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be Partaker of
other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. The meaning is, that Timothy proceed not in the
Execution of Church Power, or of his Episcopal Office, but with deliberation,
upon a just search and enquiry, a due information in all Circumstances, that
every thing be as it ought; otherwise he partakes of the Sins are occasioned
thereby, and they are his own, and their guilt adheres unto him. Now though St.
Paul's or St. Timothie's own knowledge of the Person to be Ordained, by their
nearer Relation, stricter Converse, and Personal Inspection, might be
satisfaction sufficient to themselves, and no man can be so mad as to think
such an Ordination to be invalid; self-inspection and notoriety of the Fact has
still been accounted Ground and Motive sufficient for Public Proceedings; but
then, this by how much it is more private, so much it is less satisfactory to
others; and for the Evidence to come from abroad, a Testimony from without, is
more agreeable and more clearing, and of whom so properly as from the People?
the Neighborhood, as eyewitnesses of his Conversation? And it was upon the
common course of Proceedings what Saint Peter proposed before the Consecration
of Matthias (Petrus ad Plebem loquitur, Cypr. Ep. 68.) and which was to the
People, to the Believers all in common; that out of those Men that accompanied
them, and was well known unto them, all the time that the Lord Jesus went in
and out among them, of which they were eyewitnesses, whose Application of
themselves to Holy Things, and constant Industry, made them sit for so high an
Office, an Apostle should be chosen, Acts 1. That the Seven Deacons be Men of
good Report, and this attested by them that knew them, e're the Apostles lay
their hands upon them, Acts 6. that Timothy be well reported by the Brethren,
Acts 16.2. And so again of the Bishop, that he have a good report of them that
are without, i. e. Heathens, 1 Timothy 3.7. and all which must be done suitable to
the Converse he uses, and as the Subject renders capable of it; but that
therefore the chief Interest should be in the People, (I now use the words of
Mr. Thorndicke, in his Book of the Laws of the Church, page 154.) is an
Imagination too brutish; Cannot the Apostles finding themselves to Ordain
Persons so and so qualified; for such and such Offices in the Church, appeal to
the People, whom they acknowledge so and so qualified? Cannot St. Paul
afterward provide that no man shall blame them in the dispensing the Power
that they are entrusted with, 2 Cor. 8.20. but a consequence must thereupon be
inferred against themselves, that they are commanded by God, to refer the
things concerning the Salvation of God's People in general; as the Power of an
Apostle, the Order of a Deacon, etc. to the temerity and giddiness of the
People? Nor does all those bulky Collections made by Blondel for the Clergy and
People being consulted, in reality amount to any more, In ordinationibus mos
erat Plebem and Clerum consulere, and mores and merita Singulorum Communi
Consilio ponderare, Cypr. Ep. 33. Episcopum and Collegarum and Plebis
testimonio Probatum, Ep. 41. only to give Testimony to their Manners and Merit,
of which the Persons receiving it, and to Consecrate and assign to such a
People, were always Judges; Ad eam Plebem cui Praepositus Ordinatur; Nothing
was left to the People in appointing their Pastor, he was only sent out in
their Presence; and what he brings out of the 68 Epistle of St. Cyprian, is
only more plain if possible, and a fuller Evidence against his conceit; the
design of that whole Epistle being this, That vicious Men be not received into
the Church, and admitted to attend at the Altar; and to that purpose, that no
Ordination be made but in Public, Ne indignus obreperet; that a full account
may be taken of their Life's and Conversations, and that it be not Secundum
humanam Praesumptionem, upon Presumptions only, but a full Evidence; and this
is most likely to be had from the People, or those with whom they had lived,
and their Power there asserted, Vel eligendi dignos Sacerdotes vel indignos
recusandi, cannot be allowed to amount to any more, if consistent with the
design of the Epistle; nor can there be any thing in the People like the Power
of a Judge, to refuse or reject; but as Informers and Petitioners, by way
rather of Prayer and Postulation, upon the Plea of what Testimonies they could
Produce, or what Accusations they had against them, and according to the
Determinations of the Bishops that nominated and proposed him, and who lay
hands upon him, is the Person fixed in his Station, De Episcoporum qui in
praesentia convenerant, quique de eo apud vos literas fecerant, judicio,
Episcopatus ei deferretur, and manus e^ in loco Basilidis imponeretur, ibid.
Ep. 68. Much more to this purpose is to be seen in Cyprian, and all which is
applied by Grotius to this purpose, De Imper. Sum. Potest. in Sacris, cap. 10.
sect. 9. or rather, and which Authority is much greater, this Church Rule, and
proceeding in Elections, and Ordinations of Bishops is to be seen in the Fourth
Canon of the First Council of Nicea, and which is there appointed to be done by
all the Bishops of the Province; or, because all may not be capable of
Convening, by Three at the least, the others sending their Suffrages, and then
to be Confirmed by the Metropolitan. Where to be sure, whatever of the Peoples
concurrency, or rather, anteceding Testimonies, was required, the ultimate and
alone Power is in the Clergy, and it is Balsamon's Opinion upon that Canon, That
the Canon was made purely in relation to the People, to exclude them quite,
upon the account of the inconveniences they found by their Presence; and which
adds to what I have already observed, That the Peoples concurrency in
Ordinations is so far from being of their Essence, and altogether requisite,
that it depended all along, upon the Canons and Laws of the Church, to approve
or null them; or if the Votes of the People did at any time prevail and
overruled, it was upon special Accidents, to avoid Tumults and Disorders, to
prevent a greater Mischief, or by too much Condescension of the Bishops, or by
particular Grants and Privileges to such places, which the same Power did and
might take away again, an antecedent perpetual Right, is no way to be inferred
from either, and particularly by David Blondel, who overrules in other Cases,
when against him, upon the same Considerations, Apolog. Page 541.

Divina Praecepta, Divina Praescriptio, Dominicis Praeceptis, Divina
Magisteria, Traditione Divina, Apostolica Observatione, Deisicam Disciplinam;
and that the contrary is, Secundum humanam Praesumptionem, as St. Cyprian all
along Phrases it in that 68 Epistle, is what every one will grant; nor is there
any such thing gained by it, on Blondel's side, as he thinks there is, he many
times repeating and insisting on these like Expressions; for no man sure will
question this to be the Command and Appointment of God, that no one be received
into the Public Employments of the Church, but such as are approved and
attested to be Men sit for so great a Charge, and high Office, and it amounts
to no more than that Caution of St. Paul to Timothy, Lay hands suddenly on no
man; nor is there any Nomination of a Bishop to his See, which is not made
Public to the whole Kingdom, and his Election as much made known in his
Diocese, by notices affixed on his Cathedral; that if any man have an
Accusation against him, he come and object, and then the Clergy in the presence
of the People go on to Election; and the same is observed at the Ordinations of
Presbyters and Deacons, who are not, and ought not, to be received, but upon
Public Testimony, and which are Ordained, at the four Ember-Weeks; if
Canonically, or public times of the year, where every Body has the liberty of
access, and to speak at pleasure, and which is represented, as the very course
prescribed by the Apostles in this 68 Epistle, and recommended as the Practice
of many Churches, Propter quod diligenter de Traditione Divina and Apostolica
observatione observandum est and tenendum, quod apud nos quoque and fere per
Provincias universas tenetur, ut ad Ordinationes rite Celebranda, ad eam Plebem
cui praepositus Ordinatur, Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae proximi quique
conveniant, and Episcopus delegatur Plebe praesente, quae Singulorum vitam
plenissime novit, and unusquisque actum de ejus Conversatione prospexit; That
the Neighboring Clergy Convene, and the Bishop be assigned in the presence of
the People; and to which agrees St. Jerome's peculiar Notion of (...), and
which to be sure is Argument sufficient of the Church's Practice in the Case in
his days. That the Hands of the Ordainer were extended, stretched out, lay open
and abroad, at Ordinations, Ne scilicet vocis imprecatio Clandestina, Clericos
ordinet nescientes, non lene enim peccatum, Ordinationem Clericatus nequaquam
Sanctis, and in lege Dei doctissimis, sed asseclis suis tribuere, and vilium
Officiorum Ministris, quamquam his dedecorosius est muliercularum praecibus.
Comment. in Isai. 58. to make them public, and divulge them; lest being
secret, ignorant Clerks may be Ordained, it being a great Sin to lay hands on
such as are not Holy and very Learned, on their Pages and viler Officers; but
most of all it is dishonorable and disgraceful, when Ordinations are procured
by the requests and assignations of Women. And it were otherwise unpracticable,
if all the Clergy of whole Provinces were, as by the indispensable Appointment
of God, and under peril of voiding the whole Action, to meet in Person at each
Consecration, and as unserviceable too, much more for the numerous, or rather,
innumerable Multitudes; The Nature of things requires some particular
appearances, nor can the whole be supposed to be a competent witness of their
Life's and Conversations; it is sufficient that every one has time and
opportunity to implead as occasion, or at least may have it, if he will seek
after it, and which he ought to do, if he knows a just exception, and indeed
business cannot be done otherwise, Universals are nothing; they subsist only in
Conceit, and a digestion of the Brain; it is the Individuation makes Action, and
the People in general, if not reduced to some Orders and Station, will be only
a confused heap, each Body be Cyclopian, each Assembly become a Riot, filled
only with disorder and astonishment; and the popular Elections of Bishops came
so near to it at last, that they could be no longer permitted.

NOR does D. Blondel acquit himself with Paul and Barnabas, were to be
separated to a peculiar Ministry, and Service in the Church; 'Twas the Clergy,
the Prophets and Teachers (that we know of) sent them away, to a People
unknown, as to their faces, Acts 13. and which he thinks so great a Crime; nor
is there any thing after produced against it. And himself does acknowledge,
that the Presbyters and Deacons were not substituted by the People; but the
Bishops (whose indeed Curates they are) for this Thousand years downwards; and
it will very hardly be found a sufficient proof for its Illegality, to say
there was no Controversy moved about it before; and therefore it was
otherwise, but not mentioned, or in his nauseous, impious, precarious, usual
manner of speaking, when any thing of this nature pinches him, that it was from
the Pride and Usurpation, fastus indomabilis (Page 64.) of the Bishops, and yet
he exclaims as if all Religion lay at stake, a through Degeneracy and
Dissolution, both in People and Clergy, they all become negligent and contemned
of one another; all the disorder, ill manners and failures in Duty is imputed
to this one thing, whatever inconveniences in Church are observable (and
always some there will be) all hence arise, that the People have not the
choosing or refusal of him that is to officiate among them, have only the
opportunity of bewailing with their Tears a vacancy upon Death, but not of
repairing it; that Odor priscae Disciplinae, the Primitive Proceedings being
gone, become even a stink to the Nostrils of a looser Age; the immutable fixed
Rule of Christ laid aside and broken, or in plain terms, according to the
Genius and Complexion of these Men observed already; because all the
well-setled duly constituted Churches in Christendom do not dissolve and fall
in pieces, are not framed anew into the accidental necessitous Model, of a
private French Congregation. And surely the contrary to all this is most true,
there can be nothing more fatal to Christianity, than to have a Power of
Substitution of the Clergy to their several Charges put into the hands of the
People, that the Power of Mission and Approbation of such as are to serve at
the Altar, be taken from the Clergy, nothing can reflect more upon the Wisdom
of our Savior, as the Lawgiver; and who has therefore gone quite another way,
and the Bishops and Pastors are made Guides, Inspectors, Rulers, Teachers of,
not in Substitution and Deputation from the People; nothing can go more cross
and contradictory to the Nature of things, as that the Sheep should approve of
and appoint their Shepherd, such as have wholly designed themselves to the
particular Study, should be the worst Judges in the Science, least know and be
able to judge what Persons are sit to propagate and promote their own
Profession; and all this put into the hands of Novices and Ignaro's, who are
not, who cannot be supposed to have any Skill for inspection into it; no more
and greater sign of his fastus indomabilis, the worst sort of Pride, and
irrecoverable pertinacy, than that such a sort should any ways desire, or
pretend such a Power, or presume themselves sit for it; no greater disrepute to
Religion, than that those which are really least to be esteemed in the Church,
should thus have Judgment, and alone Judgment, in the things of the highest
concern, a Power to canvass against, and determine upon the eminentest
Professors of it; nothing but a degeneracy in Knowledge and Manners, the
profoundest Ignorance, and deepest Immorality can attempt it, the whole World
must be stupid and sottish, lay aside all Sense of relations and dependency, be
sunk down together below its Orb, Suaeque in integrum restitutionis penitus
oblivisci (the words of Blondel are proper here) lose all Capacities of but
remembering what is fit and decent, be past all hopes of a restitution and
amendment.

Jerusalem and others since, they were still bound up and limited. Nor can
they, but with much less reason, challenge any more here, than in being present
at Elections and Ordinations; that upon the personal Hearing and View, (such as
desire it) may be satisfied of the justness of all Proceedings, that no man
should blame them in dispensing that Power they are entrusted with, and others
to submit unto, 2 Cor. 2.20. and most precarious is that of admitting
Lay Elders, and their Personal necessary concurrency in the Acts and Execution
of Government in the Church, certain particular Lay-Persons, as sharers with
the Pastors in the Jurisdiction, the gifts of Knowledge, Understanding, etc.
are common to all, i. e. none are denied them, but such as deny them
themselves, by their own Negligence and Non-improvement; or by a first defect
in Nature have them not, and a promiscuous admission into Debates and rational
Decisions is allowable; but Church Power, in the governing judiciary part of
it, is from without, and whoever Claims it, must evidence the Devolution, and
Deputation, how they were first brought into the Church, and in what Exigence:
Our Judicious Mr. Hooker relates at large, that they have since been set up by
Divine Immutable Right, shows only what the Projects and Interests and Ambition
of Men, can wrest and pervert Scripture unto, and where something of Men's own
is laid and designed; (for so Schismatics and Heretics are defined, De tuo
infers. So Tertullian to Apelles, Lib. de Carne Christi, cap. 7. Marcion suum,
lib. 4. Advers. Marcion. cap. 7.) Something like truth, will be alleged in
defense of it; and surely there is as little for this, as ever was urged in
behalf of any Sect whatever; the once Zealous Abettors of it in this Church and
Kingdom, could not themselves believe what they pleaded for with so much show
of Zeal, and known Violence, and their design was only, (...), as it is said the
Gentiles did against the Christians in Eusebius; with clamorous Noises to make
a show of the want of something, to make greater the Rupture they contended
for; Omnia pro tempore nihil pro veritate, as Optatus has observed of their
elder Brethren the Donatists, Lib. 1. Cont. Parme. to serve not Truth, but the
present disorder by it; and it has the Fate of other inordinate Teachings, time
makes them cease and wear out. Nor is this Platform of Lay Elders, the
Palladium they now contend for, or in the Catalogue of those Grievances and
Imperfections are complained of. Surely there might be Governments and Helps in
the Church, and Elders, which were no Laymen; and it is no where said in
Scripture they were; and as certain it is again, there is no after-practice,
either Apostolical or of Ten succeeding Centuries, in which the perpetual
immutable Divine Right of it is to be bottomed, as D. Blondel has pleaded for
their right of Election and Substitution of such as serve at the Altar, but
with what Success has already appeared. Besides, the ill effect of the Schism
in general to the first raising of which, and after Promotion it concurred.
This particular ill it occasioned and left among us, that the Divines of those
Ages, in which the Aimers at this Platform of ruling Elders so much strove for
it, as in the days of Queen Elizabeth especially, showed their greater, just
Zeal in exposing those their unreasonable Claims of their Consistories, to
Summon Kings and Arraign them at pleasure, In Ordine ad Deum, and in defending
the Rights of the Civil Power; and were less careful in stating the true Rights
of the Christian Church, as distinct from the Magistrates Power, and which is
now to be examined and discoursed in this following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Chap. 2.

The Contents.
This Power is not in the Prince. The Child Jesus is Anointed Lord and Christ,
with all Power given him in order to Heaven, to continue in the
Gospel-Priesthood to the end of the World. Sect. 1.

These two Powers have, and may reside again in the same Person, are both for
the general good of Man. Emperors how called, Apli. Epi. Sect. 2.

Their particular Power necessarily infer not one another: The Priest as such,
is no more a King, than the King as such, is a Priest, than a good Man is
always knowing, or the Despotical and Regal Power go together. The mixing these
several distinct Gifts and Powers, is the inlet to all disorder. The King and
Priest have been brought to a Morsel of Bread by it. Sect. 3.

Kings have no Plea to the Priesthood by their Unction, the Jewish Custom and
Government no example to us; if so, the consequent would be ill in our
Government. Our Kings derive no one Right from their being Anointed. Blondel's
Account of this Unction. The Error and Flattery of some Greeks herein. Sect. 4.

The Church how in the Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth how in the Church?
and both independent and self-existent. Sect. 5.

The Church founded only, and subsisting in and by Christ and his Apostles.
Sect. 6.

Proved from Clemens Romanus, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, Justin
Martyr, Athenagoras, Minutius Foelix. Sect. 7.

A distinct Power is in the Church all along in Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. Socrates,
etc. Opposed to the (...), or the Power of the Prince so called all along in
those Writings. Sect. 8.

This was not from the present Necessity, when the Empire was Heathen, if so
the Christians had understood and declared it. The Apostles, God himself, had
forewarned and preinformed the World of it. It continued the same when
Christian, only with more advantages by the Princes Countenance and Protection.
Sect. 9, 10.

In Athanasius, Hosins, St. Jerome, Austin, Optatus, Chrysostom, Ambrose. Sect.
11.

In Eusebius History from Constantine, and other Historians downward, the
Emperor and Bishop have alike their distinct Throne and Succession independent,
as plain as words and story can report it. Sect. 12.

And the same do the Ancient Councils all along; separating themselves from
(...), the (...). Sect. 13.

This is not the Sense of the Bishops only in their own behalf; and which is
the Atheistical popular Plea and Objection, the Cruelty of the French
Reformers. Sect. 14.

The Emperors own and submit unto it, as Constantine, though misunderstood by
Blondel, Valentinianus, Justinian, Theodosius, Leo, etc. Sect. 15, 16.

Blondel owns all this, and yet does not understand it. Sect. 17.

All this farther appears from the Laws and Proceedings of the Empire and the
Church; as in the two Codes, Novels and Constitutions, from our Church
Histories. Photius Nomocanon. Sect. 18.

This farther appears from the Power of the Empire in Councils; and
particularly that so much talked of Instance in Theodosius. Sect. 19.

From their Power exercised on Heretics. Heresy is defined to be such by the
Bishops. Sect. 20.

In Ordinations. Sect. 21.

Church Censures. Mr. Selden's Jus Caesareum, relates only to the outward
Exercise of the Jewish Worship, and comes up exactly to our Model. The state
then of the Jews answers this of Christianity. Sect. 22.

The Christian Emperors never Excommunicated in their own Persons, or by their
own Power. Mr. Seldom says they did. His Forgeries detected. His ridiculous
account of Holy Orders from Gamaliel. He was a Rebel of 1642. Designed a Cheat
on the Crown, when annexing to it the Priesthood. Sect. 23.

What the Empire made Law relating to Religion, was first Canon, or consented
to by the Clergy. Nothing the Empires alone but the Penalty. So Honorius and
Theodosius, Valentinian and Marcian, Zeno and Leo. Sect. 24, 25.

No need of present Miracles to Justify this Power; to Assert it does not
affront Magistrates. It Is always to be owned before them, Dr. Tillotson's
Sermon on this bottom Arianism was of old opposed against Constantius; That
this Power ceased when the Empire became Christian is a tattle; It received
many Advantages, but no one Diminution thereby. Sect. 26.

a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor, by the most high God is given
unto thee, Dan. 5.18. but yet these are not the only Separates he has upon
Earth, his alone Anointed and that to Public Offices and Services; thus he had
his Priests of old, and whose Persons and Power was separate too, Non est tuum
O Ozia adolere Deo sed Sacerdotum, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. It appertains not unto
thee, O Uzziah, to burn incense to the Lord, but to the Priests, the Sons of
Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense, go out of the Sanctuary, for thou
have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor, from the Lord thy God;
There is one Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of by God, and by his right hand
exalted; the Holy Child Jesus, whom he has Anointed, whom he raised from the
Dead, and made both Lord and Christ. God who at sundry times, and in diverse
manners, spoke in times past to the Fathers, by the Prophets, has in these
last days spoke unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things
too, and who is also the Image of his Person, who has all Power in Heaven and
Earth given unto him, a Power to Teach and Baptize all Nations in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; a Power for the managery of
the things, not of the Men of the Earth, but of their Souls and Persons for
Heaven, a Power above that of Angels; but not to tread upon Thrones and
Scepters of Princes, contemn Dignities, which Angels durst not do: a Kingdom
though not of this World, yet a true one, once given him of God, and again to
be delivered up by him to the Father, who is the head of his Body the Church,
Colos. 1.18. contrary to whom as we are not to set up, and be beguiled by
Angels, so neither Kings nor Princes, and not hold fast the head, from which
all the body, by joints and band, having nourishment and knit together,
increase in the increase of God, Col. 2.18, 19. Nursing Fathers Kings and
Queens are to be of the Church; but the Government it self is laid upon
another, upon the Shoulders of this Child, and Son, born and given unto us,
Isa. 9.6. and which they are to nourish, to protect and preserve, with their
Temporal Government and Scepters; a Generative, Procreative Power is not in
them. This Power given by the Father to the Son, was in part and some instances
of it, finished in his own Person upon Earth, in part, and other instances he
is now managing in Heaven, what was to remain here among us after his
Ascension, was to be given to whomsoever the Son pleased; this he deputed and
committed to his Apostles, some of which Power was to dye with their Persons,
was extraordinary and temporary only, or at the most survived in some few only
after them, and during a small time, what was designed, and universally useful
for all Mankind, and for the lasting perpetual managing us in order to Heaven,
to continue to the end of the World; and in the execution and discharge of
which, our Savior has promised to be with us always unto the end of the World;
this was all transferred, and devolved by the Apostles, on their Successors in
the Evangelical Priesthood, the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons of the Church;
it was not demandated to Kings and Secular Powers, which then and for some
Hundred years after, only Persecuted all that followed after that way, and
called upon that Name, before whom they appeared only as Dlinquents; if they
came before them, it was for a Mittimus to the Goal, or as men appointed to be
slain, not for Commissions and Substitutions to Preach the Gospel; and this is
the state of the World at this day, thus stand the Powers in it, divided
betwixt the King and the Priest, each moving in his proper Sphere, by virtue of
his special particular Grant from Heaven, and managing the two great Affairs of
Heaven and Earth, the Body and Soul, both of so high a concern unto us.

THAT both these Powers have been residing Aristotle speaks, Lib. 3. Polit.
cap. 10, 11. (...), to make them good Citizens and obedient to Laws, (...) to
engage their Souls to Virtue, by Rewards and Penalties; cap. 13. but the Prince
has had that Power which is purely and strictly Hieratical, and of the Priestly
Office, (...), as Aristotle, cap. 10. abovementioned, Rex Anuis, Rex idem
Phoebique Sacerdos; and that such, as of the Priestly Order, have had also the
Secular Power conjoined and annexed to it, it is most certain in all manner of
History; for Evidence of which, I Will only refer such as can enquire, to Mr.
Selden's First Book De Synedriis, cap. 15. Hugo Grotius is of Opinion, that the
Priesthood was seldom found without some Secular Power added unto it, in his
Treatise De Sum. Potest. Imper. in Sacris, Cap. 9. Sect. 4. 30. And the ancient
Canons of the Church imply, that it was much in Use, for the Clergy to be
engaged in the Affairs of the World, as appears by their several Cautions and
Commands against it; the Circumstances of the then present Church, and
particular Reasons moving them to it. So Can. Apost. 81.84. Can. 11. Council. 1,
2. Constantinop. Can. 16.18. Council. Carthag. The King and the Priest, as they
are of the same Original, so are both designed for the same great End and
Purpose for the Care and Promotion, Protection and Preservation of the Honor of
God, his Worship and Service, in the ways of Virtue and Holiness, and Obedience
to his Institutions, for the benefit of Mankind both here and hereafter, and
suitably have their names promiscuously and in common, in Ecclesiastical
Writers. Thus Constantine many times calls himself a Bishop, and by other Greek
Writers is he called (...), equal to an Apostle. Many of these are to be seen
in Potrus de Marca, de Concord. Sacerd. and Imperii, l. 2. c. 10. Sect. 6, 7.
Valentinian and Marcian the Emperors are styled Inclyti Apostoli, famous
Apostles; and Constantine's Animus Sacerdotalis is mentioned and applauded in a
Public Council, ( Vid. Observat. and Notas, in Paenitentiale Theodori Cant.
Archiep. page 138.) with several Compellations of the like Nature; And which
Considerations, or rather undue Consideration of these, gives some little gloss
upon their Error, who fix the full Power of the Priesthood in the Prince,
renders it somewhat more plausible than that of theirs who place it in the
People; but the Truth is no more in reality on the one side, than on the other.
These are given partly by way of Complement, Magnificent Title, or higher
Eulogies, not unusual to the Eminencies of such Personages, as they honored and
protected Religion, to transfer upon them the Honors that go along with it, of
what value in themselves it matters not, so be the best it has. Or where it
has nearer answered the thing it self, Constantine himself has showed, in what
Nature and Instances, in the Fourth Book of his Life wrote by Eusebius, cap.
24. Vos, speaking to the Bishops, in iis quae intra Ecclesiam Episcopi estis,
Ego vero in iis quae extra geruntur. And again, Ibid. the Historian also speaks
to the same purpose, Episcopus quasi Episcoporum erat Constantinus, and Curam
habuit ut sint pii; both which amount but to thus much, That Constantine's
Episcopacy only consisted in his outward care of the Church, and promotion of
the Duties that belong unto her, it reaches not to the inward Power, the (...)
or (...), the Sacred Function or Office it self.

AND here now is the great Enquiry, and in their Natures and Constitutions
imply and include each other? Not that they agree in one design, or more, in
some Externals; but whether where the one is, there the other, as a necessary
consequence, is at the same time, and by the same appointment, existing? and to
which I am to answer in the Negative; as to be a Priest has never inferred, a
Secular Power, so nor to be a Prince the Spiritual. For the full clearing of
this point it will be necessary first to consider the Nature of Gifts, Duties,
Offices and Power in general, how far they include and infer one another; how
far each one in it self is attainable, and from what Principle flowing; and
it is a Consideration so absolutely necessary for whosoever engages in this or
suchlike Debates, and their Resolutions, that he must otherwise be at a loss,
and miss of the aim proposed. To Virtue and Goodness in general, there is in
every Man an innate Power; he has Faculties concreated, and of his
Constitution, (...), as Clemens Alexandrinus in his (...), and this improveable
by Industry and Care, Notices and Experiences, and God in course, as he
incourages and preserves whatever is his own, gives more help: The Art of a
Physician and Skill of a Divine, are also attainable in the like way, by a
Progress of Study and continued Observations, upon an hability, or first stock
within; but this not equally given and ingraffed in each, as is a Power to
Goodness, Wisdom, Knowledge is not to all. The Power of a Father over his Child
is from God, by virtue and force of the relation laid in the foundation of it;
because begetting him, and by the general concourse of Providence; the Power of
a Husband over a Wife, and a Master over a Servant is by the appointment of
God, upon a particular Covenant or Stipulation; the Power of Government and
Jurisdiction in the greater extent; whether of a King in the State, or a Priest
in the Church, enabling each to discharge the Public Duties belonging to them,
comes quite different from each before; it is by no improvement of Nature, or
any thing within a Man, concreated, and a common concurse of Providence
contributes not; nor can common Notices, or whatever particular Industry and
Experience attain unto it; no particular act of Man, whether Moral or Natural,
is a foundation sufficient for these greater relations, and higher instances of
Power, whether of his Person apart, or by compact with others; it is, as always
lodged in several Persons, or when it was once in one and the same; so by
discriminating marks, distinct symbols, in the conveyance, and appropriation,
whereby to discern the one from the other, the Secular Power, by Descent, or
Votes; or, in some instances, Conquest; the Spiritual, by the Deputations of
the Bishop, and the Acts and Offices are quite apart and different; (as is the
design of this Discourse to make fully appear) but in this they agree, and are
as one; because immediate from God, by a special concurse and devolution, and
so deposited into particular hands and Persons; no Force, no Virtue, no
Compositions, or Overtures, in any Action or Performance, by any Person or
Persons amounting to it; they are both highest Powers, in their kind and
sphere; and it is something apart and solitary, and which none else have which
makes them so, and consequently none else can give it them, because supposed
not to have it; but only he, who is transcendently the highest, and eminently
above all, and does, and can, give to each Son of Man as he pleases. And now,
since each of these Gifts, and Offices and Powers, are attained to, conveyed
and devolved, in several courses, methods and ways, one and the same Symbol,
Compact or Act, does not produce and evidence their existence in and to the
World, invest with the Power, instate in the Possession, enable and engage all
men alike, to the attainment, the Duties and Offices of them; hence the
Consequence is as clear in the course and chain of things, as it is in Matter
of Fact, the Practice and known every day's Experience of the World, that they
are not any, but two, much more all of them, in any one degree of Necessity; as
to their coexistence, they do not any ways include, or infer each other; one
Virtue, it is true, includes and infers another; and all Virtues, I speak of
practical Virtues, Bonum ex causa integra, and Goodness is all of one chain,
and where true in any one instance, is all together; but yet this Goodness, in
the nature of it, includes not Wisdom and Knowledge, a Virtuous Man has not
always the most Knowledge; nor where this Knowledge is, is it always Universal:
To be a Divine is not to be a Physician, or were it always Universal, this
infers no one branch of Power; Solomon's poor Wise man had none at all, and so
it may be with the richest and wisest, it is too often so; nor does any instance
of Authority and Power where existing, infer all other instances of it. To be
the Husband of a Wife, is not therefore to be the Father of a Child; nor do
Paternal and Despotick Government either, necessarily go together; to be a King
indeed is usually to be all, but to be a Priest is often to be neither; he is
many times too poor to have Servants, and his Marriage is by some judged
unlawful, at least by Church-Law forbidden; and every one says he ought not to
be a King; to be sure he is not so because a Priest; nor is the King a Priest
either because a King, they no more infer one another, than do any of the
former two, or all of them; nor is their co-existence otherways necessary, than
any of the other; they indeed were once united in the Worlds Infancy, and some
Ages after, both seated in the first born; though by what special grant, we
know not, the small account we have of those Ages hinders it; only I cannot
agree with Grotius De Imper. Sum. Potest. in Sacris, Cap. 2. Sect. 4. that it
was assumed by themselves, or that every man had a Natural right to it, and the
Elder in the Family limited it to himself; but however it came there, it was
afterward severed by God himself, who took only the Tribe of Levi for his
Service at the Altar, and governed in State, more by his own Person, (and
therefore called (...)) himself sometimes appearing and giving Laws, sometimes
immediately raising up one, and sometimes another to go in and out before his
People; as from Moses, and in the days of the Judges, to King Saul. And, as I
intimated before, these things not thoroughly considered and digested; these
courses, and bonds and limits of Offices, and Gifts, and Powers, their Posts
and Stages removed or taken down; if once these Landmarks be displaced, become
promiscuous and common, making inrodes on one another, not only he will be at a
loss that engages in the Debates and Resolutions in these cases, but Mankind it
self, the Christian Part of the World to be sure, can no more continue in
Peace, but with Invasions and Usurpations, Disorders and Confusions here upon
Earth, than the earthy Globe it self, can subsist, or keep its Equilibrium,
should the Elements of which it is made lose their Native qualities, and become
blended together; or should its two Poles unite and kiss each other; and of
this our own late Experience in our own particular Church and Kingdom, gives
Testimony in abundance, when a pretense of Holiness, or the reality of it, was
determined sufficient to invest in the Priesthood; the same Plea was concluded
as good for the Crown, it staid not at the Pulpit, but went immediately to the
Throne; all manner of Dominion was bottomed in Grace alone, and their Saints
were both the wisest upon Earth, and had all Power, were to Teach and to Rule,
and to possess the Earth. All the links and contignations of Government were
taken down, or burst in sunder; whether of the Father over his Child, or
Husband over his Wife, or Master over his Servant, or Sovereign over his
Subjects, or Priest over the People; all were Christ's Freemen, and to be
Servants to none; only the knack was found out at last, that the King was to be
a Priest, when both King and Priest were first disabled; and their Authority,
either in design or actually taken from them. The Bible it self was then put
into his hands, with a Right to all Church-Offices, when the Right to his Liege
Subjects was denied him, with a Power to make the Scriptures Canonical, and to
discharge all its Duties, to lay limits by his Laws to Religion, though a false
one, and it is not permitted openly to draw Men off from the Profession of it,
(so Mr. Dean tells us in his Sermon) when to govern his Subjects by Law is
Tyranny, and Usurpation: So advantageously is this new Honor and higher
Dignity, that his entrance to the Priestly-Office, placed on him, and the
consequence was only this, both King and Priest was brought to a Morsel of
Bread, were brought to the Block, the Saints in the Right of their Power, cut
off the Heads both of King Charles the First, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury; the Father was against the Son, and the Son against the Father, as
when the Sea-marks are removed, the Walls, and Water-locks and Floodgates are
broken down, and plucked up; this greater present deluge of professed Atheism,
Profaneness and Immorality is broken in upon us, overspread the face of our
Earth in the natural course and consequence of it; the Foundations are cast
down, and what can the Righteous do? the Romanists will have their Pope to be a
King, because a Priest; these will have their King to be a Priest, and in
effect no King; and 'twas only those that either first designed, or afterward
promoted, the taking his Crown from his Head, stuck this Feather in his Cap, as
in the late unnatural Rebellion.

Cyrus, Mine anointed; nor do the outward Unctions of the Kings of Israel and
Judah, infer or prove any more, the Priests were equally anointed as they, and
it is no more to be concluded that a King by virtue of his anointing has the
Power of a Priest, than that a Priest by his anointing has the Power of a
King, which two Sacred offices every body knows, were two quite different
distinct things; though in many things they united, yet in several, they did,
they might, not; it was Sacrilege on the one hand and Rebellion on the other,
to attempt it. The Oil that the Kings were anointed withal, was made of the
same Unguents that Moses had compounded to anoint both the Priests and the Holy
Vessels and the Altar, if we may believe De Marca in his second Preface to his
Treatise De Concord. etc. and had its effects but as designed and applied to
each in particular, and which suitably received thereby their several distinct
Separations, for differing uses, had their peculiar respects and Services
conferred upon them; it did not imply all the Offices at once in the same
either Thing or Person, and it may be as well said, that the Holy Vessels and
Altar became Kings, as that the Kings became Priests, upon the alone general
account of being anointed; but admit it had been otherwise under the Jewish
Policy, and the King by his Unction had the full Extent and Latitude of Power
and Offices conferred, by the Ceremony of Oil, devolved and seated in him. What
is this to us in the Christian Church? under another Head, different Polity,
and several Dispensation? or how does it oblige us, that our Kings must be
Priests, because the Kings of Israel were once so? Surely no otherwise than it
obliged the Jews that their firstborn were to be either Kings or Priests or
both, because it was once so with their Ancestors and Predecessors, and which
is nothing at all; unless to be a King originally and in its Nature, included
the Priesthood, by a perpetual Force and Law never to be broken, and which
their own instances destroy; and did not the design and frame of the
Governments themselves forbid it? for the Law of Moses is the foundation and
direction of both Governments, both Political and Ecclesiastical, and which the
Law of our Savior is not, Civil Power is it altogether, and in every instance
antecedent and independent to that Power which is from the Gospel; the Law of
Christ supposes it, only adds, by its Precepts of Justice and Virtue, greater
Awe and Reverence, new Motives for Obedience and Subjection; yet the particular
very ill consequence could by no means be allowed us, to take and give Measures
and Rules to the Powers and Offices of the Christian Church, from the Pattern
and Practice of the Jewish, for then the Power and Extent of the Evangelical
Priesthood must be such as Christianity will not bear, nor any man in his wits
claim for it, the Power of the Priesthood among the Jews was mixed in some
cases, and the Priest and the Levite were, in some instances, civil Judges
apart, as betwixt stroke and stroke, betwixt Plea and Plea, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. and
the High Priest in other Circumstances had no Jurisdiction at all, but as
elected a Member of the Sanedrim, and which was at the choice of his Electors,
not by virtue of his Priesthood, as such tell us that are skilled in their
Customs, and sure we are he was still to be consulted, in the ordinary
difficult Affairs of the Kingdom, concerning Wars and Peace: and gave his
responses by Vrim and Thummim, and which is so strenuously opposed as unfit for
Christian Bishops and Churchmen, by those we have mostly to deal with in this
point now under debate, and which would be of worser consequence yet, if
applied unto Kings, to have the Princes Power such only as had the Kings of
Israel and Judah, particularly according as is the Model we usually receive
from these Men of their Government, and is contended for as lapsed from Heaven;
for their Sanedrim is still described as an Authority foreign and independent
from that of the Prince, that could not question the King for his life, but
could lay lesser Punishments upon him, if violating the Law. And the great
Seldom himself is at a stand, and leaves it to wiser heads than himself to
determine, whether the Sanedrim might whip their Kings or not? De Syned. lib.
2. cap. 9. 2. 5. or in what extent soever the Kings of Judah are proposed as
Patterns to our Kings for the exercise of Power in the Christian Church, in our
Nine and thirty Articles, and may authorize them in it, to be sure they were
never designed Examples in this particular of Unction, or whatever Power it was
they were to have as from them, our Church could not mean it should thus be
derived. Our Kings of England, it is plain, owe no one instance of their Power
to the Coronation it self, much less to their being then anointed, one but
particular Ceremony in the Performance of it; and all Jurisdictions and Rights
they have as Kings, they have before, and are to enjoy their whole lifetime;
Supposing they were neither anointed, nor, even Crowned at all, it is all an
high Ceremony, Solemn and Magnificent, Peculiar, as is the Person, and Power
and Majesty of a Prince, as is becoming a Crown Imperial when set on his Head,
and the anointing may be used, as very lively significant and expressing that
separation of his Person, which was due and made and acknowledged before, and
really in him, as has been the Custom by Oil so to sever and set apart Persons
and Things; but that the thing it self is either commanded, or expected by God,
or designed and used by Man to any other end, service or purpose, I never could
yet understand. David Blondel, in his Formula regnante Christo, Page 119. tells
us, that the Unction, or Custom of anointing Princes, was not used, among
Christians, till the year of our Lord 750. and the Consecration of their King
Pippin, and it was often repeated, as twice, four, five times a year, as he
instances in several Princes, and makes evident it is not looked upon as an
initiating investing Ceremony, whatever else use they appropriated to it;
though afterward it was adjudged Sacrilege to iterate it, by a growing
Superstition, and assumed Opinion of it; the famous Archbishop of Paris, De
Marca, in his Second Preface to his Book De Concord. etc. and in the Second
Book, Cap. 7. of the Treatise it self, tells us of some in the Greek Church,
that were of the Opinion, that the Prince had the Priestly Power by virtue of
his Unction: And it was defined in a Synod held at Constantinople in the year
of our Lord Nine hundred and seventy, that the anointing of the Emperor gives
him the same Power to forgive Sins, as has the Sacrament of Baptism; and the
Greeks out of the same Principle of flattery managed the same Opinion, and gave
their Emperor the same Power as has the Patriarch; but this, as we are told,
depended mostly on a Faction then on foot, as it was in it self precarious and
Arbitrary, and so we will leave it to its first bottom, which is none at all, nor
needs it any farther Consideration.

NON est Respublica in Ecclesia, sed Ecclesia in Republica, it is the saying of
Optatus lib. 3. Contr. Parmen. Donatist. The Commonwealth is not in the
Church, but the Church in the Commonwealth, under the Head and Government of
the Powers of the World, as to the Temporals; and that instance of the Polity
of it, no Plea of Office and Deputation, what Commission or Designation soever
from God, and Christ, can or ever did exempt any one Man on Earth, from it,
collate or invest therewithal, a Power for Earth above it, at least as binding
Rules for continuance, and a pattern for future Practice. Our Savior had it
not, who made me a Judge or a Divider? and none can exercise it as from him,
but by Usurpation, but the Commonwealth and the Church are no ways thus in
Subordination and dependencies in another regard, as the Church is a Body
endowed with Powers Spiritual, thus they are different as the Soul and Body are
in Man's Person, in their distinct Orbs and Stations, as are the Sun and the
Moon in the Heavens, have a quite diverse Orb, and Powers, Influences, and
Devolutions that are variant. As the Church must be always in the World, in
that other sense, subject to its governance, to the accidents too often, the
frowns and high displeasures of it, till the World it self is no more: So must
the World be in the Church in this other sense, if that World, for whose Sins
Christ died; if coming to Heaven and Salvation be subject to its Head and
Jurisdiction, the World may not improperly be said to be as the Moon, and the
Church as the Sun, receiving light and assistance, splendour, and glory, and
beauty from it; thus influenced, and increasing with the increase of God,
though the Metaphor needs not run any farther, and as it has been stretched too
much by some, and all this is demonstrable, and will appear as evident as the
Sun in its Zenith or at Noon day; it is wrote as with an Adamant, a Pen of iron
on a Rock, on that Pillar the Church, to be seen and read of all Men, and to
all Ages for evermore, in the Original rise and succession of Church Power, in
all Transactions, Records, and Histories of it; in the Matter of Fact, as
notorious to the common sense of Mankind, as that one and two make three, is to
his reason, and which is the only Rule in this case to be gone by. I Will begin
with the Apostles, and so come down to those Ages of the Church, and Laws
Imperial and Concessions, whose Truth and Interest is believed by all to be
such, as not to engage them to be false, in which, all Parties agree and
concenter.

PVLCHERRIMA illa quae Ecclesia continet coagmentatio non ex Imperio Romano
fluxit, Christo monstrante sequentibus Apostolis, Grot. in Animadvert. Rivet.
ad Articul. 7. That comeliness of Order and Degrees in the Church, did not slow
from the Roman Empire; but from Christ Jesus, the Apostles following and
imitating of him; and as he their chief and great Master had not, so neither
had they, his immediate Deputies and Successors, their Power either from Man or
the Will of Man, they in no instance consulted with Flesh and Blood, with any
thing Humane and of the World, in the first rise, devolution, and conveyance of
it; but still term themselves the Apostles and Ministers of Christ Jesus; nor
in the execution of this Power did they do otherwise, they consulted only with
themselves in the arduous difficult cases arising, it is to the Spirit of the
Prophets, the Prophets alone are to be subject; they go up to Jerusalem to the
Apostles and Elders there, Acts 15. and it is Peter, James and John consult
together upon the like occasion, Gal. 2. it is they ordain Elders, and give Laws
in all Churches; leave Timothy and Titus in Ephesus and Crete, and appoint for
decency and order; they are brought before Kings, but it is mostly, if not
always to suffer; they there take the advantages to assent and plead this their
Right and Power, distinct and separate; to give Rules and Exhortations, but ask
no Directions, receive nothing of Authority from them. Nor did this Authority
thus limited to themselves, cease with their Persons; or was it translated and
deferred to any other than of their own assignation, by their own Hands, and on
their own Deputies and Successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, in
whose hands, and whose alone, it was by them left, and there remained, with a
Power so to depute others, and with command to be executed accordingly. The
very same Church Power, I say, though not in the same particular Circumstances,
avouch'd and attended in the same outward manner, nor in every single act and
effusion, does it thus remain and is it to be executed upon all for Salvation,
and as Christ promised to be with them always to the end of the World; and this
will fully appear from the Church Records, commencing where the Scriptures end,
from the Concessions of Emperors, their Laws and Constitutions made in Church
Matters.

SAINT Clemens Romanus an Apostolical Corinthians, not long after the Schism in
Corinth, mentioned by St. Paul, tells us, That the Apostles being sent from
Christ as from God, and Preaching the Word of God through the several Regions
and Cities, made Bishops and Deacons of the elder Christians; such as were the
first fruit of their labors, and whom they first converted, being found
sufficient, in order to the Service of them that should believe, to the
bringing more into the Fold, and reducing them to Christianity; St. Ignatius
his Contemporary in part, in his Epistle to those of Smyrna, commands them to
follow the Bishop. (...). And in his Epistle to St. Polycarp, (...), That they
take heed to him as God. And again in his Epistle to Smyrna, That nothing be
done without him in Matters that belong to the Church and Salvation, (...), and
the meaning is not ill expressed by the additional Pseudo-Ignatius, whoever he
was, (...), the whole Character, whatever of their Image and Power, God and
Christ designed to devolve and impress upon his Church; whether as to the
Government or Ministry of it, are found in the Bishop; He is the Person to
whose Faith and Trust the People of God are committed, and of whom, an account
is required of their Souls, (...), etc. (...), he governs as Head, and all
Church Power and Business is to be translated within themselves, as in the
Apostles Canons, wdich bear date about this time, Can. 34.39. Irenaeus, who
trod pretty near their heels, says that he can reckon up them that were
Bishops instituted by the Apostles, and their continued Succession to his days,
Lib. 3. Adv. Haeres. cap. 3. Ed. Paris. Habemus eos annumerare qui ab Apostolis
instituti sunt Episcopi, in Ecclesiis, and successores eorum usque ad nos, to
whom, and only whom, the Gospel was committed; Sine quibus nullo certitudo
veritatis, Ibid. And again, Episcopis Apostoli tradidere Ecclesias, that the
Churches of God were committed to, and entrusted with them, Lib. 5. cap. 20.
Origin if possible is plainer and distincter yet; and in his Third Book against
Celsus, in so many express words, distinguishes betwixt the Senate in the
Church, and that in every City, Ed. Cantab. p. 129. (...). And so again betwixt
the Rulers and Governors of the Church, and the Rulers and Governors of the
City, (...), Ibid. And in his Eighth Book toward the end, he declares a
different Model, (...), from that of the Empire, in every City, (for which and
whose safety and success, in his Wars he contends and prays for, and which he
owns and acknowledges with it) a Government, framed constituted and erected,
(...), by the word which is God, and which Government is the Church, whose
great King is (...), the Word and Son of God, who has his (...), his Governors
still appointed, resident and continued there, ruling as he has prescribed,
according to his own Laws and Dictates, the Laws of the Empire being preserved
inviolated by them. Tertullian as plainly distinguishes betwixt the two Bodies,
in the Nine and thirtieth Chapter of his Apology against the Gentiles, Corpus
sumus de Conscientia Religionis, and Disciplinae unitate, and Spei foedere, we
Christians are a Body united in a sense of Religion, under a different
Discipline, as well as hope, altogether apart, a Ministris little and
Potestatibus, a statu seculi; from their Ministers and Powers, and from the
state of the World; and tells us that Polycarp was made a Bishop in the Church
of Smyrna, by Saint John, in the 23 Chapter of his Book of Prescriptions
against Heretics; as also Clement, over the Romans, he returns to the Chairs
of the Apostles, which remained till his time in their Succession, as the
Authors of his Religion; and it is not from the Seat of the Empire, but from
Corinth and Phillippi, from Ephesus and Rome, he dates their Power, and fetches
their derivation, Vnde vobis autoritas praesto est, whence its rise and
devolution. And in his Fourth Book against Marcion, cap. 5. Ordo tamen
Episcoporum ad Originem recensus in Joannem stabit auctorem, says, that St.
John is the Author of the Order of Bishops; a Polity and Dispensation all
along, another thing from that of the Empire, flowing from another fountain,
quite differing from, and no ways depending upon it. And it is Tertullian's
Argument in his Book De corona Militis; that a Christian Soldier, who fights
in the Emperor's Camp, and gives him his just Allegiance, ought rather to lay
down his Arms, than wear a Laurel Crown on his Head, though a mark of Favor
from his Prince; because relating too much to a religious Custom among the
Ethnicks, and he is no where commanded it in Scripture, nor is it traditionally
delivered to him, by the Apostles, or Bishops, or Governors of the Church,
either in Precept or in Practice; Quomodo enim usurpari quid possit, si
traditum prius non est quis denique Patriarchs, quis Prophets, aut Sacerdos
aut (...)? quis vel denique Apostolus aut Evangelizator, aut Episcopus
invenitur Coronatus? Cap. 9. where though it was his mistake, in accounting
such a thing Matter of Religion, as the wearing a Crown of Laurels upon the
Commands of his Prince. This is a different thing from that command of Licinius
the Tyrant, enjoining all that would remain in his Camp to Sacrifice to Idols,
as in Eusebius his Church History, Lib. 10. cap. 8. and which rather than do,
Christians ought not only to leave the Camp, but lay down their Lives; yet upon
the mistake and supposure, it is plain, that he removed from the Secular Power
all Matters of Religion, such was to be received from Christ alone, from the
Apostles and Bishops and succeeding Churchmen; and consequently, we are thus
to interpret those other places of this Father in his Works, when speaking of
the Emperor in these Expressions, Illum commendo, Deo, Cui soli Subjicio, Apol.
adv. Gentes, cap. 33. quem sciens a Deo constitui, lib. ad Scapulam, Cap. 2.
Colimus Imperatorem sic quomodo nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo
secundum, and quicquid est, a Deo consecutum, and solo Deo minorem; sic enim
omnibus major est, dum solo vero Deo minor est, Ibid. That the Emperor is
subject to God alone, as appointed by God; that he is second to God, less than
God only; that he is greater than all, etc. All these are to be understood in a
limited sense, suited to the present Subject he is then upon, as to the Secular
Government, he being the fountain of all Temporals, and God governs the World
by him; nor ought, nor can any one say, what does he? as accountable to God
alone, who is alone above him. But Church Power is of another Head or Species,
and it is not derivable from him; nor is he the less a Prince for want of it;
and it was, it must be, if rational and consistent with themselves, the least
in the thoughts of this or any other Father of the Church, that has used these
like Expressions, to ascribe thereby Church Power unto him. And therefore is
it, that in their Writings and Declarations and Apologies for their Loyalty and
Obedience to the Empire, as standing obliged in their Conscience, and by their
Christianity, in all manner of Obedience to him; yet it is with this reserve,
that they are withal to retain their Freedom and Rights as Christians, and
which they own, and return to another fountain. So Justin Martyr in his second
Apology, (...), with all joy and cheerfulness we serve and obey you, only the
Worship of the alone true God we derive not from you. So Tatianus in his
Oration to the Greeks, (...), If the King Commands us to pay Tribute, (...), as
a Man we will obey him in his Humane Laws; Religion is still exempted. So
Athenagoras in his Embassy to the Emperor, in behalf of the Christians,
declaring he will refuse no Tortures, (...), if they fail in these Duties, in a
greater or lesser instance of them. And those excellent words of Minutius
Foelix are much to this purpose, Quam Pulchrum spectaculum Deo, cum Christianus
cum dolor congreditur, cum adversus minas, and supplicia and tormenta
componitur, cum strepitum Mortis and horrorem Carnificis arridens insultat, cum
libertatem suam, adversus Reges ac Principes erigit, Soli Deo, cujus est,
cedit, cum Triumphator and Victor, ipsi qui adversus se Sententiam dixit,
insultat. How Pleasant a Spectacle is it to God, when a Christian encounters
with Sorrow, when he is composed against Threatenings, and Punishments, and
Torments; when with Smiles he insults over the noise of Death, and the horror
of the Hangman, when he erects his liberty against Kings and Princes, and gives
place only to that God whose he is; when with Triumph and a Victor, he has the
better of him, who gave Sentence against him?

EVSEBIVS all along in his Church History, Simeon, in respect of his Diocese,
and Church-Jurisdiction, (...), that he was worthy of his Throne, meaning his
Episcopal Chair, lib. 3. cap. 11. and of Justus his Successor in Jerusalem,
(...), that he was placed on the Throne of his Bishopric, cap. 35. when
entering upon his (...), or the Office of a Bishop, is expressed in general,
cap. 13. (...), as it is varied, lib. 5. cap. 9. that his Administration, or
acts of his Episcopal Charge and Office, to be performed to his People; and
accordingly the execution is expressed by (...), words that imply full Power
and Authority in the Bishop, if they imply it in the Prince, which have no other
words to declare it to us by; and particularly the Empire of Trajan is
expressed, by the very same word, (...), in that very Chapter. And this Hugo
Grotius has observed, Rivet. Apol. Discuss. page 699. and given one reason of
it, Omne corpus Sociale jus hebet quaedam constituendi, quibus obligentur
membra, hoc jus etiam Ecclesiae competere apparet, Actorum 15. 28 Heb. 13.17.
and ob hoc jus Episcopatus Imperii nomine appellantun; every body by virtue of
its Union and Association has a right to constitute such Rules as do oblige its
Members; that this right does belong to the Church, is apparent from Acts
15.28. Heb. 19.17. and for this the Right and Power which is annexed to
Episcopacy, is called by the Name of an Empire; and this very Empire, Power,
and Jurisdiction, we have executed by the Bishop in part upon Philip, who held
the Roman Government, and was newly come over to the Christian Faith, he
enrolled him not, but by the Rules and Laws of the Church, but upon Confession
of his Sins, and passing through the Order of the Penitents, and which was
submitted to by him, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 6. cap. 34. and the case is
farther cleared by our Historian, lib. 2. cap. 27, 28, 29, 30. in the instance
of Paulus Samosetanus (as to the distinct Power in Church and State, and the
extent of each) he was Convict of Heresy, and his Bishops Orders taken away
from him, by the Jurisdiction and Power of the Bishops in Council united, who
alone did give them, and who alone could take them from him, and placed another
in his Bishopric in the Church of Antioch; But when Paulus Samosetanus would
not go out of his Church-House, their Episcopal Power reached not so far as to
dispossess him of his Temporals; it is the Business of Princes alone to inflict
Banishment, or such outward Punishment upon Heretics, and we have Theodosius a
Bishop blamed for his Persecuting in such like manner the Sect of the
Macedonians, in the Seventh Book of Socrates his Church History, cap. 3. Church
Empire or Authority reaches not hither in any degree or instance; for this they
appealed to the proper Head or Fountain, to Aurelian the Emperor (who was then
their Friend, though he continued not so long) they asked the assistance of the
World, and that his Secular Arm might relieve them; this he granted, and
adjusted it to the present Bishop, consecrated thereunto; and thus was this
notorious Heretic, (...) (as the Power of the Prince is still called, whether
exercised in the things of the Church or of the State) by the Secular Arm and
Authority turned out of the Church, every ways dishonored and displaced.

and represent them to all Ages succeeding, guilty of Ignorance gross and
inexcusable, to give that for certain Truth, which some of our Reformers have
made their Libel and Objection, against these first and Holy Christians. That
they were more Zealous than Wise, Pious, but imprudent less discerning men, and
from whom Truth is not to be had nor expected, and which is in effect to put a
baffle upon our whole Christianity in general, and to lay a ground for mistrust
upon each of its particulars, it must receive a great blow upon such Supposals,
when reflected upon and considered, that those who alone propagated our Faith
for Three hundred years together, did not understand the Power and Authority
they were invested with in order to it, or the true tenor or state of it. To
say they did understand it, then surely it had been stated by them, a Model of
it drew up, and left, at least for Posterity; a thing so in course, and most
usual in other cases, thus to give Specimens, Schemes and Draughts of the
Design and Purpose; especially when to propose, attempt, and carry on something
that is but new, not before received; much more when thwarting to the common
Sentiments, and Apprehensions of Mankind; That no Men, but such as the
Christians were given out to be by their Opposers and Persecutors, Madmen, and
Fools, the followers of a Carpenter and a few Fishermen, can be supposed guilty
of. Certainly the occasion and meaning of that particular Power they then
exercised in the Church, different from the Secular; nay, when enjoined and
commanded the contrary, by those Powers, that they act and speak no more in
that Name, when Persecuted to Bonds and Imprisonment, moreover unto Death for
it; had been declared and published, to such those Governors, a Manifesto or
Remonstrance made of it to all Princes of the World; certainly among the many
Apologies that were made to the Empire in their own behalf, this had had a
share, a room at least, in some one of them. That what Jurisdiction was then
exercised by them, the Pastors of the Church, was only under the present
Necessity, a present contrivance of their own, to keep their Followers and
Adherents in some tolerable Peace and Order; to awe and restrain as they could,
better an assumed Usurped Government than none at all; that the real and whole
Government was laid upon theirs, the Magistrates, shoulders alone, would they
but be pleased to come in to the Faith, and sustain and execute it. What a
plausible, even, cogent Argument is here all along omitted, to let the Powers
of the World know, what a considerable Portion of their Birthright, as
Princes, they neglect, and disown, abdicate and relinquish? what a real damage
and disadvantage they receive, in not coming in to the Church? what a principal
Jewel would be added to their Crown in so doing? So great and considerable a
number, as they which are Christians, and which grow upon the World, and
increase daily, Vestra omnia implevimus, Vrbes, Insulas, Castella, Municipia,
Conciliabula, Castra ipsa, Tribus, Decurias, Palatium, Senatum, Forum, cui
bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares Copiis, as Tertullian in
his Apology, cap. 37. Vast Multitudes every where, of all sorts, in all Places
and Offices, who as they professed all manner of Allegiance, and Duty to them
in Seculars; so would they acquit, resign into their hands, their Power
Spiritual; nay, it is really theirs already, and the execution falls in course
upon them, an accession that must be advantageous, cannot be accounted mean and
inconsiderable to a Government. Thus to be the Fountain and Head of all Rule,
and every Jurisdiction, to invest or abdicate, to oblige or punish, so great,
so considerable a Sect as are the Christians, to constitute and influence, to
depose and remove, every way, to govern at Pleasure; their Bishops and Pastors,
who thus grow upon the World, and influence all Men; the Motive could never
have been neglected; the Argument must have had a great deal of room in their
several Apologies and Embassies, to the Empire, in behalf of themselves and
their Religion, who spared nothing like an Argument, that might but ingratiate,
and insinuate into their good favor, and liking; as it is evident from such
their Writings; and yet there is not one word there of any such Pleadings, or
any thing like it, but the quite contrary; as it has been already made to
appear. I Will go on farther, and assert, that it is very improbable, if not our
Savior himself, yet, that the Apostles should not have done all this, and thus
stated the case down to the World; and yet no man sets these two Powers of the
Church and State more apart than does St. Paul, and so leaves them. To instance
in no more at present, he often exhorts, That they obey Magistrates, and that
they also remember those that have rule over them, who have spoken to them the
Word of God, and his Bishop has his distinct care over the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.5. has his things to set in order, Tit. 1.5. a Power to Summon by
Process, to receive Accusations, as in Court, as upon a Seat of Judicature,
before witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19, 20. though no Power to lay either Confinement,
or any other corporal outward Punishment on their Persons. The Powers of the
World becoming Christian, it must needs make a great alteration as to its
Worship, and great was the advantage the Gospel received thereby; but so great
a translation of Power from one Body to another, must in all likelihood have
been forewarned of, and declared by such, as had a foresight for that very
purpose, of all even Contingencies, and much more of what was to come to pass
in the future Ages of the Church; and as the thing it self was so predivulg'd,
that Kings and Queens should be Nursing Fathers and Mothers to the Church; and
this seems reasonable and requisite to be done, were it only to satisfy men's
Minds in the revolution; especially since all Revelations ended in their
Persons, and it is only for such to believe and assent to after-translations,
and new appearances in the Affairs of Religion, and not upon such notices
aforehand, as expect and depend upon new Discoveries, and Periodical
Illuminations; whimsical and Enthusiastical Persons.

WHEN God was to constitute the Jewish Moses, the present State and
Necessities, as well as other Occurrences foreseen, hindering the perfection and
full accomplishment of his designed Platform, for some time; the Wisdom, and
Mercy, and Providence of God, which is always present with himself and his own
People, and accompanies his designs, foretold and declared what they were to
expect, in the particular instances, the present narrower state of things, and
future ill humors of Men, prohibiting the one, and accidentally occasioning the
other. As, when the Model and Shape of their Government was to be changed, into
that of Kings, or a translation of Power from Person to Person, as is the
pretended case here; it was declared long before by Moses, Deuteronomy. 17.14. as,
when the Worship was to be transferred, (at first of necessity elsewhere, as is
again also here pretended, that Church Power was for a time in the Clergy) to
the place that God should choose, to the Temple, at that time, not built. Men
are generally in love with old ways, and call that old, they have time out of
mind been accustomed to, Innovations are not relished without plain and a great
Authority, nothing but Prophecy, or present notorious Miracles, or a great
assurance from those, whom a known outward evidence makes appear, and most
manifest; that 'twas delivered down from Persons, so assisted by God; and as
God's Wisdom and Goodness is always the same, so neither certainly had his
Mercy and Providence been shorter to this his Body of Christians, than 'twas to
that of the Jews, in the like case; had there been any like it among
Christians, as indeed there was none, the Government of the Church, which is
here in this Discourse asserted, remaining one and the same, and in the same
succession of Persons, when the Powers of the Earth were Christian, as before,
when they were Heathen; and the good Providence of God, so ordered it, that
Constantine the Emperor's becoming Christian, and his Succession, the Church
and Churchmen received only new Courage and Strength; the greatest additional
advantages in such their Charges and Offices, by the Imperial Countenance and
Protection, with all manner of supplies, and abundance, as to Places, Utensils,
Revenues, and Immunities, Stately Churches being immediately erected, with the
greatest magnificence and elegancy of Structure; the Furniture as rich, and
Endowments as large, with a like Privilege as to Persons and Things.
Investitures every ways answerable, and all assistance conferred, and Provision
for the time to come by settled Laws, and most wholesome Constitutions, to
preserve and continue what was thus done and granted, Serviant Reges terrae
Christo, etiam leges ferendo pro Christo, as St. Augustine speaks in his 48
Epistle, The Kings of the Earth serve the Church in making Laws to defend her;
and which Saying was occasioned by St. Augustine, and more to that purpose in
that Epistle, by reason of the severer Imperial Laws and Penalties made against
and inflicted upon that spawn of the Donatists, those unruly Circumcellians,
who broke out into all manner of Outrages and Violence; and though the Church
had not long enjoyed this Peace, but what is the woeful effect of Ease and
Plenty, Divisions and Breaches, arose and grew wide within her self, carried on
to great Ruptures, and much was innovated and taught amiss in other Points; yet
as to this particular, the Subject of Church Power, it was never questioned,
fell not under debate, much less was it wrested out of the hands of Churchmen;
did any one Emperor, if not withal known Heretical, either usurp it to himself,
or alienate it from the Bishops, but all along acknowledge and confirm it to
them? and this will be as clear from the Era or Date of their turning
Christians, as it has appeared to have been from the first entrance of
Christianity till then; and that if we continue our Method, and look into those
times as we have done into the foregoing Ages.

THERE was no Man of the Age, more Athanasius; how solicitously and anxiously
did he Vindicate himself, when accused as an Enemy and Traducer of him, when by
his cruel and most malicious Adversaries, which were many, represented as
Rebellious and Disobedient? This will appear sufficiently from all such as have
employed their Pens in giving to the World an account of those Transactions, by
the Arians and Meletians managed and improved against him, and which were
numerous, and particularly from his own Apology, to Constantius, of which he
that will take a taste, let him read the beginning of it only, if he thinks
much of his labor to go through with it, he acknowledges, the Power of the
Empire in Religious things; in assigning the Feasts of Dedication, and their
times, (...), he acknowledges his Power over his Person, and asks his Diploma
or Letters of leave for the exercise of his Episcopal Function in his own
Church of Alexandria, and for the Convention of Synods, Ibid. p. 682. 754. 761.
Ed. Paris. he asks the Emperor's Grant concerning the Public Service and
Churches in Alexandria; as we have out of Sozomen, Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 20. but
yet he puts a difference betwixt the Work of a Synod, and that of the Empire,
and blames those that confound them, or rather refer all to the Emperor, (...),
p. 730. he refuses to receive Arius into Communion upon his Heretical Terms and
Principles, though the Emperor do Command him, though he threaten him if he do
not; and for refusing, he causes him to be deposed by a Synod held at Tire for
that very purpose, and of his own Convention, and afterward banished him, and
which he submits to, but not to deliver up the Rights of the Church of God; as
Socrates tells us in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 1. cap. 27, 28.32.35. and
he is so bold with Constantius, as to six the mark of Antichrist upon him, when
he undertakes the Protection of a wicked Religion, dissolving the received
Orders of Christ and his Apostles, and creates of his own head new
Constitutions, (...), as in Athanasius, Ep. ad Solit. Vit. agentes, p. 845.
860. and reproves the Emperor farther, that he pretends to have the judicial
Determination of Bishops, but really manages and does all himself, (...), Ib.
and evidently again distinguishes between the work of a Bishop, and the work of
an Emperor, he goes on and is more daring and positive, (...); when any such
thing was heard of from the beginning of the World, that the Judgment and
Decision of the Church had its Authority and Measures from the Empire? or was
ever any such Determination known at all? many Church Decisions have been made,
but never did the Presbyters persuade the Emperor to any such thing; neither
did the Prince intermeddle with the things of the Church, (...), Ibid. And all
this is recorded by Athanasius of the Divine and most Excellent Hosius, in that
his Epistle Ad Solitarium, etc. Page 840 repeating there Hosius his Epistle to
(...) on the same occasion, (...), who drew up the Nicene (...) (...), one that
was heard, and submitted to by all, his own words are these to the Emperor,
(...), etc. Do not interpose thy self, nor meddle with Ecclesiastical Affairs,
nor do you Command in these things; but rather learn them of Us; to Thee God
has committed the Empire, to Us he has deputed what is the Churches; and as
he that undermines the Government, opposes the Ordinance of God; so do thou
take heed, (...), lest forcing to thy self the things which are of the Church,
you become liable to as great a guilt; for it is written, give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods; It is neither
lawful for us to have the Government upon Earth, nor have thou the Power of
Holy things, O King: St. Jerome speaks of the evil Bishops (only the Character
is upon them) De Ecclesiae Principibus, qui non digne regunt oves Domini, as of
Princes in the Church, with Power of Jurisdiction in themselves, in his
Comments on Jeremiah, cap. 23. Sacerdos est Caput, the Priest is the Head; an
Original devolving upon others, Comment. in 1 Cor. 12. and upon Romans 13.
Apostolus in his quae recta sunt, judicibus obediendum, non in illis quae
Religioni contraria sunt; the things of Religion are not to be subjected to
Kings, nor any in Authority under them. And to this purpose he says again, in
Isai. 1. Apostolos a Christo constitutos, Principes Ecclesiarum, the Apostles
were constituted by Christ Princes of the Churches. And the same is said in his
Preface to the Epistle to the Galatians, and particularly on Psalm. 44. Fuere, O
Ecclesia, Apostoli Patres tui, quia ipsi te genuere, etc. The Apostles, O
Church, were thy Fathers that begot thee; now because, they are gone out of the
World, you have in their room Bishops, Sons, which are created of thee, and
those are thy Fathers by whom thou art governed; -- The Gospel being spread in
all Parts of the World, in which Princes of the Church, i. e. Bishops, are
constituted. This Holy Father assigning, all Church Power to and in it self;
and if it be suspected whether these Comments on the Psalms be St. Jerome's
own, I have yet here repeated this passage out of them, as most fully appearing
his sense, to whosoever pleases to consult his Works, especially his Commentary.
St. Augustine's Opinion we have already in part spoke of, and he that will
undertake an Enquiry, will find him all along of the same Opinion. I Will only
instance in the differences occasioned by the Donatists, and what Power the
Empire assumed to it self in those great and many Controversies and their
Decisions, related by him; which he tells us is only to make outward Laws in
defense of what appears to be Truth, and says he, it falls out sometimes Reges
cum in errore sunt, pro ipso errore contra veritatem leges ferunt, that they
make Laws against Truth, themselves being in Error; and good Men are only
proved thereby, as evil Men by their good Laws are amended, Tom. 7. l. 3. Cont.
Crescon. Gramat. cap. 51. they command that which is Good, and forbid that
which is Evil, Non solum quae pertinent ad humanam Societatem, verum etiam ad
divinam Religionem, in things which belong not only to Humane Society, but to
Divine Religion, he has Power to enquire into debates, and to provide for Truth
and Peaco by the Bishops, to assign the Persons, Time, and Place, Vt
superstitionem manifesta ratio confutaret, that Reason may gain upon
Superstition, and Truth be made manifest, Collat. 1. diei, and 3. cum Donatist.
Nor was Cecilianus purged and set free, but by Judiciis and Ecclesiasticis and
Imperialibus, by the Ecclesiastical, as by the Imperial Judgment and
Determinations, Ibid. nor will it appear that the Powers of the Empire have
concerned themselves any farther in those quarrels, than by abetting or
discouraging by outward Laws and Punishments, what was represented as Truth
unto them, and which the Church alone has not Power to do, either to award at
first or after mitigate, but by Prayers and Arguments; and therefore the Civil
Laws and Indulgences, have been sometimes severer, and sometimes too indulgent,
as Accidents or Truth overruled, as is to be seen in his Third and Fourth
Books ad Cresconium; and when these Laws went too hard upon these Donatists,
and pinched their Faction too sorely, then they cried out of Persecution,
denied the Empire this Power in Divine things, and that they were to stand at
no humane Judicature, as is the way of all such Factions, when themselves only
persecute and invade, and whose Insolences and Rapines are at large told us by
St. Austin, in his Forty eighth Epistle, and by Optatus in his Treatise against
Parmenius the Donatist. Hence that of Donatus, lib. 3. ibid. Quid Imperatori
cum Ecclesia? What has the Emperor to do with the Church? whom Optatus there
sharply upbraids, as well as reproves for it; tells Donatus of his Pride and
unheard of insolency in so doing, in lifting up himself above him who is second
to God alone, Cum supra Imperatorem non sit nisi solus Deus, who sits as God in
all forensick outward Judicatures, and no man can withstand him; but
Church Power is still supposed a quite differing thing. I mean, that which our
Savior left immediately to his Church, it falls not under this head of things;
it is derived in another stream, as the design of his whole Book declares; nor
is Optatus, for this or any other like Expression to be thought to refer all
Church Power into the Empire, than those other Fathers did, using much the same
Expressions, and which is above observed, and he in particular returns the rise
and devolution of the Bishops of Rome to St. Peter; by whose Successors it was
then in Siricius the Bishop in his days, in his Second Book against Parmenius;
and so St. Austin has done on the same occasion, in his Hundred and sixty fifth
Epistle, and the breach of this Succession, is the Charge and Crime of Schism,
they both object against the Donatists, as guilty of a Church, as well as a
State-transgression, and both on several accounts, as two distinct Impieties,
are they proceeded against. I Will give but one instance out of St. Chrysostom,
and it is so full, there needs no more of those many others are producible, it is
in his 86th Homily on St. John, where he says, Christ did invest his Apostles
with Power, (...), as a King sends forth his Praefects, and Governors, with a
Power immediately from himself, to imprison and release, to bind and to loose,
to execute of themselves all Power and Jurisdiction so received, and belonging
to the Deputation. And what was the Judgment of St. Ambrose, the particular
case alone betwixt him and the Emperor Theodosius, makes abundantly appear,
occasioned by that cruel Massacre committed in Thessalonica, by his, at least,
connivance; the Holy Bishop removed him from the Prayers and Altar, durst not
Communicate with him, in those Holy Duties, whose hands were so full of Blood;
not that St. Ambrose could impose these things by force, and that his Person be
so absented, by any thing like a Coercive Power, or did design or pretend to
it, and that Penance which he laid upon him, and the Emperor accepted of, upon
his Re-entrance, was it suited to his Imperial Power, no ways abating of, or
detracting from his Majesty and Sovereignty; it was to enact a Law that no
Penal Decree or Edict that comes forth, be executed, till Thirty days after its
first Sanction, to avoid the fury of such Proceedings for the future. No, St.
Ambrose upon the either Plea or Execution of this Power, does not attempt his
either Purple or Scepter, to Depose him from his Crown, or Absolve his Subjects
of their Allegiance; he only executes upon him his Pastoral Charge, and which
is in order to the World to come, (...), and as he reverenced his Kingly Power,
so did he take care also, not to transgress the Law of his God; had the Emperor
been less a Christian, and returned upon him with violence, (...), he could
receive the stroke with Pleasure, he did discharge his Duty as a Bishop, and he
was secure within, he only lets the Emperor know, that his Purple makes him a
Prince, not a Priest, that it does not exempt him from the Laws and Discipline
of God's Church; and for this he appeals to his own Education, (...), nourished
up in the Divine Oracles, and in which it was clear, (...), what was the
Priests, and what the Princes peculiar Office, and, which were there
notoriously distinguished; all this was no Pragmatick, newly started,
particular, extravagant attempt, in St. Ambrose; but a commonly received and
owned Right, and Truth, what the whole Age had been taught and bred up in. And
Theodosius in particular, (...), knew it by his Education; and which caused his
displeasure to some who were willing to abate of their Church Right, whether
out of Court-flattery, or for what other Reason, for which on the contrary he
so highly valued and honored St. Ambrose, (...), as who alone was worthy of
the Name of a Bishop; all which, with more is to be read in our Church
Histories, particularly those of Sozomen, lib. 7. cap. 25. and Theodoret, lib.
5. cap. 18. and that which gave St. Ambrose a particular advantage in the
asserting, and execution of such his Power was, that he had the Authority of
Valentinian on his side; for that good Emperor had owned all this before, and
he Sang this Hymn at his Consecration, St. Ambrose being then a lay Governor of
that Province, deputed to it by himself, (...), he gave thanks to God and
Christ, that as he had committed the Power of Men's Bodies to him in that
Province, so from them he had now the Power of Souls, by the (...), there
mentioned, his Episcopal Character then conferred upon him, Theodorit. Eccl.
Hist. l. 4. cap. 7.

Eusebius, and goes along our first Church History, to Constantine downward,
will find all along, the same Church Power continued and asserted, and
expressed in the same words too, as is that of the Empire. Nor can any man any
more doubt, that there was Ecclesiastical Power, seated in some measure, in
every Order of the Church, but primarily and chiefly in the Bishop; then that
there was a Civil Power placed by God first of all in the Empire, and from him
derived to his Praefects and inferior Magistrates; and Damasus Bishop of Rome
had as real a Power in his Diocese, and which can no more be questioned upon
the score of those public Records, than that Valentinianus his Contemporary
had a real Authority in the Empire of the World; the Bishop is still represented
in his Chair, as the Emperor is upon his Throne, or can be by words declared,
they are still called and acknowledged, (...), Eusebius. Hist. l. 10. c. 3. (...),
Cap. 4. (...), De Vita Constantini, lib. 2. c. 62. (...) cum Presbyteris suis,
l. 3. c. 7. (...), cap. 24. (...), cap. 59. (...), and de Eustathio dicitur
quod Concilium Niceae, (...). nimirum Antiochiae, cum and eodem tempore and
Capite dicit quod Constantinus (...), Sozomen, l. 1. c. 2. (...) Sacerdotes
Vocat. lib. 2. cap. 12. and he gives this account why the Bishops are Buried at
Constantinople, with the Emperors, in the Church which is called The Apostles,
(...), lib. 2. cap. ult. (...), lib. 3. c. 6. (...), De Episcopis, and (...),
De Imperatore, lib. 6. c. 4. Philip, who held a Praefecture, or some kind of
Government under the Empire, is called (...) in Constantinople, and which
implies his Mission and Deputation from and under the Emperor; But this word is
never applied to the Bishops, or any one of them, who are no Deputies of his,
receive nothing like a Commission, nor have any derived Power from him, they
are not the King's Ministers or Vicegerents, as are those in Temporals; and
they owe their Authority alone to Christ Jesus, Cap. 9. And so again, lib. 4.
cap. 3. (...), when mentioning the Officers of the Crown, under Deputation, and
all along in the History, (...), Romae, Sylvester, (...) Antiochiae, Vitalis,
and (...) post illum Phlagonius, Theodorit. lib. 1. c. 3. (...)
(Constantinopoleos) (...), Flavianus (...) Gennadius, Evagr. Hist. Eccl. lib.
1. cap. 8. lib. 2. cap. 11. lib. 5. cap. 16. So that if things by words are
delivered to us, which must be, since we have not converse with one another, as
they tell us, Angels have, or private immediate infusions from God, he speaks
not to us, inarticulately in Sounds, and in Dreams, as of old; we have here the
thing contended for in this Discourse, viz. a real, Autoritative Power in the
Church independent, equally as in the Empire; neither Subordinate to one
another. The Argument and Evidence is as good as the Story is true, and the
reception of those Ages; or as the truth of Matter of Fact can make it.

Christendom; they met indeed in the Name of the Emperor, were summoned by his
Writ; nor ought they personally, and in Bodies, collectively to Assemble
without it; but they acted and decreed in their own Names, by their own Power
and Authority, were all their Synodical Determinations made, (...). So the great
and first general Council of Nice, and was the after-form of the Proceedings of
the succeeding Councils, which still confirmed that first, solemnly owning and
receiving of it; It seemed good to the Holy Synod, to the Holy Bishops and
Fathers there; as the immediately following General Council at Constantinople
explains it, (...), a form but a little abating of that of the Apostles Synod,
Acts 15. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us; and as their Power is
distinct, so is its Execution in different words and Penalties, so as
expressed, for the most part, by none else, and in all, never, executed by any,
(...), Arceri, seu ejici ab Ecclesia, a fraternitatis Communione, relegari,
submoneri a limine and omni tecto Ecclesiae, Sacramento Benedictionis
exauctorari, Communione interdici, abstineri, depelli; these are the words
still expressing the Execution of this Church Power, as they are to be met with
up and down in the Greek Councils, and Greek and Latin Fathers; many of which
Mr. Seldom has took the pains to Collect to our hands, Lib. 1. De Synod. Page
257. 259. and are to be seen also in an earlier Copy, in the first Canon of the
Seventh general Council, held at Nicea, there reckoned up and owned, as
bottomed on the Authority of the Apostles Canons, and the Six foregoing general
Councils. And the Bishops have a Power (...), Con. 5. Council. Anciran. (...),
as before in the first Nicene Council, Can. 12. of absolving from and removing,
taking off such their Mulcts laid upon them, either in whole or in part; or
adding farther degrees, suitable as their repentance and amendment, is
perceived, and approved, or not approved of, and this Power asserted in the
Church by the great Council of Nice, and that of Ancyra, is the great instance
of the self-existing, eminent, independent, underivable Power that is in the
Church of Christ, wholly in her self, and in none else beside, as having Power
to punish and relieve, to give Sentence and relax, in her own breast; this is,
what is not done in the Civil Judicatures, where the Judge is in Deputation,
who cannot correct his Sentence once given, make heavier or alleviate it, that
is only in Sovereign Power, as the Lawyers speak; but the Bishop can do it,
(...). Photius Nomocanon. Tit. 9. cap. 1. and 3. (doctas videas and nuperas
Annotationes in Can. Niceae), there was then believed and accounted a first and
antecedent Right in the Church, to make ((...)) Laws and Rules, from which, out
of Contempt and Opposition, there was not allowed any Appeal to be made, to the
Empire or Secular Power, or Judicatures, unless by way of imploring Patronage,
for a better enquiry, as not Canonically executed, Can. 6. Council. 2. Genesis
Constantinop. Can. 107. Council. Carthag. and he that proceeds otherwise (...)
(...), and not according to the Rules and Laws of the Church, is to be cast out
of her Communion, if a Layman; if a Presbyter or Deacon, he is to be deposed,
never to be restored again, never admitted, but to Plead his Cause, Conc.
Antioch. Can. 11, 12. and the Clergyman is not to leave his Bishop in Matters
of Strife, and go to, (...), as the Power of the Realm is still called, the
Secular Judges; or if he Appeal from his Bishop, it may be only, when the Case
is with the Bishop himself, as a Party, and he is to appeal to the Provincial
Synod, or the Metropolitan, Exarch, or Patriarch, Can. 9. Council. Genesis
Chalcedon. or he may ask and Petition the Emperor, that he interpose with his
Power over all Persons in all Causes, for a farther Enquiry by the Bishop when
Justice seems to be not understood, or to be denied, Can. 107. Conc. Carth. the
Sin of Schism is still defined to be, when a Presbyter makes a Congregation,
and makes an Altar (...), in despite and contempt of his Bishop, Can. 31.
Apost. and so Can. 6. Council. Genesis Constantinopolit. (...), when they unite for
Religious Services in opposition to their Bishop; and Can. 31. Council. 6th. in
Trullo. and Can. 5. Council. Antioch. Can. 10. Council. Carthag. It Is more
express, If any Presbyter or Deacon, contemns his own Bishop, separates from
the Church, and makes a private Congregation and Altar, and disobeys farther,
his Bishops Summons, to render him accountable for so doing, he is to be
deposed, and if he perseveres to make farther troubles in the Church, (...), as
a Seditious Person, the outward Secular Power is to Chastise him, Can. 5.
Council. Antioch. where we have a through distinction of the two Powers, with
their Offices; and the Canon goes before, that of the Church is antecedent; and
therefore when Constantius went to cast some Bishops that were clamorous and
contentious out of the Church, Eleusius with Sylvanus and others, told him,
That he had Power (...) of the outward Punishment, what reached the Liberties
and Advantage of his Person; but 'twas theirs to judge (...), of Piety and
Impiety, Theodoret. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 27.

Machiavel design, against all Religion, in every instance of it; thus
professedly; endeavoring to wrest it out of their Hands, to lodge its
Possession; Care and Preservation elsewhere, in the Laity; or at the best, in
Kings and Secular Governors, by the flattery of a new Honor and Prerogative
cast upon them; the easier to gain their assistance, and with more Success to
manage their main design. Is it not now the common Discourse of the Many?
Religion, and which is still by that sort of Men whose Design is to have no
Religion at all, complained of and lamented, as decayed and lost? what can
never be retrived, or this done, continued by Churchmen, whose purpose is
only, by their Pride and Ambition, to usurp and enclose all into their own
hands, to have within themselves an Arbitrary, Autoritative, Absolute Rule and
Governance over Men's Faith and Persons; and the very title of a Clergyman
gives a suspicion of either Unfaithfulness or Insufficiency; it is what is
managed by the great Hugo Grotius, That Religion is not to be entrusted with,
nor can it, as it ought, be promoted and propagated by the Bishops and
Councils, the Prince is alone capable of it; though it is in his raw indigested
youthful Book, De Imper. Sum. Potest. in Sacris, and his Posthumous Work, after
all, he then ran with the present Crowd he was engaged in, as himself
afterward acknowledges; and much certainly is to be attributed to those
Untheological barbarous Proceedings in the Synod of Dort; which was to be sure
fresh in Memory, if not actually on the Stage, when he was in those his
Meditations; they allowing neither Humanity, nor Argument, to such as were
Remonstrants, whereof Grotius was one; that is, not of the Calvinistical
Presbyterian, both Faith and Faction, and that in every Point, as they
required. Deprivations, Banishments, were their Ordinary Punishment, and the
like Cruelties; nay worse, and more rigorous Proceedings, which was by the
French Calvinists at that time, upon the same score, and that too, upon their
own Brethren of the Reformation; whereof Peter du Moulin was the Head, and
great Manager; of which a bitter taste and such an act of Tyranny, as no Story
can Parallel, is to be had in the Life of Episcopius; upon these Reflections in
all likelihood it is, that we find not only Grotius, but those, otherwise,
Learned and Ingenious Men, on the Remonstrants side, still to inveigh against
Synods, and the unfitness of Churchmen to Preside and Rule, where such
controverted Cases are on foot, to be debated and determined, asserting the
Prince as much the fitter Person, Oppression makes the Wise man Mad. All which
is to be seen of any that are Conversant in those Transactions, particularly in
the Epistles of those learned Men lately collected in one Volume, and Printed
at Amsterdam. I shall therefore to take off the show and appearance of this
Objection, upon what account soever it was made, Vindicate the Integrity of
true Churchmen, as well as farther assert this great Truth now in hand, by
adding, to what has been said already, the Public Acknowledgments and
Declarations of the Christian Emperors themselves. That Church Power thus
removed from them, is no injury to their Crowns and Jurisdictions, thus seated
and limited in the Bishops and Church Officers only, is no Usurpation on their
parts; it is what is really existing in them.

CONSTANTINE, the First Christian Anulinus, he says of Cecilianus the Bishop,
(...), that he is Chief, and has a Government, as a Churchman, in that
Province, over which Anulinus was placed by himself, as a President in
Seculars; and enjoins him that they that serve at the Altar be freed from all
Public Services in the State, the better to attend it, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
lib. 10. cap. 7. he calls the Bishops (...), in Vita Constantini, lib. 2. cap.
2. and cap. 46. (...), he writes to the Bishops as Governors, having
Jurisdict^on, not in Secular Affairs, that belongs to the Presidents of
Provinces, or the Praefectus Praetorio, to whom he there directs them for
assistance, and this is yet clearer in that his known saying to the Christian
Bishops, when entertained by him, (...), You are appointed by God as Bishops of
those things which are within the Church, I am appointed by God as a Bishop of
those things which are without, De Vita Constantini, lib. 4. cap. 24. and what
is meant in the Ecclesiastical sense of it by (...), appears plainly by a like
Phrase in the Tenth Canon of the Council of Carthage just now made use of by
us; where to disobey the Bishop is Deposition, and if they be still turbulent
in the Church, and go on to Sedition, (...), the word but a little changed, the
outward Secular Power is to Chastise them, i. e. by outward Penalties laid upon
them, the business and work of every Prince being to Defend and Protect the
Church; or if, (...), be interpreted, to relate only to the World, i. e. those
that are not Christians, as some would have it; and so, the meaning is, that
Constantine's Province is to govern them which are out of the Church and no
Christians, the Bishops can take Cognizance only of such as are in her Arms,
and have submitted to her Discipline; the two Jurisdictions are fully owned, as
a part, and distinct, and the Empire only appears a loser by the nicety;
because his right as from hence, in Church Affairs, and over their Persons is
denied him; Nor has David Blondel any such reason for his clamorous Exceptions
against Rufinus, in his Tenth Book of Ecclesiastical History, Cap. 2. because
he brings in Constantine speaking to the Bishops upon the occasion of some
particular Quarrels that were amongst them, and telling them, Deus vos
constituit Sacerdotes, and potestatem dedit de nobis quoque judicandi, and ideo
nos a vobis recte judicamur, vos autem non potestis ab hominibus judicari, that
God had constituted them Priests, and gave them Power of judging Kings, and
they are with just Authority judged by them, but the Bishops are not judged of
Men; for it is all true in a duly confined and limited sense, and in which we
are to understand the Emperor there meaning it, the last Appeals being to the
Church in some instances, and even Kings must come to Heaven by her Laws and
Discipline, under their Spiritual Guidance and Jurisdiction; nor was this an
undue or less Cogent Argument for Constantine to use to the Bishops, for the
laying aside their Dissentions in lesser Matters, the occasion of such his
Speech; it looking and sounding very ill, that they who were his Judges in
other Cases, and in those too of the highest concern, should become liable to
his just Censures and Reproof, by reason of their want of Love and Unity with
one another; he argues with them for Peace, from the excellency of their own
high Calling and Profession, D. Blondel, it seems, had not discerned of the
difference, betwixt a Power to determine for Truth, and that which by Coercive
outward means, engages to, and maintains it, or at least he would not own it;
and it is over usual, and well known a thing with him, to blunder and be
clamorous against Ecclesiastical Writers, to run cross to the received course
of Church-Story, and thinks he does nothing unless he brings in abundance of
Inferences and Corollaries, has not Examples, heap upon heap, as he has here,
in how many Church Cases, and of how many Clergymen Constantine was Judge, as
Athanasius, Caecilianus, Eustathius Antiochenus, etc. and not one hits the
Nail, all to no purpose; because in other Judicatures, and quite diverse
causes, than Constantine or Rufinus designed; only he amuses and confounds the
Reader. If less considering, he advantages and adds, to the great Transmarine
design of bringing a disrepute and baffle upon Church-Antiquity; all which is
to be seen in his Formula Regnante Christo, Cap. 15. Page 175. 6. when the
Bishops Petitioned Valentinianus the Emperor, those who asserted the One
Substance, that they might be permitted to rectify some Errors introduced, in
the Explanation of it, the Emperor thus replied, (...), Sozomen. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 6. cap. 7. That he was in the Order of the People, or Laity, and it would
be over Pragmatical and unlawful for him to meddle with such things, the
Priests to whom the care of such things do belong, are to go and consult
together where they please about it, and where we have the Power and
Prerogative of the Empire giving leave, as to place of meeting; permitting it
to their own choice and discretions; but the Church Power it self, is wholly
and by himself removed from him, as not his Due and Right. And a Prince he was
did not use to remit of his Rights, if really his, and knew well enough to
Command and Retain them; as appears, That when first ascending his Throne, and
the Soldiery was impetuous, requiring him to choose a Partner in the
Government, made this smart return, You chose me, fellow Soldiers, for your
Emperor, and now what you demand is at my choice, within my self, and at my
alone disposal; you are to Obey, I am to see to the Government. Nor would he
suffer them to proceed in their Demands, or farther to advise him, cap. 6. and
21. Ejusdem libri.

(...), So Justinian the Constantinople, the Throne of Epiphanius then
Patriarch there, Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 4. Ed. Gothofred. and he evidently
distinguishes betwixt (...) and (...), betwixt the Priesthood and the Empire,
he assigns them two distinct Offices and apart Duties, (...), one serving in
Divine, the other governing and taking care in Humane things, Novel. 6.
Praefat. he calls the Ecclesiastical Power, (...), and their Determinations,
(...), and to which (...), the Throne of Episcopacy, the Self-existing Power of
the Priest, to which the Empire gives it concurrent Vote; and thus, (...), the
Bishop and the King, Divine and Humane going together, a full and due Sentence
is given, Novel. 42. Praesat. And so again, (...), Ibid. cap. 1. and (...), as
over and over again, upon each occasion, he distinguishes betwixt
Ecclesiastical and Civil Crimes, the Bishop is Judge of the Ecclesiastical, and
the Judges of the Provinces are not to intermeddle with them; it is to be done
(...), according to the Sacred and Divine Laws, and which his own Laws, those
of the Empire, do not disdain to follow, (...), Novel. 83. and Novel. 131. cap.
1. (...), It is decreed, That (...), the Holy and Ecclesiastical Canons have
the force of a Law, those composed by the four Councils of Nicca,
Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon; whose Determinations we receive as
Scripture; (...), and their Canons are Laws unto us. That there is something in
the Priest that is not in the Emperor; though again, more in the Emperor, which
is not in the Priest. Theodosius the younger declares, That he approaches the
Holy Altar, only to Offer, nor does he stay within the Sept. (...), or Pretend
any thing to the nigher Divinity there residing, Cod. Theodos. 9. Tit. 45.
Edict. Imperat. page 367. Ed. Gothofred. he calls the Ecclesiastical Ministry,
Principatum, a Principality, or Power within it self, Cod. 16. Tit. 5. Lex. 19.
Leo the Emperor, thus speaks of the Canons of the Church, (...), that they were
spoken by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, Imperat. Constitut. 2. page 693.
ad finem Novel. and that his assent goes along with, and he follows in his
Determinations, the Ecclesiastical Canons, (...), Constitut. 9. page 701.

Constantine, nor did he, or the succeeding Christian Emperors, alter any thing
of the Church Power, as not in it self, so nor by a change of its but Subject,
asserted and practiced, under those that were Heathen, the Empire only cast in
its assistance, added Nerves and Sinews, Strength and Corroboration to it; and
for this we need have gone no farther than that laborious Collection David
Blondel has presented the World withal, in his Book De formula regnante
Christo, page 373. where it is plain, there were still acknowledged two
distinct Empires in the World, two different Principalities, Governments,
Kingdoms and Jurisdictions, and this as before, so after the Empire was
Christian; and the Public Monuments there produced, run thus, Sub Diocletiano
Regnante Domino Christo. Sub Justiniano, Regnante Domino Christo, etc. and so
down to the Thousandth year of our Savior's Incarnation; and this, because it
is found sometimes to run, only, Regnante Christo, and the Reign of the Empire
is left out, though it do no ways infer and prove that all Empire is originally
in Christ, both as to Spirituals and Seculars; and that he, that is, his
Succession, the Church, has the disposal of the Kingdoms of the World too,
Primarily and Originally in him, as some zealous Parasites of the Roman Faith,
thence, it seems, have inferred, and against whom the main Plot of D. Blondel,
in this his Book is laid, and very well; yet this it infers, and evidently
proves, That our Savior and his Succession the Church, have been always
supposed to have had a Kingdom in the World, not to supplant and overturn, to
usurp, and encroach upon; but to bless that other of the World, to render it
Prosperous on Earth, and by her holier Laws and Discipline to bring all to the
Kingdom of Heaven, when the Reign on Earth is at an end. But this D. Blondel
could not, or would not see himself; and therefore, a thing too usual with him,
runs into the opposite extreme to his Adversaries, is angry when this very
Church Power and its existence, of which himself gives so evident a
Demonstration, is asserted, solitary, and not in the Empire, as no ways
flowing, and included in its Constitution; as the other will have no Empire,
but from and in the Church (so hard a matter is it for some Men to contend for
Truth, and against the Church of Rome at once) and as has above been observed;
but these Oversights, if no worse, are usual with him, it is like his ill luck
in other cases.

Theodosian and Justinian, in their several Laws, Novels and Constitutions,
will readily grant all this, and more, that the Church and State, the Worldly
or Secular, and Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Power, were still considered,
reputed and proceeded on, as quite distinct Bodies and Powers, though both
flowing from the same Original and Fountain, yet as diverse, as the Soul, and
Body, with several Offices and Duties on each incumbent, in different Channels
conveyed; and all aiming at the great and ultimate end, the general advantage
of Mankind; and each individual, both with their faces to the same Jerusalem;
but in several Paths, and Determinations judiciary in order to it. He Will find
that as the Church, the Councils and Bishops, were ever Conscientious and
Industrious, that they entrenched not on the Empire, withheld not from it what
was its due; usurped not any thing was not their own, paid all manner of
Observances to Kings and Secular Governors, in all manner of Duties; as
Prayers, Thanksgiving, Instructions, Directions, Admonitions, Tribute, Loyalty,
etc. So again did the Empire preserve their Functions, Persons, and Estates;
give them Liberties, Enfranchisements, Protestations, (unless where Apostates,
as Julian, where overmuch favoring Heresies, as some time Constantius, etc.)
countenanced and provided for Truth and Holiness, and sound Discipline,
according to the Rules, Canons, Directions, Interpretations, and
Determinations, given by the Bishops assembled in Council, or occasionally
otherways made, and recommended unto them; the Church still Petitioned and
Supplicated the Empire, when by the Affronts and Insolences, the greater
Impieties and Obstinacies of the World, the edge of their Spiritual Sword was
dulled and blunted, when Coercive outward Punishments alone could hope to
prevail for Peace and Amendment; of this we have several Instances upon Record,
as for the deposing Dioscorus, in Evagrius his Ecclesiastical History, l. 2. c.
4. in placing Proclus in the Episcopal Throne, Socrat. Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. cap.
4. which was immediately by Theodosius, Maximinianus, the defuncts Body, being
not yet laid in the Ground, to prevent the Tumults of the People. To this
purpose we have the Case of one Cresconius a Bishop, who left his own, and
invaded another's Church, and, upon a remand from the Council, refusing to
return, the President of the Country is Petitioned, and his Secular arm (which
alone has a Coercive Power over Men's Persons) sends him back again, according
to the Constitutions Imperial, Council. Carthag. Can. 52. just such another Case
as that of Paulus Samosetanus, in the days of Aurelian the Emperor
abovementioned, and the course of Proceedings we see is the same now as then,
both in Church and State, as that Laws may be made to restrain such as were
fled to the Church for refuge, Can. 60. that the Riot and Excess be taken away
on their Festivals, which drew Men to Gentilism again, by the obscener
Practices, and which were without shame and beyond Modesty, Can. 65, 66. that
the Secular Power would come in eo quod Episcoporum autoritas incivitatibus
contemnitur; because the Power of the Bishops is contemned in the Cities, Can.
70. ut Ecclesiae opem ferat, to assist the Church against these Impieties, so
strenuous and prevailing, Can. 78. as in the Case of the unrulier Donatists,
Can. 95, 96. and the Thanks of the Bishops were given for their Ejection, Can.
97. and the Emperor is Petitioned to grant Defensors to the Church, Can.
10.109. and as the Church thus supplicated the Empire in these arduous Cases,
and when its assistance was wanting; so on the other side, did the Empire still
advise with the Church, when designing to make Religion the Municipal Law of
the Empire, to imbody it with the World, under the same Sanctions, either as to
Punishments, or Rewards, to make it the Religion of the State also; they still
consulted antecedent Canons, or present Bishops in Council, or some
Ecclesiastical Authority, they created nothing anew, gave the help of the World,
for Countenance, Assistance and Confirmation, to stablish what the Church had
put its Sanction upon. And those Emperors that designed to discountenance
Christianity, or set up some particular Heresy, and stifle it in part, or
depose any great Churchmen, and some such there was, they attempted it not,
but by the Clergy, though of their own, the Power as in themselves alone, was
not pretended to, they had their own Synods and Bishops, in order to it, and
what they did, was done in their Names also, and all this will readily appear
to any one acquainted with the Canons of the Church, and Laws of the Empire, or
if it seem too hard a task, he will find it, at least, attempted to his hand, and
with Care and Industry, reduced to a little room, by Photius Patriarch of
Constantinople, in his Book, therefore called the Nomo-Canon, to show the
concurrency of the Laws and Canons, the Canons still placed first, as in course
anteceding. And in this sense only, that of Socrates can be understood in the
Proem to his Fifth Book of Ecclesiastical History, (...) (Reges viz.) (...). So
soon as Kings began to be Christians, the things of the Church were managed,
and accomplished by them. By which things what is there intended, and what the
Power came into the Empires hand by becoming Christian, the next words of the
Historian clears, making the Instance, (...), and the greatest Synods were by
their Appointment Summoned, and still are so. I Will bring here some instances of
the Power and Procedure of the Empire, in Church Businesses to render all more
conspicuous, if possible.

Constantine himself sat in Person, in the Case of Cecilianus, and the
Donatists, Miltiades and the Bishop of Rome, and the Clergy debating it, as St.
Austin tells us, lib. 1. cont. Parmen. Donatist. and Flavius Marcellinus is
deputed afterward by the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius, in a Collation of
that Nature, as a Secular Cognitor and Supervisor, 16. Cod. Theodos. Lex. 3.
Tit. 11. they exercised a Power and Cognizance over all Persons in these Causes
and Meetings; they were then their Subjects, as before, and whom they
commanded, and though such Members were obliged, at the Summons of the Bishops
themselves, and by consent among one another, to be present at the Council, to
come in and appear there, Can. 80. Council. Carthag. yet the Emperor retained a
Power above them, and they might be absent altogether, or depart after they had
appeared, if the Emperor, (...), by his Letters required it, Council. Sardicens.
Can. 7. they had a Power over the very Causes themselves, in these Conciliary,
Clerical Debates and Determinations, and were Judges here; If all that was
determined, seemed not duly reported, or adjusted, every ways clear and plain
unto them; if scruples and doubts notwithstanding, remain; if new matter
proposed, and adjudged considerable, by the adverse Parties, De Clericis
judicantibus, Praesidet Imperator ipse, and prout male vel been Judicat, 16.
Cod. Theodos. l. 42. Tit. 2. and which Law though instancing in some
Immunities, as to Public Secular things, yet holds in other Decisions. So
Constantine heard the Cause of Cecilianus and the Donatists a second time, when
the Bishops had heard it before, and Myltiades of Rome was there, as above in
St. Austin. And it was the suit of the Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon,
that it might be decreed by a Law, that all things at Ephesus, since the first
Synod there; of which St. Cyril of Alexandria, was Chief, should not retain any
force, implying it in his Power to revise, and reconsider, and he may reexamine
the Actions of Councils, Compend. Act. Synod. Chalced. apud Evagrium. Eccl.
Hist. l. 2. cap. 18. And Petrus de Marca gives us several instances of the like
nature, of Appeals made to the Empire upon the results of Councils, and he
accepted them, De Concord. Sacerd. and Imper. l. 7. c. 2. that the Emperor had
directed and limited in what Points, and how far to proceed, calling Councils
only for particular occasions; as De Marca, Ibid. and lib. 6. c. 22. and all
this the Security of the Empire required, in the common course of things, that
no Men imbody, or unite locally, upon any Plea whatever, or Pretense of what
Business soever, and not by his Warrant, under his Oversight and Protection,
whose Designation and Commissions come not from him, and all which Christianity
supposes, and declared for upon its admission into the World, and Kingdoms
embracing of it; it appoints every Man wherein he was called there to abide, if
a state of Honesty and Justice; not, of that filthiness, sometimes reigned
among the Gentiles, and many times had a Chief Place in what they called
Religious Worship, this Christianity was designed to rectify and remove, but
continue to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's; adds new Obligations to
Government, and gives new Arguments for Obedience to it; but cancels no one,
takes no one subject, in any one instance, from under his Jurisdiction, nor can
any Governor be secure upon other terms, that has so many Persons, so
considerable, as so many Professors are, or at least may be, with Power to
associate in his Jurisdictions as they shall please, and when, and not in all
instances, relating to such their imbodying, his Subjects; or though, if not
able to meet without his Call; yet when together, and not under his Inspection
and Jurisdiction, not Governed by his Rules and Laws, with a Power to canvass
and unhinge, to insinuate and propose and manage, as they shall list, and how
long, in Ordine ad Spiritualia; if they judge it useful to Religion. This is
the same in effect, as to meet at their Wills; no Government can bear it, can
subsist on such conditions, all must, or may, at the Pleasure or Piques, of
such the associated, be undermined and ruined. Again, the Empire is engaged, as
to preserve the Laws of the Church then in being, so that in making new ones,
those the old be not entrenched upon and affronted; or that the repeals be upon
equitable accounts, and agreeable with the Catholic Faith, certainly received,
with former Sanctions of either their Ancestry, or their own; and these we find
the Rules and Directions given by the Emperors, Honorius and Theodosius, to
Flavianus Marcellinus their Secular Cognitor, in the Debates about the
Donatists, Ea quae circa fidem Catholicam, vel certa ordinavit antiquitas, vel
Parentum nostrorum autoritas Religiosa constituit, vel nostra Serenitas
roboravit, Novella Superstitione remota, and inviolata, custodire praecipimus,
supra Cod. Theodos. 16. Tit. 11. l. 3. and indeed it were an Imposition not to
be endured in common Business betwixt one man and another, when but a private
Consent, Confirmation and Authority is desired, to deny liberty of Enquiring,
Demurring, Discoursing or Debating, or whatsoever may seem best to tend to
Information, as to particulars; and then how insufferable, if not allowed the
Prince? when supplicated and called in by the Church, to make Laws, give the
Royal Assent, Stamp and Character, and Protection, to their Results and
Determinations, and which otherwise, must want the edge and advantage of it;
and not upon a freedom to consider former Laws and Canons, made and ratified,
with future inconveniences that may happen; this were indeed to make Princes
Lacqueys, Hackneys, or what vile and mean enough we can say, to the Church, to
debase them into the order of Idiots or Pageants; all true Churchmen in their
Offers and Proceedings have started at, and abhorred it. But then we are to
note farther, that when the Emperors appeared in Councils, whether themselves
in Person, or by their Proxies and Substitutes, the most Politic and Prudent,
the more Acute and Ingenious; as Theodosius, or any other, they acted there,
and in these Church Debates, only upon the forementioned ends and purposes; to
secure the common Reputation both of Men and Governors, and to see that former
Sanctions be not violated to judge as to Matter of Fact, and what was Law and
Canon before, and that nothing destructive be admitted and imbodied into the
Empire, and which many times was deputed to the Bishops themselves; as we have
instance in the Comments of Jacob Gothofred, in extravagans de judicio
Episcopali ad finem Cod. Theodos. l. 1. (and to be sure the Empire never
determined, but by the Clergy in any thing else) and the Enquiry was only this,
an Ordinavit Antiquitas? that nothing thwarring was introduced, and imposed.
Nor can Theodosius himself be supposed to have done any more, from the Relation
made of him by Socrates, Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 10. or by Sozomen, l. 7. c. 17.
where he is engaged in Points of Faith, and which is so much insisted on by
those that resolve all Power into the Prince, in the determining and composing
all differences arising in Points of Religion, Vid. Grotium: bona fides
Lubber^i, 48. and alibi. Theodosius was an acute Man, and pursued his own
Satisfaction, in those Points or Articles, he made Law, (...), and all he did
upon his search was this, he concurred in the same Opinion with the Bishops,
received their Reasons offered, and allowed of the Grounds they proceeded on,
and imbodied in the Empire the Decrees of the Council called by him at
Constantinople, upon the occasion of the Arians; and other Business in the
Eighth Chapter of that Book of Socrates. And so again in Sozomen, he gives out
his Rescripts, for equal Honor to be given to the Persons in the Trinity; and
declares those Heretics which do it not, and enjoins Theophilus to follow the
Nicene Faith, for which the antecedent Church Canon is the rule, lib. 7. cap.
4, 5. 9.

THE Laws of the Empire against Heretics Courtiers misrepresenting (for such
it seems there always was, and will be) the Grant is to be actually void, the
Houses they meet in are Confiscated, they that have frequented them are
Punished an Hundred Pounds, and such as continue at them, Fifty; no Man is to
read their Books, they are all to be burned; none is to Petition in their
behalf, their last Testaments are voided, they are not permitted to Buy or
Sell, or Trade as do other Men; all their Gifts, Endowments, and Revenues,
settled on their Sects, are transferred to the Churches use. Such of them as
set up Schools and Teach, are to be animadverted upon Vltimo Supplicio, to be
sure by a Punishment, greater than others; and they that learn of them are to
Pay Ten Pounds. No Layman that is an Heretic, is to have or exercise any
Government, lest they be vexatious to the Bishops and Christians, all the
Moderators, Governors, and Underofficers in Provinces that neglect to execute
these Laws, or permit them to be violated, are to have a Mulct of Ten Pounds
laid upon them. No Civil or Military Power is to assist them in erecting their
quasi Ecclesias, falsely called Churches, Speluncas fidei suae, under the
Punishment of Twenty Pounds of Gold. He that entertains a Conventicle in his
House, if (vilis) of the Plebeians, he is to be beaten with Clubs; if an
Ingenuous Person, his Punishment is Ten Pounds; and if they go from their
Conventicles to Mutinies and Sedition, it is present Death; and to such as
frequent them, it is Proscription of Goods, with many more Penalties assigned.
Some greater, and some less, as was the temper of the Lawmakers, and the
apprehended Guilt, as greater or less the Heresy, of more or less danger in
Church or State, even to some, as the Manichees, their Children were not to
inherit; but then, who and what these Heretics, and Heresies were; what made a
Conventicle, or Schismatical Meeting, what constituted this Rule of Faith and
Unity? this was not the work of the Empire, nor did it pretend to be Judge and
Decide. She believed, as did the Church determine, whose Traditions and
Confessions received Strength and Authority thereby, the Civil Arm and Power
concurring; but the Catholic Faith is the Rule; and Praedicationem
Sacerdotum, the Instructions of the Priests the Director. Nor is any one
condemned by the Law, but such as are Strangers to, and neglect the Church, who
are first condemned by her; and it is what Antiquity has ordained, appoints and
constitutes. That Faith which St. Peter the Apostle Preached at Rome, and which
was then followed there by Damasus the present Bishop, and Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, Nectarius of Constantinople, Pelagius of Laodicea, Diodonis of
Tarsis, Amphilochius of Iconium, Optimus of Antioch, etc. Men led by the
Apostolical, Evangelical Discipline and Doctrine; farther taught and
recommended in the Four first Councils, Determinantibus Sacerdotibus, the
Bishops there determining, and the Exposition of Synods, by the Imperial
Authority and Laws called together. Sacram Communionem in Ecclesia Catholica,
non percipientes, a Deo amabilibus Episcopis, Haereticos just vocamus,
Justinian. Novel. 109. Praefat. The Heresy in its own Nature consists here,
when they unite and hold Communion out of the Catholic Church, not receiving
of it from God's beloved Bishops, and so Schism is defined, (...), Can. 31.
Apost. (...), Can. 6. Council. Genesis Constantinop. when they despise, and make
Assemblies contrary to their Bishops. So also, Can. 31. Council. 6. in Trullo,
Can. 10. Council. Carthag. and more expressly yet, Can. 10. Council. Antioch, and
which we have occasionally made use of before; if any Presbyter or Deacon
separate from the Church, contemning his own Bishop, and makes a Private
Congregation or Altar, (...), as in that 10th Canon, Council. Carthag. all
which, concerning Schism and Heresy and Conventicles, with a great deal more
may be seen at large, and in every particular, by whosoever is conversant in the
Canons and Church Proceedings, and Determinations; or, which may be of more
Authority with him, at least not so liable to Scorn, and contempt, to whosoever
pleases to read Cod. Justinian, Tit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Theodos. 16 Tit. 1. l.
28. and in the several Titles and Laws, with the various Novels and
Constitutions treating expressly on these Subjects.

giving Rules for Elections; for the better discharge of their Duties,
providing against Symony, for the daily Sacrifices, and Ministerial Offices, in
the Liturgy, and Service for the People; give Rules to the Bishops what
Presbyters are to be Ordained, inquires into, and gives Cautions and Charge for
their Manners, for their Abilities, that they forsake not their Priestly
Office, claiming the right of Investitures. That no Church be built, but the
Bishop be first consulted; for the maintenance of such required there to
officiate. That no Church be consecrated without the Bishop, no Idiot, or taken
out of the number of those Qui vocantur Laici, who are called Laymen,
presently upon the entrance into Holy Orders, ascend to an Episcopacy, he gives
to the Clergy Possession of their Churches, and they are all in Deputation, in
their Ecclesiastical Courts from the Emperor, and in Religious Matters, he
gives leave for the Collects or Meeting together, confers many Privileges on
their Persons, in order to the better performing of such their Offices, that no
trouble or obstruction be in Litanies, and Laws are given for the manner of
their Celebration, takes care that they meet often in Councils and Synods,
enjoins them residence on their Cures. He limits the number of such as are to
be Ordained, suitable to the Revenues of the Church, that there be not an
Impoverishment and Contempt thereby, that none be Ordained, but to a Title, and
in relation to particular Cures, or as the present Exigence may require. He
exempts certain Persons, forbidding the Bishops to give them Holy Orders, as
such as fly to the Church for Ease and Idleness, to shake off their Secular
Offices and Duty, and be acquit of their Burdens, that they may enjoy the
outward Privileges and Immunities, the Clergy by the Bounty and good Grace of
the Empire had granted unto them. Such as are actually in Public Offices, to
which thereby they become disabled, and the State is endamaged. As Captains,
Centurions, etc. whom he remands to their first station, and hence some Laws we
find, that the tenues fortuna, the Poorer in the Church are only to be
Ordained, though perhaps with less Prudence; and the reason was this, because
the Church enjoyed great Privileges and Immunities, and the Rich too
frequently ran to it, to shelter and advantage themselves in this World, a
thing too common in our days, and the like Laws might not be amiss amongst us
in some cases, when particular Men leave their Secular and Military Station,
for the Profit and Grandeur of the highest Churchmen; he forbids that any Holy
Offices or Ministerial Functions be usurped, sine Sacerdote, without a Priest,
appoints that every one first receive Holy Orders, e're he attempts the
Execution of the Public Ministry, with more of the like Nature, and which are
to be seen. Cod. Justinian, lib. 1. Tit. 2.5.14. Tit.
3.9.10.11.30.31.34.36.46.52. Cod. Theodos. 9. Tit. 40.15.16.45.3. Cod.
12.104.115.121. Cod. 16. Tit. 1.3. Tit. 2.1.2.3.6.18.25.32. Tit. 11.1. Novel.
3. cap. 1.2. and Novel. 6.1.4.7. Novel. 16.40.46.68. cap. 1.2.3. Novel. 78.
Novel. 123. Novel. 131. cap. 8.9. Novel. 137. but then, all this amounts to
only what is said to be the Office of an Emperor, Commonefacere, Cod.
Justinian. l. 1. Tit. 3. to take care, warn, and see that all these things be
done as they ought to be; the Rule is antecedent, and depends on another
Authority, I mean where it is purely Religious, and Policy alone ingages not.
The general Rule laid down and to be observed is this, Ne fiant Ordinationes,
contra interdictiones legum and Sacrorum Canonum, Novel. 12. cap. 12. that all
Ordinations be made according to Law and the Holy Canons, to the observation of
that Rule, Quam justi and laudandi and adorandi inspectores and Ministri Dei
verbi tradiderunt, Apostoli and Sancti Patres custodierunt, and explanaverunt,
Novel. 6. Praefat. which the Ministers of the Word of God, the Apostles and
Holy Fathers have kept and explained. The Emperor in his own Person, never
Pleads for, or attempts the Sacred Action or Office of Ordination it self,
never yet laid any title to it; and the Bishop upon his Ordination receives
Secular Privileges from the Emperor, to be emancipated and made free from that
Service, which otherwise the Laws require of him, by his becoming a Spiritual
Father; But the Ordination it self, the Right of a Bishop, is no where said to
be, or so claimed from the Emperor, Novel. 8. cap. 3. and although it has been
disputed, only within this Hundred years, at least it never reached any farther
than the Whimsical Brains of some one or two, now and then, (and what Point of
Faith escaped such?) whether the Power of Ordaining, has been in the Presbyter,
or in the Bishop only, as a distinct Order and Superior to him, and how the
Votes and Concurrences of the People, and in what degree of Necessity, they are
required unto it, yet none ever asserted it to belong to any that was neither
Presbyter nor Bishop; yet Antiquity is altogether silent as to the Prince in
this case, the Church always removed, nor did the Empire ever claim it; this is
still represented as the proper Work and Office of the Bishop; whatever the
Empire did in the case, was by commanding the Bishop to Consecrate, when such
an one is designed for the Function by himself, or assenting to the Election
made by others; but if any more, and not of the like Nature, the Church of God
and all understanding Christians did still look upon it, as not to be endured
in any one, (...), to act as a Priest, (...), when never entitled to, or
partaking of the Priestly Power, and it was never first conferred on him by
any, it has been adjudged (...), worthy of many Deaths; as in the case of
Ischyras in particular, Socrates Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 27.

were made in order to it, several Cautions and Directions given, that none be
interdicted without a just Cause, Cod. Justinian, lib. 1. Tit. 3.30. That
Excommunication be not for light Causes, 39. 1. That no Man be excluded the
Sacred Communion, before Cause be showed, and for which the Laws and Canons
have commanded it; and if any Excommunicates upon other accounts, the Person
Excommunicated is to be absolved, and received again into Communion, Novel.
123. cap. 11. and this with the greatest reason in the World, for the Prince is
Custos Canonum, he is the Keeper of the Canons, and is to see that their Rules
be duly executed, Omni innovatione cessante vetustatem and Canones Pristinos
Ecclesiasticos, qui usque nunc tenuere, servari Praecipimus, Cod. Justinian, l.
1. Tit. 26. and it is as his Province and Work; so the great Mercy and Justice
of the Empire, thus to conserve Men's Liberties, not to have them exposed to the
Temporal Punishments, which always followed, and severely too, upon
Excommunication. Nor is it sit, that an Action of so great a weight and
consequence, every ways of so great a concern both as to Body and Soul, be
altogether Arbitrary, at the Pleasure, many times Pique of one Man, the Prince
at this rate has not the Command of his own Subjects, and his own Laws may be
executed against the interest of his Government; Excommunications are only then
supposed to have effect, Clave non Errante, when duly executed according to
Church Rules, of which the Prince is, or ought to be, the Conserver; no one is
supposed to grant Privileges against himself, and as he enstates certain
Persons, with special Immunities, so is he to enquire and to be concerned, as
upon the admittance into (as in the case of Ordinations just now considered) so
upon an exclusion from them, otherwise his neither Favors, nor Punishments are
his own, and his Power and Government may be weak'ned by it, Ne Immunitatis
Ecclesiasticae obtentu, munia Publica, vel nervi Reipublicae conciderent, ad
clericatum confugientibus iis, a quibus munia Publica, per Provincias
sustinebantur, 12. Cod. Theodos. Tit. 1.69.104.115, etc. which way soever his
Subjects may be disabled for the Service of the Empire, whether when
Privileges are too lavishly and inconsiderately conferred, or Exemptions made,
the reason is one, and so is the effect, in either, and the Prudence and Power
of the Empire is to be implied alike, for Prevention of each, and securing the
Subject for his own, and the Subjects best advantage; and consequently, both
the Censures and Orders of the Church, when inflicted and conferred, are to be
under his Inspection. If the Empire come in with his Power to assist and
strengthen the Church, and Religion gains its outward aid and Protection, it
must be in dependence on such the Power Secular, whose Temporal Security, is to
be consulted and included in the Execution. The Plot and Contrivance both of
our common Christianity, and our common Reason, at once, do require it, and the
same I have said above, as to the Power of the Empire, in all Christian
Councils, called and protected by him. But the Emperor all this while is not
found to Excommunicate, or Absolve, in his own Person, by his own individual
formal Act; that is a Power that depends upon another Head, is derived by a
differing Stream, and to a diverse Subject; it is not in the force of the
Secular Arm, nor does the Prince lay a Claim or Pretense unto it, Divina primum
Vindicta, the Divine Vengeance, i. e. Excommunication, passed first upon the
Heretics, inflicted by the Church, and then motus animi nostri, the
Punishments from the Empire, those Penalties reckoned up before, and in part
following, Cod. Justinian, l. 1. Tit. 1. And the same Emperor, some Bishops
falling under his Displeasure, and adjudged worthy his Animadversion, for
leaving their Cures and coming up to Constantinople, under Pretense of Business
about Religion, without leave, and to the expense of the Church; He says, he
will not lay Pecuniary Mulcts upon them, (and which was all he could do, except
Banishments on their Persons,) but thinks Abstentions to be more proper, (...),
but this is to be done, either by the Patriarch of Constantinople himself, if
he be a Metropolitan that offended; or if a Bishop only of a City, by such his
Metropolitan, that he is under; and which is no otherwise the work of the
Empire, then that he urges a due execution, Ibid. Cod. Justin. l. 1. Tit. 3.43.
So again the deposition of a Bishop, which is the same as Excommunication to a
Layman, is it made, residentibus Sacerdotibus, by the Priesthood it self, a
Synod of Bishops, the Emperor only adds his Temporal Penalties; as, if he
accept not such his Deposition, but is Seditious, and disturbs the Public
Peace, he be banished an Hundred Miles from that City where he had officiated,
and which he had infested; it is the particular Punishment of the State, 16.
Cod. Theodos. Lex. 35. Tit. 2. the very same we have again, Novel. 42.
Sententia Sacerdotum, it is the Judgment and Sentence of the Priest makes the
Deposition, the Empires Secular Arm seconds it, proceeds to a Banishment of his
Person, and that his Books be burnt, (...), the first and original Right, being
in the Clergy, Praefat. Ibid. and Cap. 1. and more expressly there, Cap. 3. it is
the Appointment of the Emperor, that one Zoaras, amongst others, be
anathematized; but it follows, (...), the Priests Determination must pass upon
it, (...), which is the Churches own inward Authority, and derived from none,
(...), only the Empire makes it of more Force and Authority; that is, by a Penal
Mulct annexing Banishment unto it, as it there follows, and so it is promised
for the future, whatever are the Church censures, (...), the Laws Imperial
shall corroborate and strengthen them, ibid. and so all along, the Church
censuring, the Empire punishing, (...), Epilog. ibid. Novel. 42. and it is a Law
of Theodosius the younger, that the Clergyman that is unfaithful in his Duty,
and retained Servants at the Altar, and gave them refuge to the disadvantage of
their Masters, be deposed by the Bishop, or his Animadversion be made, sub
Episcopalis jurisdictionis Arbitrio, according to his Discretion, and when
degraded into the Order of a Layman, Motum judiciarii rigori^ accipiat, he be
given up to the Civil Magistrate, for farther Punishment, Cod. 9. Theodos. Tit.
45. l. 5. and of which more is to be seen in the Comments of Gothofred there.
And indeed all the Cautions, Rules and Directions, given to the Bishops in
these instances, imply only that they might err in the execution; the Power is
all along supposed in the Church, nor is it by the Prince attempted; as he does
not Excommunicate, though seeing just reason for it, so neither does he absolve
upon the unjustest censures denounced; wherein one Priest has been defective,
it has been enjoined another, remitted, Majori Sacerdoti, to a higher Order and
Jurisdiction, to the Metropolitan, or Patriarch, as was the Church Custom to
appeal to the Superior, Novel. 123.11. So that we can readily yield to all that
jus Caesareum, Mr. Seldom speaks of, De Synedriis, l. 1. cap. 8. page 223. that
Caesarian Power both as to Excommunications and Absolutions. And as Mr. Seldom
explains himself too, and allow his own instances, in the Jews, Page 234, 235.
Caligula Caesar laid an Inhibition upon them, and Banished their Persons out of
Rome, and denied them the exercise of their Religion; which latter is the same
in effect as Excommunication. As he there argues, this Inhibition was continued
by Claudius Caesar for some time, and afterward quite taken off by him, and
their Religion was allowed after their own manner again. The meaning of which
can be only this, that the Laws of the Empire gave License and Indemnity to
their Persons in the ancient and accustomed exercise of it, and which they
accepted and were thankful for. But does it hence follow that they
acknowledged, and returned their Original Right, either for their Worship in
general, or Excommunication in particular, in, and to, Caesar; and that they
ceased to have any because denied by the Empire? surely not; they only were
more straightened in its exercise, when under his interdict. Nor had they less
right, or stood they less bound to its Obligations, in every respect, when this
liberty was not conceded, under their Vassalage; and though the Empire owned
them not, even at this very time, i. e. during their Captivity, Mr. Seldom
says, they assumed this Discipline of Excommunication, or a naked Exclusion
from outward Communion, by consent among themselves, the better to keep up, and
preserve this their Religion, when so suppressed by the Civil Power, Ibid.
supra, Cap. 7. page 141. 143. and alibi; as they would not this day, in
England, or in what other Countries they are dispersed, therefore forego such
their Right, should the present Government distress, and frown upon them. Nor
do I know any one case or instance, coming up nearer to the state of the Power
and Right of the Prince in Ecclesiastics, and the Right of the Church,
Absolute too and Independent, than this of the Jews under the Empire; their
Religion is from another Fountain, and the Empire does not derive it unto them,
and Gallio the Secular Deputy, could discharge his Duty, without caring for any
of these things, when the Matters were purely of their Laws and Customs; but
yet their Persons, and the Public exercise of it, are subject to this
Government, and Jurisdiction, to limit, or enlarge, indulge, or recall, as may
be the Reasons and Motives; and, is his Will and Pleasure: Thus it stood with
the Jewish Church, in the days of our Savior in the Flesh, and of his
Apostles, and so it is to this day, where the Association, or imbodying is
continued; nor did the Empire conceive its Power any ways entrenched upon or
abated thereby, did he cease upon the account of their Worship, to continue to
them his Protection; or had they any engagement to withdraw their Obedience,
only those uncircumcised in Hearts and Ears, which always resisted the Holy
Ghost, and Crucified the Lord of Life; sometimes attempted Insurrections and
Rebellions against him.

BUT however it was with the Heathen Jews, Mr. Seldom positively says it, that
the Christian Emperors did actually exercise the censures of the Church,
judicially Anathematize and Excommunicate, in their own Persons and Rights, he
having first swollen up himself with an Opinion, and a true one; too true it
is, that himself is the great Searcher of Records and Authors, and Laws, of the
Books and Practice of all Ages; and if the mighty, the laborious, Seldom, has
said it, it must be so, there can be no doubt of, there needs no other search
after it; otherwise he could never have ventured to obtrude it on the world, as
out of the Imperial Code, that Princes have so Excommunicated, whose Laws,
Declarations, Practice, Positive Assertions, and Dogmatical Resolutions, are
quite another ways, as I have already made it appear in these foregoing Pages;
which Collection and Citations, if any one distrust, let but himself peruse the
particulars, with much more that might be added out of the Nomocanon
Church-story, and Primitive Fathers, concurring with, and giving strength, to
such the Relations; and the Grounds he delivers it from is such, that a Man may
swear, 'twas his bloated conceit of his Name at the Fount, like gild to the
Pills, possessed with as aerie a Fancy, that any thing would down of his
wrapping up, in the following Pages, could engage him to it. I confess could
any one have found such things out, none likelier than he, his Zeal and
Industry being singular, I wish his Integrity had been so too, he seldom
missing of any thing within the compass of his designed subject, that may be
any ways useful to his present Plot and Enquiry, had he as little failed in his
use and applying of them. The places he produces for Evidence in his Treatise
De Synedriis, lib. 1. cap. 10. page 318. is out of the Sixteenth Code
Theodosian, Tit. 5. Lex. 6. where Gratianus, Valentinianus and Theodosius, thus
give the charge to Eutropius (not Hesperius as he) That all Heretics,
especially such as oppose the Nicene Faith, Ab omnium summoti Ecclesiarum
limine, penitus arceantur, communione Sanctorum inhibentur, etc. with others to
the same purpose in the following Laws, both here and in the Justinian Code.
That Justinian often, in his own Name, thus speaks, Anathematizamus,
Anathematizentur, sub Excommunicatione fiet, etc. and which are to be found,
Code. lib. 1. That such be not suffered to come into the Church, be inhibited
the Communion of Saints, we do anathematize them, Let him be Anathematized, let
him be under Excommunication, etc. by which, all that can be meant, is only
this, and which is the Province of every good Christian Governor, to see that
the Laws of the Church be duly put in Execution; that the royal Will and
Pleasure is, it should be so; the Laws and Canons of the Church, the Rule of
Faith to be believed and adhered to, requiring it, and to which his Imperial
concurrence is annexed, which he confirms and strengthens by his Authority, and
will stand by in the Execution; as it is explained, Novel. 42. and that is to be
his sense, if the Codes may interpret themselves, which is much more proper
than for Seldom to do it; it being there most certain that the judicial Act was
from the Church, and Phrases must be interpreted according to the present
Subject, and designed Matter, and no more is meant, then, that Prerogative
which we see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy Scripture,
by God himself, that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to
their Charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain
with the Sword the stubborn and evil doers, as it is expressed in our Seven and
thirtieth Article; and he himself confesses unawares, in the next lines, having
a Quotation to bring in, and cannot either omit it, or tell where else to do
it, That they only simply judged them cursed of God, (...), as in the Georgick
Laws; and that their design was, they should be notabiles, and marked out for
it, by whose act and judicial Sentence, it is not expressed. And what he brings
out of the Hundred and three and twentieth Novel. cap. 11. and Photius his
Nomocanon. 9.9. to prove it the Act of the Empire, is quite another thing, and
none but he arrived to that strange Presumption; as to believe, that every one
that reads his Book is sworn to his Name and Words, could possibly have
produced them. The Emperor only there takes care that Excommunication be
according to the Church Canons, suitably, as Ecclesiastici hoc Canones fieri
jubent, (in the Nomocanon) the formal Power and Act is always supposed to be
in, and to be done by the Bishop, or Priest; if the Bishop or Presbyter
Excommunicate otherwise than as the Canons enjoin, the Person so Excommunicated
is to be absolved by another Bishop, or Presbyter, who has the inspection of
them, a Majore Sacerdote in the Novel; and that Bishop or Presbyter that did
the wrong, is to be censured by the Bishop, under whose Inspection, or in whose
district he is, and lie under the Mulct at his Pleasure; nor is there one word
sounds that way, that the Emperor did Excommunicate. Nor can the Emperor with
any more show of reason, be said to pass the formal Sentence of
Excommunication, by taking care, and making Provision that it be done according
to the Laws and Canons of the Church, than he can be said to make Articles of
Faith, and determine in the high Points of the Trinity, for which he appoints
that the first Council at Nicea shall be the Rule, and often enacts and
resolves it shall be so explained and believed, and professed accordingly, as
in that Council. He may as well be said to make Creeds, which he enjoins to be
done, but by the Patriarchs and Bishops, and the particular Faith, to be
professed by them, or to Baptize, for which Directions are given, especially
about Re-baptization, and he judges him unfit for the Priesthood, that does it,
Cod. Justinian. l. 1. Tit. 6. Ne Baptismus iteretur, he may no otherwise be
said to Excommunicate, than to obstruct Conversion, or hinder Repentance; and
yet it is the Imperial Edict against, and Punishment upon Apostates, Ne unquam
in Pristinum statum revertentur, ne flagitium morum obliterabitur Poenitentia,
Cod. 16. Theodos. Tit. 6. l. 1. that they are never to return to their ancient
state, that the vileness of their Manners be never blotted out by Repentance,
intimating only the greatness of the Sin, and the height of his indignation
against them; or that he did publicly officiate in his own Person in the daily
Sacrifices, because he takes care for a just Performance of the public
Liturgies and Services, and when he declares against Oaths and Blasphemies,
that the guilt is not antecedent, and from another Sanction, Novel. 78. and to
put an end to these like instances, that he Ordains in Person, and makes
Priests, by whom so many Laws and Rules, and Limitations, and Qualifications
are set and appointed, as is above to be seen. But as for this last instance,
Mr. Seldom has found out so handsome an expedient for the Original of Holy
Orders otherways, and thereby renders them so accidentally trifling,
inconsiderable a thing, that he answers his aim, evacuates and baffles so
effectually, all Church Power; and indeed, upon his Hypothesis, so
inconsiderable a thing it is, that a Churchman would not desire it upon such
terms; much less is it a Prerogative fit for a King; a Jewel for the
embellishing the Crown Imperial, so that he needs not contend to have this in
the Magistrate as he does the Church Censures; He tells us, De Synedriis, lib.
1. cap. 14. page 569, 570, 571. and lib. 2. cap. 7. page 313, 314, etc. That
Holy Orders has no more in it, than an imitation of that particular School,
wherein St. Paul was educated under Gamaliel; where it was usual for one that
had arrived to a degree of Eminence above others, as that of a Doctor; to
appoint and send out others under, and after, him. And so St. Paul did in the
managery of his Apostleship. But did our Savior also take this great Example
of Gamaliel's School in his Eye, when he sent forth his Twelve and Seventy? or
was it from his particular Education in some such place, he took his Authority
and Platform? or did the Holy Ghost do the l^ke, when placing Overseers in that
Church, which Christ had Purchased with his own Blood? was not, as the
Purchase, that of his own Blood, so the Power by which he gathered and
established it, that All Power in Heaven and Earth, first given unto him,
peculiar and extraordinary? or did St. Paul himself say, it was from Gamaliel's
School, or from the Will of any Man, or from the Will of God, he received his
Apostleship himself? and thereby had a Power to depute others, as Timothy and
Titus. And surely unless his bare fiction of Story, and Eutopian Plot, must go
for Truth, and without any search and enquiry, there can be naught in it to
engage any assent, or adherency unto it; it is so precarious a begged thing,
that only those that deserve to be begged themselves can believe it; and Mr.
Seldom doubtless pleased himself mightily, to think how many fools it would
meet with, and he was sure of others of as ill a mind and design with himself,
to tread under foot the Ministry when it was down, that it rise no more,
especially at that time, when he wrote, at least, laid the contrivance of,
those his Tracts De Synedriis, when the Sword of the Libertine alone bore rule,
and he took the advantage of it. Nor has any one reason to believe that he bore
better Will to the King than to the Church, for he was a Member of that
Rebellious Parliament of Forty Two, and continued actually amidst them, and
bore a special sway in their Traitorous Actings; and however his Pretense was,
That all Church Power as from Christ was an Imposture; and invading the
Prerogative of the Crown, it was in reality only to serve his Parliamentary
Designs, to take away the chief Support of the Crown, that Church which mostly
upheld it; and 'twas a sadder Sight yet, to see it, not only the usual fate of
common Subjects, but the Case of the greatest Prince then in Europe, to be
first stripped of his Crown and Kingly Power, to be made and published a Bankrupt
in the State, lost as to his worldly Employments, and then made a Priest, to
have only the Power and Benefit of his Clergy, remaining in, and confirmed
unto, him.

Execution, even where the Empire was inclined to Heresy, as sometimes it was;
their own Bishops and Councils were first called and consulted, their Advice
and Directions followed. What was purely Secular, the Emperor's own, and of
himself, was his Grace and Royal Favor, in condescending and yielding to the
Church's Determinations, and the many Immunities he invested their Persons
withal, were all his own choice, as it was to be a Christian, no Power besides
could, none attempted to, force it upon him; none ever made Canons, but
Churchmen; that is, Rules purely relating to the Church of God, only the
Prince has the outward Coercive Power, by force, and bodily present Penalties
to constrain and compel their Execution. Or where Princes assumed of their own
devices, as particular Extravagant Actions still have been, and will be again;
nor do they amount to the breaking a general Rule, the Church still so far
opposed, as to remonstrate upon the encroachment, to assert their Supreme Power
as from Christ, although they suffer for it, and after Emperors have altogether
voided them. This I have already made good in part, and it will farther appear
from the several Emperors Concessions, Acknowledgments, and Declarations to the
World; that none but bare, open, foreheads to any thing, dare gainsay it.

HONORIVS and Theodosius the Emperors Sancto judicio, for the Holy Judgment of
the most Reverend Patriarch of Constantinople, as Supreme in Religion, and to
the Convention of the Clergy, Cod. Justinian, l. 1. Tit. 2. Lex. 6. and which
he transcribed out of the Theodosian Cod. 16. Tit. l. 45. and, by receiving
into his own, confirmed. Valentinianus and Marcian make void all Pragmatick
Sanctions, which by Favor or Ambition were gained against the Ecclesiastical
Canons, 1. lib. Tit. 12. l. 1. Zeno calls it the state of Tyranny, where there
is Innovations against the Church, and its settled Constitutions, he calls the
times wicked, and those Laws and Constitutions impious, and confirms all the
Privileges his Royal Predecessors had granted to Holy Church, Lex. 16. ibid.
It Is Decreed that all the Canons or Holy Ecclesiastical Rules made by the Four
first General Councils, obtain the force of a Law, Novel. 131. cap. 1. Nor can
we think that the Christian Empire could do less, when these very Canons are
esteemed by them as the Holy Scriptures, ibid. Novel. 131. (...), God himself
directing the Speakers of them. As Leo the Emperor of the Canons in General.
Constitut. 2. ad finem Novel. and which Expressions, though they might be over
extravagant; yet it shows to the World, how the Emperors thought of the
Authority and Canons of the Church, what a Precedence they gave unto them.
Justinian openly speaks it, and calls them Sacras and Divinas Regulas, Holy and
Divine Laws, Quas etiam nostrae sequi non dedignantur leges, and that himself
in framing his Laws, does not disdain to follow them, and which he Commands his
Praefectus Praetorio to make known by Publication to the whole World, Epilog.
ibid. and Novel. 6. Epilog. what he enjoins all Patriarchs, Metropolitans,
Bishops and Clergy, under a civil Punishment, if not observing it, is only what
Churchmen had before appointed; it is all (...), by virtue, and in observancy,
of the Sacred Canons foregoing, (...), the Judgment of the Empire concurs with
that of the Church, adding Nerves and Authority to its Predeterminations, and
what to the Church seemed most convenient, Novel. 42. cap. 3. (...), Zeno
Imperator. Constitut. 9. when the Patriarch of Constantinople required of the
said Emperor Zeno, that it might by the Law of the Empire be determined,
concerning the time of Baptizing Children, and resolved him that he might do it
without a formal Council, (which to call together to consult only about one
Point, might be inconvenient) being directed as to the particular Matter; the
Emperor yielded to him, but told withal the Patriarch, Such things were to
proceed from the Church, and not originally from him; and that in Holy Matters
his Holiness ought to pass the Sanction, Constitut. 17. and if in these lesser
things, and Circumstantials, much more in the weightiest Church Matters, as
Abstentions, Excommunications, Depositions, is the Church to be followed, are
her Determinations and Judicial Acts to precede, and so they did. Among all the
Temporal Punishments upon Heretics and Schismatics, none was inflicted, till
by the Councils and Bishops rejected, the Clerk that is unfaithful in his
Office, the Bishop is commanded first to depose him, and then follows the
Secular Judgment; as in the Theodosian Code. supra ultimum Supplicium, a
farther Punishment succeeds, and which Dionysius Gothofred interprets to be
Death, in his Notes upon Cod. Justinian, lib. 1. Tit. lib. 3.3. (though I
cannot assent to him in that, finding no Sanguinary Laws in those Cases) with
many more of the like Nature which we have already produced.

Information, to any one into whose hands these Papers shall come, or that will
receive it, what the Church Power is in it self, and what the Power of the
Empire, in Religious Matters; And particularly for Dr. Tillotson Dean of
Canterbury, who in his Sermon April 2. 1680. Page 11, 12, on Joshua 24.15. has
thus expressed himself: And to speak freely in this Matter, I cannot think
(till I be better informed, which I am always ready to be) that any Pretense of
Conscience warrants any Man, that is not extraordinarily Commissioned as the
Apostles and first Publishers of the Gospel were, and cannot justify that
Commission by Miracles as they did, to Affront the Established Religion of a
Nation (though it be false) and openly draw Men off from the Profession of it,
in Contempt of the Magistrate and Law, all that Persons of a different Religion
can in such a case reasonably Pretend to, is to enjoy the Private and Exercise
of their own Conscience and Religion; for which they ought to be very thankful,
and to forbear the open making of Proselytes to their own Religion (though they
be never so sure that they are in the right) till they have either an
extraordinary Commission from God to that Purpose, or the Providence of God
make way for it by the Permission of the Magistrate. That there has been always
a Spiritual, Ecclesiastical Power in the World, as derived, and received once
by the Holy Ghost, and not of Man, so preserved, and propagated, devolved and
continued from the same Fountain, in order to the first great end, for the
support and continuance of the same Religion, though the extraordinary
Commissions have ceased, which the Apostles and firsh Publishers of the Gospel
had, though by present Miracles not to be justified. And this equally enabling
and warranting the Church of God, such as can evidence the Succession of Power,
in its own and appointed way, as when Miracles were annexed, to affront, is an
improper Speech, but to Teach, Declare and Protest against the Established
Religion of a Nation if a false one, openly to draw Men off from the Profession
of it, in Contempt, is again an ill Expression, but in different ways and rules
of Duty, then those false ones of the Law and Magistrate; though the Men of the
World do Publish their dislike and threaten and punish, and go on into a Law
against them, as they did when Christianity was first Taught, and Church Power
first came down, was settled and professed in the World; though the Kings of the
Earth stand up together, and the Rulers take Council, they rise up as one Man,
as did Herod and Pontius Pilate, and all the Gentiles, against the Child Jesus;
as it was then the Apostles, so is it no less our Duty, thus to speak before
Kings, and not be ashamed. Church Power came first into the World, as not from
the School of Gamaliel, so nor from the Thrones of Kings; and it is independent
and distant as in its rise, so in its execution, though embellished, assisted
and strengthened, advantaged much, by the outward favors of Princes, their
many Adjuncts and royal Appendages, and which where conferred, will equally
embellish and add to their own Crowns, to be sure, in Heaven. And upon these
terms to suffer, will be our Duty, if what we profess be not received, it will
amount to Martyrdom. If the King's wrath be the return, and our Doctrine with
our selves be cast out; and if we do not this, it will come too near the
Traditores, in the days of the Donatists, or to those that offered at Heathen
Shrines in the Persecutions before, what will it be, but to give up our Bibles
and Profession, upon the Summons of any prevailing Party, to give up, to be
sure, our Church Power, and which amounts to, in effect the same; nor can
Christianity continue without it, when upon Persuasion of the Arians; first,
upon point, as he thought, of interest, receiving his Father's Will from an
Arian Priest; and then by the Miletians, joining with them, Constantius the
Emperor engaged against the Faith of one Substance; and great and rigorous
Persecutions were its consequent. Athanasius and his followers, that adhered to
the Nicene Faith in that Doctrine, did not therefore in point of Conscience
submit, and say nothing, with but silence, give over and desert the Truth; but
the rather were more vigorous, and active for it, even to the greatest
Calumnies and Distresses, which through the malicious instigations of the
Arians and Meletians, (as evil Men always unite against Truth) the Emperor laid
upon them. And though Liberius of Rome and Hosius of Corduba, (this latter the
ancientest Bishop then in the Christian World, and who was one of the Council
of Nice, and Penned that Creed,) and Gregory Nazianzen, and others, even the
whole World becoming Arians, (as St. Jerome complained) by the height of
Threats, and succession of Miseries, after sharp trials and resistancies, did
at length submit and subscribe to their Doctrines, yet it cost them both
repentance and tears; as Gregory Nazianzen declares in particular in the Life
of Athanasius. And all this they did, and thought themselves bound in
Conscience to do, not as extraordinarily Commissioned as the Apostles and first
Publishers of the Gospel were, as warranted and justified by Miracles, but as
commissionated, in course by their Holy Orders, instated with the same
Authority, though not in so open a show, and equally bound to render an account
to God, of such their trust and charge committed then and therewith unto them,
as the same Stewards of his Mysteries, and this, not upon the receipt of any
new Revelation from Heaven; but upon the score of their ordinary Ministry,
contending for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, guided and directed by
the Tradition of Faith, delivered by the Apostles, and conserved in the Church
by a continued devolution, and to which St. Athanasius and all the Catholic
Bishops, which strove against Arianism, always referred themselves, and is
evident on all Occasions from Church History; as Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c.
46. l. 3. c. 7. Athanasius, ad Serapion. ad Epictet. Ep. that Faith into which,
when recommended to him, and explained, the Emperor Theodosius was Baptized,
Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 6. upon which rule all the Councils proceeded, in
their Conciliary Acts and Determinations, as Can. 13. Conc. Nic. 1. Can. 19.
Conc. Hab. in Trullo. Can. 2. Conc. 2. Nic. Athanas. Orat. 1. Cont. Arios; and
they proceeding upon this bottom what they Decreed, is to be received for Truth
by all Christians, is to be subscribed and assented to, is to be taught before
Kings, when denying of it; 'twas this Theodosius himself acknowledged at his
Death, it is reputed as the Law, the Voice of God himself, as St. Basil ad
Diodorum among his Canons, apud Pandect. Can. Beverig. and so by Constantine
the Emperor, in Socrates, Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 9. and Sozom. l. 1. cap. 20. 25.
and in particular, it will be expected, that that common (...), that usual
shift be omitted, so usual among us, when this known Power of the Church is
urged. That it is accidental only in its Original, introduced by the present
necessity, and upon a common consent and compact; the Christians being then
under Heathen Governors, to whose Judicatures it was neither for their Safety
nor Honor to Appeal, and stand their Trial and Verdict; and therefore they
resolved it all into the chief Churchmen, and which Power, Constantine
becoming Christian, and so the succeeding Emperors, confirmed by his Royal
Authority, and continued, of his own choice and motion unto them. This is the
common tattle of the wiser Men, as they think, and are generally so reputed,
reporting it to the World, with much Confidence; and yet upon no other ground
than old Women's Stories are told and bottomed, at the farthest; they will tell
you, that Mr. Seldom and Mr. Hobs said so; and every one is as secure of its
Authority and Credit, as if they had read it in the Gospel of our Savior, or in
one of St. Paul's Epistles, when it is all as false as the Gospel it self is
true. Great and many were the Privileges, Royal Favors and Immunities, that
Constantine bestowed upon the Church and Churchmen, he received them with both
hands, and with him in the Comedy, could he have found a third, he would have
gave it them. He annexed to them Adjuncts and Appendages, which their Lord and
Master, Christ Jesus, did not, could not, would not do, his Kingdom being not
of this World; nor was it his business to divide Inheritances, and he had all
the reason in the world for it, Christianus nulli Inimicus praesertim
Imperatori, as Tertullian; a Christian is an Enemy to no Man, especially the
Emperor, whom he acknowledges, as a Man immediately under God, that receives
his Power only from God; nor has any Man a Power above and beyond him; to Obey
and Serve him is his Conscience, his Religion, and he expects his Heaven, his
eternal Salvation by it; and indeed Christianity is the great, truly rational,
permanent Support of Kingdoms, and Bodies Politic. What favor Constantine
showed the Christians, was his real particular Interest, and perhaps he could
not have retained his Empire, had not the Christian Bishops been of his side,
without their Aid and Assistance; and, as by them his Crown might be fixed the
more firm and secure on his Head, who yet gave him not his Original Right unto
it, for that was his, upon other terms than his Christianity he prosessed; nor
did they add one cubit to his Power in this sense, Dominion is not founded in
Grace; so did they receive from him his outward aid and assistance, for the
more due and advantageous execution of that Power they had, but not from him;
they had exercised before he was Emperor, though perhaps with less success, by
a Donation antecedent to his, by a Right from Christ Jesus; thus the Empire
became their Nursing-Father, to support and encourage, but did not, could not
give their Power, as Churchmen unto them. As God gave to the Empire the
Government of the World, so he gave to the Bishops the Government of the
Church, and which they were to use for the Empires advantage; but might not use
it against him: And all this Constantine well knew, and was highly sensible of,
as were his Succession that was Christian, still acknowledging Church Power
from another hand; nor was it in the arm of Flesh, by favor or frowns, as to
its Power purely from above, to extinguish or enlarge it. I Will conclude this
Section and Chapter with that of St. Austin, Ep. 165. Quia Constantinus (...)
aus^ est de causa Episcopi judicare, eam discutiendam and finiendam Episcopis
delegavit. And again, Ibid. Imperatores non si in errore essent, quod absit,
pro errore suo contra veritatem leges darent, per quas justi and probarentur
and coronarentur, non faciendo quod illis juberent, quia Deus prohiberet.
Religion, as such, falls not under the Determination of the Prince; and if he
gives Laws against Truth, the Just will be both Tried and Crowned in disobeying
him.

Chap. 3.
CHAP. III.
The Contents.
Church Power is a Specific, constituted by Christ, in order to a Succession;
the erecting a new and lasting Government upon Earth; a Community of diverse
Orders, Offices, Acts, Stations, every ways peculiar, the Body of Christ, Sect.
1.

A Government to Rule, and defend it self, and Independent, Sect. 2.

The main Objection, That it is against the Civil Power. Common Sense and
Experience confutes it. The more a Christian the better Subject. The Christians
supported Constantine's Crown. Sect. 3, 4.

They did not want Power to do otherwise; nor consequently Integrity, as is
objected, Sect. 5.

To say they were Fools, is more plausible to the Age, but then the Empire must
be so too; who were equally ignorant of these destructive Consequences to their
Government, Sect. 6.

The reason of the present Misunderstandings, and that we do not see as the
Ancients did; because no Government owned but that which is Temporal and
outwardly Coercive, Sect. 7.

So 'twas stated by an Anonymous Author, 1641. All Power and Punishment was
outward and bodily among the Jews, and so it must be among Christians, Sect. 8.

So Mr. Seldom, allowing no Punishments but what are outwardly Coercive,
because none other; as not under, so nor before the Law, Sect. 9.

Erastus went the same way before him, Sect. 10.

And Salmasius, and says, the Apostles had no Power, because without Whips and
Axes; Concludes against all Church Power upon these terms, and that he may
surely take it from Bishops. So does a French Reformer usually lose his Senses,
when running his Forehead against our Prelacy, Sect. 11.

Grotius is in this Error, but often corrects himself. His Inconstancy is to be
lamented; He imputes it to his Education. He fights with the very same Weapon
against Church Power in general, the Jesuit does against the Supremacy in the
Church of England, Sect. 12.

IT returns then with more force and strength, what was laid down in the as the
World came into the Church, Believers were made, the Harvest grew great, and
there needed more Laborers to be sent forth into it; a Power, I say, received
for the use of others, the advantage of Mankind, in the Successions of it; not
for one single Purpose and Action, as were several Commissions and Delegations
both before and under the Law, and one at the entrance of the Gospel, viz. That
given to St. John Baptist, but to erect a new and standing Government, and this
to continue till the World is no more, and then only is the Kingdom to be
delivered up to the Father, whose is the Kingdom and the Power and the Glory,
for ever and ever, Amen. And St. Clemens Romanus in his Epistle to the Romans,
and which place we had occasion to use before, tells us, That the Apostles
receiving Commands, and imbued with a full certitude by the Resurrection of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and confirmed by the Word of God, with all fullness of the
Holy Ghost, they went out declaring the coming of the Kingdom of God, and
Preaching through the Regions and Cities, they constituted Bishops and Deacons,
in order to those that should believe, knowing by our Lord Jesus Christ, that
Contentions would arise by reason of the Episcopacy, or Power of the Ministry;
and therefore having a perfect foreknowledge, as they constituted the
forementioned Bishops; so they afterward gave them Rules for Ordinations,
that others, Approved Men, might succeed in the Places of such as should die,
and execute such their Offices; the Consult and Design was laid for future Ages
also. A Power and Authority framing and fashioning Believers into a Body, not an
accidental casual concurrency of People only, but a Community, well and duly
associated, every part proportionably fitted and put together, increasing with
the increase of God, in which all things are to be done, (...), decently and in
order, as the Lord commanded, (...), as St. Clemens there goes on, not without
Reason and Rules, (...), where, at appointed, fixed seasons and hours,
Oblations and Holy Services are to be offered and performed, (...), and in what
Place, and by what Persons. God has appointed, that all things being
religiously Performed, and according to his Will, they may be grateful and
acceptable unto him, where every Man has his Order and Station, (...), and
therein gives his Thanks to God, or serves him in his Public Worship,
expressed by that one principal Branch or Performance. To the chief Priest,
(...), are his Offices appropriated, to the Priest or Presbyter, (...), a
special Province is assigned, and the Levites have their own Ministry incumbent
upon them. The Layman, (...), is confined to his Laick Affairs, a Body it is
like to that of an Army, and which this Apostolical Person there recommends to
their Consideration, where the Soldier is under the Captain, (...), how in
order? how in readiness? and in all subjection, executing Commands, and
Obeying, where all are not Praetors or Rulers of Thousands, nor Rulers of
Hundreds, nor Rulers of Fifties, every one in his Station and Sphere,
discharges, what of the King and Tribunes is enjoined him, where the great
cannot be without the less, nor the less without the great; in which is a
yielding, a mixture and condescension, and all becomes useful, (...), etc. May
then this our Body be kept whole and entire in Christ Jesus; and every one be
subject, according to that Order in which by the Grace of God he is placed. So
that Apostolical Person goes on, and so are his Prayers, as well as Directions;
as is to be seen at large in that his Epistle. A Collection, Community, or
Body, gathered out of the World; and so not of it, as with a differing Head, so
by another infusion, differing Laws, diverse Offices, for quite another end,
and with Powers for a present Peace, which the World cannot give unto us, Ye
are my Body, says our Savior; and each one Members in particular; his Body
which is the Church, ye are not of this World, so Christ tells his followers
again, are neither the Subjects of it, nor from its Powers, receive neither
Rules, nor Measures, by it.

Church upon earth, a body, whose head is Christ, and each Believer, Members in
particular, if any thing like a visible Association, the Rules, and Laws, and
Reasons, of all Associations in general enjoin this; nor can that Community be
supposed, such as is the Christian in particular, to subsist under another,
live in dependency upon, or by its concessions, whose call and separation was
on purpose to be another thing from it, which had the grant for its being, to
reduce and recall, in some Cases to gainsay, and thwart it, which is so framed
and contrived, as to be, and increase, under the severest of its frowns, and
the most raging Persecutions, from those very Powers of this World, which in
its lay and make, was to have the Kings of the Earth stand up, and the Rulers
to take Council together against it. Our Savior, who knew all things, who had
the full design of his Father in his Head, and before him, knew also the
several Accidents and Contingencies that would befall the Church, and his
Wisdom provided suitably; he did not leave his Church, as the Ostrich in Job
did her young ones, that every foot might crush and kill them; nor did he Build
upon those Sands either, that every Wind which blows, and Storm which descends,
could destroy her, and which he must have done if founding his Church purely in
Subordination to the secular Arm, to the Wills and Passions of Princes; which
Experience tells us, how various, how mutable, and disorderly they have
sometimes been; even the best of them, has but the breath in his Nostrils; and
yet even the worst of them, the greatest, and a succession too, of Tyrants, has
never been able to dissolve this Community, to erase its Foundations. To erect
a Body solitary and alone, without its own Laws, and a strength, that is
singular, to subsist and be Ruled by a Foreign Power, and that is extraneous to
it, is in course to be swallowed up, thoroughly absorpt thereby. And it is again
as bad or worse, where every private Member is not obliged to such its own
Constitutions, and Jurisdictions, this is Anarchy and Confusion, which God
cannot be the Author of; the Society must on these terms equally dissolve and
perish, be as liable to Invasions as before. Our Savior therefore erected his
Corporation independent to the Secular Power, but dependent, and in
subordination, as to its own Members, and to one another; and if any be unruly,
and do not submit, to the Laws of their Body, some of which are unchangeable,
and as the Sun, for evermore; others occasional, and in the Prudence and
Discretion of the present Governors, Penal Laws, Abstentions, Interminations,
Excision it self is to follow, the Church Censures most justly pass upon them;
nor ought they to have any benefit of that Body, can they indeed, if such
disorders permitted, which they so rent in pieces, and which by such their
Rebellions, in course must decay, be rendered unserviceable to themselves and
others.

is notorious to the common Senses; nor is there any one Demonstration carries
more Evidence along with it; it is as plainly and legibly set before our Eyes,
as Christ Crucified, was before the Eyes of the Galatians, Gal. 3.1. upon the
common Sense, and traditional conveyance of Mankind, as evidently seen from one
to another, by handing it downwards, as those particular Persons who stood
under the Cross, did see and behold Christ distended and dying upon it; and yet
so foolish and bewitched were those very Galatians as to dissent from, and make
of none effect Christ Crucified unto them; and there are of the same unhappy
temper still amongst us, that deny and exclude this Succession of Church Power
now, and in whom to rectify and undeceive. By answering such Objections they
produce in their own behalf, is what I am in the next place to undertake. Their
grand Objection runs thus. To assert a Church Power independent, and residing
in differing Subjects, from that of the State, must be a restraint to the Civil
Power, or that Power of the State, to erect an Authority against it; because not
of, and under it; that Prince cannot be said to be Supreme, if a differing
Power within him; To be Supreme is to be above all, there must be no Power
apart from his, who is the Supreme, if so, he is not Supreme. This they urge
with a great deal more to the same purpose, and is the Stone that the great
Hugo Grotius stumbles at, in the entrance to his Treatise, De jure Summarum
Potestatum in Sacris, and which occasions so many more falls he has all along
in that Discourse; it being stuffed with inconsistencies to it self throughout;
and no wonder, when bottomed on so false a Principle, that the Power of our
Savior is an Usurpation on the State; nor does one absurdity go alone. A
Suspicion upon Church Government that has not the Honor to be new, it is as old
as our Savior in the Flesh, and Herod we know started it against him so soon
as Born in the World, and his Title as King was known unto him; for this he
sought to kill him when an Infant, and the little Children in Bethlehem were
barbarously Murdered, hoping the Babe Jesus might have died in the crowd;
distrusting, if he escaped, he would have supplanted him of his Kingdom. Nor
did his Apostles after him, escape the Suspicion and Censure; and yet, our
Savior all along his lifetime upon Earth, and notoriously at his death, still
cleared himself of the Aspersion, asserting and maintaining his Power and
Kingdom delivered him of the Father, that All Power in Heaven and Earth; and so
did his Apostles too, retain and exercise the same Power, and with the same
Innocence. Nor do I doubt but to Vindicate his Body the Succeeding Church,
still claiming the like Power, and that to every rational considering Person,
to each one, that with Herod, has not a design, and believes it his interest,
to kill our Savior, to blot out his Power, and Name and Memory on Earth.

must fall of it self, to any one of common sense, that exercises not his
Enquiries more about Tricks and Phrases, to wheedle, delude, and carry on his
own particular Plot, and Party; then about that which is notorious Matter of
Fact, certain Truths, and realities. One thing I know, that whereas I was blind
I now see, a Man that is called Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and
said unto me, Go to the Pool of Siloam, and wash; And I went and washed, and I
received sight. He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see. This was
the Answer of the Man that was born Blind and cured by our Savior, John
9.11.15.25. and this great notoriety to common sense baffled all the Malice and
Purposes, superseded all their trifling Enquiries, designed to obscure the
Power and Miracle of our Savior's working that mighty Cure upon him; as
whether it was done on the Sabbath Day! the Person was a Sinner! etc. and the
same common sense and notoriety of Matter of Fact, will be our Evidence and
Avoucher in this our particular Case also, and is the alone Answer we need to
give in, able indeed to baffle whatever the Skill of an Objector can lay, or
whatever inconsistencies the wit of Man may urge against us. Can any, even a
Pharisaical race of Men, ill-natured and Perverse, give out and believe, That,
that Body of Christians, their Bishops and Governors, should Assert and
Maintain a Kingdom and Jurisdiction upon Earth, destructive to that of the
Empire, or Secular, by whose breath, they in their Persons professed to
subsist; for whose Persons and Government, and the Prosperity of both, they
always Prayed; and in the first place, as by whose Influences they were to live
Godly lives, in all Godliness and Honesty, whose Battles they fought, whom they
Honored with all the titles of Power, and Majesty, and Magnificence, whom but
to think Evil of, to Curse in their Hearts, in their Bed-Chambers, much more
openly to Defame and speak Evil of, was their Sin and Irreligion, whom they
acknowledged upon Earth, as under God alone, and to God alone accountable for
all their Actions and Designs, nor could any Man say what do thou? And all
this they still Remonstrated and Published to the World, under the deepest
sense of Religion and Zeal, with the most solemn Protestations, as in all their
Apologies, Defenses and Writings does appear; who made it a term of their
Communion, to Serve, Support, and Assist the Emperor; to show themselves
Faithful and Just, and Conscientious toward him, equally as to serve their God
and Savior, as to say their Prayers for themselves, and live Righteously and
Soberly in the World; and the contrary was a just occasion for their Censures,
an Intermination upon the Offender, who too often died under their Tyranny,
came peaceably to the Stake, neither accusing nor reviling, as under the stroke
of God himself, sealing with their Blood, such their Obedience. Nor in all our
first Church-Story do we find the Catholic Christian engaged in any thing like
a Plot, or Council, against his Governor, his either Person or Power; much less
an open Rebel against him, when either an Heathen or Heretic, and his
professed Persecutor; for an Heretic has been no less Cruel than an Heathen:
and when to make up the Charge by their Malice, as in the particular case of
Athanasius, accused, as designing against the Empire by the Arians and
Meletians, to be accused was his great trouble, to be under the Suspicion of so
foul a Crime, being otherways able to acquit himself, and so he did; and indeed
so generally received a Truth was it, that a Christian could not be a Rebel, or
attempt any thing upon the Empire. So much was it concluded of the Essence of
his Profession, that when his Enemies thought effectually to blemish, and make
him appear no Christian, they libelled him as a Rebel; the more and the better
a Christian, the more did his Prince confide in him, and it is very well urged
by our Adversaries, that Constantine did look upon them as his great Support
and Preservers; nor could the Empire in all Probability have been continued to
him, without their Aid and Fidelity; and for which his Favors and
Temporalities, were deservedly large unto them; but this is their Error when
they tell the World, that all Church Power was then, and is still, continued
upon this score, and by the alone favor of Princes.

IF it be said that all this was the effect wanting both of Power and
Opportunity to do otherwise; and had it not been so, the Hypocrisy had ceased,
they had both appeared and acted, as their Principle of independent Power,
received of the Lord Jesus, did influence and in course suggest unto them, set
up against and oppose the Empire. So Buchanan and Knox give the reason, why the
Apostles did not Mutiny and Rebel for the Gospel, as they did in Scotland;
because they wanted Power, had neither Force, nor Opportunity as had they. And
the same was the usual Plea, of our Presbyterian Classical Men, both in their
Pulpits and Printed Pamphlets, in defense of their Rebellions Reformation
against King Charles the First; and too many of the Romish Doctors urge the
same for the Maintenance of the Bishop of Romes Omnipotency, laying claim to
both Swords; the wielding and executing both Governments, and disposing of the
Kingdoms of Princes, from a Donation and Right by Christ Jesus. To which my
Answer is, That whatever particular designing Sects may have asserted or done,
and which I cannot be supposed to be engaged to defend; nor need I attempt
their Confutation, where the Plea in it self is so Notorious and Criminal, to
urge and conclude these things against these Primitive Professors and Doctors
of the Church, against the Apostles themselves, to suggest against and implead
them of, Hypocrisy and unsincere Dealings, underhand Designs and Actings,
against the most frequent Protestations to the contrary, where no one outward,
overt Act has appeared, or but collateral Evidence, or one Circumstance,
implying it; where the whole course of their Lives and Conversations visible to
outward sense, was quite contrary, this is what is against the common Faith of
Mankind; and the whole race and make is impleaded and condemned at once, as
reserved and persidious, without Faith or Honesty, and in particular, is it
Scandalous and to the dishonor of our common Christianity, when the first
Divulgers, and most eminent after-Professors of it, upon whose Fidelity alone
depends its Reception and Imbracement, by whose hands it came to us, and who
sealed it with their Blood, are so notoriously double-hearted and handed, are
not to be believed in their common Actions, and singular Protestations; and the
censure it self is the more odious and abominable, because in all Probability,
they did not want Power, and the Objectors themselves suppose and concede i^;
for they say the Christians were the Support of Constantine's Crown, and indeed
so numerous and considerable, of so much repute were they, and so great
influence had the Christians in and over the World, as to turn the Scale which
way they pleased to lean, to declare for and assist, and consequently ground
enough they had to have themselves grasped the Scepter, had they believed it
annexed to their Christian Kingdom, had it been derivable from Christ Jesus, or
had they had but thoughts of making attempt upon it, an injured right lies not
long concealed, especially on such bottoms, nor is a Zeal for its recovery,
usually long suppressed, the late Boutefeaus, and Zeloti of the Age, upon a
like mistaken ground, give over fresh instances to the contrary. He that reads
over the 37 Chapter of Tertullian's Apology against the Gentiles, will there
find, That the Christians in his time, were no ways inconsiderable, either as
to Number, Power, or Opportunity; they could in one Night burn down their City,
or join openly with Neighbour-Enemies, which were numerous, and greater than
all the World besides; such as the Marcomanni and Parthians; they filled both
their Cities and Isles, and Castles, and Corporations, and Councils, and Tents,
and Tribes, and Companies, the Palace, and the Senate and Market, they only
relinquisht their Temples, they were ready for any War to inequality, they
could baffle them, without Weapons or Fighting, only by Discords and
Separations made among them, by leaving their Cities, and leaving only their
Enemies there, to their amaze and astonishment, tranplanting to other Colonies;
and besides all, lay them open to the incursions of Devils, and which they
alone kept off, exorcised, and expelled from them. Now under all these
advantages, whether real, or supposed, it matters not, so long as certainly
believed, and thought such, where so many favoring Circumstances, could any
Men sit down under an Usurpation? their right over Kings must have been
asserted and demanded, and contended for, had they had any, or but fancied it,
Qui tam libenter trucidamur, si non apud istam Disciplinam, magis occidi
liceret, quam occidere, to be sure they could never so willingly have suffered
and been killed, without resistance and opposition, only such was their
Discipline and Instructions, rather to be killed, than to kill. Had they ever
had thoughts of assuming to themselves the Empire, or but exempting themselves,
by their Charter as Christians, from the Government of it.

'TWILL be much more agreeing with the the Empire, when improved as it will
bear, and more cunning Heads take it into their hands, have their particular
Interests and Designs to serve upon, and maintain by it. But all this admitted,
that the then Clergy were so stupid and sottish, serving only present Zeal and
Ignorance, its Mother, that there was not one wise Man among them, to foresee,
and consider, and determine, and which, with less Persuasions may be done, we
can endure this Scandal upon our common Faith, we contend too usually to have
it so; what! was it so with the Laity too? with the Emperors themselves, their
Court and Senate? or was it reserved alone for Mr. Seldom and Mr. Hobs, and
some few more of their Adherents, to see in such Causes, these fatal and
noxious Effects? That a Church Government, derived from Christ, independent to
that which is Temporal, is not only an Usurpation in it self, but upon all
Civil Government also, that these two are wholly inconsistent, and can no ways
stand together? If they must all go for Fools in these great Men's opinions,
undiscerning, unconsidering Persons, we cannot help it. Sure it is they both
acknowledged and abetted this very Church Power, and saw not these killing
Consequents, were aware of no such destroying aim upon themselves, thought the
Power of the Empire not one whit the less, or their Persons to receive any
abatement by it; and yet Men of reputed Fame and Renown, for all manner of
Wisdom and Prowess in their Generations, nor would they actually forego, or but
endure a lessening discourse of their Prerogative; and particularly their Care
and Provision, in respect of Churchmen was great and Eminent, that no Damage
return to the Crown, upon any Pleas of Exemptions, or Privileges derived from
them. How severe they were in limiting them in their Ordinations, we have
already observed; that, by any Excessive Practice of that special Power,
acknowledged in the Bishops alone, and still removed from themselves, the State
might not be weakened, it being it seems too usual for Men of great Fortunes,
and sufficient Abilities otherways, to Serve their Prince in his Wars or other
Secular Employments, to come into the Church, and receive Holy Orders, only to
exempt themselves for the advantage of those Freedoms and Immunities invested
in the Clergy, to crowd under the Church's Protection for Ease and Idleness.
And therefore the Bishops were forbad to Consecrate any such Persons, and many
other such like Restrictions are to be seen in the Imperial Laws and
Constitutions. I Will instance in one or two of them. As that the Jews when
Criminal and under bad Circumstances, turned Christians only for Favor and an
easier discharge in the Courts of Justice, were not to be received into the
Church, nor imbodied among the Christians; Nor Servants and Debtors, which fled
to the Altar to avoid their Masters and Creditors; and the Clergy that received
them were first to be deposed, and then to be delivered over to the Civil
Power, for farther Punishment, Cod. 9. Theodos. l. l. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And surely
the Empire that was so Industrious and Vigilant to preserve from
Church-incroachments, such the Accessories of their Power and Government, that
the meanest of their Subjects be not oppressed, by any such Plea or Charter;
much greater must be their severity upon that Body or Community, if suspected
in the Make and Constitution, to strike at the Original Power it self, to lay
Limits and farther inconveniences upon their own Persons and Actions, to wrest
the Government it self out of their hands; to Countermand and Supersede with
their Canons, the most Sacred and Solemn of their Sanctions and Determinations.
And though Clergymen, as to every particular Person, or some lesser Collection
of them, may not be altogether Innocent, as to some attempts and encroachments
upon the State, through Zeal ill guided, or incogitancy, or some particular
designed interest, (for who Pleads that they are all exempted from all faults?)
and suitably strict Provision was made by the Imperial Laws, to prevent or
restrain, or punish; yet no one Law, or but Provision, was made, that we read
of, against the Body of Christians themselves (unless by the Heathen Power
designing an Extirpation) or their Power and Government as from Christ, because
not under such a Suspicion, its frame and make was such, as designed for the
Support, but no ways for the Injury of the Empire. The best and wisest of
Emperors, at the same time that they write to the Patriarchs and Bishops of the
Church, as its Supreme and Universal Governors, and owned and remonstrated
their Power as from Christ Jesus alone, yet reserved among their own Titles,
that of Pontifex Maximus, the chief Priest, as Mr. Seldom according to his
usual Industry has Collected several Inscriptions of theirs to this purpose,
lib. 1. De Syned. c. 10. and by which Title, if they meant the same, he would
have them to have done, as it matters not now to inquire, since the Church and
Empire still gave and allowed one another these Compellations interchangeably,
the Inference is strong on our side, that they were not conceived to carry and
imply any thwarting or opposition to one another; and upon what account soever
Julian the Emperor was so obliged by, and tenacious of the Title, we have
reason to believe he did it not on this account to affront in others, and
ingross to himself Church Power, Antistes legis Christinae, being the Title
also in his days of the Bishop; and so Bishops are still occasionally called,
by Ammianus Marcellinus, an Heathen Historian of his time, whose History is
mostly made up of his Actions and Praises, and may not amiss be called his
Parasite, as well as Historian; nor can he be thought to give that to
Churchmen, which in its execution carries so great an Opposition to the
Prerogative of his admired Master. But that which comes nearer, is this; when
the Emperors submitted to the Laws of the Church, as from God himself, made
them their Rule for their civil Sanctions, disdained not to follow them, gave
them every Eulogy, or Character that might declare them of an Heavenly stamp, a
Divine race and infusion, as I have already showed; yet did they not believe
their own Laws and Sanctions the less from God by reason of it, or of a lower
Institution, and suitably still expressed themselves, in the Heads of their
Laws, the Forms and Preambles of their Constitutions, in these following
manners, Quem ex coelesti Arbitrio sumpserimus, (...), as Justinian. Code. l.
1. Tit. 1.1.3. The Laws themselves are called Oracula, Sacra absolute. And then
again, Leges Sacrae, Sanctio sacra, Sacratissima, Sacratissimae leges, Judicium
Sacrum, Praeceptio Sacra, Praeceptum Sacrum, Sacrae literae, Sanctionibus
Consecratae, Oraculum Coeleste, Divales Sanctiones, Divina Precepta, Divino
arbitrio Decreta, Divalia Beneficia, Divale Praeceptum, Lex Divalis, Divalia
Scita, Divalia Statuta; all which, and more, he that will not Peruse in the
several Laws, may read at once Collected to his hand by the Excellent Jacob
Gothofred, 1. Cod. Theodos. Tit. 1. Paratitlon. and Tit. 2. Paratitlon. Hereby
declaring the Laws both of the Church and Empire to come alike from God, and to
be equally Heavenly, although by differing conveyances, upon Persons of
different Orders, for particular diverse ends; but both uniting in, and serving
the great End, the Universal Good, and Directions and Government of Mankind;
and yet each one to act in, and keep its Sphere and Order, and so independent;
and the Objection was not raised in those days, just now recited, nor was any
thing like a thwarting suspected, and which is now contended for; nor indeed
can their hitting and justling be otherwise supposed, than can that be of the
Orbs, or that Dissonancy of the Spheres talked of, the one or both must become
Eccentrick, be Perverse and Irregular, the whole Universe be untuned, in
disorder, and suffer by it; as our own Experience has been a great Evidence of
late, and whether has lost more by it, the King or the Priest, is not easily
determined, though the Pretense was on the Princes side laid, by those that set
the Controversy on foot, and with shows, to disenthrall and enlarge him.

WHAT is the reason of such our misunderstandings? Roman and Geneva Discipline?
who out of a Plea to one, took both Swords, invaded Kings and Kingdoms by it.
Let but the same Rule take place here, as in the other Points of the
Reformation, and all will soon be well again. Return to such the beginning,
those first and purer Ages of the Church, to be ruled, and governed by, where
the Platform is plain, the Model easy for any Capacity, and the Aberrations of
some cannot in reason prejudice it. But this will not do, the ground of the
Quarrel has really another bottom, and their Reasons are another thing; as must
be obvious to him that is conversant with the Writings either of the Principal
Authors of these new started Opinions, or such as were accidentally only their
occasion, or after Abettors of them. They cannot see, nor assent to any
Government, as existing in the World; but what is visible and sensible, has its
Operations and Effects upon outward Sense, and its Organs, upon the Person or
Estate, the Life or Bodily Action of Mankind; and this to be presently
inflicted. Men they are that will allow no Corporations or Societies but those
of this World, for Buying and Selling, for Trading and Trafficking, for the
Belly and the Back, for outward Peace and Ease, to Preserve themselves from one
another at Home, and Invasions from Abroad, for the present Mess of Pottage,
good and gain on Earth; nor can any other Power but such as this, or in order
to it, be apprehended. We have above observed, That Herod the King, was the
first Man that suggested this great Error, and that the Kingdom of our Savior
must supplant and abolish the Kingdoms of this World, his Power and Caesar's
could not stand together. And this was managed by the Jews all along after, who
united with Herod to destroy our Savior as an Usurper, allowing and owning no
King but Caesar, upon that one Design and Principle. And these Men we have now
to deal with, are every ways as blind, as gross and carnal in this particular
Point, as were the Jews their Predecessors; and the Veil of Moses is it so over
their Faces, that they are stark Blind either beyond or besides it. The Jews of
old did not with more Zeal and Industry contend for his Temporal Canaan and
Promises, Ordinances and Administrations, or with greater Blindness rest
himself in them, or with greater Malice, scorn and pursue such as said they saw
beyond it; then do these Men now adays deride those that say, there is a
Spiritual Kingdom which is our Savior's, a Power originally from Christ
derived by Succession to his Body the Church, to remain till the Restitution of
all things, that there is, or can be, any King but Caesar, resolving all Power
whatever into that which is Secular, and rejecting all other, as Opposite to
the Dignity and Prerogative of Princes.

IT is not much to be marvelled at the The true Grounds of Ecclesiastical
Regiment, etc. but the Title within is, The Divine Right of Episcopacy refuted,
the more to engage the Reader; for Episcopacy was first to be taken away, and
he had the most advantage to do it, it being the particular quarrel; but the
after-game was at all Church Power in general, and which he endeavors to erase
upon this score, as against the Sovereign Dignity of Kings, for which he seems
Zealous, when to Dethrone Churchmen, but at last sets a Thousand more upon the
Throne with him, his Princes in Parliament, as he calls them; nay, he sets them
above the King, and says, though to Princes on their lawful Tribunals,
something is more due than at other times; but to Princes something is more due
than at other times, but to Princes in Parliament there is most of all due; all
Power being not derived to the King without them, and whose Ecclesiastical
Power he there discourses. And which I therefore here repeat, to show what was
designed for our Kings by these Men, when so much Pleading for a Power
belonging to them which is the Church's; and his chief Argument all along
against Church Power, independent to Princes, is, that it is not like, nor does
it enter into any Rivality with that solid, sensible, coercive Power wherewith
God has invested his true Lieutenants upon Earth; and therefore is it but
Imaginary and Improper. That Power which is proper, must include not only a
Power of Commanding, but also an effectual Virtue of forcing Obedience to its
Commands, and of subjecting and reducing such as shall not render themselves
obedient; that, as among the Jews, the Church and State was the same, had the
same Body, the same Head, the same Sword; and that Head was Temporal, and that
Sword was Material; and therefore it is so with Christians, nor have they any
Sword or Head that is Spiritual. Christians ought not to be so contrary to that
excellent Discipline of the Jews, which God himself ordered, and to introduce I
know not what Spiritual Rule, in prejudice of Temporal Rule; nor does he expect
any Satisfaction from his Adversaries, why there should be less Division
betwixt Church and State, among the Jews, and less use of two several Swords;
and because Adultery was Punished with Death, Christians ought not to be
Excommunicated for it. If God has given them sole Knowledge to Determine all
Controversies, and Power to Enact all Ecclesiastical Canons, doubtless he has
given them some binding Coercive force correspondent thereunto, and if so, why
do they not expel all Dissension by it? If their Virtue extend no further than
to Exhortation, why do they urge Commands upon us? If they have a Commanding
Power, why do they not second it with due Compulsion? it is plainly cleared to
us, that Adultery by God's Law was Punished by the Temporal not Spiritual
Sword; and that the Abscissio animae amongst the Jews, was only Corporal
Punishment by Death, the infliction whereof was only left to the Temporal
Magistrate; and that there was no difference observed between Crimes Spiritual
and Crimes Temporal. And therefore there ought to be none in the Church of
Christ; the form or essence of Law, is that Coercive or Penal Virtue by which
it binds all to its Obedience; if Priests had any such Spiritual Sword,
doubtless it would have some sensible Efficacy, and work to good Ends, and Men
would not, nor could not choose, but bow and submit themselves under it. Thus
he.

Mr. Seldom who was Contemporary with an incessant Industry of his own,
improved the Argument to a greater height of irreligion and audaciousness, and
contemptuously treads upon whatever is like a Church Power in any instance of
it, which his Friend was a little shy of, who allows in Churchmen a Power for
Non-communion or Abstention in some Cases, which, though he will by no means call
it Excommunication, and acknowledges that Justinian did only command that the
Bishop proceed against the Faulty, by Excommunication, Suspension, Deprivation;
but Mr. Seldom says, with the greatest assurance and impudence, it was his own
judicial act, with that truth we have already considered; but his Argument and
course of proceeding is all along the same, and upon the supposition founded in
the constitution and practice of the Jewish Church, and which he proves by a
vast reading and intolerable expense of Pains to have used only outward,
Bodily, Penal, Coercive Punishments, whether before, or after giving the Law in
Sinai, so he tells us, it was with Adam and Cain, the one upon his fall, the
other upon his murder, both banished their Countries for it, the Sword is the
punishment for Murder, Genesis 9.3. And they were to be stoned that came near the
Mount at the giving the Law, Exodus 19. And the punishment was only secular upon
the violation of the Seven Precepts, given to the Sons of Noah, the
uncircumcised was to be punished, though not forinsecally, yet by Gods own
immediate hand; and a particular judgment of the same nature was the Curse upon
Meroz, the punishment of Kore, Dathan and Abiram, nor do the words, (...),
Anathema, etc. as used by the Prophets according to the Septuagint, or other
Greek Translations, signify any thing else, nor are there used for
Excommunication, or afterward by the Apostles, as in St. Paul's delivering up
the incestuous to Satan, etc. and the Jews took up that Excommunication which
was of later years exercised among them by special Compact with one another, in
the time of Captivity, and for the present Exigence, when the Temporal Power
was taken out of their hands, and which was no ways appropriated to the Priest,
or any other Order of Men, either now under their Captivity, or for the
infliction of those other Punishments before or after the Law; and what
Excommunications were practiced in the Apostles times, and the first Century
(where by the way, his great Master Erastus will allow of none, in his Hundred
Theses answered by Theodore Beza in his Tractatus Pius and Moderatus de vera
Excommunicatione, and Christiano Magisterio) was first Judaick, in imitation of
the Jews; for there was none of the Christians for many years after our
Savior's Ascension, which were not either Jews originally, or Greek
Proselytes, and were accounted as Jews in common repute, and members of their
Synagogue, and so used their Customs and Rights as before, and of which this of
Excommunication was one, and so living among the Jews, and called by the same
Name, when Caesar indulged the Jews, and they had the liberty of their own
Religion, the Christians enjoyed the Privileges together with them; and thus
their Excommunication became Caesarean, their Church Acts derived a Public
Authority from the Empire; (having none before but by private Covenant) and by
this Authority they held Presbyteries, had Judicatures, relating purely to their
Religion, and retained a Power to Punish under Death, as did the Jews, and if
not thwarting the Laws Imperial; and which grant of Favor, though abated by
succeeding Emperors, they notwithstanding retained a Body, and Union among
themselves, upon their own terms for Confederation, till the days of
Constantine, and the Empire became Christian; and then the Church being taken
in to the State, the Jurisdiction wholly became his, as naturally annexed to
the Crown, and there to reside till all Authority and Power cease. This is the
chief of Mr. Selden's Plot, for the overthrowing the Power of Christ's Kingdom,
in the Polity, Laws and Rights of it, Lib. 1. De Syned. cap. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
11. and which has with much more advantage been very lately represented to the
Age, than I am able to do, by a great and Learned Hand, Dr. Parker, Archdeacon
of Canterbury. Nor needs there any thing more to be added for the satisfying
the World of the vainer Attempts, and undue Consequents there raised, only the
general Design of this Discourse engages, that it be not wholly passed by, and
which otherwise could not be answered.

THOMAS Erastus, Mr. Selden's great and Jews, so all Offenders of what Nature
soever are by the Coercion alone of the Magistrate to be Corrected, and the
Christian Church is to go no farther than theirs did, and the Civil Magistrate
has all the Care of Religion, that it is very difficult to conceive, how there
can be two Heads in one Body, both to have right to Punish and Exercise
Domination over the same Subjects, still supposing no Power to have, or that
can have, existency, but that of outward Coercion. And which Plea, however it
might be forced from him, and seem necessary, and makes a plausible show of
Truth, in regard of Beza's Lay Elders and the Consistorian Government of
Geneva, and in whose irregular Power he instances, laying Penal Mulcts and
outward Restraints, as do the Civil Magistrates; and the Consideration of which
ran him upon this his, as groundless, Extreme. Yet as to the Constitution and
Practice of the truly Catholic Christian Church, it has no Pretense or
likelihood at all, as will hereafter be made to appear.

CLAUDIUS Salmasius, though he was Beza's Complexion; yet is he not so
ingenuous, and true to their common Cause, as was Beza in his Writings against
Erastus; for in his Apparatus to his Book De Primatu Papae, a long rambling,
indigested, tedious Discourse, purposely made against the Divine Right of
Bishops; he there to pursue home his Design, takes away all Church Government
whatsoever at the same rate of arguing. And if he concludes any thing at all,
and which is not easily seen, it is this, That a Bishop is so far from having a
distinct Power above a Presbyter, solitary and apart from him; that he has
neither (...) nor (...) in general, no Government nor Jurisdiction at all. And
the reason he backs it with is this, Christ did not invest his Apostles with
the Power of worldly and civil Magistrates, when he sent them out to Preach. If
so, he should have adjoined to them so many Lictors and Apparitors, furnished
them with Whips and Axes; and not having done it, there is no Magistracy at
all, nothing of Power residing, because able to engage none by Violence;
neither Corporal nor Pecuniary Mulcts can be inflicted by them. And so in his
Dissertation De Episcopis and Presbyteris contra Petavium, under the Name of
Walo Messalinus, he concludes Episcopacy to be Curatio only, and which he
distinguishes a Magistratu, Potestate and Imperio, from all sorts of
Government. And says expressly, That any Jurisdiction of one Clergyman above
another came from Constantine, Cap. 6. and so Zealous is he to make Episcopacy
but an Humane Disposition, that he delivers it as his Opinion, and takes a
great deal of pains to prove it, That the Presbyters themselves, are no other
than Laymen, have nothing of a Distinction, or of a Power different from the
Laity, as the Priesthood of old had amongst the Jews. That as Laymen did
Baptize, as well as any, and which is acknowledged, so that Bishops and
Presbyters do Administer the Sacraments of Christ, it is only as dedicated to
it, by the choice of the People, and in whose absence Laics may Consecrate all
Believers, and not only the Apostles, receiving the Commission and Power at
Christ's Institution; and suitably was it done in every Family, and after
Supper, for some Ages; and the difference betwixt the Order Ecclesiastical, and
the People in common, has nothing of Divine Institution. That Ordination by
Imposition of hands, gives nothing at all of new Power; only ranks them in such
a Body and Order, as First, Second and Third. And the Door-Keepers have as much
a place and order in the Church, as either Deacon, Presbyter or Bishop; the
Bishop and Presbyter were only the more Honorable and Honest part of the
People. And thus he brings in his Lay Elders to have an equal Right and
Government in Church Matters with them, by a Primitive Devolution, and which
Officers once were in every Church, but now remains only in the Affrican,
though with the addition of the Order of Presbyters, for which there is no
footstep in the Primitive Apostolical Church. And at last is angry with
Petavius, that he perstringes the Waldenses and Luther, because they retained
no Priesthood at all, under the Gospel; but believe that just and faithful
Laics may do all that is needful in the Church of God, and discharge every
Ecclesiastical Office, receiving a Power by the Imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery; that is, the Senate not Ecclesiastical but Laick; in which whether
Petavius injures the Waldenses and Luther or not, is not the matter now to be
enquired after; sure it is, Salmasius adopts these their imputed Opinions, and
they are his. And he thinks it the Mind of St. Peter too, whom he cites, Cap.
2. calling the Laics that are faithful, an Holy Priesthood, to offer Spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God through Christ Jesus, a Royal Priesthood, Ibid.
and all which Petavius the Jesuit makes no small advantage of, to the Infamy
of the Reformation. Neither have I done Claudius Salmasius any injury in
ranking him among those that deny all Church Power as from Christ Jesus; for he
is worse than those I have mentioned before him, he takes the civil assignation
from the hands of the Prince, and puts it into the People. So that every Man
may as well Ordain himself; as in the days of Jeroboam. And hence we cannot but
take notice with what furious, inconsiderate, malicious purposes some Men have
pursued Episcopacy, and rather than have it stand, they will fall themselves, deny
what is otherwise their Diana and great Delight, the Divine Right of
Presbytery, take away all Church Power for ever with it; And indeed the
Principles that these Men go upon are such, when to throw down Episcopacy, that
they strike at our whole Christianity with the same blow, as does his Friend
David Blondel in particular; and there cannot, under their Guiding and Conduct,
be any such thing as either Truth or Heresy; the one to be convincingly
Vindicated, or the other solidly confuted; as might be easily made appear.

BUT what is mostly to be admired, the Hugo Grotius goes along with them in
part, and can apprehend only a Power that is outward and compulsive, and
working by sensible force. And whatsoever Power is erected in the Church
independent to the Secular, is an abating its Arm, an Usurpation, a sharing
with the Prince in his Government, De Imper. Sum. Potest. in Sacris. Sect. 3.
cap. 1. cap. 5. and Sect. 9. That there is no Empire by Divine Right granted to
the Church. The Ministry of the Empire is the Sword, but the Weapons of the
Church are not Carnal, Cap. 4. Sect. 9. And again argues, That there is no
Jurisdiction belonging to the Church, because none that is Coactive or
Commanding, Cap. 9. Sect. 3. with more to this purpose all along there. As also
in his Ordinum Holland. Pietas, etc. Orat. Habit. in Senate. Amstelodam, bona
fides Sibrandi, Lubberti, etc. and yet that this was not his constant, lasting,
through digested opinion, it is again as certain, he going quite the other way,
and fully thwarting, even in that very Discourse of his of the Power of the
Supreme Magistrate in Holy Things, and much oftener in his other Writings. He
will not allow the Pastors to be Vicars of those very Powers, any otherwise
then as Subjects; and that, besides their Pastoral charge, they receive aliquid
Imperii and Jurisdictionis, something of Empire and Jurisdiction, Cap. 1. Sect.
3. cap. 4. Sect. 1. that Kings are the Object of this Power, not only as the
Gospel is tendered unto them in the way of Preaching, but by the application of
the use of the Keys, Cap. 4. Sect. 3. and Cap. 9. Sect. 18. That the Church is
Coetus, a Body and Association, not only permitted, but instituted by Divine
Right; and whatever naturally belongs to any other Body, this belongs also to
the Church, Cap. 4. Sect. 9. That the Church destitute of the Protection of the
outward Government, does not cease to be a Church, Cap. 8.2. He asserts a
Church Power to exclude from their Congregations, for either Heresy, or
Immorality, and that distinct from the Magistrate, who constrains for fear of
Punishment, Annot. in Mat. 13.41. which Annotations he proposes for the Pattern
of all his other, and if from any Writings of his, we may hence conclude his
maturated Judgment. And again, in his Annotations on St. Luke 6.22. he
instances in two Branches of this Power, Baptism and Excommunication. And in
St. Joh. 20.23. and when the Apostle only advises to shun Evil Men, he
concludes the Presbyterium or Association, was not then settled at Rome,
otherwise he had ordered, that they had then been Excommunicated. In Romans 6.17.
and in 1 Cor. 5.11. by the Keys of David, he understands, not only he that has
the Power of Death and Hell, but he that has Plenissimum Imperium, the entire
Power in the House of God, as Eliachim had in the House of David. Ad Apoc. 3.7.
and, then which, what more can be desired by us, and how consistent with
himself any one may see. I Will only add the words of our Profound Mr. Thorndike
in his Treatise of the Laws of the Church, p. 395. He that in his Preface to
his Annotations on the Gospel shall read him disclaiming whatever the Consent
of the Church shall be found to refuse, will never believe that he had admitted
no Corporation of the Church, without which, no Consent thereof, could have
been observed. And it is, I say, from these his Annotations on the Gospels, we
are to find and know what are his Sentiments; if any where, he desires us to
have recourse hither, if we will read his other things with Profit, in his
Preface to the Reader. Now, that those above cited Treatises in which his
Errors as to Church Government are so visible, were all wrote when he was
young, it is certain; and that he was too much pre-occupated and prejudiced by
his Education and particular Converse and Business at Amsterdam, in such his
Youth, follows in course, and himself was afterward sensible of, and lamented
it throughout his whole Life. And thinks it less Candid and Ingenious in Andrew
Rivette, that he objects those things against him, that he had wrote some times
since, Cum illi multarum rerum conspectum adimeret nimius Patriae amor; cum
esset Parvulus, loquebatur ut Parvulus; when the overmuch love to his Country,
did take from him the sight of many things. When he was a Child, he wrote as a
Child, Rivet. Apol. Discuss. Page 732. And it must be also very harsh and
severe in us, should we object against him that his particular Treatise of the
Power of the Supreme Magistrate in Holy Things, which that it is a Posthumous
work it is most apparent. And farther, That he disowned it when it was wrote,
and never designed it for the Press, it is more then probable; especially if we
give Credit to what account our Herbert Thorndike gives of it, in his Laws of
the Church, the last Chapter, That at his being in England, he left it with two
great Prelates of our Church, Lancelot Lord Bishop of Winchester, and John Lord
Bishop of Norwich, to peruse; and both of them advising him not to Print it, he
rested in their Judgments, and 'twas laid aside till his Death. And indeed,
that that Treatise was not the issue of a fixed Judgment, but to serve a Party,
appears from the unevenness of the Discourse, contradicting it self frequently,
and contending against the very design of it; the great Argument of a raw
imperfect confused Notion. And particularly, if we consider, he was every ways
an adherent to the Holland Remonstrants, a sort of Men, that in Prejudice to
the Church, so extremely flattered the Civil Magistrate; as our Author makes it
appear, Ibid. supra; though he never drank so deep of the Cup, as to take off
the Dregs, as he himself farther pleads to Rivet, concerning some Presbyterian
Tenants, imbibed in his Youth, Ibid. supra, and acknowledges much to the
Mercies of God, that when compassed round with their so great Power, he could
never be brought to Approve that which is proper to Calvinists, Ibid. And how
easily these things slide into Mankind, how incredibly they work, and how
difficultly cast off, Experience too much Evidences; The Natural Love to a
man's Country, the Prejudice of his Education, the higher Employments in it,
its Applause and Acclamations: All which Grotius had in a great measure. The
latter alone is able to spoil a Judgment; it must do it, where entertained and
pursued: and though he that reads over Grotius, and says he is not the better
for him, such is his excellent and incomparable Notion, must be either a great
Fool, or very ill natured; yet it is to be doubted some of these never quitted
him quite, his Theological Works, lately Printed together, give too great a
Presumption; all Amsterdam, somewhere or other being to be found in them, and
every one may pick out, or very near it, his own Religion. So fatal is it, for
Men of great Parts to set out, without some first Principles, as he did, and
frame their Scheme of Divinity to the present Notion and Conception, no regard
had to something received, and certain. So in course does it follow, what in
him is to be found, and nothing could have done him so much right, as, in the
setting out of his Works, to have given account to the World, of the particular
time, when they were each of them Composed, and first made Public. All that I
shall add more concerning Grotius, is this, In the pursuance of his assumed
Notion of Supreme, laid down by him in the Entrance to his Treatise De Imperio
summarum Potestatum in Sacris, and which is the chief occasion of his following
Mistakes. As, To be Supreme is to be above all, indefinitely in the full
Latitude of things, and where fixed and attributed to any one Person or
Subject, the very Design and Nature of the Expression, will allow none to be
excluded, or exempted from a Submission and Subjection; no other Power can be
supposed, and not in Subordinacy and Dependency upon, to be and subsist,
without and besides it. He is so unhappy, as to fall into and pursue the same
Mistake, the Jesuit had done in Doctor Bilson's Book of Christian Subjection,
and Obedience, in the Second Part, who there thus argues against the Oath of
Supremacy. If Princes be Supreme Governors over all Persons in all Causes; then
in vain did the Holy Ghost appoint Pastors and Bishops to govern the Church,
then are they Superior to Christ himself, in effect being Christ's Masters;
then may they prescribe which way to Worship God. And goes on a little farther,
and declares his dislike to Supreme in the Oath, because, that word makes
Princes Superior to God himself, for Supreme is Superior to all; neither
Christ's own Person, nor his Church excepted. Now, I say, this one and the same
Notion of Grotius and the Jesuit, if adhered unto, and both will continue to
allow it; they are upon equal Grounds, and with the same advantage sight
against one another, and the Combat may be Eternal, only of Skirmishes and some
Blows; but no Victory on either side. When Grotius goes along with our Church
of England, and makes his Magistrate Supreme in all Causes, and over all
Persons, the Jesuit tells him, That to be Supreme is above all, to be Superior
to all, and he sets up his Prince above God and Christ, and the Church; when
the Jesuit asserts the Supreme Power of the Church of God, Grotius upon the
same Ground replies the self-same thing upon him. That he exalts the
Church Power above God and Christ, and the Magistrate, as all their Masters.
And indeed, according to these Men's Notions, to apply the Superlative to any
Person or Thing, is the height of Blasphemy. For why? God is not excepted. And
the most common Phrases, of a most Mighty Prince, a most Holy Place, a most
Wise Counselor, are all instances of it; nor can any one Attribute of Gods, be
otherwise applied to the Creature. Whereas, if the Word be understood and used,
as in common use it is to be, and in compliance with things it must be,
suitable to the present Subject it is assigned and limited to, and the
particular things it is conversant with, as under such and such Heads and
Orders, all is easy and plain. Thus God is the alone Supreme, all Rule,
Governance and Authority being originally in him and eminently. Christ is
Supreme, as Head of the Church, to whom all Power is given of the Father, for
bringing Mankind to Heaven; the Apostles and their Successors, the Pastors of
the Church, were and are now Supreme on Earth, in the same Power derived from
Christ, by the Apostles unto them. The Prince is Supreme, and has all Power
from God committed unto him; as to Government relating to this World; over all
Things, Persons and Causes, to appropriate or alienate, to Endow, Limit,
Restrain, Coerce or Compel, as the alone Supreme Lawgiver upon Earth, and none
may oppose; and the great and giant Objection, that is only wrangling about and
mistaking of words, falls to the ground, as it is in it self nothing.

CHAP. IV. Chap. 4.

The Contents.
The Objections answered. Selden's Error, that there are to be, no other
Punishments by Christ, than was before and under the Law; the Query is to be
what Christ did actually constitute; He mixes the Temporal Actions of the
Apostles, and those designed for Perpetuity. Adam and Cain might have more than
a Temporal Punishment, Sect. 1.

The great Disparity betwixt the Jewish and Christian State considered, no
Inferences to be drawn from the one to the other, but what is on our side,
Sect. 2.

Theirs is the Letter, ours the Spirit; They Punished by Bodily Death, we by
Spiritual, Sect. 3.

If Government was judged so absolutely necessary by the dispersed Jews, that
they then framed one of their own for the present Necessity, and whose Wisdom
in so doing, Mr. Seldom so much admires; it must blemish our Savior much to
say, he purposely called together a Church and designed it none of its own, to
preserve it, Sect. 4.

The Jews Excommunication, was not bodily Coercive, and then there may be such
a Punishment, an Obligation to Obedience, without force, and that is not
outward; and this much more in the Christian Society, Sect. 5.

And this their Government abstracted from the Civil Magistrate, is an Essay of
Christ's Government; so far of the same Nature, to come into the World, Sect. 6.

The Christian Church might be both from Caesar and Christ, as was the Jewish,
from God and Caesar, and there is no thwarting. The Jews and Christians
distinct, Sect. 7.

In answer to his main Objection, That all Government must be of this World,
Sect. 8. It is replied,

To assert Christ to have such a Kingdom, is to thwart his design of coming
into the World, the whole course of his Actions and Government; and those
Ancients that expected him to come and Rule with them on Earth; yet did not
believe it to be accomplished, till after the Resurrection, Sect. 9.

To say he therefore has no Power at all, is as wide of Truth, the way of Men
in Error, to run from one extreme to another, and of Mr. Seldom here, Sect. 10.

The Church is a Body of a differing Nature from others, Sect. 11.

With differing Organs and Members of its own, in Subordination to one another,
Sect. 12.

With different Offices and Duties, Gifts and Endowments; these either Common
to all Believers, or limited to particular Persons, Sect. 13.

As Christians in common, they had one Faith, into which Baptized, and of which
Confession was made; the Apostles Creed, and other Summaries of Faith and sound
Doctrine. Interrogatories in Baptism. How Infants perform it, Sect. 14.

They had one and the same Laws and Rules for Obedience for which they
Covenanted, which is their Baptismal Vow, the Abrenunciation of the World, the
Flesh and the Devil, Sect. 15.

One Common Worship and Service, and Religious Performance to God, in their
Assemblies, the particular Offices and Duties there, the Priest and People
officiate interchangeably; as in Tertullian, Justin Martyr, etc. Sect. 16.

Common Duties and Services as to God, so to one another; in supplying one
another Necessities as occasion, Sect. 17.

In the supply of such as attended at the Altar, by a Common Purse deposited in
the hands of the Bishop, Sect. 18.

Of the Poor and Indigent, whose Treasurer was the Bishop, Sect. 19.

The Power, Offices, and Duties not promiscuous, but limited to particular
Persons, are those of the Ministry, distributed into the three standing Orders
of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, and which make up that (...), that Gospel
Priesthood to remain to the Restitution, Sect. 20.

This Power and Jurisdiction, though limited to and residing in these three,
yet it is not in each of them alike, in the same degree, force, and virtue; the
Deacon is lowest, the Presbyter next; the Bishop, the full Orders and
Uppermost, Supreme and including all, Sect. 21.

Against this Primacy of Bishops, that of Metropolitans, Exarchy, Patriarchy,
and the Supremacy of Rome is objected, Sect. 22.

The Metropolitan, etc. is in some Cases above the Bishop, but not in the Power
of the Priesthood; it is the same Power enlarged. No new Ordination in Order to
it, Sect. 23.

The Universal Primacy of the Bishop of Rome is but Pretended, not bottomed on
either the Scriptures, or Fathers, or Councils, Sect. 24. 25, 26.

The Bishops Superiority, or full Orders and Power in the Church is reassumed,
and farther asserted. He with his Presbyter or Deacon, or some one of them are
to be in every Congregation; for the Presbyter or Deacon or both to assemble
the People and Officiate, and not under him, is Schism. The several instances
of this Power of the Priesthood, Sect. 27.

To Preside in the Assemblies, Pray, give Thanks for, Teach and Govern there.
No Extempore Prayers in those Assemblies, Sect. 28.

To Administer the Sacraments, the Consecration of the Lords Supper, by Prayer
and Thanksgiving and Attrectation of the Elements. Baptism by Lay-Persons.
Rebaptizations on what terms in the Ancient Church Confirmation, Sect. 29.

To Unite and Determine in Council. The use of Councils and Obligation. Their
Authority Declarative, Autoritative, Sect. 30.

To impose Discipline, the several instances and degrees of it, in the Ancient
Church. Indulgencies and Abatements, Sect. 31.

To Excommunicate or cast out of the Church, a Power without which the Church
as a Body cannot subsist; a natural Consequent to Baptism, Priests not
excommunicated, but deposed, Sect. 32.

To Absolve, and Re-admit into the Church, this the design of Excommunication,
which is only a shutting out for a time, in order to Mercy, on whom to be
inflicted. Its certain force in the Execution, Sect. 33.

To depute others in the Ministry by Ordination; the Necessity of it. An
instance in St. John out of Eusebius, St. Clemens Romanus, Calvin and Beza's
Opinion and Practice. Its ill Consequences. Only, those of the Priesthood can
give this Power to others, Sect. 34.

The Objection answered, and it is plain the Church is an Incorporation, with
Laws, Rewards and Penalties of its own, not of this World, nor opposing its
Government, Sect. 35.

The outward stroke is reserved to the Day of Judgment, but the Obligation is
present. If the Church has no Power nor Obligation, because not that present
Power to Punish, or any like it; neither has any Law in the Gospel. Mr. Hobbs
the more honest Man, says neither the Ecclesiastical, or Evangelical Law
obliges. His and their Principles infer it, Sect. 36.

The Power of Christ and his Church cannot clash with the Civil Power, because
no outward Process till the Day of Judgment, and then civil outward Dominion is
to cease in its course; the present Union and Power to be sure cannot: this is
clear from the several instances of it, already reckoned up, Sect. 37.

Their Faith is an inward act of the Soul, acquitted by Mr. Hobbes; and that
which is more open, Confession, obliges, if opposed, but to dye, and be
Martyrs, Sect. 38.

That they Covenant against Sin, makes them but the better Subjects, Sect. 39.

No Man that says his Prayers duly can be a Rebel; because first of all to own
his Prince and Pray for him. The first Christians Innocence defended them, when
impleaded for Assembling without leave. If this did not do, they suffered;
Their Christianity did not exempt them from inspection, Sect. 40.

Charity, not obstructive to Government, when on due Objects; a common Purse
without leave, dangerous, not generally to be allowed. These Christians
innocence indemnified them. The Divine Right of Titles how asserted. Nothing
can justify those Practices, but their real Case. The Profession of
Christianity must otherwise cease, Sect. 41, 42.

Presiding in the Church, rises no higher than the Duties exercised. It Is Dr.
Tillotson alone ever said, -- To Preach Christ, is to Affront Princes; If the
Jesuit do, let him look, to it. Christianity is not in fault. An entering into,
or renewing the Covenant, at the Font or Altar, is no Encroachment on the but
Justice of Peace in the Neighborhood, Sect. 43.

Excommunication and other Censures change no Man's Condition as to this World;
they have no force, but in relation to known Duties. Prudence is to rule in the
Execution, particular regard to be had to Princes. Whatever is Coercive
annexed, is from the Prince. Lay-Judges, Chancellors, etc. when first granted
by the Empire upon the Bishops Petition. The same is Absolution, neither,
innovate in Civil Affairs, Sect. 44.

Conciliary Acts, invade no more than does the Gospel it self. That Canons have
had the precedence of the Law, is by the favor of Princes; a Council without
local meeting. Letters Missive, Sect. 45.

Ordaining others, no more prejudicial to the Crown than the former acts. This
is Mr. Hobbe's Misapprehension, Sect. 46.

HAVING produced the chief and first Seldom, and his other Friends, and which
is laid down and insisted on as the Foundation of the whole ensuing Fabric. We
are told that all Punishments both before, and after, the giving the Law in
Sinai, from Adam to Christ, were bodily and outwardly Coercive, and inflictive,
the distinction of Sins Spiritual and Temporal was not then known, nor was
there any such different Regiments and Governors, in regard to them; the Sword
punished Adulteries as well as Burglary. And therefore it is so still under the
Gospel, by the Institution of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; nor was there
a Jurisdiction separate and apart, relating alone to Spiritual Church Affairs,
designed, or erected, by him. An Inference (granting the truth of the Premises)
surely as wide as their keenest Adversaries can wish it to be, and the
Consequence had been every ways as due and firm, in respect to the Law given by
Moses, that there were never any such Levitical Rites, and Ceremonies given
from God by him, such a Polity erected, because nothing like it, that we know
of, was given to Adam, in Paradise; nor is there one Rule, Law or Direction
since given to his Succession, the Patriarchs in particular, but upon the same
force and account, must still be exemplary, nor ought there, can there be, any
institution that is diverse from them received; if a distinct Power, from all
the World before him, be admitted and allowed in Moses the Servant, much more
in Christ a Son over his own House, by whom God has spoken to us in these last
days, as in times past he did to the Fathers, by the Prophets, whom he
appointed Heir of all things; by whom also he has made the worlds; who is the
bright Image of his Person, upholding all things by the word of his Power, Heb.
1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. who had greater Authority, more full and larger Instructions
and Commission, and more signally evidenced to the outward sense of Mankind,
than any Prophets or Messengers of Gods had before, who had all Power in Heaven
and Earth committed unto him, both spoke and acted as never Man did. And in the
same peculiar manner did he gather and stablish and six his Church, or Body
upon Earth; and at his going away into Heaven, send down his own Gifts in the
face of all Nations at the Feast of Pentecost; erected his own Kingdom,
appointed his own Officers, assigned his own Members, influenced them by his
own Spirit, governed them by his own Laws, associated them in his own Method,
and nothing of it was of this World. He made a new Covenant, stablish'd on
better Grounds, encouraged with better Hopes and Promises, instituted new
Ordinances, made new Seals and Conveyances, gave new Liveries, and Pledges that
were diverse, a Government to last for ever, till the restitution of all
things, with a respect to nothing future, but Heaven, and all this absolute in
it self, and independent, abstract and separate from any, or all the Powers and
Associations in the world beside; complying and yielding to no one
Circumstance, Exigence, or Necessity whatever; so contrived and ordained, that
as himself, her Head, so the Church his Body, and every Member in particular
has life in it self, derived only from him; their own Powers and Capacities,
and Institutions, and the gates of Hell are not to prevail against them; and
then surely special Commands, and different Offenses, may be allowed, there
must be new Animadversions and Corrections, Discipline and Punishments; and
these in such hands as is his Pleasure. However, to infer, there is now no such
things, or in such a manner, and such hands, because never in the World before,
is hugely inconcluding; nor do any Men that are in earnest, or out of a Plot,
believe, or declare themselves any otherwise obliged by such the forementioned
Instances and Presidents, whether in Law or Government, any farther than the
Parity of Reason, and Correspondency of things enforce and engage; and there
would be mad work were it otherwise. Only Mr. Seldom and his Friends, are, it
seems, to be excepted, who thus argue, Adam and Cain, for their Offenses
against God, had a civil Banishment. Achan's Body and all his Goods were a
devoted thing for his Sacrilege. Others were Slain or Stoned, or swallowed up
by the Earth for their greater Impieties, Excommunication was not at all
amongst the Jews for some time, and since, it was received only as a Compact
among themselves to keep their People in awe and order, when they were in
Captivity, and without the benefit of the Civil Magistrate, and their Penal
Laws to correct and restrain them. And therefore there are not, neither ought
to be, any other Punishments under the Gospel; All the Anathema's, Devotings,
Cuttings off, Separation, Abstentions, Interminations, Excommunications, are
nothing else. The Primitive Christians, without any Pre-obligation from Christ,
upon the same score entered into their Discipline, and governed themselves also
as they could, while the Empire was Heathen; because not capable any otherways
to subsist, keep their Body together and Protect it, and which ceased when
Constantine became Christian, who took it all into his own hands, managed it as
occasion, and as he pleased; in whom, by right, alone it resided. And the
Argument is every whit as good, as to Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which were
imitations of the Jewish Customs; and that there is no more in either, than was
in their Baptizing and Washing when they made Proselytes, or in their Cup of
Blessing, Drinking a Health, Eating and Banqueting together, and which must be
in the Power of the Supreme Magistrate, to cancel or continue at his Pleasure.
And much wider yet is a farther Conclusion of his in his Twelfth Chapter, That
there was no Excommunication at all amongst the Jews; nor is therefore to be
any among Christians, because no mention of it, in an old Jewish Manuscript
Ritual, which he has by him, and there produces; and the courses of Penance and
Repentance, are all Innovations, because his Priest of Mahomet neither knew nor
discovered any thing of it; and which must be the alone Inferences from all his
great Pains and Reading there showed to the World, if there can be any at all.
And indeed, had he not intended more to amuse the World with a bulk of Stuff
and Reading, as is his usual way, and by a confusion of things first to
confound his Reader, the easier to impose upon him, the usual way of all
Heretics, as Tertullian has observed Adversus Praxean Cap. 20. Proprium est
omnium Hereticorum, pauca adversus plura defendunt, and posteriora adversus
priora. Scribis tanquam ad Croesum and Pyrrhum Loxias; as Marius Mercator of
the Pelagian; First, to involve and entangle; he would have omitted all these
Impertinencies, and gone directly to the Business, As whether such a Kingdom
was once erected? Such Power was left upon Earth or not? and this indeed he
attempts, but it is in the After-Game, the Bustle, and Distraction. And he does
it only too in compliance with his own false Supposition. He considers nothing
of the Kingdom of Christ, the Nature of his Commission, it is Power, Reasons,
Design, End and Reward, he wrests particular passages of Scripture, to his
perverted purpose, and I Will bring as many Readings and Expositions with their
tricks and turnings, quite against him. And particularly intermixes and
confounds the miraculous, especial Actions of the Apostles, when inflicting
Death and Temporal Punishments, for the Testimony of their Commissions, and
terror to the present Offender, and warning to future Ages, and which were to
cease, with that settled fixed Power of theirs, designed for a Perpetuity. And
his Mistake is as great in his numerous Instances of the Imperial Acts and
their Constitutions; of their Titles of Episcopus Episcoporum, Summus Pontifex,
and the Application of them, all which are (...), and which is already showed.
The Power of the Church, purely as such, and which is alone the Subject of the
Debate, is entire and within it self, supported and maintained; but never
invaded, by the Titles and Acts Imperial. Nor need all be let pass, as for
granted, that he thinks himself so secure of, as an unshaken Medium, for his
undue gathered Conclusion. And certainly there was more than a Bodily Temporal
Punishment in Adam and Cain, a single Punishment was not all they had inflicted
on, or was intended to them, there was a withholding something Spiritual too; a
Suspension, at least, of inward Strength and Assistances, a turning out from
some other outward Advantages and Enjoyments, and which is imported, by the
turning out from the Presence of God, and the change of the Earth, was not the
alone Deprivation. And sure I am, we have as good Grounds that it was more, as
Mr. Seldom has produced to the contrary, (though his Enumerations are great,
and his little Autorities are many; as indeed he does nothing but what is
abundance in that Sense,) did the clearing the present Truth any ways depend
upon it.

2.That then which will be more considerable Sanedrim, is allowed to be of the
same Complexion, or mixed multitude together, and united for present
Government. And hence is it, as Mr. Seldom says very well, That when a
Conquered People and in Captivity, under the Civil Government of a Foreign
Power, and which considered not their Religion, it had no Power to Protect it
self; and therefore by Compact among themselves, they submitted to
Excommunication. A Politic accidental Contrivance of their own, to keep
themselves together. The Offices of the Priests and Levites, though appropriate
and distinct as to some Acts and Powers, yet not as to Government; they, as
such, were placed only in the Services of the Tabernacle, the Temple and Altar.
And Grotius well describes them, Judices erant de arduis Legis, ut viri
caeteris Eruditiores, in Deuteronomy. 17.9. They executed the Offices of Judges, as
Men more Skilled and Learned than others; it flowed not purely from their
Priestly Delegation. That Power came another way, perhaps as Elected into the
Sanedrim, if there was such a continued Society for Government, which from the
Old Testament appears not, however in use in the days of our Savior. And which
makes me admire some Men among us, who contend so much for the letter of the
Scriptures, and run down whatever is Tradition besides it; and yet so much
adore their magnified Sanedrim, upon the alone talk of some Jewish Doctors
which were but of Yesterday. And it was a great Error in Theodore Beza, and
argued in him more Zeal than Judgment; who, in answer to this Part of Erastus
in his forementioned Hundred Theses, asserts the Jewish Church and State to
have been two Bodies, with different Powers for Judicature. And who is followed
herein by Matthew Sutcliffe, De Presbyterio, and others; besides the very
Stipulation and Compact betwixt Moses and Israel was for the Temporal Canaan,
upon Temporal Promises and Rewards, the Milk and Honey, and quiet Possession of
it; Nor did the Levitical Covenant as such engage for any more. Whatever good
things to come, were expected by the more discerning part of them, they
received another way. By accidental occasional Notices, they saw in the Glass,
through the Veil, in the Type and Shadow (for so the Law was in the Plot and
Design to be unto them,) or by the additional Advantages of the Prophets which
God all along sent unto them, whose Business it was, at least a great part of
it, farther to reveal, unfold, and discover the End and Purport of the Law unto
them, and whose report was very hardly believed: and consequently, as were
their Covenant, and Indentment; so were their Awards and Punishments. In course
they were to be Bodily and Temporal, no wonder that Adultery was Punished by
the Sword, and they quite cut off from that good Land, as it afterward
happened unto them. So Saint Jerome speaks of the Jews, Qui ob Praesentia
tantum bona, Legis praecepta custodiunt, ut terrenae Foelicitatis and longae
vitae Praemium consequuntur -- Qui te ob praesentia tantum rerum promissa
venerantur, Ep. Damaso. Tom. 4. who kept the Law only for the present
Advantage, for long Life and earthly Felicity; and for the present Promises
worship God. And St. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. 1. dividing the Law into Four
parts, he leaves out that Branch (...), which belongs to Morality, and
concludes (...), the Letter or Historical part to be alone Nomothetical, and to
oblige as a Law. And so we find this one Reason of that one Branch of the Law
which consists in Sacrifices (not excluding that which is Typical of it) as a
trial of the Jews Obedience to God, that the Blessing of the Covenant may be
continued unto them, Qua Populum pronum in Idololatriam and Transgressionem
ejusmodi Officiis Religioni suae voluit adstringere. Tertul. adv. Marcion. l.
2. c. 18. (...), Just. Martyr. Dialog. cum Triph. Jud. facilem ad Idola reverti
Populum erudiebat. Irenaeus, l 4. c. 28. So St. Jerome, l. 2. adv. Pelag. Tom.
3. And in Jerem. 7.22. Isai. 1.12. in Mat. 5. and all which are followed
exactly by Grotius Comment. in Exodus 15.26. in Mat. 5.17. Ephesians. 3.10. and De
Veritate Religionis Christianae, l. 2. Sect. 9. l. 5. Sect. 7. So that to speak
to the whole at once, the Disparity between the Jewish and Christian
Government, being every ways, in the both Frame, Practice and Reward so great,
the Inferences from the Jewish against the Christian, cannot be due and just,
and must be also wide and inconsistent. The Advantage by their Scheme and
Objection, as drawn up, is on our side; and we thence claim these following
Conclusions, which no Man, as in themselves, can deny; though in their
thwartings, as to the Design of our Adversaries, and compliance with ours, they
are bluster'd against and misrepresented.

was Carnal; So the Body of Christ which is Spiritual has its Rewards and
Punishments which are Spiritual and like it self, suitable to its Nature and
Constitution, and the Spiritual Commandment. The earthly Magistrate, or worldly
Secular Power (as called in Antiquity, and which has been sufficiently already
observed) can have no first, original share, in the Churches Sanctions, and
Denunciations, Administrations and Distributions, because a Body in its frame
independent, in its design called out from the World, capable of the World's
favors; but not of either a rise or dissolution by it. And this Mr. Seldom
must submit unto, upon the Supposition, that the Church is a Body, no body
subsisting without its Laws, as he learnedly argues, and concludes soundly, in
his first Book De Synedriis, and not to have Laws within it self, but what are
Arbitrary, or borrowed from others, is to destroy the Supposition, and make it
no Enclosure, or Self-Community. Or if the Levitical Polity does any ways
relate to and infer upon the Christian, as the Christian Church affirms it to
do; it is as its Type and Shadow, the Law being a Shadow of good things to come,
as the Author to the Hebrews speaks; for though other Reasons are given, or
rather proposed only, by the abovementioned Fathers of the Church, for the
Sacrifical part of the Law, and that it was given upon other Motives; yet they
exclude not that design which is Typical, but suppose it in the first place,
and the principal purpose of the Lawgiver, was by Types and Shadows to
represent the succeeding Gospel. So St. Clemens Alexandrinus, l. 7. Strom.
(...), that the Sacrifices under the Law did allegorize, or speak in other
things our Worship under the Gospel, (...), as he speaks, Ibid. the Sacrificing
our selves, or that we present our selves a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable,
which is our reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. Mentem ipsam pro Sacrificio, as
Lactantius, l. 5. Sect. 19. where the mind it self is the Sacrifice, (...),
Temperance, Righteousness and Humanity, is offered, in Justin Martyr. Apol. 2.
Opima hostia Oration. de Carne Pudica, De anima innocenti, de spiritu sancto
profecta, as Tertullian, Apol. c. 30. and it is Prayer out of a chaste Body, an
innocent Mind, and an Holy Soul, is the Sacrifice of fat things, Qui justitiam
Deo libat, qui fraudibus abstinet, propitiat Deum, qui hominem periculo
surripit, opimam victimam caedit, haec nostra Sacrificia, haec Dei Sacra sunt,
as Minutius Foelix to the same purpose. And Justin Martyr, Respons. ad Quaest.
101. ad Orthodoxos, or whoever was the Author, calls the Law (...), the Gospel
in the Prophecy, or Pre-published, and the Gospel, (...), the Law fulfilled, or
in its Completion. Origin calls the Law (...), the Flesh of the Scriptures,
speaking of the literal sense of it, (...). Cap. 1. Ed. Spencer. and divides
the Scriptures into (...), the Body and Soul, and Spirit. The Body as to the
Jews, the Soul to Christians, and the Spirit, relating to life Eternal. And
again, That there was a (...) in the Writings of the Old Testament, which the
Jews understood not, Lib. 2. adv. Celsum. Nova veteris adimpletio. So
Lactantius, l. 4. And Tertullian says, l. 4. adv. Marcion, That the Earthly
Promises of Wine, and Oil and Corn, in Spiritualia figurari a Creatore, did
prefigure Spiritual things; In illa Vmbram, in hoc veritatem esse dicimus, the
Law is the Shadow, the Gospel is the Truth; So St. Jerome in his first Book
against Pelagius, Imo singulae pene Syllabae, etc. ad Paulinum, he makes every
Letter there, almost of the same Nature; and he more than once asserts, the
Three Orders of the High Priest, Priest and Levite, to be the forerunners of
the Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, under the Gospel-Priesthood. And St. Clemens
in his Epistle to the Romans said the same before him. And though St. Augustine
seemed to blame some, that all things there are involved in Allegorical
Expressions, as it is too usual to outdo things; yet he admits of such as duly
thence draw Spiritual Senses, Civ. Dei, l. 17. c. 3. But that which Hugo
Grotius cites out of him, and receives, and Publishes as his own, in his
Annotations ad Deuteronomy. 17.12. is more full and apposite to our purpose, Hoc nunc
agit in Ecclesia Excommunicatio, quod agebat tunc interfectio, quaest. super
Deuteronomy. 5. c. 38. Excommunication does now the same in the Church, as putting to
Death did under the Law. And De fide and Operibus, Cap. 6. Phinehes Sacerdos,
Adulteros simul inventos ferro ultore confixit, quod utique Degradationibus and
Excommunicationibus significatum est esse faciendum hoc tempore. Phinehes the
Priest stroke through the Belly with a Dart the Adulterers, when found by him
together, and which signified, what is to be done now by Degradations and
Excommunications in the same Case. So that the sum is this, If Mr. Seldom will
say, That the Levitical Law, and the other Judicial Acts among the Jews concern
us not at all; and therein affront the concurrency of Christianity; then all
his Design and Labor, declaring what their Acts and Punishments were, his main
Plot, falls to the Ground, is altogether to no purpose; and he needs no answer.
If it does concern us, and thus typifies the Gospel; and which, I think, cannot
be denied; then all he has done is against himself, and his particular design;
for it flings it unavoidably upon him; that the Spiritual part is now ours, as
theirs was Carnal; they punished by bodily Mulcts, and Death; we punish by
Spiritual, either Suspension, Degradation, particular Penances for a time, or
total cuttings off; as, by Excommunication.

Aristotle, Polit. l. 1. c. 2. (...), to be a Beast or a God; incapable in
their Natures, or above the Inconveniences of it; though God himself does not
manage the World by his Supremacy alone, and higher incontrollable Power; but
according to his Justice, and Equity, and Mercy, and other Attributes; and
which perhaps Aristotle did not consider. And this the Jews were so sensible
and aware of, that when their Power was given over into the Enemies hands, and
they had lost the Advantages and Protection of it, to keep their Body together
and entire, and to which they thought themselves obliged, by the antecedent
Bonds of their Religion, they framed and submitted to an Institution of their
own, in order to their present Preservation. And can we then but suspect the
incomparable Wisdom of our Savior to have so far failed in this Point, to
institute a particular Society, and leave it originally, and in its design, in
the hands of its Enemies, under the deepest Obligations of a visible
Prosession, to continue so imbodied; but without any Laws and enforcements of
its own, only what is to be received of its Enemies? this certainly cannot fix
upon the thoughts of a seriously considering Person; at least upon the^rs we
have now to do with, who so much admire the Policy of the dispersed Jews in
this particular, and even obtrude it, as the Pattern for succeeding Government;
for our Savior Christ to do this, is so far from outdoing all the Lawgivers
that have been before him, as it is justly contended he did; that it sinks him
below the meanest and most inconsiderable. The words of the Learned Grotius
seem here most apposite, Quando quidem Ecclesia coetus est, Divina lege non
permissus tancum sed and institutus (De aspectabili coetu loquor) sequuntur ea
omnia quae coetibus legitimis naturaliter competunt, etiam Ecclesiae competere,
De Imper. Sum. Potest. etc. Cap. 4. Sect. 9. that since the Church is a Company
not permitted only, but constituted by God, (I speak of a Company that is
visible) all those things which naturally belong to lawful Associations, do
also belong unto her. And again, Omne Corpus Sociale jus habet quaedam
constituendi quibus membra obligentur, hoc etiam jus Ecclesiae competere
apparet, ex Act. 15.28. Heb. 13.17. Rivet. Apol. Discuss. every associated Body
has a right of constituting such things by which its Members may be obliged;
and that this right does belong to the Church is apparent from the Fifteenth of
the Acts the Twenty eight, and the Thirteenth to the Hebrews the Seventeenth.

Jews by the naked influence and force of this their Excommunication, where
nothing outward and violent to coerce and constrain them, (for such Power is
supposed to be gone, when this took place, the Empire cared not for it, as
relating to their Religion) did oblige their Members, to preserve that unity,
they believed themselves obliged unto, did govern, and reduce them upon each
occasion; and upon this one score are they continued as one Body in the World
at this day, the Secular Power giving them no advantage; the case is plain that
there may be Mutatio Status, as Mr. Seldom expresses it, a change of the
present Condition, Capitis quaedam apud suos diminutio, in his Description of
Excommunication, De Syned. l. 1. c. 7. abatement of Privileges in respect of
that Body, and which is not Death, on any other Bodily infliction, as he there
explains it, falls under no outward forcible Restraint; for whatever was of
this kind, was annexed to their Excommunication, by the Empire; and is by Mr.
Seldom acknowledged not of its Nature, Ibid. nor indeed in their Captivities
could they execute it. And this considered, will abate what is so much objected
against Church Government, that it cannot be at all, because not, as is the
Secular, sensible and coercing, not outwardly forcing a compliance, no such
Penal Virtue and Efficacy, that Men cannot choose but bow and submit unto it.
The loss of that Communion to which once imbodied, suitable to the Advantages
expected in, or Peril incurred upon a disunion from it, is Motive sufficient,
even coercively obliging to him; who on rational and true Grounds closed with,
and submitted to the Association, and this particularly to the Christian, who
imbodies for Eternity, whose loss is Heaven, whose Punishment is Hell, if fully
and justly cut off; who believes, that out of this Society, Church or
Collection of Persons, there is no Salvation.

THAT God's particular Wisdom and Providence Jewish People, in whatever they
were to do or suffer; and that all had a special Relation and Prospect to
Christianity which was to succeed. This appears more than probable, it was in
the Plot and Design, to disenclose the Jews by degrees, to lead them by steps
and gradations without the Temple into the Church-Catholique, to work them off
from their Carnal Ordinances, and Expectations; and prepare the way for the
coming of Christ, and the Worship in Spirit and Truth; to accomplish upon them
with more case, and facility and obviousness, what was at first designed for a
full End and Period. And that the Gospel might with less prejudice, and more
readiness be received at its Promulgation. And we have several Instances of
this kind, both before, all along throughout, and the midst of the Levitical
Dispensation. Such as were not of the Descent of Abram were still taken in, and
Gentiles admitted to Salvation, and not upon either the Levitical, or
Abrahamitical Compact or Indentment. So Job in the Land of Huz. So the
Ninevites upon the terms alone of Repentance and Amendment. Of the same sort
were the (...), or Grecian Worshippers amongst the Jews, called Proselytes of
Righteousness, known to every Body. This was one great end why Christ sent his
many Prophets early and late unto them, to take them off from the Carnal
Services, to open and unfold the true and farther meaning of them, and in what
respect they were enjoined. That it was not the Sacrifice it self and burnt
Offerings, new Moons, Incense and Oblations, God then required, but Purity,
Judgment and Humility, to obey the Voice of God. As is evident in every one of
the Prophecies, each of their Sermons and Discourses; particularly Isa. 1. Jer.
7. Micah 6. and the nearer they came to their end, the more Zealous and Active
were they; witness the Prophet Malachy, the last of all. Unfathomable and
undiscernible Providence, save only in its Effects, so ordered it, that their
Captivities are the greatest instances in this Nature, they more sensibly and
forcibly prevailed in order to it; disinvested them of their Temple, without
which they would not have thought they could have lived one day, and so led
them by the same Necessity, to that Worship, and Service and Form of
Government, which in the Design and Appointment of God was to overspread the
whole Earth, and remain to the Restitution of all things. Thus came it about,
that the Seventy and two Jews, themselves Translated the Holy Bible into Greek,
the most known Language of the then civilized and learned Part of the World,
and which at some times to have done was Piaculous; and what then this, could
more tend to the Conversion of the Gentiles? This occasioned that Design of
those Pious Persons, Jesus the Son of Syrach, and the Author of the Book of
Wisdom, whoever he was, of drawing them off from Judaism, and instilling the
Gospel-Service and Obedience, which was by and by to succeed, and to be
Eternal; whose devout most Holy Pens taking the advantage of their present
Captivity, and forlorn State, without their Pompous carnal Ordinances,
incapable of the Temple Duties, instructed and urged upon them that Religion,
which the Accidents or Contingencies of the World could not deprive them the
Exercise of. Neither time, nor Place, nor Person, could obstruct the
Performance, true Holiness, Obedience, and Judgment to come; and which alone
would bring them Peace at the last. And we may safely say, That in these Moral
Writings of theirs, there is, though not more of the Gospel; yet it is more
plain here, and open and intelligible, than in all the Books of the Old
Testament beside; what is there only in either Shades and Types, the Mystical
allegorical Sense, or else upon the glance, and by accident, spoken, is here
with open face, in the intent and purpose. And I may speak it out, That the
Resurrection of the Body is so evidently Professed by the Mother of the Seven
Sons in the Maccabees, Cap. 2. v. 7. that the like was not done before it. Sure
I am, not in the Levitical Law, which is at the most but shadowed there, and
even the wiser scarce saw and discerned it; and for certain, a Sect there was
among them, those of the Sadduces, that were Zealous for the Law, and yet
believed neither Angel, nor Spirit, nor the World to come; so great Enemies to
themselves, to the early appearance of Christianity, to a great Evidence for it
against the Jews, are they, who refuse and reject, this so huge an advantage of
these Apocryphal Writings, and that will not read them, though Saint Paul did,
and hence made Evidence to his Auditors, that the Resurrection in those days
was believed, Heb. 11.33, 34, etc. because the Evidence is less clear, that
they were indicted by the immediate impulse of God, as were the other parts of
the Old Testament, being Penned since the days of Malachy, after whom we have
no avouchment for any other Prophets, and therefore called Apochryphal; because
thus hidden and obscure in their Original. St. Austin, Ep. 4. to Volusianus a
great Contemner of Christianity, among other Arguments of God's Power and
Wisdom in the managery of it, brings this for one, Reproba per Infidelitatem
gens ipsa Judaeorum a sedibus extirpata per mundum usque quaque dispergitur, ut
ubique portet Codices Sanctos, ac si Prophetiae Testimonium qua Christus and
Ecclesia praenuntiata est, ne ad tempus a vobis fictum existimaretur, ab ipsis
Adversariis Proferatur, ubi etiam ipsos praedictum est non fuisse credituros.
The Jew carries with him the Bible into what Nation he is dispersed, and Christ
and his own belief, so plainly there foretold, never want a Testimony thereby,
of his own, asserting the one, and upbraiding the other. And on these Grounds
it is we may probably Collect, that this Association of the Jews, in a
voluntary Discipline, occasioned by reason of such their Captivity, and which a
rigider Necessity brought them to, being deprived of their proper Government,
and depending on themselves alone, was an early instance of the like imbodying
and Jurisdiction in the succeeding Church of Christ; a Prelibation of that his
Kingdom, not long after to come down from Heaven, and such its abstracted
independent Polity is therein anticipated.

WHEN Mr. Seldom goes on and tells us. Caesarean, only, because it was imbodied
in the State, at least indulged by the Empire, this has as little of Argument
as any one could wish, unless he had proved the Church had had no other bottom
to stand upon; that to Institute and Protect were all one; and that it could
not be from Christ and from Caesar in different respects, the contrary to which
has been made to appear all along in this Discourse; and the Churches in
Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, Caesarea, Rome, might all be, and were, of an
Antecedent Institution, though the Owning and Protection from the Empire was
much to their advantage; or why should this be concluded against the
Christians, and not against the Jews? who are supposed to have instituted their
own Discipline under the Captivity, before Judea was reduced to a Province, and
they professed Subjection to the Empire, and all along retained it, and all
other Rites, or at least so many of them as their conquered Condition did
render them capable of Practicing, as immediately from God, and independent to
the State; nor will any one venture to assert otherwise. The Law was given by
the Mediation of Angels, indeed; but Princes were not so much as instrumental
in it, and after its first giving, even to the days of St. Paul, both the Law,
and the Temple and Caesar, were distinct Powers, created different Obligations,
and he Pleads for himself as injurious to neither of them, in the Acts of the
Apostles, and the Deputy Gallio there had failed much of his Duty, when caring
for none of these things, had the Matters of their Religion resolved it self
immediately into Caesar, especially since Mr. Seldom contends that all the
Privileges the Christians enjoyed as to their Religion, they had as Jews,
going under their Names, and, as such, reputed. Nor could the Empire upon this
his Supposition, assume any Power as to their Religion, he did not over the
Jewish. And to make good this his Precarious and impertinent Presumption [That
for some years after our Savior's Ascension, the Jews and Christians went
under the Name of Jews, and were reputed as one] he is more precarious yet; and
goes on in his Arbitrary way, and tells us, That no Gentiles during that time
were admitted Disciples to Christ, but such as were before Proselytes, either
of the Gates, or of Justice, or first Circumcised: all which, if true, is
nothing to his designed end; for the Christians might shelter themselves under
that Name, to partake of, by that means, the Privileges and Immunities, the
Empire bestowed upon the Jews, and retain their distinct Rites and Character,
their own particular Sentiments, as other Sects did, Multis in locis Judeos
Christum sequentes in Synagogas admissos fuisse credam, dummodo ritus servarem
Judaicos (Grotius Appendix ad Comment. de Antichristo.) That in many places the
Jews which followed Christ were admitted into the Synagogue, it may be
believed, especially if we consider, that the Jewish Rites were observed for
some time, together with the Christian, at least not publicly absented from
and declared against. So St. Paul had his Vow, and Paid it in the Temple, upon
a Private Consideration and future design; so he caused Timothy to be
Circumcised. But though the Empire might consider them no farther, then as Men
of another Profession, as to Religion in general, from it self, and so grant
one Toleration for them all, and the Christians upon particular occasions might
intermix with the Jews, yet that they were visible and distinguishable, as
distinct Bodies, and different Associations, the Case of St. Paul makes
manifest, when Purifying himself in the Temple, how the Jews which were of Asia
soon discovered him and ran tumultuously upon him, and drew him out of it. And
that those Greeks then with St. Paul, were no Proselytes at all, either of the
Gates or of Justice, though Christians, as Mr. Seldom supposes all Christians
were, is more than likely, Acts 21. and the whole Book of these Acts of the
Apostles, renders notorious; whence otherwise all those other Persecutions from
the Hebrews? and that their Women so raved and blasphemed, when the Gentiles
were received as equal sharers in the Mercies of God with themselves, if all
were Proselytes before and no more was now pretended to? The Christians did not
suffer more afterward, by the Heathen Powers, than they did thus early by the
unbelieving Jews, so far as they were able, which certainly is no mark of being
of the same Body, and using the same Synagogue and Service; the Jews in general
and the Christians were so far from thus associating in one Body, and appearing
every ways the same (however upon particular occasions some of them might) that
the Believing Jews and the Gentile Christians, still made a Separation for a
good pretty while after our Savior's Ascension; how wide the rent, and great
the distance was, we read in the Epistle to the Galatians, even to a
withdrawing and Separation. And the Church Story is evident they had their
distinct Bishops and Congregations in the same City; as St. Peter and St. Paul
at Rome, and so continued till after the Siege at Jerusalem, when the
Christians departed to Aelia, as Grotius tells us, in his Annotations on the
Eleventh Chapter and Third Verse of the Revelations.

BUT these at the most are but trifling Seldom design them any otherwise than
as a Gild and Varnish to his main Body, and ill managed Discourse preceding;
That which is his fundamental Error, the bottom of his whole design, and which
all his Accomplices begin with and manage together with himself, is this; That
there can be no Government, which is not of this World, but what is by the
Powers, Managery, Methods and Instruments, Courses, outward Compulsions and
Penalties of it; each of whose Forces and Ligaments must operate by the outward
Organs, sensibly and in a visible manner. In this Supposal is his whole
Discourse laid, as we have already from himself, stated it, in the latter end
of the Third Chapter, in some instances showed the weakness of the Plea it
self, how inconsistent with his own Schemes and Concessions; and what seems
farther necessary to a through Answer, and the carrying on withal, and clearing
this my own particular Discourse, follows in the succeeding Sections.

AND part of my Answer shall be by way Gospel is not, cannot be outwardly
forcing and Coercive, by the either Instruments or Penalties of this World. To
assert such a Power erected by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, is
immediately and with the same breath, to publish it a Cheat, an Imposture and
Usurpation, it is in the very letter to Affront and Contradict, the very Plot,
Frame, and Constitution of it, since Christ himself has declared that his
Kingdom is not of this World, neither laid in the contrivance, either sustained
or supported in the ways and courses of it. If it had been so, he had surely
never appeared in the World in that meaner form and lower order he did, a
different way then by dying upon the Cross had been designed for the managery
and accomplishment of it, he could have called for Fire from Heaven as Elijah
did upon the Head of his Gainsayers, a course of Proceedings agreeable enough
to that present Constitution, whose Rewards and Penalties were Carnal, in the
hands of a Temporal Jurisdiction, or have had Millions of Angels his Seconds,
to smite, as they did Sennacherib's Army, in one Night, one Minute, all that
opposed, that sat in Judgment against him; or with but one word from his Mouth,
laid any one gain-sayer flat upon the ground; as he did those few that came
first to lay hold of him, when he was betrayed; He was not sent into the World
weak and unable, with less perfect Credentials and Instructions, or lesser
Power, than other Prophets or Holy Men had, which were sent into the World
before him, all was full and perfect, in order to the Message and Embassy, the
Errand he came into the World for, he came with more, with all, Power in Heaven
and Earth given him, the Power of the Kingdom wholly and solely delivered up
unto him; only he came of a different Errand and Design, than some others had
come of before him, he was of another Spirit, and to work his work quite in
another manner, and by other Weapons; not such as were Carnal, but Spiritual,
mighty indeed, to the beating down strong holds, but of Sin and Satan; he came
not to destroy, but to save that which was lost, to lay hold on the Seed of
Abram, when he passed by the fallen Angels, lest they come into their blackness
of darkness, those Chains they are now reserved in for Judgment. And let any
one but seriously peruse, and consider this great Mystery of Godliness; God
manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up into Glory, let him
look over the History of his Savior, his first coming from Heaven, his whole
Life, Actings, Suffering, Dying, rising again and ascending into Heaven, and he
can discern nothing like an outward sensible, worldly Regiment and Jurisdiction
to be erected or executed by him, any outward force upon Men's either Persons,
or Lives or Fortunes, in bringing about that work he was sent for into the
World by the Father to do, is the intent and purpose of it; and as he had not,
neither can he be conceived to have had, a design in his own Person to exercise
a worldly Dominion, or did he delegate others, his Apostles and principal
Ministers, to any such Office and Undertakings; his being Preached to the
Gentiles and believed on in the World, implied or inferred nothing of it, but
the quite contrary; nor could any be his Adherents and Followers, on any such
purposes. With an industrious Zeal he still removed it out of the apprehensions
and thoughts of his Disciples when on Earth among them; he told St. Peter he
was an Offense to him, when savouring these things of Men, fancying him to
reign as a Temporal Prince on Earth; with outward force and Power to repel the
Injuries of his Adversaries, St. Mat. 16.21, 22, 23. As also when his Disciples
required him to call down Fire from Heaven upon the Heads of his Enemies in St.
Luke's Gospel, urging to St. Peter, and all of them those quite different
Doctrines of his Gospel, That if any man will come after him, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow him; that whosoever will save his
life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his life, shall save it; and it is
to save the Soul, not gain the World, is to be their aim in becoming his
Disciples. And thus did they Preach Christ ever since the Holy Ghost so fully
came upon them; reproving the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and Judgment, the
work of the Comforter, Joh. 16.7, 8. And that trifling Argument, as if want of
Power and Prudential forbearance made them not to attempt any thing more, is
what cannot fall under the thoughts of a considering Person. He that by Twelve
mean Persons, as were the Apostles, could convert so great a part of the World,
by the same Power and Instruments could he have overruled the Persons of the
rest of the World; to Master and bring into Captivity to the Law of Faith, an
undisciplined, unruly Understanding and Will, is as great a Work of the
Almighty, as to subdue the whole Person. The Mind is as difficultly conquered
as the Body, and more difficultly too; because no immediate outward force can
be put upon it. He that when mere Idiots and Ignaro's gave them the
Understanding and Tongue of the Learned, could also have given them the Arm of
the Mighty and Valiant. St. Peter, who with but one word from his Mouth struck
dead Ananias and Saphira his Wife for cheating the Church, might with one word
from his Mouth also have reversed the Edict of Nero, appointing him to be
crucified at Rome, have enfeebled those hands of the Executioner, that nailed
and fixed him on the Cross. St. Paul who struck Elymas the Sorcerer Blind,
might have smote Ananias on the Bench, made that officious reviling Orator
Tertullus to be Dumb, and baffled Nero with all his Power, had outward Coercion
and Force been the assigned way to Plant and Propagate Religion, a general
course set up, a standing Rule, either for the present, or Succession of Ages.
However God thought fit to give special Instances of such his Power upon
particular notorious Sinners, by the hands of his Apostles, to let the World
see it was not against the Nature of the Gospel, though not in the intent of
it, thus to have them dealt with in particular Cases; to preserve the horror in
remembrance, till the appointed time, till the Empire became Christian; in
whose hands, not the Apostles, and their Succession, this outward sorcing
punishing part does reside, in its constant perpetual Seat or Subject, Ita tunc
Deus supplebat id quod Magistratus Ecclesiae praestare debent, and tunc non
Praestabant, Grotius, in 1 Cor. 4.21. Then God did supply what the Magistrates
ought to have discharged, and did not; instancing in these very Punishments of
Ananias and Saphira struck Dead, of Elymas the Sorcerer struck Blind, and of
the Bodily Diseases sent out upon others. Our Savior Christ in his Life
designed and contrived upon every occasion, when any appearance that others
should suspect him, or when any apt opportunity to express and declare himself,
that he was neither to exempt himself from any instance of Subjection to his
Governors, nor exercise in any Case the Jurisdiction that was theirs, and for
this he Pays Tribute, refuses to divide Inheritances; nor did he invade any one
private Person, and we read of but one Colt, that he commanded to be brought
unto him, to which, as what was his Title we do not read, so are we not told of
any injury done by it; nor of any Complaint made in the Streets on the
occasion. And his Death, though pre-ordained in the fore determination of God,
for no one worldly end or design, to serve no one Political Purpose, but solely
and altogether to satisfy for the Sins of Man, to make complete our
Redemption; yet it was ordered that the earthy Governors should have a Power
given them from above, for a legal Process and judicial Trial upon him; he died
in a course of Law, and a Posture of Obedience to them: And although it must be
granted that some of the ancient Fathers, and most eminent first Christians did
Believe and Publish to the World, that Christ should come again and reign upon
Earth in his Person, as Supreme Governor of all, and his Saints with and by him
in the independent, full freedom, use and advantage of the Goods of this World,
and of Sense, that Jerusalem should be Rebuilt, its Streets enlarged and
inhabited by them. So Justin Martyr, Dialog. cum Tryph. Jud. Irenaeus lib. 5.
cont. Here Is. c. 32. Tertul. lib. 3. cont. Marcion. c. 24. with Lactantius, and
others; yet it amounted not to an Universal received Opinion of that Age.
Justin Martyr acknowledges there were many (...), Holy and Pious in their
Judgments which did not acknowledge it. And Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical
History, lib. 3. cap. 39. giving that slender account of its rise and original
from Papias, tells us that many, but not all Ecclesiastical Writers, led by a
show of the Antiquity, assented unto it; but yet this was not by any of them
expected during this state of things on Earth, and in the Regeneration, Sed
alio statu, utpote post resurrectionem, as Tertullian. Tom. 4. inter fra^menta,
(...), as Justin Martyr supra. Ibid. Post Resurrectionem, coram judicio, terram
possidebunt. As Irenaeus, Ibid. but not till after the Resurrection, ante
coelum, before their Ascension into Heaven, as Tertullian again, Ibid. when all
Rule and Authority and Power has had its just Time and Period upon Earth, is put
under foot alone by God; it seeming just that in what condition they had
labored and been afflicted, tried and proved by all manner of ways or
Sufferings upon Earth; they there receive the Reward and Fruit of such their
Sufferings, as Irenaeus ill argues, in qua enim condition laboraverunt sive
afflicti sunt, omnibus modis probati per sufferentiam, justum est in ea
recipere fructus sufferentiae; they cannot be conceived to have thoughts of
either evading or invading the Civil Power, which then was supposed to be none
at all, because after the Resurrection, and of which during its time for
continuance by God affixed, they were the most Zealous Maintainers and
Asserters, as has been already showed. So far do they err from the Spirit of
these first and eminent Christians, who pretending to the same Millennium, or
reign upon Earth, oppose and fight against their present Governors, to hasten
and effect it.

Clemens Alexandrinus, in his Admonition to the Gentiles, observed it of old
among them, and that their Ignorance still led them into one of the two
Extremes, of either Ignorance or Superstition, (...), either they Worshipped
their many ridiculous beastlier Gods, or else none at all, denied the only true
God. On this score Evenemus Agrigentinus, Nicanor Cyprius, Diagoras, Hippo,
Melius and Theodorus, with some others were called Atheists; Men that
considered not the Truth, only saw the Error of the then abominable Worships
and Acknowledgments. And the same is easily acknowledged throughout the whole
Ecclesiastical Tradition, how, as Atheists before, so Heretics since, have
still run the same way; and their Heresies, by these courses, been either
started or maintained. Thus that Pestilent Sect of the Arians united, not only
with the Miletian Scismaticks, but with the Heathens too, the more to oppose,
and make numerous their Party against the Catholics, as we have it in Sozomen,
Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 15. Athanas. Orat. 1. Cont. Arium. and in his Apology,
Page 731. and his Epistle Ad Solitariam vitam agentes. And the same did the
Donatists after them, who set open the Idol Temples, that themselves might have
liberty, applauded and sided with Julian the Apostate, and gave opportunity for
the Public Worship of the Devil, that they might with full freedom serve their
own particular Designs, and their Malice and Revenge be gratified, as St.
Austin and Optatus at large declare, Contra Petil. cap. 8. 92. Ep. 48. etc.
Contr. Parmen. Donatist. lib. 2. I might all along trace them down, I Will only
make my farther instances in what comes more nearly up to the case in hand,
because there may be such a thing as Domination over the Clergy. Therefore
there is no real Power to be exercised over them, because Diotrephes affected a
Superiority where it belonged not unto him; therefore a Bishop and a Presbyter
must be of equal Power. The Church of God must not exercise Authority as do the
Kings of the Gentiles; therefore whatever the Power they execute is, must be
Tyranny and Usurpation. The Church of Rome have notoriously exceeded their
Commission, Pretended to what they never had, either from Christ or St. Peter,
as to depose Kings, to acquit their Subjects of their Allegiance, exercising
Temporal, outward Coercive Power, as in their Charter by Religion. Therefore
the Church of God has no Charter at all, is no Body or Corporation Autoritative
and Juridical; or as Mr. Seldom and his Friends argue, we read of no other
Power in the World before, but what was sensible, outward, and coercive; and
all Gospel-Power must be such or none, a Plea to what is otherwise, is a Cheat
and Imposture. And in answer to which, I must here repeat in part what I have
said in the beginning of the Third Chapter of this Treatise upon another
occasion.

eternal purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, Ephesians. 3.11. a
Body, but the Body of Christ, framed and fitted alone according to the fullness
of the measure of his Stature, his Body which is the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. an
Association of People incorporated and united under him their Head, in one
Spirit, one Lord, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. growing up into him in all things,
who is the head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4.15. a Body that is to be visible,
subject to outward sense, but it is by an Holy Life, and Religious Conversation;
that which Men are to see, is their good works, and glorify their Father which
is in Heaven; and all grants to its Officers, Power, Means, Ordinances, are
only in order hereunto; the only change here designed, is the change of our
vile Bodies, that they may be like unto Christ's glorious Body, according to
the mighty working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. A
Lordship there is, but not over Kings and Scepters; it is Death and Sin Christ
Jesus treads under his Feet only. He is the Lord of the Sabbath invested with
all Power in Heaven and Earth, relating to God's Worship and Service, his
Adoration and Homage, to appoint, stablish and fix, as he pleases, for ever.

A BODY or Corporation, with its different Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons;
Orders of Men, instituted and invested by Christ, not with an improper, as some
speak with abatement, but with a true real Praefecture, Power and Jurisdiction
in the Church, that sitting upon Twelve Thrones and Judging, that Spiritual
Grace and Investiture, to be collated, and so Promised, in the (...), the new
Age or State beginning just after the Resurrection of Christ; it is an
Autoritative, Paternal Power of Chastisements, Discipline and Government, to be
exercised on all its Subjects; each one that has given up his Name unto Christ,
(that expects any benefit of the incorporation) for the keeping them in some
compass, within the terms of a Peaceable, Holy, truly Christian Congregation;
As are the words of our Learned Doctor Hammond, in his Treatise of The Power of
the Keys, Cap. 1. Sect. 1.

Church; it is Matter of Fact, self-evident, and not to be denied. But this Body
or Church is not known and acknowledged to have such means of Salvation, such
Power and Efficacy, such Properties and Privileges, as the true Church of
Christ implies and contains. The name Church ((...)) belongs to Profane, as
well as Ecclesiastical Congregations; whether in Athens, Corinth, Alexandria,
or Jerusalem, as Origin argues against Celsus, lib. 3. but all have not the
Powers and Operations alike. The Church of God is a Society, as with differing
Members and Offices, Services and Obligations: So, to differing Ends, with
differing Gifts and Endowments; For the perfecting the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. the building,
and raising them to Heaven, in the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son
of God. Sciendum est illam esse veram Ecclesiam, in qua est Confessio and
Penitentia, quae peccata and vulnera, quibus subjecta est imbecillitas carnis,
salubriter curat, as Lactantius, Lib. 4. Sect. Vlt. Vbi Ecclesia, ibi Spiritus
Dei, and ubi Spiritus Dei, ibi Ecclesia and omnis gratia, So Irenaeus, l. 3. c.
40. that is the true Church, where Confession is and Repentance, with wholesome
means to cure those Wounds and Sins, to which the weakness of the Flesh is
subject; where there is the Spirit of God and all Grace, as in the Armory of
David, those many Shields of the Mighty, Divine Assistances and Remedies for
Eternity. Catholicum nomen non ex Vniversitate gentium. Sed ex Plenitudine
Sacramentorum; as St. Austin relates of the Donatists, well replying, Collat.
cum Donatist. Tertii Diei, the fullness of the Sacraments, not the bare
Coalition of all the Nations in the World, makes the true Catholic Church. And
St. Austin himself says the same, Ep. 48. Vincentio fratri, where there is that
(...), and (...), first and second cleansing and Purgation, the one the Effect
of Baptism, the other of Repentance. In Sozomen's Church History, l. 1. c. 3.
Now these different Powers and Duties, as distant from all others in the World
besides; so being diverse also as to themselves, and in respect of one another,
according to the several Gifts and Relations; these are either common to the
whole, each Member of the Association, every Believer, or else, they are
limited and appropriate to particular distinct Orders and Offices in the Body.
What Duties and Offices are common, and what appropriate, I am now to declare,
and explain.

and who is instructed for the Kingdom of Glory, cannot be supposed with
Knowledge and Judgment enough, so to digest them, as to be ready to answer to
every Man that asks a Reason of his Faith that is in him, or so as his own
need shall require, in his daily Confessions and Acknowledgments to God. I Will
add, so as the Duties in common, to be performed by all as Christians, even the
most learned Scribe among them shall exact; for the rehearsing their Faith, and
open Confession of it before Men, was a branch of their constant Devotions. And
it must be as impertinent, and unhandsom, when they come together, if every one
have a diverse Interpretation, Digestion and Expression of his Faith, as if
every one should have a differing Prayer, Hymn, or Thanksgiving; the World must
believe them all Mad; nothing can be done to Edification, nothing of Order and
Peace, only Confusion be in the Churches of God. Hence that Summary of what is
to be believed and confessed, the Apostles Creed, was composed, it is generally
concluded, by the Twelve Apostles themselves; and to which, if St. Paul's form
of Doctrine delivered, Romans 6.17. his form of sound words, that good thing
committed to Timothy's trust, to be kept by him, and to be conveyed to
others, 1 Timothy 2.20. 2 Timothy 1.13, 14.2.2. related not; yet thus much may
certainly be collected thence, That they had Summaries of Christianity,
antecedent to St. Paul's Epistles, and which suppose these Doctrines received;
and pursuant to which St. Paul wrote his Epistles, as general needs, and in
course required, or upon particular occasion of false Teachers coming in, those
vain Bablings and Oppositions of Science falsely so called, which some
Professing, have erred from the Truth; and by which Summaries they were to
censure and exclude them. And the same may be St. Peter's Holy Commandment
delivered, 2 Pet. 2.21. And St. John's Unction received; or that which they
heard from the beginning, and which he Exhorts them to abide in, and it will
teach them all things, 1 John 2.20.24.27. but of whatever use they were to the
conserving of Truth, and ejection of Heresies (and which falls not under this
Head now to pursue.) Certain it is Creeds they had and Collections of Faith to
be assented to and Professed by all that were Baptized, or any ways admitted
into the Body and Society of Christians. Baptism is a Stipulation, Agreement
and Assent. Aliquid respondentes, as Tertullian speaks, de Corona Militis, Cap.
3. There is something answered, professed, and engaged in. And Dionysius in
Eusebius, Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 9. there mentions (...), Questions and Answers
in use of Baptism, and which were made in part relating to what they believed,
and received as Christians. Thus Irenaeus Cent. Haereses, lib. 1. c. 1. speaks
of (...), a Canon or Rule of Truth which is received when Baptized. So
Tertullian, Lib. de Spectaculis, c. 4. Cum aquam ingressi, Christianam fidem in
Legis suae verba profitemur. Going into the Water, we make Profession of
Christianity. St. Cyprian tells the same, Sed and ipsa interrogatio quae fit in
Baptismo testis est veritatis. Nam cum dicimus, Credis in vitam Eternam, and
remissionem peccatorum per Sanctam Ecclesiam, intelligimus remissionem
peccatorum non nisi in Ecclesia dari, The Question at Baptism is a witness of
the Truth. And when we say we believe Forgiveness of Sins, and Life
Everlasting, and the Holy Church; we understand that Remission of Sins is given
only in the Church, Ep. 70. St. Jerome adv. Luciferianos says also, Solenne sit
in lavacro post Trinitatis Confessionem, interrogare, Credis in Sancta
Ecclesia! Credis remissionem Peccatorum. It Is usual at Baptism after the
Confession of the Trinity, to ask, Do thou believe in the Holy Church, and
Remission of Sins? and l. 2. adv. Pelag. in Confessione Baptismatis, lavat nos
a Peccatis sanguis Christi, in our Confession at Baptism, the Blood of Christ,
washes us from our Sins, Interrogamus an Credat Deo. So Optatus, l. 5. cont.
Parmen. Donatist. We ask if he believes in God, Credo, inquis, in Deum. Thou
say, I Believe in God; having renounced the World and Devil at Baptism.
Salvian, l. 6. De gubernat. Dei. And accordingly are they found together in
Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 8. (...), Faith and Confession, i. e. Baptism
and Confession; for so is the frequent Ecclesiastical Phrase of Faith, Nec
secundas post fidem nuptias permittitur nosse, they must not Marry again after
Baptism, or after Confession of Faith, by which Baptism is expressed, Tertul.
Exhort. ad Castitat. c. 1. with many of the like Nature, Lib. de Pudicit. Cap.
16. Scorpiac. c. 8, etc. where Fides and Baptisma are but diverse Expressions
of the same thing, Baptism being a Public Confession of Faith in and Adhesion
to the Gospel of Christ Jesus; an open undertaking of it upon its Terms and
Conditions. And so in the Imperial Laws, Cod. 16. Tit. 7. l. 4. to violate
Baptism is to violate Faith given up to Christ. And the ancient Church
distinguishing of Christians into Fideles and Catecumenos; those were the
(...), or Faithful, who were Baptized; in opposition to the Catechumens, which
were not, and in that sense not Believers. And all this is acknowledged by
Theodore Beza, in his Eighth Epistle written to Grindal Archbishop of
Canterbury, when they were baptized Adults, and at the years of Understanding.
But upon what account Infantulus de fide compelletur, a little Infant should be
interrogated, or have such Questions put unto him; what Covenant can here be
entered he knows not. What was the Archbishops return to him I have not yet met
with. I shall at present only reply in the words of St. Austin de Baptismo
contra Donatistas, c. 23. Ideo cum alii pro iis respondent, ut impleatur erga
eos celebratio Sacramenti, valeat utique ad eorum Consecrationem, quia ipsi
respondere non possunt. Their Susceptors or Undertakers answer for them,
because they cannot answer for themselves; and upon such their undertaking, the
Sacrament becomes effectual unto them.

an eminent instance, Tertul. Apol. c. 2. in the words of Pliny to Trajan the
Emperor, Nihil aliud se conserisse quam Coetus antelucanos -- ad confederandam
Disciplinam, Homicidium, Adulterium, Fraudem, Perfidiam and Caetera scelera
Prohibentes. They entered Compacts, and a State of Discipline against Murder,
Adultery, Fraud, Perfidiousness, and other Wickednesses. And which Indentment
or Compact, upon what particular occasion it was then undertook, the main
design and purpose of it, was then, by all that were Baptized, and has been all
along since answered in such their Baptism. Another branch or instance of which
Vow is this, To forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
the wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to keep all God's
Holy Commandments. Cum aquam ingressi renunciasse nos Diabolo, and Pompae and
Angelis ejus, contestamur, Tertul. De Spectaculis, l. 4. and De habitu
Muliebri, c. 2. his sunt Angeli quibus in lavacro renunciamus. And, De Corona
Militis, c. 3. Aquam adituri sub Antistitis manu contestamur nos renunciare
Diabolo and Pompae and Angelis ejus. So St. Cyprian, Ep. 7. Seculo
renunciaveramus, cum Baptizati fuimus. So Optatus, Interrogamus an renunciat
Diabolo, Lib. ^. Cont. Parmen. Donatist. And Salvian says the same, Quae enim
est in Baptismo Salutari Christianorum prima Professio? Quae sc. nisi se
renunciare Diabolo ac Pompis ejus ac spectaculis and operibus profitentur. --
Quo modo O Christian post Baptismum sequeris quae opus Diaboli confiteris, De
Gubernat. Dei, l. 6. And all which is but the Baptismal Vow in Latin, with a
severe check to those who^ after their Baptism, and so solemn an Engagement to
the contrary, are overruled by the Devil, and follow after the World's Pomps
and Vanities, and sinful Lusts of the Flesh. And St. Jerome, Ep. ad Paulam,
calls the Monastical Vow, Secundum Baptisma, a Second Baptism; and it is that
St. Austin cautions the Donatists, Ne seculo verbis solis renunciant, l. 5. De
Baptism. cont. Donatist. that they renounce not the World in words only. Nor
were the Christians of old, their Body or Association, discernable and apart
from the whole World in any thing more then in their good Life, their stricter
and most heavenly Conversation.

Tertullian, Apol. Cap. 39. Edam nunc ipse negotia factionis Christianae,
Corpus sumus de Conscientia Religionis, and Disciplinae Vnitate, and Spei
foedere, coimits in coetum and Congregationem ut ad Deum quasi manu facta
Precationes ambiamus Orantes: Haec vis Deo grata est; Oramus etiam pro
Imperatoribus, pro Ministris eorum and Potestatibus, pro statu seculi, pro
rerum quiet, pro mora finis, cogimur ad Divinarum literarum Commemorationem;
si quid praesentium rerum qualitas, aut praemonere cogit, aut recognoscere,
certe fidem Sanctis vocibus poscimus, spem erigimus, fiduciam sigimus,
Disciplinam Praeceptorum nihilominus inculcationibus densamus: Ibidem etiam
Exhortationes, castigaetiones, and censura Divina. I will now declare the
Offices of Christianity, We are a Body in the Conscience of Religion, in Unity
of Discipline, and Covenant of Hope; we come together in one Company and
Congregation, that making Prayers altogether and at once we may procure his
Favor and Blessing; this force is grateful to God. We Pray also for the
Emperors, for their Ministers, and such to whom their Power is deputed; for the
State of the World; for the quiet and due accomplishment of all things. The
Divine Letters are urged upon us, either to Premonish us against what we may
expect to come, or stablish in us what we have received; our Faith is
nourished, our Hope increased, our Confidence fixed, and Duties frequently
inculcated upon us. There are Exhortations, Castigations, and the Divine
Censure. And to the same purpose in his Book De Anima, Cap. 9. Scripturae
leguntur, Psalmi canuntur, Adlocutiones Proseruntur, Petitiones delegantur, the
Scriptures are Read, Psalms are Sung, Admonitions are made, and Petitions are
sent forth by us. Deum Principem, ac rerum cunctarum Dominum adorans, obsequio
venerabili invocare. Arnob. lib. 1. adv. Gentes; and lib. 4. Huic omnes ex more
Prosternimur, hunc collatis precibus adoramus, ab hoc justa and honesta, and
auditu ejus digna deposcimus, -- in quibus summus oratur Deus, Pax cunctis and
venia postulatur Magistratibus, Exercitibus, Regibus, Familiaribus, Amicis,
vitam adhuc degentibus, and resolutis Corporum unctione, in quibus nihil aliud
auditur nisi quod humanos faciat, nisi quod mites, verecundos, pudicos, castos,
etc. we there adoring, with Obsequious reverence call upon God, the Chief and
Lord of all things; before him, as is the Custom, we are Prostrate, asking of
him what is Just and Honest, and worthy his hearing; we Pray for Peace and
Pardon to all in Authority, for the Armies, for Kings, for our Familiars and
Friends, whether dead or alive; nor is any heard from us, but what makes us
Humane, Meek, Modest, and Chaste. And the same account we have in Justin Martyr,
in his second Apology, (...), etc. Praying and sending up Hymns of Thanksgiving
suitable to our Powers; for that he Created us, gives us Health, Plenty,
fruitful Seasons, and will bestow upon us a blessed Resurrection. We there
worship and adore God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, the
Blessed Trinity; and so in the close of that Apology, (...), upon Sunday we
meet together, (...), in Common Prayers and Supplications for themselves, all
Christians, all Mankind, giving one another the Holy Kiss, celebrating the
Communion, giving thanks to the Creator of all things by Jesus Christ and the
Holy Ghost, to which the People say Amen; reading the Writings of the Apostles
and Prophets as the time will bear, the President or Bishop discoursing to them
upon some one or more Portions of them, and against this it is he Cautions;
that upon any Pets or assumed Anger, upon what differences may happen, they do
not absent, and go apart, from the Communion in Prayers, (...), Ep. ad Zenam
and Serenum. So also Origin in his Third and Fourth Books against Celsus.
Clemens Alexandrinus in his Seventh Stromaton. Eusebius, l. 7. c. 9. Eccl.
Hist. and De Vita Constantini, l. 4. c. 17, 18. And Eccl. Hist. l. 10. c. 3.
Council. Laodicen. Can. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and every one of them to the same
Purpose. This indeed being the chief Office of the Body of Christ, the great
End of the Christian Incorporation; thus to assemble* and be one in the Common
Services of God, its undoubted Right and Property; though not in every instance
peculiar to it, and incommunicable, Thus to confess with their Mouths that
Jesus is risen from the Dead, to assent to the Gospel by Faith, evidenced in an
Holy and Innocent Conversation, attending the Sacraments of Baptism and the
Supper of the Lord, the Common Prayers, Praises, Thanksgivings and Recognitions
due to God Almighty, as Created, Preserved, and Redeemed by him; all of what
order and rank soever thus joining and uniting in Heart and Hand and Mouth,
every Man taking and performing his part; Priest and People, saying that Amen
mentioned in Justin Martyr, and after him by St. Austin, Per tot gentes in
quibus respondetur una pene Voce Amen, and Cantatur Halelujah; That Amen which
is answered, and Halelujah which is Sung with one almost Voice, throughout so
many Nations, Lib. 2. adv. Literas Petiliani Donatistae, and super Gestis cum
Emerito Episcopo. So Athanasius in his Apology, (...). How Decent and Holy is
it to hear in the House built for Prayer, the People say Amen, (...) (...),
with one sound and consent there mentioned, Carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere
Semet invicem; saying a Hymn to Christ as God, in courses with one another. As
Pliny, lib. 10. Ep. 97. and is referred to by Tertullian in his Apology, (...),
Singing back again to one another in St. Basil, (...), Praying betwixt one
another, Ep. 63. Ad Clericos Neocesariensis Ecclesiae, in amoibeunis, and
alternate Responses. The Priest Parat mentes fratrum dicendo, sursum Corda, ut
dum respondit Plebs, habemus ad Dominum. As St, Cyprian upon the Lord's Prayer,
preparing the Minds of his Brethren, saying, Lift up your hearts; and the
People answering, We lift them up to the Lord; this the great and common
constant Service of the Church of God. The usual manner of old in the
Performance of it; and an earlier Pattern we have yet, as to the Substance of
it. So soon as we meet with a Church gathered, the Holy Ghost descended, and
those Thousands Converted by St. Peter, Acts 7. he there opens to them the
Scriptures, they receive the Word and are Baptized; they go on, and continue
steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship and Prayer, attend the Holy
Communion, Praising God, Poetically extolling of him. And thus became Peter in
the letter of it, a Rock, a first Stone, or principal Pillar in the Church, or
People of God.

one another, in the Supplies and Assistances of all its Members, whose either
special Offices and Employments in the Service and Support of the Church, Body,
or Association, rendered incapable of undergoing the Cares and Offices of the
World for the providing themselves sustenance suitable to their Office and
Quality in the Trades and Employments of it for the Body of Christians, though
a Collection and Incorporation for Heaven, yet is to remain its due time and
abode upon Earth, and to subsist whilst on Earth, by the usual and lawful
courses of it; it does not therefore immediately receive Food from Heaven, or
else whose unavoidable Want and Poverty, by the unaccountable disposal of
things, and the many Contingencies of this mutable state here, lays before
them, in their Streets, and Highways, in the rode to this Jerusalem also, as
Objects of Pity and Commiseration, Relief and Charity; for their Savior has
told them, That the Poor you must always have with you, and to them belongs the
Kingdom of Heaven. And this is to be done, and is the general Duty of the whole
Body; and each Christian there in particular, not only by the tenure of the
special Charter from God, and it is implied and made up and required in the
Donation it self; but by the common course and Laws of things, no Body can
subsist without it, it must run to Decay, Degeneracy and Contempt, either
through want of Instruction, Order and Government on the one hand; or by
Idleness, Destitution and Distress, on the other; and those weighty Reasons and
Motives which engaged, freely of their own choice, no outward force compelling,
as in the Associations of the World, in order to Governance and Subsistency, to
unite in God's Service; it then necessitates that such ways and means be used
here, as in the sustaining other Societies, and this upon the same
Consideration and Motive, as they believe it useful to be of such the
Association, and in Communion with one another, especially where the force of
the World enjoins no other Provision, as it did not till the Government became
Christian, and the World came in, to the Support of the Church, for which, our
Savior did and must, in reason, provide, upon failure; otherwise Religion can
no longer subsist then as the civil Empire pleases.

Paul so much Pleads for, and with so great earnestness and weight of Argument,
1 Cor. 9.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and tells them plainly, That if he be an Apostle, as
he most certainly is to them, who are the Seal of his Apostleship in the Lord,
then he has a right to their Estates. Have we not Power to eat and drink? Have
we not Power to lead about a Sister or Wife? and to forbear working? Who goes
to warfare at any time at his own Charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats
not of the Fruit thereof? or who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Fruit
of the Flock? Do ye not know that they that minister about Holy things, live of
the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are Partakers with
the Altar? So has the Lord ordained that they which Preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. And this the Churchmen had not as Stipendiaries and
Salary-men; but the Believers brought in of their Goods and laid them at the
Apostles feet, which made a Common Stock or Bank, to be at their Prudence in
the disposal, called the Lord's Goods; and in relation to this Common Stock or
Bank in the hands of the Apostles, in which every Christian, upon occasion, had
a right, it is said, That all things were common among these first Christians,
in the Book of the Acts; for that no one had Property besides, cannot be
believed, and the fault of Ananias and Sapphira was not, that they did not
bring all they had, and lay it at the Apostles feet, reserved nothing of their
Estate to themselves; but this was their guilt, they kept part back, and said
it was the whole, their lying to the Holy Ghost, otherwise it was their own,
and they might have reserved to themselves what of it they pleased. Now these
common Gifts and common Purse, as it was first entrusted with the Apostles, so
upon their failure did the trust descend and remain with the Bishops their
Successors, who distributed to the Necessities both of Churches and Churchmen,
their Officers and Attendants, as occasion required; a competent Portion
whereof, was set apart, and reputed their own Persoanl Goods, which they had
Power to give, by Will, to their Executors or Relations, as they had need and
they saw cause. This is plain out of the Fortieth Canon of the Apostles, (...),
etc. The Goods of the Bishop are to be proper to himself, and manifestly
distinct from those of the Church, and which are more peculiarly called the
Lord's Goods. That the Bishop may have Power at his Death, to leave that part
which is his own, to whom he please, and not under pretense of a title of
Church Goods to have them entangled and lost; especially, if he have either a
Wife or Children, or Kindred, or Household Servants. -- These were not to be cut
off and left in want by reason of the Church, and occasion Curses upon the
Bishop when he is dead. And indeed, how else had the Churches their Endowments
and Provisions Temporal, as Houses, Gardens, etc. before the days of
Constantine, and which were by the Rules and Obligations of Christianity, as
their Freehold, 'twas Sacrilege, the blackest Guilt, to invade them, and which
Constantine only restored when preyed upon and spoiled by the Heathen
Persecutors, as Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. l. 10. c. 5. and we have the famous Case
of this Nature in Paulus Samosetanus, who when deposed for Heresy, kept
Possession of his Church-House, till Aurelian the Emperor, no Christian,
assisted the Catholics, and, by force, dispossessed him; The heathen Power
sometimes conniving at these Donations of the Christians, and took not
advantage of the Forfeitures their Laws gave them, now and then countenancing
them against Invaders; but never, by the Imperial Laws, giving a full
Settlement and Confirmation of them.

BUT then besides this, another Portion Acts 4.37. and the Complaint was made
to the Apostles, when the Grecian Widows were thought to be neglected; and, who
determined, that a new Order of Deacons should be constituted, and appointed
for this business, the better and more impartial looking after the Poor, Acts
6. and this continued course of Charity and Goodness is apparent in the
succeeding Church-Practice. Tertullian tells us, they had Quoddam arcae genus,
a kind of Chest in which every Month, or when they will, or if they will, and
if they can, every one puts in something; and this to be expended not in
Banquets, and Gluttony, but to sustain, or bury such as died in Want, Children
destitute of Parents, and the Maintenance of old Men, such as suffered
Shipwreck, worked in Metals, were banished into Islands, and such as were in
Prison, in the Thirty ninth Chapter of his Apology. So also Justin Martyr, who
was earlier a little than he, after the Holy Communion, (...) etc. Such as were
rich and willing, offered every Man what he pleased, and it was deposited in
the hand of the Bishop, for the Relief of Orphans and Widows; such as by
Sickness or any other Accident were brought to want, if in Bonds or Strangers,
and the care of all that were indigent in general was upon him. St. Cyprian in
his Book De Opere and Elecmosynis, will not allow him that is rich and
abounding, to keep the Lord's Day at all, if he passes by the Corban, or Poor
Man's Box, Qui in Dominicum sine Sacrificio ^en^^, and comes into the Lord's
House without a Sacrifice, tying them up more strictly to that of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 16.1, 2. Now concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given
order to the Churches of Gal^tia, even so do ye. Upon the first day of the
Week, let every one of you lay up in store as God has prospered him. And it is
the Injunction of the One and fortieth Canon of the Apostles, (...). We Command
that the Bishop have Power of the Goods of the Church, to assist by the
Presbyters and Deacons such as are in want, and to care for his own
Necessities, (if he have any) and for the Brethren that are sustained by
Hospitality -- that there be nothing wanting among any of them. And suitably in
the Eighth Canon, Conc. 4. Genesis held at Chalcedon, Care is there taken, That if
the Bishop be translated out of one See into another, that he carry nothing
with him of the Goods of his former Church, (...), whether of those belonged to
the Martyrs, or the Hospitals, or the Entertainment of Strangers.

AND thus has this Body or Association some after that, according to the
measure of the Gift which is given, and every one in their own order. God is
not the God of Confusion but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints; a
Power limited to Church Officers only, such as were at first thereunto called,
appointed, and invested by Christ in his own Person, or by his Succession. Nor
may any Member in common, or barely as a Believer, take unto himself this Honor
and Function; and the select Persons herein deputed, were either the Apostles,
and Seventy, appointed by our Savior in Person; or afterward those Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. with others then, as occasion
deputed, according to the present reason of the Churches first Planting and
Propagation, by those more immediate Descents of the Holy Ghost. And all which,
with the reason and design of them ceasing, what Power was adjudged fit and
useful to remain, was afterward devolved, fixed, and limited to the three
Orders of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon; and so to continue, till the Power and
the Kingdom is delivered up to the Father. These three Orders, I say, still
remain upon the Rolls of Antiquity, in the (...) in the Hieratical Priestly
Order and Catalogue, as it is in 15 and 18 Canons of the Apostles. And in others
of those Canons, in opposition to the Readers, Psalmists, Door-keepers, all
Ecclesiastical Officers, but not in the same Catalogue. So in St. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Strom. 6. (...), these three of the Bishop, Presbyter, and
Deacon, are the whole Progression, and several Orders and Ascents in the
Church-Ministry. These those (...), all the degrees of the Priesthood; as
Zonaras in Can. 8. Apost. Omnes gradus Sacerdotales; as it is in the same words
in the last Canon of the first and second Council at Constantinople, and which,
that Canon provides that every one must go through that becomes a Bishop. The
Bishop Presbyter and Deacon are opposed to the Laity, and placed in the number
(...) of such as preside in the Church, Can. 1. Conc. Antioch. (...), these are
fellow-workers in the Ministry, as in the Council called against Paulus
Samosetanus, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 3. And again (...) in the Life of
Constantine, Lib. 2. Cap. 46. (...), Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 11. (...),
Can. 58. Conc. 6. in Trullo. None in the Order of Laymen may deliver to
themselves of the Divine Mysteries, or Administer in Holy things, the Bishop,
Presbyter or Deacon being present, where the Public Offices of the Church are
again limited to these three. St. Jerome places them in Superioribus ordinibus
Ecclesiae, in the higher Order of the Church, Comment. in Ep. ad. Tit. Cap. 2.
in the same Language runs the Imperial Laws, as are plain and obvious in the
Theodosian Codes, especially with the Notes and Commentaries of the Learned
Jacob Gothfred, the Bishop Presbyter and Deacon are the Sacerdotalis assumptio,
one or all of them, 16. Cod. Tit. 5. Lex. 5. and 52. and are called Primi, the
First, in respect of the Readers, Door-keepers, etc. ibid. Tit. 2. l. 24. and
as Gothofred explains it. And the same is again, l. 41. and he calls them Primi
Clerici the first of the Clergy, ibid. Tit. 8. l. 13. and Justinian after him
speaks the same, Novel. 6. c. 1. and all this is expressed by our Judicious Mr.
Hooker, and called the Power of Orders, Degrees of Order Ecclesiastical, in
which there are three Degrees, Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, distinguished
from Services and Offices in the Church, as Exorcists, Readers, etc. in his
Preface to his Ecclesiastical Polity, at the end of the seventh Section, and in
his Fifth Book, seventh and ninth Section.

Justinian, Novel. 6. Cap. 6. our Savior himself did not confer all Power
alike upon all that he chose for his special Service; nor did the Apostles, or
their Successors, (...), hic dici videtur qui in Ecclesia sublimiorem caeteris
consecutus gradum, ut Apostoli erant consecuturi, and post eos Episcopi, as
Grotius in Lucae, 22.26. the Ruler or greatest there mentioned by our Savior
seems to be such, who had gained a higher, more sublime degree in the Church,
such as the Apostles were to have and after them the Bishops. In the Church are
those (...) abovementioned in Clemens Alexandrinus; Progressions and
Promotions from one Order to another, as, from Deacons to Presbyters, and from
Presbyters to Bishops: Sacerdotes secundi in honor Ecclesiastici gradus.
Hieronimus, Comment. in Jerem. 13. the Presbyters are second in the Honor of
Ecclesiastical degrees. And so in Ezekiel. 48. and Sacerdos primus ordo in
Sophoniam, c. 3. the Bishop is the first Order. Sacerdos being a word applied
to the Bishop or Presbyter as occasion; as (...) includes the whole of
Church Power, as is above-noted, and applied, as occasion, to each of the
degrees. Optatus in his first Book against the Donatists mentions, besides
Laymen, which have no Power in the Church, or any one degree of the
Priesthood, Tertium, Secundum Sacerdotium, and apices, Principesque omnium
Episcopos, the Third and Second Priesthood, and the top and chief of both, the
Bishops. As Eusebius still expresses the Ministry in general by (...), as is
already at large observed. So, his (...), those of the second Throne or Order,
are Presbyters, Eccl. Hist. lib. 10. Cap. 39. the Presbyter is major Sacerdotio
then the Deacon, has more of the Priesthood, Hieronimus ad Evagrium, Tom. 3.
Presbyter Proximus gradu ab Episcopis, Presbyter secundi ordinis Sacerdos, a
Presbyter is next in degree to a Bishop, a Priest of the Second Order, so all
along in the Phrase of the Imperial Laws, Cod. Theodos. 5. Tit. 3. Cod. 12.
Tit. 1. Lex. 121. Cod. 16. Tit. 2. l. 7. Tit. 5. l. 9. Constantine the Holy
Christian Emperor writes to Chrestus Bishop of Syracuse, that he would take
with him to a certain Synod (...), two of the second Throne or Order, two
Presbyters, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 5. in a word, this is the current
voice and distribution of all Antiquity, as might be showed more largely, or,
were it the design of this Discourse, to treat of the Three Orders
particularly, as the Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon are Primi Clerici, the first
Clergy, in respect of the Readers, Singers, etc. for the word Clerus, or
Clergy, is applied to all Ecclesiastical Officers in general, as well Reader,
etc. as Presbyter, etc. among the Ancient Writers, so among the Primi Clerici,
those Three which are first, Summus Sacerdos qui est Episcopus, the Bishop is
the First there; as in Tertullian de Baptismo, Cap. 17. his is Maximum
Sacerdotium in Lactantius, Lib. 4. Sect. Vlt. Sacerdotii Sublime fastigium. So
Cyprian, Ep. 52. (...), Can. 10. Conc. Sardicenf. his Power is the greatest and
topmost, most full and comprehensive of all, and all Power in Heaven and Earth,
now abiding in the Church, and purely relating to Church Affairs, and the
bringing Souls to Heaven, in the ordinary course and known appointments is it
fixed, and so far limited, in the Person and Office of the Bishop, by Christ
and his Apostles, as that from, and only from, him, is this Power to be
transferred and transmitted, as is the Harvest and common Need, in the
particular devolution and distribution of it; a great part of this, is still
given by the Bishop, to the Presbyter, an Order or Station in the Church, for
the Service of Souls, invested with a large share of the Priestly Power, at his
Ordination or Deputation to it, but comes short of the whole, is limited to
particular Instances, and much below that of a Bishop. Presbyterorum ordinem
Patres Ecclesiae generare non valentem, per regenerationis lavacrum, Ecclesiae
filios, non Patres aut Doctores genuisse, as D. Blondel himself in his Apology
pro Hieronimo, Page 311. quotes Epiphanius, Haeres. 75.4. the Presbyter though
not able to beget or constitute Fathers, or Bishops, or Doctors in the Church,
can he yet by Baptism beget Sons, create to the Adoption of Children; he can
Baptize, but he cannot give Power and enable others to do it, and which the
Bishop can. And a share of this Power is also given to the Deacon, but a much
less than that to the Presbyter, and yet is he more than a Layman; there is
something (...), of the Priestly Function enstated on him, Can. 1.2. Conc.
Ancyr. (...), Can. 10. Conc. Naeocesar. he has an Order there, Concionatur in
Populos, Diaconus gradus in Ecclesia, cui Obediendum, assurgamus Diacono, he
Preaches to the People; it is a Church degree, to whom Service and Respect is to
be paid. As St. Jerome Comment. in Ezekiel. c. 48. in Micah, c. 7. a Person above
all Men not to be suspected to give the Deacon more than his due, as will
appear to whosoever has read over that his smart Epistle to Evagrius, reproving the
insolency of some Deacons, that set themselves above Presbyters. And indeed had
they been designed only to serve Tables, little reason can be given, why they
had so Solemn an Ordination and Separation at their first Institution, Acts 6.
and so distinct are these Orders, and their Powers so peremptorily limited and
consined, in the Intent, Prayer and whole Performance at their Ordination, That
it is equally an Usurpation, for a Deacon to undertake the Office of a
Presbyter, or a Presbyter the Office of a Bishop without a distinct Ordination,
or a farther Commission granted; as for a Layman, as such to intrude into any
one and more of them without Ordination at all; it is in either or all of them,
the Sin of Vzzah and the Bethshemites, a Robbery and Invasion. It Is not my
sense alone, they are the words and determination of our great and profound Dr.
Thomas Jackson, in the second Volume of his Works, Cap. 6. p. 377. according to
the last Edition. I find two great Cases upon Church Story, concerning the
Ordinations made by Ischyras and Colluthus; the former had no Orders at all,
the other was only a Presbyter, and they were both nulled, and declared void
alike; and those ordained by the Presbyter, equally as by the Layman, were
reduced to, and reputed in the Laick Order. So Athanas. Apol. page 732. Ed.
Paris. and Ibid. p. 784. and Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 27.

Primacy of Bishops in the Christian Church, as thus asserted the first and
immediate Subject of Church Power, the chief Fountain and Head, next under
Christ, from whence all instances of Church-Autority are devolved, and derived
to particular Offices, and Members of it. I shall omit that Plea of those who
contend that the Presbyter is really equal with the Bishop; that the Bishop is
not invested with a true, and distinct Power above him, and the whole
Priesthood, or Power of the Ministry, is in every Presbyter by his Orders in
Actu Primo and habitually, radically and intrinsecally, (in which very words,
their sense is very stoutly stated in the late Irenicum, p. 197. 276.) only
limited in the Execution, for present convenience; because what is the sense of
Antiquity, and our particular Church in part, I have but just now declared, and
who give it in the Negative, and the distinct Power of the Bishop above the
Presbyter is notorious; and I may have occasion hereafter in this Discourse to
instance farther in the sense of Antiquity about it, it falling again in the
way. I shall only insist upon what either the whole Church of God has allowed
and assented to and practiced, giving and fixing a Precedence to certain
Church Officers beyond these of Bishops, as Patriarchs, Exarchs, for some time
to be sure; but to Metropolitans, Primates, Archbishops, or whatever the
Titles were, (into which an Enquiry is not now to be made) all frequent in
Church-Story, and their Prerogative and Jurisdiction above and apart is there
as frequent also; or else what a great part of the visible Church, so numerous,
as next to an Universal, have still, for some Hundreds of years together with
great ostentation and clamor both of Argument and Authority, contended to be in
the Pope or Bishop of Rome in particular, as Superior to, not only all other
Bishops in Christendom, but even these Patriarchs, and all other Metropolitanes
too be sure, and to this immediately enstated and invested by Christ in the
Person of St. Peter, with a first and absolute Power, as Universal Governor and
Bishop of the believing World, whence even all and every, even Bishop himself,
must derive what Authority he has, or can duly receive, and legally execute, to
whom each Metropolitan, and Patriarch is an Homager and Subject, in Dependency
and Subordination unto, and all this inseparably annexed to St. Peter's Chair,
and to descend through all Ages, in the Succession, till time be no more, and
to the restitution of all things. What was the sense of the Church as to the
Nature, Reason and Designment of the former, and what the no Ground and
Foundation of the latter, I shall endeavor to declare and evince, not in that
extent the Subjects require; for that is the work of Volumes: But with that
brevity seems requisite, to the clearing and better managery of this particular
Discourse.

not, so would it be too long and excursive now to enquire; as when the Name
Patriarch came first into the Church; how it differs from that of a
Metropolitan; when the change of Names, as to these two, or any other, and
which Ecclesiastical Men discourse. Certain it is, that the Power was there
very early, and the Bishops themselves were under Canonical Obedience to their
Primate; they were in some instances inferior to, governed and ruled by them,
and as certain it is again, this their Prerogative and Presidency flowed not
from any thing conferred in their Orders; the Power given to a Bishop, is the
utmost, is or ever shall be, in that Holy Rite or Sacrament collated; nor is
there any thing in Holy Orders beyond it. And when the Patriarch, Metropolitan,
or Primate was constituted, or whoever that (...), or Primae sedis Episcopus
was, mentioned so often in the Council of Carthage, we do not read in the
ancient Church Rituals, or any Practice apart from them, of any farther new or
solemn Ordination that was used at their Enstalment. There is no (...), none of
those solemn Services of Prayer and Invocation of the Spirit of God, as
Ordination was performed with; and is so related by Zonaras in Can. 1. Apost.
no imposition of hands devolving, and collating a new real Power, and which is
done at the Consecration of a Bishop, Primacies have been many times
translated, not only as to Places, and which Bishoprics have been but as to
Persons, from one Person to another, and that not by Deposition, as when
Criminal, (and which indeed cannot be called Translation) a thing usual in the
Church by way of Discipline; but when the same Bishop abides in his Chair, and
his Episcopal Power with him, only the Primacy removed, and which could not be
by any Power whatsoever, it would be equally Sacrilege, to depose a Primate or
Metropolitan, as it is for a Bishop to degrade himself into the Order of a
Presbyter, Can. 29. Conc. Chalced. the Metropolitan has no more Power from his
Orders than has the Bishop; only the Metropolitan's Jurisdiction is larger, and
under other Circumstances. And therefore as we read of a twofold Ecclesiastical
Audience in the Affairs of Religion, the one before (...), the Bishop of the
City, who himself is Judge. The other upon Appeals, before a Synod of Bishops
united under their Metropolitan; this latter is called (...), a greater Conflux
of Bishops. The original Power is one and the same in both, only Circumstances
alter the course of Proceeding, it may be the Bishops own concern, and so he
not so fit to be the alone Judge. And which Proceedings of the Church, whosoever
please may read more at large, and therein what sense she had between the
Bishop and his Primate, in the Comments of Jacob Gothofred upon the Sixteenth
Theodosian Code, Tit. 2. l. 23. And it is easily observable by such as are
Conversant in the Acts and Determinations of the Councils, and Bishops of the
Church, about the Subordination of its Hierarchy, that it is no where contended
for, but in the sense now mentioned, as the same Original Power enlarged; a
Precedence of Power retained by the Apostles, over all the Churches of their
own first Conversion and Planting, and particularly deputed by St. Paul to
Timothy and Titus in Ephesus and Crete, and which is a Platform still obliging,
in general, and immutable, admitting the Church to continue in that sense
Catholic, i. e. not to be limited again to one House or Congregation, or even
City, and which may easily be granted, where the Church under the like
Circumstances is to be governed; and that it did actually continue so, all
along downward. It Is as certain, there was a Prerogative in those Churches in
the Sixth Council of Nice, whether Patriarchical or Metropolitical only the
design of this Discourse does not now exact an enquiry; and so Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 5. cap. 23. there giving an account of the
Convention of several Synods of Bishops in their respective Districts, about
the keeping of Easter, (and which was earlier, than the Council of Nice) as of
Palestine, Rome, etc. Tells us also how every Epistle ran in the Name of their
particular Governor or Head; as Theophilus of Caesarea, Narcissus of
Jerusalem, Victor of Rome, Irenaeus of France, and Palmas of Pontus, who as
(...), did preside as the most ancient Bishop of the Diocese; but as to the
particular Seats of this Power, and in which these Metropolitans did reside, is
not the thing any farther worth the considering, then as the certainty of the
Power, as always actually in the Church, is thereby made evidently known unto
us, and Palmas might have the Prerogative in that particular Synod, whether for
his Age, or whatever else accidental Motive, though not Amastris his Episcopal
See; but Heraclea, was the constant Metropolis of Pontus, as Vallesius there
notes unto us; the assignment of Places and of Persons, Judicatures, and
Primates, depends purely upon occasion, and the present Circumstance, and have
been still appropriated and fixed, either at the Discretion of the Clergy
themselves, and by the Laws and Canons Ecclesiastical; and suitably the first
and famous Council at Nicea, in her sixth and seventh Canons confirms and
settles those four first and known Primacies of Alexandria, Rome, Antioch, and
Aelia or Jerusalem; as what before was received and submitted to, in the
ancient Practice and Usages of the Church, and for which, as not having any
antecedent right, but as bottomed alone on the Church Sanction and Reception,
Peter de Marca contends, De Concord. lib. 1. cap. 3. and the Confirmation were
by Canon were impertinent, was the Right fixed antecedently, inseparable and
immutable; So also the general Council at Constantinople, Can. 2. appoints that
no Bishop goes beyond the Bounds of his Diocese, in his Ordinations or other
Administrations, etc. or else this was done at the Discretion and Pleasure of
the Empire, when become Christian, and that either by establishing in Law, what
the Church had preassigned, as to those four great Churches just now mentioned,
Novel 135. or else by translating the Sea, as Reasons and Motives appeared, and
were pressing. Thus Justinianea Prima, a City in Pannonia Secunda, and after
called Bulgaria, was made a Metropolitan by Justinian the Emperor, invested
with all the Privileges, Pre-eminences and Jurisdictions in such the Provinces
subjected to it, as had old Rome; because it was the Place and City of the
Emperor's Birth, and is therefore reckoned among those Churches which are
(...), govern themselves and are Independent, by Balsamon in Can. 2.
Constantinop. all which Privileges did once belong to Firmium a City in
Illiricum, till the Civil Government removed to Thessalonica, upon the inrode
made by Attila, King of the Huns, and the Bishop there upon pretense of the
chief seat of Government, had it settled on him, and so remained till this
occasional removal by Justinian, as is to be seen, in the Preface to his 11.
Novel, and Nov. 131. cap. 4. And Theodosius Translated the Primacy from Antioch
to Laodicaea, because the People of Antioch in a Sedition overthrew and offered
farther violence and contumely to the Statue of Flaccilla his Empress. As
Theodorit Eccl. Hist. lib. 5 c. 20. so that it is plain what first fixed, and
again removed, these Primacies, though for the most part they still went along
with the Civil Government, and the chief Seats of Judicatures, and the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Government was in the same place; the both Canons of the
Church and Laws of the State having respect thereunto. Hence the greatness and
transcendency of Rome in particular, Cui propter Potentiorem Principalitatem
necesse est omnem Ecclesiam convenire; there was a Necessity that every Church
went thither as the more Potent Principality, as Irenaeus, l. 3. Cont. Here Is.
cap. 3. and to the same purpose St. Cyprian after him, Pro Magnitudine sua
debet Roma Carthaginem precedere; That Rome ought to have the Precedence of
Carthage by reason of its greatness, Ep. 49. and upon this occasion, first
contending which should be the greatest City; great Controversies once arose
betwixt the Bishops of Rome and Ravennas, as we are told by Dionysius
Gothofred, in his Comments on the Eleventh Novel; and whose Pleas of Authority
and Jurisdiction, not only over the Bishop of Ravennas, but all the Bishops of
the Christian World, as the Universal Bishop of Christendom, we are now to
enquire into.

Roman Faith in the maintenance of this their universal Primacy, seems to come
short of that Evidence is required to settle an Article of Faith, to fix an
Order in the Church, a continued Power and Successive Constitution, immutable,
and for ever. And all that can with any ground be challenged for the Bishop of
Rome, as what was in the best Ages of the Church, will hardly amount to any
more than an occasional particular Presidency, or first Chair, and which others
have sometimes had, no singular, solitary Special Power connate and inhering;
but only such as by occasion of Business and particular Emergencies
interposing, and of merely Ecclesiastical humane assignation; for them to claim
and urge it, as the Successors of St. Peter, seems very begging, and places
more in the Conclusion, than appears in the Premises; for it is no where
evident, either from St. Peter's Commission in general, or from any other
special Donation apart or at other times made by our Savior, that this
particular Power beyond and above the other Apostles was deputed and made over
unto him. There appears no difference in their Call in general, either in Words
or Offices, when first leaving all, and enjoined to follow him. Nor was it
otherwise in their after-Influences and Instructions, they were all alike
breathed upon at once, received the same Authority, to retain and remit Sins;
the Holy Ghost fell equally upon them all at once at the Feast of Pentecost;
there universally and visibly on their Heads in the face of all Nations; and
each one went out a Theopneust, Independent and self-autoritative, to Preach,
and constitute Churches; they were only liable to be advised, and directed and
reproved by one another, if occasion; Vnde Petrus a suo posteriori Apostolo
salubri admonitione correctus; as St. Austin lib. 3. Cont. Gaudentium, and St.
Peter had a great share of the latter. Nor was there any one of them more
notoriously withstood to the face, than he was in the Business of the Gentiles.
Cardinal Bellarmine solves all indeed, would a single apposite reply and
distinction do it, a nicer, exact stating the Question serve the turn, and in
which his accuracy must always be allowed. Nor is there any Man in such cases
that goes beyond him. Caeteros Apostolos parem cum Petro potestatem accepisse,
sed ut legati extraordinarii, Petrus ut Ordinarius, and Caput Successionis,
Controvers. 3. Genesis de Romans Pontif. Tom. 1. l. 1. c. 13. The rest of the
Apostles received equal Power with Peter, but as Ambassadors Extraordinary;
Peter as Ordinary, and the Head of the Succession; theirs was only for the
present Service, during their Natural life's, or till recalled by that same
Authority that they received it from, his to abide with his Person, and descend
in the Succession, and from whence each influence and supply, each instance of
Church-Autority is to be derived throughout all Ages for evermore. So that St.
Peter's Power was more than the rest in regard only to the abode and during use
of it. But the bottom here is altogether sandy; nor does he produce any thing
that is Evidence for such the Privilege either to his Person or Succession.
Thou art Peter, upon this Rock will I build my Church. And the Confession
preceding, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, feed my Sheep. His first
Call, if he had it; and his being left to Posterity with his Name in the head
of them, cannot any one, or all of them, imply any thing like it, to a rational
considering Person. These were occurring Discourses, particular Applications,
and accidental; such as in course must be supposed to fall in and to be, where
a constant Converse, and so known a Design as was then on foot amongst them;
and the Contingencies of the World cannot be otherwise conceived of, or
adjusted. That same is now the Confession of every Christian, and to be sure,
was then of all the Apostles, at least e're their Commissions were fully
delivered, and their Power deputed unto them. The second Call might be as full
and extensive as the first, nor does the Precedence imply in its Nature any
thing otherwise. One branch or instance of the Church was first founded on St.
Peter's personal Preaching, and other Administrations and Church-Offices, in
which he officiated, Acts 2. and the other Apostles in the same Way and Duties
and Power did found and constitute others. St. Paul had his Apostleship equally
evidenced, nor were its seals less notorious, our Savior might as particularly
urge the Care of the Church to others, as he did to St. Peter, and we ought to
believe nothing less then that he did; that they all see to their Duty, in
feeding and governing of it. He might have a differing Confidence in one above
another, as we are sure his love was unequal; and that something might happen
extraordinary in Discourse by Acknowledgment and Approbation, all this may
easily be allowed; but that a Commission and Power more lasting, a special
Headship and Charge is hereby granted and seated for ever, is hence to be
inferred, and in consequence follows, none that understands a Syllogism, or
enquires into but obvious Inferences, can submit unto it. And therefore Estius
abates a little in his Treatise on the Sentences, Lib. 4. Did. 47. Sect. 9.
and says, Vere est Vniversalis Episcopus, etc. that the Bishop of Rome is truly
an Universal Bishop, if he be called Universal Bishop who has the care of the
whole Church; but if you understand a Universal Bishop, Qui solus omnium
Provinciarum and Civitatum Episcopus sit, sic ut alii non Episcopi sint, sed
unius Episcopi, seu Pontificis, sunt Vicarii; who is Bishop alone of all
Provinces and Cities, so as others are not Bishops, but Vicars of this one
Bishop, or High Priest; then it is plainly to be denied, that the Bishop of
Rome is an Universal Bishop. He seems to distinguish betwixt the Power of
giving of Holy Orders, and the Power of governing the Church; the former he
will not allow the Bishop of Rome to be singular in, and apart from other
Bishops, Caput Successionis, as Bellarmine will have him to be, the alone Head
and Fountain of Priestly Succession; as if illegal, and wanting when not
derived from his Chair; the latter he peremptorily affixes upon him, and
believes him alone invested with a Power Universal, for the governing the
Church of Christ, all Christian Bishops by whomsoever Consecrated, and his Arm
is to rule them, whosesoever's Hands were laid upon them; and this solitary,
and by himself; nor is any one a sharer with, or out of subjection to him. To
which I shall reply, that though the distinction in it self, will with very
much difficulty be admitted of, and the ordaining and governing Parts will be
very rarely found asunder. Nor do I believe there can be an instance given of
but one Bishop, who at his Consecration had the Power of governing left out of
the Office in which that other of Ordination together with this were not
designed at once and transmitted, though the Objects have many times been
changed, either enlarged or limited, as they have been both suspended
altogether; yet, allowing the distinction, it may possibly do Estius this
present Kindness, looked upon as a Disputant, and oppressed with an Argument,
giving him the opportunity of something like an Answer, and with some show he
may escape that severity of words, and blacker censure he there acknowledges to
be passed by St. Gregory, in several Occasional Epistles, against whomsoever it
is shall style himself Universal Bishop, or Bishop of all Bishops. That the
very Name is Profane, Proud, Sacrilegious, Diabolical, a Name of Blasphemy,
and the forerunner of Antichrist; and all this Estius there tells us was
occasioned from this Holy Father, by reason of the Patriarch of
Constantinople's Ambition in that Nature; declaring, that as the Emperor did
alone hold the Empire, and all Inferior Governors were sent by him, and held of
him the Head, and not to do it was Usurpation and Treason; so did he alone hold
the Episcopacy, and all Holy Orders were to descend and flow from him, and to
receive them, and not from him, was to climb up the wrong way, and by intrusion
come in. But then, what more right he has on his side, or better Authority than
Bellarmine has on his; or how he can prove a solitary peculiar Care and
Government demandated to, and in its special Constitution, settled on St.
Peter, and by his Succession at Reme, or which way soever else it was, over the
Universal Church or whole Gospel-Priesthood, so as to constitute him and them
its immutable perpetual Head to Govern, though not to Ordain them; and which
was not in the rest of the Apostles Persons, to be sure not in their
Succession; this does not readily appear, the Scriptures are favorers of both
alike, and indeed give to neither any bottom at all. Nor does any such thing
appear in the best Antiquity, or succeeding Matter of Fact in his behalf; no
ill Argument of ever a Divine Right, were it on their side.

Victor Bishop of Rome, in the year One Hundred ninety four, who threatened
Excommunication against the Asiaticks, because they complied not with him in
the Observation of Easter. The Succession of the Bishops of Rome is all along
delivered down in Church History, from the beginning to this day, each Bishop
particularized, under the Title of Romanae Vrbis Episcopus, Antistes, etc.
there is no one note of Singularity affixed unto him, and this is the first time
we meet with any thing like a Superiority there practiced, and at the most he
is but ranked with the other Metropolitans. Now whether this was attempted by
Victor, purely out of Zeal for an Apostolical Custom, and we have many examples
of Eminent Bishops that have intermeddled without their own Districts; or
whether as supposing himself really invested with a Power for Inspection and
Animadversion upon all other Christian Bishops; certain it is, this his Power
was disowned and rejected, by an eminent Branch of the Church Catholic, and as
eminent Bishops as any She had; the Authority and Practice of St. John is set up
and Pleaded against that of St. Peter, as what every way balances; nor does it
any way submit unto it. And Irenaeus Bishop of Lions in France, and none of the
Quartodecimane, but one who complied with Victor in the Observation of Easter,
yet asserts the Asiaticks (...) and Self-Autority; nor is any Foreign Power to
overruled and control them, or the Peace of the Church to be broken on such
occasions, all which is to be seen in Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23, 24.
and if we descend some time lower, we shall not find any thing really more
advantageous to him. Constantine the Great, Complements indeed Eusebius of
Caesarea, and tells him he is worthy of the Episcopale, or Government of the
whole Church, De Vita Constant. apud Eusebius. l. 9. c. 6. but that such an extent
of Power was then in the Person of any one Bishop, is no where said; nor is
there any probability to suppose it. It Is true, that some Privileges have
belonged to the Bishop of Rome, and which have been claimed as their due in
good times; Julius is very angry with the Clergy of Antioch, that they did not
call him to a Synod, and urges it as (...), a Law of the Church; that
whatsoever is done without the Bishop of Rome is to be void. Sozom. Eccl. Hist.
l. 3. c. 10. and in an Epistle of his to some, whom he accuses of Contention,
and want of Charity, not consulting the Peace of the Church, in the cause of
Athanasius, he farther adds, Are you ignorant that this is the Custom, that we
are first to be wrote to, that what is just may hence be defined? Inter.
Athanas. Opera, Tom. 1. Ed. Paris. Page 753. But then whatever this Privilege
was, that it did not arise from any Connatural Right to his See; but
Ecclesiastical Canon, is most plain out of Socrates his Church History, l. 2.
c. 8. (...), etc. and he may not have so much, for what Vallesius in his
Annotations there can produce for it. Which is the alone Authority of Ferrandus
that is Christian, and Ammianus Marcellinus an Heathen, an Historian that
concerns himself as little with Christianity and Church Affairs, as any one can
be supposed to have done that attempted an History of the Times, in which so
much of the Church concerns, its Power, and Authority was Transacted; as in the
days of Constantius and Julian, and whose times make up the best part of his
Story. The latter he studiously affects to represent to the World with what
advantages he can both living and dying. And for the Christian Religion, he
does not, I am confident, so much as name it Twenty times in all his Books, and
then accidentally, and very slightly; and the greatest advantage that he gives
us, is, we have his Testimony, that such a Sect called Christians was then in
the World; and for that particular passage quoted by Vallesius, it makes, if
any thing, against himself; for he tells us, That when Constantius the Emperor,
who is known to be Athanasius his great and mortal Enemy, and moved every stone
to ruin him, had procured the Sentence of a Synod against him [licet Sciret
impletam] and which he knew was sufficient and cogent of it self, yet he
endeavored all he could, thereby to render him lower, and more contemptible,
to have it corroborated and confirmed by that Authority, Qua potiuntur Aeternae
Vrbis Episcopi, which the Bishops of the Eternal City, or of Rome did enjoy;
which Authority what it was, is still in the dark for him, there is no mention of
it in any one Degree; and it is mostly agreeable that he endeavored it, as the
more great and popular Bishops of the World, by reason of that Vrbs aeterna (as
the City of Rome, for its Pompous Magnificence is all along through that
History called) that eminent City, the seat of their Residence, Lib. 15. Page
75, 76. Ed. Lugdun. in Duodecimo; nor does it from this whole History appear,
that there was then, as not any distinct Power, so nor any but Title affixed to
the Bishops of Rome, which other Christian Bishops had not. The Bishops in
general are called Christianae legis Antistites, and Liberius of Rome has but
the same Title, or that of Episcopus Romanus, and Vrbis aeternae Episcopi, is
what the whole Succession is called by, Ibid. supra. Et lib. 20. Page 261. lib.
22. p. 329.

AND now the whole of the Matter is driven and then reconcile it with the
general Practice of the Church, which appears another thing; and to enlarge
this Power, whatever that above mentioned is, as claimed by the Bishop of Rome,
beyond a limited Exarchy or Primacy, or that it any ways reaches to Antioch, is
to go beyond the whole Story Ecclesiastical, in any tolerable Age of it. It Is
to go beside the Acts of every General Council upon every occasion, and all the
Imperial Courses and Proceedings in point of Jurisdiction, when the state came
into the Church, engaged for its Governance and Jurisdiction, and turn^d their
Canons into Laws. There is nothing in any one Council, whether General or
Topical, that either refers to, determines actually, or but implies any such
thing, unless what was foysted into the Canons of the first Council of Nice,
and recommended to the Council of Carthage, for an Approbation, with the rest
of those Canons, by Faustinus an Italian Bishop and Legate of Rome, be since
made Canonical. Sure we are, it was then detected and exploded for a Cheat by
the Holy Bishops of that Council, and who there and then disowned the Superior
Universal Power in the Bishop of Rome; all which with the several
Circumstances, is to be seen in the opening of the Synod. The Sea of Rome is
still represented as but equal, and in the same rank with the other Four great
Churches of Christendom; and its Bishop neither Presides in the Councils, nor
Overrules in the Definitions of Christendom; nor is the Authority any ways
defective upon his absence, or if convented without his License, than upon the
absence of, or when not licensed by, any other Bishop. There is not an Instance
of any one Reference or Appeal in Church Affairs, but still the either
Patriarch, Exarch, Metropolitan, Primate, or Private Bishop is to accommodate
and rectify all, as the alone Judges and Determiners, under a Synod of
Bishops, or a Council; and if new Canons be wanting, it is the Imperial
Direction that the Bishop of Constantinople, and the Convention of Priests be
convened to consider of, and to make them, Cod. Justin. l. 1. Tit. 2.6. Et Cod.
Theodos. 16. l. 45. Tit. 2. As for that of the Council of Sardica, Can. 3. 4.
and which seems to favor the Bishop of Rome, in the right of hearing and
adjusting Foreign Causes, not to make any Reflections on the Synod it self,
whatsoever it is, it is bottomed neither on Scriptures, nor ancient Tradition or
Custom; but seems in particular Cases to be allowed him for the honor of St.
Peter, nor can we believe it could run against the different Determinations of
general Councils; (if so it is to be of no Authority) particularly the first of
Nicea, considering also that Hosius was President both at Nice and here. I
shall add, it cannot be conceived to run against it self, whose Tenth Canon
places the top and uppermost of all Church Power in the Bishop, (...), and
which is not consistent with a Superior Order in the Church, fixed and
immutable, whether as to Jurisdiction and Ordination, or Government only. As
Bellarmine and Estius are not agreed, and those several Exempts we have an
account of in Church Story, (...), and governed within themselves; as Cyprus,
Bulgaria, Iberia, Anglia, whatever they relate to; and so called in respect of
whether Patriarchacies, Exarchies, or this pretended Monarchy Universal, or
howsoever they came so to be, they are Evidence sufficient, against this claim
of Rome, and that every Church is not therefore Schismatical because disowning
a dependency upon her, especially if we reflect, how strongly these Privileges
are contended for in the Eighth Canon of the Council of Ephesus, occasioned by
some Usurpations attempted upon Cyprus in particular, and it is there made Law,
that no inrode be made upon them. And that which is farther considerable is,
that among all the Orders and Directions issued out to Churchmen by the
Empire, for the executing the Canons, and preserving the Discipline of the
Church, the Persons in Charge are the Bishops, Metropolitan, or Patriarch; the
Bishop under the Metropolitan, the Metropolitan under the Patriarch, and the
Patriarch is always last and uppermost; and it is very strange to reflect, that
if there was an Order above these, a Power Universal, residing in any one
Person, with a care over all the Churches in Christendom, so settled by Laws
Ecclesiastical, and Superior to all the aforementioned Orders, in Jurisdiction
and Government, and this Person and Power should still be overlook't, and
disregarded, no one Direction and Application made unto him, in the Affairs so
immediately his; of his Charge and Inspection, and this too in the days of
Justinian, especially since whatever was done by the Empire was in Prosecution
of what was Church-Law and Canon before, according to the Appointments and
Decisions of it. And that this is all so, it is most manifest in our Church
Story, Acts of Councils, and particularly the Proceedings Imperial, in the two
Codes, and the Novels. Vid. Cod. Justinian. lib. 1. Tit. 3.43.2. Novel. 5.
Epilog. Novel. 6. Cap. 3. Epilog. and alibi saepius. Not that the Empire was
shye, in giving the Sea of Rome any Power or Title was its due, as it must be
acknowledged very great things were owned, and attributed as hers, in those
days of the Church. Justinian writing to John Patriarch of Old Rome, as he
there styles him and his See, Novel. 9. says enough of the Sea it self, Sortita
est ut Originem legum, ita and summi Pontificatus apicem, nemo est qui dubitet.
And he goes on and calls Rome, Patriam Legum, Fontem Sacerdotii, veneranda
Seeds summi Apostoli Petri. She is the venerable Seat of the chief Apostle St.
Peter, the top of the Pontificate, the Mother of Laws, and Fountain of the
Priesthood. By all which, thus much is only implied, That Eminent and Renowned
was that See at that time, great and huge her Care and Service in the Church of
God; something peculiar was effected, but that the Original Power and Authority
was special also, and by which she acted, none other equalling of her, this
cannot be granted. The Applications and Instructions for Government had then in
course been accordingly, which we have observed was to none higher than the
Patriarch. And let but Justinian explain himself, as it is all the reason in the
world he should have leave so to do, and all will be plain and easy. Papa
veteris Romae est Caput omnium Sacerdotum Dei, vel eo maxim, quod quoties in
iis locis haeretici pullularunt, and Sententia and recto judicio illius Sedis
coerciti sunt, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1.7. The Pope of Old Rome is the Head of all the
Priests of God, upon this account especially, that in those Places, or within
his Districts, Heresies did spring up, and by the Sentence and right Judgment
of that Venerable Seat they were Suppressed: meaning he was more expedite and
happy, strenuous and successful than other Bishops in such those like
Undertakings. Otherwise Peter of Alexandria, as well as Damasus of Rome, are
proposed as Leaders and Examples of the Catholic Faith, in that very Code and
Title. And the Four first General Councils of Nice, Constantinople, etc. are
the Conviction of Heretics, and such reputed Heretics that refuse Communion,
not with the Bishop of Rome, but with Procerius of Alexandria, Tit. 5. Ibid.
8.3. And so it is again, Cod. Theodos. 16. Tit. 1. l. 16. and this very often
elsewhere, and these very Complements, or rather due Characters, we have here
given to the Bishop of Rome, we find given also to much privater Bishops on the
like Occasions, for their particular learning Piety, and Service in the Church.
So Acholius is called by St. Ambrose murus fidei. And Gregory Nazianzen, calls
St. Basil, (...), and which are produced by Jacob Gothofred in his Comments on
the forementioned place; and no Inserences of a solitary appropriate Power and
Jurisdiction was ever thence inferred or but attempted. But this is the usual
proceeding with the Romanist Zelot, from some one or more occasional Character,
Power, Concession, or particular Privilege; devolved, granted and affixed on
the Bishop of Rome, to deduce general Rules, and manage them to a Perpetuation;
give them in charge as standing marks, and Laws immutable exclusive to all
others. What if Athanasius did Appeal to Rome in his Cause? was it that none
else could equally hear, and legally determine it? He fled thither perhaps, as
Sozomen tells us his Successor Peter did; because of the same Faith with him,
Lib. 2. Hist. Eccl. cap. 22. or rather because his Vogue and Authority was more
in the World, than that of Eugubium; the far abler to Protect and give Authority
to his Sentence given for him, as no one in England but would fix upon
Canterbury, rather than Landasse, had he the like occasion. Besides, each
Bishop, as such, has the Care of the Universal Church committed unto him; it is
given in his Orders. And since the several Districts by after Laws, particular
Bishops have often interposed, and intermedled, by their Care for some Churches
and Proceedings foreign to their particular Exarchies, or Bishoprics; and it is
recorded as their true Zeal and Merit, of which we have abundance of instances
given us by Spalatensis, De Repub. Eccl. l. 2. c. 7. Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. and
which might be the Motive in the case of Holy Athanasius. The Council of
Sardica gives something to Rome for the honor of St. Peter. And how the
Cyprians have gained much for the honor of St. Barnabas, because his Relics
were found in their Island, with the Gospel of St. Matthew upon his Breast,
fairly written with his own hand, we are informed Lib. 2. Tripart. Hist. Eccl.
Theodori Lectoris, set forth by Vallesius at the end of the Ecclesiastical
Histories. Their Metropolis thereby became free and independent, as much as
Rome it self, not subject to Antioch as formerly. Peter upon whom by the favor
of our Lord the Church is founded. This is the usual saying of St. Cyprian,
Peter, James, and John are the Pillars of the Church, and upon them is the
Foundation of the Church laid; So St. Jerome Comment. in Galat. Cap. 2. with
more to the same purpose; and any one that is but a little skilled in St.
Cyprian, and the Church Affairs by him transacted, will not easily believe that
he resolved his Faith into the Bishop of Rome, his own Opinion together with
them of Carthage, where he was Archbishop about Rebaptization, are too
notorious Evidences to the contrary; and no one gives to St. Peter and his
Succession more glorious Epithetes than he all along does. And that the (...)
or Privileges attributed to Rome, and in which Constantinople is to be second,
Can. 3. Conc. Genesis Constantinop. are not of real Power, but only of Place and
Honorary, is plain from the 36 Can. Conc. in Trullo. For the same Privilege
Rome has before Constantinople, Constantinople has before Alexandria, and
Alexandria has before Antioch, and Jerusalem* is the lowermost; Neither of
which Four are pretended by any; nor will the Church of Rome to be sure admit,
to have any thing of real Power over one another. I shall end this Section, and
all that I have to say on this Head, with that of the 42 Can. Conc. Carthag.
(...), etc. That the first Bishop, or Bishop of the first Seat be not called
(...), the Prince of Priests, or the chief Priest, but only the Bishop (...) of
the first Seat, and which first Seat that it is in no manner dependent on Rome;
and the (...), so often mentioned in the following Canons, ows not thither any
Appeals, nor can the Bishop of Rome wrest the Audience out of his hands, is so
clearly the sense of that Council, that nothing can be more, it being there
Positively and on set purpose decided and determined against him, upon the
detection of that Fraud of the Bishop of Rome's, designed upon them in the very
Case, and but just now by me mentioned, or more plainly in the Scholia on
Aristenus upon that Canon. The Dignity of the Priesthood is one and the same in
all; and this shall not be called the chief Priest, and that a Priest less
Perfect; but all are equally Priests, all equally Bishops, as who all have
equally received the Gift of the Holy Spirit; the Metropolitan Bishop, as
having the first Chair, with addition, shall be called Bishop Metropolitan; or
which seems mostly apposite for a present Conclusion (if any thing can be more
than that which is already brought) in the sense of those three Bishops, Can 8.
Conc. Genesis Ephesians. Whatsoever is nominated contrary to the Ecclesiastical Laws,
and the Canons of the Holy Fathers, and which touches the common liberty of
Christians, is to be renounced and rejected.

Hosius in the entrance of the Council of Carthage, (...), etc. if by chance an
angry Bishop (though such an one ought not to be) is over-sharp against a
Presbyter or Deacon, or over-sudden, care is to be taken for better
satisfaction, and he may appeal to a neighbour-Bishop, who is not to deny him
audience. And that Bishop who first gave Sentence, whether right or wrong is to
bear the Examination, and his Animadversions to be either confirmed or
corrected, as occasion; or else the Bishop derives so much of this Power to the
two Orders below him, as the Presbyter and Deacon, whose Power is more solemnly
conveyed by laying on of Hands and Prayer, and then conferred, so fixing a
Character indelible, save only by that Power which devolved it, and upon a
succeeding Guilt, and which for themselves to lay down and desert is
Sacrilege, and these sent out by the Bishop as is the Harvest great or small,
so more or less in number, in subjection to and dependency upon him. So that
the standing Church Officers are these; the Metropolitan which is only a Bishop
with larger Jurisdiction, and with the execution of a Power the Bishop has not,
and the naked Bishop with his Presbyter and Deacon, in the ordinary course of
officiating in order to Salvation, and which three, or some one or more of
them, as is the occasional Service, are still to be present, and in their
spheres and courses, according to their several proper Provinces and Offices,
as already described, and particularized, to attend and officiate in each Holy
Assembly, in every Congregation that is Public and Christian, where the
Worship and Service of God is so performed, as by the rules of the Gospel is
ordered and appointed. Thus Tertullian among the many absurdities of his time
reckons up this, Laicis munia sacerdotalia injun^unt, the Laymen undertake the
Priestly office, De Praescript. cap. 41. the (...) the People united Sacerdoti
suo, to their Priest, and a Flock with their Pastor, Cypr. lib. 4. Ep. 9. that
is no Church quae non habet Sacerdotem, which has no Priest, as St. Jerome. adv.
Luciferianos. And he that reads over St. Austin's Sermon super gestis cum
Emerito Donatist. Episcopo. Col. 631. will there find a great many Divine
Services, and all without acceptance and advantage, because thus extra
Ecclesiam, without the Church, no one belonging to the Priesthood there
officiating for them. The Church of God is either Episcopatus unus Episcoporum
multorum concordi numerositate d^ffusus, as St. Cyprian again speaks, Ep. 52.
that one Episcopacy diffused and overspreading the World in the Union and
Concord of its numerous Bishops, and these either make a general Council, or
are under their several Metropolitans, and are the Church representative; or
else it is in Episcopo and clero and omnibus stantibus constituta, as Cyprian
again Ep. 27. Cum Episcopis, Presbyteris, Diaconis and stantibus, Ep. 31. in
the Bishop and Clergy, the Presbyter Deacon and Laity, the latter expressed by
the stantes, the People standing without in the time of officiating, according
to the ancient Ecclesiastical Custom. And so also Optatus lib. 1. adv. Parmen.
Donatist. speaks of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons and turbam fidelium the
Believers in general. Si tantummodo Christianus es, hoc est non Apostolus,
Tertul. adv. Marc. cap. 2. such as were Christians at large and not Public
Officers, nor of the Priesthood; and this as Members of a particular Church,
Parish, or Congregation, or however as relating to the public Service of God,
to be discharged by all Christians, and which cannot duly be performed without
the Bishop in Person, or in his Proxies, by his Power lodged in the Presbyter
or Deacon. Thus he is called a Schismatic that erects an Altar without the
consent of the Bishop, Can. 3. Apost. even though the Confession of Faith is
otherwise sound. If thus (...), if thus dividing from and meeting against his
Authority, Can. 6. Conc. genesis Constantinop. the very Clergy themselves are not
to administer in their Oratories without license had of the Bishop, Can. 31.
Conc. 6. in Trullo. And to the same purpose is Schism again desined, a
recession from the Bishop erecting an Altar against an Altar, Can. 13, 14, 15.
Conc. 1, 2. Constantin. Can. 57. Conc. Carthag. and Can. 6. Conc. Gangrens. as
the Church is there defined a Congregation of the Faithful, with their Bishop;
so is it there peremptorily determined that the Anathema or Curse is due to
those, that privately and apart from these do convene and congregate
themselves. Nor is it Schism only, but Heresy also; so reputed by the imperial
Constitution, Sacram Communionem in Ecclesia Catholica non percipientes a Deo
amabilibus Episcopis Hereticos just vocamus. We justly call them Heretics
that do not receive Communion in the Catholic Church from the Bishops which
are beloved of God; for as such, they were then looked upon, and that more
eminently than others, in the then Christian account, and it was the Bishop's
common Epithete, Deo amabiles Episcopi, however the opinion and style of them
is now altered, Justinian. Novel. 109. Praefat. And now these Church Officers
being thus set out and enumerated, what their peculiar Power and Jurisdiction
is, their appropriated Acts and Duties and Influences are peculiar to
themselves, apart and from the rest of Believers, the tantummodo Christians in
Tertullian, take in these following instances.

President probati quique seniores, as Tertullian goes on, describing the
coition or meeting together of Christians in his days, Apol. cap. 39. above
mentioned, their Seniors or Elders there preside, and are in the Head, and
governing such their Holy Convocations, (...). So Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. the
Bishop makes an Instruction and Exhortation in remembrance of God's Mercies;
and he that reads over those Directions he gives to Zenas and Serenus two
Presbyters, how to behave themselves in their Duties, will readily see who it
was in those days that spoke to and exhorted the People, and that this is a
branch (...) as he calls it, of their Government and Jurisdiction, the
Directions are these, (...), that they be not affected and conceited in the
discharge of their Ministry, over-pragmatick and officious in the services of
it; but do it (...), in an even and regular way, in the Seasons and Places
affixed, otherwise they will appear like Dancers on the Ropes, be admired only by
the idle People, (...), holding out their Necks like so many Geese, and gaping
at the vainer Glory; that they be neither clownish nor unskilful on the one
hand, nor clamorous in their manner of speaking, an instance of worldliness and
feracity, to be avoided; be cautious against the Actions of those, who make the
Public Oratories a Stage to divulge what is iller composed by them,
personating Orestes, who appeared terrible and great to Fools, for his wooden
Feet, his made Belly, his odd Habit, monstrous Face, that vaunt in a freedom of
speaking, studious of Emulation and Contention, and like the Bacchae, under the
habit of Peace, and a show of Holy Duties, carry Swords and Spears. He there
cautions against those unequal forced Countenances, one while pleasant, another
while sower and tetricous, and particularly against that histrionical way of
those who are every day speaking and acting their Play divided into so many
parts on purpose, and the Presbyter deposed for Sedition against his Bishop is
called (...) Can. 18. Conc. Ancyran. and in several Canons is the same
expression on the like occasion; he is one not allowed to Preach any longer,
(...), Just. Mart. Apol. 2. and this President, These Elders or Churchmen,
they suitable to their strength, and in all due manner, send up Prayers
likewise and Thanksgivings for the People, who still go along and join with
them in such their Invocations, (...) we rise up all together, Sermon being
ended, and go to our Prayers, as it is there expressed, and supra ibid. be their
Mouth, and they speak after him. Thus the ordained, or they, whose Office is
affixed to attend in holy things, are Paraphrased in Justinian, Novel. 137.
Cap. 1. (...), the assigned to Pray for the People; and these are those Prayers
(...) in Ignatius his Ep. ad Ephesios, of the Bishop and the whole Church, and
which that Apostolical Martyr there says are so prevailing. And now having
come to that passage of Justin Martyr just now mentioned. I cannot but take
notice of the chief Argument that is there raised by our Enthusiasts, for their
gifted Extempore Prayer, the President say they, there prayed, (...), according
to his private gifts and abilities, as he could conceive and utter words, and
not in a form set and prescribed him. To which I answer, That as the Phrase
imparts no such thing, so we have reason to believe that the Author meant
nothing less by it. What did the whole Congregation, and every man in it thus
Pray after his own conceiving? and yet the same Father, in the same Apology
tells us, that all prayed with their President, and in the same Phrase is their
Praying expressed too, p. 60. Ed. Paris. and the meaning can alone be this,
they prayed (...), as it is expressed before, both Priest and People all at once
poured out their Prayers together, animo intento, as it is translated, with
Souls intent and fixed upon the Duty, De pectore as Tertullian varies it, Apol.
c. 30. (and which place they pervert to their purpose also) from their Hearts
and Consciences, with that Attention, Zeal, Faith, and other Qualifications,
that make Prayers acceptable, and which is the alone praying with the Spirit.
Like Phrases we have in other Ecclesiastical Writers, but not one makes any
thing to their purpose. So Origin in his lib. 8. cont. Celsum, (...), they say
Hymns to God with all their might and power, like the Amen with all their might
among the Jews, and of which the Hebrew Doctors have this observation, whosoever
says Amen with all his might the Garden of Eden is open unto him, vid.
Thorndike. The Service of Religious Assemblies, p. 234. So Eusebius Hist. Eccl.
l. 10. c. 3. the Presidents of the Churches had their Panegyric Orations
(...), quantum quisque poterat ingenio; as Vallesius translates it, according
to his faculty in Oratory, which no man presumes to be otherwise than
preconceived, to be an ex-tempore effusion and inpremeditated. And so it is said
in that Chapter, that every age and the promiscuous multitude of each Sex,
(...), toto pectore as translated, with all the strength of their Mind and
Thoughts, did officiate in Prayers, and giving of Thanks, worshipping with
cheerfulness of Mind; and surely these Men, Women and Children, did not every
one Perform, Pray and give Thanks in an extempore way; besides, if we consider
the manner of their Worship, which was in set composed Hymns, and Songs,
speaking in courses and interchangeably one to another, as is above observed;
all which must be preconceived and penned down, it must in each instance be
familiar to them before; to all which add how repugnant these casual effusions
are to that course of Liturgies and set Forms of Prayer which we have as much
reason to believe these first Christians used, as that they served God at all;
or let them consider with what Spirit it was they said the Lord's Prayer, which
St. Jerome says our Savior taught the Apostles every day to repeat in their
Liturgies, Sic docuit Apostolos suos, ut quotidie in corporis illius Sacrificio
credentes audeant loqui, Pater noster, qui es in Coelis, etc. Lib. 3. Cont.
Pelag. versus finem.

viz. the Holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, together with that
other Sacrament, (as it is also called by the Ancients) or Rite or Ceremony of
Confirmation, and which are, and ever were, administered by Men in Holy Orders;
and then, and only then adjudged, duly discharged, valid, and serviceable, as
all do agree, that acknowledge either, or both, or all of them, to be Christian
Institutions. As for that of the Lord's Supper, that it was consecrated by the
Bishop, and from him, by the Deacon, delivered to the People; it is evident of
Justin Martyr's second Apology, (...), etc. the Bishop giving thanks, i. e.
having consecrated the Elements, the Deacon distributed; for the manner and
virtue of Consecration did not consist in pronouncing so many words over the
Elements, as it is weakly contended by some in the days that have been since,
but in the office of Prayer and Thanksgiving by the attractation of, or some
other signal appropriation to the Elements, particularly applied unto them;
(...), Can. 4. Conc. Carthag. Verborum solemnitas, and sacra invocatio nominis,
and signa, institutionibus Apostolicis, sacerdotum Ministeriis, attributa,
visibile celebrant Sacramentum, etc. Cypr. de Baptism. Christi ad initium, the
solemnity of words, sacred invocation of the Holy Name, and Signs, added to the
Apostolical Institution, by the ministry of the Priests, celebrate the visible
Sacrament; the visible part, or thing it self, is formed and shaped by the
Spirit, perfecting and crowning all, and so in the forementioned place of
Justin Martyr, the action of consecrating is called, (...), nourishment
thankfully received by Prayer, and the action of consecration is expressed in
Irenaeus, lib. 1. c. 9. by (...), to give thanks, (...), extending the word of
invocation, ibid. as Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 8. and the same is in Ignatius
before them all, Ep. ad Smyrnenses, (...), and so general was it, that the very
Heretics, who usually ap'd it after the Church when to their advantage, used
this very way, and it is said of Marcus the Heretic and Conjurer, that
designing to delude his followers, and represent to them an appearance, as of
Blood, distilling into the Chalice, and mock-Sacrament, Simulans se gratias
agere, seu (...), quod hodie, consecrare dicimus, post longam invocationem;
purpureum and rubrum apparere faciebat, feigning to give thanks, which is the
Phrase for Consecration, after a long invocation, he made it look like purple
color and red, as Pamelius gives the account, Annot. in Tertull. cap. 4. cont.
V^l^ntin. number. 32. and though the Presbyter do desist from Consecration in the
presence of the Bishop, Can. 13. Conc. Neocesar: yet it is in his Orders,
enabling him to it, and either he or the Bishop are said (...), to give the
Bread in Prayer, (as it is now in our Communion Book) that (...) that
immaculate Communion Can. 23. Can. 6 in Trullo. And Zonaras in Can. 78. Apost.
says that a blind man, or one without his right hand, ought not to be ordained;
for how can he officiate in holy things (...), or handle the holy Elements, or
distribute to others of them? I Will only add what I find in Eusebius his
History, l. 7. c. 9. concerning one that was dissatisfied in his Baptism, which
he received from Heretics, and desired Catholic Baptism of one Dionysius, a
then present famous Bishop, the words are these, and give a good account of the
offices of private Christians in those days. The holy Bishop tells him he dares
not Rebaptize him, and that a daily and constant Communion with the Church will
suffice; for he that shall frequently hear Prayers, and answer Amen with the
rest of the Congregation, who places himself at the holy Table, there stands
and reaches forth his hand to receive the holy Food, who there very often
receives it, and is partaker of the Body and Blood of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. I dare not baptize him again, but appoint him to go on and
persevere in such his Religious Duties. And the same is as notorious of the
Sacrament of Confirmation. This is sufficiently clear out of St. Jerome adv.
Luciferian. Tom. 3. that those which were baptized by the Presbyters and
Deacons in lesser Cities, Episcopus ad invocationem Spiritus Sancti manum
impositurus excurrat; for the invocation of the Spirit of God, the Bishop runs
forth, or takes his Circuit, and lays his hand upon them, the only difficulty
appearing is as to the Sacrament of Baptism. St. Austin's Judgment is, Laicus
urgente necessitate, possit baptizare, Tom. 7. l. 2. cont. Parmen. cap. 13. a
Layman, if necessity urges, may baptize. And St. Jerome says the same adv.
Luciferianos, and that it was in use in his days; and the Practice being
permitted in our Church, made up a part of the Canvass betwixt Thomas
Cartwright, and our two learned Writers Archbishop Whitgift, and Mr. Hooker, as
is to be seen in their Writings; but the case goes farther in that of
Athanasius, who when a Boy, and at play on the Seashore, acted a Bishop, and
baptized such of his play-fellows, as were not before initiated by that
Sacrament, and when examined by the Bishop, and upon an after consultation with
his Presbyters, the Baptism was allowed of, Sozom. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 17. The
deep sense and apprehension they had of but one Baptism, and the danger of
being rebaptized, which is branded by the name of Incest and Sacrilege, and
the Priest was to be deposed that did it, as appears in the Imperial Laws
provided in the case, 16. Cod. Theodos. and the great trouble that the Church
of God had at that time, occasioned first by St. Cyprian and his Bishops
pleading it, upon the former usuage of the Church, and afterward managed to the
evil of a great Schism by the Donatists, who followed St. Cyprian in his Error,
but forsook him in his Obedience, who refused to make a rent in the Church upon
the occasion, as all Scismaticks do. These Considerations might make them very
careful, and perhaps too nice; how they admitted of Rebaptizations, and which
were only admitted in case of certain Heretics who denied the Trinity, ( Vid.
Can. 47. Apost. and 49. and Can. 9. Conc. Nic. 1.) or else where there is a
doubt, and no sure witness to avouch the Baptism, pretended, once to be
administered, or the Persons themselves are not able to give an account of the
Mysteries then delivered unto them, as Can. 57. Conc. Carthag. and which Canon
was occasioned by their Ambassador with the Moors, who usually brought such
Children from the Barbarians; but yet there is no instance in the first Canons
of rebaptizing those who were certainly known to be baptized in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, upon any accident, by Laymen;
and yet such we have reason to believe there was. Hence Baptism once appearing
to have been administered as to the Matter and Substance of it, and in the words
of the Institution, and by such as were not of the Hieratical Order, they
adjudged it the safer way, to trust the Mercy and Goodness of God for a supply
of whatever defect might be in one or two outward Circumstances, than to run
the hazard of an attempt, of what seemed so visibly and notoriously unlawful,
viz. a second admission by that Sacrament, or a violation of that known and
sacred rule, or instance of our Belief; one Baptism for remission of Sins. And
this, as in all defects, and where something is wanting, it ought to be
permitted and pardoned only under the present and unhappy Circumstances (as
also in the after practice of the Church,) but never produced and urged as a
Rule, enacted into a Law. Infirmities are never made Presidents, unless for
Pity and Pardon, and to quicken future care and watchfulness against them, the
common course of things abhors; nor is it to be endured if otherwise,
Potestatem regenerationis demandans suis discipulis, cum dixit iis, Euntes
docete omnes gentes baptizantes, etc. Iren. l. 3. c. 19. Christ Jesus then
demandated or devolved the Power for Regeneration unto his Disciples when he
bad them go and teach all Nations baptizing them, etc. and certainly such as
attempt it, ought first to receive the same Authority in Succession from him,
without which his Disciples, that in Person attended him did it not. Tertullian
represents it, as the height of impudence and irregularity for a Woman to
baptize, forsitan and tingere, a more saucy act, then to teach in the Church,
De praescr. c. 41. then which no Book was ever wrote with a more Primitive
Spirit, and speaks of it as a thing in general forbad a Woman, de Virgin.
Veland. c. 9. He limits it to the Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon; only in
necessity it comes to the Layman, Sufficiat sc. ut in necessitatibus utaris,
sicubi aut loci, aut temporis, aut personae conditio compellit, tunc enim
constantia succurrentis excipitur, quam urgit circumstantia periclitantis, De
Baptism. c. 17. and surely that which is but one, never to be reiterated, it is
Sacrilege, it is incest, to do it, to which so many and great Titles, Eulogies
and Effects are given by the Ancients, it would be endless to repeat them; so
many to be sure, more, are not spoken of any one Service in the whole City of
God. That which first enters us into the Body and Association of Christians,
with so large Promises, upon such solemn ties and obligations, the Expectations
and Duties of our whole life following; and that which is performed and
obtained with the same solemnity and invocation, as in other Holy Mysteries,
invocato Deo, Sanctificationis Sacramentum consequuntur aequae, Tertul. de
Baptism. c. 4. it is not agreeable, that the Consecration and Solemnization be
left and assigned promiscuously and to every hand, and which is not in other
Sacraments, it must in course be equally peculiar and separate; as to the
separation of the Persons that are to be entrusted with the administration of
it.

A further appropriated distinct Power to God, for the settling of Consciences
in the private apprehension of them, and governing suitable to such the Laws
and Canons in each case so made and constituted by them. For this end the
Apostles and Elders met together and united in Council at Jerusalem, and
determined concerning things offered to Idols and eating of Blood, etc. Acts
15. so those many subsequent Councils, whilst the Empire kept off from the
Church, as against that Error of the Arabians, that the Souls sleep upon the
separation, Eusebius. Hist. l. 6. c. 37. in that against Novatus, Cap. 43. against
Paulus Samosetanus, l. 7. c. 29. with several others in History transmitted to
this purpose was that Body or Collection of Canons, bearing the Title of the
Apostles Canons, upon several occasions made for the use and direction, and
government of the Christian Incorporation and Society, such were the four first
general Councils, when the Empire became Christian, and received the Church
under its wings and protection. The first under Constantine held at Nicaea
against Arius, and asserted the Eternity of the Son of God, that he was not a
mere Creature. The second held at Constantinople, under Theodosius the Great
against Macedonius, and asserted the Eternal divinity of the Holy Ghost; who
said the third Person was a mere Creature. The third was held at Ephesus under
Theodosius the lesser, against Nestorius, who owned the both Godhead and
Manhood of Christ, but divided him into two Persons. The fourth at Chalcedon
under Marcian, the Emperor, against Eutiches, who consounded the two Natures in
one Person, as Nestorius divided the Persons, with others, whether Ecumenical
or Topical, during or succeeding these, and whose either Declarations, as to
what Faith was at first delivered and since received, upon a just and
traditional enquiry, even to the placing some Books into the Canon of
Scripture, which were not with the earliest admitted; or constituted Canons in
Church-Polity, were still thought obliging to all good and peaceable
Christians, determined and ended the present debate, and only a Compliance was
the issue of them; and that either to all Christendom, or particular Churches,
suitable as were the Councils, either Universal, or under single Metropolitans,
or particular Bishops, accordingly did they oblige. And this Legislative Power,
as originally given only to Church Officers; so is it alone residing in them,
to rule and to govern, receive or reject, to punish or reward, according to
such their own Laws, as the reason and nature of such the Societies and their
Constitution will direct and bear, as unhappy Differences and Debates arose,
they were thus to be decided by the Convention of Councils, who either
confirmed what they found was well done before, or passed farther Sanctions
where the occasion was new, or upon notoriety of failure, in former
Declarations. For the Power of Councils was never asserted, as absolutely
Autorative in it self, and infallible in its Determinations, as to make Truth,
but declarative only of what was Truth from the beginning, as the best
expedient on Earth to find it out, and the alone Authority on Earth to pass
Sanctions upon present appearance for present Settlement, Peace, and Unity,
every man had his liberty still entire, and reserved for farther enquiries
where he saw or suspected occasions; but this to be proposed in the next
Council, 'twas to be brought to the Apostles and Elders there, whose Authority
alone was to reject or admit it. As to Public Confessions, what room and
authority the Empire had, and is always to have in these Councils is already
declared, Cap. 2. and though the Faithful or Believers at large many times had
conflux thither, and were permitted either for their diversion, or private
satisfaction, or information; yet no one ever passed his Vote judicially, or
concurred in the Power Legislative, as has been above also showed, ibid. This
still goes in the Name and Power of the Bishops, and Clergy alone, as must
appear to every one, from the both first derivation of that Power, and
after-practice, both in that Apostolical first Synod at Jerusalem, and all
other succeeding, excepting such who on purpose set their Face against what
with their Eyes they never did and will not see.

Barnabas set out by Isaac Vossius Sect. 1. ad finem Epistolae, (...), that he
work with his hands to the purging away his Sins. So Lactantius, l. 6. Sect.
ult. Si quid mali fecerit satisfaciat, that satisfaction be given for his evil.
St. Cyprian Ep. 50. gives an account of the Epistle he had received from Fidus
his Brother, who tells him how Therapius his Colleague did reconcile to the
Church over-hastily Victor a certain Presbyter, Antequam penitentiam plenam
egisset, and domino Deo, in quem deliquerat, satisfecisset; before he had
completed his Repentance, and satisfied God against whom he had sinned, and for
which St. Cyprian admonishes his Friend that he do so no more, ibid. And
again, Ep. 64. Satisfaction is what is required upon a sense of having sinned,
ut se peccasse potius intelligant and satisfaciant; to give all the instances
were to spend too much Paper, what is here brought may suffice, or he that
desires more may have it from the learned Hugo Grotius Rivetian. Apol. Discuss.
Page 700. ed. Land: and all this placed in such as have the Keys of the Church,
whence they are to receive satisfactionis suae modum, the measures of their
Penance and Satisfaction, as he there cites St. Austin, no man was admitted
into the Church of Christ but by degrees, but as through so many Posts and
Stations, through which they were to pass, (...), as it is Can. 4. 6. 9. Conc.
Ancyr. and then to go on to that which is more perfect, to be admitted to the
Holy Communion, the top instance of Devotion and Communion, or be received
(...) with an oblation, as it is expressed, Can. 7, 8. ibid. for by the words of
(...), etc. that holy Sacrament was by the Ancients still expressed. Thus we
read in the Church Story and Practice, as remembered and referred unto, but as
not then instituted, being antecedent, and of more antiquity, of the (...) the
hearers only in the Church, a set order of Penitents permitted only to hear the
Word of God, with the Hymns and Songs and Praises, placed without the Temple,
and these were the lowermost form in order to something else, to farther
Duties, as thus instructed and fitted for them, and such as staid here, and
would only hear, engage and incorporate no farther, neither come to the Prayers
nor the Holy Sacrament in the set Order, and assigned Times for it, were
reputed as if they had not been initiated at all; the Council of Antioch turns
them quite out of the Church, Can. 2. and by which rule what will become of the
greatest part of our now adays professing Christians, let them look to it; or
perhaps, let such as preside over them have the government and power of
Discipline in their hands. Then we have the (...), such as advanced to the
public Prayers, next the (...), those that came to the Sacraments. See Can.
11. Conc. Nic. 1. together with the Scholia's of Zonaras and Balsamon; and Can.
14. we have the (...), who it seems were those that were Auditors and more,
were Baptized, as by the Scholia there appears, and the same we find before
this Council of Nicea, Conc. Ancyr. Can. 4, 5, 6. and the (...) or Demoniacks,
who had their distinct station, Can. 17. Cum scholiis. And these courses of
Discipline we have alluded to in several places of Tertullian, (and therefore
were extant in the Church very early, Tertullian being sometime before any of
these now mentioned Councils) but most fully and at once, of any that I have
observed in them, in his Book of Prescriptions, Cap. 41. and which I shall
therefore here repeat; where he reproves and prestringes such those Heretics
he writes against, for the perverting and violating such this received
customary Discipline, Non omitta^ ipsius etiam conversationis hereticae
descriptione^, quam futilis, quam terrena, quam humana sit, sine gravitate,
sine autoritate, sine disciplina, ut fidei suae congruen^; imprim^s, quis
catecumenus, quis fidelis, incertum sit, pariter adeunt, pariter audiunt,
pariter orant, etiam ethnici si supervenerint, sanctum canibus, and porcis
Margaritas, licet non veras, jaclabunt, simplicitatem volunt esse prostrationem
disciplinae, cujus penes nos curam lenocinium vocant, pacem quoque passim cum
omnibus miscent; nihil enim interest illis, licet diversa tractantibus, dum ad
unius veritatis expugnationem conspirent, omnes tument, omnes seditionem
pollicentur, ante sunt perfecti catecumeni quam edocti. I will not omit a
description of the heretical even conversation, how futile, how vain, how
humane it is, without Gravity, without Authority, without Discipline, how
congruous with their faith? first of all, who is the catecumen, who the
faithful it is uncertain, they go together, they hear together, they pray
together, even the Ethnicks if they come among them, they will cast the holy
things to dogs, and the Margarites to Swine, though not true ones, they will
have simplicity to be only a prostration of Discipline, the care of which that
we have, they call a cheat or the work of a Pander, they give their peace
promiscuously with one another, nor are they concerned, though different in
themselves, whilst they conspire to the destruction of one Truth, all are
puffed up, all swell, all pretend to science, they are first Catecumens ere
thoroughly learned. Or he that would see this course of Discipline in its fuller
draught, let him peruse the late learned Annotations in Can. 11. and 14. Con.
Nic. 1. printed at Oxford, now suitable to these stations and orders and
degrees, in which such as came over to Christianity were placed, and according
to their proficiency and due behavior were promoted; so were they the rules
and measures the ancient Church took for the exercising discipline upon those
persons, that having passed through them, been baptized, confirmed and admitted
to the Holy Communion, became of the Lapsi, fell back again from the grace
received, Apostatized from their most Holy Order and Profession, and that
according to the circumstances of such their departure, as more or less of
guilt appeared. And this is plain from the forementioned Canons and others,
thus in the Can. 11. Conc. Nic. 1. Such as without any necessity, no violence
to their Goods offered, or any sensible danger appearing, did recede under
Licinius the Tyrant, their Penance or Discipline was upon a true repentance, to
be placed back again, and become hearers only for three years, and after two
years more among the Orantes, they were readmitted to the Holy Altar. So Can.
14. The proportionate punishments were inflicted on the Catecumeni and others
lapsed, in Can 4. Conc. Ancyr. They on the other hand that sacrificed by force,
but yet did eat at the Idol Feasts, without any remorse expressed either in
their habits and countenance, though not adhering to them, their Punishment was
less; to be Hearers only but one year, to become prostrate three, two years to
attend the place of Prayer, and then to go on to that which is perfect, to be
admitted again to the advantage of the great mystery, and highest instance of
Christian Devotion, the partaking of the holy Altar; and Can. 5. those that eat
with apparent present remorse, evidenced by their tears, being substrate two
years, in the third year they were fully restored, and so according to the
proportion of the demerit; and as the more or less guilt appeared, such was the
Amerciament, as is to be seen in the following Canons of that Council, and I
have produced my instances out of these two Councils, both for the greatest
authority, and very near, greatest antiquity, they being very ancient, of these
Ecclesiastical Penances, and the way used by the Church in the laying of them.
And all this, that it was appropriated and peculiar to the Office of the
Priesthood, in whose alone hands it resided, and in the obedience alone and
subjection to whom it was adjudged acceptable in the performance is equally
evident, (...). Ignatius Ep. ad Philadelph. ed. Voss. when repenting they come
to the Unity of the Church, and the Regiment and Subjection to the Bishop,
these are of God, and the Lord will forgive them. Penitentiam autem ille agit,
qui divinis Praeceptis mitis and patiens, and sacerdotibus Dei obtemperans,
obsequiis suis and operibus justis Deum promeretur. He it is that is the true
Penitent, who meekly and patiently according to the Divine Precepts, and
submitting to the Priests of God, by his Obedience and just Performances,
regains, or obtains favor anew of God, Cypr. Ep. 4. ed. Pamel. As it is even
necessary to examine (...), the rise and kind of the Repentance, in order to
the due Punishment. So this Power is in the Bishop, to whom it is lawful (...),
to consult in order to Mercy or Severity, Can. 12, 13. Conc. 1. Nic. So Can. 5.
Conc. Ancyr. the Bishops have Power to examine the manner of the Penitents
conversation, and to use Clemency, (...), or to add to the time of his
Discipline, (...), to add to, or abate of the Penance; and all this as very
ancient in Church Story, so is it a transcript of that which is from the
beginning of St. Paul's own hand and original, in that Person under the Church
censures, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Sufficient to such an one is this
Punishment inflicted by many; so that contrariwise ye ought to forgive him,
lest perhaps such an one be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. Wherefore I
beseech you, that you would confirm your love toward him; for to this end also
did I write that I might know the proof of you, whether ye be obedient in all
things, to whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive; for if I forgave any thing, to
whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it, in the Person of Christ, lest
Satan should get the advantage of us, for we are not ignorant of his devices.

THERE is a fifth instance of Power peculiar and appropriate to the Gospel
Ministry, Cyprian, Vtar ea admonitione qua me uti Dominus jubet, ut interim
prohibeantur offerre, a forbidding the Holy Altar, Ep. 10. ad finem, but there
is a censura Evangelica, a Gospel censure which follows upon this Discipline or
Ecclesiastical Punishment, if contemned, and mentioned together with it by St.
Cyprian, Ep. 52. ad finem, and (...) to be cast out of the Church, or
excommunicated; by which words Excommunication is expressed. Can. 2. Conc.
Antioch, is a farther Act or Punishment upon such as had first passed the other
Sentence upon themselves, turned themselves out of the Communion of the Church,
in its Prayers and holy Eucharist; and which seems the sense and design of that
(...) Can. 9. Apost. that farther Separation to be made of such, as in a case
very like it, would come to Church and hear the Scriptures, but separate from
Prayers and the Holy Communion. An act or censure that is forensick, judicial
and autoratative, pronounced by those sitting on twelve Thrones in the Gospel,
the Church-Governors, judging the Tribes of Israel; Plenissimum imperium in
domo Dei, having a complete through Power in the House of God; as Grot. in Apoc.
3.7. and all which thus on Earth by them transacted is bound and confirmed in
Heaven; So it is expressed by St. Cyprian, a spe Communionis and Pacis
prohibendos esse, it is a prohibiting from the Hope and Communion of Peace, so
long as continuing in the Impiety; or as the Church sense is given of it to us
before him by Tertullian, Apol. c. 39. Summum futuri judicii prejudicium, si
quis ita deliquerit, ut a Communione Orationis and Conve^us and omnis sancti
Commercii relegetur, it is the greatest, most certain Presumption and
pre-occupation of the Judgment to come, upon a Delinquent that is banished from
the Communion of Prayer and Conventions, and all holy Commerce, Quodammodo ante
diem judicii judicant. So St. Jerome of the Priests, Ep. ad Heliodorum, spoken
with some abatement of Expression, but to the same purpose, they in a manner
judge before the Day of Judgment. And if some Fathers in the Council of Ephesus
refused Subscriptions to the Anathema's and Excommunications of the Nestorian
Heretics there condemned, and rather turned the Sentence upon themselves in
absenting from their Communion, as Mr. Seldom de Syned. l. 2. c. 12. reports it
from Acacius; this argues only the great tenderness of these holy Men, and how
dreadful and tremendous the Ordinance appeared unto them, the same Blessing is
denied, only with a show of more, I had almost said foolish, Pity and Love, it
returns at length to the same thing, and with more weight and argument, that
such as are unruly, and will not obey the Truth, are to be turned out of the
Church Communion, even the most tender and affectionate to their Persons, dare
not congregate in holy Duties with them; a Power in the Church which in course
follows, supposing it to be a Church, admitting such the imbodying and
incorporation that is here contended for, what is natural in all other Bodies
and Associations, and which must be concluded in this, without a great affront
on the wisdom and foresight of the Institutor; for otherwise it has not what is
necessary for its Preservation, nor can it subsist without such a jurisdiction
over contumacious Offenders. And indeed to allow in Churchmen a Power for
admission by Baptism, and to enstate in Church Privileges, which none that own
Christianity dare deny, and to deny this power for Punishment and Correction,
upon the breach of the Baptismal terms, and which how many among us that are
zealous for the former, do, is what is as incongruous and inconsequential as
any thing in the world, as any thing in common apprehensions can be; only men
are rash and heady, and do not thoroughly consider. And it is as easily
conceivable to men that give themselves a due liberty of thinking, that the
same Power in Heaven may equally concur with and ratify what is done in Earth,
in the cutting off and due Exclusion from the Church, upon breach of the terms
on which admitted to it, as at the first admission, and when on those terms
enjoined, the disadvantage, as the Privilege must be equally allowed; nor is
there any thing of thwarting more in the one than the other; a branch of
Discipline once executed only upon Laymen, the first Canons of the Church not
permitting Excommunication to pass upon any of the (...), within the Order of
the Priesthood, these were to be deposed from such their high office upon
Crimes committed; 'twas the other only was excommunicated, when the offense was
adjudged worthy of it, and which in effect is but the same Punishment, and the
same inconveniences attend the one as the other in their several Stations;
there was a deprivation to both, the Clergy of his Ecclesiastical, and the
Laick of his Baptismal advantages, it was not lawful to join in religious Duty
with a Layman excommunicated, neither with a Clergyman deposed, as in the
tenth and eleventh Canons of the Apostles.

as is from the Ancients in the foregoing Chapter observed; but herein it
differs from that last Sentence, because inflicted as a Remedy, and not only as
a Punishment, it leads by Hell gates for Heaven; it is on this side the Pit,
that its mouth be not shut upon us for ever; it is inflicted in order to Mercy
and Remission, which no Punishments from the Sentence of the great Judge are;
and this our Judgment, it is only then without mercy and irreversible, like as
is that, when the Sinner perseveres, as do those damned, in the height of his
non-repentance. The formal act of Excommunication is expressed by St. Paul by a
word which signifies to mourn, and ye have not mourned, i. e. excommunicated
that wicked Person, 2 Cor. 5.2. it is done with remorse and sorrow, and
rescinded again with joy, those hands which cast out, have arms wide open to
receive again with Kisses and Embracings, as it was with the returning Prodigal
in the Gospel; it is a departure for a time, that they may be received for ever,
by a sensible feeling of the loss, to set a more value on the Blessing; and
therefore it is not inflicted on those that are without, as St. Paul, 1 Cor.
5.12. do we not judge them that are within, but them which are without God
judges, v. 19. ibid. and which, were it only as a Punishment, and but to
aggravate, or ensure their Damnation, were it only a bare Cursing out of the
Church, as the licentious and Enemies to God's Discipline still slanderously
report of it, it were equally proper for both, Sinners without, as Sinners
within; but it is quite otherwise, an excision, or cutting off only, where
formerly Members, and which the act supposes in the bare expression; it is
somewhat laid on those that have had once a sense of the benefit of the
heavenly Association, and have tasted of the good Gifts thereof, and to teach
them in the absence and deprivation, that advantage they would not otherwise
consider, at least they set no value upon. Amongst others, this was one error
of the Novatians, that remission is not to be expected from the Priest, but
from God alone, as Socrates tells us, Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 10. and was
condemned by the Church amongst his other mistakes, Ad exomologesin veniunt,
and per manus impositionem Episcopi and Cleri, jus Communionis accipiant. So
Cyprian, Ep. 10. they came to Confession, and are received into the Church, by
the laying on of the hands of the Bishop and Clergy. And in that Epistle and
the eleventh just following, he reproves the Presbyters, because Nomen
offertur, Eucharistia datur, their readmission and enrollment is granted. And
not only St. Cyprian, but the whole Clergy of Rome, (ad quos perfidia habere
non possit accessum, Ep. 55.) when not worked out, as since, for their
perfidiousness, concur with him, and condemn such, se pacem habere dicentes,
and non ab Episcopo, who said they had their Peace from Heaven, and did not ask
it by the Bishops. I Will shut up this Section in the words of our learned Bishop
Richard Montague, Orig. Eccl. Tom. 1. Pars Poster. Sect. 40. Vere penitentes
absoluti per verbum Sacerdotis, aeque absolvuntur ac si Angelus de Coelo,
Propheta internuncius, imo ipse Deus, diceret, Remittuntur tibi peccata tua.
The truly Penitents, absolved by the words of the Priest, are equally absolved,
as if an Angel from Heaven, with the Message of a Prophet, even God himself
should say, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

THE last instance of this special Power Pentecost come at each Ordination, the
sending forth every particular Person into the Ministry, or which is every ways
as unlikely, the whole race of Bishops be Cheats and Usurpers, at every one of
their Consecrations, a private spirit of a particular incitation cannot avouch,
or but recommend to a public Profession, or justify the Undertakers; nor is
there any other than one of the two ways, to be proposed, or that can with any
show be pleaded; and the latter no man when considering, and in his wits, will
lay claim unto; in pursuance of this it is we are told by Eusebius, that when
St. John was returned out of Patmos, upon the Death of Domitian the Tyrant, who
had banished him thither, he betook himself to the neighboring Provinces
there, constituting or ordaining Bishops, setting whole Churches in order, and
placing in the Ministry or lot of the Lord (...), such as either the Spirit of
God pointed out unto him, or such whom he found suitably qualified with
spiritual Gifts, whether one or the other, or both ways, his own seposition or
co-optation into the Office was over and above required, Eccl. hist. l. 3. cap.
23. and the same course St. Clemens, an Apostolical Person in his Epistle to
the Corinthians tells us all the Apostles used, (...), etc. and our Apostles
knowing by revelation through our Lord Jesus Christ, that contentions would
arise about Episcopacy; and for this cause being imbued with perfect knowledge,
they constituted approved men to be Bishops and Deacons, to these they gave
Rules and Prescriptions and Power to continue the Succession, and that other
approved men succeed in the place of such as dye, and receive their Office and
Ministry; so that not only the matter of Fact, but the reason and necessity of
it, that it must be so, is here declared; this Power is it thus to be
propagated and carried on by transmission and devolution from hand to hand in
the Succession, every one deriving it from his Predecessor, who was himself so
visibly stated in the Power, otherwise no security of the Power at all,
Contentions and Dissatisfactions would arise concerning Church Orders, and no
test or rule left to sedate and compose them, the Priests of Jeroboams Order
have equal Plea, as those of the Sons of Aaron, and every one that will may
consecrate himself; and which Succession, if once visibly and notoriously lost,
without a new Indentment and Mission in general, and upon a course of Miracles
avouched; or else, a single particular Miracle upon the head of every one when
coming into these Offices, together with the hands there laid on, or what else
soever it is they do unto him, all Church Power must fall to the ground; that
there is in it any thing of Heaven cannot be made to appear to any particular
Person. Mr. Calvin therefore when he first set up for a Lecturer at Geneva,
having allowed this Succession quite lost, and seemingly, at least, lamenting
of it, Fateor optandum est ut valeret continua Successio, ut functio ipsa quasi
per manus traderetur, as is to be seen in his Epistle to the King of Polonia.
And the same thing is done by his Successor Theodore Beza, in his fifth Epistle
to one Alamannus, and in his Tractatus de Minist. Evang. Grad. cont. Saraviam,
ad cap. 2. lib. 1. finding their People must be at a loss, and enquiring whence
their public Call and Ministry (as if they did not, they had reason enough for
to do.) For vindicating themselves, they there tell them, that they were
immediately called and sent by God extraordinarily commissioned, as were the
Prophets and holy Men of old, Abram, Moses and Samuel, as was Christ Jesus
himself, and that they came as signally into Geneva to reform it, as he did
into the Temple, turning out the Money Changers and purging it, as were the
Apostles and Evangelists. So Calvin in express words, again, Institut. lib. 4.
cap. 3. Sect. 4. Alios tres, nimirum, Apostolos, Prophetas, Evangelistas,
initio regni sui Dominus suscitavit, and suscitat etiam imerdum prout temporum
necessitas postulat. -- Quamquam non nego Apostolos postea quoque vel saltem
eorum loco Evangelistas interdum excitavit Deus, ut nostro tempore factum est,
talibus enim qui Ecclesiam ab Antichristi defectione reducerem opus erat, etc.
and all this is what pure necessity, and the present distress put them upon:
it is what was to follow in course, and by the same force of consequence, that
one absurdity comes upon the neck of another, they had knocked their own Bishop
oth' head, and disowned all other of the Christian world, in whom alone the
Power of giving Orders was lodged, and to whose hands confined; and this so
acknowledgedly, that Calvin and Beza themselves did not believe to he in any
other on Earth besides, (that trick, that all Power was radically and virtually
in the Presbyters Orders, was not then invented) and their pretended Power must
be either of Man or from Heaven, there can be but one of these two ways
proposed, the one failing the other must be introduced, otherwise there must be
an universal failure of the Power it self; and therefore they are sent as was
Christ Jesus, as were his Apostles and the Disciples in the Acts; and so
necessary is it that Calvin still go for an Apostle, by all such as now claim a
Succession from him. It Is soundly as well as wittily argued by the Author of
those Questions and Answers going under the name of Justin Martyr, Respons. ad
Quest. 78. ad Orthodox, the Child which was illegitimate by Bathsheba died. God
would not have Christ descend in the Flesh, but by such as were born to David
by lawful Marriage, his descent as the Son of David, was to be in the legally
received way, and such are to be his descents according to the Spirit, it is by
a due and regular course and succession he devolves and continues his Power
amongst us, is his Kingdom supported. And though there has been several cases
in Church Story, and Plea's and Bandyings about the validity of Ordinations,
and some Irregularities as to Canon have been passed by, and the Ordination
notwithstanding, admitted; but yet where it plainly appeared that the Person
ordaining was no Bishop himself, nor received that Power by a devolved
Succession, which he pretended to give to others; all debates presently ended,
the Ordination was, I cannot say, nulled and voided, because declared to be
none at all, as in the case of Maximus Cynicus, Can. 4. Conc. 2. Genesis
Constantinop. for this it is Socrates Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 27. tells us, that
Ischyras was reputed worthy of many Deaths, (...), that having attained to no
one degree of the Priesthood, he durst attempt to officiate in holy Things, no
one Plea of Necessity, or Circumstance whatever could gain a liberty for this,
or but a connivance. In some cases the Canons were dispensed with, and in time
of Persecutions Bishops might attend and officiate in foreign Ordinations, and
so they did, as we read in Sozomen, Hist. Eccl. l. 7. cap. the common safety
and succession of the Church was their great aim, and particular Rules and
Canons had no force in such cases. Thus we read Can. 2. Conc. 2. Genesis
Constantinop. of some distant barbarous Countries, which had no Bishops planted
among them, and there it was lawful for any Bishop to Ordain, that they could
either procure, or of himself would take the pains. And so it appears also from
Can. 102. Conc. Carthag. that several discerptions and regions there were,
which had not their proper Bishops; and the same in all probability was the
case of the Church of Carthage, an account of which we have from Victor in his
History De Persecutione Vandalorum, l. 2. page 627. as bound up with the
tripartite History, who tells us there was no Bishop there for twenty four
years together, till Zeno the Emperor interposed with Hunnericus the King of
the Vandals, who had invaded Africa, and Eugenius was consecrated their Bishop;
and this the London Ministers have observed to our hands in their Divine right
of the Evangelical Ministry, cap. 5. page 80. with what Zeal, and how many
Miles some have traveled for Episcopal Ordination; and that our Neighbors in
Scotland did not do the same, admitting what is pretended, that once they had
only Presbyters among them, I could never yet meet with any thing to convince
us. Sure I am their having none of their own, does not imply they used none,
the instances above given refute a necessity of that, or if they did not, but
consecrated one another, such as urge it a Pattern to all Christian Churches,
ought first to have given the world Satisfaction, that it was not their
imperfection, their guilt, and indeed Insolency and Usurpation in so doing: But
when Musaeus and Eutichianus who were no Bishops, had ordained, and Gaudentius
the Bishop of the place, did contend to have their Ordinations valid and
confirmed, by that Synod, and gave the very same reason why it should be
confirmed, because at that time Troubles and Seditions were many, and there
seemed a necessity for what they had done, his Reasons were not accepted of;
Necessity and other accidents do plead for, and excuse what is only
uncanonical, but where want of Power in general, it does not. And Hosius that
most Holy and Reverend Bishop stood up and publicly declared in the Council,
that we ought indeed all to be quiet and meek, and to contend for it; but
neither Eutichianus nor Musaeus were Bishops, had any Power at all for what
they pretended, and therefore their Consecration was invalid, and themselves
were only to be admitted into Lay Communion; of all which who so pleases may
have an account, Can. 18, 19. Conc. Sardic. with the Scholia's of Balsamon and
Zonaras, and the Annotations of William Beveridge; these are certain Rules,
Habere namque aut tenere Eccelsiam nullo modo potest, qui Ordinatus in Ecclesia
non est; he cannot any ways have or hold a Place in the Church, who is not
ordained in the Church, Cypr. Ep. 76. Sine successione Sacerdotum totus ordo
cadit, without a succession of Priests, the whole Order falls. St. Jerome, lib.
2. adv. Lucifer. Tom. 3. (...), where the Succession is cut off, a
Communication of the Holy Ghost cease, Can. 1. St. Basilii ad Amphilochium,
apud Pandect. Can. Beveridg.

Fratres dicuntur and habentur qui unum Deum patrem agnoverunt, unum spiritum
biberunt sanctitatis qui de uno utero ignorantiae ejusdem ad unam lucem
expaverunt veritatis, as Tertullian describes the incorporation Apol. cap. 30.
Christians are called and accounted Brethren who have acknowledged one God and
Father, who have drank of one Spirit of holiness, who have broke through with
astonishment one Womb of Ignorance, into one Light and Truth. I do not know how
better to give an account of this Kingdom of Christ than in the answer of those
Kindred of our Saviors to Domitian the Tyrant, related by Eusebius Eccl. hist.
l. 3. c. 20. Domitian was afraid of Christ's Kingdom as Herod had been before
him; he had the same apprehension that still is in the World, derived from most
excellent Presidents Herod and Domitian, that Christ's Kingdom and Caesar's
could not stand together; whereupon such Christ's Kindred, were summoned and
accused as of the stock of David; who upon demand, acknowledging they were so,
and giving an account of their Meanness and Poverty as to this World, and
showing their hands which were hard and callous, with the assiduity of labor
for a daily sustenance, and not to be suspected to be Invaders of the Kingdoms
here, they were at length demanded concerning Christ and his Kingdom what the
nature and quality of it was? and when, and in what places he was to appear?
and to which they also answered, (...), etc. that Christ's Kingdom is not of
this world or earthy, but heavenly and Angelical; to be accomplished in the
conclusion of Ages, when coming in Glory he shall Judge the living and the
dead, and retribute to every one according to his works.

IN the mean time, and till such his Personal ignorant of the Reasons of such
God's terrible Proceedings at the end of the World, that Fire and Brimstone in
Hell, as they are of the nature of his Church and Association, its Rules and
Laws and Discipline here on Earth And our Savior therefore and then personally
and bodily afflicts for ever; because his Moral spiritual Laws, his Church
Injunctions, so often urged, have been believed on these men's Principles, to be
of no account, to have no edge or force, because no present destruction of the
flesh, nothing sensible restraining or coercing, had they been received and
obeyed, as in the design from God, such his fearful doom had never reached
them: and to contend that the Ecclesiastical Church Power is now none at all
because not such as at that great Day, or not the same as of a secular Judge at
an Assize, to send to Prison, Whip, or put to Death; is with the same Argument
to contend, that there is no force or obligation in any one, o^ all the Gospel
moral Precepts either, whose utmost return, by way of outward Penalty* upon
such as received them not, was to cas^ off the dust of their Shoes upon them;
As the Seventy we know were by our Savior alon^ enjoined, who had neither
Whips or Axe^ Goals nor Gallows committed unto them, wh^ could only deny them
the advantage of tha^ Gospel which themselves refused, when it was Preached
unto them. To say Church Power can be none at all upon this score, is to deny
all Evangelical Power, for present Judgment is not there speedily executed, and
the Law of Love and Virtue are alike precarious, and of no Authority and
Jurisdiction that is engaging, as are the Laws Ecclesiastical, if their reason
be good they give against the latter; because voluntary in the submission to,
and acceptance of them, and no one is forced, except he please, to covenant at
first; or if he does covenant, he is as much free from all outward force,
whether he pleased or not, to put his part in practice, he may renounce and
rescind it at his liberty. Surely no Cords tie, no Irons bind, like those that
enter into the Soul, whether it be by Love or Fear, by Punishments or Rewards,
by the Comforts and Hopes of the one, or the Terrors and Consternations of the
other; a wounded Conscience who can bear? its burdens are insupportable, and
which comes not by Weights and Engines, inventions of Man, pressing and
over-powering (and according to the Principles of these men there can be no
other) but by reflex actions, and a sense of nonperformance of Duty, and the
horrid black guilt annexed, from a sense of that loss, which like the
Conscience it self is spiritual, and which over-bears and overrules, very often
to the neglecting of the flesh, to the undergoing any Tortures and Cruciatings
of the Body, as we know despairing Persons do; when, as with Esau, the Blessing
is sought, and it is too late, there is no room for Repentance; but which is not
the first and immediate punishment and burden, and surely a sense of Duty
performed; and the Expectations of a good man are no less binding on the other
side, ^ngage and tie the Soul, that is not feared with an hot iron, is sensible
and considering; and he that believes and is fully possessed, that without the
Pale of the Church, if not a Member of this Body and Association, as above
described, there is no Gospel advantages here, nor life hereafter, no other way
revealed to us by God in his Word to follow and adhere unto; he needs no other
Motive and Bo^d, for his keeping within this Pale, for his submission to the
Laws and Discipline of it; and if any one does not believe it, he is to be
dealt with, as those are, that say the flames of Hell are painted also, that
deny the reality and truth of those eternal Punishments: and it is the great
folly of those men* who first suppose there can be no Association but by
outward ties, and then upon this begged Principle of their own, conclude
against this of the Church, and which is only spiritual. The sum of this
Section is this, if the Church on Earth has no Power, because no outward
coercion, neither has any one instance of the Gospel; if these Men's reasons
conclude any thing. And Mr. Hobb^ is to be done thus much right in the case,
that he speaks so like an Honest man, that is to one that is true to his
Principles; and all along asserts, That the New Testament is only Canonical and
Law, as made so by the Civil Magistrate; and to say it is a Law in any place,
where the Law of the Commonwealth has not made it so, is contrary to the
Nature of a Law; and more particularly, as to the present point in hand, that
the Decrees of the Council at jerusalem, Acts 15.28. were no more Laws, than
are those other Precepts, Repent, be Baptized, keep the Commandments, believe
the Gospel, come unto me, sell all that thou have, give it to the Poor, and
follow me; which are not Commandments, but Invitations and Callings of Men to
Christianity, -- the Kingdom which they acknowledged, and to which they
invited, being not present but to come; and they that have no Kingdom, can make
no Laws; nor did any sin in not receiving the Doctrines of Christ. All which is
to be read with more to the same purpose in his Leviathan, Part 3. cap. 42. Of
Power Ecclesiastical.

NOR are they less out of the way, when and which as the sense of the Primitive
and first Christians is clear, by the account that is given of the Kindred of
our Savior in the abovementioned place of Eusebius, of the constant course of
their Tribute, out of the assiduity of their labor, and lower condition in the
World, they paid unto Caesar, no one relation to Christ, as not of the Flesh,
so nor of the Spirit, either as Men or Christians, giving but any show of Title
unto the Government that is Civil, or of exemption from any one Tax or
Imposition by that Government laid upon them, a Truth that has been opened,
illustrated and deduced down through this Discourse, and in some competent
measure, so as to satisfy upon a rational enquiry, and it may be farther
cleared up, and rendered more easy and convincing yet, to a due understanding,
if the several acts and offices of this Body the Church be resumed again in
their distinct Considerations; and it will farther appear, that these Powers,
as they never have in Matter of Fact, so in their Nature and Constitution, they
do not any ways impinge upon, much less silence and depose, any ways justle
with and usurp, those Powers that are Secular; let us run them over, as in
their order already set down.

Hobbs with great industry and pains does collect and prove, and it is what is
owned by him as reconcilable with our obedience to the civil Magistrate, be he
Christian, or Infidel; for their Faith is internal and invisible, as he goes on
and tells us, they have the license that Naaman had, and need not put
themselves into danger for it, Leviathan, Part 3. cap. 43. or admitting
farther, and which Christianity surely obliges to, that public Professions of
this Faith are to be made, (and for this the several Creeds, as the Apostles,
etc. were drawn up, open Confessions of them were made, and Subscriptions to
them, to the incurring of danger from the Civil Power) they only hereby engaged
themselves to suffer, to dye, and become in that signal manner Martyrs and
Witnesses for and of them at the stake, but never so to oppose, as to rebel, in
the defense and maintenance of them; there was nothing there believed and
professed, or from any other Obligation or Contract that did engage them so to
do.

THEY next covenanted against Sin and etc. and was of old and is still, a
particular Act of this Christian Body or Association, as in the Covenant at
Baptism; nor is any one any farther a Christian than he performs it: and this
cannot by Malice it self be termed a covenanting against the Prince, or his
Power. None are indeed and thoroughly good Subjects but such as are good
Christians; thus vow, and pay. Evil manners abate of a just sense and
Conscience of Justice and Honesty; the Prince cannot have of such men so full a
security of their due and true Allegiance and Fidelity to him; why should they
be more true to him than they are to their God? and besides, they expose the
Government to his Wrath and Vengeance. And it is not upon this account the late
Solemn League and Covenant, was adjudged by the public Authority of the Nation
to be injurious to the State, as engaging to Repentance, and to be burnt by the
common Hangman.

Jeremy in the Dungeon, or where two or three are met together, God will be
with them; but the daily Sacrifice cannot wholly be abolished till Days and
Nights are no more; should I say they are to be longer, and to remain in
Heaven, it were not amiss, to be sure the Praises will, and why not the
Prayers? so far at least as a signal acknowledgment of our dependency upon God,
the Perfection of that State, and full growth we there arrive unto, does not
invest us with any of those first and nearest of God's attributes, and which
are therefore called incommunicable, as peculiar to his Essence, and
particularly those of Self-existency and Independency, his Autarchy and
All Sufficiency, and which Duties, if discharged, as required by God on Earth,
imply and enjoin our acknowledgment and obedience, as to our God, so to our
Prince, in his distinct relations to us, and that by all the ties and
obligations, the performance of so solemn a Duty, as Prayer and Praises are,
can lay upon us, least found perfidious Hypocrites, and unfaithful to our God,
as all that are false to their King in the long run will appear so to God
Almighty: the very Form and Nature of our Prayers and Praises run so; that
therein we are first to Pray and give Thanks for Kings, and there, and in that
most solemn manner, own them, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. a Rebbel cannot say his Prayers
at all, but in the very action publish himself a Rogue, if saying them as St.
Paul has appointed, so as acceptable to God our Savior. It Is true this Duty is
not with the same Circumstances performed as are the two former, it requires
personal local uniting, and which if without the Permission of the Prince, may
be termed Sedition or Riot, or, if against his Commands, Rebellion; or whatever
criminal Characters the present Laws put upon such like Conventions; the first
Christians therefore, when under those harder Necessities, by the severer
Edicts of the Heathen Emperors, went still to pray out of the Cities, met
before day and in the Woods; and when discovered and impleaded, 'twas alone the
great and tried innocence of both their Religion and Persons was their advocate
and rescue, as in the days of Traj^n the Emperor, who occasioned particular
search to be made into them, and such their Assemblies, or else they did it
with more privacy, abating of their Numbers in particular Meetings, as less
discerned; or if discerned, less offensive and obnoxious, not so liable to
jealousies of State, and suspicions; or if this did not do, and gain a
connivance, as many times it did not, they then became Martyrs and Suffered,
whether by Confiscation of Goods or Banishment of their Persons, by the Prison
or Death, as they were appointed to it, and engaged to undergo, for their Faith
it self, and the Profession of Christianity; there was no Pleas for exemptions
of their Persons from such the Laws, because Christians, as if beyond their
inspection, and above their Punishments. And St. Cyprian Ep. 7. blames
particular Christians, that when under interdict, returned home again without
the leave of that Government by which exiled, Et deprehensi jam, non quasi
Christiani, sed quasi nocentes, pereant, as bringing guilt with such their
Punishments on their Heads; there was no other strivings, or struglings in the
Streets, unless for their last Breath, when upon the Racks, and by other
Cruelties. As their case was every ways like that of the Prophet Daniel, so was
their behavior too, and the most open inhibition, and most severe, as to
Penalties, must not cease the daily Sacrifice and Praises of God Almighty, they
still owned their Religion and their God its Author, and so they did their
Prince in his due Subordination; praying with such their last Breath for him.
There was no Arms, nor one Shield of the Mighty, but Prayers and Tears; and the
late Field Conventicles and Rendevouzes of Rebellion were in those days unheard
of.

THAT these Christians by a common Shot Paul, that every one give as his God
has prosper'd him, readily and of a willing mind; nor is it, can it be, against
any Law, any ways blameworthy, when fixed on due ends and objects, when
designed for, and dispended on, only the Poor and Indigent; but when preferred
to and justling out of doors acts of Justice and Equity, when set up and
practiced against, always necessary and immutable Duties, and against which
these Christians always provided, their own Fulminations, or Church Censures,
by way of Penance, and correction still proceeded upon any defect or perverser
design discovered, and 'twas their abhorrency; and so ought the Secular Power
to animadvert, and proceed in its courses of Restraint, Coercion, Seizures,
Confiscations, or whatever is the ways and Methods the present Government in
such cases instructs and enables them to. Though where the Church is in the
Commonwealth, as it is now, that the Civil Polity is Christian; this case
cannot so usually fall out, as it did before the days of Constantine, a common
maintenance being provided for such by Law, and the case as to the general, is
now none at all.

was it not thine own? and in thine own Power? as St. Peter argues with Ananias
on the like occasion, no motives from Christianity tend to any thing of force,
or lay any outward Coercion, as not to the Persons, so nor on the Estates of
any; their Goods are equally their own, as are all their other lawful Rights
and Properties, after their coming in to be Christians as before; every man is
to abide in that calling, state or advantage as to this World, in which he was
called, if not sinful; 'twas their own hands and hearts did offer and dedicate
their Goods to the Service of the Church; they still remained in their own
Power, and they might, for any restraint as to their Profession, or relating to
any such particular Church Endowments, use them, as all men may their own, to
what end they please; if not to the prejudice of their Prince, or their
Neighbor. And so far were these first Christians and their Church
Contributions and religious Enfeoffments from being suspected of bringing
damage, or but any one incommodiousness to either, that I do not remember any
one thing like a charge of that nature, drawn up against them for it; though
great Sums of Money were brought in to this purpose, and the Church had great
Possessions in the time of the Heathen Emperors, and which the Empire confirmed
sometimes to the Church, by its Princely Edicts; as Aurelius did in particular
in the case of Paulus Samosetanus, and which is abovementioned; or if at any
time they were suspected, as by their Apologies and Remonstrances in their own
behalf it may be inferred, and their Church-Houses and Gardens, their Patrimony
alone might be their Crime, as what too usually falls out; nor was they
altogether free from violences, as appears by the Restaurations made by
Constantine, at his Possession of the Empire: and which is also above noted;
they then not only made public such their Protestations, but their Practice
too, to the contrary, and which avouched and vindicated their innocence. So
Justin Martyr, in his Apology to Antoninus for the Christians, (...), we only
Worship God, Confessing Kings and Governors of Men; and praying for them. So
again Athenagoras in his Embassy for the Christians, (...), etc. and if it so
falls out that we are accused, as doing injustice to any more or less, we
refuse not to be punished; we are worthy of it in the highest Nature. And
Justin Martyr again in his Epistle ad Diognetum, speaks of the Christians in
general (...), they obey their appointed Laws, and by their exacter Life's and
stricter Conversations, go beyond the Laws, supererogate and are more perfect
than their Rules require, or Sanctions enjoin them. To which I Will add that of
Octavius to Cecilianus in Minutius Faelix, De nostro numero carcer exaestuat,
Christianus ibi nullus est nisi aut reus suae Religionis aut Profugus; your
Prisons swarm, the Walls will scarce contain them; but there is no Christian,
unless Runawaies, and Desertors of their Religion; and when we assert the
divine Right of Titles, and that God himself assigned and separated such a
Portion of the goods of the Earth for the maintenance of the Evangelical
Priesthood also, and which Sanction is to endure together with the Kingdom, and
to take away this is to rob God, we do not then maintain them with any such
Clause in the Charter or Conveyance, warranting and enabling a forcible violent
Entry, as in the usual cases of Right and Property upon dispossession; that
Power St. Paul speaks of, as to Eat and to Drink not, to work with our hands,
but to live upon the Gospel, and which we believe to descend with the Gospel,
is together with holy Orders invested in him, is quite another thing, and
neither implies nor supposes Power like it; it is bottomed only on the Grounds
and Reasons of our Association, nor has it any other motives but those which
make us Christians, and which did not at all depend on outward force. Hence it
was, till the world came into the Church, that the Priesthood was maintained by
what every one offered, upon the forementioned inducements; and as he that
denied this maintenance to him that served at the Altar, was supposed still to
deny withal his Faith, and place in the Body of Christians; and suitably is it
with the greatest equity and proportion of things, still the continued Practice
of the Christian Courts, to Excommunicate or cut off such an one from the
Church Communion; so neither could they which saw no reason why themselves
should become Christians, be supposed to be convinced, by other reasons, of the
necessity of maintaining those who claimed no other right for the maintenance,
than their Preaching and Publishing such that Religion. And therefore when upon
withholding of Tithes, or the Churches Revenue, we proceed farther than
Excommunication, to Personal Confinement; or whatever outward restraint, we
have no Warrant or Power for this, but from the Prince, and the Laws of the
Land alone enable us to do it. It Is true, to have a Body or Government in it
self distinct and apart from that which is Secular, and with its own
obligations for maintenance, which way soever it arises, but more especially
when from so prevailing a motive and engagement, as that which makes men
Christians, and entitles them to Eternity, to have their own bank or stock, to
what ends or on what Persons soever erogated and expended, it matters not,
whether on their Poor, or on their Clergy, (to which add the Power to assemble
for religious Worship, upon the same Considerations) is what may carry some
appearance for Suspicions and Jealousies from the State, and advantages are
possible to be taken for undermining and overthrowing of it, upon each
occasion; a Government, indeed, ought to be watchful, and jealous in such
Cases; Premunires, Eschetes and Confiscations, are but due and equitable
Provisions, as by Law assigned; that surely is a very unsafe Rule, I find among
other as bad, laid down by Mr. Dean in his Sermon, in a case not very unlike to
this in hand, He that acknowledges himself to derive all his Authority from God,
can pretend to none against him. Unless we will suppose there can be no Cheats
nor Hypocrites, double dealings in the World; or that a power or trust duly
received, cannot be abused and estranged; such as designedly Act against God,
pretend mostly to his Authority, and often have it really in them. And the truth
is, nothing but the peculiar constitution of this Christian Body or
Incorporation, could have then by any one been permitted, as it was by some
before Constantine, or now be pleaded for, whose humble, innocent, peaceable
temper and complexion, as above described, was so undoubted and notorious, in
every instance experienced, whose very essence was obedience, whose design of
making good Christians, was to make them good Subjects; the very Plot of the
Gospel was in part this, that Government be every ways preserved and entire,
administering new Motives and Arguments for it, and that Princes if possible be
more Sovereign and Glorious thereby; whatever the Gospel Preaches and Commands
is all along with a just regard, and even subordination to it, But then again
since thus it is by the Blessings and Providence of God, that Kings and Queens
themselves are become Nursing Fathers and Mothers of the Church, since our
Church Doors are set wide open by their command, our Revenues in our hands, at
the public disposal of our Bishops, to which is superadded their own Royal
Bounty and Endowments, together with more from the Piety of others their
Subjects, and eminent Christians among us, and all by Law Established and
Confirmed unto us, as the rest of our Tenures; still to plead the example of
the Primitive Christians, who were under no one of these Advantages, to keep a
part in distinct Assemblies, to make Privy Purses and Fonds, brings such as
practice it under as great a suspicion of Hypocrisy, and private ill-laid
designs as those first Christians were notorious for their integrity when so
doing and unsuspected; not only that Government under which they live, but all
good Christians have ground enough for jealousy of their underhand, indirect
purposes, to implead and seize on the one hand, and to admonish and censure on
the other, as Delinquents; no one consideration of State can countervail the
Damage, a toleration or connivance of such may bring unto it; nothing can
justify the Practice it self, but that alone which was pleaded by the
Primitive Christians, and was their real case; that the Association and
Assemblies of Christians, for the Profession and Service of the Gospel must
cease and fall without so doing; that Christianity it self cannot otherwise
stand, and which our supposal overthrows, as to any such Pleas now adays; nor
indeed dare any of our Dissenters openly say it.

Preaching the Gospel, in the due sense of it, in opposition to a false
Religion, whether by an extraordinary Commission and justified by Miracles; or
as ordinary Pastors of the Church, (for it is all one as to the Gospel it self,
which is the same which way soever Preached) is said to be an affront and
contempt to the Magistracy and Law. As again in Dr. Tillotson's Sermon, it
being quite contrary, and to Preach Christ crucified, is to honor, profess and
maintain whatever is in Magistracy and Law; nor is it truly Preached, but when
in a due dependency upon them: And if the Jesuits practice be otherwise, and
he deposes Kings to propagate his Faith, Mr. Dean's Observation ought there to
have been limited and fixed; and not to have drawn so universal a Rule, so
notoriously making way for the silencing the Gospel for ever; if a false
Religion be once by Law in that particular Kingdom or Nation, or if to be
imagined, over the whole World established, because no way supposed to publish
it, but by the affront and contempt of the Magistracy and Law; but this is too
usual a course of too many in the world, who if they can but show their Zeal,
and produce a present popular Argument against a Jesuit, they consider not the
common Christianity which is most certainly destroyed by it; as indeed all
Church Power on this supposal is gone; nor ought it to be pretended to amongst
the purest and most Catholic Professors (I might say, there can be no
Professors at all) which have no more extraordinary Commissions, nor are they
any other ways justifiable by Miracles, than we believe the Jesuits; and sure
we are to boot, that Men of these Principles will never invade the offices of
an Apostle or Evangelist, to go forth and convert Nations, be first Setlers of
the Gospel among them. The other instances of this Power, is to administer the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper; the one admits and enters into this
Body upon the terms of the Gospel, and farther engages by that Vow and
Stipulation there contracted in order to a secure Performance; The other
accepts of, owns, confirms and revives it. So often as we approach that Holy
Table, and no Justice of Peace in the Parish ever yet suspected that his
Pastor, when officiating in these Administrations entered into, and laid the
grounds of a Plot or Engagement against his but confined and lesser
Jurisdiction in the County. These Protestations, Covenants and Engagements were
never concluded Illegal, nor such their practice, State Usurpations.

for holy living, and satisfaction enjoined by the Confessor, to take any
Place, to have any force upon the Penitent or Candidates Conscience, if the
Performance be inconsistent with, and thwarts any one Duty, by any one of the
forementioned relations arising, if common-fidelity, Justice, or Charity be
excluded thereby in any one instance of them, or any be contracted against
humane Converse and Society. And the tenth Canon of the Apostles forbids to
Pray with an excommunicate Person, but permits to have converse with him; the
less is still to submit to the greater obligation: And the World with its
Necessities, I, and Conveniences too, is always considered; there can be no
compensations which infers omissions in another kind, especially where the Duty
neglected is more obliging; nor is the Arrearage paid by a differing Debt
contracted. And by the like Rules also is Excommunication it self to he
limited, upon the very same terms has it its assigned force and efficacy; and
which, as of it self, neither invests with, nor deprives of any earthy Goods,
any one instance of Wealth, Power or Dominion; so is it to he executed alone in
compliance with the Necessities of Mankind, with those Laws of that Body and
Society to which, as Men, they stand related; this Discipline cannot it be
either a Contempt or Affront to the Magistracy or Law; and then too, when all
this is, as it ought to be, duly observed, as to these generals, a great deal
is left to the prudence and discretion of the Instrument, it is pursued only on
rational Grounds and Motives, and the effect to be considered, with the best
foresight, which, as is already showed, is not always immediate and
irresistible; the advantage or disadvantage is to be weighed, whether as to
particular Persons, or as to Public. And therefore this instance of the Power
of the Keys, though deputed to every one that is ordained a Presbyter; yet by
Church Laws and usuage, upon Prudence and Prediscernment, the execution is
limited, and the Bishop only has it, or some other in special deputation from
him, to that particular purpose, and since the Empire became Christian, the
Laws of it have prescribed, and gave limits to the Bishops themselves, as to
Persons, and the reasons of their Excommunications, and which the Church in
good Ages of it did own and comply with. There were many other notorious
offenders in the Church of Corinth, and deserved St. Paul's Animadversions too,
as well as that one incestuous Corinthian, who alone was there Excommunicated
by him. Long aliter ista, long aliter vitiosa curanda and sananda est
multitudo; but the proceeding against a multitude is to be of another Nature,
than that against one single notorious Sinner; a Schism may be occasioned, and
the Wheat be pulled up with so many Tares, and instead of curing the Distemper
it spread farther; as St. Austin, Tom. 7. Post. Collat. lib. cont. Donatist.
cap. 20. and we read in Socrates his Church History, l. 4. cap. 23. of one
Arsenius, that he never did exercise his Discipline upon, and separate from
their Society; a Monk that was a Novice, and not of much continuance in the
Fraternity, though he might for his offenses deserve it; and his reason is,
that the utmost course or excommunication, might render such an one but the
more obstinate; 'twas only those that had experienced the advantage of their
Communion for a good while, would be sensible of the loss, be apprehensive of
the sorrow and burden of it; and that all Excommunications were not to take
effect, in the first times of the Church, we have Origin for an example, who
when excommunicated by Demetrius, with the assistance of other Bishops,
continued still a Presbyter, and publicly associated as such. And Vallesius
annot. in Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c. 23. gives these two Reasons for it, because his
Sentence was denounced when absent, and he had not legal Citations, and it was
not confirmed by the Bishop of Rome; though to me a more probable reason may be
given than either, for the illegality of the proceeding and the no effect it
had, the ancient Canons of the Church still forbidding any one of the
hieratical Order, whether Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon, to be excommunicated.
Excommunication was the Punishment for the Laity; the Clergies was Deposition;
nor were the Clergy subject to the other, till removed from the Priesthood. And
certainly then much less can it be conceived in reason, and as agreeable with
the common courses of foresight and discretion, that other things are managed
in the Gospel with, that this Ordinance should on such terms be instituted and
put in execution as to reach Kings themselves, and with less regard and
consideration, than to Persons in Holy Orders, and be concluded more
peremptorily and immediately to take effect upon them, as if inconveniences,
and that overbalance whatever the proposed advantage may be, may not here be
a consequent also. Princes, it is true, are equally subject to the Laws of
Christ and his Church, and they must come to Heaven in the same Path that the
meanest of their Subjects do come in; they are to be urged and taught
publicly, as are others, and particularly in private, and where due
opportunity to be severely warned of; but then upon a supposed failure to
proceed to an open public Exclusion; this, if in any one instance else, ought
first to be weighed and considered, whether it be likely to have due effect, to
be for the good of the Church in general, which his outward arm alone can
protect? and whether instead of reducing him as to his Person, it may not much
more harden him, and especially since his Person falls under no farther
Coercion, than his engagements to Christianity lay upon him. Examples of Kings
are strangely influential and prevailing, and whether a greater deluge of
Profaneness may not be let in by so doing? or again, whether the exposing him
to shame and contumely, would not withal expose his reputation to the contempt
of his People; and thus not only Religion and Morality, but the outward Peace
and Quiet of the Realm might be exposed to danger, and the both Church and
State be liable to inrodes and violence thereby, we believe it to be what was
appointed by God, and supposed by our Savior, in the lay and frame of our
Christianity, that the Secular Power receive no abatement; but on the contrary,
every of its Prerogatives be strengthened, by its spreading over and reception
in the World. Since every other relation is to continue and be obliging, so
also must this of Kings, which came into the World with the first, is connate
and coaevous with Paternity, the Foundation was laid for both at once, and
Kings and Subjects are to remain so long as Fathers and Children, the race of
Mankind is on Earth continued; and suitably to this first contrivance, no
sooner did the Empire come in to the Church, and engage in Christianity, but
Emperors declared themselves, and the Church joyfully received them for its
Nursing Father, and the Prince is the Supreme Governor there, the Laws and
Judicatures are the Kings, and our Bishops give Citations in their own Names,
but by an antecedent Power derived from, and by the Prince devolved unto them.
And the Bishops of old, were so far from assuming to themselves any such
outward Coercive Power, as to make Citations of men's Persons, to proceed by
Court Process and Penal Mulcts, that when they laid the Plot for Lay-Deputies,
Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, or whatever title they went under, to sit
in their Courts, and give occasional Judgments (for what private reasons I
cannot tell, but the pretended is this, that it was less decent that they being
Spiritual Persons should mingle themselves in Secular Affairs.) they could not
constitute such their Deputies, nor erect such an Order, but by a special Grant
and Seal from the Emperor (a firm Argument that the Power was not originally
theirs) and they suitably supplicate him in order to it, and he yields to their
demand, but gives a Caution that the Church be not dammaged thereby, a thing in
course to be suspected; and perhaps the advantage the Church has since had,
that the Courts for her Justice are the Bishops, and her Causes fall not
immediately under a Secular Cognitor, are so little and inconsiderable, that
though the first Piety and royal Indulgence is apparent; yet the present
benefit is hardly discernible at this day among us, Vid. Cod. 16. Theodos. Tit.
2. l. 38. and the Story is to be seen at large in the Commentaries of Jacob
Gothos^red upon that Law. And can we now with any show of Reason suppose that
in the design of our Savior, and the execution of Church Power, no regard is
to be had to the Prince, and that Proceedings are to be alike as upon other
Persons and promiscuously, though all so far under the same Circumstances, as
equally Members of the same Association for Heaven? Those rules of Policy which
were contrived, complied with, and submitted to in the first planting the
Gospel, seem not consistent with such an after-practice, a Presbyter was not to
be Excommunicated till first deposed, and yet then shall each single Presbyter
Excommunicate his Prince? I do not say till deposed, as was by the ancient
Canons the Presbyter to be, and then Excommunicated, for that is what no Power
on Earth can do, and the Church of God never pretended to it, 'twas what she
always abhorred; but that the Considerations must needs weigh more, and be much
rather cogent; that the censure go not out against a Prince, and greater
inconveniences must hence follow, whatever they were the ancient Church did
apprehend to be a consequent to the other, and the common foresight of things
could not also allow it. The single Corinthian was Excommunicated by St. Paul,
when the whole Body of them, each one full of iniquity had not the like
Animadversions from him; and what may not be connived at in him who is more
than ten thousand? and by which there is less Security that the edge of the
censure will not be more abated and dulled thereby? in whom is all Strength and
Power, in whose hand it is to expose all to the malice and violence of the
Enemy, to reduce the Church so near to the first state under the Heathens, and
which condition, though it is rather to be hazarded, then to comply with and
imbody into us any thing that is sinful, even to gain a Protection for other
instances of Virtue and Duty; yet nothing but that which strikes at Religion it
self, will engage or be a Warrant to proceed in this extreme, utmost way upon
him, whose alone is the outward Coercive Power, and who can weild his Sword at
pleasure, deny the Church that support, countenance and assistance, which our
Savior designed Religion should outwardly flourish under, be in some respects
propagated and preserved by, become more notoriously visib^e and conspicuous to
all Nations. And what is said of Excommunication and other Church censures, is
to be said of Absolution, which though a Power enstated alone in the Priesthood
by Christ; yet is not to be executed in an Arbitrary way, and that not only as
to the Laws of Christ, but the Laws of Kingdoms also, in many cases, especially
where Christian. I Will end this Section and Head of Discourse in the words of
our Learned Dr. Hammond in his Book of the Power of the Keys, Cap. 1. Sect. 1.
The Power of binding and loosing, is only an Engine of Christ's invention to
make a Battery or impression upon the obdurate Sinner, to win him to himself,
to bless not triumph over him; it invades no part of the Civil Judicature, nor
looses the bonds thereof by these Spiritual Pretenses; but leaves the
Government of the World just in the posture it was before Christ's coming, or
as it would be supposed to be, if he had never left any Keys in his Church.

Laws Ecclesiastical or Civil are made and tend, these Church Canons are, as in
the make and obligation, so in the Practice and execution to retain that just
regard to known Duties, especially those of Allegiance, that such the other
Church acts and censures do, and as already showed. It Is true the great
transcendent regard and reverence the Empire when Christian has had for the
institution as from our Savior, for Religion it self, in whose defense the
Canons were made, and for the high Dignity and Office of the Bishops his
Commissioners, that it still has made antecedent Canons the Rule of all Laws
enacted, if relating to or but bordering upon affairs Ecclesiastical (as
instances are already produced) quas leges nostrae sequi non dedignantur,
Novel. 83. and to command contra venerabilem Ecclesiam, against the venerable
Church, Nullius est nisi Tyrannidis, cujus actus omnes rescinduntur, is reputed
as the Act of a Tyrant, and such Acts are nulled, Cod. Justin. l. 1. Tit. 2.16.
nay farther, Canones, ubi agitur de re Ecclesiastica, jure civili sunt
preferendi; and if the Canon and Civil Laws, those of the Church and the State,
have happened to be different and in competition, in any Ecclesiastical case,
the Canons have took place and obliged, as in that Code and Title Sect. 6. and
their general care and industry was mostly for these, as the Determinations
more immediately for the good of their Souls, Novel. 137. but this was from the
greater Indulgence and Grace of the Christian Emperors, and in particular
cases, and it cannot be supposed that the Church should designedly set up her
Bishops and Laws, above or in opposition to that Government which the frame of
their Religion includes, in Subordination to, and by Protection of which it was
to be propagated and preserved; but of this we shall have occasion anon to
consider farther. And if it be replied, that a Council cannot be convened or
meet at all, without the Prince's Grant, at least his Letters of leave, and how
then can they have any Authority independent? or should they otherwise assemble,
they are reputed Seditious, Disturbers of the Peace, and of Majesty, and
punishable; as is the Law imperial 16. Cod. Theodos. Tit. 1. l. 3. To this I
answer, neither can they, nor ought they, nor did ever any Christian Council
otherwise unite in their Persons, then by the Grant and Letters Imperial; and
that censure was just, if any did otherwise attempt it. But then it is farther
to be considered, that the form, essence and force of a Council, that which
gives a right for Sanctions, and invests with Authority Ecclesiastical, is not
their local personal meeting, as in one place, there convocated and sitting;
but a joynt-enquiry and resolution as to the Truth's debated, and concurrency
as one man in the Laws enacted, upon the true Motives and Reasons of Faith and
the Gospel, as by Tradition transmitted, or in Discipline, for Government and
Peace useful, and which may be done by the Bishops and Clergy dissite, and in
diverse Countries by their Letters Missive and Communicatory, those Literae
signatae or systaticae, or circular Epistles to one another, and which has been
done under diverse Circumstances, and when the state of the Church was so low,
and its Capacities not enabling her to do it otherwise, as is plain from Church
Story and Practice; and that this was the course of the Church's it is more than
probable, when that debate arose about the keeping of Easter, an account of
whose Epistles we have, appearing to this purpose, given us by Eusebius, Eccl.
Hist. l. 5. c. 23.

AND lastly, that this Church Power is derived Leviathan scruples not to say,
That they all derive their Offices and Power only from the Prince, and are but
his Ministers, in the same manner as Magistrates in Towns, Judges in Courts of
Justice, and Commanders in Armies are; and his account, why they must be so,
is, because the Government could not be secure upon other terms. If the
Soveraignity in the Pastor over himself and his People be allowed of, it
deprives the Magistrate of the Civil Power, and his Peoples dependency would be
on such their Doctors, both in respect of the opinion they have of their Duty
to them, and the fear they have of Punishment in another World, Part 3. Cap.
42. but this mistake of his has been enough discovered all along in this
Treatise, and will be more hereafter; and he will suppose no Power to be, but
what is outwardly Coercive; and for his two Reasons he gives, they are no less
apt and ill placed, for that Duty and Obedience Christians are engaged in by
St. Paul, and suitably owe to their Doctors, them that are set over them in the
Lord, reaches no farther than does their Commission, which is only in order to
Heaven, and fear of Punishment in another World, arises in a particular manner,
from their Rebellion and Disobedience to Princes; this is one of the Sins is
there to be Punished; and for Church-mens being no less subject to Ambition and
Ignorance than any other sort of men, which he adds for another reason, nothing
in particular can justly be inferred from it, because others are equally liable
to them, and which he does not deny.

CHAP. V. Chap. 5.

The Contents.
The grand Objection out of Mr. Hobbes, if these two Powers command the same
Person at the same time inconsistent Performances; it arises from that false
Principle, that all Power is outward, Sect. 1.

This infers equally against the Laws of God, and which may and do sometimes
thus interfere, are as difficultly reconcilable with the State acts. No Church
Laws oblige against Natural Duty. The Laws of Religion considered at large in
order to a clearer solution, Sect. 2.

Mr. Hobbe's Rule will Answer all; Consider what is, and what is not necessary
to Eternal Salvation, Sect. 3.

The same is the Rule of the Ancient Fathers, Sect. 4.

If Mr. Hobbes his Faith and Obedience be all that is Necessary, it is then
easily determined; because to obey only the Sovereign, Sect. 5.

Dr. Tillotson his Sermon of Love and Peace to his Yorkshire Countrymen, not
to be Vindicated from being herein of Hobbe's Judgment; in what he Dissents
from him. No Church Power, since Miracles, ceased; according to Mr. Dean, Sect.
6.

The Gospel calls for Confession and Obedience, in Opposition to, though not in
Contempt of, Princes; to the hazard of all. So the best Christians, the worst
of Heretics; only Simon Magus, Basilides, etc. did otherwise, Sect. 7.

For a full Answer, the Laws of Religion are to be ranked under Three general
Heads; They are Arbitrary and Humane, Arbitrary and Divine, Necessary and
Divine, Sect. 8.

Laws Arbitrary and Humane, though never losing their Sanction; yet cease in
some Cases in the Execution. As when the Empire gave Indulgencies beside the
Canon, Sect. 9.

The Civil Injunction does not immediately oblige the Christian in these Cases.
The Church has her own Power, never to be yielded up; Ceremonies not the main
thing, Sect. 10.

Not to be changed with our Clothes. That Worship which is best not to be
foregone; only to yield to what is always Necessary. The Case of the Asiaticks
about Easter, Sect. 11.

Especially in our Church of England, Sect. 12.

Least of all are our Mutinies and Factions, our even weakness, a Ground for
Change, Sect. 13.

Laws Arbitrary and Divine, cease in some instances, as to Practice; the
Advantage of Afflictions. A good Christian always a good Subject; the Empire
still gave Rules and Limits in the Exercise of these Positive Duties, Sect. 14.

To submit and cease as to particular Practice, upon the lawful Command of the
Magistrate, is not the Case in Doctor Tillotson's Sermon, to give up the
Institution to him. If commanding a false Worship I am to withstand him. It Is
no Hypocrisy, though I go not into immediately, and there Preach the same in
Spain. Mr, Dean's unheard of Notion of Hypocrisy, in what Case the Magistrate
is serviceable, to promote the Faith, Sect. 15.

The last sort of Laws, both Necessary and Divine, are never to cease in any
one Instance, or under what Circumstances soever; either as to their Right or
Practice. I am never to do any one Immorality, always to own and profess the
Cross of my Savior, Sect. 16.

The great Goodness of God in giving such a Subordination of Duties, that the
end of each may be answered; in enjoining nothing absolutely necessary to
Heaven but what is in our Power; that no Contingencies of this World can take
from us our Eternity; a Reward we can never miss of without our own Faults,
Sect. 17.

THERE is but one thing now behind that Hobbs aggravates as that Kingdom
divided in it self and cannot stand, it must necessarily distract a People, and
expose them to the greatest inconveniences; it is a dividing the Sovereign
Power, here is a Supremacy against Sovereignty, Canons against Laws, a Ghostly
authority against the Civil, two Kingdoms and each Subject to, must obey two
Masters, who both will have the Commands observed as Law, which is impossible.
This he places among his other effects of an imperfect institution, is reckoned
up and urged by him among the Infirmities of a Commonwealth: nay more, as what
is, against the Essence of it, in the number of those things that weaken and
tend to its dissolution, Leviathan, Part. 2 cap. 29. And all this as objected
by Mr. Hobbs, is easily answered, and has been over and over again in this
Discourse, for it proceeds alone upon that false precarious supposition, and
pertinaciously resolved upon Principle of his, and his other Friends above
reckoned up; as Erastus, Seldom, Salmasius, etc. which have formerly perplexed
the World therewith, and still do in their Adherents. That there is no Power
but what is outwardly cogent upon men's Persons or Estates or Liberties, working
by sensible force and impressions, no other Kingdom but what is of this World,
unless a Kingdom of Fairies, in the dark, as Hobbs ridicules it, for thus he
argues against Bellarmine, and concludes his Enquiries all in vain, whether the
Power of the Pope of Rome ought to be Monarchical, Aristocratical or
Democratical; because all these Powers are Sovereign and Coercive, and
consequently none of them can belong to him as from Christ, Part 3. c. 42. And
hence he argues on in the next Section, For if the Supreme King have not his
Regal Power in this World, by what authority can Obedience be required of his
Officers? with abundance of the same almost every where. But yet, because there
appears some show of objection in the thing it self, and it may fall under some
doubt with a less, but conscientious, considering Person, whether it be likely,
and also consistent with obedience to, and the ends of Government, that two
such Powers, both obliging, should be erected over one and the same subject,
and in what case it will be that they are to obey. I shall add farther,

THAT if this Conclusion be good, That etc. are what are the appointment of
Christ, and obliging every Christian; and yet in the time of War, in order to
public Justice, by the very accidents and contingencies of man's life, do and
must come cross in Mr. Hobb's sense, and the Governments dissolution must be
also hazarded thereby; and 'twill be the same where the Gospel-Commands reach
the Imperate Acts of the Will, as they speak, or organical Duties, and which
require set times and place, and motions in the Performance; and yet these were
Sovereign Laws notwithstanding, when actually, and in their persons given by
Christ and the Apostles; then, Mr. Hobbs acknowledges them to be such, only to
be superseded on diverse Considerations, not so particularly engaging the
Performance at some times, and yet still continuing to be obliging, as in their
several designs and purposes; and none do any more. And Herod indeed, suspected
a Dissolution of the Government by it; these very Laws of God compared with one
another, as with those of the Civil Magistrate upon these men's inferences, must
cease, were unduly imposed, because they are not at all times, by reason of one
another, practicable; and it is equally impossible to Mourn and to Rejoice, to
Fast and to be Hospitable, to be upon my knees at Prayer, and to be doing
Justice on the Bench, to obey God and my King in the same Person, at one and
the same time, and in the same Duties, as to obey Sovereignty and Supremacy,
Canons and Laws, a Ghostly and a Civil Authority, and all or none; are on the
same account to be placed in opposition. If the Objection has any force, as Mr.
Hobbs thinks it has, and lays his full stress against Ecclesiastical Laws upon
it: And again, if whatever is from a due institution, and from just authority,
then looses its Sanction and Nature, is to be nulled and to cease; if upon
other Considerations suspended for some time, something more weighty, more
useful, or absolutely necessary may intervene, and it is not at that time to be
practiced and complied with; or thus, because not always practicable it ought
not to be enjoined at all, then sundry of God's own Laws must cease to oblige
and that for ever, or were unjust in their Enactions; because obliging to
practice only in their due times and circumstances. The affirmative Precepts of
the Ten Commandments themselves will fail one way or both; nor does any pretend
in his Expositions on the Decalogue, to make but sense of such those Precepts,
without first laying down that distinction of semper and ad semper,
presupposing and taking it for a truth, that, that which is always a Law, and
of it self obliging, does not actually engage to performance at every time, has
only its proper seasons for practice; if then a compromising and adjustment is
not allowed to be made in one instance, it is not in the other; and, if in any
one, it is in all; we can as easily reconcile the Laws of the Church in their
Practice with the Laws of the State, as we can the immediate Laws of God and
Christ, as we can the Laws of God with one another, and through Obedience in
every respect, is equally possible, the same humane Prudence and Discretion,
one and the same; but course of things, their Natures and Obligations
considered, will determine and adjust in one as in the other, and which not
presupposed, and made use of in all, there will be indeed, only justling and
thwarting, as to all our Obligations, and at last, (...), an Universal
Dissolution. Now in order to this, in regard to the Sovereignty and Supremacy,
Laws and Canons, Civil and Ghostly Obedience, as it is phrased, and which is at
present the particular concern; what I have already said in the former Chapter
concerning Church Censures, Penances, Excommunications, and the Canons of
Councils, and their particular Obligations, might suffice in general, and
satisfy any serious inquirer. Nothing of this nature is to be of force, if
shutting out any antecedent immutable known Duty, implying Rebellion and
Sedition, thwarting what is upon any occasional Necessity, or appearance of a
convenience, commanded by the lawful Civil Power; the Church always asserts,
owns, and pleads for Princes, and what she enjoins cannot be believed to be of
force, or by her intendment, if against them. But my purpose is to go a little
farther in compliance with this present opportunity, and to consider the Laws
of the Church, in the large acceptance, as including the Laws of Religion in
general, whether merely Humane and Ecclesiastical, or more purely and
immediately Divine, given by Christ and his Apostles in their Persons and
Instances, whether as to Positive institutions or Moral, and in regard to each
of which, what is the force and authority of a civil Command, how far it either
suspends, or disengageth; and I the rather also do it, take this latitude,
because the one when well considered, will add light, and much contribute to
the better understanding of the other; especially to the clearing of the point
of Ecclesiastical and Civil Power, their extent and obligations.

NOW in order to this, Mr. Hobbs himself But this difficulty of obeying God and
the Civil Sovereign on Earth, to those that can distinguish betwixt what is
necessary, and what is not necessary for their reception into the Kingdom of
God, is of no moment; for if the command of the Civil Sovereign be such, as
that it may be obeyed without the forfeiture of life eternal; not to obey is
unjust, and the Precept of the Apostle takes place, Servants obey your Masters
in all things; and the Precept of our Savior, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses Chair; all therefore they shall say, observe and do; but if the Command
be such as cannot be obeyed without being damned to eternal Death, then it were
madness to obey it; and the Council of our Savior takes place, ( Mat. 10.28.)
Fear not those that can kill the Body, but can kill the Soul. All men therefore
that would avoid both the Punishments that are in this World to be inflicted
for Disobedience to their earthly Sovereign, and those which shall be inflicted
in the World to come for Disobedience to God, have need to be taught to
distinguish well between what is, and what is not necessary to eternal
Salvation, Leviathan, Part 3. cap. 43.

Hobbs his Rule only, but the Rule of those who were as much better, as they
are ancienter than he; I mean the Ancient and Holy Fathers of the Christian
Church, whom we find thus laying down these distinctions of necessary and not
necessary, or rather more and less necessary, for the adjusting and determining
concerning the degrees and measures of Duty, whether to God or Man. In Clemens
Alexandrinus, we have the (...), and (...), Tenants that are Principal and of a
first Order, and others that are higher, and go beyond them, Strom. l. 6. page
675. and Lib. 4. p. 538. (...), whatever is impossible is not necessary, and
what is necessary is easy, (...), there is no want or inability to such
things, we are indispensably to do. Idem. (...), l. 2. c. 1.148. (...), Strom.
lib. 7. page 737. in the Life of Constantine by Eusebius, l. 2. c. 70, 71.
there is mentioned (...), the Head and Uppermost of the Commandments in the
Law, which will admit of no debate and demur in the assent unto them; and
(...), to the same purpose in Evagrius, Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 11. which are
Principles and not to be innovated in or dissented from, which to do is certain
Punishment, in some points a liberty to change is granted, but not in all; as
it is in that Chapter. St. Austin discourses of some things, ad ipsa fidei
pertinent fundamenta, as the foundation and support of Religion; and which if
taken away, Totum quod in Christo auferre molitur, Christianity it self is gone
with it, and in others he leaves a latitude, and good and Learned Men may
dissent about them, Lib. 1. cont. Julian. Pelag. cap. 6. and Ep. 157. ad
Optatum; and not thus to consider things is occasion of distraction among
Christians, nor can Conscience receive a just satisfaction in discharge of her
Obedience. I do not know how to express my self better than in the words of our
Learned Dr. Hammond. Sermon. on Acts 3.26. Vol. 2. There is not a more noxious
mistake, a more fatal piece of Stoicism among Christians, than not to observe
the different degrees and elevations of Sin, one of the first, another of the
second magnitude; it is the ground, to say no more, of a deal of desperate
profaneness. And it is this in particular is lamented in John Calvin by
Arnoldus Poelengburgh (one friend enough to him) that he did not apprehend and
separate inter fundamentalia and non fundamentalia, between what was
fundamental and what not; Vberiori cum fructu arduum opus reformationis
promovisset; and which had he done, his Reformation had been with much success
carried on by him, inter Ep. Eccl. page 328. Amstelodam.

BUT then what is necessary and what not, Hobs in that Chapter, and then indeed
it is easy enough done. For he tells us, All that is necessary to Salvation is
contained in two Virtues, Faith in Christ, and Obedience to Laws, and the Laws
we are to obey are only what the Civil Sovereign has made so, and the Precepts
of the Bible oblige no otherwise, then as he so commands and puts his Sanction
upon them, and this all the Obedience is necessary to salvation, and by Faith
he only means, that Jesus is the Christ; thus indeed it is not hard to
reconcile our obedience to God with our obedience to the Civil Magistrate, as
himself there very well infers, because on his terms we owe, and are to pay, no
obedience to God at all; all the faith we are not to violate, and all the Laws
we are to obey, are only this, that Commandment to obey our Civil Sovereign,
and whatever rules he assigns for our obedience, nothing upon these accounts,
can make demur, or but lay a scruple upon conscience; for the point is plain
and easy, and decided to our hands, that it is Man and not God we are to obey,
unless man please to receive and imbody into his Codes or Laws, what God in
Scripture has proposed and recommended unto us, not unlike that Law of the
Senate, decided and exposed by Tertullian Apol. cap. 5. Ne quis Deus ab
Imperatore consecretur nisi a Senatu probatus, apud nos de humano arbitrio
divinitas pensitetur, nisi homini Deus placuerit, non erit Deus, that none must
be consecrated a God, unless approved of by the Senate, the Apotheosis is from
man, by his favor and grant, and unless God pleases man he shall not be God.

Hobbs and Spinosa his Scholar, whose known design is to depretiate, and make
nothing at all of the Gospel of Christ, to render both God and his Church
insignificant; but the admiration and astonishment is this, to see it publicly
Preached, and then Printed in our Church of England, and by him that is of a
higher Order and Dignity there, as by the Dean of Canterbury, as in his Sermon
above mentioned; and he that takes but a little pains to run over that train of
absurdities collected out of Mr. Hobbs, by the great Archdeacon of Canterbury,
in his late Treatise of the [Obligation of Christianity by Divine Right] and
compares them with that passage of the Sermon, and the following part of the
Section, the occasion of this Discourse will find very little difference in the
expression and delivery. So many of those most fulsome Positions, to come so
very near what is said by the Dean, as his own present Judgment, that no less
than an Ambition of being suspected for a Hobbist, if not embraced as really
such, could have drawn it from his Tongue and Pen; and the next wonder must be,
that two such opposite Judgments, and at this time of the day in the Church of
England, should be found fellow members together, and with the two Head Titles,
in her famous Metropolitical Church of Canterbury. And had I been of the same
Judgment with Mr. Deane, or but inclinable to a persuasion, in order to it; and
had Yorkshire been my Country, and I to Preach a Sermon to my fellow Natives of
it, of Love and Peace, as he once did, I would never have laid the Surplice and
Cross and Kneeling at the Altar upon the Bishops, but plainly told them, that
they were made Law, and established by the Civil ^veraign, and they were to
thank God it was no worse, and did the King command to adore the Linen, or
Font, or Tables themselves, they are not to gainsay and affront, because
affronting Laws and Magistracy, to pretend to a farther obligation from
Conscience, and to oppose even a false Religion, or to make Proselytes to their
own, though they be never so sure they are in the right, is to be guilty of
gross hypocrisy, without an extraordinary Commission from God to that purpose,
they are no more obliged to do it here at home, than to go into Spain, or
Italy, or Turkey, and there make Converts, and which no Protestant holds
himself obliged to do. Sure I am the Bishops had had more Justice done them
than they found in the Sermon, and it seems very unequal, that they should be
supposed to redress, and be left wide open to a popular Odium, because not
doing, what never was in their Commission, what would have been their gross
hypocrisy in attempting, because having neither an extraordinary Commission
for it, nor has the Providence of God made way by the Permission of the
Magistrate, and all that can be replied is this, that Mr. Dean changed his
Judgment upon the writing his next Sermon, which he has declared to be by
Nature mutable, and thereby has this advantage, is always ready for better
information, or rather to act the Aecebolius as occasion; and to do him all the
right I can, this is to be said for him, that he dissents from Mr. Hobbs
something in this very passage of his Sermon; for the inference on his side is
strong, that where extraordinary Commission by Miracles is evidenced, a false
Religion is to be opposed, and the true one to be Preached, though the
Magistracy and Law be otherwise; which Mr. Hobs will by no means allow, he will
not permit it to the Apostles, Leviathan, Part 3. Cap. 42. but then how Mr.
Dean will avoid this Consequence, that there is no Church Power on Earth; nor
is it lawful for any one to Preach the Gospel, when it is not Law by the Civil
Sovereign, since those Miracles, which alone were in the Apostles time, and
which is, though less of it, every whit as rank Hobbism, I have not sagacity
enough to see, that he desires to do it, is not very certain; all that can be
said for him is, that he seems to have been but raw in the Controversy, and is
ready, as all such ought to be, to submit upon better Information, and to which
if these Papers contribute, they so far answer the design of the Author.

BUT whatever either Mr. Hobs or his Adherents Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 10.
whatever anteceding Law against us, or what Power soever enacting; it is our
very case now as was St. Peter's in the Acts; and we are to obey God and not
Man. And as sure I am also that this was the Practice of the succeeding Holy
Fathers and Professors of the Church, in the best Ages of it, who still opposed
whatever Religion was false, by what Law soever established and abetted, and
still possessed and preached the true in opposition to it, with the hazard of
whatsoever was merciless from this World could attend them for it. Nor was it
then thought a Contempt or Affront to the Persons, or Laws, or Offices of the
Civil Magistrate; nor was it believed so to be by the Empire it self, where
satisfaction desired, or enquiry made; as appears particularly in the days of
Trajan, who ceased his Persecutions and Jealousies too, being well assured that
they met before day, to Pray and give Thanks to, and Praise God and Christ;
covenanting against Adultery, Murder, and such like Iniquities, (...), and that
they acted nothing at all against the Laws, and the Government was not
affronted, nor endangered by it; an account of which is to be seen, Tertul.
Apol. c. 1. and in Eusebius his Church History, Lib. 3. c. 33. and not to
Profess Christianity, was to deny it, and nothing but that (...), that second
Baptism, as it is called in Sozomen's Church History, that initiation or
entrance by a new Engagement, a through Change, and severe Repentance, could
give again a Name or Interest in Christ, replace such among the Candidates for
Heaven. And those that offered at the Heathen shrines at the Command of the
Emperor, that fell away and disowned the Faith in the time of Persecution, were
not received, nor had their Libellum Pacis, admitted to a Reconciliation and
Unity with the Church, but upon severest Penance, and a larger trial of
after-adherency, and such were never admitted into Holy Orders, to any Charge,
or Public Power in the Church, or if in Holy Orders before, he was deposed for
ever; of so much blacker a guilt was it not to Preach Christ, than not barely
only to confess him, (however Mr. Dean places no Duty at all in it, but the
quite contrary) as appears all along in the Story of those times, and the Rules
and Canons of the Church made occasionally on such accounts. And we have
instances in some, that when dragged to the Idol, with Cenfers in their Hands,
and there forced to offer; as it was one of the Devices of the Devil, thus
outwardly to gain Countenance to his Worship, Men of greater Eminency in
Christianity being reserved for this purpose, and whose Examples were more
prevailing, and apter to persuade, being represented as such that had freely
offered; these Christians did not satisfy themselves in their own innocence,
and that the Church did so repute and receive them, but when released, openly
declared the force in the face of the Magistracy, and their greatest
Conventions, and were again laid hold of for it, went immediately to the stake,
or the Beasts, suffered Martyrdom for it; though the Laws of the Land
Prohibited it, and the doing of it was Death, though indulged by the Church,
and the present Circumstances indemnified, if not done; yet all did not
persuade, when but in show to the World their Christianity was not owned, and
to the appearance of many denied by them, they could on no other terms believe
themselves Christians, nor consequently design to live upon Earth, than as on
Earth they confessed their Savior before Men; on this account only did they
expect that Christ should own them before his Father which is in Heaven. And
they were only the worst of Heretics and of Men, which, in that Age, taught
and practiced otherwise. Simon Magus, and his Sect, (...). He was received to
be the Ringleader of all Heretics; nor was there any thing so impure which he
and his followers did not outdo them in, as Eusebius tells us, Hist. Eccl. lib.
2. c. 14. and particularly he tells us, lib. 4. c. 7. that these were the
Tenants of Basilides, (...), that it is indifferent to eat what is offered to
Idols, and deny the Faith in the time of Persecution, and suitably I find this
account of them in Irenaeus, That whatsoever they outwardly committed against
the rules of the Gospel was no Sin, that they were not saved by their just
actions, that there was no such thing as Martyrdom, and by the Redemption it
was so ordered, that the Judge had no advantage over them, Ed. Fenard. Paris.
l. 1. c. 20. l. 4. c. 64, etc. that they were in their own opinion of
themselves, (...), a Kingly Royal Priesthood, and People, in this sense,
because above all Laws and Rules of good living, as St. Clemens, Strom. 3. p.
438, 439. Ed. Sylburg. and no doubt but Mr. Hobs has been very well acquainted
with these Men, though he may pass for an Original, with many of his Welwishers.

IT then appearing that Obedience is due and Institutor is Christ, or such as
were immediately inspired, miraculously and in an extraordinary manner
commissioned by him in order to this very thing. Such are the Sacraments, etc.
and which might have been other than they now are, had he pleased. 3. They are
such as are no ways Arbitrary in the instance, but follow necessarily and
naturally upon the supposal and reception of Religion, and this, whether the
Religion be that of Nature, immediately flowing from our Natural Relations and
dependency to and upon God, and one another; such are all the Acts of Natural
Religion, as Faith and Relyance upon God, Prayer and Praises, and Thanksgivings
to him, an Imitation and Copying out of his Purity and Holiness, Love, and
Faith, and Justice, being tenderhearted and affectionate to one another, with
more of the like nature, and to which all Mankind is obliged immutably and for
ever, not by any positive-superadded Law or Injunction, but by the force and
necessary results of his Creation, connate and congenious with man's being and
subsistency, and the first Notions of Religion; Man must fall from his Orb,
cease his own proper instincts and operations without them; or whether the
Religion be founded in the Offices of Christ, to which he was since deputed of
the Father upon Earth, as a King, Prophet and Priest, in order to Man's
Redemption, and is in part now executed in Heaven, to govern, teach, satisfy
and intercede for him; and which implies and includes, in the first design and
purpose, whatever Duty and Service is Natural, as above, and its farther
distinct Acts and Obligations, are, that this Savior and Redeemer be believed
in, inwardly and from the Heart, and suitably be obeyed and submitted to as is
required of us by him; and this to be publicly own^d and confessed in each of
his Offices, even on the Cross it self, when in the greatest hazards, when
called before Kings for his Name sake, and this so immediately and
indispensably every Christian's Duty, that not only his Honor and Advantage is
placed in it, but he must cease to be a Christian without it, and his Savior
will not upon others terms own him before his Father which is in Heaven, the
Religion cannot be where it is not, we cannot suppose a Savior to come in that
Nature into the World, so to dye and live for us, upon other terms, it is all
connate with the being and offices of a Redeemer. I Will consider them each in
their order.

1. THE Laws of Religion are Church the Lawgiver, as to be so fitted for and
answer each Case that offers, or Circumstance that may happen, to fall in of it
self, and comply with the present accident, and then, if no present Power to
oblige and overruled, only disorder and confusion in the Church will be the
consequent. Now these Laws though in themselves obliging, and each Christian,
as a Member of that Society, stands immediately engaged unto them; nor can any
other Foreign Power repeal or null them as to their Sanction, yet there may be,
there is to be, a Cessation as to Practice under some Cases and Circumstances,
and the particular local Performance may be superseded at present, or suspended
for the future; nor do the terms for Heaven consist in the forbearance, or shut
out of the Church-Society because of it, little Accidents and Contingencies,
not to be foreseen, nor prevented, will often obstruct, and become lawful
Impediments; and much more where the Civil Power comes thwarting upon us, and
renders Church Laws impracticable, a Secular inhibition upon Penalties and
Inconveniences, which tend to the greater Damage of our common Christianity if
incurred, and to the silencing and abating from Duties of a higher concern.
Acts of Charity, we know, are to cease in respect of Acts of Justice, nor does
the Practice of Charity oblige at all, but as qualified, and in set Capacities;
every one is to give as he is able, and yet both oblige in their kind and
order, and the engagement is always the same and perpetual, the former is not
nulled by reason of the present incapacity, or does it end with the Cessation,
as to Practice, or has the veriest Lazar, a Charter thereby, for inhumanity.
And upon the same account it is, and the Parity of Reason, that even particular
Acts of the Positive Institutions and Worship of God, give way to Obedience to
Governors, and when the common Political good of Mankind is engaged, as I shall
have occasion to instance farther hereafter. Upon these accounts it is, that
the Laws and Magistracy are not to be affronted or contemned, nor can the
Magistracy it self subsist with the Church upon other terms. Obedience is to be
preferred before Sacrifice, the positive Appointments even of God himself, and
much more may the Obligation cease, and which created in us a Duty, in Laws
purely Humane and Ecclesiastical. It Is true, these Powers did never yet clash,
or break out into public Oppositions; from the time that the Empire became
Christian, and so along in the best and flourishing Ages, as is above observed,
the Empire still consulting the Church, and her Canons were made Law; or if
otherwise* and some particular Indulgences and Abatements there was, as to
Church Duties, by good Emperors, upon the score of their alone Imperial Power,
granted, as some there was, upon what rules of Policy and Necessity, is not now
needful to enquire, and which we have reason to believe the Church never
consented to, and to be sure there was no antecedent Canon to go by; yet we
know this, that the Church submitted, and her Discipline was so far relaxed and
abated thereby. Constantine the Great was always a favourer of the true
Catholics, and upheld and maintained them in each their Privileges and
Immunities, suffering no one Sect to advance above, to oppress and invade them;
and yet he sometimes gave Indulgencies to all Sects whatever, the Heathens not
excepted, and laid Penalties upon none, because of their Religion, and the
Novatians in particular had again special favor, when all other Conventicles
were put down, Eusebius. Hist. l. 10. c. 5. De Vit. Constant. l. 2. c. 59. Socrat.
Hist. l. 5. c. 10. and that they had their Churches in Rome it self, and
flourished there in many Congregations, and with great Auditories Socrates also
tells us, till removed by Pope Celestinus, l. 7. c. 11. and that most Pestilent
Sect of the Donatists, all along condemned by the Catholic Church, was so long
indulged by Constantine, till encouraged by his Mercy, they brake out into
Tumults and Seditions, and the Empire was unsafe, even shaken by them (the
Natural effect of all Schisms) and there was a Necessity for recalling their
Grants of Liberty, as aso by their other continued outrages upon all that was
Sacred and Separate, whether Persons or Objects; all which is to be seen at
large in Optatus and Saint Austin, especially Lib. 3. Cont. Cres. con.
Donatist. or he that desires an account of them more briefly, let him read it,
given by Vallesius in his Treatise entitled De Scismate Donatist. bound up at
the end of his Eusebius Church History. Now in these Cases, the Church Power
and Laws are to cease in part in the Execution, though the right remains, nor
were they so exercised against these Schismatics, as otherwise they ought and
would have been. If God's Name cannot be glorified on Earth, in that decent,
befitting, reverend useful way, agreeing with his Nature and Worship, and our
relations to him, and the whole Earth be filled with his due Praise at once,
the Church Power and Laws which provide that it may, are not to be stretched
beyond those Designs for which she is endowed with a Power for Sanction, nor
can any Society suppose themselves obliged to promote by such means as God
never put into their hands; the holy Bishops therefore and good Christians of
old, praised God for the Liberties and Advantages they had in their own Persons
and Congregations, adorning their Professions by Zeal and good Works, they
could not remedy in others what Power and Laws, which they had not, did indulge
and indemnifie them in. Or if this by a Law he denied to themselves, the Laws
purely Ecclesiastical were never designed nor urged, so to oblige against the
state, as that the particular Practice is in the immutable indispensable Duties
for Heaven, and in such cases it is only their equity, reasonableness, higher
use and advantage in the Christian Worship is to be insinuated, pleaded and
persuaded unto. Authority over men's Persons or Actions was never placed in
Churchmen, nor has it any other influence or effect upon either, than to
exclude them the Kingdom of Heaven; nor will omissions of this Nature, and
under the same Circumstances amount unto that, nor can any man lose his Heaven
for it, it may be a Sin in such, as with too much liberty, or too little regard
indulge or restrain, or in such as too gladly accept of it, to the neglect, or
abuse, or contempt of the Service of God; but there can be none in those, where
Necessity lays the force, and the harder terms and obligations from the Powers
of the World, makes the intermission and Vacancies in the Performances.

Mahumetan, for such Persons may be, and so then it must be, upon these
Principles; it is one thing to want what ought to be, or what is most useful,
through an undue Administration of Justice, and which my Religion may engage me
to undergo, and quite another thing to be antecedently engaged in their
Determinations. Nor again on the other hand, can the Church be supposed to
engage immutably and peremptorily by those Laws of her own, though never so apt
and useful, to the Practice of which, the Persons, and other Advantages from
the World are necessary, and which she has not in her Power, as she is a
Society of our Savior's Institution, where the Prince has made Edicts
inconsistent with their Practice, and in whom the Church does acknowledge the
Advantages of the World to be seated, and which declares him to be Supreme over
all Persons, in all Causes, Actions and Performances whatsoever; Abatements
then as to Practice there may, there must be, where that Commonwealth overbears
out of which the Church cannot be or subsist, where Necessity and Accidents
prevent and obstruct, even many times in order to Union and Uniformity; that
first Zeal of the Asiaticks, afterward abated about the time of keeping
Easter, and which they accounted not a thing necessary, as succeeding Practice
has declared, and mostly when Religion may be in hazard, otherwise these, as
they are of an after-Institution, so must they yield in place to that which is
antecedently God's Worship, and in order to which alone they are acceptable.
Julian the Apostate, among other Diabolical Stratagems and Infernal Devices he
had for overthrowing and erasing Christianity, ( Hist. Tripart. l. 6. c. 29.)
had this for one, he instructed and adorned the Heathen Worship in all the
Forms, and Rites, and Customs, with every Order, and Habit, that was in use
among Christians in their Worship, hereby believing to gain from them a value
upon his Idol Services, to flatter and cheat the Christians into a compliance
with and entertainment of them; but this worked not all upon the most holy
Bishops and Confessors of the Age, the outward form was reputed nothing if not
leading to that within the Veil, nor did one way of Worship at all prevail, if
so be without, if engaging to deny, that one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all; the Ceremonial part never had any other estimate than in
order to the more Substantial, and 'twas in course that the Veil was rent at
our Savior's Passion, when the Oracle was gone, and that Worship to be no
more; and should it so fall out, that what is in it self so advantageous to the
true Worship, be allowed, but upon severer terms, and inconsistent with our
Christian Profession, as it was by Julian; and or the Carved or Polished works
of the Temple only be beaten down, and which is now so much contended for, by
those among us that own one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
all, and which Julian did not do; in the former case we are altogether to
refuse, in the latter we are to submit to the force, and God must be served by
us as he was by the Children of Israel, for some time in the Brick Kilns, and
in the Wilderness, and all along till the Temple was built by Solomon, with
allays and abatements, as to what was better, what their Lord God had chose,
and was otherways laid and designed by him, Persons and things in the ordinary
course, retarding and obstructing, and which the Wisdom of God thought not
convenient by an extraordinary Power to overrule and prevent, for the more
speedy accomplishment.

BUT then on the other side, to be so unequal as to our particular Church of
England, her Rites and Ceremonies, when I hear and read them reported in
Public to be the best Model and Constitution the Christian World affords, that
she has even slit the Hair in each instance, Order and Canon, Rubric and
Injunction, and is answering to every end of Piety and Devotion in the
Worshipper, of reverence and regard to God that is worshipped, and full of
Helps and Advantages all along in order to a suitable discharge of each. When I
hear her Wisdom and Prudence, through and weightiest Considerations in the
composing of each, so exalted and extolled, as is very usual both in Discourse,
and from the Press; and yet again in the very next Breath or Page, Proposals
made for comprehension and compromisements, as is frequent also for Repeals or
Abatements of what is thus Prudent and Discreet, Honorable and Beneficial,
every ways apt and significant, and then to supersede this most holy Worship in
so useful a way performed, or, which is worse, to alienate it, give it up for a
Sacrifice, to be burnt, offered up, and devoted to strange Gods, the private
Designs, and perverser Enmities, the Lusts and Passions, and peevish interests
of a never-satisfied Faction, and Party among us, such as have still turned the
World upside down, wherever having Rule, and now attempt it in the ways of
God's Worship among us, and whose Spleen seems to swell and be fixed among us,
as did theirs of the City of Rome heathen, against God himself, Civitas Romana
omnes omnium gentium Deos colebant, praeterquam Judeorum Deum. Arnob. Adv.
Gent. l. 1. which worshipped all the Gods of the Gentiles, only they received
not the God of the Jews, every thing is complied with, but that which is thus
by Law established among us. This, I say, is what I dare scarce trust to my
Ears in, when giving the conveyance, I am rather apt to suspect an
Indisposition in the Organ, that the words are distorted, and come cross to the
design of the Speaker; and seeing, I can hardly believe I see it, I still
suspect either the Medium is undue, the Optic is weak, or it is by a false
Gloss, by some one or more Errors in the conveyance, whatever it is,
represented unto me. And however I might be overborn by that Power, which as a
Christian I am not commissioned to resist, and so may not escape the force, and
the worship must cease in Public; yet I would as soon cut out my Tongue as
speak, or cut off my Hands, as subscribe, for the abolishing or ceasing of it;
and that upon any other terms, than the omitting God's Worship altogether, or
that my Religion it self is not retainable with it. He that values God's
Worship it self must in a due Proportion value that which comes so near to it,
or at least he apprehends so to do, which is so congruous, so decent and so
advantageous to, and in, the Performance of it. And as my Religion in general
is to be preferred before all things, so is that which seems most apt, and best
answering with, and proportioned to its discharge to be next in my thoughts and
designs, to retain and continue, and in the next degree would I become its
Advocate. These Proposals then of Moderation, and from these Persons, break and
are inconsistent in themselves, there is a repugnancy in the terms, and then
surely not allowable with a through considering Person. If I believe the Service
Book in the Church of England, the best and aptest Instrument of God's Public
Worship, I am no more to forego and give it over, than I can satisfy my self
that the Blind and the Lame, and withered in the Flock, was acceptable to God
of old, then I may devote my Body to his Service under the Gospel, and leave
out the best Member of it that I have, or give but half of my self unto him,
and the worser part too, my Body without my Spirit, the life and soul of it.
The Controversy about the precise Day on which Easter was to be kept, was high
amongst the ancient Bishops, and yet the more considering of them all the while
counted for it in the order of those things which in their first Nature are
indifferent, and it might be kept on this day or on that, no peremptory
fixation of God's supervening, nor does indeed the limiting and fixing it to
any time, conduce so much to the ends of Devotion, and the Service and Honor
of God, as many other instances now under debate do, only Victor Bishop of
Rome, incited, whether by Zeal or Ambition, went too high, limiting Church
Communion to one set time, for the observancy, and did, to be sure, threaten
Non-Communion with the Asiaticks upon their dissent from the Western Churches
in it; but yet the first indifferency and original immutability of the thing it
self, was not concluded by them a ground sufficient to lay aside, or alter that
Custom, when, whatever it was in the Bishop of Rome, because below an
antecedent Command in the Gospel, whether Zeal or Ambition demanded it; none
farther from imposing on other Churches, what was the alone particular Practice
of their own, or from censuring what was differing from them, and none again
more strenuous in defending and maintaining their own way and time; they did
not recede from what so great and contiguous a tradition of most holy Bishops
and Authority, even Apostolical, had devolved, they had immediately received
from and transmitted to one another, and all along in an unalterable Practice
upheld and maintained, and recommended, and Rome's Universal Power had not then
gained so much in the Church as to overruled and constrain them, all which is
to be seen at large in the account given of it by Eusebius, Hist. lib. 5. cap.
23, 24.

I do not say that Apostolical Practice it Easter contradicts; Apostolical
Practice was on both sides, and several other Actions and Synodical
Determinations by the Apostles do not now oblige Christendom, being occasional
Decisions and Canons; But this I say, where the concern is not only the same,
but higher, as in the Public Service of God in our Church, and which more
nearly relates to God in his Worship, and with equal heat its abolishment is
endeavored, as was the time of keeping Easter, after the manner of the Jews by
the Bishop of Rome, when equally bottomed on the same both Authority and
Antiquity, even to Apostolical, for so the Asiaticks pleaded the Authority of
St. Philip and St. John, and the Malice and Industry of our Opposers cannot
gainsay us. I Will add, where every thing concurs to the procuring Reverence,
Piety, and Devotion, and in which case Calvin himself contends for Ceremonies
in the Church of Christ, when Christ is, so, illustrated by them, Ergone
inquies nihil Ceremoniarum debitur ad juvandam ^orum imperitiam? id ego non
dico, omnino enim utile illis esse sentio, id modo contendo, ut modus ille
adhibeatur qui Christum illus^ret, non obscuret. Institut. l. 4. c. 10. Sect.
14. and for us to abate of these Rites, to change or lay aside our either times
or ways of Worship, because perhaps a Neighboring Church is differing, and
requires, or perhaps, and which is worse, demands it of us, as the Church of
Rome did of the Church of Asia, this has no Precedent of Example, no rule of
Religion to enforce us to submit to, or comply with; we have a President of as
famous Apostolical a Church, as the Primitive Story acquaints us with, that is
against it, and that Church which so urges and requires of us, savours too much
of the present Usurpations of Rome, not improbably first attempted in Victor
their once Bishop.

Reformations, and which is at this day only without Arms; but with the same
virulency of Spirit, carried on in our Streets, when at the best the
Infirmities, but rather the impetuousness and madness of the People promotes
it, this no reason can endure; and yet it is the great and popular Plea for the
nulling our Laws Ecclesiastical now among us, when the rule bends to the
obliquity, the right Line warps and complies with that which is crooked, both
become disordered and perverse together; and, which is the misery of all, no
standard supposed to remain, to reduce them. When the Laws of the Church submit
to that Extravagancy they are designed to prevent or remedy; and the only
reason why they are to be no more is, because every Man may, and must, do what
seems him good in his own eyes, their Will, and Lusts, and Passions must
reign, and give Laws, this is the height of Anarchy and Confusion, or farther,
and for which there is something more of show and pretense, because Pity may be
a Motive, to give up all to the weak and infirm, that is, to those of the least
understanding and discernment, for St. Paul has no other sense of a weak
Brother, or a weak Conscience, then that which is more ignorant; what is this,
but to place the Discretion and Government of the Church, in the hands of
Idiots, and half witted? against the rules of all Policy that was ever heard of
till now, that the womanish part, and such as are less able, direct, nay
overruled, the more able and knowing, and to pay our Obedience and Obligations
hither; to set up this sort of weakness as the rule, their suggestions and
demands for the Voice from Heaven, is not with more seeming semblance to be
compared to any thing in the World, than to those most absurd Homages and
Acknowledgments of the Heathens of old, so ridiculed and laughed at by the
Primitive Apologists, and first most holy Christian Writers, which were made to
Fevers and Agues, to their slavish Fears, and weaker Passions, paying
Sacrifices and Devotions to them, who made Gods of Calamities, and worshipped
the vicissitudes and courses of evil Accidents, adored the bad Genius,
Eumenides and the Furies, (...), Clem. (...), Ibid. the very Entrails and
Ordure of the Beasts overruled in their Councils, over-awed and over-bore
them; if defects be the rule, then let the Monsters and Exorbitancies of Nature
(which have present Necessity enough to plead) be the Patterns of the whole
Creation, let us take our Ideal knowledge of the Universe from its Wens and
Excrescencies, the contingencies and accidents of it; and by the same rule we
shall exclude God from its Government, supersede his Providence, as we do the
Laws of the Church, we may as well, every one of us, cut off our Legs and
become Cripples in the Streets, lay our selves in the Highways and become
Beggars; as if the Sun in the Firmament was only then to be Copied, as most
beauteous and obliging, when laboring, and in an eclipse, or the whole Earth
in its due Posture when in a Paroxysm, a Rupture and Consternation. Surely
these were not the infirmities St. Paul glorified in, nor this that depressed,
dethroned condition of the Church, of which the Ancient Fathers make so large
Eulogies, reckon up unto us so many advantages, and though something has always
been allowed and abated upon such the like Exigent, and unavoidable Necessity;
yet it was never on this manner carried on and improved, to appear against and
affront fixed and established Rules and Laws, the particular Connivance, or
Exception, did never cancel the rule, but rather confirm, and give new
Obligations, as the exception is said to strengthen in all cases and instances
besides; it is the great end and design of Government to observe and animadvert
where deficient, to make stronger, assist and enable, where declining. So was
Job in the Land of Huz, Eyes to the Blind, Feet to the Lame, enabling the
Faculty, and helping on, in Duty and Obedience, and this though to be the work
of Prudence and Deliberation, in applying the general Rule; yet it is the most
deplorable condition, when the rule comes quite over to the obliquity, gives it
self up to the defect, its Guidance and Directions, its Tyranny indeed, and
Depredations; and which to prevent or redress, to relieve and rescue from, is
its office. On these terms no means are left for recovery, (...), the Disorder
goes on to infinite, all bounds and limits taken away, it is a running always
down hill, and the bottomless Pit is to be its last Post or Period, perpetual
horror, desolation and confusion for ever more.

and benefit came thereby unto them, the greater devolution of help and
assistance from the Heavens, the greater reward and glory annexed. Ambulatis in
metallo, captivo quidem corpore sed cord regnante, praecessit disciplina,
sequetur and venia. Cyphr. Ep. 8.77. haec pala illa quae and nunc dominicam
aream purgat, a quo certamen edicitur, nisi a quo corona et praemia
proponuntur. Ecclesia in attonito est, tunc fides expeditior. Tertul. lib. de
fuga in persecut. cap. 1. tota paradisi clavis tuus sanguis est. speaking of
the Martyrs lib. de anima. cap. 55. and whom he places immediately in Heaven
nearer to God himself, excelsoque throno coruscans, martyribus septus. poem. de
ult. judicio, cap. 7. (...). Clem. (...) l. 1. c. 7. (...). Ignat. Ep. ad
Smyrn. (...). Ep. ad Romans per dentes bestiarum molor ut mundus panis Dei
inveniar, as in that Epistle ad Romans and which is cited by Ireneus, lib. 5. c.
28. nor is the Church always secured against the like Obstructions in the best
of her conditions, and under the protection of those Governors that are
Christian, the usual contingencies of the World, and which in course succeed,
so long as day and night succeed one another, must make the intermission, nor
is the casualty to be avoided. But then, these do not intercept betwixt the
Christian and his God, no more than did the Metals and the Thunderclaps, the
stake and the wild Beasts, to those first Christians just now mentioned, or
should the case really be, and which is so often feigned, and not always to due
purposes, that Christians are alone in a Ship, or cast on a desert Shore, where
neither Bishop nor under Churchman, and the Ordinances cannot, as in the
design of their institution, be celebrated among them. And surely then the
commands of a Sovereign are to have some room in the like cases, when in the
due execution of that Power entrusted with him by God and a good Christian, who
is also a good Subject, is to abate of what Duties and Performances he in some
instances immediately owes to Religion and his Savior; in obedience to those
Secular injunctions, to which if not engaged to submit, the Government cannot
subsist and be managed as in these particular instances did a pretense to, or
the actual present exercise in religious Worship exempt and disingage. Every
one is born a Subject, owes a duty to his Prince and the Government, as soon as
he is indebted for his Being to his Maker: and an after-dedication of my Person
by holy Orders, does not cancel that first dependency, my Savior himself
hither all along had his regard, and he laid his Religion in relation to it:
and when in the Pulpit, or, which is more, at the Altar, in the midst of my
Office, am I to give up my Person to that Civil Power by my Christianity
supposed, and by the same God placed over me. The severer Rules and Laws of the
Sabbath, were to give place to the saving the life of a Man, in the design of
Moses, as our Savior expounds him to the Pharisees; and much more for the
support of Kingdoms and Communities, and so in all other Instances of this sort
of Holiness, called Relative, and which is good only from the institution and
positive appointment, and no greater more notorious Cheats than those in Ordine
ad Deum, that manage and abet Disobedience by a Charter from Religion: it is
that very Corban in the Gospel, so severely chastised by Christ, the saying it
is a gift and robbing my Father and Mother. That absence from Divine Service or
religious Worship, which is in it self a sin, upon a single instance of
Charity, for the advantage and relief of the neighborhood, (and then surely
of a whole Community,) is a duty: on this score Christians fight their Battles
on the Lord's Day, the very Ass is to be pulled out of the Pit, and how the
reasons and ends of Government, for its better manag^ry and conservation did
stiil overruled in the Christian Church, in each of these like religious
Performances, in the best and most flourishing Times of it, and the Empire when
Christian gave Laws, Directions and Limitations, as to the Collectae and
Public Assemblies in Ordinations, Excommunications, Absolutions, etc. for the
more orderly administration of the Civil Affairs, is already showed in this
discourse; and yet the things themselves are immediately from Christ, that
power is not from the Prince, which warrants and makes effectual the
Institutions and Offices of each of them.

AND if it be replied, that this seems Magistrate and the Law are to silence
and limit in the exercise and profession of these higher Instances of
Christianity, what is this less than to submit my Religion to their pleasure?
To which I answer, the case is not at all the same, this is only adjusting of
Duties in order to a due performance, a suspension upon a higher reason and
duty intervening, and both which are equally Christian, or at the most a but
concealing some truths upon present reasons and motives, and which every one
allows may be done. Should the Prince command me not to say my Prayers at all,
as he did Daniel, to preach or speak no more in Christ's Name, as the Sanedrim
did the Apostles, that Ordinations and Censures be no more, Church, both
Officers and Offices cease for ever, or which is the case in Mr. Dean's Sermon,
should a false Religion be commanded in their rooms, and be made the Religion
of the Nation, this is the case in which I am to speak before Kings and not be
ashamed, when my life is in my hand, as it is the expression of holy David, with
a great many more to that purpose in the hundred and nineteenth Psalm; then I
am not only to exercise what is my duty as a private Christian, but to make
what open Proselytes I can to that Religion, which I am sure is in the right,
to draw off all I can from that which is false, and imposed by the Magistrate
and Law. This is that confession with the Mouth called for all along in the
sacred Epistles, Confession at Matyrdome, that (...) in St. Clemens Strom. l.
4. p. 503. an eminent way to gain Mercy for our sins, and it is called by the
Church (...) a right, and rescuing from a false Religion, at so great a
distance was it set from gross hypocrisy, and which Mr. Dean demonstrates to
be such in the next Paragraph of the Sermon. I Will go on so far with his Worship
and Consent, that where neither Miracles to justify the extraordinary
Commission, as had the Apostles, nor the providence of God makes way by the
permission of the Magistrate, the Proselytes are very like to be few, and since
the former is ceased altogether and never to be more expected, the countenance
and protection of the latter is what usual course and common Prudence directs
to wait for upon any attempt for converting and reducing of Nations from a
false Worship. I find the Proposal and the Complaint recited and made both at
once by our learned Doctor Hammond Sermon. 10. in Joh. 7.48. Vol. 2. I Will here
use his own Words. If we should plant Christianity in Turkey, we must first
invade and conquer them, and then convince them of their Follies, which about
an hundred years ago Cleonard proposed to most Courts in Christendom (and to
that end himself studied Arabic) that Princes would join their strength and
Scholars their brains, and all surprise them in their own Land and Language, at
once besiege the Turk and his Alcoran, put him to the Sword, and his Religion
to the touchstone: first command him to Christianity with an high hand, and
then to show him the reasonableness of the Command. Thus also we may complain,
but not wonder, that the reformation gets ground so slow in Christendom;
because the Forces and potent Abetters of Papacy secure them from being led
captive to Christ, as long as the Pope is invested so fast in his Chair, and as
long as the Rulers take part with him, there shall be no doubt of the truth of
their Religion, unless it please God to back Arguments with steel, and to raise
up Kings and Emperors to be our Champions, we may question, but never confute
his Supremacy. Let us come with all the power and rhetoric of Paul and
Barnabas, all the demonstrations and reasons of the Spirit; and yet as long as
they have such Topics against us, as the authority of the Rulers and Pharisees,
we may dispute out our hearts, and preach out our Lungs and gain no Proselytes,
we shall get but a Scoff and a Curse, a Sarcasm and an Anathema in the words
next after my Text, this People that know not the Law is accursed, there is no
heed to be taken to such poor and contemptible Fellows. But yet if any one's
zeal does engage him to expose his Authority and Person upon the stock of his
own single strength and oratory, and he does encounter with these many, almost
impossibilities, in order to the converting of Nations, it is to be ranked with
those heroic Actions which are above the ordinary rule: some may pity him, and
others may applaud him, but none ought absolutely to condemn him. But then,
that he that keeps his ground at home, asserts what is right and detects the
false, when the one is opposed, and the other obtruded, must in so doing, be a
hypocrite and act without any obligation of Conscience, and which is singularly
to be observed, for this reason, because he does not hold himself obliged to go
and preach up his Religion and make Converts in Spain and Italy; because he
does not think himself bound in conscience to preach the Gospel in Turkey to
convert the Mahumetans, is as wide of true reasoning, and as far from a due
conclusion, as is England from either, or all, of them: and surely Mr. Dean's
is the only Pen that such a notion of Hypocrisy ever dropped from. And this is
the top of the argument, no Protestant Minister thinks himself bound to go and
preach the Gospel in Italy or Spain: and therefore it is hypocrisy when he does
it at home, if in the danger he suspects to be there, it has scarce appearance
enough to make a popular argument from a Pulpit against a Priest or Jesuit,
and the lesser womanish understanding, cannot but see the invalidity of it. And
admit a Protestant Minister now in England had no other disswasives from his
going to convert Spain (as surely he may have many more) than the danger that
must attend such an undertaking: Surely this alone (though our Sermon is never
to the contrary) will abate something as to the obligation of Conscience:
Circumstances and Objects are usually said to specify and constitute in these
like duties, otherwise our whole Church at a blow falls under the guilt of
gross hypocrisy, whose Canon 67th confirmed by King James appoints every
Minister upon notice to go and visit the sick in his Parish, unless it be
certain, or but probable, that the Disease is contagious; and surely a Spanish
Inquisition is no less fatal and tremendous, than a Plague Sore, and the
censure is very severe, that every Minister is an hypocrite, that visits not
every Pesthouse in his Parish, and the danger only throws off the false
pretense and disguise that he before walked under. And I cannot but say it here
again, how glad I should be to see the Priests and Jesuits so confuted and
exposed, as that Religion it self comes in no hazard by it, and our selves be
not hit through their sides, not to say mortally wounded.

and only so, bind under each circumstance and immutably, as depending on no
Law that is super-induced; so neither is there any distant Power can but
suspend, much less repeal and null them, and in ceasing in any one instance and
degree in these Duties, we cease so much, and in the very same instance of
being Men and Christians; I may suffer under, but am not to obey, the highest
Power on Earth, if enjoining it. God himself cannot impose it upon the
published Terms of our Creation and Redemption, having first made us Men, and
afterward by his Son in our flesh redeemed us, I am always to believe in, and
rely upon God and Christ, praise and make my Prayers unto them. I am always to
own and confess my Savior on the cross, to propose and make him my example in
all Godliness of conversation. I am never to be unmerciful or unjust, to be
cruel or bloody, to be hateful and hating, to be an adulterer or unclean, to be
a Rebel or an Extortioner, this is the Rule set up, wrote as with an Adamant,
as on a Rock to remain for ever, whosoever does these, or such like things, shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God.

AND thus we at length come to that one necessary, and the due inquirer may
have information, in what he is to obey God and in what to obey Man, in what
instances of Religion he is indespensably and immutably bound, and in what not,
and how his Salvation is upon each depending; we see here the infinite Wisdom
of God, in the frame and constitution of his Church; a body it is, and
Association, a City, compact and at unity in it self, with its own Laws and
Rules, and yet Ecclesia in Republica, this Church is in the State or
Commonwealth, with a due regard and observancy to it, each ruling and obeying
in their courses, neither clashing or interfering, both, of force and obliging,
in the several Reasons and Designs of each. We see farther, the same infinite
love and tender care of his toward Man, every ways providing for his Heaven
and Salvation, in that, having placed him here in this World, liable to the
Accidents and Obstructions of it, the changes and chances of this mortal Life,
what otherways was his Duty, and Heaven not attainable, but in observancy of
its Laws and Rules, is upon these like scores abated and remitted to him; where
either the Natural incapacities, or other Necessities of the World, in order to
its Conduct and Government enjoin it, and no one thing for Eternal Salvation is
always a Duty, in the intendment of the Sanction, with the execution or
rigorous exercise of which the Advantages that are are Temporal, and their due
conservation are inconsistent. Grace does not destroy Nature, and where God is
to be obeyed, and not Man, where the Commands of both are incompetible, and
such we have showed there are, or may be, the Obedience to God, as in all
reason, is first to be performed, so is it, what alone is the benefit of
Mankind, there is not one instance of what is antecedent Duty, or is really
beneficial unto him, abated thereby, and we cannot be either good Men, or good
Subjects, if vicious in our Morals, if once we renounce these higher Duties of
Christianity. God has not made that the immutable term of Man's Salvation, but
what is in his own Power, and of which if he fails, it is his own perverse will
and choice that is debauched and betrays him to it; the Carved works of the
Temple may be beaten down, the Church Discipline be weakened, and her Laws and
Rules for Holiness become of less force; her Towers and Bulwarks be taken away,
and the Secular Protection be withdrawn. I may have neither tongue to speak,
nor hands to lift up in prayer, nor feet to walk to the House of God; there may
be no Houses of God in our Land, the Tyrant may pull out, or cut off the one,
or pull down the other, the daily Sacrifice my cease, and the Priesthood too,
as to particular Persons; and when we say, where Episcopal Power is not, there
is no Church, we do not so mean, that where it is not Men cannot go to Heaven;
these all may be supplied by an upright heart, and due intentions; God accepts
of a Man according to what he has, and not according to what he has not. The
Sacraments are only generally necessary to Salvation, and so of other duties in
the same Order of Sanction. God does not oblige us to the Tyranny of Impossible
Commands; to climb up to Heaven, and go down into the Deep, and fetch thence
our Eternity; ask of us ten thousand Rams, or a thousand of Rivers of Oil, or
those Cattle upon a thousand Hills for a Sacrifice, (...), as St. Clement
argues to the Gentiles. (...). and it is our own Lust, not others we are to
answer for, if not Subdued and Conquered, he does not bind us to go to Heaven
when we have no Legs, Move without Faculties, Act without Strength, Live when
Dead Men, and with Paralytick Joints, Enfeebled by Irrecoverable Weakness to
work out our own Salvation; every Brick-bat, will then make an Altar, and
Prayers are to be made every where, with Holy Hands lift up, or but Devout
Hearts, without Wrath, and without Doubting; nor is it by Subduing Kings, and
Conquering Worldly Powers, we are to go to Heaven, Faith, Love, Dependence upon
God, etc. are among those acts of the Soul usually called Elicitae, whose
Practice depends on no outward Faculty; and if some Virtues equally
indispensable, are otherways seated, and among those Acts called Imperatae, and
to be performed by the outward Organs of the Body, yet are they equally free
from outward Force, so seated in each ones Self, and lodged in his Person, that
no Violence but from a Man's own self can reach them, those the only Enemies
that are of his own House, and it is every ones own hand that draws his Sword,
and makes him a Rebel; his alone Adulterous Eyes and Heart, Promote and Actuate
whatever of uncleanness is from him, and it is neither Person, nor Object, nor
Quality, any thing that comes cross, or is of force from within, or without
himself; whether Devil, or Tyrant, or Lust, any one accident, or contingency,
that can either dismember him from the Church, or disunite him from his God,
deprive him of sufficient Means here, or Eternal Life hereafter; even the
Tyrannies, and Deaths here, will but Advance the Crown, and these lighter
Afflictions, work for us that more Eternal Weight of Glory; and which
Considerations, are to be the great Support, and Comfort of all Christians.
Should it so happen in the courses of Providence, and Kings and Queens cease to
be Nursing Fathers and Mothers unto us. Should a Nero, or a Domitian, a
Parliament of forty two, a Cromwell, or a Committee of Safety; or what
Association soever be set up against, and Tyrannize over us, plane volumus
pati, verum eo modo quo and Bellum miles, nemo quippe libens Bellum patitur,
cum et trepidari, and periclitari necesse sit, tamen and praeliatur omnibus
viribus, et vincens in praelio gaudet, qui de praelio querebatur, quia and
Gloriam consequitur and praedam, they are the words of Tertullian, Apol. c. 5.
to those Scoffers of the Heathens in his days, and whom Julian the Apostate
after imitated, telling the Christians Afflictions was their Advantage, and to
be Loved by them, because their Martyrdom, and Crown. We must willingly suffer,
and engage as the Soldier does in War, and it is the expectation of Victory,
and that recompense of Reward, makes us fight on, and Rejoice under that
Banner, which otherwise the present Difficulties, and Dangers, working on our
fears, would engage us to avoid and run from: 'twas the constancy and evenness
of the Christians, for the Truth, and in Gods Service, (...), together with
their Gravity, Sincerity, their Freedom and Modesty of Conversation gained upon
their Enemies, both Greeks and Barbarians, and silenced their baser Slanders,
and Calumnies against them; thus, together with the learned discourses and
endeavors by Writing, and which were not few, the Church grew and multiplied,
as Eusebius tells us, Hist. l. 4. c. 7. These the Weapons of a Christian
Warfare, and the many Shields of the Mighty, these the Spoils and Trophies they
contended for. I know not how in fitter words to conclude this Chapter, than in
those of our Noble Historian Eusebius, in his Preface to his fifth Book of his
Church History, giving an account of those many, and Eminent Martyrs in the
days of Antoninus Verus (...). etc. Others making Historical Narrations, have
delivered in their Writings, Victories in War, and Trophies over their Enemies,
the great Actions of Captains, and the Valor of Soldiers, that had stained
their hands in Blood, and a thousand Battles, for their Children, their
Country, and their Fortunes; but the History, or the Narrative of the Divine
Commonwealth, and Enrollment which is of Heaven, writes on Eternal Pillars,
those Peace Designing Battles, in order to the Peace of the Soul, or that are
Spiritual Those that fight in these Battles, for Truth, rather than their
Country, for Religion, rather than their Children. The constancy of the
Contenders for Piety and their Fortitude in their manifold Sufferings, their
Trophies against Devils, and Victories obtained against the Invisible Powers,
or Enemies, making public their Crown, for an Everlasting Remembrance.

CHAP. VI. Chap. 6.

The Contents.
The last general of the Discourse, Sect. 1.

What the Authority of our particular Church and Kingdom is in this
Controversy; where not Apostolical, and Primitive, there not obliging. Their
Doctrine, Laws and Practice all along on our side, Sect. 2.

The People are only Testimonies of the Manners of such as are to be Ordained,
in our Book of Ordination, Sect. 3.

No Authority in any but those of the Priesthood, to Ordain, Excommunicate, etc.
as in our Rubricks, Articles, etc. Sect. 4.

Our Kings claimed it not, in their Acts, Declarations, etc. in the days of
Henry VIII. in the Act of Submission. He is declared a Layman, nothing in
Religion made Law but by him. He defends Religion. His Power as the Supreme
Governor of the Church. Is called Worldly and Secular, Sect. 5, 6, 7, 8.

Of King Edward VI. That the Bishops were to use not their own, as formerly,
but his Name and Seal in their Processes, etc. implies no such thing. Sect. 9.

Of Queen Elizabeth. King James, Sect. 10, 11.

The King and Church distinct Powers in our Statute Book. Our Kings now have
but the same Power the Empire of old, and their Predecessors before the
Reformation had. If our Religion be Parliamentary, that anciently was Imperial,
Sect. 12.

Mr. Seldom says, the Parliament of England both can, and has actually
Excommunicated, and the Bishops Power is derived only from them, Sect. 13.

The Acts of Parliament he produces, V. VI. Edw. VI. Cap. IV. III. Jacobi. Cap.
V. infer it not, Sect. 14.

Nor do those of II. III. Edw. VI. Cap. 1. Elizabethae Cap. II. that the Prince
limits Excommunications in the Execution, is not against the Divine Right of
them. His Instances in the Rump Parliament. Geneva. The Parliament of Scotland,
III. Jacob. VI. Cap. XLV. are all against him, Sect. 15.

Archbishop Whitgift is not proved to have Licensed Erastus his Works for the
Press; that they were found in his Study, is no Argument he was an Erastian; if
Licensed by the Authority of the Nation, no Evidence that his Doctrines were
then owned. Sect. 16.

Our own Doctors of the same Opinion with us, instances in two of them, Sect.
17.

Bishop Bilson, St. Ambrose, one of Doctor Tillotson's Hypocrites. A private
Liberty of Conscience not enough, a false Religion to be declared against,
though by Authority abetted. Mr. Dean gives advantage to the Papists Calumny,
That our Religion is only that of our Prince, Sect. 18.

Bishop Sanderson, his particular Judgment concerning the Divine Right of
Episcopacy. Sect. 19.

Mr. Seldom objects again, that our own Doctors and Writers are all on the
other side. The particular Authors each reckoned up. He perverts and abuses
them all, Sect. 20.

The two Universities in their Opus Eximium, etc. in the Reign of Henry VIII.
1534. altogether against him, Sect. 21.

Stephen Bishop of Winchester, Orat. de vera Obedientia, is of the same Mind,
and so is Richard Sampson, Dean of the Chapel to Henry VIII. in an Oration to
this purpose. Sect. 22.

The Papers in the Cottonian Library seems the same with Dr. Stillingfleet's M.
SS. in his Irenicum. Both he and Dr. Burnet unfaithful in the Printing of it.
Dr. Durell's account of it. Archbishop Cranmer, with the Bishops and Doctors
engaged in our first Reformation were not Erastians, from the account given of
them, in his Church History, by Dr. Burnet. Less Discretion in Printing such
Papers; nor is their Authority really to be any thing, Sect. 23.

Mr. Seldom is shameless in quoting Bishop Andrews, who determines all along
against him. Those Laws that Protect the Church, must in course inspect their
Actions. The Bishop dissuaded Grotius from Printing his Book De Imperio
summarum Potestatum in Sacris. Have y' any Work for a Cooper, is indeed of Mr.
Selden's side, and the Lord Falkland. His very ill Speech in the House of
Commons, 1641. His Pulpit Law, and Decision of the Divine Right of Kings, as
well as of the Church. He, and such like Speech-makers, Promoters of the late
Rebellion, affronts both to King and Priest designed at once, when the Crown is
entitled to the Priesthood, Sect. 24.

Archbishop Bancroft, Archbishop Whitgift, and Bishop Bilson under the
Suspicion of Erastianism. Accused as such by Robert Parker de Politeia
Ecclesiastica, a Malicious Schismatic, made use of still against our Church by
Dailee against Ignatius his Epistles, by Doctor Stillingfleet in his Irenicum.
Our Bishops and Doctors are not against the Divine immutable Right of Bishops;
as Doctor Stillingfleet mistook out of Parker, and reports them to be.
Satisfaction may justly be required of him for it. Sect. 25.

The Writings of the best Men, how they may be mistaken, as of Justin Martyr.
The first Council of Nice. St. Jerome concerning Chastity, and Episcopacy.
Bishop Cranmer and our first Reformers. Bishop Whitgift, Bancroft, and Bilson.
The Point was at first only the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy. A secular title
only, no Characteristical mark then betwixt the Protestant, and Papist. The
Lay Elders in their Consistory set up after this, as Popes in his room. These
our Bishops warmth was exercised against whatever indiscretion in laying the
Argument. The Power of the Prince and the Priest, are still
contra-distinguished. Kings are not Governors next and immediately under
Christ, as the Mediator. The mistake of many in their Pulpit Prayer. Our Kings
and Church do not thence derive their Power, nor so claim it in their Acts,
Statutes, Declarations, Articles, etc. in the forms of bidding Prayer, by Queen
Elizabeth and King James, etc. of ill consequence if they do. Doctor Hammond's
Authority, Sect. 26.

Particular Doctors, not the Rule in Religion, The several ways by which Error
comes into the World. Julian's Plot to destroy Christianity. How Pelagius
managed his Heresy, by Rich and Potent Women, by feigned Autorities of great
Men. Liberius of Rome and Hosius, comply with Arianism wearied with
Persecutions. Theodosius his Doctores Probabiles, Cod. 16. Theodos. Tit. 1. l.
l. 2, 3.

THE last general of this Discourse now

AN undertaking I do not therefore engage Church, in each of her Collections,
Articles, Injunctions, Canons, Constitutions, and Homilies appointed to be read
in the Churches in the time of Q. Elizabeth.

And altogether to our purpose are the Homilies composed by the Bishops,
limiting Church Power to the Priesthood, and apparently distinguishing betwixt
the Authority and Laws of the Church and State, assigning different Ends and
Effects unto each.

Part 2. Of the Sermon of Good Works. This arrogance God detested, that Man
should so advance his Laws, to make them equal with God's Laws, wherein the
true honoring and worshipping of God stands, and to make his Laws for them
to be left off. God has appointed his Laws, wherein his Pleasure is to be
honored: His Pleasure is also, That all men's Laws, not being contrary unto his
Laws, shall be obeyed and kept, as good and necessary for every Commonwealth;
but not as things wherein principally his honor rests, and all Civil and
Man's Laws, either be or should be made, to bring Men better to keep God's Laws,
that consequently, or followingly, God should be the better honored by them.

Part 2. Of the Sermon of the right Use of the Church. And according to this
Example of our Savior, in the Primitive Church (whipping the Buyers and
Sellers out of the Temple) which was most Holy and Godly, and in the which due
Discipline with severity was used against the wicked, open Offenders were not
suffered once to enter into the House of the Lord, nor admitted to Common
Prayer, and the Use of the Holy Sacraments with other true Christians, until
they had done open Penance before the whole Church; and this was practiced, not
only upon mean Persons, but also upon the Rich, Noble, and Mighty Persons. Yea,
upon Theodosius, that Puissant and Mighty Emperor, whom for committing a
grievous and wilful Murder, St. Ambrose Bishop of Millain reproved sharply, and
('it is in the Margin, he was only dehorted from receiving the Sacrament, until
by Repentance he might be better prepared, Chrysostom.) did also Excommunicate
the said Emperor, and brought him to open Penance; and they that were so justly
exempted and banished (as it were) from the House of the Lord, were taken (as
they be indeed) for Men divided and separated from Christ's Church, and in most
dangerous estate; yea, as St. Paul says, even given unto Satan the Devil for
a time, and their company was shunned and avoided of all Godly Men and Women,
until such time as they by Repentance and public Penance were reconciled.

Part 2. Of the Homily of Fasting. It is necessary that we make a difference
between the Policies of Princes, made for the ordering of their Common-weals,
in provision of things serving to the most sure defense of their Subjects and
Countries, and between Ecclesiastical Policies in prescribing such Works; by
which, as by secondary means, God's Wrath may be pacified, and his Mercy
purchased. An instance of the one is in enjoining Abstinence from Flesh; for
the increase of Victuals, and the better sustenance of the Poor, and the
furniture of the Navy, the forbearing some piece of licentious Appetite upon
the Ordinance of the Prince, with the consent of the Wise of the Realm. An
instance of the other is, prescribing a form of Fasting, to humble our selves
in the sight of Almighty God, and which binds the Conscience, as to time and
occasion, and other Circumstances as the Church requires, and which has Power
to enjoin or relax; as is to be seen in the Homily.

Each Law of the Kingdom relating to Religion, which still suppose whatever is
taught and reported, enacted and made Law, received and submitted to,
maintained and protested, as the Establishments of our Church and State, to be
bottomed on the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and what the Catholic
Fathers and ancient Bishops have thence Collected, particularly in the four
first General Councils, or any other General Council, 10 Elizabethae, Cap. 1.
Sect. 36. Nor does our Reformation commence upon any other Grounds, than a
supposed depravation and defection, as to such that first depositum; those
Rules and Practices depending, and with a purpose to restore and reinforce
them; and did I believe our Church of England not to have followed this Rule,
did I find her any ways but swerving from, and much rather then if running
cross to, any one or more of those Primitive Standards, designedly erected for
the Pillars of Truth, the constant Marks and Copies for the practice and
adherency of future Ages, always obliging (for all Church Laws and Practice are
not so, even of the most Primitive Church, even the Laws and Practice
Apostolical.) I would be so far from abetting, or closing with such her
Authority, and Actions, that I would immediately go over to and embrace the Rule
wherever, or if any where, to be found, in the Isle of Patmos with St. John, or
in the Cave with Holy Athanasius; as not Magistracy and Law, so not the
Reformed Church of England, should be my either fear or obligation to the
contrary, be the crosser Circumstances whatsoever or wheresoever, that attend
me, could I not join with a present visible Church, or Body of Believers, in
the Enjoyment and Profession of it. This is only that, which as my own
Satisfaction, so I endeavor to make it others, that as Born and Baptized in
the Church of England, and still in Union with her, and my self in particular,
as a Presbyter there, have subscribed to her Articles, Canons and
Constitutions; so it is to and in that Church which is every ways Primitive and
Apostolical, and particularly in this instance of Church Power; and that it is
so is easily and readily to be demonstrated, and which I shall endeavor to do,
Methodo Synthetica, as they speak, as it lies in the course of things and
actions. 1. In the Judgment and by the Determinations of our Church, in her
conciliary Acts, Articles, Canons, Rubricks, in her Book of Ordination, etc. 2.
By the public Acts and Determinations of the Prince both in Parliament and out
of it, in his Statutes, Injunctions, and Proclamations, making Law these
Antecedent Church Determinations, and Autorities preceding. 3. From our own
particular Doctors, in their several Tracts and Writings.

Whether (as supposed to be more conversant with them) they know any notable
Crime they are guilty of, and which may render them unfit for the said Holy
Function; the words of the Bishop are these, Brethren, if there be any among
you that know any Impediment, or notable Crime in any of these Persons for
which he ought not to be admitted into this Holy Ministry, let him come forth
in the Name of God, and show what the Crime and Impediment is. The People are
no more concerned in Ordinations, then as Testimonies of the manners of those
who are to be Ordained, and in which alone they were concerned of old, and in
the Articles and Constitutions taking care that fit Men he admitted to Holy
Orders; what relates to the People, and they are to be enquired of, is a
Testimony of their Conversations; and if the Bishop lay hands on suddenly, and
without due Enquiry and competent Satisfaction, and the Person ordained prove
unworthy, the Orders notwithstanding are valid, the Penalty is laid on the
Bishop, he is to be suspended, and to ordain no more for two years. Articuli
pro clero 1584. Constitutiones Ecclesiasticae, 1597. ut homines idonei ad
sacros ordines admittantur.

IT were needless Pains to insist on, and That Person which by open
denunciation of the Church is rightly cut off from the Unity of the Church and
excommunicate, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the Faithful as an
Heathen and Publican, until he be openly reconciled by Penance, and received
into the Church by a Judge that has Authority thereunto; as among the Articles
of Religion 1562. Article 33. and this Judge is neither Chancellor, Official nor
Commissary, etc. but a Bishop or Presbyter: the Archdeacon cannot do it, if
not a Presbyter, and but in Deacon's Orders, in these alone is the Power of
both retaining and absolving, in the Articuli pro clero, 1584. and the libri
quorundam Canonum, etc. and in the constitutiones Ecclesiasticae, 1597. and all
set out by Queen Elizabeth; he that would once for all be satisfied what is the
sense of our Church, let him but once read over our seven and thirthieth
Article of Religion, together with the occasion of it, and he must be convinced
that her Judgment is on our side, however it is received, whether as Orthodox or
Erroneous by him. Among other Articles agreed upon by the Bishops, and other
learned Godly Men in the Convocation held at London 1552. this was one. The
King of England is supreme Head in Earth, next under Christ, of the Church of
England and Ireland. Many bad Inferences were made, and sinister Consequences
affixed, and particularly that the King was declared a Priest, empowered to
administer in Divine Service. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth 1561. (and till
which time, during the Reign of Queen Mary, the Objection, to be sure, had been
urged sufficiently, and improved) a Convocation being called, and Articles
agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole
Clergy, in the 37th Article; and in answer to the Objection, they more fully
explain themselves in these Words, and declare,

The Queens Majesty has the chief Power in this Realm of England and other her
Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or Civil in all Causes do appertain, and is not, nor
ought not to be, subject to any foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles
we understand the Minds of some dangerous Folk to be offended: We give not our
Princes the ministering either of God's Word, or of the Sacraments, the which
thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our Queen, do most
plainly testify, but that only Prerogative, which we see to have been given
always to all Godly Princes in holy Scripture by God himself, that is, that
they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their Charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restraining with the Civil
Sword the stubborn and Evil doers.

AND this is all is laid claim to by our etc. made by Anthony Sparrow now Lord
Bishop of Norwich, I meet with nothing done by King Henry VIII. save what is
mentioned by King Edward VI. in the entrance to his Injunctions 1547. and which
are there transcribed with his own additions: the design and end of which is
only to procure public and general obedience to the Laws and Duties of true
Religion, and that every Man truly observe them, as they will avoid his
Displeasure and Penalties annexed. All that Henry VIII got by the submission of
the Clergy in the five and twentieth year of his reign cap. 19. was this, as
there set down in the Statute: That the Clergy would not for the time to come
assemble in convocation without the King's Writ, That they would not enact,
promulge or execute any new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinance provincial or
other, or by whatsoever Name they shall be called in Convocation; unless the
King's Royal license be had, his Assent and Consent in that behalf. That all
Canons, Constitutions before made prejudicial to the King's Prerogative Royal,
repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or overmuch onerous to the
Subject, be abrogated and of no value, all other standing in their full
strength and power, the King's Assent first had unto them. The meaning of all
which appears only to be this, That nothing relating to Church Affairs and
Proceedings, is to be made Law, or to be proceeded for or against in any
outward Court whatever in a forensick judicial way, but by the leave and
authority of the King; without his Royal Assent first had, and his hand set to
it. And this is that Title of the supreme Head of the Church of England, which
he hereupon assumed to himself, and which some little time afterward confirmed
to him in full Parliament, his Heirs and Successors: the Power of the Church it
self is not at all abated, as purely such, and from our Savior, only brought
to a dependency upon the King, which before was upon the Bishop of Rome, and
who had exercised here that headship and still claims it.

submission of the Clergy, viz, a Right and Supremacy of Inspection over all
Persons in all Causes within his Realms and Dominions, and that no Pleas of
Religion, or the service of Christ, is to exempt them from the judicial
Cognizance and Jurisdiction of their Prince: this will appear more plain and
evident by the several Proceedings and Acts concerning Church Affairs made by
this King, in that 19 cap. and five and twentieth year of his Reign, where the
submission of the Clergy is turned into an Act, and in the several Acts
ensuing, in all which it does not appear that he ever assumed to himself and
exercised any other, than such like external Power and Authority in spiritual
Matters; he intermedles not with any one Instance of Priestly Power as purely
such, but on the contrary cautions, with Clauses and Preventions, lest any such
thing should be, or be supposeable so, in the Objection, the several Acts are
these. That no one Canon of the Church have the force of a Law, but what is
appointed by such Inspector of the Canons as he shall name and appoint. That no
Appeals be made to Rome upon the Penalty and Danger contained and limited in
the Act of Provision and Praemunire made in the 16th year of King Richard II.
That all the Canons not repugnant to the Laws of the Realm, or to the Damage of
the King's Prerogative Royal, are to be used and executed, as they were before
the making this Act. That no license is to be required from the Sea of Rome,
for the Consecrating and Investiture of Bishops. That it is in the King alone to
nominate and present them. That the Pope has no Power in Spiritual Causes to
give Licenses, Dispensations, Faculties, Grants, etc. all this is to be done at
home by our own Bishops and in our own Synods and Councils. cap. 21. and this
Provision is particularly made Sect. 19. ibid. provided that this Act, or any
thing or things herein contained, shall be hereafter interpreted or expounded:
that your Grace your Nobles and Subjects intend by the same to decline or vary
from the Congregation of Christ's Church, in any thing concerning the very
Articles of the Catholic Faith of Christendom, or in any other things declared
in Holy Scripture, and the Word of God necessary for yours and their Salvation:
but only to make an Ordinance by Policies necessary and convenient to repress
Vice. And for good conservation of this Realm in Peace, Unity and Tranquillity
from Ravine and Spoil, ensuing much the old ancient Customs of this Realm in
that behalf, not minding to seek for any Relief, Succor or Remedies, for any
worldly things and humane Laws in any case of necessity, but within this Realm
at the hands of your Highness, your Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm,
which have, and ought to have, an Imperial Power and Authority in the same, and
not obliged in any worldly Causes to any Superior.

cap. 1. when declared Supreme Head of the Church of England in Parliament, as
before recognized by the Clergy, the Power he thereby is invested with is also
declared, viz. To visit, redress, reform, order, correct, restrain and amend
all such Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities
whatsoever they be: which by any manner of spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction
ought or may lawfully be reformed, repressed, ordered, redressed, corrected,
restrained or amended, most to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of
Virtue in Christ's Religion, and for the conservation of Unity, Peace and
Tranquillity of this Realm. cap. 14. he appoints the number of suffragan
Bishops, the Places of their residence, and the Archbishop is to consecrate
them. In the 28th year of his Reign cap. 10. The King may nominate such number
of Bishops, Sees for Bishops, Cathedral Churches, and endow them with such
Possessions as he will. In the 31th year cap. 14. he defends the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, the Sacrament in but one kind, enacts that all Heretics be
burnt and their Goods forfeited, that no Priest may marry; for Masses,
Auricular Confession, etc. in the 34, 5. cap. 1. recourse must be had to the
Catholic Apostolic Church for the decision of Controversies. And therefore
all Books of the Old and New Testament in English, being of Tindal 's false
Translation, or comprising any matter of Christian Religion, Articles of the
Faith or Holy Scripture contrary to the Doctrine set forth sithence Anno Domini
1540. or to be set forth by the King, shall be abolished; no Printer or
Bookseller shall utter any of the said Books, no Persons shall play or
interlude, sing or rhyme contrary to the said Doctrine, no Person shall retain
any English Books or Writings concerning Matter against the holy and blessed
Sacrament of the Altar, or for the maintenance of the Anabaptists, or other
Books abolished by the King's Proclamation. There shall be no Annotations or
Preambles in Bibles or new Testaments in English, the Bible shall not be read
in English in any Church, no Women, etc. to read the New Testament in English,
nothing shall be taught contrary to the Kings Injunctions, and if any spiritual
Person preach, teach or maintain any thing contrary to the King's Instructions
or Determinations made or to be made, and shall thereof be convict, he shall
for his first Offense recant, for his second abjure and bear a faggot, for the
third he shall be adjudged an Heretic, and be burnt, and loose all his Goods
and Chattels. In the 37. year cap. 17. The full Power and Authority he has by
being Supreme Head of the Church of England, is, To correct, punish and repress
all manner of Heresies, Errors, Vices, Sins, Abuses, Idolatries, Hypocrises and
Superstitions, sprung and growing within the same, and to exercise all other
manner of Jurisdiction called Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Sect. 1. and Sect.
3. it is farther added, To whom by Holy Scriptures all Authority and Power is
wholly given to hear and determine all manner of Causes Ecclesiastical; and to
correct Vice and Sin whatsoever, and to all such Persons as his Majesty shall
appoint thereunto. And so far is all this from deriving to himself, and
exercising any thing of the Priesthood, that he is totidem verbis declared and
reputed only a Layman in the first Section of that Chapter: nor do any one of
these Instances here produced, amount to any more than to the defending and
guarding by Laws, Truth, and punishing and repressing Errors, whether in
Doctrines or in Manners, at least such as are so reputed by the Church and
State.

the supreme Head of the Church, there was ground enough for suspicion that the
Church her self, and all her Power was to be laid aside: and whereas the reason
and end of every particular Parliament before, and of each of his till then is
still said to be for the honor of God and holy Church, and for the Commonweal
and Profit of this Realm, it is abated, and said only for the honor of God and
for the Commonweal and Profit of this Realm, the benefit of holy Church, is,
in words at least, left out, and in the room of it is once added to the
conservation of the true Doctrine of Christ's Religion. As if the design was
according to the Models now adays framed and endeavored by private Persons to
be set up. That the care was to be only of Doctrines, in which, and in charity
and love and abatements to one another, the Essence of Church-Unity in general,
and each Christian with another consists. But yet however this so happened, or
upon what design either in himself or others, it is certain he abridged not the
Churchmen of any one Instance of that Secular worldly Power (as that of the
supremacy derived unto them is called 25 Henry VIII. cap. 21.) in the outward
Courts and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical: neither did he in his Practice, either
in his own Person, or the Persons of Churchmen, by a Plea of deriving the
Power unto them from himself, take upon him any thing essential to the
Priesthood, as to determine in Matters of Faith, decide Controversies, to
offiociate at the Altar, to ordain, etc. even to appoint Laws and Canons for
discipline or Proceedings in that Convocation called and continued by his
Power, but as there first debated and determined, framed into a Rule, and in
presiding over whom his headship so much consisted.

Henry VIII. to King Edward VI. and in the first year of his Reign cap. 2.
Sect. 3. we meet with a notable alteration made in Words, and though no more,
yet may make a show, as if he assumed a farther new Power to himself, as
supreme head of the Church, which King Henry VIII. did not do before him: and
whereas the Archbishops, Bishops, and other spiritual Persons do use to make
and send out their Summons, Citations and Process in their own Names, and with
their own Seals, it is enacted, That they be made and sent out in the Name and
with the Seal of the King, etc. but this relating only to the Courts
Ecclesiastical, as in the Words of the Statute, and by which the King is owned
the Supreme by the Clegy, as it is also in the Statute worded and acknowledged;
nor can any Archbishop, Bishop, etc. summon any of the King's Subjects to any
Place without his leave, and not enabled by him; the King may authorize them in
what form he please, whether of that of the Common Law, or in any other, as in
that of Majors in Corporations, or Vice-Chancellors in the University, or
Court-Leets, which latter was the form, and is by this Act abolished, and the
first brought into its room, and upon what reasons soever this Act was laid and
passed in King Edward's days, or repealed by Queen Mary, as to be sure the two
Parties, the Puritan and the Papist, thought they served themselves and
particular Designs in it, it was never re-enforced by any succeeding
Parliaments, nor attempted, that I have met with, in the days of either Queen
Elizabeth or King James, or King Charles the first or second. The Prince was
not thought to loose or gain any thing, as to his Authority, in Spirituals,
which way soever it went, nor the Bishops to have any Plea of inroding the
Errors, by so using it, as they now do, in their own Names, and with their own
Seals, as by the male-contented and puritanical Party in the days of King
Charles the first it was objected they did; and they libelled and traduced for
it, but are sufficiently vindicated therein by the reverend Father in God
Robert Sanderson late Lord Bishop of Lincoln in a Treatise called, Episcopacy
(as established by the Laws in England) not prejudicial to regal Power. And
even in this very Statute of Edward VI. the Bishops are to use their own Seals
and Names in all faculties, dispensations, collations, institutions,
inductions, letters of Orders, etc. and in limiting which also to his own Name
and Seal the King's supremacy had been equally asserted, nay, more concerned,
because peculiarly enlarged, if that the thing was aimed at; for the granting
Letters of Orders is what is purely hieratical, and solely Episcopal, seated in
the highest Order of the Priesthood, a peculiar embellishment to the Crown and
the Bishops, by acting in the other Instances in their own Names and by their
own Seals, must have in as his high a degree invaded, a most singular and
choice Prerogative of the Prince, the right of Investiture, admission into
Temporals, Institution and Induction into Benefices are Acts purely worldly and
secular and originally in the Crown; could an Objection be framed from the
particular Form either ways, and such its Circumstances, as indeed and really
cannot be.

Elizabeth, where we shall find that as she reassumed the Supremacy in the
first year of her Reign, alienated by Queen Mary, and this by Act of Parliament
cap. 1. in which is the Oath of Supremacy to be taken, as in that Act ordered
and limited: and because a great many Cavils were made, and sinister malicious
Constructions. The Queen her self in that very Year endeavors to rescue her
Subjects, and disentangle them from all such Jealousies, and among her
Injunctions 1559 for Peace and Order in the Church and State, there is an
admonition to simple Men deceived by Malicious. The Words are these, which,
though many, I Will here transcribe, and in effect but the same with those of the
Convocation 1562. on the very same occasion. The Queens Majesty being informed,
That in certain Places of the Realm, sundry of her Native Subjects being called
to Ecclesiastical Ministry of the Church, be by sinister Persuasion and
perverse construction induced to find some Scruple in the form of an Oath,
which by an Act of the late Parliament is prescribed, to be required of diverse
Persons for the recognition of their Allegiance to her Majesty: which certainly
was never meant, nor by any equity of Words or good Sense can be there from
gathered, would that all her loving Subjects should understand, that nothing
was, is, or shall be meant or intended by the same Oath than was acknowledged
to be due to the most noble King of famous Memory King Henry VIII. her
Majesty's Father, or King Edward the VI. her Majesty's Brother. And farther,
her Majesty forbids all manner her Subjects to give ear and credit to such
perverse and malicious Persons, which most sinisterly and maliciously labor to
notify to her loving Subjects how by word of the said Oath it may be
collected, that the King and Queens, Possessors of the Crown, may challenge
Authority and Power of Ministry of divine Service in the Church; wherein her
said Subjects be much abused by such evil disposed Persons, for certainly her
Majesty neither does nor ever will challenge any Authority than that was
challenged and lately used by the said noble Kings of famous Memory King Henry
VIII, and King Edward VI, which is and was in Ancient time due to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm, that is under God to have the Sovereignty and Rule over
all manner of Persons born within these her Realms, Dominions and Countries, of
what Estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal ever they be, so as no other
Foreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them; And if any
Person that has conceived any other sense of the Form of the said Oath, shall
accept the same Oath with this interpretation, sense or meaning, her Majesty is
well pleased to accept every such in that behalf as her good and obedient
Subjects, and shall acquit them of all manner of Penalties contemned in the
said Act against such as shall peremptorily and obstinately refuse to take the
same Oath. And because this is more private, her Majesty declares in Parliament
this very same thing, in her first year, Cap. 1. Sect. 14. Provided also that
the Oath expressed in the said Act, made in the first year, shall be taken and
expounded in such Form as is set forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queens
Majesty's Injunctions Published in the first year of her Majesty's Reign, that
is to say, To confess and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs, and
Successors, none other Authority than that was challenged, and lately used by
the noble King Henry VIII. and King Edward the VI. as in the said Admonition
more plainly may appear.

James, who is next, comes up to the same Point, and in his Proclamation before
the Articles of Religion, thus declares, That We are the Supreme Governor of
the Church of England, and if any difference arise about the external Polity,
concerning Injunctions, Canons, or other Constitutions whatsoever, thereunto
belonging, the Clergy in their Convocation is to order and settle them, having
first obtained leave under Our Broad Seal so to do, We approving their said
Ordinances and Constitutions, provided that none be made contrary to the Laws
and Customs of this Land. -- That out of Our Princely Duty and Care, the
Churchmen may do the Work that is proper for them; the Bishops and Clergy from
time to time in Convocation have leave to do what is necessary to the settling
the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church.

SO that I think no more need be said to Parliament Religion then it might have
been called so before, where the same Secular Power is equally extended and
executed, as in case of the Lollards certain supposed Heretics, Subverting the
Christian Faith, the Law of God, and the Church and Realm, to the extirpating
of them, and taking care that they be punished by the Ordinaries, II. Henry V.
Cap. VIII. and so before IV. Henry IV. Cap. XV. where the Laws are these, None
shall Preach without the License of the Diocesane of the same place. None shall
Preach or Write any Book contrary to the Catholic Faith, or the Determination
of the Holy Church. None shall make any Conventicles of such Sects and wicked
Doctrines, nor shall favor such Preachers. Every Ordinary may Convent before
him, and Imprison any Person suspected of Heresy. An obstinate Heretic shall
be burnt before the People. And VI. Richard II. Cap. V. Commissions are
directed to Sheriffs and others to apprehend such as be certified by the
Prelates to be Preachers of Heresies, their Fautors, Maintainers and Abettors,
and to hold them in strong Prison until they justify themselves according to
the Laws of Holy Church. And which is more remarkable, in the II. and III. of
this King, Cap. VI. the choice or Pope Urban is made Law, and confirmed in
Parliament, and it is by them Commanded that he be accepted and obeyed. But does
the Pope of Rome therefore return and owe his Authority to the Parliament of
England? how would they of Rome scorn such a thing if but insinuated? and yet
the Act of Parliament was in its design acceptable and advantageous to them;
they had the Civil Authority thereby to back and assist them as occasion, and
which might work that Submission to the present Election; his Holinesse's Bulls
could not do, at least, so readily and effectually. That this Nation did always
understand the outward Policy of the Church, or Government of it, in foro
exteriori, to depend upon the Prince, a learned Gentleman, late of the County
of Kent, Sir Roger Twisden Knight and Baronet, has given a very satisfactory
account, to them that will receive any, in his Historical Vindication of the
Church of England in Point of Schism, etc. Cap. 5. practiced by the best of
Kings before the Conquest, Ina, Canutus, Edward the Confessor, whose Praises
are upon Record in the Romanists account of them; and the last a Canonized
Saint, and to which they were often supplicated by the most Holy Bishops. Upon
the same Grounds are we to laugh at their Folly or Madness, or rather Malice,
when they taunt us with a Parliament-Religion, which has only the benefit of
the Government for its Protection, and our Kings do but that Duty is laid upon
them by St. Paul, take care that under them we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life in all Godliness and Honesty. Christianity it self ever since
Constantine's time, may be as well reproached, that it was Imperial, or, which
is in effect the same, Parliamental. Since the Empire was Christian and
defended it; nay while it was Heathen, for some particular Emperors, upon some
occasions have adhered to and protected it, and that it had no other bottom
than Reasons of State, and a worldly Compliance (and the lewd Pen of Baxter in
his Prophaner History of Bishops, etc. Cap. 1. Sect. 37. gives the same account
of the Church's increase under Constantine, on the score of Temporal
Immunities. That a Murderer that was to be hanged, if a Christian, was but to
be kept from the Sacrament, and do some confessing Penance, etc.) for those
Governors then assumed the same Power in Religious Matters, as have done our
Kings since the Reformation, as must appear to him that compares the two Codes,
Novels, and Constitutions at large, (or if he will not take that pains, the
Abridgment is made above) with our Statute Book, both which only take care,
that the Religion received and owned in the Church and by Churchmen, be
protected, and every Man in his station do his Duty in order to it, if the
common words in the Statutes carry the usual common sense, and are to be
apprehended by him, that is not a common Lawyer, and which the Author of these
Papers does not pretend to be.

Seldom inrodes us here again, and comes quite cross too against us: he tells
the World other things. That Excommunication in particular (and then they may
as well do all the rest) is what belongs to the Parliament, and which has
actually Excommunicated, and the Bishops are empowered, only by Parliament to
proceed in the like censures, and but by a Derivation from both Houses; he says
in plain terms, that all Power and Jurisdiction, usually called Church Power
and Jurisdiction, is originally and immediately from the Secular; and this he
thinks he has demonstrated from several Acts of Parliament to this purpose, and
because Erastus his Works were Licensed for the Press, and Published by the
Authority of the Kingdom in the Days of Queen Elizabeth, and which would not
have been done, did not the same Authority receive, and own, and espouse and
submit to his Doctrines, and which are wholly levelled against the
Church Power, as independent, and not derived from the Magistrate. I Will
consider each.

Edw. VI. Cap. IV. That if any Person or Persons shall smite or lay any violent
hands upon any other, either in any Church or Churchyard, or draw any Weapon,
then ipso facto every Person so offending shall be deemed Excommunicate, and be
excluded from the Fellowship and Company of Christ's Congregation, Sect. 2, 3.
and III James, Cap. V. That every Popish Recusant that is or shall be Convict
of Popish Recusancy, shall stand and be reputed to all ends and purposes
disabled as a Person Excommunicated by Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court.
Which two Acts being put together by Mr. Seldom, De Syned. lib. 1. c. 10. p.
320. as one and the same, and suitably he backs that of King Edward with this
of King James, Simili modo ex lata Lege, etc. It Is all the reason in the World
they should interpret one another; Now King James says expressly, That lawful
and due Excommunication is when denounced and Excommunicated according to the
Laws of this Realm. That is by a Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court, and this
by a Bishop or Presbyter in Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, by a Judge that has
Authority thereunto, Article 33. and which, to be sure, in the Act it self,
being not done as by Law, and by the acknowledged Laws of the Land, in such the
Statute; the Parliament rendered incapable of doing of it, being not the Judges
appointed, Mr. Seldom must in course be supposed so intolerably absurd in his
Inference, that the Secular Power Excommunicates, that common sense is not able
to endure him: And the true intent and meaning of the Parliament can only be
this, That these Offenders, though they be not Excommunicated, and which the
Parliament, though the Higher Court of England, have not Power to do, being not
Judges with Authority thereunto; yet they shall have the usual Secular
Punishments inflicted, and which are usually laid upon such as are duly
Excommunicated, the imposing which is the Act of Parliament alone, and which,
as they may remove, so they may impose when they please, without any respect to
the Excommunication anteceding, They shall be deemed as such. So King Edward,
They shall stand and be reputed to all ends and purposes as such. So King
James. The particular Punishment instanced in by King Edward, is Exclusion from
the Fellowship and Company of Christ's Congregation; which indeed comes
somewhat nearer to what always and immediately follows Excommunication it self,
in the first Institution and Primitive Practice, Vt a Communione Orationis and
conventus, and omnis Sancti commercii relegetur, Tertul. Apol. Cap. 39. where
so much Power over Men's Persons is obtained as to be able to exclude them their
Oratories; and the Christians usually absented themselves, and it is agreeable
with the Practice and Injunction Apostolical, with such an one not to
accompany, 1 Cor. 5.11. but yet this is not of the first Nature and Essence of
it; because this may be where the Excommunication is not; it is supposeable to
arise from a different Authority and Motive; and so, the Secular Arm, if
agreeable to its self, its own Power and Proceedings, and in relation to which
it is to be interpreted, must be concluded to appoint and execute in this
Statute, and no otherwise. As every Science, so every Power, is to be conceived
of, as on its own object, and proper work; and those Apostatizing dissenting
Christians of old, who laid this Punishment upon themselves, and out of
peevishness, or whatever undue ground, turned themselves out of Communion with
the Church, in her Prayers and Eucharist, the Church proceeded notwithstanding
to Excommunicate them; her own censure, as a Church-Act did judicially proceed
against them, See Can. 2. Conc. Antioch. and fusius supra; Cap. 4. Sect. 31.
and since our Parliaments have so frequently declared the Practice and
Inferences of the first Doctors and Holy Bishops from the Old and New
Testament, to be their rule in all their religious Proceedings they have so
often hither limited and confined themselves, every one of such their
Proceedings must in course be interpreted, in Subordination to and compliance
with them; they are not to be concluded, where Words and Actions, and things
will bear any favorable Construction, to run cross to, and Head against them;
or if they do, and no Friendly office can be done them, and a better gloss is
not to be put upon it; it is to be reputed as that particular Error, from which
they plead not an Exemption, and the general Design will weigh down, if coming
in Competition. But the Statute of King James instances in and confines to a
Punishment, that is not pleadable to be otherwise than Secular and Worldly, nor
can be interpreted of any immediate Spiritual consequence upon whom it is
inflicted. The Punishment is, to be disabled as to Suits at Law, and which
every Body knows, the alone Laws of the Land and Power of Parliament can
impose, and which may be, and is imposed upon sundry other occasions, and not
that of Excommunication only, and so supposed in the Act.

Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth in their Acts, for authorizing and making Law
the Common Prayer Book, ibid. p. 386. as ranked by themselves, so are they of
different Complexions, nor does the Prince there attempt any thing but what as
Supreme Governor in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, he is enabled
to do, as Mr. Seldom there very well refers to such his Title for his Evidence;
that is, to see that every one does his Duty in his Order and Station, enabling
and protecting him thereunto; the Prince is thereby to be interpreted no more
enabled by his own Power, whether in his own Person, or the Person of any other
to discharge the Office of a Priest, than he is supposed to have the Skill and
Capacity of any Artist, Mechanic, or what other Tradesman, whom he Empowers by
his Letters Patents, or any otherways, in Law acquits or indemnifies, in the
managery and public Profession of such his Art and Invention his Trade and
Employment, and no otherwise can the Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Officers
be said there to be empowered to proceed by censures against all such as will
not come to Church, II. III. Edw. VI. Cap. I. Sect. XII. I Elizabethae, Cap.
II. Sect XVI. nor do any of those many many instances, which his usual
intolerable Pains has heaped together in several Pages both before and after in
that Chapter, about the Prince, or ^ecular Powers, interposing, limiting and
restraining in Excommunications, prove any thing at all to his purpose, but on
the contrary, are all against him; himself has given so good an account of it,
that nothing needs here to be added, but the recital of his own words, whatever
Power there is executed in the Church Semper a jure Anglicano civili temperatum
est and restrictum, ut inde plane modos suos and limits perpetuo receperit,
page 387. received modes, and rules, and limits by the Laws of the Land,
Prohibitions and Injunctions in order to a search and enquiry, whether not
destructive to the Prince, to the Justice of the Subject, and into the merit
and demerit of the Cause, or Person, all follow as naturally as any thing in
the World, that in a Christian Kingdom, where the Church is protected, the
Power of her Officers asserted and maintained, its Acts and Executions assisted
and abetted, licensed and indulged in every thing that may be advantageous to
the promoting this Power, rendering it considerable and effectual, as in the
first design, institution and purpose of it, that the Prince do not wholly
denudate and divest himself by his Grants and Concessions, that the Church
receive Rules back again, and not act independently, but with a regard to that
arm which thus upholds her, and it is to be the care of a Prince, that as not
himself, so nor his Subjects be burdned and oppressed with the vexatious
proceedings of the Courts Ecclesiastical by Excommunications, or otherways. But
then as to the force of Mr. Selden's Argument on this Concession, I Will only
here use the words of Mr. Thorndike in his Treatise of the Laws of the Church,
Cap. ult. page 394. But will all this serve for an Argument that there is no
such thing as a Church in the Opinion of Christendom, but that which stands by
the acts of Christian Powers, because they pretend to limit the abuse of it?
when as the very name of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Title of those
Books, and those Actions is sufficient Demonstration that they acknowledge and
suppose a right to Jurisdiction in the Church, which they pretend to limit, as
the neither Church nor the rest of their Subjects to have cause to complain of
wrong by the abuse of it. And since Mr. Seldom has here Page 387. instanced in
the first Christian Emperors, we will accept of their both rules and limits,
Laxations and Temperatures, as he calls it, and who as they never attempted to
Excommunicate in their own Power and Persons, so neither did they obstruct or
declare against in their Laws, the Divine immutable Right and Precept of its
Institution, as is plainly made appear in my Treatise above about it, and all
that which Mr. Seldom has brought to the contrary is only some show of words
and expressions which he has wrested to his purposes, as he does here in our
Statute-Book; and that which he brings of the Rump Parliament, Page 387. and
that Excommunicationi Presbyterali retinacula and repagula quae egride rite ea
nequiret, diversimodo prudenter assignabant, etc. they gave Laws and Rules to
the Presbyterian Excommunications, in their Assembly at Westminster, and which,
though not without some Arguments to the contrary, were submitted unto, and
also of Geneva it self, whose Church Power was thus limited in its Proceedings
by State-Rules, and for the better Security of the Power; all this proves
nothing less than what he designs and produces them for; for these are the very
Men and particular Incorporations, as to Faith and Discipline, he instances in
Page 325, 326. who assert and defend Excommunication, as subjected in
themselves, and instituted by the preceptive Command, and positive Appointment
of either Christ and his Apostles, or of both; and the Inference thence can be
only this, That a Subordination to the Christian State, and submission to the
Rules of Policy in the Execution, for order and convenience, and the more
effectually compassing the end of the Ordinance, is not inconsistent, as such,
with the Gospel-Institution, it no ways invests the thing it self, or Original
Power in the State; and that which the Assembly-men demurred upon, when the
Parliament laid their Restrictions in all Probability, was, not that it
enterfeired with the Divine Right, or encroach'd upon it; but as inconsistent
with that Omnipotent Power, and Self-existent, their aim was to erect in their
Presbytery, or Consistoritorian Seigniority, made up of Lay, and Church Elders,
as accountable to none, but themselves, or the Classis or Synod, for the
Proceedings of such their Parlour, whether King or Parliament demanded it, all
being there but Subjects, that were not by Election, of that precise Order and
Fraternity, and as unlucky an instance he has brought above, Page 320. out of
the Parliament of Scotland, III Jacob. VI. Cap. XLV. that the Parliament did
there Excommunicate also, a thing so abhorring to the Kirk, and every ways
disagreeing to the both humor of those People, and its then present
Constitution, as reformed by Buchanan and Knox, in the height of Calvinism,
that no one that valued the Reputation of his Book among but easy considering
Men, would have inserted such a Quotation; and yet it serves as well as five
hundred more do, with which his Margin is all along stuffed.

Erastus his Works were Licensed by Authority and Printed, in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, by John Wolf, the Queens Bookseller, and it stands so Entered in the
Booksellers-Hall at London to this day, De Syned. l. 1. c. 10. Page 486. to
which I answer, that every Book Printed by Richard Royston His Majesty's now
Bookseller, and Licensed by Authority, is not therefore to be necessarily the
sense of the Authority of the Kingdom, and the same Latitude was in Licensing
Books in the days of Queen Elizabeth, as has been since, and the same liberty
taken. Nor is it clear that the Book was really Licensed by Authority from what
Mr. Seldom says, for the Entrance into the Booksellers-Hall only is, that it
was reported by Mr. Fortescue to be allowed by the Archbishop of Canterbury;
it is not said that the Archbishop's hand, or the hand of any other in Authority
was set to the License, and Books are not usually Entered for the Press upon a
Report that they are Licensed, but when a License is really not to be had, and
the Bookseller contrives as good a Plea as he can, for his false Entry and
surreptitious Impression; what is added, that the Archbishop had the Book in
his Study fairly Bound, and with a Golden Motto on the outside of it, will not
do, because Heretical, it was not fit for many other Studies than his, and
which is the only thing else urged by Mr. Seldom that he Licensed it; yet admit
it was Licensed duly, whether by those viri summi of the Ecclesiastical Order
and great Statesmen, who got the Copy of Erastus his Widow, or of Castelvetrus
her second Husband, as Mr. Seldom suggests, or by the Archbishop himself; what
is necessarily hence to be inferred, I Will here again give in the words of our
always to be reverenced Mr. Herbert Thorndike, of the Laws of the Church, Cap.
Vlt. Page 394. Neither is the Publishing Erastus his Book against
Excommunication at London to be drawn into the like Consequence, that those who
allowed and procured it, allowed the substance of what he maintained, so long
as a sufficient Reason is to be rendered for it otherwise: for at such time as
the Presbyterian Pretenses were so hot under Queen Elizabeth, it is no marvel
if it was thought to show England how they prevailed at home; first, because he
has advanced such Arguments as are really effectual against them, which are
not yet, nor never will be, answered by them, though void of the Positive
Truth, which ought to take place instead of their Mistakes, and besides,
because at such times as Popes did what them listed in England, it would have
been to the purpose to show the English how Machiavel observes they were
hampered at home, and for the like Reason when the Geneva Platform was cried up
with such Zeal here, it was not amiss to show the World how it was esteemed
under their own Noses in the Cantons and the Palatinate.

supremacy in all Causes and over all Persons infers it not, an induction would
be too numerous, the Particulars being so many. I Will only instance in two, the
one is Thomas Bilson then Warden of Winchester and afterward Bishop there, in
his Book entitled, The true difference between Christian Subjection, and
un-christian Rebellion, perused and allowed by public Authority and dedicated
to Queen Elizabeth, and for writing of which he had his Bishopric; the other
is Robert Sanderson, then the King's Professor at Oxford, and after Bishop of
Lincoln, in his Book called, Episcopacie (as establed by Law in England) not
prejudicial to the Regal Power, written in the time of the long Parliament by
the special Command of King Charles the I. but not published by reason of the
Iniquity and Confusion of the Times, and since printed and dedicated to our
present gracious Sovereign King Charles II. two Divines, as they flourished in
our Church at a great distance of time from one another; so are they at as
great distance for their Worth and Merit, beyond the generality of the Divines
of their times, and by which, as we have the advantage of their greater
Authority as to themselves, to which add, That they acted herein as public
Persons, by Authority appointed to write in the Name of the Church of England,
and in such Cases Men generally are more careful how they vent their own
private Niceties and Conceptions, so also have we a farther benefit hereby,
that this was and is the continued constant Doctrine of our Church and
Churchmen, from Queen Elizabeth to King Charles II.

Bishop Bilson thus speaks, part. 2d. page Oxford. It is one thing who may
command for truth, and another who shall direct unto truth. We say Princes may
command for Truth, and punish the refusers: this no Bishop may challenge, but
only the Prince that bears the Sword, no Prelate has Authority from Christ to
compel private Men, much less Princes, but only to teach and instruct them,
these two Points we stand on, page 125. 126. he tells the Jesuit, the Prince
is Supreme to establish those things Christ has commanded; and so he all along
shows it the design of the Oath of Supremacy, against the pretended outward
Jurisdiction of the Pope, claiming, as Christ's Vicar on Earth, a coercive
Power in order to spiritual things, over the Persons of all Christians
whatsoever, whose Subjects soever, and in whatsoever Causes, even our Kings
themselves. And that it is no more thence to be inferred, that Princes, because
supreme Governors over all Persons in all Causes, are therefore supreme Judges
of Faith, Deciders of Controversies, Interpreters of Scripture, Appointers of
Sacraments, Devisers of Ceremonies, and what not? then if it should be
inferred, Princes are supreme Governors in all Corporal things and causes,
ergo, they are supreme Guiders of Grammar, Moderators of Logique, Directors of
Rhetoric, Appointers of Music, Prescribers of Medicines, Resolvers of all
Doubts, and Judges of all Matters incident any ways to reason, art or action.
We confess them to be supreme Governors of their Realms and Dominions, and that
in all Spiritual things and causes, not of all Spiritual things and causes, we
make them not Governors of the Things themselves, but of their Subjects: we
confess that her Highness is the only Governor of this Realm, the Word Governor
does sever the Magistrate from the Minister, and shows a manifest difference
between their Office, for Bishops be no Governors of Countries, Princes be;
these bear the Sword to reward and punish, those do not, page 127. They have
several Commissions which God signed, those to dispense the Word and
Sacraments, these to prescribe by their Laws, and punish by the Sword, such as
resist them, within their Dominions, page 128. That no Clergyman, by God's
Law, can challenge an exemption from earthly Powers, page, 129. Princes have
full Power to forbid, prevent and punish in all their Subjects, be they
Laymen, Clerks or Bishops, not only Murders, Thefts, Adulteries, Perjuries and
such like Breaches, of the second table; but also Schisms, Heresies,
Idolatries, and all other Offenses against the first Table, pertaining only to
the Service of God and Matters of Religion, page 130. as the Kings of Israel
did, who are the Christian Princes example, page 132. and it is the duty of
Christian Kings to compel from Heresies and Schisms to the confession of the
truth, consent of Prayer and Communion of the Lord's Table, to compel Heretics
and Schismatics, to repress Schism and Heresy with their princely Power,
which they receive from above, chiefly to maintain God's glory, by the causing
the Bands of Virtue to be preserved in the Church, and the Rules of Faith
observed, page 133. this is the Prince's charge, to see the Law of God fully
executed, his Son rightly served, his Spouse safely nursed, his House timely
filled, his Enemies duly punished; and he tells the Jesuit, if he grants
this, he will ask no more. And these the causes and things that be Spiritual as
well as Temporal, the Princes power and charge does reach unto, or in the words
of St. Austin, that Princes may command that which is good, and prohibit that
which is evil within their Kingdoms, not in Civil Affairs only, but in Matters
that concern divine Religion. Cont. Crescon. l. 3. c. 51. page 134. to page
145. and this, or power of the like nature, was what was claimed and used in
causes Ecclesiastical, which he proves thoughout the Church Historians, Fathers
and Imperial Laws, thus declaring, assenting to and practicing, page 146. If by
the Church you mean the Precepts and Promises, Gifts and Graces of God preached
in the Church, and poured on the Church, Princes must humbly obey them, and
reverently receive them, as well as other private Men: so that Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, and all other builders of Christ's Church, as touching
their Persons be subject to the Princes power: Mary, the word of God in their
Mouths, and Seals of grace in their hands; because they are of God and not of
themselves, they be far above the Princes Calling and Regiment, and in those
Cases, Kings and Queens, if they will be saved, must submit themselves to God's
everlasting truth and testament, as well as the meanest of their People; and
yet they are for all this Supreme, and subject only to God, as to outward
Process, either from the Pope, or from any other Power. And so page 147. he
brings in those Passages of Tertullian, Optatus and Chrysostom, a Deo secundum,
solo Deo minorem, parem super terram non habet, etc. the word Supreme was added
to the Oath; for that the Bishop of Rome takes upon him to command and depose
Princes, as their lawful supreme Judge; to exclude this wicked presumption, we
teach, that Princes be supreme Rulers, we mean subject to no superior Judge, to
give a reason of their doings, but only to God. page 164, 165, 166. it must be
confessed he speaks not home, as might be required: when explaining how Kings,
as well as other Christians, are comprised under the duty of obeying their
Rulers, and to be subject unto them, etc. surely there is a true real obedience
due even from Princes to Church Officers, and their Power devolved from Christ,
and this learned Man seems here, and in other places, not to be rescued from
that common prejudice and possession seized upon too many, and all along
continued, upon casting of the Popes Superiority here in England: that there
can be no Church Power at all, universally obliging and requiring obedience:
but what implies and infers corporal bodily subjection, a change in Seculars:
it is this puts him upon that great mistake, that the Pastors of the Church, are
not influenced by the Kingly power of Christ; and what is regal in him, is
given to the Civil Magistrate, and who only succeed him in that Office,
(perpetual Government of the Church cap. 10.) and Archbishop Bancroft
confounding these two Powers, gives Beza and Cartwright as much advantage in
that Particular, as their Disciples and Followers can now really wish; and
because they say, that Christ as a King prescribed the form of Ecclesiastical
Government being a King, the head of the Church, does administer his Kingdom
per legitime vocatos pastores, by Pastors lawfully called; he runs them upon
this absurdity, that their Authority must be without any control. The Pastors
must be all of them Emperors, the Doctors Kings, the Elders Dukes, and the
Deacons Lords of the Treasury, etc.] survey of the holy pretended discipline,
etc. cap 24.] and yet after all it is mostly Name^ and Titles that occasions
this or the accidental pressing an argument, as there will be occasion to
consider anon; and Bishop Bilson goes on, and acknowledges all in effect, only
Bishops and Pastors are left out, and tells us, That the Church may be
Superior, and yet the Pope subject to Princes, Princes be Supreme and the
Church their Superior, the Scriptures be superior to Princes, and yet Princes
supreme, the Sacrament be likewise above them, and yet that hinders not their
Supremacy; Truth, Grace, Faith Prayer and other Ghostly Virtues, be higher than
all earthly States, and all this notwithstanding, Princes may be supreme
Governors of their Countries, and which, though in over abating Terms, and with
too scrupulous a fear, where no fear ought to be, declares as fully as can be,
the thing it self, viz. That Princes are to be subject to the Government in the
Church settled by Christ in its Bishops and Pastors, and which both as a
Prophet, a Priest and a King, he derives unto them. Church Officers have a
Power underived, and independent to the Crown, only it is ill worded by the
Warden, Things, Powers, Gifts, Virtues, etc. as standing and settled on Earth,
and not invested in Persons, can really be of no force and command at all, or
rather, and which at last will amount to the same, will be what every one shall
please to make them; and the Prince will have as many Supremes, as are
pretenders to these Gifts of the Spirit, and which will be enough, as
experience taught us: this only then can be meant by these Circumlocutions, and
why it might not have been spoken in downright terms, I cannot imagine; that
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, with the Bible put into their hands, as
it is at their Ordination, with full authority given for the Offices
ministerial, have a real Power and are truly Rulers in the Church, have a
Supremacy and Superiority peculiarly theirs, and all that will come to Heaven,
must come under this Ministry or Government, it is jurisdiction and discipline;
be they Princes or Subjects on Earth, or what ever worldly Government they are
possessed of, unless he will say, every Man has these Ghostly Virtues, which can
urge a Text of Scripture, and which cannot be conceived of him; and to this
purpose he goes farther, page 167, 168. Though the Members of the Church be
subject and obedient to Princes; yet the things contained in the Church, and
bestowed on the Church by God himself, I mean the light of his Word, the
working of his Sacraments, the gifts of his Grace, and fruits of his Spirit, be
far superior to all Princes; The plain meaning of which, can be but this.
Certain separate Persons invested by God, beyond Christians at large, with such
Gifts and Graces, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church; and in which respect a
good Emperor is within the Church and not above it, as St. Ambrose is to this
purpose here quoted by him, page 171. You must distinguish the things proposed
in the Church, from the Persons that were Members of the Church; the Persons
both Laymen and Clerks by God's Law were the Princes Subjects, the things
comprised in the Church, and by God himself committed to the Church; because
they were Gods, could be subject to the Power and Will of no mortal Creature,
Pope nor Prince; the Prince is above the Persons of the Church, not above
things in the Church, page 173. 176. 178. you know we do not make the Prince
Judge of Faith; we confess Princes to be no Judges of Faith, but we do not
encourage Princes themselves to be Judges of Faith: but only we wish them to
discern betwixt truth and error, which every private Man must do, that is a
Christian, page 174, 175, 176. he approves of Ambrose's Answer to Valentinian,
that is, was stout, but lawful, constant but Christian, when he refused to give
up his Church to the Arians, denied the Emperor's power over truth, and to
determine in Doctrines: The Emperor might force him out, if he pleased, neither
might he resist the force, his Weapons being only Prayers and Tears; but the
truth must not yield up to him, and he give his consent or seem to do it, by
his own departure, that the Arian Doctrine be there preached, this was not then
thought an Affront to the Magistrate and Law, nor had St. Ambrose a Commission
immediate from Heaven and abetted with Miracles, or was he judged a hypocrite
in so doing, because he did not go and preach the Cause against Arius amongst
the Goths and Vandals, who subscribed to his Creed, at their receiving
Christianity, though Mr. Dean of Canterbury tells us, he that pleads Conscience
and preaches it in England, and does not go and preach it also in Turkey, is
guilty of gross hypocrisy, page 203, 213. We do not make them Judges and
Deciders of Truth, but Receivers and Establishers of it, we say Princes be only
Governors, that is, higher Powers, ordained of God, and bearing the Sword, with
lawful and public Authority to command for truth, to prohibit, and with the
Sword punish Errors, and all other Ecclesiastical Disorders, as well as
Temporal, within their Realms; that as all their Subjects, Bishops and others
must obey them, commanding what is good in Matters of Religion, and endure them
with patience, when they take part with Error. So they, their Swords and
Scopters be not subject to the Popes Tribunal, neither has he by the Law of
God, or by the Canons of the Church, any Power or Pre-eminence to reverse their
Doings nor depose their Persons: and for this Cause we confess Princes within
their Territories, to be supreme, that is, not under the Popes jurisdiction,
neither to be commanded nor displaced at his pleasure, page 215, 216. There be
two Parts of our Assertion. The first avouching that Princes may command for
Truth and abolish Error. The next that Princes be Supreme, i. e. not subject to
the Popes judicial Process, to be cited, suspended, deposed at his beck. The
Word Supreme ever was, and is defended by us, to make Princes free from the
wrongful and usurped Jurisdiction which the Pope claims over them, page 217.
219. Bishops have their Authority to preach and administer the Sacraments, not
from the Prince, but Christ himself -- only the Prince gives them public
liberty without let or disturbance to do what Christ has commanded them, he no
more conferreth that Power and Function than he conferreth Life and Breath,
when he permits to live and breath, when he does not destroy the life of his
Subjects. That Princes may prescribe what Faith they list, what Service of God
they please, what form of Administering the Sacraments they think best, is no
part of our thoughts, nor point of our Doctrine, for external Power and
Authority to compel and punish, which is the Point we stand upon, God has
preferred the Prince before the Priest, page 223. touching the Regiment of
their own Persons and Lives, Princes owe the very same Reverence and Obedience
to the Word and Sacraments, that every private Man does: and if any Prince
would be baptized, or approach the Lord's Table, with manifest show of unbelief
or irrepentance, the Minister is bound freely to speak, or rather to lay down
his life at the Princes feet, than to let the King of Kings to be provoked, the
Mysteries to be defiled, his own Soul and the Princes endangered, for lack of
often and earnest Admonition, page 226. by Governors we do not mean Moderators,
Prescribers, Directors, Inventers, or Authors of these things, but Rulers or
Magistrates, bearing the Sword, to permit and defend that which Christ himself
first appointed and ordained, and with lawful force to disturb the Despisers of
his lawful Will and Testament. Now what inconvenience is this, if we say that
Princes as public Magistrates, may give freedom, protection and assistance to
the preaching of the Word, ministering of the Sacraments, and right using of the
Keys, and not fetch license from Rome? page 236. Princes have no right to call
and confirm Preachers, but to receive such as be sent of God, and give them
liberty for their preaching, and security for their Persons, and if Princes
refuse so to do, God's Laborers must go forward with that which is commanded
them from Heaven, not by disturbing Princes from their Thrones, nor invading
their Realms, but by mildly submitting themselves to the Powers on Earth, and
meekly suffering, for the defense of the truth, what they shall inflict. A
private liberty and exercise of their own Conscience and Religion was not then
thought enough, if the Religion of a Nation be false, and though authority do
abet it, nor would the Authority in Queen Elizabeth's days have owned that
Person, asserting and maintaining of it, though not stubbornly irreligious; but
only wanting information in so notoriously a known case of practice, page 238.
In all spiritual Things and Causes Princes only bear the Sword, i. e. have
public Authority to receive, establish and defend all Points and Parts of
Christian Doctrine and Discipline within their Realms, and without their help,
tho the Faith and Canons of Christ's Church may be privately professed and
observed of such as be willing, yet they cannot be generally planted or settled
in any Kingdom, nor urged by public Laws and external Punishments on such as
refuse, but by their consents that bear the Sword. This is that we say, refel
it if you can, page 252. to devise new Rites and Ceremonies for the Church, is
not the Princes vocation, but to receive and allow such as the Scripture and
Canons commend, and such as the Bishops and Pastors on the Place shall advise,
not infringing the Scripture or Canons, and so for all other Ecclesiastical
Things and Causes: Princes be neither the Devisers nor Directors of them, but
the Confirmers and Establishers of that which is good, and Displacers and
Revengers of that which is Evil, which power we say they have in all things be
they Spiritual, Ecclesiastical or Temporal; the Abuse of Excommunication in the
Priest, and contempt of it in the People; Princes may punish, excommunicate
they may not, for so much of the Keys, are no part of their Charge, page 256.
The Prince is in Ecclesiastical Discipline to receive and stablish such Rules
and Orders as the Scripture and Canons shall decide to be needful and healthful
for the Church of God in their Kingdoms. It is the Objection indeed and undue
consequence the Church of Rome makes against us, and the Oath of Supremacy, and
which is urged by Philander in this Dialogue betwixt him and Theophilus, or
betwixt the Christian and the Jesuit, page 124, 125. That we will have our
Faith and Salvation to hang on the Princes Will and Laws, that there can be
imagined no nearer way to Religion than to believe what our temporal Lord and
Master list, in the Oath we make Princes the only supreme Governors of all
Persons in all Causes, as well spiritual as temporal, utterly renouncing all
foreign Jurisdictions, Superiorities and Autorities; upon which Words mark what
an horrible Confusion of all Faith and Religion ensues; if Princes be the only
Governors in Ecclesiastical Matters, then in vain did the Holy Ghost appoint
Pastors and Bishops to govern the Church: if they be Supreme, then they are
superior to Christ himself, and in effect Christ's Masters: if in all Things
and Causes spiritual, than they may prescribe to the Priests and Bishops what
to preach, which way to worship and serve God, how, in what Form to minister
the Sacraments, and generally how Men shall be governed in Soul; if all foreign
Jurisdiction must be renounced, then Christ and his Apostles, (because they
were and are Foreigners) have no Jurisdiction nor Authority over England. But
this is what only the ill Nature and Malice of our Adversaries would have us to
believe and assert, and give out to the World we do; it is what is, and all
along has been repelled with scorn and indignation both by our Princes in their
single Persons, and in their Laws in Parliament: and though some of our Divines
have wished the Oath had been more cautiously Penned, and think it lies more
open to little obvious Inferences of this nature than it needs, and which amuse
the unwary less discerning Reader, yet all own and defend it as to the
substance and design and intent of it, and which is thoroughly and sufficiently
done by the learned Warden in this Treatise, as appears by this Specimen or
shorter account is now given of it, and he that peruses the whole Treatise will
find more, and John Tillotson Doctor in Divinity and Dean of Canterbury, is, if
not the only, yet one professed conforming Divine in our Church, that publicly
from the both Pulpit and Press, has given the Romanist so much ground really to
believe we are such, as they on purpose to abuse us and delude others, give it
out we are, and complyes so far with their Objection and Calumny just now
recited, as by Philander drawn up against us, gives so much of Force and
Authority to it.

Sanderson in his Treatise now mentioned has a different task from Bishop
Bilson, the one was to vindicate the Prince, that he invades not the Church,
the other the Bishops or Church that from usurping on the Prince. Bishop
Sanderson among many other things urged by him, and as his Subject requires, is
express in these Particulars, page 121. That there is a supreme Ecclesiastical
Power, which by the Law of the Land is established, and by the Doctrine of our
Church acknowledged to be inherent in the Church, page 23. That regal and
Episcopal Power, are two Powers of quite different kinds: and such as
considered purely in those things which are proper and assential to either,
have no mutual relation unto or dependence upon each other, neither has either
of them to do with the other, the one of them being purely spiritual and
internal, the other external and temporal: albeit in regard of the Persons that
are to exercise them, or some accidental Circumstances appertaining to the
exercise thereof, it may happen the one to be some ways helpful or prejudicial
to the other, page 41. that the derivation of any Power from God, does not
necessarily infer the non-subjection of the Persons in whom that Power resideth
to all other Men; for doubtless the power that Fathers have over their
Children, Husbands over their Wives, Masters over their Servants is from
Heaven, of God and not of Men, yet are Parents, Husbands, Masters in the
exercise of their several respective Powers, subject to the Power, Jurisdiction
and Laws of their lawful Sovereigns, page 44. The King does not challenge to
himself, as belonging to him, by virtue of his Supremacy Ecclesiastical, the
Power of ordaining Ministers, excommunicating scandalous Offenders, the power
of Preaching, adminstring Sacraments, etc. and yet does the King by virtue of
that Supremacy, challenge a Power as belonging to him in the right of his Crown
to make Laws, concerning Preaching administering the Sacraments, ordination of
Ministers, and other Acts belonging to the Function of a Priest, page 69, 70,
71. it is the peculiar reason he gives in behalf of the Bishops, for not using
the King's Name in their Process, etc. in the Ecclesiastical Courts (the
occasion of the whole discourse) and which cannot be given for the Judges of
any other Courts, from the different nature and kind of their several
respective Jurisdictions, which is, That the Summons and other Proceedings and
Acts in the Ecclesiastical Courts, are for the most part in order to the
Ecclesiastical Censures and Sentences of Excommunications, etc. the passing of
which Sentences and others of the like kind, being a part of the Power of the
Keys, which our Lord Jesus Christ thought sit to leave in the hands of the
Apostles and their Successors, and not in the hands of Laymen: The Kings of
England never challenged to belong to themselves but left the exercise of that
Power entirely to the Bishops, as the lawful Successors of the Apostles and
Inheritors of their Power, the regulating and ordering of that Power in sundry
Circumstances concerning the outward exercise thereof in foro exteruo, the
Godly Kings of England have thought to belong unto them, as in the Right of
their Crown; and have accordingly made Laws concerning the same, even as they
have done also concerning other Matters appertaining to Religion and the
Worship of God; but the substance of that Power, and the Function thereof, as
they saw it altogether to be improper to their Office and Calling; so they
never pretended or laid any claim thereunto, but on the contrary renounced all
claim, to any such Power or Authority. And for Episcopacy it self, the Bishop
sets down his opinion in a Postscript to the Reader; the words are these, My
opinion is, That Episcopal Government is not to be derived merely from
Apostolical Practice or Institution; but that it is originally founded in the
Person and Office of the Messiah, our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ; who being sent
by his Heavenly Father to be The great Apostle, [Heb. 3.1.] Bishop and Pastor
[1 Pet. 2.25.] of his Church, and anointed to that Office immediately after his
Baptism by John, with Power and the Holy Ghost, [ Acts 10.37, 38.] descending
then upon him in a bodily shape [ Luke 3.22.] did afterward, before his
Ascension into Heaven, send and empower his holy Apostles (giving them the Holy
Ghost likewise as his Father had given him) in like manner as his Father had
before sent him, [ Joh. 20.21.] to exercise the same Apostolical, Episcopal and
Pastoral office for the Ordering and Governing of his Church until his coming
again, and so the same office to continue in them and their Successors unto the
Worlds end [ Mat. 28.18.20.] this I take to be so clear from these and other
like Texts of Scripture, that if they shall be diligently compared together,
both between themselves, and with the following Practice of all the Churches of
Christ, as well in the Apostles times, as in the purest and Primitive time
nearest thereunto, there will be left a little cause why any man should doubt
thereof.

Seldom is once more to be encountered with, who appears against all this, and
says, that the Doctors of our Church are quite of a different Judgment, and
have declared the same to the World in their Writings, De Syned. l. 1. cap. 10.
page 424, 425. As the two Universities at once, Published in the Reign of Henry
VIII. 1534. called Opus eximium de vera differentia Regiae Potestatis and
Ecclesiasticae, and quae sit ipsa veritas, and virtus utriusque Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, in an Oration de vera Obedientia, Joannes
Bekinsau, de Supremo and absoluto regis Imperio, with abundance more which he
tells us, was to have been Printed in King James' days, but the Printer was in
the blame. The Manuscripts in the Cottonian Library, where an account is given
of Henry VIII. entrance upon the Reformation 1540. and the Question among
others, is, Vtrum Episcopus aut Presbyter possit Excommunicare, and ob quaenam
delicta, and utrum ii soli possint, and jure divino, whether the Bishop or the
Presbyter can Excommunicate, and for what Offenses, and whether they alone can
do it, by Divine Right? and about which great Divines were distracted in their
Opinions, but the Bishop of Hereford, St. David, Westminster, Dr. Day, Curwin,
Laighton, Cox, Symons, say that Laymen may Excommunicate, if they be appointed
by the high Ruler, or the King; and all those Writings in every Bodies hands,
De primatu regio, de potestate Papae and Regia, against Bellarmine, Tortus,
Becan. Eudemon Joannes, Suarez, etc. in the time of King James, and whose
Authors were Bishop Andrews, Bishop Buckeridge, Dr. Collings, Bishop Carlton,
etc. and, in which three first Mr. Seldom instances; a great appearance of
Adversaries and considerable withal, and did not Mr. Seldom give in the
Catalogue, whose unfaithfulness and imposings I have so often experienced in this
kind, would be much more terrible in reality, than they at first look appear;
encouraged therefore by former success, I Will encounter him once more, and
undertake an Examination of so many of them as I have by me, and it is very
pardonable if I have not all; we that live remote in the Country, and but poor
Vicars there, have not the advantage of Sir Robert Cotton's Library, cannot
attend Auctions, or but common Booksellers Shops, and have not Money to employ
others, especially for the obtaining such Authors as these, most of which are
out of Print, and some very rarely to be had by any; and I am the more
encouraged to the search, just now finding, in that Book of Bishop Sanderson's,
I had so lately occasion to make use of, some of these Authors made use of on
the contrary side; as those, who by the occasion of the title of Supreme Head,
our Church being charged with giving to the Prince, the Power, Authority, and
Offices of the Priest openly disavow and disclaim it; and I think I may as soon
rely upon Bishop Sanderson's report, as Mr. Selden's, his skill as Divine, and
Integrity as a Christian, can be no ways below him, even in the Judgment of Mr.
Selden's Friends.

THE Opus eximium de vera differentia, etc. I do not know why the Universities
are entitled to it, but upon Mr. Selden's report, for this time, will grant it
readily, because the Authority how great soever, is really on my side; nor does
it answer any thing at all of Mr. Selden's design in producing of it. The first
Part is, De potestate Ecclesiastica, and is wholly levelled at the Power of the
Pope, and discovers his Usurpations over the Christian both Kingdoms and
Bishops; that his pretended both Spiritual and Temporal Plea has no ground
either on the Scriptures, or Fathers; for it is altogether begged and sandy. I
cannot so much commend the clearness of it, when discoursing of Church Power,
as in it self, and purely in the Donation, and which he allows and defends, he
appearing not to have the true Notion of Church-Laws, and stumbles at that so
usual block, that all Laws must be outwardly Coercive, or they cannot be called
Laws, and so can be only in the Prince, whom he well enough proves to have
alone that Power, and what he allows, the Church, is to make Canons, i. e.
rules to be received only by those that are willing; but not Laws which
enforce, with more to this purpose, something too crudely, and which the then
present Age will plead something; for, Confirmant quidem praedicta potestatem
Ecclesiasticam, sed Dominum regant, tribuunt autoritatem non jurisdictionem
admonere, hortari, consolari, deprecari, docere, praedicare, Sacramenta
ministrare, cum charitate arguere, increpare, obsecrare, certissimis Dei
promissis spem in Deo augere, gravibus Scripturarum comminationibus a vitiis
deterrere, eorum sit Proprium qui Apostolis succedunt, and quibus etiam dictum
est, quorum remiseritis peccata, etc. Leges autem, poenae, judicia, coerciones,
sententiae, and caetera hujusmodi, Caesarum, and Regum, and aliarum Potestatum;
but surely all these are Laws too, and have real Penalties, if our Savior
himself be a Lawgiver, and have Authority, and do oblige the unwilling, only
they break in sunder the bonds of Duty, on whose Truth, these their
Admonitions, Increpations, etc. are to be founded, by whose Virtue the
Sacraments have their Influence, and the Power of retaining is executed, unless
the Pains of Hell are only painted or have no force, because not inflicted so
soon as denounced: there is a Dominion sure goes along with Christ's Kingdom
too, accompanying his Ordinances, only it is not by the Rules, and with the
Consequents of the other Jurisdictions of the World, and on this account Men
have been so unwary as not to discern it, to speak against it, or unwilling to
speak plainly out concerning it, a mistake has been observed in others, and
it is here pretty aged, but it is most sure and certain this, it is most plain and
conspicuous, the whether Potestas or dominium, autoritas or jurisdictio, as
they distinguish, Power or Dominion, Authority or Jurisdiction, that is allowed
to be Ecclesiastical, is no where in the Treatise, attributed to Kings, to
those that have Secular Dominion, this is only eorum qui Apostolis succedunt,
theirs that succeed the Apostles. The second Part is, De potestate Regia, where
first the Divine Right of Kings is asserted, and then their Power in the
Church, or over-spiritual things, where their Right of Investiture is declared
from Genesis 47. and the Priests received their Benefices from them, as also over
the Power and Persons of the Priests, to Correct and Punish them, to whom the
Priests are to pay Tribute, and this all along from the Examples of the Kings
of Israel, from our Savior, from St. Peter, this contrary to the practice of
the Pope, who claims these Powers and Advantages to himself, and in his own
Power and Person executes them; it is the Princes Province assigned him in the
Scripture to Punish and Coerce, to enforce Penance and Restitution, and that
evildoers be cut off according to St. Paul, to prohibit and smite such as
refuse to serve God according to the Priests instruction, as did Hezekiah to
the Worshippers in the Groves and high places, destroying them, as did the King
of Nineveh compelling the whole City to Repentance, forbidding for the future
by terrible Laws, as did Nebucadnezzar; thus Justinian the Emperor gave Laws in
Religion, concerning Faith and Heretics; Churches, Bishops, and Churchmen,
Marriages, etc. and the same, and only this Power have the Kings of England
assumed to themselves, as he instances all along to the End of the Book;
particularly in the Church Laws made by several Kings in this Island; as
Canutus, Etheldred, Edgar, Edmund, Adelstan, Ive, Oswin, Egfrid, William the
Conqueror, in his Letters for the Endowment of Battle, with its Privileges and
Immunities, and which Mr. Seldom makes use of to his purpose, though no ways
serving it; for he only exempts the Church from Episcopal Visitation; but
neither in this or any other of their Letters, Rules, Laws and Injunctions
given to the Church, is any thing of Church Power as such, owned, claimed,
appropriated, or but pretended to, by virtue of the Crown or Regal Power given
them of God; but the two Powers are supposed distinct and disparates, and so in
particular, King Edgar, in that his severer, correptive Monitory-Oration or
Letter to the Clergy of England, their faults appearing then very notorious, he
at length thus addresses himself unto them, Ego Constantini, vos Petri, gladium
habetis in manibus, jungawus dexteras, gladium gladio copulemus, ut ejiciantur
extra castra leprosi, ut purgetur Sanctuarium Domini, and ministrent in Templo
silii Levi. I have the Sword of Constantine, you have the Sword of Peter in
your hands, let us join right hands together, let us couple Sword with Sword,
that the Leprous may be cast out of the Tents, and the Sanctuary of the Lord be
Purged, and the Sons of Levi minister in the Temple. And a little farther
applying himself to Dunstan the Archbishop, he tells him, Contempta sunt verba,
veniendum est ad verbera, urguisti, obsecrasti, atque increpasti, Admonitions
will do no more good, he must come to blows, and thereunto directs him to join
with himself Edwald Bishop of Winchester, and Oswald Bishop of Worcester, Vt
Episcopali Censura and regia Autoritate, turpiter viventes de Ecclesia
ejiciantur, etc. by the Episcopal Censure and Regal Authority, the one
assisting, but neither usurping upon, and destroying the other, these evil Men
be cast out of the Church, and better placed in their rooms. So unlucky is Mr.
Seldom in this first Quotation.

STEPHEN Bishop of Winchester in his Oration de vera Obedientia comes next, but
brings nothing more of advantage to his side, and as it was Printed 1537. and
but a year after the Opus eximium, etc. so does he as to the Substance copy
after him, and asserts Henry VIII. Head of the Church, i. e. all Christians
within his Dominions, as were the Kings of Israel over all the Jews, i. e. to
take care of their Morals, and see that they do their Duty to God, their
Neighbor, and themselves; as Justinian gave Laws to the Church, and the Causes
of Heresies were agitated with the Caesar's and Princes that were Christians,
and Laws made, promulgated and enjoined execution, both by our Kings here in
England, and also by others elsewhere, and particularly refers to that Oration
of Edgar, just now mentioned; and adds farther out of it, how Dunstan that most
holy and excellent Archbishop of Canterbury, submitted to this his
Jurisdiction, and most willingly embraced that word of the King, Qua se gladium
gladio copulaturum edixit, ut dissoluti Ecclesiae mores, ad rectam vivendi
normam aptarentur; in which he engaged to join Sword to Sword, in order to the
reducing the Church to a just and due way of living, meaning his Kingly Power
to the Power of the Church, assisting the Spiritual with the Temporal Arm, for
so the Bishop goes on and interprets these two Swords, and instances in
Excommunication, as a branch of that which is in the Churches hands, Altero
gladio ad illud Pauli alludens, quem verbi ministri docendo and excommunicando
exercent; altero praeminentiam ostendens jure divino concessam, cui omnes
parere, quotquot Principis ditioni subjecti Ecclesiam constituunt, omnino
debent; By one Sword alluding to that of Paul, which the Ministers of the Word
exercise in Teaching and Excommunicating; by the other showing that
Pre-eminence granted by God, and to which all must obey, that, subjected to the
Jurisdiction of a Prince, constitute a Church within his Dominions, and which
two Powers, though requiring different Obedience to diverse Persons and
Governors, as to the Bishops and Ministers of the Word of God, and to the King,
are not at all adverse to and against one another; nor is any thing more
detracted from or diminished thereby of the Obedience to the King, than when a
Wife obeys her Husband, and a Servant his Master, by the general Command of
God; and yet this is another of Mr. Selden's Autorities, which with his usual
forehead he brings for the sense of the Doctors of our Church in the days of
Henry VIII. and that the Church Power is none at all but as derived from the
Crown, and the Prince can Excommunicate I wonder how he omitted the Oration of
Richard Samson to this purpose, and at the same time, he being Dean of the
Chapel to Henry VIII and which would have made a (...) show in his Margin,
which is the main thing he aims at, it certainly came not to his hands, and it
would have served his turn as well as any of the other, there being in him not
one word concerning the Power of the Church left by Christ, and he only asserts
the King Supreme Head of the Church of England, the Church, as made of so many
Persons, implying a Body politic too, and they Subjects equally as Christians;
nor could any man think that is but ordinarily considering, or designs not by
Names, and Attempts, to deceive the unwary, but credulous World, and so is a
Knave; that the two Universities at that time, or the eminenter of the Clergy
at Court, should assert the Supremacy upon other terms, who in all Probability,
were, a secretis, of his intimate Council, when designing for the Supremacy,
and to be sure could not be ignorant of the King's Public Declarations, and
the Statute in Parliament; that in assuming of it, he did not design to
infringe and invade any Power of the Church, and it least of all Vindicates Mr.
Selden's innocence, in urging them, with whose Reputation it is as little
consistent, to say, he is ignorant of the Statute Book, being by Profession a
common Lawyer.

Cottonian Library, seem to be the very same with that Manuscript of Doctor
Stillingfleet's, at least to be upon the same occasion, and which the Doctor
published in part in his Irenicum, and since, it seems he thought it not
public enough there, communicated it to his Friend Doctor Burnet, and who has
Printed it at large in the Third Book of his History of the Reformation of the
Church of England, and they seem to bear date about the same time, according to
the Computation given by John Durell, since Dean of Windsor in his Ecclesiae
Anglicanae Vindiciae, Cap. 28. placing it in the Days of Henry 8th. and so has
Doctor Burnet since, Correcting Doctor Stillingfleet's Mistake, that it was in
a Conference in the days of Edward VI. and entitling it to the Authority of the
Reformation; and though Doctor Stillingfleet only mistook in the time, yet both
he and Burnet have joined together in that which is worse, and have dealt
unfaithfully in the transcribing of it, if we may believe the Dean of Windsor's
account, who tells us, in his forementioned Vindiciae, out of the Manuscript it
self, which Dr. Stillingfleet gave him the opportunity to peruse, that when
Archbishop Cranmer had affirmed, 1. That it was not only in the Power of a
Bishop to create a Presbyter, but in the Power of a Prince; yea, in the Power
of the very People to create a Presbyter. 2. That he who under the Gospel is
designed a Bishop or Presbyter, wants no Consecration; that the Election and
Designation is enough in order to it; and Leighton a Doctor of Divinity gave
his Opinion in these words, 1. I suppose a Bishop according to Scripture to
have Power from God, as his Minister of creating a Presbyter, though he ought
not to promote any to the Office of a Presbyter, or admit to any other
Ecclesiastical Ministry in a Commonwealth, unless the leave of the Prince be
first had; but that any other have Power according to Scripture, I have neither
read, nor learned by Example. 2. I suppose Consecration to be necessary as by
imposition of hands, for so we are taught by the Examples of the Apostles; such
says the Dean was Cranmer's Candor, and so great his love of Truth, he doubted
not to yield to this Opinion of Leighton's, and this is plain in Doctor
Stillingfleet's Manuscript, in which is to be seen Th. Cantuariensis, set with
his own hand below Leighton's Name, in token of his Approbation of it, and of
which both the Doctors have given no account to the World, being omitted in two
Impressions. Why Doctor Stillingfleet did leave out this passage in his
Irenicum it is plain, because it thwarts his particular design, and he had lost
the advantage of so considerable a Name and Authority, as Cranmer's, before his
most false Assertion, That Ordination is not appropriated to Bishops; and for
which in that Treatise he so contends, it takes down somewhat of their
Top-gallant. As I remember, somewhere in that Book, he expresses their solitary
Power, he wondered no question with himself how at those years he could find out
such a Book to present the World with, and indeed well he might, and when he
had read so far as served his present turn, went no farther, otherwise he would
have enquired also a little better into the time when this conference was, and
not obtruded it on the World, as done by the Authority of our Reformation;
though it is agreeable enough with the following Testimonies of the Bishops and
Doctors of our Church in the same point of Episcopacy, and which, to say no
worse of them, are lame and imperfect, as is here his account of the
Manuscript. But what should move Doctor Burnet to omit it I cannot imagine;
that it was not his purpose to leave Cranmer to Posterity, as either an
Erastian or Independent, and of which he is justly to be suspected otherwise;
this is plain from his own account of him, Lib. 3. Page 289. where he tells us,
In Cranmer's Paper, relating to this very Conference, some singular Opinions of
his about the Nature of Ecclesiastical Offices will be found; but as they are
delivered by him with all possible Modesty; so they were not established as the
Doctrine of the Church, but laid aside as particular Conceits of his own, and
it seems that afterward he changed his opinion; and having said this, why
might he not have Printed out the whole Manuscript, and which is but the very
same thing, only more satisfactory to the World, and the Doctor had dealt more
clear and ingenuous in the Matter, nor is he quite to be acquitted from some
little sinister end, and clawing therein a thing not to the advantage of an
Historian; especially since he Printed out of another part of that Manuscript
the Archbishops judgment so fully, with Eight other Bishops concerning the
Supremacy, denying the Prince any Church Power thereby, and which is peculiar
only to those that are chosen and sent by Christ Jesus, as his Father sent him
into the World, and invested him with it, and also in a Declaration of the
Function and Divine Institution of Bishops and Priests, Subscribed by him, and
the Archbishop of York, and Eleven Bishops, and Twenty Divines and Canonists;
declaring that the Power of the Keys, and other Church Functions is formally
distinct from the Power of the Sword, Printed in his Addenda, Number. 5. at the
end of his History; and indeed that Archbishop Cranmer did so alter his
Judgment, as the Dean of Windsor tells us he did, in Doctor Stillingfleet's
Manuscript; there is Evidence sufficient from the alone Book of Ordination, and
the Preface to it; which was composed and made public by him, and others, to
be sure some of them, these very Bishops and Doctors mentioned there, and by
Mr. Seldom, in his Cottonian Manuscript, it being done in the first year of
King Edward's Reign, and where the Orders of Ministers wholly depend on the
Apostles and their Institution; but when all is said and done that can be, such
particular Conferences as these, if duly considered and in their Circumstances,
can avail little for or against either Party, nor can Cranmer's Opinion, or any
other Doctors be reported with Justice, out of any such their Papers. The
greatest advantage the Reformation had in the days of King Henry VIII. was that
every one had encouragement to think, and liberty to offer, and in Conferences
some must act the adverse part, and every thing must be stated, and proposed,
and urged too, and though the opportunity and curiosity of some, did not do
amiss in collecting and preserving such Discourses, yet I cannot but think it
less Discretion in Printing and Publishing them, and least of all, to say no
worse, in urging them as the sense and judgment of our Reformers, and not to be
endured, when in opposition to our received and established Church Articles,
Laws, Rubricks and Book of Ordination, which and which alone, upon the full
enquiry and debate, each Proposal and Objection, and which must be many,
answered and satisfaction given, is to be concluded the sense of every
particular Doctor; and admit the Conference had been, as Doctor Stillingfleet
Mistook it, appointed by King Edward and his Council, and by Law, in order to
the Reformation, and which was began in that King's days, the Judgment of the
Church of England was to have been reported, not from the particular bandyings
pro and con amongst them, or the draught or draughts of any one or more men,
and which in their Season was useful, nay necessary, but from the joint
unanimous result of the whole, and which we are sure as to that particular of
Church Power and its Subject, ended and united in the Book of Ordination; nor
upon a general account, can those Collections, whether in the Cottonian, or any
Library, be in any better repute among us, than any other, of all the
Pamphlets, Models of Church and State Government, Attempts and Proposals, the
late unhappy Revolutions in our Kingdom gave occasion to, and produced, the
Condition, as to Religion, being just such in King Henry VIII. days, as it was
then; and the Autorities an Hundred years hence, if all shaked in a bag
together, will be much at one too, every man contrived, said, proposed and
wrote as his own either Fancy or Interest or Curiosity, or sometimes Reason
prompted and directed him, and though they may make a Pleasant History, with
much of diversion, yet little of the Sense and Authority of the Nation can be
collected and urged from them.

I am now come to the last of Mr. Selden's De Primatu Regio, and de potestate
Papae and regia adversus Bellarminos, Tortos, Becanos, Eudemon Joannes,
Suaresius, etc. mostly in the days of King James, and which were wrote by
Lancelot Bishop of Chichester, John Collins, and the Bishop of Rochester. The
two last I have not by me, nor do I remember I ever saw, nor is it of any
concern whether I have Bishop Andrews either, in order to the answering what is
by Mr. Seldom brought against him, any one that has but heard of that once
flourishing Prelate in this Church, will easily grant him on our side, and much
more must he that has read and conversed with his Works find him so; and indeed
all that Mr. Seldom brings out of him, and the other two, is really ours; so
far as he reports them to have asserted, that the execution of all
Ecclesiastical forensick Jurisdiction, and by consquence, that of
Excommunication, receives measures, and is ruled by the King and his Laws, as
Head and Moderator and Governor of the Church and Realm, and so it ought to be,
whereas with us, the Prince and Realm is Christian, and the Church Censures are
backed and supported by his Penal Laws in course annexed to and following them,
the Prince cannot be supposed, so void of foresight, as to leave himself no
Power of inspection in such Proceedings, as thus to put his Power into another
Man's hands, and who is not accountable to him in the Execution. Thus the
King's Authority is capable of being used against himself, and it must in course
so happen, to his best Subjects it is that traitorous Position to be abhorred;
and it is peculiarly provided that it be so, and publicly too, by the Laws of
our Land, in the Act for Uniformity of Public Prayers, and it is a great deal
more horrible in Church Affairs, as more immediately entitling our Savior
therewith, the great abhorrer of all, and who we are sure renounced all Pleas
in dividing and disposing in Seculars; and did all the Power Bishops legally
execute in this Kingdom, or in others that are Christian, belong to them as of
Divine Right, or was it any other ways so devolved and sixed upon them, as
thereby enabled, in an Arbitrary way of Proceeding, without the leave, or
against the Power of the King with no respect to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, to put it in Execution, the Bishop and the King thus Independent, were
also inconsistent; any thing, or person, may and must be inroded and offered
violence to, when the Bishop will, and the greatest worldly Punishments, next
under Capital, whenever, or upon what Grounds soever, he is pleased to
Excommunicate, be necessarily inflicted; this is Imperium cum Jove, to erect an
Empire within an Empire, and no Governments thus divided and distributed, can
stand, and I heartily wish such as upon these Considerations most readily
detest it in the Bishop, would make their Reflections in other Persons and Cases
also; But if Mr. Seldom mean, as he must do if he continue on the design of his
Book, that Church Power and Jurisdiction, as such, and coming from Christ,
naked and void of all outward Secular Additions, and implies only the
forfeiture as a Christian, with no one worldly inconvenience, no forfeitures of
Personal outward Liberty or Estate, that the execution and force of this
depends on the Prince, and Humane Pleasure, to temperate, restrain and abolish,
nor is it duly exercised other ways, this is overthrown already throughout this
Discourse, and I Will only add the Authority of Mr. Selden's mistaken Friend, but
our real one, the great and most learned Bishop Andrews, who all along in those
very Pages to which Mr. Seldom in his Margin refers, asserts the quite
contrary, and the Power of the Prince and the Priest are declared by him two
distinct things, and not in Subordination; he tells us how God instituted in
Israel a Kingdom and a Church, and which never coaluerunt in unum, procul se
habuit Imperium ab Ecclesia, so came together by coalition, as to make one, but
were still diverse and two things, had different Works and Offices; and thence
concludes, Conjungi debent Regnum and Ecclesia, confundi non debent, they ought
to be united, but not confused together, and he reckons up the several Offices
and Duties of the Prince, to take care of Religion in general, to see that
every Order do their Duties, to reprove, to correct and coerce in order to it,
Non licuisse tamen Davidi arcam contingere; so Tortus objects upon him, and to
which he answers, Nec regi quidem nostro licet, nec ulli, aut Sacra
administrare, aut attrectare quicquam, quod potestatis sit mere Sacerdotalis,
ut sunt Leiturgiae, conciones, claves, Sacramenta, arcam figunt suo loco reges,
attingant post illi, quos ea cura tangit, ex suscepto munere Ministerii sui.
But it was not lawful for David to touch the Ark, neither is it lawful for our
King, nor for any, either to administer holy things, or to attrectate any
thing, which is merely of the Sacerdotal Power, as are Leiturgies, Sermons, the
Keys and Sacraments. Kings six the Ark in its place, those afterward touch it,
whose care it is, by the receiving the Office of their Ministry; and though
Solomon's dedication of the Temple implies something extraordinary, yet he
denies it to reach to any thing in the Temple, which is Sacerdotal, sed neque
in iis quae sunt pontisicalis muneris regi jus facimus. We give the King a
right to do no Office which is the Priests, semel autem habe sententiam
nostram, it is a thing so often said by our Doctors, that he is a weary, ita
coccyzare, of the Cuckoo tone, and speaking it so over and over again, nos non
regi potestatem tribuimus quam habere voluit Osias, solam illam quam Josias
habuit, we do not give to our King the Power of Osias, as Tortus says we do,
but the Power alone of Josias all this, and more is; to be seen in Tortura
Torti, from page 363 to page 370. nor is there any thing more on his side in
the responsio ad Bellarminum, cap. 1. and to these he refers the Reader, so
shameless is he in his Quotations, and he must first slatter himself into a
belief that the pointing of his finger from the Margin is direction and
authority enough, and supersedes all farther Inquiry. Nor is he less
disingenuous in his dealings with the Bishop, when he there says that he
corrected Grotius de sum. Potest. in Sacr. etc. for the Press, when Andrews
overruled him that he printed it not, and it was at last but a posthumous
Work. So that unless Archbishop Whitgift be an Erastian, because Mr. Seldom
once in his Library at Lambeth, saw Erastus's Works neatly bound up in yellow
Leather, with this Motto in Gold upon the outside of it, Intus quam extra
formosior, as he tells us, and it is his chief Argument de Syned. lib. 1. cap.
10. page 437. he is like to go without a Doctor in the Church of England on his
side, for ought I know, or as he knew either, for he seldom misses a Name that
bears but the likelihood of an Authority; hav' y' any Work for a Cooper, I
remember makes it the serious part of that scandalous Libel to upbraid our
Church and Churchmen, that the Prince makes them Bishops and Presbyters, and
their Religion is what the worldly Power pleases, with a deal of stuff to that
purpose. I know not now where that Pamphlet is, and it is not worth searching
after, though the Author might be a Doctor for ought I know. I am only sure he
was not a Doctor of our Church. Or unless the Lord Falkland turned Doctor, as
he might deserve it, by the larger Character Mr. Dean of Canterbury gives of
him, joined with Mr. Chillingworth, as I remember in the Preface to his first
Book of Sermons, and then Mr. Seldom is secure of one of his side, and we of an
adversary from within our selves: though he impleads us in a different way,
owns it for our Judgment, and states it very well, abating some malicious
Terms, and ranks it among those abundance more Grievances of the Nation, (and
the placing this together with those other, is as great an honor he could have
done us) that we have evidently labored to bring in an English, though not a
Roman, Popery, equally absolute, a blind obedience of the People upon the
Clergy, and the Clergy upon themselves, and inveighs against them altogether,
according to the then zealous and modish way, in that very ill Speech of his to
the House of Commons, 1641. I Will repeat part of it, as I find it transcribed
and printed by a very good friend of his, and one that seems to honor him, as
much as Doctor Tillotson does.

Mr. Speaker, he is a great stranger in Israel, who knows not that this Kingdom
has long labored under many and great Oppressions, both in Religion and
Liberty, and his Acquaintance here is not great or his Ingenuity less, who does
not know and acknowledge, that a great, if not a principal Cause of both these,
has been some Bishops and their Adherents.

Mr. Speaker, a little will serve to find them to have been the destruction of
Unity, under pretense of Uniformity, to have brought in Superstition and
Scandal, under the Titles of Reverence and Decency, to have defiled our
Churches, to have slackned the stictness of that Union which was formerly
betwixt us and those of our Religion beyond the Sea, an Action as unpolitick as
ungodly.

As Sir Thomas Moor says of the Casuists, their business was not to keep Men
from sinning, but to inform them, quam prope ad peccatum sine peccato liceat
accedere. So it seemed their Work (meaning the Prelates) was to try how much of
a Papist might be brought in without Popery, and to destroy as much as they
could of the Gospel, without bringing themselves into danger of being destroyed
by Law.

Mr. Speaker, to go yet farther, some of them have so industriously labored to
deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspicion, that in
gratitude they desire to return thither, or at last to meet it half way. Some
have evidently labored to bring in an English, though not a Roman Popery, I
mean not the outside of it only and dress of it, but equally absolute: a blind
Obedience of the People upon the Clergy, and the Clergy upon themselves, and
have opposed Papacy beyond the Sea, that they might settle one beyond the
Water; nay common fame is more than ordinarily false, if none of them have
found a way to reconcile the Opinions of Rome to the Preferments of England, be
so absolutely, directly and cordial Papists, that it is all 1500 l per Annum,
can do to keep them from confessing it.

We shall find them to have both kindled and blown the common fire of both
Nations, to have both sent and maintained that Book of which the Author has no
doubt long since wished with Nero, Vtinam nescirem literas; and of which more
than one Kingdom has cause to wish, that when he writ that he had rather
burned a Library, though of the value of Ptolemey's. We shall find them to have
been the first and principal Author of the Breach, I will not say of, but since
the Pacification at Barwick, we shall find them to have been almost sole
Abetters of my Lord Strafford: whilst he was practicing upon another Kingdom,
that manner of Government he intended to settle in this, where he committed so
many, so mighty and so manifest Enormities, as the like have not been committed
by any Governor in any Government since Verres left Sicily, and after they had
called him over from being Deputy of Ireland, to be in a manner Deputy of
England (all things here being governed by a Juntillo, and that Juntillo
governed by him) to have assisted him in giving such Counsels, and the pursuing
such Courses, as it is an hard and measuring Cast, whether they were more
unwise, more unjust or more unfortunate, and which had infallibly been our
destruction, if by the Grace of God, their share had not been as small in the
subtilty of Serpents, as in the innocence of Doves.

A pretty knick-knack of Speech-making every body must own it to be, but as to
the occasion and matter of it, each line as evidently deserves a lash, and is
as liable to it; there appears only passion and prejudice, rancor and malice in
the height, and truly scarce sense under some of the pretty cadencies and
chiming Words; but not one dram of that incomparable reason Mr. Dean magnifies
him for, and once saw in him, but for him to own it here, will not be, at
least, convenient, could he find it out, as perhaps he may, though another
cannot. All I shall say at present, is, and it is as mostly relating to this
present discourse, how wonderfully the same Fate has still attended the Crown
of England and the Church of England, the King and the Bishops of it, and the
Power, the Institution and Authority of both as from Heaven and not of Man is
still, if either of them, decried and run again at once and by the same Person;
and ten to one it had not come into my mind, had not a Man of his own
complexion in Loyalty (in the late life of Julian) told it the world, much to
the honor of this great and loyal Lord, as he thinks, that the Doctrine of Dr.
Manwaring's and Dr. Sibthorp's Sermons long before the War broke out, was as
ridiculous to him, as it appears from this his Speech in 1641. was then the
Authority and Actions of the Bishops, and the divine Right of Kings as well as
the divine Right of the Church, independent to the People, are both but Pulpit
Law; that is in his admired most ingenious Expression, and which alone then
confuted, and still confutes Doctor Manwaring, the prate and tattle of idle
Churchmen from the Pulpit, and the both King and Church fell at once and
together, and which himself particularly experienced at Newbery, when 'twas too
late to help; what himself, by Speech-making and Scoffings had promoted, and
Abner's Epitaph, seems in this respect exactly fitted for him, nor know I in
what other terms his death could be lamented better: had the Pulpit laws been
more frequently made, more encouraged and executed, in teaching the Peoples
dependency upon Kings and duties to them, that unnatural Rebellion had never
followed; had not those worst of Principles published in Scotland by Buchanan de
jure regni apud Scotos, and Knox in his Appel. and Church History, placing both
Church and Crown in Subordination to the People, come hither into England, and
by their Country man the Lord Falkland, in the House of Commons, encouraged,
and those now adays mend the Matter bravely, that rescue us from the People,
and put us under the Prince. Herein enlarge his Prerogative beyond his
Progenitors, that he is uppermost in Religion, are zealous for him to be a
Priest, but leave him as King in the hands he was before, and below the People;
and thus in sight strike at both Monarchy and Religion at a blow, as is the
Priest so is the King, to take their Measures and Protection from others: a
false Religion is to be obeyed if the Religion of a Nation, lest affronting
Magistracy and Law, and every one may Petition and libel the Government that
pleases, the Bible is put into the King's hand, and the Scepter taken out; the
King may excommunicate, but he may not govern his People, and both Prince and
Priest are in a pretty Condition; and the notorious contempt Church Power and
Offices lie under at this day amongst us, is an evident Testimony of the mock
Addition they design and contend for to his Crown; in that the Power Sacerdotal
is with so much noise and bussle seated in him, it is only to ridicule both at
once, and with the same Argument render them contemptible, nor can any in the
course of things, as well as in common Experience, be found to give to Caesar
the things which are Caesar's, but he that gives to Christ the things that are
Christ's; No Bishop No King, is and will be a Maxim still, a first truth, and
not to be gain-sayed.

Elizabeth and King James, as Archbishop Whitgift, Archbishop Bancroft,
Bishop Bilson, etc. that lean too much to the Erastian Way, or rather by an
incuriousness of Expression, do not give that account of Church Power, nor
state it so clearly, as may be expected, and it is not impossible, where a
design, to render them as of the Party. Something of this nature has been
observed already, in Bishop Bilson and Archbishop Bancroft, and he that reads
over the first Book de Politeia Ecclesiastica, cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. wrote
by Robert Parker, and printed at Frankfort, 1616. and only reads him, will
conclude them not only almost but altogether such; he was a Man vehement and of
extremity of Spirit, and his business is in his whole three Books, to set and
continue our Church against her self, o^e of her Members against another, and
all of them opposite to Christ Jesus, exactly answering his Title, de Politeia
Ecclesiastica Christiani and Hierarchica opposita, and indeed most that have
appeared since him against the Government of the Church, and with appearance of
pertinency, have not only sharpened, but borrowed their Weapons from this shop
of the Philistines: it is their Magazine and Storehouse, as another Armory,
like that of David's in Israel, wherein are Mill Clypei, all sorts of Weapons
for these Mighty, and with which they have still made their Attempts, even
Batteries and Breaches upon us. Our learned Doctor Pearson, since Lord Bishop
of Chester, in his Vindiciae Epistolarum Ignatii, in his first Chapter or
Proeme, there relates him to be, though not the first setter on foot and
contriver of that unworthy, most shameful Design upon Ignatius's, Epistles, in
representing them spurious and imposed on the World; and that not one of them
was wrote by that most Holy and Apostolical Martyr, whose name they bear; yet
he was more bold, and went farther in the Attempt, than any one had done before
him, and with whose Conjectures Dailee's dissertation is stuffed, and he may be
said a principal Cause why it spread so far, and has been so successful to the
great disadvantage of our common Christianity, from him or Dialee, or both,
unless Blundel and Salmasius be added, and which are much the same thing, it is
Doctor Stillingfleet translates what he has on this Subject, in his Irenicum,
and who may have the honor to be the first that made it English, for any other
I have met with, and tells us in the Mother Tongue, The story of Ignatius (as
much as it is defended with his Epistles) does not seem to be any of the most
probable, cap. 6. Sect. 16. I have heard I confess of Doctor Owen's Preface to
his Book of Perseverance, and then, to be sure, he is with abundance of honor,
his second, and, to omit the other ill Adventures in that unlucky Book of
particular Forms of Church Government, and which savor too much of Robert
Parker's musty Vessel, the Doctor is beyond measure unfortunate, who having by
a notorious Mistake urged the Authority of our whole Church representative in
King Edward VI day's, to avouch his most false Assertion. That Episcopacy is
not necessary and immutable. That the King's Majesty may appoint Bishops or not
appoint them, or appoint other Officers for the Government of the Church, cap.
8. When he goes on further, to prove this by the particular Autorities of our
Doctors since, as Whitgift, Cozius Whitgift's Chancellor, Low, Hooker,
Bridges, etc. he is, if possible, more unlucky yet, and his Mistake more
shameful, he not only transcribes every Quotation out of Parker's second Book
De politeia Ecclesiastica, cap. 39.42. and the very Book, Page, Chapter,
Section and Figures, stand all in Parker's Margin, as they are wrote in his
Book, and which is no great Matter, but, and which is the harder Fate, he urges
and appeals to them, as his Authority, that Episcopacy is mutable and of but
humane assignation, and which thing Parker all along there owns and declares,
was not these Doctors Opinions, he upbraids and taunts them for asserting the
contrary, as contradicting themselves, and putting Cheats upon others; because
they believe Bishops by divine Right and perpetually obliging, it is his
Objection upon them, that their own Principles will not bear them out in it.
This is the case, these Doctors assert over and over again, as they must do, if
agreeing with our Church, and their own Subscriptions, that the Scriptures are
not a full and perfect Rule for Discipline and Government, and there is still a
Power in the Church to make Laws, as occasion offers, even to vary from
Examples of Discipline and Government, which has there been practiced. Parker
thinks he has the advantage, and concludes upon them, that then the Government
by Bishops is changeable also, and which is sounded only on Scripture Example,
and who reply, that though they can make Laws in some Cases, and alter them as
occasion, yet in all they cannot: though some Examples in Scripture do not, yet
others do necessarily oblige, and the Examples they produce necessarily
obliging are these. Imposition of Hands in Ordinations, that to impose Hands is
appropriated to Bishops, as the Apostles Successors. The observation of the
Lord's Day. The institution of Metropolitans, etc. and this very account Parker
himself gives us, as to these Instances, and all which will readily appear to
any one that reads over Parker, l. 2. cap. 39, 40, 41, 42. particularly cap.
42. Sect. 8. 9. and that consults farther than Titles and Margins. And that
this Power of making Canons and Laws for the Government and Discipline of the
Church, is one of the main Foundations of the Hierarchy, and therefore Parker
sets himself with might and main to oppose it. This will be yielded to Doctor
Stillingfleet, 'twas this alone, by which the Courts Ecclesiastical kept them
within some moderate Bounds; nor did they break out into Rebellion and Schism,
till that Power was abated in the execution, and which made the Bishops so
odious to them: but that Episcopacy it self is as Arbitrary, in its original,
and occasionally only, as are many Church Laws, and in the Power of any order
of Persons, or any Person now upon Earth, to alter or confirm it. This Parker
by arguing would willingly infer upon these Doctors from their own Principles,
but acknowledges they did not own, contrary to their Principles, this Dr.
Stillingfleet every ways mistakes and reports, out of Parker's ill gathered
Conclusion and Objection, as their both Principles and Practice, and so every
ways defames them; and I shall only propose it to the Doctors consideration,
whether some satisfaction may not, ought not to be required of him, for the
injury he has done to so many Worthies of our Church hereby. I can assure him,
it has been long expected, and if it be not done suddenly, he may believe, the
World ere it be much older, will be particularly disinformed: at present I
shall return to those Doctors mentioned in the beginning of this Section, and
who are not yet freed from the Contumelies laid on them by Parker, as these are
from his, though I do not question, but I shall equally vindicate both.

and Circumstances not considered, and if particular Occurrencies be not abated
for, the worst of Heresies will thus shelter themselves under the best
Autorities. How largely and frequently do the Ancient Fathers of the Church
speak of the Powers and excellence of Nature and Reason, when disputing against
the Gentiles, when Apologizing for and recommending to them the Christian
Religion, Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. goes so far, as to say the wiser sort of the
Greeks were Christians, such as Socrates, Heraclitus, etc. (...), etc. because
living up to the Rules of Reason, but must not those be wide Arguings that say
(and some have said it,) the Fathers thought the use of Reason alone able to
direct and assist us for Heaven, when it is the coming of Christ in the Flesh,
his additional supernatural Revelations of Grace and Truth, those farther
discoveries and assistances to Mankind, is the occasion and general subject of
their Writings, and a belief of which is that they endeavor to bring the Greeks
unto, to make evident and rational to all Men, when 'twas only the particular
application of an Argument they aimed at, and in the design is most true, that
every one so far as truly rational, he is Christian, Christianity is no new
thing nor strange. (...). Whosoever pursues Justice and Honesty, and other
commendable Actions suited to the universal, eternal Rules of Nature, is
acceptable to God, by this both the Jews under the Law, and the Patriarchs and
holy Men from the first Creation, through the knowledge of Christ were saved, as
Justin Martyr disputes cum Tryphone Judeo, and Eusebius has a whole Chapter to
this purpose, Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 4. Every one that is read in that History
knows, that the great cry of the Arians against the Council of Nice was, they
were Innovators, (and a licentious Pen has of late managed and pursued it
afresh, Sandius hist. Enucleata) as using Words, and bringing in Doctrines
which were not either in Scripture, or in the Writings and Determinations of
the ancient Doctors of the Church; when asserting and explaining the one
substance, or eternal Generation of the Son of God: which though it be in part
a great untruth, and both Athanasius Synod. Nicen. Cont. here is. Arian. decreta,
p. 277, 278. Ed. paris. et Ep. de Synod. Arimini et Seleuciae, p. 889. and Ep.
ad ubique Orthodoxos, etc. p. 943. and Theodorit Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 5. and
12. refer them to the Writings of the eminent Bishops and Doctors, who lived an
hundred and twenty years before the Synod of Nice, and then used this Word
Consubstantial in explaining the Divinity of the Father and the Son, and it is
what Sandius in effect confesses, only he thinks it for the dishonor of the
Cause that all the Heretics that were in the Church before Arius were
Homousians, hist. Enucleat. l. 1. and which in truth is only this, the worst of
Heretics did not arrive to that height of impudence as to deny so received an
acknowledgment in the universal Church. Yet what Athanasius replies upon Arius
himself ( Tom. 1. disputat. cum Ario page 134.) making the Objection is a
better answer here, that what was in the Council asserted and declared, was
always in the Scriptures by way of consequence, and occasion was not given the
Church, till the rise and spreading of that Heresy, for that particular and
precise explication. Heresies and Novelties must be, and it is the work of
Councils to detect and determine against them, but there would be mad work in
the Church, should that go for Innovation, which an upstart Heresy forces the
Church in new Terms to state and declare against, and explain themselves
thereby; it must be declamed against, as defective in Authority and Precedents,
because former Doctors had not sagacity enough, the very Apostles had not
Spirit of Prophecy enough to anticipate the Fictions of every Brain; so to word
it beforehand, that the particular Heresy in its Nicety, must be antidated
and pre-abide upon Record bassled and contradicted. He that reads over St.
Jerome lib. 1. Cont. Jovinianum will find him there, so urging Chastity, as if
Marriage it self was a sin, and which that Father never designed, as his
Opinion: and Dailee confesses that he only speaks comparatively, and is so to
be understood, as do, and are to be, many more of the Fathers, cap. 5. de usu
patrum, though he will not allow it him in other Cases, and when to serve his
own particular Design of him, I mean as to his Judgment of Episcopacy, and will
have his Epistle ad Evagrium, and his Comments on Titus to the same purpose, to
be absolute, and with no regard to those great, even just Provocatious from the
Bishops, in preferring the Deacon before the Presbyters, who as he well argues,
are of so much more Power and higher Order in the Church, as that a Bishop is
often called a Presbyter in Scripture and Antiquity, when so injurious were the
Bishops to the Presbyters, and so partial to the Deacons and indulgent, that
the Deacons scorned the Presbyters Order, qui ignorantes humilitatem status
sui, ultra Sacerdotes, hoc est, Presbyteros, intumescunt, (...) putent, si
Presbyter ordinetur. Their nearer attendance on the Bishops Person, and
familiarity with him, with other advantages attending, occasioned that they
found it an Injury to be promoted to the Presbyters Order, as he tells us,
Comment in Ezekiel. cap. 48. and which together with the great superciliousness
and insulting pride of John Bishop of Jerusalem, exercized over him, and giving
some disturbance to his Monastic ease in the holy Land, ( Ep. 60, 61.)
something raised his spleen, and in vindicating his own Order, he spared not
some little flourishes or Arguments abating of the Episcopate, if thereby these
indecencies might cease. What effects all this had at that time, we read not,
and that it was afterward looked upon by the Church, as his alone Passion and
particular Provocation, we have all the reason in the World to believe, it all
ceased with his Person to be sure, if not with the Passion; nor do we find any
one follower he had, or is his Authority ever used against the solitary
appropriated Power of a Bishop above a Presbyter, 'till of late in these parts
of Christendom: who thence take the rise for their Schism, and it is the ground
they stand upon, for the battery and abolishing the whole Order, and
withdrawing their obedience, and which to be sure St. Jerome never did, nor
attempted, and herein they are particularly unlucky, they beat down Bishops by
St. Jerome's Authority, to bring in their Schism, and it is the main Argument,
they still urge against them, in the height of these Divisions and Distractions
are now on foot in Europe, and then too when they contend, that St. Jerome knew
no other occasion or use of Bishops, but ad tollenda Schismata; because Schisms
and Divisions cannot be kept out of the Church, but by them. So that, St.
Jerome's Authority, if any thing in their present Case, must be against them,
and if complying with him, they must for the present expedience, submit unto
Bishops, whom they will allow to have acknowledged this necessity and usefulness
of them, what ever reasons else he saw for their institution and continuance.
It Is that which Doctor Durel pleads for Archbishop Cranmer; that admitting him
guilty of Erastianism, and he did resolve the Power of the Keys into the
Prince, as Doctor Stillingfleet says he was, and did, his present Circumstances
will plead much for him, and the other Doctors of his time, if of the same mind
then with him, he had been educated in many Errors, with which the Church, the
whole Age, at that time abounded, and though a Reformation was on foot, no
wonder if in some Instances he was in the wrong, 'twas then their work to
abdicate the Bishop of Rome, and case him of that Primacy and usurpation he had
exercised over this Church, and it might so happen that in giving to the King
what was his, he abated too much of the Power of the Priesthood and the Church,
and which was hers, and not to be given to any other, and yet even this Error
did he see at last, acknowledged it to Doctor Leighton, submitted to and
subscribed the truth against it, as the Dean of Windsor tell us he read it in
Doctor Stillingfleet's Manuscript, and in his presence. And there is enough to
be pleaded of this nature in the behalf of those inconsiderable Offers are made
against our three eminent Bishops, Whitgift, Bilson and Bancroft, and which
will so thoroughly acquit them of the but suspicion of Erastianism; that the
Bill must in course be flung out, that is drawn up against them, every one
knows, that is conversant in those their Writings, whence Parker's Objections
are taken. The Point under debate, was mostly, very near altogether in King
Henry VIII. day's betwixt the King and the Pope, whether was supreme in the
forensick, outward Ecclesiastical Courts and Proceedings on the Persons of Men
within this his Majesty's Kingdom: the Pope had usurped it for some time, the
King reassumes it, Religion it self was not thought to be concerned, 'twas what
was reputed only secular, and the most eminent, and very near all the Bishops,
were zealous Sticklers against the Pope, or, at least, submitted to it, then,
when zealous for the Roman Catholic Religion, Doctrines and Worship, and to
which they adhered in King Edward's days and Queen Elizabeth's, when the
Reformation went on farther, and was settled, as now, by Law in the Church. The
Supremacy was not then the Characteristical Mark, though since, to keep up the
Parties, it is so, and which occasioned that warm Dialogue betwixt the Jesuit
and Doctor Bilson, of which I have given so large an account already, the
Doctor's design being to vindicate our Church, from the Opinions of Erastus,
urged in effect upon us by the Jesuit, and that by asserting the Prince
Supreme in all Causes over all Persons; we give not to him any thing that is
Church Power, enstated by Christ on the Apostles, and by them derived to the
Bishops, their alone Successors herein, this being thus settled and overruled
against the Romanist, another Enemy, Man comes with his Tares, and which are
scattered in the seed-Plot, and grow up together with it, the Puritan starts up
in the midst of us, and the Point is, That this Power of the Keys is in the
Presbytery, their Eldership, made up of Laymen mostly, called Lay Elders, and
these for the greatest part (as must be in abundance of Parishes) Mechanics,
and the meaner sort, who have the Power of laying on of Hands, Ordaining and
Excommunicating, nay more* these inconsiderable Persons are not only invested
with the Power of Bishops and Churchmen, but with that Power and Supremacy, is
by us given to the Prince, to Preside over and Govern all Persons and Causes,
by Process, to Cite, Summon and Convene, before them, to implead, acquit, or
condemn, amerce or punish, even to confinement, in their Consistories, and no
Cause or Person to be exempted, if manageable in order to Religion, they
emulate and succeed the Pope himself, and in the highest instances of his
pretended Power and Sovereignty, even to Summon and Censure Kings, of whom
Personal Attendance is required; now against this it is, these Worthies change
and wield their Weapons accordingly, as a good Fencer is ready at all, against
these New Popes, as they call them; and whosoever please may read in Bishop
Bancroft's Survey of the pretended holy Discipline, cap. 22, 23, 24, 25. and in
his Book of Dangerous Positions and Proceedings published and practiced within
the Island of Britain, under pretense for Reformation, and for the Presbyterial
Discipline; In Bishop Bilson's Perpetual Government of Christ's Church, Cap. 9,
10. and Bishop Whitgift's Defense of the Answer to the Admonition, Tract. 17.
page 627, 628, 629, 630, etc. against these it is their warmth and Argument is
spent, in Defense of the Rights of the King and Church, in scorn and
detestation of such those pretending Ignaro's. Their words are these, with a
deal more to this purpose; As though Christ's Sovereignty, Kingdom and Lordship
were no where acknowledged, or to be found, but where half a dozen Artisans,
Shoo-makers, Tinkers and Tailors, with their Preacher and Reader (Eight or Nine
Cherubins forsooth) do rule the whole Parish. So Bancroft, Dangerous Positions,
etc. l. 2. c. 2. That the King must submit to the Pastor, and be content to be
joined in Commission with the basest sort of People, if it please the Parish to
appoint him, and if overruled must be contented, and the Prince loses all
Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters, and he must maintain and see executed such
Laws, Orders, and Ceremonies, as the Pastor with his Seniors shall make and
decree. So Bishop Whitgift, ibid. p. 656, 657. That the Churchwarden and
Syde-men in every Parish, are the meetest Men that you can find to direct
Princes in judging of Ecclesiastical Crimes and Causes; a wretched state of the
Church it must be that shall depend on such silly Governors, as Husbandmen and
Artisans, Ploughmen and Craftsmen, and we descend to the Cart for advice in
Church Government. So Bishop Bilson, Perpetual Government, Cap. 10. and if thus
in behalf of the Regal and Sacerdotal Power, the Magistracy and the Ministry
(and which are the only Governors of the Church of Christ, as they contend)
against these monstrous sort of People, with their High-shoo'd feet and Clowns
hands invading both, the King and the Church be set as one man to oppose them,
and their distinct Powers not so nicely and distinctly stated at one time, as
they are and require an another, and appear but as one Weapon, that with
present advantage it may be wellded against them; this is to be imputed to the
warmth and zeal of the Disputant, whether as Aggressor or Defendant; his
settled particular judgment is to be fetched from his particular designed
Decision and Determination in other Cases; and when the naked Cause is alone
and before him, the immediate proper object of his Consideration; and it must
be confessed (neither do I believe the great reason and choicer learning of
that excellent Prelate, were he now alive again, could, upon second thoughts
extricate himself) that Bishop Bilson's Argument against Lay Elders ( Cap. 10.
Page 148. and which Robert Parker so much twits him with) is wide of a
Conclusion, and very ill laid, it runs thus. I cannot conceive how Lay Elders
should be Governors of Christ's Church, and yet be neither Ministers nor
Magistrates; Christ being the Head and fullness of the Church which is his Body,
governs the same, as a Prophet, a Priest, and a King; and after his Example
all Government in the Church is either Prophetical, Sacerdotal or Regal; the
Doctors have a Prophetical, the Pastors a Sacerdotal, and the Magistrates a
Regal Power. What fourth Regiment can we find for Lay Elders? All that can be
said is this, there appeared an Argument against a Lay-Elder, he was thought
thus shut out from having any Place or Power as from Christ, not considering
the ill distribution of the offices of Christ, in general, and his bad-placed
Successions, and more especially the worser consequence, that must attend, a
deriving the Magistrates Power from the Mediatorship, and it is what neither
Whitgift nor Bancroft did Consider. As a King, Priest and Prophet, he erected
and settled his Church on Earth, by virtue of that Commission; and All Power
given him of the Father, Mat. 11. but he did not, as such, meddle with the
Kingdoms on Earth as the Mediator, he was himself a Subject, and professed and
practiced Subjection and Obedience, demanded only the Subjects right,
Protection by the Government he found established in the World by his Father.
But however the present Argument was wrong laid, and whencesoever the
Magistrates Power is derived, it is all along, and by them all, supposed and
maintained quite different and apart from that of the Ministry, or the
Priesthood, and they are asserted two quite diverse offices, and their Powers
do not reach to one another. I Will only now instance in Bishop Bilson, Cap. 9.
page 113. As for Excommunication, if you take it for removing the unruly from
the Civil Society of the Faithful, until they conform themselves to a more
Christian sort of life; this he takes to be the Power of a Christian
Magistrate: and he goes on and says, I am not averse that the whole Church
where he is wanting, did and should concur in that action, for thereby the
sooner, when all the Multitude join with the Pastor in one Mind to renounce all
manner of conversing with such, will the Parties be reduced to a better mind,
to see themselves rejected and exiled from all company; but it is the Pastors
charge only to deliver or deny the Sacraments, Page 114.147. but otherwise
Laymen that are no Magistrates, may not challenge to intermeddle with the
Pastors Function, or overruled them in their own Charge, without manifest and
violent intrusion on other men's Callings without the Word and Will of Christ,
who gave his Apostle the Holy Ghost, to remit and retain Sins. And so expressly
again, p. 149. If you join not Lay Elders in those Sacred and Sacerdotal
Actions with Pastors, but make them Overseers and Moderators of those things
which Pastors do, this Power belongs exactly to Christian Magistrates, to see
that Pastors do their Duty exactly according to the Will of Christ, and not to
abuse their Power to annoy his Church or the Members thereof; neither is the
case alike betwixt Pastors and Lay Elders. Pastors have their Power and
Function distinguished from Princes by God himself; insomuch that it were more
than Presumption for Princes to execute those actions by themselves, or by
their Substitutes. To Preach, Baptize, retain Sins and impose Hands, Princes
have no Power; the Prince of Princes, even the Son of God, has severed it from
their Callings, and committed it to his Apostles, and they by imposition of
hands derived it to their Successors; but to cause these actions to be orderly
done according to Christ's Commandment, and to prevent and redress abuses in
the doers, this is all that is left for Lay Elders, and this is all that we
reserve for the Christian Magistrate, and that no other Church Power was then
thought by any to belong to the Prince; he was not at all considered as its
Subject, there was no such thing as a pretense then on foot, it is most plain,
Cap. 9. page 108. and among the many Conceits about the Power of the Keys, and
Subject, this never entered into the heart o^ any; his words are these, The
Power of the Keys, and right to impose Hands, I mean to ordain Ministers, and
to Excommunicate Sinners, are more controverted than the other two, (the Word
and Sacraments and which were never questioned) by reason that diverse Men have
diverse Conceits of them, some fasten them on the liking of the Multitude,
which they call the Church; others commit them to the judgment of certain
chosen Persons as well of the Laiety as of the Clergy, whom they call the
Presbytery. Some attribute only, but equally, to all Pastors and Preachers, and
some especially reserve them to Men of the greatest gifts, ripest years, and
highest calling among the Clergy. But there is none mentioned that they are in
the Prince. It Is, I know, the usual Expression in the Pulpit Prayer, and the
King is placed next under Christ in these His Majesty's Realms and Dominions,
and which as that Prayer it self, has no good bottom, that ever I could meet
with, for such the use of it, a mere Arbitrary customary thing; where did God
ever make Christ his Deputy, and the King Christ's, as to the worldly Powers
and Secular things of this life? his Commission to our Savior ran quite
contrary, and nothing less can be gathered from it, this is to found right of
Dominion in Grace with a Witness, our Kings did not receive, or rather reassume
it upon these terms, nor do they since acknowledge it as so derived, King Henry
VIII. did not, and there is no such thing in any one Act or Statute in his days.
Doctor Burnet indeed in his Collection of Records, gives us two instances
wherein the Title of Supreme Head under Christ of the Church of England.
Supremum Ecclesiae Anglicanae sub Christo Caput. The one in the Injunctions to
the Clergy made by Cromwell, Page 178. Number. 12. the other in the Commission by
which Bonner held his Bishopric of the King, Page 184. Number. 14. but in his
Addenda, Page 305. Number. 1. in the Preamble to Articles about Religion, set out
by the Convocation, and Published by the King's Authority, it is only, and in
Earth Supreme Head of the Church of England, and which is of more Authority than
the other, because in Convocation; It is once or twice used by King Edward,
before his Injunctions, Articles, etc. and sometimes lest out, but no mention
of it, but never used by Queen Elizabeth, in any of hers, or in her
Proclamations; nor is it commanded in her Form of bidding of Prayer, nor in the
Canons, or Form of bidding Prayer in the days of King James; it is neither in
the Oath of Supremacy or Allegiance, and which is to be seen in the account we
have of them by Anthony Sparrow now Lord Bishop of Norwich, in his Collection
of Canons, Articles, Injunctions, etc. and our Seven and thirtieth Article of
Religion gives the Queens Majesty, that only Prerogative was given all Godly
Princes by God himself in Holy Scriptures, that which had the Kings of Israel
and Judah, that which had the Kings of the Gentiles, the King of Nineveh, in
the Prophecy of Jonah, and which is an instance I find given by our Divines of
the preceding Power in other Princes, we contend for, and have determined to be
in ours, and with which if the Prince be not invested, he has no Government
over his People; a great part always will, and all may when they will, exempt
their Persons and Actions from his cognizance and inspection, upon pretense of
their Faith, and Religion, but there is not a word of any one Derivation as
from Christ; nor as the Mediator, does he, can he, bestow any such Power upon
them, or are Kings thus under him, or any ways, then as Members of his Body,
and as Christians; they are to submit to, and receive his Laws in order to
Heaven, and these Laws are to be their Rule in their Government upon Earth,
which they are to obey and protect, which indeed supports and exalts them, as
Righteousness does a Nation; but it is in and by that Authority they were
invested in before Christ, and they were indeed in a feeble piteous Case if no
other Power to rule with, than what the crucified Jesus can give them, whose
Kingdom was not of this World; nor did he manage any thing by the Powers of it;
I know it is the least of the Designs of such that still use this Expression in
their Prayers and Discourses, and they have great Examples for it, and of those
who abominate the natural and direct consequences are thence to be drawn, where
the Civil Power is returned into the Mediator; but it thoroughly answers their
Expectations, who contend to have their Prince a Priest too, and would delight
more to see him in his Rochet, and at the Altar, Blessing and Consecrating,
than on his Throne and with his Scepter, sweying and governing his People, and
for which latter they believe themselves equally capacitated and enabled as he,
and their belief on these Grounds is well bottomed; for Christ when ascending
up on high, gave no other Gifts to Men, than what either enabled to the work of
the Ministry, and which alone were for peculiar Persons; or what made
Christians good and virtuous men only; and which were to all promiscuous and
common. And had our Church in her Article, given to Kings that only Prerogative
they saw given to Aristotle's Prince, and which is extended to the (...) also,
as is above showed, to the things of Religion, it had been the same, though
less popular and persuading; I shall only add the Authority of Doctor Hammond,
in his Practical Catechism, Lib. 2. Sect. 11. that Christ in his Sermon on the
Mount meddled not with the Fifth Commandment. Though he were as God, the King of
all Kings, and might have changed and disposed of their Dominions as he
pleased; yet he was not pleased to make any Alteration, but to continue and
settle all in that course wherein it formerly had been placed by God himself,
-- What he added to Moses in this Matter was only greater reverence and aw to
the Father or Magistrate, or Civil Power, -- he left the Woman taken in
Adultery, and other Offenders, to the ordinary legal course, and would not upon
any importunity usurp or take upon him any thing in that Matter; and more
considerate Papists, as he goes on and tells us, discerning this, and yet
unwilling to divest the Pope of his so long usurped Power, have found it
necessary to pretend another tenure for him, and therefore style the Pope, not
the Vicar of Christ (for that would give him no Power, so much as of a Civil
Judge) but the Vicar of God, whom he has set up to be the Vicegerent of all
the World. The whole Discourse might not unfitly be here transcribed, only
it is, as it ought to be, in every bodies hands.

BUT what if these Doctors were in the design Rome; So neither do we into
three, or twice so many at home, of what Order and Authority soever, and which
adds in it self, just nothing to the Skill of a Divine, nor is the Tradition of
Truth broken by it. And indeed there are so many Accidents in the World, and
with so great force upon Mankind, so often influencing and overruling, that
Christianity in its particular Articles, and sometimes the highest of them,
would be but in a bad Condition, were it responsible for what every particular
Doctor has said or wrote, and which comes not up unto them; whether out of a
tenderness of Disposition, a mistaken Zeal for Union and to reconcile,
Moderation and Comprehension, a keeping present Peace, or a design of working
more effectually for the future; or whether through a fear and impotency of
Nature, averse to and unable for Struglings, wearied out by daily Provocations,
or a foresight of some Calamities foreseen and approaching, and every one is
not an Athanasius always undaunted, or real misapprehension in the
understanding; or which is a thing very frequent upon the rise of an Heresy,
to set up for a middle way, and which is as injurious, to gratify either lust
in general, or that itch of Ambition in particular, and to become the Head of a
Party, whether out of peevishness or revenge, or to magnify their own Parts
and Eloquence, lead by the Authority of Names, or by self-interest, blinded by
one or more of which ways, errors and differences in Religion are either
occasioned or started, managed and pursued. No sooner was his Master Justin
Martyr dead, but Tatianus grew Proud, and puffed up with an opinion of being
uppermost in the School, turned Heretic, Iren. adv. Haeres. cap. 31. l. 1.
Basilides was a Master of luxury, and was to do something extraordinary to
disguise it, as St. Jerone. Tom. 3. l. 2. adv. Jovinian. and so was Marcion, as
Tertullian Prescript. Cap. 51. and Lactantius tells us of several others who
affecting the highest Order in the Church, studying Honor and Greatness, and
sailing of it, made a Secession from the Church, not enduring Subjection, Lib.
4. Sect. ult. and so did Valentinus because he lost a Bishopric, Tertul. adv.
Valent. cap. 4. as did Aerius, Novatius, etc. and Theodorit describes Heretics
in general ambitioni and vanae gloriae mancipatos, Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 2. and
Sozomen complains of a worser effect they have yet in God's Church, Nonnullos
in vias medias adigunt, Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 1. occasion the setting up
somewhat like Truth which is not Truth, when they write Irenicums, and set up
for Reconcilers, make a hotch-potch of Truth and Falsehood together, a sure way
to elude and baffle Truth, and insinuate Error, the abatement being still on
Truth's side, and the Error is brought to become tolerable, and which would not
in plain terms have been endured, but thus gets ground onward, and so much of
Truth is destroyed and erased, to give place to the Falsehood. This was the most
devilish Plot of Julian the Apostate, by which he baffled Christianity, he
mixed his Paganism with it, complied in many instances of its Performances,
that the less discerning might be the easier carried over to it; a very ill
consequence of Error, mostly ruining Truth, and mostly to be abominated; the
Ape is the more deformed because like a Man, and is not one. Tertullian turned
Montanist, in disdain of the Pride of the greater Clergy at Rome, as inter
fragmenta Tertull. and Hieron. Catalog. Script. Ecclesiast. no one stands
fairer in the Church Story for Piety and Morals than Pelagius, and he and his
Scholars, Julianus, Celestius, etc. seduced many by it, designed and perverted
it to that alone purpose, even Men of great Fame and Learning became thereby
inclined to them; as Sixtus at Rome, John of Jerusalem, Cyril in Egypt, and
Sulpitius Severus in France; And particularly the Rich and Potent Women, whom
he strangely insinuated into by all manner of Flatteries, Hypocrisies and
Delusions; (and which generally are the Engines Heretics have worked by, as in
Church Story) and for which Austin and Jerome sufficiently shrape him; as an
account is given at large by Joannes Garnerus, the late Publisher of the Works
of Marius Mercator. Dissert. 4. De Subscript. etc. Cap. 3. who was, or who
could be more stout and courageous for the Nicene Faith, than was Liberius
Bishop of Rome, and which appeared in his behavior all along, particularly in
his personal Conference with our Emperor, suffering Banishment for it, an
account of which is given by Athanasius, Apol. page 833. Ed. Paris. and Sozomen
Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 11. and yet lassus injuriis, provoked and tired out by
oppressions, he forsook Athanasius, and went over to the Sect of the Arians,
Page 837. ibid. and so did the Divine Hosius, then ancientest Bishop in the
Christian World, and who was in a manner the Author of the Determinations of
the first Council of Nice. Sulpitius Severus suspects he might be in his
dotage, and there is ground enough for the Suspicion, being an hundred years
old, as it is in his Historia Sacra, lib. 2. a Man, if any that ever lived could
be, to be exempted, one would think, from so great an Apostasy, as will appear
by the Character Athanasius gives him, Ep. ad solitariam vitam agentes, page
840. and yet tormenta longaevus, plagasque perpessus est, unde etiam
necessitate vehementi, expositionibus tunc editis Syrmiensi Synodo consensit,
atque subscripsit, Hist. Tripartit. l. 5. c. 9. being of a great Age, and by
reason of his many Sufferings, through a more than usual force, he consented
and subscribed to the Expositions set forth in the Synod at Syrmium. Gregory
Nazianzen says in the Life of Athanasius, that there was very sew to be found,
that were not contemptible for their obscurity, or very eminent for virtue, as
the seed and root remaining in Israel, whence the Truth was to spring out and
reflourish; as it did upon the return of Athanasius, which did not for fear or
gain, by flattery or through ignorance, tempori obsequi, qui quamvis mente
haudquaquam prolapsi fuerint, subscribe with their hand, amongst whom he
confesses himself to be one, but withal, and which is not usual, obliges the
World with his Public Acknowledgment and Recantation. This is the time when
St. Jerome adv. Luciferian. and in his Comments in Ps. 133. says, Totum orbem
fuisse Arianum, that the whole World was Arian, and which only can be
understood, as St. John must be, when he tells us, if all that our Savior did
were written, the whole World could not contain the Books, i. e. there would be
a great many; and for this St. Jerome himself will become his own avoucher, who
in his Comments on Ezekiel, cap. 48. thus bespeaks the Catholic Priests,
Audiat hoc sacerdotalis gradus, etc. that though overpowered by the Arians,
yet, as holding the true Faith, so their manners be accordingly; and that the
Homousians were numerous and visible, even then might be made to appear, were I
now to write that History. I Will add but one more way by which particular
Persons are seduced and misled into Heresy; it is by Lies, underhand Dealings,
and downright Forgeries, obtruded upon Mankind. Thus the Pelagia grew and was
numerous, still making use of the Names and feigned Counterfeit Letters of
Bishops and Eminent Men in his Commendations, and the savor of his Heresy, as
the same Publisher of Marius Mercator gives us an account also, Ibid. And then
since so much uncertainty in the Autorities of particular Doctors, since liable
to so many failures, and under so many ill and provoking Circumstances, and to
many of which good Men are liable, are over-sweigh'd and overruled thereby for
some time; how unequal, unjust a thing is it to urge them, each Circumstance
not considered, but most of all when an accidental saying, or pressing a
present Argument is reported to the World, the sense and judgment of a Doctor,
against the whole course and design of all his other Writings, and the
publicly declared Doctrines of that Church of which he is a Member, which he
owns and professes, submits and subscribes to? That of Tertullian in his
Prescriptions, Cap. 3. is the more substantial and rational way, Quid ergo si
Episcopus, si Diaconus lapsus a regula suit, ideo haereses veritatem vid^bantur
obtinere? ex personis probamus fidem an ex fide personas? what if a Bishop, or
a Deacon, or whoever he be falls from the Rule, shall Heresy thence obtain
Truth? shall we prove the Faith by the Persons, or the Persons by the Faith? if
Theodosius the Great designed any more than a Committee of Triers, when
appointing such a set number of Bishops, to examine every one that was admitted
to a benefice in the Church, as so many Doctores Probabiles, as he terms them,
in Communion with whom all must be, that are instituted or inducted, or
whatsoever was the way and expression of then giving Titles and Possession,
Cod. Theodos. 16. Tit. 1. l. l. 2, 3. his Rule is unsafe, and the Church may be
imposed upon by it, though the Bishop of Rome was one, for Liberius once
subscribed to Arianism, nor indeed did he design any more, and they were only
as so many Examiners according to the Nicene Faith, and which the Piety and
Zeal of that Holy Emperor did design and endeavor to have took place
throughout his Dominions, and which is express in the Laws. Nor was that so
great a Secession from this Faith in the days of Constantius, and then much
less of one or two particular Doctors of the time, thought to break off the
Succession of such the Doctrine, or render it less Catholic; but it is,
notwithstanding, declared to have continued from St. Peter the Apostle, by
Damasus and Peter, Bishops of Rome and Alexandria, usque nunc, to his days,
that then Period of time, safe and inviolated.

FINIS.

