AN ENQUIRY AFTER HAPPINESS.

VOL. I.

By the Author of the PRACTICAL CHRISTIANITY.

(...). Pythag. apud Stob. Sermon. 80.

Qui quod tibi parum videtur Eruditus, ea Causa est quod nullam Eruditionem
esse duxit, nisi quae Beatae vitae Disciplinam juvaret. Cic. de Finib. Bonor.
and Mal.

LONDON, Printed for George Pawlett at the Bible in Chancery Lane, and Samuel
Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

To my Worthy Friend MR. WILLIAM POWELL, Rector of Llan-Wennarth, etc.
My Dear Friend,
WHom neither thy Prosperity nor my Affliction has ever divided from me, it has
ever been your good Fortune (and your Mind has ever been better than your
Fortune) from the first Day of our Friendship to stand upon the higher Ground,
and to have always been doing Kindnesses, and never needed any. I will confess
if you will Pardon me that I have sometimes secretly repined at this thy good
luck and envied the Honor and the Pleasure which this Advantage gave you, and
can you blame me since it excluded me from a share in one of the most ravishing
Delights of Friendship? You know what Attempts I have made to redeem this
Inequality, but all in vain till now: Now I flatter my self that I have found a
Present to make you that cannot provoke your Generosity though it were Nicer and
more scrupulous than it is; I have now at length found a way to End most
happily, the only Difference that ever has been between us in an uninterrupted
Friendship of near Seventeen years: You shall always be Fortunate, always able
to do Kindnesses, and be in need of none; and I will always strive to vanquish
and surmount all the Disadvantages of my Fortune, and in despite of them find
some way to express my Affection, and return your Obligations. And thus if I
fall' not short of my Design, I shall be equal with you; for it is no small
Service I propose to do you, I will now be your Guide, I will Conduct you not
as you have done me (though for that too I must ever thank you) through barren
and impoverish't Piccardy, but through all the Ways of Pleasantness, and all
the Paths of Peace. I will give you a Sight not of France, but Canaan; I will
make you a sharer of that Immortality which I aspired to, and bring you to that
Heaven which is the Sacred Abode of Sacred Friendship, and Sacred Joys. What a
Dark Cottage, what a Rude Heap will the now-Admir'd Versailles then seem to
you! But see whither I have suffered this Passion to transport me? how easy is
it for one that follows the Conduct of Affection to be rather Obliging than
Discreet! I had alalmost forgot how little you stand in need of these kind of
Helps, being not only a sufficient Guide to your Self, but a Prudent and
Successful one to others in the Way to Happiness: however though you need no
Guide, I may serve you as the Companion of your Journey, I may 'wake you in a
Morning, I may oblige you to quicken your pace, and I may Entertain you with
Reflections and Remarks upon the Country as we pass, and ever and anon mind you
of the Beauty and the Pleasures of that Country we Travel to; these and such
like Assistances the most Perfect need, these are the Offices of the truest
Friendship, and these the Papers I send you, may I hope in some measure
perform. Adieu,

Thy Affectionate R. L.

TO THE READER.
IT has pleased God that in a few Years I should finish the more pleasant, and
delightful part of Life, if Sense were to be the Judge, and Standard of
Pleasure; being confined (I will not say condemned) by well-nigh utter
Blindness to Retirement, and Solitude. In this state Conversation has lost much
of it is former air, and briskness; Business (wherein I could never pretend to
any great Address) gives me now more trouble than formerly; and that too
without the usual dispatch or success: Study (which is the only Employment left
me) is clogged with this Weight and Encumbrance, that all the Assistance I can
receive from without, must be conveyed by another's Senses not my own; which it
may easily be believed, are Instruments, or Organs as ill fitted and as
awkwardly managed by me, as wooden Legs, or Hands by the Maimed.

In this Case, should I affect to procure my self a decent Funeral, and leave
an Honorable Remembrance of me behind; should I struggle to Rescue my self from
that Contempt to which this Condition (wherein I may seem lost to the World,
and my self) exposes me; should I ambitiously affect to have my Name march in
the train of those All (though not all equally) great ones, Homer, Appius, Cn.
Aufidius, Didymus, Walkup, Pere Jean l'aveugle, etc. All of them eminent for
their service and usefulness, as well as for their affliction of the same kind
with mine; Even this might seem almost a Commendable Infirmity, for the last
thing a Mind truly great, and Philosophical puts off, Tacit. Hist. l. 4.
is the Desire of Glory: Hence Tacitus closes his Divine Character of Helvidius
Priscus thus, Erant quibus appetentior fama videretur, quando etiam sapientibus
cupido gloriae novissima exuitur: But this Treatise owes neither its
Conception, nor Birth to this Principle; for besides that I know my own
Insufficiency too well, to flatter my self with the hopes of a Romantic
Immortality from any performance of mine in this Ingenious, and Learned Age; I
must confess I never had a Soul great enough to be acted by the Heroic heat
which the love of Fame and Honor has kindled in some.

-- Tuta and parvula laudo. I have ever loved the Security and Contentment of
Privacy and Retirement almost to the guilt of Singularity, and Affectation.

But the truth is plainly this, the Vigor and Activity of my Mind, the health
and strength of my body (being now in the flower of my Age) continuing
unbroken, unbent under this Affliction; I found that if I did not provide some
Employment that might Entertain my Mind, it would weary out it self with
fruitless Desires of and Vain Attempts after its wonted Objects, and so that
Strength and Vivacity of Nature which should render my state more Comfortable,
would make it much more Intolerable.

I confess my Zeal for Public Good by the Propagation and Endearment of Divine
Truths was less fervent in me, than could well become the particular
Obligations of my Profession; or the Common ones which every Christian in
proportion to his Talents lies under; I was almost induced to believe, that
this Chastisement which had removed me from the Service of the Altar, did at
the same time discharge me from all Duty owing to the Public; But my good
Friend Mr. Lamb revived the Dying sparks of a decaying Zeal, and restored me to
a proper sense of my Duty in this Point; for whether by Design or by Providence
governing Chance, I know not, (for he never seemed to address or design the
Discourse particularly to me) he had ever and anon in his mouth this Excellent
Principle, That the life of Man is to be estimated by its usefulness and
serviceableness in the World. A sober reflection upon this wrought me up to a
Resolution strong enough to contemn all the Difficulties which the loss of my
Sight could represent to me in an Enterprise of this Nature. Thus you see on
what Principles I became engaged in this Work; I thought it my Duty to set my
self some Task which might serve at once to divert my Thoughts from a
melancholy Application on my Misfortune, and Entertain my Mind with such a
Rational Employment as might render me most easy to my self, and most
serviceable to the World. Being now abundantly convinced that I am not released
from that Duty I owe that Body of which I am still a Member, by being cut off
from a great part of the Pleasures and Advantages of it; therefore like one
that truly loves his Country, when no way else is left him, he fights for it
on his stumps, so will I even in the Remains of a broken body express at least
my affection for Mankind, and breath out my last Gasp in their Service.

The fitness, and tendency of this subject to serve these Ends is so apparent,
that I will not impertinently detain the Reader by a Justification of this
Choice. How fit I am for it, will be best judged by the Performance; yet that
this may not suffer any Disadvantage from such Prejudices with which the
Consideration of my state may easily prepossess Men, I think my self obliged to
some sort of Justification of my self.

I have had so much Experience of all the several Pleasures that Prosperity can
afford Man in this life, that I am sufficiently Capable of setting a true Rate
and Value upon them; and of judging their Subserviency to true Happiness: And I
am so well acquainted with Trouble and Affliction, that I am sufficiently
sensible, as of the weakness of Humane Nature and Misery of this Mortal state;
so of the Necessity, and Power of Virtue in Relieving and Supporting Man under
both: And after all, my Mind lives now in the Body (like a Soul in a separate
state) retired as from the Pleasures, so from the Troubles of the World, and is
therefore the more able to pass a free, and more dispassionate Judgment upon
both.

It may probably be feared that the same should befall me, which has many
Monkish Writers, who being much retired from the World, having much leisure and
few Books, did spin out every Subject into wandering Mazes, and airy
Speculations, like Plants which destitute of a well manured and fat soil run
all into the Exuberancy of Leaves and fruitless Sprigs: but the Commerce I
still maintain with the World may in part prevent this Error, and the Nature
of the Subject so fruitful of many Necessary Enquiries will of it self lead me
on to useful and profitable Thoughts.

There is one thing which may be by some objected against my manner of treating
this Subject, the freedom I use in it; being not altogether so common to my
Profession; but I hope it will not be found that I have abused the Liberty I
have taken to the Disparagement of the least Truth of our Religion, or to the
least Discouragement of Virtue; and therefore I think it cannot justly reflect
any Disadvantage upon my Calling.

Besides I have in a former Treatise wherein I designed the same End, The
Happiness of Mankind, treated this Subject in a manner suited to the generality
of Readers: but this Discourse I design for such who are not content to submit
to Inferences deduced from Received Principles, unless they can be fairly
Convin'd of the Reasonableness and Truth of the Principles themselves: nor
should I think it any Crime, were I Master of such Talents, if I did mingle
with Necessary Truths all that variety of Thought, all that fineness and
briskness of fancy which might render them as delightful as useful, the Example
of God himself in the great Work of the Creation would justify this Liberty,
who has Created as well Leaves and Flowers, as Herbs and Fruit, and in the
variety and beauty, in the Colors and figures of all that he has produced; he
appears plainly to have made provision not only to feed the Appetite, but even
the fancies of his Creatures.

There is after all I confess one thing that stands in need of an Excuse, which
is the publishing what should come forth a just Treatise by small Parts; to
this I may truly say, having laid together all the Materials I saw necessary to
complete this Discourse, I found it grown unavoidably to that Voluminous Bulk,
that I took this Method partly out of compliance to the Ease of my Reader, but
especially in compliance to my own; for in my present Circumstances I saw no
other way to avoid that Confusion which would inevitably have disordered the
Contexture of a long Discourse, if I should have charged my Memory with the
Contrivance and Connection of so many, and various Parts at once: and I foresaw
that all the Strength of my Mind, which should be collected and united in the
treating every single Argument would be unprofitably spent in distracted,
divided, and imperfect Efforts.

THE INTRODUCTION OR A Brief Scheme of the Design OF THE Whole WORK.
TO inform Man what is his true, and proper Happiness, and to mark out before
him the Right way to it has been, and ever must be the aim of all Philosophy
and all Religion: and yet so numerous have been and are the Disputes on this
Subject, and so seemingly insuperable the difficulties which encounter us in
every way, that the Despair of attaining Happiness at least in this World seems
almost as Universal, as the Desire of it: and as Nature will never give o^^e
the pursuit of it, so will Man never forbear the Tragical Complaints of his
Disappointments, and the raving Exaggerations of Humane Misery. That therefore
I may attempt at least to treat this Subject satisfactorily, I will endeavor,

. 1. To show you, That Happiness is not a mere airy and imaginary Notion, but
is a real state, and really attainable; and that our Disappointments and
Unsuccessfulness must be imputed to our selves, and this shall be the work of
this present Volume.

. 2. To Explain the Nature of Happiness, to Examine wherein it consists, and
what is the highway to it: in which to proceed successfully, I thought the
plainest Method I could take would be this, To fix and define the Notion of the
most absolute and Complete Happiness, that so we might discern what it behooved
us to aim at, and how near we could approach the Perfection of Happiness. Now
the most perfect Idaea of Happiness that the Mind of Man can frame is this,
Happiness is the state of a perfect Being in the unmixt, uninterrupted, and
Eternal Enjoyment of the most perfect Pleasure; Such I conceive to be the
Happiness of God himself: In this Definition there are Three Parts which
manifestly appear to be the Ingredients of a Divine Happiness. First,
Perfection of Being: Secondly, Freedom from Trouble: Thirdly, Eternal Enjoyment
of the most perfect Pleasure. It is therefore now Evident that to discover the
Nature of Humane Happiness and the way to it, I am obliged to Discourse.

1. Of the Being of Man, and its Perfection. 2. Of Indolence or freedom from
Pain or Trouble. 3. Of Fruition or the Enjoyment of Pleasure.
Each of which shall be the Subject of a distinct Volume; and because there may
some Questions arise of a more general Nature; such as, whether every Man's
particular Happiness ought to be dearer to him than the Happiness of another?
or whatever else can be imagined. Secondly, On supposal, that an Entire
Happiness cannot be attained, what part then of it ought to be preferred? and
such like. I will therefore,

. 3. Assign a particular Volume for the Discussion of such Questions, and the
Establishment of such Inferences, as will naturally result from the former
Discourses.

ERRATA.
Page 77. lin. 12. for them read him, p. 135. l. 3. omit so, p. 148. l. 4. for
tutelary r. tutelar, p. 159. l. 27. omit only, l. 28. for as r. then, p. 308.
l. 7. for times r. time.

AN Enquiry after Happiness. Part I. Contains three Chapters: The First, Treats
of the Motives to this Enquiry, and Objections against it. The Second, of the
Possibility of attaining Happiness. The Third, of the Causes of our ill
Success, and Disappointments in our pursuit of it.
CHAP. I. Of the Motives to this Enquiry, and of the Objections which may be
formed against it.
The Importance. The Necessity of it.
The Objections are, First, Happiness is not attainable; and therefore
Enquiries after it are to no purpose.

Secondly, It is too Divine a state for Man to aspire to.

Thirdly, It is so little that the Attainment is not worth our while.

Fourthly, We had best follow Nature and Custom as the Guides to Happiness
without Study.

Fifthly, There is that Variety in Men, and consequently in their Happiness,
that it seems incapable of any Constant and General Rules.

Sixthly, The Diversity of Opinions concerning Happiness.

The Importance of this Enquiry.
THe Desire of Happiness is the first, most Powerful, and most Universal
Principle of humane Actions; This moves the Prince and Peasant, the Learned and
the Idiot: Revelation and Reason take this for granted, all Laws both Divine,
and Humane, proposing our Happiness as the sole and sufficient Motive to our
Obedience.

But all this while, tho all sorts of Religion and Government do unanimously
consent in the Proposal of this one general end; yet so great is the Diversity
(I may say Contrariety) in the Methods in which they pursue it, that it seems
to imply the Discovery of Happiness a matter of no less Uncertainty than
Importance; there being necessarily as great a Variety in the Opinions of Men
about it, as in their Lives and Actions, or in the forms of Religion and
Government in the World; since all these seem, according to the different
Judgments of Men, so many different Paths which lead to it.

Till therefore I have fixed the Notion of Happiness, and found out what it
consists in, it is impossible I should live rationally: how shall I steer the
Course of my Life aright, when I know not what Port I would make? how shall my
Actions tend to any Wise or Noble purposes when I have no mark prefix't 'em?
till then I must live extempore and act at Random, I must abandon my self to
Wind and Tide, to Time and Chance.

Hospes. Horat.

Quo me cunque rapit tempestas deferor
Tossed by a Storm for my Retreat I take,
Whatever Shore the unguided Bark can make.
In a word, till I have fixed this Notion, and know what to aim at, Business
will be but a Mechanic Drudging out of life, and Study but a vain amusement of
my Mind: whereas when all the Inclinations of Life and Soul shall have one
Uniform bent and tendency, when every desire of the Soul, and every action of
Life shall be a step advancing in a direct line toward Happiness, when the
vigor and activity of my Mind shall not be suspended and frustrated by
incertainties and fluctuation, nor deluded and lost in wandering Errors and
Deviations, but shall ever carry me straight forwards toward my Journey's End:
then certainly all my Labors will thrive and prosper, and my progress will be
great, tho my Motion should be but feeble and slow: Thus Plants whose native
vigor mounts straight upwards, tho their bulk be less, yet their height and
beauty is greater than their's whose Luxuriant nourishment wastes it self in
gouty Knots, and distorted Branches.

Having considered this I resolved, that I could not spend my time more manly,
and Philosophically than in an Enquiry, what the Happiness of Man is, and how
attainable: Every Advance toward this is an accession to my Life and Being;
and all Travail which does not lead me on toward this End is but so much of
Life misspent and lost; what a sillyness were it to load my Memory with terms
and words, with numerous Instances of Matters of Fact, to marshal up in Order,
Lines, and Figures, to talk of unknown Seas and distant Shores, to tumble over
each Page in Nature's Systeme? What trifling Cunning to skill the gainful
Mysteries of Trade? what solemn and laborious foppery to penetrate into all the
Subtilties of Government and Arts of Conversation? If after all I have no
Receipt for a troubled Mind, no Cure for distempered Passions, if I have no
Principle to support my Mind under a sinking Fortune, or govern it in a rising
one, if I have nothing to arm me against my Fears, or to disperse my Griefs;
would any one think I had spent my time well, or stock't my self with useful
Knowledge?

But to find out what would make me Happier, to find out what would free my
Mind from the slavery of uneasy Passions, what would make it serene, steady,
great and manly in all the Accidents of Life; this every Man sees at the first
blush to be a wise, generous and serviceable Employment of my Reason. This,
Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque,
Aeque neglectum pueris senibusque nocebit.
This Learning rich and poor alike do need,
And its Neglect does certain Ruin breed,
To old and young alike --


This occasioned St. Austin's Ingenious Reflection on the Poly-theism of the
Romans; when he considered that they worshipped Felicitas (by which they meant
that Deity that could confer Happiness upon men) he could not but wonder, why
this was not the most Ancient of all their God's; or why, when this Deity was
found out, they did not presently discard the other idle multitude of
superfluous and unnecessary Gods; since this alone was sufficient to supply all
the Necessities, and gratify all the desires and appetites of Mankind.

But tho Happiness should be a project too great, The Necessity of this Enquiry
for the Redress of Humane Misery.
too ambitious for a poor silly Mortal; yet sure the Redress of those Evil
which oppress our State and Nature is such an humble and modest Design as may
well become the meanness of Man; and therefore if I could not excuse the
Confidence or Presumption of this Enquiry by pleading the innate Desire of
Happiness; yet sure I might by urging the multitude of those Evils which infest
Humane Life, which it is not only irrational but impossible so far to yield and
submit to, as not to struggle to free our selves from 'em, or endeavor to
lighten their afflicting weight, or study to prevent 'em: This I confess was
the first, and none of the least prevalent Arguments that engaged me; I love my
self, and would be, if not Happy, at least not miserable, and I am neither
insensible nor fearless; I know the common Portion of Man, and I cannot so far
flatter my self as not to apprehend approaching Evils, nor am I naturally so
hard and tough as not to shrink and gall under the weight of them, and I
suppose most Men are of the same Nature with me, and as liable as I am to all
the Evils of Time and Chance; and consequently this one Consideration of Humane
Misery ought to work very powerfully in them, and effectually oblige 'em to
this Study.

In this place I took a Distinct View, and made an Exact Survey of every
particular Calamity which befalls Man, reducing 'em all under their several
heads; I allowed my self the Melancholy pleasure of viewing the mournful Pomp,
whilst I saw their numerous Legions marching under their distinct ^^nners,
armed, with great variety of fatal, dreadful weapons: but besides that this
would have made too tedious an Interruption in the thread of my Discourse: I
will deal freely with the World, I had in private drawn as exact and lively a
Portraicture of Humane Misery, as I could, I had left no shade, no feature
wanting as I thought: but when I had finished it, observing it exactly from
head to foot, I found my own Sins and Follies made up the ugliest and most
frightful Parts of it: and therefore I thought it not freedom but impudence to
expose to open view all the Deformities of the Soul, when natural Modesty
guides the Painter's hand to draw a covering over the uncomley Parts of the
Body.

However such a general Survey of Humane Misery as may serve to awaken our
Concern, and quicken and inflame our Industry, will not be improper or
unnecessary in this place: A rude Draught or naked Scheme of the general heads
of those Evils, to which the Life of Man is exposed, will present us with a
very formidable host of Plagues and Mischiefs. The Evils that harrass Mankind
are either Natural, which grow out of our selves like Rust, and Moths, and
Worms, out of those very Bodies which they afterward destroy; or else they are
accidental, such as the various Chances and Revolutions of the World bring upon
us: Natural Evils either have their Residence in the Soul or in the Body; the
Body is liable to maiming, to loss of Senses, to Decay and Languishings, to
numerous Diseases, and to Death. As to the Soul, in the Understanding, there is
Ignorance, Error, Superstition, Uncertainty, Suspicion, etc. In the Will
Obstinacy, Precipitancy, Levity, Inconstancy, Impotence, Irresolution,
Fluctuation, Distraction. In the inferior and sensitive Part of the Soul of
Man a thousand restless Passions marching under the Conduct of blind and rash
Love and Hate. Accidental Evils contain all that vast number which may befall
those things without us, which we to our great hurt falsely call ours; such are
Loss or Diminution of Reputation, Power, Estate, Friends, Relations, etc. and
what is worse than this, numerous are the Evils which we suffer not only in
those things which we call our's, but also in those we our selves confess not
to be our's; such are restless Desire, wakeful and laborious Pursuit, tame
digestion of the Neglect, Coldness, Insolence and Insincerity of those we
depend upon and address to; Contemptuous Repulses, Vexatious disappointments,
etc. After all this, all these Evils are to be reckoned double, for we are
liable to 'em not only in our selves, but in our Friends and our Relations; and
then we must double 'em almost all again, for we suffer 'em in Reality or in
Fancy and Imagination, we suffer 'em when present and when future too: for as
if the Evil of the Day were not sufficient for it, we search the dark and
unknown Regions of future time, that we may find out what may make us
miserable; and we frequently torture our selves with Idle not Prophetic fears:
we often suffer the want, the pain, etc. which we shall never feel; and our own
suspicious, despondent, melancholy Minds do raise those hideous Apparitions
which scare and frighten us. These are a few of the general Heads of Humane
Misery, those Fountains that ever flow with bitter Waters; this is a brief
account of the Nature and State of Man. Aristotle's Definition of him, that he
is a Rational Creature, is flat and heavy in Comparison to that of Apuleius the
witty tho dissolute Platonic, Apul. de Deo Socratis.
Homines Ratione plaudentes, oratione pollentes, immortalibus animis,
moribundis membris, levibus and anxiis mentibus, brutis and obnoxiis
corporibus, dissimilibus moribus, similibus erroribus, pervicaci audacia,
pertinaci spe, casso labor, fortuna caduca, volucri tempore, tarda sapientia,
cita morte, quaerula vita terras incolunt, i. e. Men the Inhabitants of Earth
are endowed with Speech, and vaunt of Reason, immortal are their Souls, mortal
their Limbs, inconstant and anxious are their Minds, brutish and obnoxious are
their Bodies; unlike are they in their Manners, like in their Errors, sturdy is
their Confidence and obstinate their Hope, fruitless their Toil, uncertain
their Fortune, swift their Years, and slow their Wisdom, speedy their Death and
their Life full of Plaints.

Thus miserable is our State, and shall we now sit down and only Childishly
bewail our selves? Shall we sink under the weight of these Evils, by adding to
'em one heavier than 'em all, Despair? Shall we think the thread of Evils is so
closely and fatally wove into one Piece with the thread of Life, that no
Wisdom, no Industry can prevent 'em? that no Philosophy (how Divine soever) can
divide or separate the one from the other? and consequently never think of any
other than that one Universal Remedy of Virgil, Patience.

-- Fortuna omnis superanda ferendo est,
Ah wretched Nature! ah too helpless State!
If naught but suffering can overcome our Fate!
No, no, let others do what they will, I Will never thus abandon my self, I will
not tamely and dastardly renounce my hopes of Happiness, I Will study and contend
for it whilst I have a being, whatever Calamities assault me, they shall find
me ready armed from head to foot, nor shall they ever gain over me an easy
Victory; Death it self, when e're it comes, shall find me struggling to the last
for life, Eternal Life and Happiness: nor can I entertain so unworthy a thought
of the most perfect Being, but that he loves this Resolution wheree're he meets
it, and will be most ready to assist his Creatures in so just and rational an
Endeavor.

But as the Israelites when they marched in Arms to take Possession of the
Promised Land, were told of Sons of Anak, Gigantic Enemies, and Cities walled
and fenced up to Heaven; so shall I or any man who goes about to possess
himself of so great a Blessing as Happiness, be discouraged by worldly and
sensual Men with the toil we are to undergo, with the Difficulties we are to
encounter, and generally with representations of the folly and rashness of the
Attempt: These must indeed be contemned and slighted, but it must be upon
Rational grounds, and therefore I must consider their weight and strength
before I proceed.

SECT. II. Of the Objections formed against this Enquiry.
THe Objection which assaults this v. Chapter 2.

There are other Objections which are framed partly from the Nature of
Happiness, partly from the Nature of Man, which tho, as all Errors, they
Contradict one another; yet do they all unite their forces to oppose the Truth,
and to deter Men from the Noblest and most Rational Study and Travail, That of
Happiness.

Genesis 3.
Ye shall be as Gods; and what can be more truly the Prerogative and peculiar
possession of God than Happiness? or what can make us more like God? to affect
this therefore were the folly of those Earth-Born Creatures in the Poet which
sacrilegiously invaded Heaven; Omnis enim per se Divum natura necesse est,
Immortali aevo summa cum pace f^uatur,
-- Privata dolor omni, privata periclis
Ipsa suis pollens opibus.
Lucret.
let us be content with the Portion of Man, and rest satisfied with those easy
and obvious Pleasures which best suit this imperfect Nature and imperfect
State: I know not how well some may please themselves with this sort of Talk;
but this is plain to me, these Men are contradictions to themselves and their
Philosophy to all true Reason; for notwithstanding this affected debasing of
humane Nature, the transports of these Voluptuaries are as bold and ambitious
as those of the haughtiest Stoic, and it is no strange thing to hear an
Epicurean boast of a Parity or Equality with his Jupiter in the point of
Happiness or Pleasure. But to answer the Objection in a word, be the Nature of
Mankind what it will, I do readily confess, that it were, if not a sinful, yet
a vain ambition for Man to affect any other Happiness than what was suitable to
his Nature; for it were to pursue what he were not capable of, it were like the
folly of Semele in the Poet when she desired that she might be entertained by
Jupiter, not only with the Passion of a Lover, but the Glory and Majesty of a
God, and so being fatally successful in her wish, she perished in the Embraces
she had so proudly begged; this therefore we readily grant, Happiness is a
state of Pleasure, and Pleasure is the Result of the proportion and
agreeableness of the Object to the capacity or appetite; so that he that
aspires to a state of Happiness that infinitely exceeds his nature, foolishly
doats on Contradictions, and affects a Happiness devoid of Pleasure: or which
is all one, covets a Pleasure which he cannot enjoy: This being yielded to on
the one hand, that we ought to pursue no other state of Happiness than what
suits and fits our Capacities; they ought as readily to yield on the other hand
if they will suppose God the Creator of Man, and concerned in his Actions (as
these seem to do) that he does not only allow of, but delight in all the
Endeavors of Man after such a state: those Faculties and Capacities he endows
us with being the fairest Declarations of his Will what he designs us for: the
sole Difficulty therefore that remains will be this, what the Nature of Man is?
what the Dignity and Excellency of the Rational Soul? which shall be discussed
in its place.

There are others of that sluggish for when I read St. Austin so far inflamed
with the Love of true Philosophy by Cicero's Book ad Hortensium, that he
presently abandons all the luscious Pleasures of his Pagan Conversation for the
sake of those which he should afterward find in a Philosophical life; when I
find Cicero in surely a holy ravishment of Soul, preferring one Day sp^nt
according to the Precepts of Virtue before a sinful Immortality; and the
Psalmist almost in the same words as well as the same passion, Psalm. 84.
One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand; I cannot choose but think
there are irresistible Charms and Beauties in Virtue, and Pleasures in true
Philosophy as ravishing as they are pure and sacred and who then can restrain
himself from the glowing desires of, and resolute Endeavors after a share in
them? when I have read Socrates dying with a generous Charity, and serene
Hopes, and with an undisturbed Mind, easily parting with all here below; when I
have read of Simeon waiting for, and expecting Death, as weary Laborers do the
Evening Shades, or Hirelings the Reward of their work; when I read St. Paul
with humble Impatience expressing his devout desire of Death and Dissolution;
when I have seen some (as some I have seen) setting in Calm, and Majesty, and
Triumph, as if they had attended Death, as the old Romans once did the
barbarous Gauls in their Chairs and Robes; when I have seen men dye, not only
with Content, but almost in Ecstasy, and the Soul breathed forth not in a
Groan, but an Ejaculation, I must needs say I could not choose but wish with
Balaam, Numb. 23.
that I might dye the Death of the Righteous, and that my latter end might be
like his. These are degrees of Happiness which I should judge it reasonable to
purchase at any Rate, whatever there be hereafter; a smooth, contented,
delightful life, such as would not only bear but invite Reflections on it, a
cheerful, lightsome Death, able to make the living in love with it.

But after all, whether this present life be all my Portion, whether I dye all
of me together with my Body, or whether this life be only the time of our
probation and preparation for another, and Death be nothing but the rough
passage from one shore to another, or the Horizon that parts the Hemisphere of
Darkness from that of Light, is a question I will not now determine: it is
sufficient to propose it here as a doubt whereof one side or other must be
true. If therefore this life be in Order to Eternity, it nearly imports me to
consider my present Relation to a future state; if it be not, then this life,
call it what you please, a Span, a Dream, or a Bubble, yet is it my All, and I
must make the most of it: But,

Nature and Custom the best guides to Happiness? what needs there so much
poring to find out that which mere instinct leads us to? we do not see that the
most learned Clerks are always the most Happy men; let such demonstrate the
truth of their Philosophy by their own success: And thus they magnify Nature,
not out of any honor they design to do it or the Author of it, but that they
may with the greater Security contemn the one, and deprave the other by
sluggish Luxury and unbridled Lust. I am not easily tempted to a Contempt of
Nature or of Customs, for by the one I should seem injurious to God, who is the
Author of Nature; and by the other I should seem injurious to Mankind, whose
concurrent Sense and constant Practice creates a Custom. Therefore as to the
former part of the Objection, were it but once truly determined what were to be
understood by Nature, this Objection would vanish: I think our Souls within us
may be justly supposed to constitute a part of our Nature as well as our
Bodies; and therefore I cannot be content that the Body, much less vicious
habits (commonly called indeed a second Nature) should usurp the Name and
Authority of Nature; nor consequently can I be content to allow of the mere
sensual Appetites of the Body, much less the Dictates of vicious habits for the
Laws of Nature: The Body indeed is an Essential part of our Nature, but then it
must be remembered it is not the governing part; and therefore it is Instinct
cannot Arrogate to it self the Authority of a Law. It remains therefore that
tho the Rational Soul within us be but a part of our Nature, yet being the
better part, the Ruling part, its Dictates must have the force of Laws; so that
the Law of Nature will be nothing else but the Commands of right Reason: I
shall be most ready to grant, that we ought to follow the Conduct of our
Nature, taking it in this sense, Aug. contra Academicos.
Beat vivit qui secundum eam partem animi vivit quam dominari in homine fas
est, he indeed lives Happily who follows the Conduct of that part to which
belongs the undoubted Right of Sovereignty and Dominion in man. As to the
latter part of this Objection; By Customs is commonly meant those Principles
and Practices which are generally received and fashionable in the place we
live; I have a just Veneration for whatever is the sense of Mankind, but I
think their suffrage is not to be taken by number, but by weight: nor are we to
follow the Opinion or Example of the most, but of the best, nor indeed is it
possible to understand what is the sense of Mankind in this point; for we have
Custom against Custom, Nation against Nation, and Religion against Religion.

It ought farther to be considered, That Principles taken upon trust have
seldom an equal influence upon us, with those which we take up upon strict
Examination and mature Deliberation: that men will easily be tempted to desert
those for which they have no better Authority than the vote of a Multitude: Nor
can any thing tend more to the Disparagement of any persuasion than this, that
it is not the Result of our Judgment but our Fortune; or to the Dishonor of any
Religion than this, that it is Magisterially obtruded by the Authority of Laws
and terror of Force, and will not submit it self to the trial of sober
Philosophy: and so I take it to be a Credit to the Christian Religion, that it
did not force assent, but gain it by irresistible Arguments; that it is so far
from shunning the trial of Impartial Philosophy, that it did always invite men
to a sober Examination of its Evidence: and commanded its Disciples, 1 Pet. 3.
be ready to give an answer to every man that asks you a Reason of the hope
that is in you. It Is true indeed as the Case now stands, Religion may, nay must
be recommended by Authority of Law and Custom, and ingratiated by particular
Practice of it; but afterward must grow up and be confirmed by Reason, like a
tender Plant that is first fix^t by the help of another's hands, but afterward
it stands firmest upon its own Roots: and this Method our Savior himself did
sometimes make use of, when either the stupidity of Nature or Prejudice of
Education rendered those to whom he addressed his Doctrine incapable of entering
into a through Examination of it; Then if any man will do my will, he shall know
of the Doctrine whether it be of God.

Lastly, That to trust to others who themselves with like Rashness and
Credulity do in the same manner trust to others in the matter of the highest
moment of my life, seems to me inconsistent with common Prudence, with the very
Constitution of a rational Nature: for what use can be as much as fancied of
Reason, if I slight its service in so important an affair as this?

It is true, Temper Fortune and Education have de facto so great a share in the
Happiness or Misery of some kind of men especially, that I must not yet dismiss
this Objection till I have taken a little notice of such for whose defense and
service it was at first found out; These are,

First, The stupid and brutish part of Mankind, these seem to have met with
Happiness whilst they seek it not: their Fancy's flat, their Prospect short,
and their Desires few and easy, and consequently if their Pleasures be not
raised, neither are their troubles deep; Time and Chance happen to 'em, and
they bear the one, and wear out the other without any very melancholy or tender
Resentments: Stupidity in them outdoes all the habits of Philosophy in others,
and want of sense makes them laugh more loudly, live more securely, and dye
more unconcern'dly than the acutest and thoughtfullest of Men can.

Were the Incapacity of these Men great enough to justify their Contempt of
Reason and Religion, I should almost be tempted to call them Happy: but at the
same moment I should despise their Happiness, Non ideo tamen quisquam felicia
dixerit, Senec. de Vit. Beata.
quibus non est felicitatis Intellectus. I cannot call those Happy, whatever
their Enjoyments be, whose Souls are too sluggish and drousie to understand or
reflect upon their Happiness: or if I must call this Happiness, it is the
Happiness of a Beast not of a Man: with me to live is somewhat greater than to
feed and Rest, and to be Happy must be much more than to live. The Extreme to
these are,

Secondly, The Gay, the Gaudy, the Modish, the unthinking part of Mankind;
these in their own Opinion, and truly in the Opinion of the World (most men
being either Flatterers or Enviers of their good luck) may pretend to
Happiness: and if their pretense be well founded, their way to Happiness is a
more ready, plain, and compendious one than any that ever was or ever will be
discovered.

But alas shortness of sight cannot pass with me for Wit, nor an unthinking
Confidence for Wisdom: I have seen most of those Dreams the World can present
the gayest fancy with, and upon the utmost of my trial, I have perhaps found
something that could divert, nothing that could satisfy a Rational Soul: I
will not here Examine what is the Employment, what the Pleasure proper to a
Rational Being: Nor will I now go about to show, that that Mind can enjoy no
sober or lasting Peace, much less Pleasure, which is engaged in such a Method
of life as it cannot give a good account of, or rationally justify to it self;
both which Considerations would be plain Refutations of this gay Objection:
it is enough in this place to say that this, sort of life is repugnant to those
Principles which Religion reveals, which Reason seems readily to embrace, and
which are backed by all the Authority which the unanimous Approbation of the
wisest and best part of Mankind can give 'em. It behooves us therefore not to
abandon our selves to this kind of life, till we have narrowly discus't and
tried these Principles; for if they should prove true, then will this sensual
careless life betray us to a miserable Eternity: and tho they should be false,
yet till we are upon Rational Grounds convinced that they are so, we have
little Reason to commit our Happiness to so great a hazard, where the Odds are
very great against us that we are in the wrong.

It remains notwithstanding all these Objections that it behooves every man to
pursue his Happiness by a Rational Enquiry after it, neither undervaluing
Humane Nature or its Happiness, nor giving up himself to the guidance of the
brutish and blind part of him, but seriously and thoroughly to Examine whatever
End be proposed to him as his Happiness, or whatever Method be proposed to him
as the way to it; but when we have blown off these not formidable Objections
against this Enquiry, but loose and wanton Excuses of the neglect of it; there
are others yet that seem by a fairer show of Reason to deter us from it by the
Difficulty and unsuccessfulness of the Attempt.

Happiness (say they) is like Proteus whereby they are constituted Creatures of
the same Species: just such accidental Varieties may the Happiness of man be
capable of, and yet the Life and Being, the Soul and Substance of Happiness may
be one and the same, and consequently may be comprehended under general Rules.
And if this answer were not sufficient, it would not be absurd to say, that
Happiness like Beauty may put on various Dresses, and yet be still charming and
delightful in each, or that this Bread like that of Heaven (for so the Rabbis
tell us of Manna) has that in it which gratifies every Palate; there are
Sovereign and unallay'd Blessings, such as Lise, and Perfection, and Indolence,
etc. which take with every appetite, and are universally welcomed to all the
Sons of men. Or I may truly say, That Happiness must not only be prepared and
fitted for Man, but Man for his Happiness; he must become a Rational Creature
e're he can enjoy a Rational Pleasure: it is from this want of Preparation that
diversity of Opinions concerning Happiness springs, which is so universal a
Discouragement. For,

It cannot lastly be denied but that -- Magnis tamen excidit ausis.

Nor can I think that uncertainty which this Diversity of Opinions seems to
imply, sufficient to deter any wise man's Enquiry; no Sick man in his Wits will
renounce the Desires or Hopes of a Cure, because Physicians differ in their
Opinions about the Method of it: the study of Philosophy has never been utterly
forsaken, tho that of one age baffle and overthrow that of another, and yet
even this again stands rather upon the weakness and obscurity of the former,
than its own Strength or Evidence. The Academics do not seem to have
entertained so gross an absurdity as some have fancied, when they taught that
Wisdom consisted in the search of Truth, even at the same time when they
believed that it could not be fully found out: for where Certainty cannot be
had, it is not unreasonable to follow the fairest probabilities. And if this
were rationally practiced in any Study, certainly much more in that of
Happiness; since the Necessity of this Study above any other does more
indispensibly oblige us to it; for all Labor and Learning that promotes not
the great End of Happiness is to no purpose, since we are never the better
for it; for to be the better, and to be the happier for it is all one.

But there is no Reason why we should take up with these cold and lifeless
Answers which will satisfy none, but those who are extremely well inclined: we
may now boldly say, the Difficulties that former Ages met with, are of no force
now to deter us we can now free our selves from the distracting Terrors of an
Invisible Power without banishing him out of that World which himself creat^d,
we can now prove a Judgment to come without the Assistance of Poetic Dreams;
and the Existence of Souls after Death, without their Praeexistence before our
Birth: To be short, we have now Revelation for our Rule, and every good Man a
Divine Spirit for his guide; nay, every man (if he be sincere) in such
Enquiries as these. If any of you lack Wisdom, James 1.
let him ask of God who gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not; and it
shall be given him. So that now, we may very rationally conclude, that fatal
Ignorance or fatal Error in this Point must be imputed either to a lazy and
sottish Contempt of that Knowledge we are most nearly concerned in, and the
means conducing to it, or to an obstinate Resistance of that Conviction which
God endeavors to beget in us by his Word and his Spirit, or at least to the
want of that just Consideration we ought to allow to revealed Truths, or of
that Necessary preparation which fits us for Divine Assistance, and enables us
to understand the Divine Will; and for this Reason the Dissentions and sharp
Contentions of Christians ought to be no prejudice to the Authority or
Perspicuity of Revelation, or to the Assertion of the Spirit's Conduct and
Assistance: for besides that Unity of Faith is an Unity of Fundamentals not of
Fancies, it must be confessed that our Sects and Divisions have their Rise and
Propagation from these and such like Causes; nothing being more common than
that men's Tempers and Complexions, and Educations, and Interests and Passions
should give a Bias to their Judgments, and a Tincture to their Tenets and
Opinions: it is easy to see that the Errors of some are the Dreams of a drouzy
Carelessness; of others, the wanderings of a wanton Confidence; of others, the
crooked windings of Designing Interest, and so on; for it may with much truth
be affirmed, that all Erroneous Philosophy in matters Necessary and
Fundamental, is the Result of some unworthy Lust and Passion; But all these
Matters, namely the use of Revelation and God's Spirit, the Vanity of all
Objections formed against Religion from Dissentions about it, the Difficulties
the Heathens were to encounter in their Enquiries after Happiness, etc. shall
be more fully treated of in their proper places.

Thus I think I have sufficiently evinced the Importance and Necessity of an
Enquiry after Happiness, since it is impossible to steer the Course of Life
aright without a clear Knowledge of that which ought to be the End, the Center
of all our Desires and Endeavors, that is, Happiness: without this it is not
only impossible to be happy, but what ought seriously to be weighed, impossible
not to be miserable: nor let us ever so far disparage and undervalue Humane
Nature or dishonor the Author of it, as ever once to fancy, that Happiness is
too great for us, or we too little for it; or that God should disallow as a
Sacrilegious Ambition the most rational attempts of a rational Creature, I mean
those of becoming Happy: since we seek no other Happiness than what the Make
and Frame of Nature, and consequently the God of Nature app^ars plainly to
capacitate us for, and design us to; the greatness of which, nothing can so
well express as the Transports and Raptures of Happy Men.

But let us not think this Happiness so easy a purchase that it will run into
the lap of the sluggish Body, or prostitute it self to the Embraces of
senseless brutish Lusts. No, no, nothing but Industrious Reason, pure and
vigorous Philosophy can e're attain it; The Sluggard or the Wanton, the Fool
and Vain may have some Fits of Ease and Mirth, only the Rational, only the
Philosopher can possess true and lasting Happiness: Nor let the endless
Quarrels, the numerous Contentions of vain and proud Pretenders discourage us
from following the Conduct of Reason and Revelation, these are the Contentions
of Lust, not Philosophy; Truth and Happiness, (as some have lately fancied of
Love) inhabit a Palace into which none can enter, but humble, sincere, and
constant Lovers.

CHAP. II. Of the Possibility of attaining Happiness.
Obj. Few or none ever actually Happy, Answered.. Religion denies not the
Possibility of present Happiness. The Doctrine of the Cross no Obstruction to
this life's Happiness. Mortification recommended by the Light of Nature, as
subservient to our present Happiness. The Happiness of this life granted
Imperfect.. The Possibility, etc. proved; because some are Happier than others;
because there is Good and Evil in the World. Evils not more than Goods in the
World. The Efficacy of Evil not greater than that of Good. Man's Good or Evil
depends upon himself.. Objections answered. God not delighted in Humane Misery.
Fortune cannot prevent our Happiness. Every Man Architect of his own Fortune.
Fortune not Necessary to Happiness. The Objection from Fate answered. Several
Notions of Fate. No insuperable Necessity in Humane Affairs or Actions, at
least no Fate overruling the Mind of Man. No Incapacity of Happiness from
Nature. Against Moral Incapacity. Against penal Incapacity. Instances of Men
actually Happy in this Life. The Position of the Possibility of Happiness
consonant to the Sense of Mankind. The Conclusion.

IT is apparent from the former Chapter, that the pursuit and search after
Happiness is a Rational Undertaking, an Employment becoming the Nature and
State of Man: there remains only one Objection, which if true, were sufficient
to discourage the Endeavors, and chill the heat of the most Virtuous and
Resolved Ambition. Which is this,

It Is true, Obj. Few or none ever actually Happy in this life.
Happiness may be found in Speculation, but rarely if ever in possession and
fruition: The Number of the Fortunate and Happy is extremely small; and most
Men, if not all, when they have worn life to its last Period, may give that
account of it which the Aged (and as others no doubt thought Happy Patriarch)
did of his to Pharaoh, Genesis 47.
Few and Evil have the Days of the Years of my life been. But it moves me not
so much to hear this from the mouth of a Shepherd who from his Youth led a
laborious and unsettled life: But when I read the mournful Poems of Job, the
Discontents and Melancholy of Solomon, Men no less Eminent for Wisdom and
Philosophy than for their Worldly Glory and Prosperity; when I read 'em
bewailing the Lot of Mankind, unable to reflect upon it without a mixture of
Indignation, Contempt and Womanish Sorrow, I cannot but acknowledge that I am
shrewdly tempted to despair of Happiness as of something too great and Divine
to make its abode upon Earth, and to look upon all the fine Discourses that Men
make of it only as so many flights of a bold fancy. Happiness! what is it? or
where is it? in what distant Coasts or unknown Regions does it dwell? who and
where are the Fortunate? who and where are the Darlings of Heaven to whose Lot
it happens? Shall we like Bajazet in a melancholy Humor think Poor, Silly,
Lazy Peasants Happy? Knowl's Turkish Hist.
O happy Shepherd who had neither Sebastia nor Orthobales to lose: as if
secure Beggary and slothful want were Happiness; happy thus might I call the
Man born Blind, he has no Eyes to lose. Or shall we call the gaudy swarm which
(like Flies and Insects in Gleams of Sunshine) do buzze and flutter in the Rays
and warmth of Greatness and Prosperity? Shall we call these Happy? Ah! These
are they that furnish Theaters and Poets with Tragic Stories; amongst these,
Restless Passions, Contemptible Levity, ungovernable Insolence, withered and
meagre Envy, wandering Lust, Empty Pride, Loud and Senseless Confidence, and
finally shameful and fearful Sins have their abode: and can we call those Happy
who are infested with such Legions of Evils? Miserere tu felicium, they are
their own burden whilst they are other's Envy; Shall we then call the busy
trading World Happy? alas! these would have thought it a Happiness not to have
needed to trade or toil, they love Wealth, but most admire Martial.
Res non parta labor sed Relicta,
Not Gold they laboring dig themselves in Mines,
But what the toiling Ancestor resigns
To his more happy Issue.


Whom lastly shall we call Happy? Surely if any, the Devout and Learned: these
are the Souls that converse with Heaven, that dwell continually in the pure
Light, and feed upon the Bread, the Joys of Angels. But alas, if Happiness
were the inseparable Companion of Learning, how came the Stoic's adored- Cato
to be led by Pride and Humor and Vainglory through burning Sands and dreadful
Deserts? how came he in a mood of desperate Discontent to dye his own Murderer?
Whence was it that the Learned and Eloquent Tully after so many brave
Discourses of the Contempt of Death and Pain, and briefly all humane Evils; did
sink so poorly under the weight of his Misfortunes? whence was it that after he
had taught the Soul's Immortality, and its Translation into some glorious Star,
he should at last be so unwilling to let it leave this vile Clod of Earth, and
the Decayed, Melancholy and darksom Mansion of the Body? if Learning did put
Men in possession of Happiness, why was our Raleigh so uneasy, so unfortunate,
not more tos't by a restless Fortune than a restless Mind? Why was our Verulam
so utterly a Stranger to Happiness in both Fortunes, as unable to govern and
enjoy Prosperity aright as to bear up under Adversity? if Learning were so
Sovereign an Antidote against Misery, if Philosophy were such a Paradise, and
Speculations were such luscious Meals, the very fruits of the Garden; why do
the Learned leave their Sacred shades to haunt the Houses of great ones, or the
Courts of Princes? why do they fawn and cringe, and with all imaginable
assiduity and artifice labor to insinuate themselves into such Men whose
Esteem for them is a just Scandal to 'em, and their Favors but so many public
marks of Reproach? O vilest sort of Servitude! can it consist with the grandeur
of a Philosopher, with the true Liberty of a Christian Spirit to lacquey some
Favorite of Fortune, and for many years together with an obstinate Stupidity
digest the Capricies of his Humor, and not only dissemble his Vices, but
magnify even his Vanity and Folly? and not this only, but there are slavish
Arts of Insinuation to be practiced upon every one that is near him: O glorious
Merit! when the same thing recommends the Philosopher that does the Valet de
Chamber, or the Footman! and yet after all, even this Equals not the baseness,
the slavery of those who prostitute Philosophy and themselves to the Multitude,
and make an Ignorant and Insolent Herd the Arbitrary Sovereigns of their
Principles, their Liberty, their Happiness, for this depends upon their
Popularity. O how far should I prefer the humble Contented and Independent
drudgery of an honest Hind, before this un-manly Servitude! how far should I
prefer the generous and undesigning freedom and unconcernment of a Poet
(whatever Ignorance or Contempt of Interest it may be traduced for) before the
former sort of servile Philosophic Proggers!

And now there remains no place where Happiness can as much as be suspected to
dwell, unless among the Devout and Religious. These sure live in Raptures and
Transfigurations on the Mount, these sure have their Conversation in Heaven,
and from thence derive Glory, and Liberty, and Joy, and Peace and Hope, these
are Partakers of Divine Nature, how can they therefore be destitute of a Divine
Happiness? But alas! behold the Blessed Jesus, and we shall find him as the
Psalmist and the Prophets represent him, A man of sorrow, and acquainted with
grief. Hear again the most Zealous and the most Elevated of our Divine Master's
Disciples, 1 Cor. 15.19.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most
miserable.

O Happiness!
Thou Blessed State or rather pleasing sound,
Thou always sought and never to be found!
In what Grot, do thou, or what Cell,
Or in what Court or Temple dwell?
Where and what art thou? art thou merely Name,
No otherwise known than by Reports and Fame?
Art a Reality? or art thou just
Like public Good and public Trust,
A solemn, sacred, but deceitful Notion:
Obj. answered.
But to return from this Revery, this is after all but a slight and popular
Objection, which from the Evil Consequences which attend the Sins and Follies
of the Multitude, and from those Complaints which humane Infirmity has
sometimes wrung from the wise and virtuous, would unsoundly and illogically
infer, that there is no such thing as Happiness here below: and yet this
Opinion has so universally possessed Mankind, that they seem to teach with too
general a Consent, that Happiness is to be Expected only in another World; and
this Doctrine is very commonly thought to have the Countenance and Patronage of
Divine Revelation. These false Persuasions have not a little obstructed the
Happiness of Man, deterring men at once from the Embracing of the Gospel, and
from the pursuit of true Happiness. I will therefore,

First, Endeavor to free this Assertion, That Happiness is attainable in this
World, from that Prejudice which the Authority of Revelation seems to some to
bring upon it, by a brief account of the sense of Revelation in this Point.

Secondly, I will endeavor to make good the Truth of it by plain and obvious
Proofs.

Thirdly, I will answer this and what other Objection, may be started from an
Imaginary incapacity of Happiness caused by Fortune, Fate, or Nature,

SECT. I. As to the sense of Rev^lation in this Point.
Religion denies not the possibility of present Happiness.
REligion ever had, and always must have the Character of it is Author visibly
stamp't upon it; nothing that is not infinitely kind and infinitely wise can be
found in any part of Revelation truly Divine, from whence we may rationally
conclude, that the great aim of God in the Establishing Religion is to advance
the Happiness of Man, and to advance it in a Method Consonant to those natural
Principles he has implanted in him: Nor did any one-inspir'd-Author ever think
otherwise; Prove. 29.
He that ^eepeth the Law (says Solomon) Happy is he. Psalm. 119.
Great Peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. Prove.
3.
Happy is the man that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets Understanding.
That this was to be understood of actual and present Happiness in this life is
apparent from what follows a little after, Length of days are in her right
hand, and in her left hand Riches and Honor. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to those that
lay hold upon her. And tho the Gospel as a higher and more perfect Dispensation
does propose to us as our great and Chief End, Life, and Immortality, yet it
does by no means exclude us from Happiness here; but rather does establish it
upon proper and firm Foundations; and fences it about with Impregnable
Bulwarks. John 14.27.
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world gives, give
I unto you; let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Gal. 5.22.
Now the fruit of the Spirit is joy, peace, etc. Romans 15.
Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, and make you
abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come. Nor can I indeed conceive how the state of a
Righteous and Holy Soul should be other than a Happy and blessed one: The
belief and confident Expectation of a Heaven must needs be more transporting
and ravishing than the richest Fancy of a Sinner, and that Security both in
respect of this and a future life, which a good Man enjoys in the Protection of
God and the Assurance of his Favor, who is Almighty, Immutable, etc. must
infinitely exceed any thing that a Sinner can attain to, and must exclude those
uneasy Fears which do frequently interrupt the Sinner's Enjoyment and over
cast his hopes: he that loves God and Virtue, cannot but be Happy in the daily
Practice and Enjoyment of what he most delights in: and he, lastly, that has
subdued his Passions and overcome the World, cannot choose but reap the daily
Fruits of so glorious a Conquest, and be constantly entertained with pleasing
Reflections and delightful Prospects; and yet if he should enjoy nothing else,
that Sovereignty, Liberty, Magnanimity, and Divine Charity, and Enlargement of
Soul which he thereby gains, were an abundant Reward of his Victory. The sum of
all is this, A good Man has the best Title to the Blessings of this life, and
the Glories of another, he enjoys this World with as great Security as Wisdom
and Moderation, and has an assured hope of a far better when he quits this; the
Anticipations of which by Faith, Love, and Hope, do at once facilitate and
confirm his Conquest over all unworthy Lusts and entertain him with
unexpressible Satisfaction and Pleasure.

For this Reason, I do in this Chapter discourse of Happiness without that
immediate regard to another life, which might be expected: not judging my self
obliged either to prove the Certainty of it, or to demonstrate the
Reasonableness of embracing Misery during the space of this short life, in
Expectation of that Perfect and Eternal Happiness which is promised hereafter;
since I saw well enough that in the ordinary course of Providence, the
Happiness of this life and the other, were not incompatible: but on the
Contrary, that that wherein the Life and Being of true Happiness in this World
does consist, was but a necessary Introduction to, or Qualification of us for
the Happiness of another; which does in some measure already appear, and will
much more in the progress of the following Discourses.

The Doctrine of the Cross no Obstruction of this life's Happiness. Math. 16.24.
But what becomes now of the Doctrine of the Cross? this is a very soft and mild
Commentary upon that of our Savior, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me. But this is not so formidable
an Objection as it may at first sight seem, it is true Suffering through all the
Progress and Stages of Evils even to the last, that is, Death it self, was a
Common, nay almost an Universal Duty in the beginning of Christianity, being
indispensibly Necessary to the Propagation of the Gospel; but blessed be God,
the obligation of that Duty has long ago ceased; And all that I can think
necessary to be said here in pursuance of my Design is, That the Pleasures of
those Confessors and Martyrs did far outweigh their Sufferings whilst they
lived; That when they suffered Death it self, the time was come when they must
exchange Temporal for Eternal Happiness: Nor does this at all infringe the
Truth of my Proposition, which does not vainly assert an Eternal Duration of
Happiness in this life, but only teaches the possibility of attaining it. And I
think the Death of Martyrs and Confessors, is rather a great Confirmation than
Confutation of this Opinion: teaching us plainly that in despite of all
Calamities, it is not only possible to live, but to die Happily; which last is no
small accession to Temporal Happiness. From this little I have said on this
Occasion, it is easy to shape an answer to what is objected from St. Paul, 1
Cor. 15.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable;
it is confessedly indisputably true, that had these Christians been destitute of
that hope which was their Support, they had sunk under the weight of such
Sufferings, and so had been the most miserable of all men: but since their
hopes did not only support 'em under their Afflictions, but also render 'em
somewhat more than Conquerours; all that can follow hence is, That the
Resurrection and Eternal life are unquestionable Truths, and that life who
believes 'em as firmly as Confessors and Martyrs did, may like them be Happy,
tho a thousand Seas of Calamities and Troubles should break in upon him.

Mortification recommended by the Light of Nature as subservient to our present
Happiness.
As to Mortification which is a Duty of perpetual Obligation, (for the Purity of
Religion is still the same, tho its fortune in the World be altered) this did
at first signify the Renunciation and Extirpation of Jewish and Pagan Lusts,
according to that of St. Paul, Mortify therefore your members which are upon
the Earth; Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, Evil Concupiscence,
and Covetousness which is Idolatry; and it still signifies the same thing, and
whatever difficulty we are to encounter in the performance of this Duty, it
must be vanquished, for it is impossible to be wicked and Happy: a wicked man is
his own Hell, and every Passion, every Lust is a Fiend, a Fury that does
outrage and torment him: and all this the Heathens themselves did not only
constantly acknowledge, but also paint out with as lively Eloquence as any
Christian could ever do: their Experience, (over whom Sin had an uncontrolled
dominion) most effectually convincing 'em of the Outrages, Tyranny, and
unspeakable Mischiefs of wicked and abominable Passions; Nay, so manifest is it
that the subduing these Irregular Passions is necessary to our Happiness, that
even the Epicureans themselves (notwithstanding their confining the Happiness
of Man to this short life, and by a probable Consequence, resolving it
ultimately into the Enjoyments of the Body) did yet look upon themselves as
extremely injured by Tully, and others, when they represented 'em as revolted
from, and Enemies to Virtue. It Is not my business here to Examine what
foundation for Virtue their Philosophy could leave, or what rank and place they
could assign it, it is enough that they could not but acknowledge it as
necessary to Happiness.

It Is true, Mortification in the Gospel-sense requires us not only to restrain
these Irregular Lusts, but also not to over-rate and overvalue this World and
the things of it; not to look upon this life as our only or chief Portion, and
dote upon it with fondness and passion; and I cannot think that this is any
thing more than what is implied and included in the former Notion of
Mortification: this Moderation of our Inclinations to the World, being a proper
and necessary foundation of the former Abstinence; it being very Improbable
that he who values and doats upon the World above all things, should refrain
from irregular Pursuits and Enjoyments of it. Now even this Degree of
Mortification was as clearly taught, and the Necessity of it in order to
Happiness, by the Wise men amongst the Heathens, as by our Savior and his
Apostles, by those conducted by the Light of Nature, as by these conducted by
the Light of Revelation: and that together with the Discipline which promotes
it, I mean the observation of great Abstinence from sensual Pleasures: No Monk
or Anchoret can speak with a more glorious contempt of the World than a Stoic;
but their flights who would allow the Body, the World, and the things of it no
place nor degree in the Number of Good things are too daring and bold to lay
any stress upon; but the Opinion of other Philosophers who allowed these their
proper place and value ought to be of weight with us, because they show us
plainly, That Mortification was ever thought by the Light of Nature subservient
to our true Happiness. Hierocles in the beginning of his Divine Comments gives
us a short but full account of the Pythagorean (and I may add, Platonic
Philosophy) in this Point. (...). The substance of which is, The business of
Philosophy is to purify the Soul of Man from sensual Lusts and inordinate
Passions, and to transform it into the likeness and Image of God; This is that
which it pursues by discovering to us Excellent Truths, and by recommending to
us the practice of Excellent Virtues. And this was that Philosophy which the
best and acutest of the Heathens looked upon as the only way to Happiness, so
far were they from judging it inconsistent and incompatible with it; nay, they
deemed this very state of Virtue a state of more Exalted Happiness, and an
Image of the Divine Life: hence is that little less than Inspired Heat or
Rapture of Tully, L. 2. de Leg.
Cum animus cognitis perceptisque virtutibus a Corporis obsequio,
indulgentiaque discesserit, voluptatemque sicut labem decoris oppresserit,
omnemque mortis Dolorisque timorem effugerit, Societatemque Charitatis colerit
cum suis, omnesque natura conjunctos suos duxerit, Cultumque Deorum and puram
Religionem susceperit, and exacuerit illam, ut oculorum sic Ingenii Aciem ad
bona deligenda and rejicienda Contraria. Quid eo dici aut excogitari poterit
beatius? When the Soul having discovered and entertained Virtue, has
extinguish't its fondness for, and indulgence of the Body, and stifled Lust as
the Reproach and Stain of its Honor and Beauty, and has put off all dread of
Death and Pain, etc. What can be said, or as much as fancied, more blessed than
the state of such a man? Nay, after all, the greatest Patrons and Abettors of
Pleasure did ever acknowledge this moderation in our Passions and Enjoyments
indispensibly Necessary to our Happiness.

Nil admirari prope res est una Numici
Solaque quae possit facere ac servare beatos. Hor.

Naught to admire's the thing alone that can
Cause and Preserve the Happiness of Man.
And it is well known how much the followers of Epicurus gloried in his
Abstinence; that these Voluptuaries should prescribe and practice the Doctrine
of Mortification! but this they were compelled to by the irresistible force of
Reason; for how can he who doats upon the World, and melts in soft and sensual
Pleasures, be able to secure the repose of his Mind against those melancholy
Alterations which may daily and some time or other will certainly befall
himself and his Enjoyments? on what foundation can the Peace or Liberty of his
Mind be Established? or can he be Happy who is distress't by every change of
Weather, and is divided and distracted between numerous, contrary Passions, and
a slave to each?

To come to a Conclusion, the Scripture is so far from denying, that it does
affirm the possibility of attaining Happiness; nor are the Sufferings of
Confessors and Martyrs, or the Doctrine of Mortification any prejudice to this
Assertion; for neither Affliction nor Mortification are inconsistent with the
true Happiness of Man; that Affliction is not, the Example of those very
Martyrs and Confessors triumphing over it does sufficiently evince; that
Mortification is not, is unanimously confessed by the Suffrages of such as were
conducted by the Light of Nature, and of such too as were entirely devoted to
the Pleasures of this life, and that upon undeniable Grounds.

Having thus removed this first Objection against the Possibility of attaining
Happiness by vindicating Scripture from Requiring any thing injurious to the
Happiness of this life, or asserting any thing that may damp or discourage our
hopes of it, it is now high time to proceed to the second thing I proposed;
that is,

SECT. II.
TO make good the Truth of this Assertion, That Happiness may be attained by
plain and obvious Proofs. And here that I may not be mistaken, The Happiness of
this life granted Imperfect.
I think it is fit that I should tell the Reader, that I do not promise him a
Heaven upon Earth, that I do not promise him the Happiness of Angels but of
Men; and that I do not understand Happiness in this Proposition of that which
is every way perfect and absolute, to which fancy it self can add nothing, but
of that which is like our Nature incomplete and imperfect, speaking
Comparatively, and yet truly great and excellent in it self too. Seneca does
somewhere describe his Happy man much after this manner, He is one who despises
all those things which are subject to Change, who accounts nothing good or bad
but Virtue or Vice, who is not pufft up by prosperous Events nor cast down by
Adverse ones, one whose great Pleasure is to despise Pleasure, one above either
Desire or Fear, content with the Riches which are the true and proper
possession of Virtue, and coveting nothing more; such a one, he thinks cannot
choose but be Happy. And I think so too, and I fear a great deal Happier than
any man on Earth can ever be; this is a gay Dream, but well-suiting that
Philosophy which requires the Tranquillity and Steadiness or Constancy of God
to be joined with the frailty of Man; a Composition of things infinitely more
incompatible than that of an Immortal Soul and Mortal Body can be fancied to
be: for my part, I am content to call a Building beautiful, tho there be
something in it which does not answer the Test of the strictest Art, or at
least of the most accurate fancy; I am content to call it Day, tho flitting
Clouds and Showers do now and then a little obscure the Light: so can I not
choose but call him Righteous who is sincere tho not perfect, whose life is
generally speaking bright and exemplary, tho not utterly void of spots and
blemishes, whose motion is a progress toward Virtue, tho it be sometimes
retarded, nay sometimes interrupted: and so am I content to think him a Happy
man, not who is utterly exempt from all disturbances in Mind or Body, not who
lives in constant Ecstasy; but him whose Pleasures are more and greater than
his Troubles, whose Hopes are more and greater than his Fears: one whose
Enjoyments, tho they do not transport, do satisfy him; one whose Serenity and
Calm of mind, though it may suffer Interruptions, suffer but few and slight
ones: I will entreat the Reader to admit of this Notion of Happiness here, till
we gradually advance to a clear and full discovery of it. Now as we are not to
lay aside any advice of being Virtuous, because we cannot arrive at the height
and constancy of holy Angels; so neither are we to cast off all thoughts of
Happiness, because we cannot equal theirs: for if we are Happy in such a degree
as the Imperfection of our Nature and this Inferior state will permit; if we
can free our selves from those Miseries which do involve the foolish and
vicious part of Mankind, if we can possess our selves of those humble and
modest joys that Humane Nature is here capable of, it will be worth all the
time and travail we can spend upon the Design: and that we may advance thus
far, the following Considerations will, The possibility, etc. proved.
I think, render it more than probable.

Because some are happier than others.
1. It cannot be denied but that some Men are more Happy, or at least less
Miserable than others; who will deny Titus to have been infinitely more Happy
than Nero? Titus whose Government of the Roman People was not more mild and
gentle than the impartial Reflections of his Conscience upon himself and
actions, Sueton. in vita Titi.
if we credit Suetonius in his Relation of his Death? Nero that guilty Wretch,
whose Conscience was no less a Plague to him than he to Rome? Who prefers not
the Character of Mitio in the Comedian before that of Demea? Terent.
Mitio whose smooth and kind as well as prudent Behavior rendered him easy and
amiable to his Family and Relations, and made the Fortune of his whole life
flow calmly and gently to the End: Demea whose four, suspicious and severe
Behavior did exasperate and ruffle the minds of all that related to him, and
did disturb and muddy that stream of his affairs, which would have otherwise
run smooth and clear: who will compare the pleasant Retirements, the modest
Contentments, the regular and virtuous Enjoyments of Atticus, with the
turbulent popularity of Gracchus or the fatal Luxuries of Catiline, or the
proud Cruelties of Sylla and Marius? what then? Shall we attribute no share of
Happiness or Misery to the Virtues or the Vices of the one or other? or no part
of their Virtues or Vices to themselves, but to (I know not) what fatal and
irresistible Causes? If we assert the former, with frontless Confidence we
contradict unquestionable Matters of Fact; if the latter we rob the Virtuous of
that merit which rendered 'em beloved in their Lives, and ever since has
preserved their Memories Sacred and Honorable, and we acquit those from all
blame or guilt which the Laws of their own Country and the Common sense o^
Mankind have ever condemned and detested. What gross and monstrous absurdities
are these? shall we now after the Improvement of so many Ages (for we pretend
to grow more Wise and Learned daily) dispute whether Vice or Virtue be the
better guide of Humane Actions, or the more service able to Humane Life? Shall
Sloth and Luxury be thought to conduce as much to the prosperity and decency o^
our Lives, as Industry and frugal Temperance? Shall Ambition, Pride, and Choler
be now judged as instrumental to promote or preserve the Peace and repose of
our Minds and States, as Modesty, Meekness, and Charity? or if this be too
daring a defiance to Sense and Experience, shall we contend that the slothful
and luxurious, the unjust, and cruel, etc. are as blameless and innocent; nay,
if we will extend Principles to their just Consequence, as commendable and
worthy of Praise as the Industrious and Temperate, the Meek and Gentle, the
Just and Charitable? for this must inevitably follow, if neither Men's Virtues
nor Vices be in any degree to be ascribed to themselves: wretched and desperate
is that shift that equals the just and unjust, the industrious and the
sluggard, the great Mind that stands upright under and outbraves Misfortune,
and the degenerous one which effeminately shrinks and breaks under it! wretched
the Shift that equals the Tyrant and most gracious Prince, the loyallest
Subject and the Traitor, the faithful Friend and the perfidious Flatterer, and
all this we must be driven to, or else, as we cannot deny, that some are
Happier than others, so we must not deny that the Happiness of the one, or
Misery of the other, is owing in some measure at least to their Virtues and
Vices, and these to themselves. And if this be true, it is evident, we may be
Happy if we will; and tho we may not equal the most Happy (for I will not
exclude Temper, Education, Fortune from all share in Men's Misery or Happiness)
yet since every degree of Happiness is truly valuable, let us with all our
might endeavor to be as Happy as we can.

Horat.
Nec quia desperes invicti membri Glyconis,
Nodosa Corpus noli prohibere Chyragra,
Est quiddam prodire tenus --
The mighty Glyco's strength you cannot attain,
Don't therefore scorn to free your Limbs from Pain
Of Knotty Gout? Ease, tho not Strength to gain,
Is no small Happiness --
But to pursue our proof,

2. Because there is Good and Evil in the World.
It is a great absurdity to confound or equal Virtue and Vice, but it is not the
greatest they commit who deny the possibility of attaining Happiness; for he
that banishes Happiness out of the World, does at the same time banish Good and
Evil out of it too: for Good being nothing else but the subserviency of some
things to our true Interest and Pleasure, and Evil the tendency of others to
our trouble and injury; it must needs follow if there be Good and Evil in the
World, that he who has a greater share of Good than Evil is a Happy man; and he
that denies Good and Evil, may with as plausible a Confidence deny all Humane
Passions, and assert that there is neither Love nor Hatred, neither Joy nor
Grief, nor Hope, nor Fear, nor Pity, nor Envy; for Good or Evil are the Objects
or Causes of all these. I may then, I think, take it for granted, that no man
will take the Confidence to say, that there is no such thing as Good or Evil in
the World; and consequently all men must be obliged to acknowledge such a state
as Happiness in the World too, unless they will affirm one of these three
things, either First, That Evil grows up every where in thick Crops; Good thin,
scattered and rarely to be found, epecially grown up to its maturity; That
consequently there are none whose share of Evil does not infinitely outweigh
that of Good. Or Secondly, That Evil has so much of Venom and Malignity in it,
that a little Evil contributes more to our Misery than a great Deal of Good can
to our Happiness; so ripe and full grown, is Evil, so lank, undergrown, and
every way imperfect, is Good in this World. Or Thirdly, That we our selves can
contribute nothing to that Good or Evil which is our Portion, it is the Product
not of Reason or Industry, but of Time and Chance, or of some other Principle
which is not in our Power. All these deserve to be weighed, not only because
the Examination of 'em will tend to cheer and encourage the Minds of Men, and
to render the great Creator and Governor of the World more dear and venerable
to us; but also, because it will be of some use and service to the whole
Inquiry.

First, 1. Evils not more than Goods in the World.
Therefore let us examine what Truth there is in that fancy which supposes the
weight and number of Evils in the World infinitely to exceed that of Good
things. I know there are a sort of sour and murmuring, of proud and ambitious
Wretches, who deal with their God, as with their Prince or Patrons; and
estimate Favors and Benefits, not according to their Merit, but Expectation;
greedy and haughty Expectation, which even Prodigal Bounty cannot satisfy:
it is the strange temper of some men that they wither and grow lean with
Discontent and Envy; even whilst their studied Meals distract the wanton
Appetite, and their very Attendance are sleek, and full, and fat with the
Remains of their Feasts; and the meanest of their Relations thrive into Pride
and Insolence by the mere sprinklings of their Plenty: I know it is Natural to
some to Blaspheme God and the King, to quarrel with and reproach Providence,
and the Government; while loaded with good things, they stretch themselves on
Silken Couches under Roofs of Cedar, or loll at Ease in their gilt Coaches; and
yet at the same time the honest Countryman, who with Security tho much
Drudgery Ploughs, and Sows, and Reaps a few Acres, Eats his plain Meals with
Cheerfulness, Sleeps without Disturbance, Blesses God, and magnifies the
goodness of his Prince: The Contentment of the One is an evident proof of the
Divine Bounty and Goodness, whose Provision does far exceed the Necessities of
his Creatures: The Discontent of the other can be no disparagement to the
Goodness of our Creator, who has dealt extremely liberally with 'em, tho they
enjoy not what they possess: we are not therefore to judge of the World by the
Clamours and Invectives of such as are always mutinous and dissatisfied, but by
the suffrages of those humble, modest, and grateful Souls who know how to value
the Favors of Heaven and themselves as they ought to do; who do not mar and
corrupt every Blessing by Peevishness, or Envy, or Pride, or Wantonness, but
can weigh their Enjoyments, their Hopes, and their Merits in just and equal
Balances, and discerning how much the one does exceed the other, cheerfully
adore and praise the World's Author and Governor. If this Controversy were to
be determined by such, we should find these even under uneasy and Tyrannical
Governments, and in the more barren and niggardly Countries, confuting this
Objection by their Cheerfulness and Contentment: what would they have done, if
Providence had planted 'em there where a fertile Soil and thriving Trade had
unladed the Wealth and Plenty of the World into their Arms, and a mild and
gentle Government had secured and guarded their Enjoyments? But let us decide
the Controversy not by Votes but Reasons, let us consider the State and Nature
of the World; is there one in a Thousand who is left utterly unfurnish't of all
means of wise and wholesome Instruction, which is the Good of the Soul of Man?
or is there one in a Thousand maimed and defective in the Powers and Faculties
of the Soul, or Senses and Members of the Body? is there one in a Thousand born
under so unlucky and envious Planets that he cannot by any Industry or Virtue
provide himself a comfortable Subsistence? View and Survey the World; Examine
and Consider Man, and then tell me whether there be any room for those
Reproaches and spiteful Reflections by which some men have so outrag'd Nature
and Providence? Phylo Judaeus tells us a Rabbinical Story to this purpose, that
when God had created the World, he demanded of a Prophet, whether he saw any
thing wanting to consummate and complete the glorious Work; who told him,
Phylo-Jud. de Plantatione Noae.
Nothing, but an Intelligent Being to praise the wise and gracious Architect:
God approving the Advice, etc. The Hebrew Philosophers (it seems) thought the
World exactly perfect, such a Work as might bespeak God the Author of it: and
no wonder, for they were inspired by Moses, who brings in God reflecting upon
his own Creation, thus: And God saw every thing that he had made, Genesis 1.
and behold it was very good. How unlike is all this to the Epicurean
Philosophy, whose great Patron Lucretius endeavors to infer from the
Ill-Contrivance, the manifold Defects, the innumerable Evils of the World, that
God could not be the Creator of it! That ever that Work by which God designed
to exalt his Glory should be drawn into an occasion of Dishonouring and
Reproaching them! That ever that work which deserved the praises of Men and
Angels, should at last stand in need of Apologies and Defenses! If we look up
to the Heavens, such is the Beauty of those Bodies, so uniform and regular
their Motions, so exactly are they disposed both for Ornament and Service, that
the Speculation naturally exalts the Mind, and insensibly raises it above the
Body: Nay, it has tempted some to think every Star moved and acted by some
understanding Spirit. If we look upon the Earth, so wonderful is the Variety,
so inconceivable the Wealth and Plenty of it, that it is not only sufficient
for the Needs and Desires of the Sober and Temperate, but even for the Luxury
and Wantonness of the fancyful and Intemperate: Every place almost is a
Paradise, there is no Country almost which cannot afford us Tempe, or Campania,
opus gaudentis naturae, a Work which Nature seems to have Created when in the
gayest and the kindest humor. If there were room for fancy in Sacred things,
one would almost think that Moses out of Ignorance of other Countries or love
of his own, had confined Eden within those narrow Bounds he sets it: and that
it had only been lost there, because a fuller Discovery of the World had now
found it almost every where: This is the World we complain of. Let us now
consider Man, Psalm. 139.
and we shall find with the Psalmist that he is wonderfully made, he is but a
little lower than the Angels; he is crowned with Glory and Honor, and all the
Creatures are put under his Feet: Psalm. 8.
All the Fowls of the Air, and all the Beasts of the Field, etc. How infinitely
wise as well as kind does God appear in his Contrivance? So modest his
Appetites that a small Portion of Nature's good is a full Meal or Feast, and
yet so various, that there is nothing in all the provision, in all the joys
and luxuries of Nature, which he is not capable of Tasting and Enjoying: If we
regard the Mind of Man, it is capable of a most surprising Satisfaction in the
Contemplation of the hidden Powers, the secret Laws and Operations of Nature;
nay, it rises higher, it passes the Bounds of Mechanic Nature, it entertains it
self with Moral Perfections, and the Spiritual Excellencies of an invisible
World, and gazes on those Charms and Glories which are not subject to the
bodily Eye: Vultus nimis lubricos aspici: Such is the Nature of the Soul that
when it pleases it can retire within it self, withdraw from Sense, and be
secure and Happy in its own Strength and Wealth, Ipsa suis pollens opibus, and
when it pleases it can walk forth like Dinah to see the Daughters of the Land,
those Beauties that Sense presents it with, and that too (if guarded by aweful
Virtue) without the Danger of a Rape. To say all of it in a word, it is capable
of a share in all the Good, and not necessarily subject to any of the Evil of
this World.

-- Fatis avolsa Voluntas.
There are no Fates that can control
The sovereign freedom of the Soul.
If this be a true account of Man, and the state of that World which he
inhabits, if the one be filled with all things Necessary and Delightful, and
the other be endowed with all those Capacities and Appetites that fit him to
enjoy 'em, nay, if his Soul can raise it self above the Pleasures, and exempt
it self from the Changes and Revolutions of it, nothing is more manifest than
that the Evil in life cannot be greater than the Good, unless it be owing to
our selves; and to leave this matter beyond Dispute, no man pretending to
receive Revelation should admit of the contrary Opinion, for no Texts of Divine
Writ are more plain than those which proclaim to us God's love of Mankind: that
he does not afflict or grieve willingly the Children of men, that the Book of
Creation and Providence is writ all over with the legible Characters of Love,
so legible that it renders the Idolatry and Wickedness of the Gentiles
inexcusable, and finally that he gives us Richly all things to enjoy: 1 Timothy 6.
where the Apostle excellently expresses at once the Bounty and Design of God.
His Bounty in that he gives us all things Richly; his Design, not to enkindle
and then delude our Desires, by being like the Tree of Life or Knowledge
forbidden us, but on purpose to be enjoyed by us: So then the Christian cannot
without contradicting Revelation embrace this Opinion, nor the Atheist or
Epicurean without contradicting himself: if Nature has contrived the World so
ill, if it has scattered good things with such a sparing and envious hand,
whence are all those Transports and Ecstasies we meet with amongst these Men?
what it is the Ground? what is the Matter of ^'em? whence so rich a Crop of
Worldly sensual Pleasures? whence so much dotage on, and fondness for the World
we so complain of? whence are the Charms and Irresistible Temptation which the
generality of Mankind i^ vanquished by? whence is it that Men are so willing to
set up their Rest on this side Canaan? whence that dread and aversion of Death
as the most formidable Evil? If Nature has been such a Stepmother to Man, if
it has frowardly and peevishly designed him little else but Mischief, whence
that sagacity and penetration of Mind searching with delight into all the
Retirements of Nature? whence that Comprehensive and almost immense Capacity of
Pleasure? whence that strength and greatness of Soul, enabling no^ only to
confront, but to despise Evil and to be Happy in despite of 'em these are
Advantages so incomparabl^ great and good, that no Evils can be balanced
against 'em: and it is Eviden^^ that no Writings, no not of the Stoics
themselves were ever more stuffed with boasting and daring accounts of the
Nature of Man, than those of the Epicureans. And thus from all put together,
whether we consult the Nature and state of the World and Man, testimony of
Revelation or Reason, the Suffrages of the good humored and grateful part of
Mankind, or the Confessions of the Voluptuous and Atheistical, it is Evident
that Good does outweigh Evil in the Design of God or Nature. But have I not my
self in the beginning of this Treatise presented the Reader with a large
Catalogue of Evils? Yes, But not of God's Creation but our own: for the Truth
of the whole is (...). Not things themselves but the Shades and Fantasms,
wanton, superstitious, effeminate or froward Minds do raise about 'em, disturb
the quiet and repose of Man. So then, if we our selves do not multiply the
Number of our Evils, our share of Good in life may be much greater than our
share of Evil; and if we be not accessory to our own Misery, we may be Happy.
Unless,

Secondly, 2. The Efficacy of Evil not greater than that of Good.
Evil has so much of Venom and Malignity in it, that a little Evil contributes
more to our Misery, than a great deal of Good can to our Happiness. We may here
judge of the force and energy of Good and Evil either by that Influence they
generally have, or that they ought to have upon the state of Mankind: if we
consider what Impressions they ought to make upon Men, the question will come
to a speedy and a Happy Issue; for then we must either reckon nothing an Evil
but a Moral one, that is Sin and Vice; or at least we must acknowledge that the
Venom and Malignity of other Evils is not comparable to that of Moral ones:
This latter opinion is an unquestionable Truth, for who will not make a wide
difference between a Misfortune and a Crime, between an Affliction and a
Punishment, between those Inconveniences, Trouble, and Pain which we suffer as
guilty Criminals, and those we suffer as unfortunate Innocents, or afflicted
Hero's or Saints? for notwithstanding the Evils or Pains should be in the
matter of 'em the same; yet there is a vast difference in the Suffering, the
one makes Man much more miserable than the other for our Misfortunes should
only reach the Body not the Mind: But when we suffer for our Crimes, the whole
Man suffers, the Soul as well as Body: Misfortunes, when the Storm is o'repast
leave no deformed Ruins, no Wounds nor Scars behind 'em; but our Crimes leave
stains and guilt behind, which haunt the Mind with perpetual horror. From this
Distinction of the Nature and Effect of Evils we may infer this Comfortable
Conclusion; That nothing can make man wholly, truly miserable but himself;
Nothing can oppress him by the weight of Moral Evils, but his own Choice, for
nothing can compel or necessitate him to be wicked; the strokes, the wounds of
natural Evils (so I will call all the rest distinct from moral and owing their
Being to the Revolutions of time and Chance and Nature, etc.) are faint and
slight; the Mind of Man ought not to suffer it self to be too deeply and
sensibly affected by them: it is the work of Reason and Religion to fortify
the Mind against the Impressions of these Evils: and truly that Mind that is
furnished with true Notions of things, with a rational and solid Faith, with
steady and well-grounded hopes may bear the impetuous shock of all these Waves
and Storms, calm and unmoved; Nay, I may boldly affirm, not only that Virtue
checks and controuls these Evils, blunts their Edge and abates their force; but
what is more, that their natural strength, their own proper force is weak and
contemptible; unless our own Vices be combined and confederated with 'em
against us: Our Pride must aid our Enemy to render his affront provoking; Our
Covetousness and Ambition must assist Fortune to render its Contempt or Hatred
of us destructive to the Tranquillity of our state. Falsehood under a disguise
of Friendship could never have abused our Confidence, by betraying our
Infirmities, or forsaking us in Affliction, had not our own folly and
self-conceit first betrayed us, exposing us a naked prey to Flattery and
Treachery: The Coldness or Neglect of great Men could never wound us, the
hollow deceitful Professions of those above us could never fool or fret us, did
not the fondness of our own desires betray us first into vain Presumption and a
flattering Credulity: The Storm that snatcheth away a Relation or a Friend
could never overthrow me, if I stood upon my own Bottom, if I were not guilty
of one of the greatest weaknesses, of placing my Happiness in any thing out of
my own Power, and so making my self dependent upon another man's fancy or
fortune. Finally Death it self must derive its terrors from the mournful
Solemnities we dress it in, from the darkness and horrors of our deluded
Imaginations; or else it would prove but a contemptible Bugbear, a very
inconsiderable Evil, or none at All. Thus it is Evident, that if we distinguish
Evils into Natural and Moral, we shall have little reason to think the
Influence of Evil so Malignant and Deadly, since it is in our own Power to avoid
moral Evils, and natural ones strike but half way, they wound not the Soul that
is armed and guarded with Reason and Religion. But now,

If with the Stoics we should admit of no other sort of Evil but what is Moral,
if we should allow the name of Good to nothing but Virtue, or of Evil to
nothing but Vice, then we must look upon Temporal and External Misfortunes as
Inconveniences and Disadvantages only, they may make us less Happy, but they
cannot make us miserable; And truly if we should here suppose or take for
granted that there were another life, or that the pleasure of Virtue triumphing
over Calamities and Afflictions were considerably great, this opinion cannot
imply so great an Absurdity as some would fasten upon it; or be a mere (...) or
Idle Contention of words, since I cannot tell, with what Consonancy to Truth,
or Propriety of Speech we can call those troubles or hardships Evils which
directly tend to procure for us an infinite Good, a Pleasure which does
abundantly outweigh our Sufferings. I 'think it is now sufficiently Evident that
natural Evils are not of that mighty Efficacy and deadly Venomous quality that
it should be thought that a little Evil does more effectually contribute to our
Misery than a great deal of Good can to our Happiness: it is apparent how slight
the Impressions are which they ought to make upon us. It will now be time to
consider what impressions they do generally make upon us, what their real
Effect commonly is, how men generally are moved and affected by them. It Is true
there are some that mix Heaven and Earth upon every slight occasion, that will
receive Good but no Evil at the hand of God, most insensible of Blessing, but
extremely tender and sensible of any Evil; but this speaks not the Nature of
Evil, but of the Man; it speaks him ungrateful, but not the Evil intolerable.
Nor is humane Nature to be measured by this whining querulous humor of a few,
but by the sense and temper of the Generality; amongst whom it is easy to
observe, how Instinct teaches us to elude the stroke and force of Evil, Nature
opens its Arms and enlarges it self to receive good, and all the Powers of the
mind greedily strive to share in it, but it contracts and shrinks, retires and
stands upon its Defense at the Approach of Evil, it is apt to flatter it self,
and apt to hope, apt to lessen Evil, and magnify Good, apt to put off the
thoughts of approaching trouble, and to anticipate its Pleasures; it is full of
great Designs and gaudy Projects, and easily prone to delight, and content it
self with thin, airy, and imaginary Schemes of Good; this and much more is
Evident in a Thousand daily instances of humane life, by which it is plain
Nature in the Contrivance of Man kindly designed to fit and dispose him for
Happiness by giving him such Inclinations as might serve to lessen the Evil, to
increase the Good, to supply the Defects of this mortal and imperfect state. Is
it not manifest that whereas Evil looks less to us, Good looks bigger at a
Distance, we are willing to help Fortune, and call in the Aids of fancy to
adorn and enrich her gifts; nor is it easy to defeat Man of this Humor, he
Dreams of a bottomless Abyss in every Good, in every Pleasure, and
notwithstanding the daily Confutations of Experience, he still desires to
repeat his Enjoyments over again, as if he did still hope to find some new
untasted sweet, some pleasure undiscovered untried before: how apt are we to
flatter our selves, and willing to be flattered, every Man represents himself
and state under the fairest Idea that he can possibly frame of it, and turns
away his Eye and Thought from every thing that may offend him: Beauty,
Strength, Health, Understanding, Wisdom, Reputation, Attendants, Power, Wealth,
and whatever future Good he can form tho but a slender Pretension to, make up
the gay Idea, nay, and even long life and undisturbed security are there drawn
as two Pillars to support the Building; the Daring but kind Confidence of Man
that makes himself the Master of Fate and Fortune! if you should mark this
Tablet with e're so prying and curious an Eye, you would not be able to
discover either Deformity or Folly, or Dishonor, or Poverty, or Disease or
Death: for these Man kind to himself banishes far from his Thoughts, and
suffers not to enter into the Portraicture of himself: And hence it is that most
Men never disturb life with the Apprehension of its End, and never feel Death
till they are dying; Kind Instinct showing us an easier way to lessen this
Evil, than the Reason of most Philosophers ever could, making our suffering
extremely short, and even then too almost in the midst of Death men fondly
Dream of and hope for life, and can scarcely suffer their hope to expire in the
last gasp: Nay, so willing to be deluded, so easy to be imposed upon are Men,
that they make even those things which are the Trophies of Death, and the
Monuments of Man's Frailty and Vanity, minister to them some slight Comforts at
least against Mortality; they divert and entertain themselves with the Mourning
and Pomp of their Obsequies, with Blacks and Tombs, with the dying Eccho's of
surviving Reputation, and with the grandeur and felicity of their Posterity; as
if they did fondly persuade themselves that they should be concerned in all
these things, that something beyond the Grave did relate to them, and that they
did not utterly perish and dye. And if this kind as well as obstinate hope do
in some measure break the force of the greatest Evil that is Death; we cannot
but expect that it should be highly serviceable to Man in moving him to
despise, or enabling him to vanquish less Evils; hence it is that no examples of
the Inconstancy or Change of fortune, of the incertainty of Royal or Popular
favor, no Instances of slighted Service, deluded Hope, sudden Death, or any
thing of this kind are sufficient to discourage the attempts, the pursuits of
Mankind after worldly things, we boldly adventure upon those Seas which we see
scattered over with numerous Wrecks, and confidently pursue those Paths where
we every moment meet with the ominous Ruins of disappointed hope, and
fruitless drudgery, and baffled presumption. Thus it is, I determined not that
thus it ought to be, I examined not what is here the office of Philosophy or
the work of Virtue, I have only barely represented the humor and inclination
of Man, only that you may see that he is not such a defenseless shiftless
Creature, but that his Reason dares confront and can vanquish Evils in open
Battle, and by downright force, and instinct teaches him how to elude 'em by
various and those (if well conducted) useful and innocent Arts. After all it
does therefore manifestly appear that as the Number of Evils is not greater
than that of Goods, so neither is the Vigor and Energy of the one so much
greater than that of the other, that a little Evil should outweigh a great
deal of Good, that a little Evil should contribute more to a man's Misery, than
a great deal of Good to his Happiness There remains nothing further to be
examined, but

3. Man's Good or Evil depends upon himself.
Thirdly, That Fancy which ascribes Man's portion of Good and Evil, to time or
chance, etc. not Man's Virtue or Industry, to any thing but to himself; and he
that can with Confidence affirm this, may with as good grace assert, that there
is neither Wisdom nor Folly in the World; for if there be, this Imagination
must soon vanish, since Wisdom is nothing else but the choice of true Good and
rejection of Evil, the pursuit of our true Happiness by all the most rational
and probable means, and a declining and flying from all those things that are
repugnant to it. And tho success and good fortune do not always attend Wisdom
and Virtue, yet you shall never persuade any but Madmen or Fools that it is in
vain to be Virtuous, or irrational to be Wise. Solomon has indeed observed as
an instance or proof of the vanity of all things, Eccles. 9.
That the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, neither yet
Bread to the Wise, nor yet Riches to men of Understanding, nor yet favor to
men of Skill: I exempt not the wise from subjection to Time and Chance, which
is all that Solomon complains of here; but notwithstanding I must ever think
with him, Eccles. 2.
that Wisdom excels folly as much as light does darkness; not only because
cheerful, delightful to it self, but also because it is the Happiest guide of
humane Life, blessed generally with success as well as Rich in intrinsic Good,
and in some measure self-sufficient: Nor does our English Proverb Fools have
the fortune, imply any more than that the Prosperity of Fools is to be imputed
to their Fortune, that of Wise men to their Merit, that success does commonly
wait upon Virtue and Wisdom, and nothing but an extraordinary Chance can turn
it upon the Fool or Sinner; tho all this while I understand Success in things
necessary not superfluous, for I cannot see how it can be any disparagement to
Providence to turn that Plenty another way, which would not like soft
distilling Rains and Dew cherish, refresh, and increase the tender Plants,
Wisdom and Virtue, but like a Flood wash away the Earth from their Roots, and
either utterly extirpate 'em, or leave 'em oppressed and buried in Rubbish: If
this were not true, if the Experience as well as Reason of Mankind did not
confirm it, Men would not serve Apprentiships to Trades, Men would not study
Arts or Sciences, Men would not strive with toil and hazard to make their
Point, but lazily and securely stay till Fortune rain its Golden Showers into
their Laps.

By a Recapitulation of all that has been hitherto discoursed, it may easily
appear how far I have advanced in the proof of that Assertion I undertook to
make Good, namely, that Happiness may be attained in this World; I have showed
that Religion does no way obstruct our present Happiness, that Duty of
Mortification which it enjoins, not forbidding us to allow the World a proper
place in our Esteem, but to overvalue it, but to dote upon it; not forbidding
us the Enjoyment, but abuse of the things of this World. No man therefore will
ever be able to prove that this Doctrine is injurious to our Happiness, till he
be able to convince us that it is indispensibly necessary to our Happiness to
dote upon these Temporal things, and to be as irrational and intemperate in our
Enjoyment of 'em as our Passion for 'em: which he can never go about to do,
without contradicting not only revealed Truth, but also the Universal Reason
and Experience of Mankind. I have in the next place showed, that some are
happier than others, or at least less miserable, That this Distinction of the
Condition or state of Men is to be imputed to the Virtues of some, and the
Vices of others. I have showed in the last place that the World abounds with
good things, that there is no Appetite nor Capacity of Man that may not find
Objects proper and agreeable, and such as in a great measure may delight and
satisfy; and that Man is endowed with such a variety of faculties, and senses,
that there is scarce any thing in all the variety of Beings the World contains,
which he is not capable of enjoying. From whence it clearly follows, That Man
may be happy in the Enjoyment of these good things, unless the Evil of life
sour and imbitter the Good, or the attainment of the Good be out of the Power
of Man, to remove all suspicion of both which, I discoursed something tho
briefly of the Nature of Evil, and the Nature of Man, evincing plainly the
Impotence and Feebleness of the one, and the Strength and Preparations of the
other; and for the Close of all, I have endeavored to make it manifest that
Good and Evil are not so much the Result of Time or Chance, etc. as the
Necessary Consequence of Wisdom and Folly. From all which the Conclusion that
naturally arises is this; That if Man be miserable it is his own fault, or which
is all one, a Man may be happy if he will, which was the thing to be proved.
Let us try now by a Close Application of all that has been said to the Wants
and Necessities of Mankind, what the Evidence, what the Conviction, what the
real use and force of this Discourse is. I am unhappy, I am miserable; whoever
thou art that say so, thou must needs mean one of these two things. Thou
do enjoy no good or art oppressed with Evil: If the latter, I demand what
Evil? speak out; speak plainly. There are three sorts of Evils; the Evils of
the Mind, the Evils of the Body, the Evils of Fortune. Which of those art thou
oppressed by? The Evils of the Mind? These are either sinful Passions, or what is
the Effect of them, guilty Fears: Nothing can compel thee to be wicked, cease
to be wicked, and thou will cease to fear. The Evils of the Body? they are
generally the Effect of unruly Passions and a disorderly Life; and where they
are not, the Pleasures of the Mind will outweigh the Pains of the Body. The
Evils of Fortune? it is in thy Power, whether these shall be really Evils, or
no; they befall thy Possessions not thee; the foolish and vicious Mind only
suffers in these, the Wise and Virtuous one is much above them; it is therefore
thy own fault if thou be oppressed with Evil. But will thou say the former? I
enjoy no Good, no satisfactory Good. why? is there no Good to be enjoyed? I
have already proved the contrary; and if I had not, how easy were it here to
do it? there is Truth to entertain thy Understanding; Moral Perfections to
delight thy Will; Variety of Objects to treat thy senses, the Excellencies of
the visible and invisible World to be enjoyed by thee: why then do thou
defer to live? why do thou not begin to enjoy? here it is Evident that thou
must be forced to say one of these Two things, either That thou art not capable
of Enjoying these Blessings, or that they are out of thy Reach, out of thy
Power: to say thou art not capable of 'em is to re-renounce the faculties of
thy Soul and the senses of thy Body; to say they are out of thy Reach, is in
Effect to say that Virtue and Vice, Wisdom and Folly are all one; or which is
every jot as absurd, that thou art wicked and sottish, and can not help it.
And this is that indeed which in Effect, all do say that accuse Fortune, or
Fate, or Nature, or any thing but themselves as the Causes of their Misery: and
yet as absurd as this is, it must be now examined, because the Minds of Men
are perverted and discouraged by such Notions, I will proceed therefore to the
Third thing proposed. That is,

SECT. III. To answer the Objections against the Attainment of Happiness.
THose who deny the Possibility of attaining Happiness in this Life, are of two
sorts; First, such who argue from Experience and Observation (without troubling
themselves to assign any Reason or Cause of what they affirm) No man ever has
been Happy; and therefore No man can: This has in part been already answered,
and shall more fully in the close of this Chapter. Secondly, Such who assign a
Cause or Reason, why some are miserable and cannot possibly be otherwise. The
Number of these, if men would talk Coherently, if they would be firm, and
steady to their Principles, would be very small: for as the Belief of a God,
the Creator and Governor of the World, destroys Fate; so does the Denial of a
God destroy the Liberty of the Mind of Man, and render all its motion as
Determinate and Necessary, as that of Fire, or Air, or any inanimate Body
whatever: and therefore (as it were fit) the Atheist only should oppose this
Proposition, and he who has excluded God out of the World, should exclude
Happiness too: for if whatever be not voluntary (I speak of Humane Misery) be
necessary and unavoidabe, and whatever be so, be Fatal, as needs it must, for I
am not able to distinguish between a fatal Event, and one that is Necessary and
unavoidable: Then it naturally follows, that the Atheist only should deny the
possibility of attaining Happiness, as he who only asserts Fate. But the
Reasonings of many men are wild and inconsistent, and therefore some who widely
differ in their Principles, do yet conclude and center in one common Error;
and thus it happens here, Theists as well as Atheists endeavoring to introduce
Fate into the World, and consequently to make the misery of such as are
miserable involuntary, fatal, and unavoidable: it is true, he that affirms some
men to be unavoidably miserable, does not deny, that others may be Happy; but
he does in Effect discourage all who are not already Happy, from endeavoring
to be so: and therefore must here be opposed by me.

Now it is true that I might this way with one stroke cut off all Objections at
once; for he that baffles the Opinion of Fate, leaves every man in a Capacity
of Happiness, and proves his misery voluntary; for that Choice which Man makes,
being not necessarily or fatally determined to it, is a voluntary one; and this
were a very easy Task. For first, I do not know, that there were ever any in
the World (a few only excepted) so addicted to maintain an Universal Fate, as
that they did not exempt the Mind of Man from its Sovereignty and Dominion (of
which anon) and in the second place, if any at this Day do not, as a
Philosopher once proved, motion by walking; so were it as easy and ready a way
to prove the Liberty of Mankind by some free Choice or other: But when one is
obliged to answer Objections, that Method must be taken, not which the Nature
of things invites to, but the manner of Men's proposing their Opinions compels
to; Therefore because men do generally impute their Misery to either God,
Fortune, Fate, or their own Incapacity of Happiness; I will speak distinctly to
each of these. And,

First, I Will endeavor to show that God is not the Cause of any man's Misery,
to which purpose I must assert and vindicate the infinite Goodness of God, and
his love of Mankind: If what Epictetus said with respect to many Gods had been
spoke, with respect to one, nothing had ever been said with more exact truth,
or a better poised judgment, Epicteti. Enchirid. c. 37.
(...). The first and Chief thing in Religion is to have Rational and true
Notions of God, it being otherwise impossible that Religion should serve the
great Interest of God's Glory, and Man's Happiness: for false and unworthy
Notions of him must needs bereave God of the Honor and Worship due to him from
his Creatures, by alienating the Minds of Men from him, and betraying 'em into
Superstition, Idolatry or Atheism: and thus that Religion which was designed to
glorify God by the manifestation and acknowledgment of his Divine Excellencies
and Perfections, and to advance Man into a state of Blessedness, by influencing
his life, and filling his Mind with Security and Cheerfulness, shall be
perverted to Ends directly contrary, and prove instrumental to Dishonor God
and render Man miserable. The truth of this has been too too Evident in those
visible Effects the Ignorance, or misrepresentation of the Divine Nature
produced amongst the Gentiles, the want of conceiving aright his Omnipotence and
Immensity, etc. joined with the numerous Necessities of Mankind did bring
forth, or at least confirm Polytheism; Groundless Apprehensions of Cruelty in
God brought forth Superstition, and the Absurdities of Polytheism and
Superstition gave Being to Atheism: and at this Day there are many mischiefs
which I must impute either to false Notions of God, or want of just
Consideration of the true Ones, or at least to not arguing clearly and truly
from 'em. For from one of these Reasons it proceeds, that the Worship of some
Men is so slight, empty and trifling; the Religion of others so melancholy and
uncomfortable, and truly Superstitious; and I am afraid there is too much of
Atheistical looseness, sensual, carnal Presumption and wretchless Despair, and
many other Evils owing to the same Cause: had Men worthy Notions of God, how
were it possible they should ever fancy, that God would accept the Sincerity
and Devotion of a Communicant sitting, but not kneeling? after Supper, but not
in the Morning? that the whiteness of the Garment would pollute and unhallow
the Spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer and Praises? and such like. Would not a right
Notion of God easily convince such a weak and scrupulous trifler, That God were
not to be pleased but by sincere and substantial Holiness and Righteousness,
nor to be displeased but by voluntary wickedness? All things else weighing
nothing in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and not deserving the Notice or
Regard of the Governor of the World: and tho such a one should suppose his
scruples warranted by Divine Command, and consequently because the Sovereignty
of God renders all his Commandments indisputably Authoritative and binding, he
should therefore think himself as indispensibly obliged to reject these things,
as to shun a Sin; yet even here a right Understanding of the Divine Nature,
would soon instruct him how to distinguish the Divine Commands, and teach him
that those which did enjoin Holiness and Righteousness were the standing and
Fundamental Laws of the Divine Government; that those which did enjoin Duties
subservient to that End were of an Inferior Nature, and did bind in proportion
to their Necessity and Tendency; that such as did enjoin or forbid things of a
more remote and distant Nature, Circumstantial, Ritual, etc. were merely
Positive and Arbitrary, Temporary and mutable, and the interposing Necessity of
Superior Duties is at any time sufficient to supersede their Obligation. To
proceed to other Effects of mis conceptions of the Divine Nature, how were it
possible that any one who rightly understood the unspeakable goodness of God
should, after he had done all he could, be tormented with doubtful Fears and
Jealousies concerning his state, nay sometimes with a melancholy dread of God,
as if he were a hard Master and impossible to be pleased? or how could such a
persuasion as this, That one were Damned from Eternity, and that neither
Prayers, nor Tears, nor Industry could ever reverse the fatal Sentence, find
any Entertainment in that Man who were possessed with a true sense and firm
belief of the boundless love which God has for all his Rational Creatures?

It is evident therefore of what Importance it is to propagate and settle in the
Minds of Men a right Understanding of the Divine Nature; and of all the
Attributes of God, there are none that have a more immediate and powerful
Influence either upon the Conduct of Man's Life, or the Comfort of his Mind,
than these two, his Holiness and Goodness: These make us willing and desirous
to believe that there is a God, these make us love him and depend upon him, as
one from whom we may rationably expect all that is Good, (...), Epict.
He that comes to God (says St. Paul) must believe that he is, and that he is
a Rewarder of all those that diligently seek him. These words do not only
assert the Being of a God; but also his Holiness and Goodness; both which may
be clearly inferred from three Propositions couched in those words of the
Apostle, that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: First, That
all men may seek God diligently if they will; Secondly; That it is the desire
of God that they should do so; and Thirdly, That God will reward all that do
so: On these Principles is Religion founded, on these Principles the Honor of
God, and the Happiness of Man must be established: I will therefore discourse
here, First, of the Goodness; and Secondly, of the Holiness of God, which I
distinguish from one another only for Methods sake.

Cruelty was the property of the Gentil Gods, not of the true God, Of the
Goodness of God.
Humane Blood in which the Canaanites, Carthaginians, and others Sacrificed,
was an Oblation fit for Baal, Moloch, etc. that is, for Devils not for God:
Innate Wrath and Cruelty is inconsistent with a Happy Nature or a Happy state,
for these are furious and tormenting Passions: Nor can we imagine that such a
Being should make its Residence in Heaven, a place of Peace and Love, or be
delighted with Hallelujah's and Adorations of Angels; This were no Pleasure, no
Music to a Being in whom Wrath and Cruelty were Predominant. Nor were those
Good, those Holy, those Charitable Spirits fit Attendance, fit Ministers for
such a Being; No, could we suppose (as some Heretics once fancied) that there
were two first Principles, A good and bad one? could we suppose there were an
Evil God? one in whom Cruelty, and Wrath were his beloved Attributes? We must
necessarily conclude that he would make Hell his Court, that his Guards and
Courtiers would be Fiends and Furies, and that the shrieks and torments of
wretched Creatures would be the Pleasure, the Harmony he delighted in; this
were a God fit for a Hobbist, one who can discern no difference between Virtue
and Vice, between Good and Evil, between Love or Charity and Devillishness. And
yet, I cannot in Charity, but retract and condemn this thought; for Oh! no
other God is fit for him, but he whom he denies! no other God is fit for such
a Wretch but the God of Love and Mercy! to whom I recommend him and proceed.
All who believe a God, must believe him a most perfect Being, for whence else
should the scattered Perfections of his Creatures have Beginning? But if any
man will say, that there is no Difference between Perfections and
Imperfections, I would know, why does he reverence Wisdom more than Folly? or
why he doats on Beauty rather than Deformity? or if he tell me, that he
acknowledges a Distinction between Natural, but none between Moral Perfections
or Imperfections; not to urge that the Virtues of the Will are as truly Natural
as those of the Understanding, the Capacities of and Aptitudes to each being
born with us, not the habits, and the one being as agreeable to the Nature and
Consonant to the Interest of Man as the other; I will ask him, why he does not
love the froward and peevish as well as the Sweet and Gentle? the Cruel and
Implacable, as well as the Kind and Charitable? the Proud and Wilful as well as
the Humble and Modest? and whatever answer he gives me, will abundantly serve
to refute his fancy; If then there be Natural and Moral Perfections, and God be
the most perfect Being, we must needs ascribe to him those Properties which we
look upon as Perfections in his Rational Creatures, and that in such degrees as
exempt him from all Imperfection; if therefore Goodness, Charity, Clemency be
universally acknowledged for Perfections, we must necessarily suppose them in
God in the most perfect Degree: Nor let any one think it absurd that the same
should be the Virtues o^ God and Man, of a finite and an infinite Being, for we
suppose them in God in a manner suitable to His Majesty, and in Man in a manner
suitable to his meanness; and unless we acknowledge this, there cannot possibly
be any settled and certain Reason for our Love, or Hope, or Dependence the
great parts of Divine Worship: That therefore God is Good and Merciful, a lover
of Mankind, was ever the constant and unanimous sense o^ the wise and good part
of Mankind* Poets indeed and Painters degenerous dastardly, (...), Plutarch De
Superstitione.
cruel and vicious Men did represent the Deity under hideous Shapes and in such
Colors, as their guilty Fears or Vices furnished 'em with but Philosophers, as
Plutarch observes, were always wont to represent him most amiable and lovely,
always tempering his Majesty with Love and Goodness, his Power and Justice,
with Tenderness, Mercy and Compassion toward Mankind. Hence it was that they
were wont to attribute all those things that were extremely useful and
beneficial, to God as the Author of 'em, as Government, Laws, Arts and
Sciences, etc. they looked upon their Gods as the Guides and Guardians of Men,
and ascribed to 'em whatever they achieved bravely and Happily in life: But on
the other hand, frowardness, wrath and cruelty did ever seem so ugly and
detestable to Wise and Virtuous men, that they not only despised but abhorred
as well the wickedness as folly of Superstition, which represented God, or
rather dishonored him under such Characters: Ibid.
(...). And this Notion of the Deity which represented that Being which was
kind and benign, as terrible and dreadful; which was gracious and fatherly, as
Tyrannical; which was friendly and careful of us, as injurious and hurtful;
which was mild and gentle as fierce and savage; gave such a distaste and disgust
to all ingenious Tempers, that they thought Atheism a much more Excusable
Impiety than Superstition; Hence is that of Plutarch (so generally praised by
all Writers) (...), Ibid.
(...). I had rather men should say of me, there neither was, nor is such a one
as Plutarch, than that they should say, that he was a man of a fickle,
unconstant froward, revengeful and implacable temper. Let us not therefore
entertain such an Idea of God, as Humane Nature would recoil from, and start
back pale and scared at the sight: Let us not fasten those Characters upon God,
which a good-temper'd man, if charged with 'em would look upon, as the foulest
Reproaches and most injurious Accusations; Especially since a Defect is not
only more Conspicuous, but more Reproachful, where there should be nothing but
Perfection: And Peevishness and Cruelty are infinitely more mischievous in an
Almighty than Impotent Being: I might shun Polycrates, Dionysius, Periander,
etc. but how should I shun God? I might leave Samos, Sicily, or Corinth, and
where Clemency and Justice made their Abode, I might make mine: But whither
should I go, what place should be my Refuge, if the Governor of the World were
but an Almighty Tyrant? Thus it is manifest such kind of Representations of God
tend not to enamour Man of God, but to alienate and estrange him: they tend not
to advance Religion but Superstition; they tend to make Men dread God, but not
love him; they are therefore to be banished out of the World, and God is to be
represented such as our Dear Lord, who lay in the Bosom of his Father has
revealed him, A God of Hope, a God of Love, a God who is a Rewarder of them
that diligently seek him. This is the Dictate of Nature, This is the Dictate of
the Spirit, God is Love. Let it not be thought an absurd or barren Tautology,
tho I should recite this one Text a Thousand times oft'ner than I do: for no
Tongue can express the Divine Nature so much to the life, as his who was
inspired by the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Love.

Nor let God's dealings with the Gentil World before the Revelation of
Christianity be alleged as an Objection against the Goodness of God, and his
Tenderness and Compassion for Mankind; Act. 14. and 17.
it is true, God in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways;
and the times of this Ignorance he winked at: he published no revealed Law to
the Gentiles from Heaven, he deputed no Prophets to 'em, as to his People the
Jews, with a Commission to restore by Signs and Miracles, that Natural Religion
conformably to which they were to Worship God: which is the Import of those
places of St. Paul; and yet it is true that the Belief of the Living and true
God, and the natural Law of Good and Evil was strangely effaced and obliterated
amongst the Gentiles: but notwithstanding all this, it must be remembered too; 1.
That God left not himself without a witness in any age of Gentilism: the
Heathen were never destitute of so much Light as might have conducted 'em to
God, and that Happiness he designed 'em: for besides the Traditions transmitted
from Noah to Posterity, the Book of Nature and Providence was ever open to 'em,
and this did in most legible Characters assert the Being of one Supreme God,
and instructed 'em in the Knowledge of his Power and Goodness; Thus St. Paul,
Acts 14.
Nevertheless he left not himself without witness, in that he did good, and
gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our hearts with Food
and Gladness. Nor was this Testimony so unsuccessful, Sunt autem alii
Philosophi and hi quidem magni atque nobiles, qui Deorum mente atque ratione
omnem mundum administrari and regi censeant, neque vero id solum, sed etiam ab
iisdem vitae hominum consuli and Provideri: Nam and fruges and reliqua quae
terra pariat, and tempestates, ac tem porum Varietates, coelique mutationes,
quibus omnia, quae terra gignat, maturata pubescant, a Diis Immortalibus tribui
generi humano putant. Cic. l. 1. De Natura Deorum.
but that in all Ages there were some Excellent men who did ascribe the
Original and Government of the World to God, and gave such an account of his
Holiness and Goodness as was sufficient to have founded a Rational and
Excellent Worship upon: these were so many Lights shining in dark places, as so
many Justifications of Divine Providence, and Reproaches of Man's wilful
Stupidity.

2. It Is not in the least to be doubted, but that the Nature of their Duty and
consequently the Condition of their Happiness was Proportioned and Conformed to
those Manifestations which God made 'em, to those Obligations which he laid
before 'em, and to that Strength and Assistance which he Vouchsafed 'em: for
God is not a hard Master, he will not make good the Accusation of the wicked
Servant; he will not take up what he laid not down, Luke 19.
nor reap what he did not sow. In a word, if God do at the last Day deal with
Men according to those several Oeconomies of his Providence which they were
under, and if he has afforded all Nations means proportionable to those Duties
he required of them, and to those Degrees of Happiness to which he designed
them, then he was always the God of the Gentiles as well as once of the Jews,
or now of the Christians, and there is no one part in the whole series of
Providence which can give us any Color to call into question the Care or
Goodness of God toward Mankind. This I think is enough to remove this
Objection as it lay in my way: if my Design did not hasten me on, and I did not
judge this Satisfactory, I could easily make appear God's Goodness to the
Gentiles, by presenting the Reader with a Scheme of the Religion of the
Pythagoreans, Platonics, and Stoics; by examining the Difference of the
Idolatry of the Wise and Virtuous part of the Gentil World, and that of the
sottish and vicious part of it; by considering the Assistances that God
vouchsafed 'em, and giving an Account whence it came to pass that the Worship
of one true God by Holiness and Virtue, was so far stifled and oppressed in the
Gentil World: But I have said enough to Vindicate the Goodness of God; and the
state of Gentiles and Infidels does not so nearly concern my present Enquiry, as
to deserve so exact a Discussion.

The Barrenness of some Countries, the Servitude and Poverty of some People is
a much slighter Objection; for till it can appear, that Poverty is an Enemy to
Virtue, or that Wealth which is the Instrument of Luxury, and the Nurse of
Sloth and Wantonness, is absolutely necessary to Man's Happiness, it will weigh
but very little against so many Demonstrations of Divine Love, that he has not
heaped upon all Nations so many Temporal Blessings as might put 'em into a
Capacity of being Lazy, Wanton and Insolent.

Now give me leave to make a stand, and like a Traveller when he has gained an
Ascent, look back upon the way I have gone, and see how much of my Journey I
have dispatched: My Undertaking was to demonstrate the Love of God to Mankind;
thus far I have advanced toward this with undeniable Evidence; I have proved,
That Peevishness, Malignity and Cruelty cannot belong to God, because this were
inconsistent with the Perfection of his Nature, or the Happiness of his State:
nor can it rationally be supposed, that the same Properties should belong to
those Evil Spirits which for a long time deluded the World, and that God who
has done so much to destroy that Kingdom of Darkness, and rescuing Man, to
restore him to a Capacity of Happiness and Glory: how could it be, that God
should have done so much, as it is apparent he has, in the Contexture of our
Nature, and the Contrivance of our state, to make us in Love with Goodness, and
irreconcileably Enemies to Tyranny, Cruelty, Arbitrary Revenge, etc. if he
himself were passionate, furious, and Arbitrary in his Cruelties? Nay, I have
advanced further, and have proved, Secondly, That boundless Love and Goodness
are the unquestionable Attributes of God, for the very same Arguments which
exclude all manner of Imperfections and Evils from the Deity, do necessarily
assert to it all manner of Perfection and Good: Nor does the unconceivable
Majesty and Eminence of the Divine Nature only, but also the Indigence and
Weakness of Humane Nature require this; since without it, he could not be the
Object of our Love or Dependence, nor consequently our Worship: Having
proceeded thus far and proved that Tyranny or Cruelty are utterly repugnant to
the Divine Nature; and boundless Love and Goodness the Essential and
Inseparable Properties of it; I do not think it Necessary to prove that the
Emanations o^ this his Goodness do extend even to Man; for tho the Epicureans
acknowledging God Perfect, did at the same time allow him no other Employment
than the Enjoyment of his own Perfections; and tho Aristotle confined the
Providence of God, and consequently the Irradiation of his Goodness within
Heaven; and tho lastly before the Creation of the World, we are incapable of
conceiving any Subjects, about which Divine Love could exercise it self, and
consequently can conceive of it no otherwise than confined within himself; All
which seems to conclude thus much that the Deity may be infinitely good, and
yet this Goodness not extend it self to Man: All this concerns not our present
question, for tho Man should not be the Object of Divine Goodness, yet if God
be infinitely good, this will be enough to free Man from unreasonable and
superstitious fear of him, and to acquit God from the least suspicion of being
the Cause of Humane Misery; which is the utmost I was obliged to make good, in
pursuance of the design of this Chapter: Besides, they who accuse God of their
Misery, do not suppose him unconcerned about all things but himself, as
Epicurus, nor bound and limit his Providence within the Enclosures of Heaven,
but do plainly suppose all the affairs of Mankind to depend upon the first
Contrivance of God in the Creation, or upon the Overruling Influences of his
Providence in his present Government of the World: However, I am not willing to
quit one Inch of the ground I have got, and therefore I cannot but acknowledge,
that the World being now created, and Mankind formed after God's Image ((...),
we are his Offspring, says St. Paul out of the Poet) unactive and unconcerned
Love seems to me a Contradiction, and infinite, boundless Goodness confined
within Heaven cannot but seem as gross a one: let it therefore remain an
unshaken truth, The God is Good, and that this Goodness does exert and express
it self toward Mankind, and we shall from hence gain these two Points.

1. That God is not the Cause o^ Man's Misery, and what is more yet,

2. That he is most ready and willing to further and assist him in all his
Endeavors after Happiness.

The first of these is apparent, for if God be infinitely Good, then every
thing that came out of his hands must in the state of its Creation have been
exceeding Good; the End of the Creation must have been something extremely kind
and gracious, and the Law he prescribed his Creatures for the Attainment of
that End, must be as Good as Wise; this must have been the glorious state of
things, when God contrived this wonderful frame of Nature, when he erected this
vast Work the World; and in all the continued progress of Divine Providence we
are to expect no other acts of Government than what may become the most
gracious Prince, the most tender Father; for the same Immense Goodness that
once created, does ever continue to Rule the World: Let us not therefore accuse
God but our selves if we be not Happy; Blessings indeed and Mercies, like warm
Sun and fruitful Seasons, descend upon us without our Importunity or Merit, but
Evils and Mischiefs come not till our Sins and Provocations have pulled 'em
down upon us: Solon indeed in Herodotus tells Croesus (...), That the Deity was
envious and froward, and delighted to magnify it self in the Disturbance of
the settled Happiness and Calm of Poor Men: But alas! it is our Fondness or our
Pride, our Peevishness or our Wantonness, which raises in us these unworthy
thoughts of God; he may indeed like a kind Parent train up a Son through a
strict Discipline to Virtue and Glory, he may throw difficulties into our way
on purpose to reward our Conquest, he may like a wise Physician restore us to
our Health by bitter Potions, and will like an Excellent Governor vindicate,
if need be, our wanton Contempt of Love and Mercy by Severity and
Chastisements, but he will never, like a Salvage Tyrant, delight in the
Sufferings or Ruin of Innocent or humble Subjects: he will never prescribe
Impossible Laws, that he may enjoy the Pleasure of bloody Executions; he will
never make the groans of wretched People his Music; nor think Misery and Death
the best marks of his absolute Power, or fairest Ornaments of his Throne; No,
we shall never need any other proof to clear the Divine Majesty from any such
Imputation, than to Examine our selves and reflect upon our own behavior, we
shall soon find that we alone are guilty of our Ruin, and that God is utterly
free from it; our excessive Enjoyments create the Diseases of the Body, and our
excessive Passion the pains and torments of the Mind, and most of the Changes
in our Fortune derive themselves from both; a languishing Body, and a
languishing Reputation, a broken Estate, and a dejected Mind are the Common
Effects of a Disorderly and Debauched life; and such a life is the natural
Effect of a Mind enslaved to the Body and estranged from God, not only by a
Neglect, but by a Contempt and Defiance of all those means by which a Good God
designed to bring him through Virtue to Glory; and then at last a guilty
Conscience, a distracted Mind, and a most melancholy, miserable Death is the
Consequence and End of all: This is the Progress which our Voluntary Sin and
Folly makes, we cannot think that a Good God can direct or Necessitate us to
these Courses; they are as repugnant to his Laws, as to our own Interest, and
the same time we forfeit our Happiness, we disappoint his Love and Goodness;
all the Ways and Methods of God are Kind and Gracious, and Wise and Rational,
inanimate Bodies do not desert those Offices he has prescribed 'em, Animals
move regularly by those Instincts he has implanted in them, and so both the one
and the other do necessarily serve those Excellent Ends, for which they were
Created: But Man having no Necessity but Liberty wove into the Constitution of
his Nature, and having no Compulsory, but only directing Law prescribed him,
has perverted his own ways, abused his Liberty and made that his Ruin, which
(...) well-us'd, had enhanc'd his Merit and Reward; This is the Account which
the Scripture gives us of Man's Misery, it imputes it wholly to himself, and
represents his Obstinacy as ungrateful and displeasing to God, as it is fatal to
himself: Hos. 13. Ezekiel. 38.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self: As I live, I delight not b^ the Death
of a Sinner, turn ye, into ye, Math. 23.
why will ye die? O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets and
stonest them which are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a He^ gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye
would not? Nor is this account of things which the Scripture gives ^s any other
than that which was generally embraced by the Heathens, this being not the
sense of any particular prepossessions or private Opinions instilled by Custom
or Education, but of natural Reason, and fairly and easily deduced from those
Notions of Divine Goodness which were universally entertained by all judicious
and understanding Heathens: and how scandalous a thing were it, if that
Comfortable and Heavenly Truth which the Darkness and Idolatry of the
Superstitious could not extinguish in the Pagan World, should be rejected or
suppressed by Christians, Jamblichus de Vita Pythag. l. 1.
(...), etc. (...) -- That is,

Not the Will of the Gods, Idem l. 2.
but the Luxury and Riot of Men is the Cause of those Evils which infest the
Body, etc. Hence that Charitable piece of Heathen Devotion.

(...),
(...).
O Father Jove, from numerous Evils free
Mankind, or show 'em their Ruin's not from thee,
A Gracious and Benign Deity.
But from themselves --

I will here add a Testimony of Apuleius, as containing the Sense of the
Platonic Philosophy in this Point of God's Government of Mankind: Apul. de
Dogmate Platonis.
Omnia quae naturaliter and propterea recte feruntur, Providentiae Custodia
gubernantur, nec ullius mali Causa Deo poterit ascribi: All the Motions of
Providence are wise and regular, nor must any Evil be ascribed to God as its
Cause: But this is not all we gain from the Assurance of God's Infinite
Goodness, that we have no Reason to apprehend any harm or mischief from him,
that he cannot be the Author of our Misery. But we may confidently persuade our
selves on the other side,

Secondly, That he is most ready and willing to further and assist us in all
our Endeavors after Happiness. And now methinks, I am so far from questioning
the possibility of attaining Happiness, that I begin already to feel and enjoy
it; I see the Day breaking in upon me from above; how can he choose but be
Happy who is the Love, the Care of God! I may walk like Peter on the Waves, and
bid defiance to the Storms, I know I shall never sink, whilst that God upholds
me, who calls me this way to him; I can now easily believe that my temper may
be transformed, my Corruptions may be put off, and I be made partaker of a
Divine Nature; since the Spirit of God will dwell with me, the Light of God
will always shine upon me, and the Power of God will always succor and aid me;
can I imagine as much as any Color or Pretext, why I should not now be able to
attain to an Excellent state of Virtue, or why this Virtue should not be able
to Vanquish all those Difficulties that oppose my Happiness, since I am assured
that God will not refuse me his Spirit if I ask it, and that his Grace will be
sufficient for me? You see, of what vast Importance this Truth is, that God
will be always ready to assist every man in his Endeavors after Happiness; and
therefore tho it stand here as a Necessary and undeniable Conclusion from the
foregoing Discourse, tho the Perfection of the Divine Nature do amount to a
little less than a Demonstration of it; for (...); Max. Tyrius Disser. 22.
Beneficence to his Creatures is as necessarily included in the Notion of
Perfection, as Perfection is in the Notion of a God; yet as well for my own
Pleasure, as that interest which is nearly concerned in this Truth, I will
dwell a little longer on the Confirmation and Illustration of it: There are
three Eminent Acts of Divine Assistance; The First, is such a Direction of the
Events of Secular Affairs, that they may tend to our Good: The Second is his
Assistance of us in the Attainment of Virtue; And the Third is, his recruiting
us by fresh supplies of Strength in all our hazardous Conflicts and
Extraordinary Trials: Now tho I could not give an account of the manner how God
performs this kind Work of his Providence, yet ought not that to dissuade me
from the belief of it; because we know that our Comprehension ought not to be
the Standard of Divine Perfections, nor the narrow bounds of our Imagination be
the utmost extent of the Almighty's Power. However it is not difficult so to
explain this Assistance of God in such sort as may free it from the least
suspicion of Implying a Contradiction: For First, as to his Direction and
Conduct of Temporal Events, how easy will it be for us to Conceive this
possible to God, if we consider, First, That God can form what Impressions he
pleases in the Minds of Men, and inspire 'em with what Affections he shall
think most serviceable to his Designs? for there is not the least pretext or
color to imagine that the Soul is any more exempt from the Sovereignty of God
than the Body: or that God cannot do that which the Great, or the Cunning, or
the Eloquent, nay the Popular and Ambitious, do seldom fail to do, raise what
Passions he pleases in the Mind of Man. Or if we consider Secondly, That the
Power and Efficacy of Nature is wholly in his hands, that Life or Death, Plenty
or Poverty, every thing depends upon his Will; for the Winds and Seas, Earth
and Air, Fire, Hail and Vapor obey his Voice, and are all of 'em, as often as
he pleases the Instruments and Executioners of his Will: he that stills the
Ragings of the Multitude, and becalms the Passions of the Mighty; he at whose
Command, new Creatures enter upon the Stage of the World, and the old leave it,
what is it impossible for him to do? nay, what is it this Almighty Governor
cannot do, without moving one step out of the Common Road of his Providence,
without employing any extraordinary Instrument, or exerting any Act of
extraordinary Power? for what Secular Interest can there be imagined whose
Success or Disappointment depends not upon some or other of these Natural
Causes? And yet we must acknowledge further, Thirdly, That the Almighty has not
prefixed or set himself such immutable, inalterable Laws, but that he has
reserved to himself the Prerogative of suspending or overruling 'em when he
pleases, I mean with respect to the Motions of Natural Bodies, or Revolutions
of Secular Affairs; and if such an Interposal of Divine Power cannot be
conceived to be other than a Miracle, I must confess, I do not look upon one
Age only, but every Age an Age of Miracles; Nay, I believe such as these
wrought every Day for the Protection or Relief of those who depend upon this
Governor of the World; for I know not to what purpose I should, like Jonah or
his Mariners, call upon God in a Storm, if it were never to be laid, till it
had naturally spent its force and fury: I know not, to what purpose I should
implore the Almighty's direction upon all my Deliberations in perplex't and
entangled Affairs, if I could expect no other Light than what my Laboring Mind
could give it self: I know not why I should address my self to God in the Pains
and Danger of an insupportable Disease, if the Medicines will be the same, and
their Virtue the same, if the Fever will abate, and its flames be extinguish't
or extinguish life in the same degree and manner, if I Pray or if I do not. All
these ways of Divine Providence are very plain and intelligible, and therefore
it is manifest that we may without any absurdity ascribe to God such a
Super-intendency and Direction over Humane Affairs, as may render the issue of
'em most serviceable to the true interest of those that Worship him.

As to the second Part of Divine Assistance which consists in aiding us in the
Attainment of Holiness and Virtue, I do readily acknowledge as far as this is
performed by the internal Operations of his Spirit, by the Influx of Divine
Light or Heavenly Vigor, I do no more understand the (...) the manner of
Sanctification, than that of the Creation of the Soul; This I know, that Virtue
is the Rational work of a Rational Creature, it is the work of Man, tho assisted
by God, it is a Rational work which implies the Knowledge of our Duty, and a
Power to perform it: and therefore this I know, that this aid must consist in
the Improvement of my rational Faculties in some accession to the Reason of my
Understanding, and to the Power and Liberty of my Will; Now tho I cannot
comprehend how God does this, yet how easily can I believe it possible for him
to do it, since it is natural to imagine, that he who created my Understanding
can improve it, and he who invested me with a Rational Liberty can confirm or
enlarge it, or if you please, rescue it from that diseased and servile
Condition, unto which it was degenerated, and restore it to the health and
soundness of its first State?

The Third Act of Divine Providence does not imply a new manner, but a new
degree of Assistance, and therefore contains in it no further Difficulty: this
time which I have spent upon the illustration of Divine Goodness toward Man,
will not I hope be judged mis-imploy'd or lost, if it be considered, that such
is the Confidence, or rather such is the wantonness of some Men, that they
reject every thing which carries in it, I will not say, any seeming
Contradiction, but any seeming Difficulty.

But it does not so nearly concern the Happiness of Man to be instructed in the
manner, as to be thoroughly persuaded of the Truth of Divine Assistance; and
therefore choosing rather to be tedious than defective in the proof of it, I
will add to those Arguments taken from the Nature of God, whatever force and
strength can be derived from the Consideration of Divine Government, which is
the Expression of the Divine Nature and the Image of its Perfection visible in
its Effects; The Gospel contains this Doctrine in almost every Page, and the
lives of Apostles and Martyrs are so many illustrious Instances of the Divine
Faithfulness and Love, performing those Promises which he had made 'em by his
Son. The Jewish Polity was a Theocracy, God did for a great while preside over
'em immediately, and govern 'em (if I may so speak) without a Substitute or
Viceroy; Repeated Miracles, repeated Prophecies, extraordinary Manifestations
of himself, and extraordinary Revelations were the Illustrious proofs of God's
affection and care for that People; so that it were to insult over my Reader's
Patience, or to reproach his Stupidity if I should go about to confirm this
Truth from the old or New Testament: it is therefore only necessary to Examine
what the Heathen thought of the Necessity of this Divine Assistance, and what
instances of it may be found amongst them: whether the Gentiles had any Notion
of the Fall and Corruption of Man is not here Necessary to be inquired, but
this I am sure, they were extremely sensible of that opposition, which Virtue
met with from the World and the Body; they were extremely sensible that the
Inclinations of the one, and the Affluence and Troubles of the other did
naturally tend to engage 'em in Vice; and therefore tho they do sometimes
magnify Humane Nature, yet they were not so forgetful of their own
Infirmities, or the Condition of this Life as not to judge the Assistance of
God indispensably necessary to render them Virtuous and Happy: Hence it is that
Pythagoras, Socrates and Plato were Eminent in that part of Religion which
consists in Prayer and Invocation: Max. T^t. Disser. 30.
(...) (...). The life of Socrates was a life of Prayer. And hence it was that
they did generally ascribe their Laws to those Gods from whom they received
their Oracles; The Cretanes, Romans, etc. not more Confidently believing that
they received their Laws from Minos, Numa Pompilius, etc. than that these
received them from Jove, Aegeria and other Gods: and I wonder not that Cicero
should somewhere say, Nunquam vir magnus sine Divino afflatu, That there never
was a great Man who enjoyed not some Divine Impulse; since it did so generally
obtain through the Pagan World to attribute all the surprising Excellencies, or
extraordinary Exploits of their Heroes and eminent Men to the immediate Favor
and Patronage of their Gods. Hist. Romans
Must Vespasian restore life to the expiring State of Rome? Prodigies and
Miracles shall prepare his way; and the extraordinary marks of some Divine
Assistance shall consecrate and destine him to this great Work. Must Alexander
conquer the Eastern World? Miracles shall attend his March as it did that of
Moses, Josephus.
and the Pamphylian Sea retreat before the one, as the Red Sea did before the
other; Nor let any one think, that this was usual only amongst the barbarous
People, Athens it self, Athens the very abode of Wit and Philosophy did
attribute the Perfections of Eleusinian Melesagoras and Cretan Epimenides to
the Instruction of some Divine Being, and those of Socrates to his Guardian
Angel, as well as the Scythians those of their Zamolxis, or they of Proconesus
those of Aristeas to the peculiar favor and assistance of their Gods; nor
ought it to seem strange that the Works of Hesiod, Homer, or other Poets should
be ascribed by the Heathens to Divine Inspiration, since those of Aholiab and
Bezaleel are by Moses himself ascribed to the Spirit of God: for the Poems of
the former could not but seem to the Heathens as Rich a piece of Fancy, as the
Embroideries of the Latter, did to the Jews: and this puts me in Mind of an
excellent Argument Maximus Tyrius makes use of to prove Virtue to be derived
from the Assistance and Bounty of God, If Arts (says he) less Excellent in
their Nature, and less useful in their End, be owing to God, how much more
Virtue the Divine Guide and Comfort of Humane life? If there be no Good that
descends not from above, Max. Tyr. Dissert. 22.
much less surely the Chief and Sovereign good of Man, (...). Thus far I have
proceeded to show you what the Heathens thought of the Necessity of Divine
Assistance, particularly in the Attainment of Virtue; for as to Secular Matters
and Temporal Events their sense of the overruling Power and Influence of
Divine Providence, was so notorious that it is not to be called into question;
the Being, and Providence of God (in this sense of it) seemed so inseparable,
that the Epicurean who denied the latter, could never find belief, when he
professed himself to own the former; Nay, even those very Men who could not be
convinced of a Providence by the Bounty, were convinced of it by the Severity
of God in his Chastisement of Sins, hence that bold and brisk, tho not very
Religious Reflection of Tacitus upon the Miseries the Roman Empire suffered
under Galba, Otho and Vitellius, Nec enim unquam atrocioribus populi Romani
Cladibus, Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
magisve justis Judiciis approbatum est: non esse Curae Diis securitatem
Nostram, esse Ultionem. The justice and the greatness of our Plagues abundantly
evince the Gods concerned, tho not for our Prosperity, yet for our Punishment;
such is Man's disingenious temper, that he is more easily convinced by the
wideness and fatality of a Wound, that it was inflicted by an Almighty Arm,
than he is by the greatness of the Benefits he receives, that they are
distributed by a Divine Munificence; tho the number and infinite value of the
good things we receive be in it self a much clearer proof of a Divine
Providence, than the Evils we suffer, can be; for these we can create our
selves, those none but a God can bestow: there needs then nothing to be said to
convince you what the Heathens thought of Providence with respect to outward
and temporal things; nor is it I think now to be questioned, whether it were
their opinion that the Divine Assistance was necessary to the Attainment of
Virtue and Happiness; nor would I add a word more but that the words of
Hierocles on this Subject carry in 'em not only so full a Conviction, but also
so extraordinary a Relish of a Wise and Religious Humility, that I cannot
prevail with my self to pass 'em by: Hierocles in Pythagori Aurea Carm.
(...) that is, We need no Motive or Incentive to Vice but our Own
Inclinations, But to make us Virtuous we stand in need (...) the aid of God,
joined with that (...) Reason.

And this Opinion of the Necessity of God's Assistance sprung not only from the
Experience of the weakness and corruption of Humane Nature, but also of the
Power and Goodness of the Divine Nature; for I cannot think that the Order,
Beauty, and greatness of the Creation, the fixed and constant Returns of
fruitful Seasons, the filling men's hearts with food and gladness, were the
only Testimonies which God gave the Gentiles of himself and his Care for
Mankind: when I read that Angels are the ministering Spirits of God; when I read
in Daniel of the Princes of Grecia and Persia, and find that Provinces were
committed to Angels as the Viceroys and Lieutenants of God, I cannot think,
that these Devout and Charitable Spirits did with less Zeal in their Provinces
labor to promote the Honor of God, and the Good of Man, than Evil Spirits did
the Dishonor of the one and the Ruin of the other: and unless the frequent
Appearances of Angels in the Beginning had possessed Men's Minds with a firm
persuasion that there was a constant Commerce maintained between Heaven and
Earth; and that Spirits very frequently did visibly engage themselves in the
Protection and Assistance of Men; I cannot as much as Imagine, what foundation
there could be for the numerous Impostures of Oracles, or upon what ground the
Custom of putting themselves under the Patronage of some Tutelary Spirit, could
so generally have prevailed in the Pagan World: without this Supposition the
Poetry of Homer had been so far from being entertained as Sacred and Inspired,
that it had been universally contemned and dislik't as an idle Rapsody of
un-natural, incredible and fulsome Characters of their Gods: how could any Man,
who had never heard of the Appearances of Spirits, nay who could not conceive
any other Notion of such Fancies than as something absurd and impossible, ever
digest the gross Confidence of a Poet bringing in a God upon the Stage at every
turn? I do not therefore doubt, but that the Gentile World received very many
good Offices and Advantages from good Angels, as well as suffered many
Mischiefs from Evil ones: and I think I might with good probability believe
that every good Heathen as well as Socrates had the Assistance of a good Spirit
very frequently.

Nor was the Ministry of Angels the only assistance that God afforded the
Gentil World, but in every Age he raised up Wise and Good Men to be his
Prophets or Interpreters of Nature's Law to the Gentiles: I know St. Austin does
in two places at least of his Retractations censure and condemn that Charity
which he had elsewhere expressed for the Philosophers or Excellent Men among
the Gentiles, which is the more to be wondered at, since he so frequently
acknowledges himself to have been first enflamed with the Holy Love of true
Philosophy by reading a Piece of Tully; but were the matter to be carried by
Votes, I do not question, but I could produce Testimonies in favor of those
Men, of such whose Antiquity, Learning and Piety might more than Balance the
Authority of St. Austin: it is true, their Faith differed much from that of a
Christian, and no Man, I think, in his Wits could expect it otherwise; for how
vast is the Distance between the Light of Nature and that of Revelation? but if
we look upon those Motives and Principles to Virtue by which they were acted,
they were such as a Christian need not blush at, or be ashamed of; they looked
upon it not only as the Perfection of Humane Nature; the Bond and Support of
Society; the Delight, the Guide and Comfort of every particular Man's life; but
also as the Image of God, that which did render us like him, and therefore
acceptable to him; as the only thing that could unite Man to God, that could
raise Man above the bodily Pollutions of sensuality; that could enable him to
outbrave the fears of Fortune and of Death; as that which could fit him for the
Conversation of Heaven; And lastly, they looked upon it as the gift of God.
It Is true, together with all this, you will say, they were Idolaters: I do not
question, but they did often partake in the Pollution of the Idolatrous
multitude; But if we regard the Idolatry of their Religion, and compare it with
that of the Heathen Multitude, there was a vast difference between both; and
that in these three Points: the Object, the Acts of Worship, and the Effects of
it.

As to the Object, the Philosophers, it is true, did Worship Spirits, but good
ones; the Multitude did worship Devils: how contradictory are those Characters
which the sensual, infatuated Multitude bestowed upon their Idols, and those by
which the Philosophers describe the Nature of their Gods or their Genii? Lust
and Cruelty make up the one; Purity, Goodness and Charity the other: This needs
no proof, it is Evident from almost all the Writings of ancient Philosophy that
are extant: yet I think it cannot seem superfluous to produce one Testimony
containing an Account of the Nature of their Genii or Guardian Angels, by which
it will be easy to conclude what Notion they had of those Superior Spirits
whom they supposed to dwell always in Heaven in the presence of the Supreme
God: and whom, tho they called 'em Gods, they thought infinitely inferior to
that one God, their Creator and ours; But yet much Superior as well in the
Excellency of their Nature as Dignity of their place to those Angels which they
looked upon as the Messengers and Ministers of God to Man, and as the Guardians
of Man, and the Interpreters or Conveyers of his Requests to God. These are
thus described by Apuleius, Apuleius de Deo Socratis, p. 68.
Hic quem Dico prorsus Custos, singularis praefectus, Domesticus speculator,
proprius Curator, intimus Cognitor, assiduus Observator, individuus Arbiter;
inseparabilis testis, malorum improbator, bonorum probator, si rite
animadvertatur, sedulo cognoscatur, religiose colatur, ita ut a Socrate
justitia and Innocentiacultus est, in Rebus incertis prospector, dubiis
praemonitor, periculosis tutator, egenis opitulator, qui tibi quaeat tum in
Somniis, tum in Signis, tum etiam fortasse cor^m, c^m usus postulat mala
averruncare, bona prosperare, humilia sublimare, nutantia fulcire, obscura
clarare, secunda regere, adversa corrigere. The substance of all which is, This
our truly Guardian Angel, our immediate Superintendent, the Domestic spy of all
our Actions, the Conscious witness of our Desires and Thoughts, the Approver
and Encourager of our Virtue, and the Hater and Discourager of our Vice, if he
be heedfully minded by us, rightly known, and religiously worshipped with
Righteousness and Innocence, as he was by Socrates, will be our Council in
doubtful, our Guard in hazardous Affairs, etc. But all this while they were
Idolaters? admit it if they were damned for this Idolatry, Good God! what will
become of that great part of the Christian Church, whose Practice at this Day
is infinitely more inexcusable than theirs was? because God has publicly
declared that he has appointed one Mediator, through whom he wills us to
approach him: there was then Room for the Plea of Humility; but now a pretense
of Humility, what can it be in Reality, but wanton fondness or Presumptuous
wilfulness?

Thus widely did the virtuous and understanding part of Mankind differ in the
Object of their Worship from the sensual and stupid Herd; and since the manner
of Worship is naturally derived from the Notions men entertain, of that Being,
which is the Object of it; it could not be otherwise, but that they must differ
as widely in the Essential parts of Worship, as they did in the Objects of it:
Hence it was, that while the People offered to their Gods their Lusts and
Passions, and sacrificed to 'em in Uncleanness or Cruelty, the Philosophers
thought, that nothing could be so welcome a Sacrifice to Their's, as the
Imitation of their Purity and Goodness, holy Affections, and good Works: From
both these differences, there followed a

Third, Consisting in the different Effects which the Religion of the one and
the other did produce; the Idolatry of the one, (as Wickedness always will)
utterly estranged them more and more from the true God; the Idolatry of the
other (for so I Will call it to avoid dispute) seemed to unite them more and more
to him, since they looked upon the Spirits they worshipped, not only as the
Creatures, but most lively Images of the true God; and acknowledged that all
good Gifts proceeded from him, tho they received 'em by the Ministry and
Mediation of Angels, and that Virtue which they looked upon as the only
grateful Worship of God did exalt their Minds, and by rendering 'em more like
him, must needs render 'em more near to him: Thus they talked, whether thus
they lived or no, is not very material to my present purpose; for after all,
tho their lives should not have come up to their Philosophy, these their
Discourses could not choose but be some way serviceable to Mankind, being a
manifest reproof to the stupid Idolatry, to the brutish and barbarous Worship
which then prevailed in the World. These Doctrines could not but manifestly
tend to convince the World of the Being and Nature of the Supreme God, they
could not but tend to restore the Law of Nature to its just Authority, and
present the corrupt and degenerous World with a natural, that is lovely, Idea
of Virtue; and give 'em a just sense of the Obligation they lay under, and of
the Sanctions, by which God established that Law which he writ in the Minds of
Men: who sees not now, that God by raising up such Men, and by assisting 'em
with a Spirit of Wisdom and a Spirit of Courage, which the Constancy of a great
many of 'em in Suffering for these Truths, and the Luster and Beauty of their
Writings in those dark Times do abundantly testify, was an undoubted proof of
God's Goodness to the Gentiles, and of his Concern for their true Interest and
Happiness? why should not this Light, which God lent the then-wandring
benighted part of Mankind, be as kindly interpreted by Man as it was designed
by God? why should not the Philosophers of the Gentiles be looked upon as
Priests and Prophets, well enough suited to the Economy of the Law of Nature?
very excellent use have Christians, even the most Learned and Pious made of
'em; and surely they ought to have proved as much more beneficial to the World
they lived in, as they were then more necessary.

I think I have by this time said enough not only to extinguish in any Man all
superstitious Fears, and unworthy Apprehensions of the Divine Majesty, but also
to enkindle in him a grateful Love of God, and cheerful hopes of true Happiness
by establishing this persuasion upon unshaken foundations, That God is a Good
and gracious God, That he is always ready to further and assist every Man in
his Endeavors after Happiness: But now let not that Doctrine be perverted to
the betraying of us into sloth, which was designed to inspire the Mind with a
fresh vigor, to quicken and confirm us in an Industrious pursuit after our
true Happiness: for we must remember, that God is not only good and gracious,
but also

Holy too; I shall not insist long on this Point, 2 Holiness of God.
because I think it is already proved; Holiness being as necessarily implied in
Perfection, as Love or Goodness: I know some have talked, as if God were a mere
Arbitrary Being, as if his Laws were not the Image or Expression of his Nature,
but merely the positive Precepts of an Arbitrary Will. If any Man can be so
senseless, as to believe that the most perfect Being can love or hate without
any Reason for it; or that all the Laws and Actions of God shall be Consonant to
the Strictest Rules of Justice and Goodness, and all this by Chance, for mere
Arbitrary Motion is blind and unguided; such a one seems to me as incapable as
he is unworthy of Instruction: I can as soon believe Lightning and Thunder,
Wind and Storm a God, as believe him to be a mere Arbitrary Being: The Heathens
believed a God, Proteus that could turn himself into all shapes; but these Men
believe what is infinitely more absurd, a God, not of various and uncertain
shapes only, but also of an unfixt, uncertain, indetermin'd Nature: for the
Will must always be agreeable and consonant to the Nature of that Being whose
Will it is: thus Liberty and Indetermination of Will in Man proceeds from some
contrariety in the Principles which Constitute him; unsteady Judgment produces
unsteady Will, and brutish Nature brutish Will or Inclination. If we consult
the Scriptures, nothing is more Evident than the Sanctity of the Divine Nature,
we are there exhorted to walk in the Light, because God is light; and to be
holy, because he is holy; which Holiness does not regard the Declaration of his
Will, but his Nature; this being given as a Motive to oblige us to walk
according to his Righteous Precepts, because this alone is that which can
please a Righteous God, this alone is that which can make us like and dear to
him. From this Attribute of God, that is Holiness, we may plainly infer,

First, That we are not to expect any Assistance from him; but then, when that
which we Enterprise, is just and lawful, and we our selves are not wanting to
our selves; for it is inconsistent with the Holiness of God to make his
Providence the Refuge of Laziness or Impiety. (...), Plutarch de Superstitione.
(...), God is the Hope of Virtue, not the Excuse of Sloth and Cowardice. It Is
a rational and well-weighed Prayer, which Josephus puts into the Mouth of Moses
standing on the Shore of the Red Sea; inaccessible Rocks and Mountains denied
the Israelites passage one way, the numerous Host of the Egyptians had filled
all other's: only before them was the Red Sea, whose Waves threatened as
certain, and more dreadful a Destruction as the Sword of the Egyptians, there
was no Weapon for Fight, no Provision for a Camp, no place for Flight. In this
Case Moses Prays thus, (...), etc. Lord thou know, that no Contrivance,
Industry, nor force of ours can here avail us, it is in thee alone to find out a
way to the Rescue of this People, who by thy Command and under thy Conduct,
have left Egypt: despairing of all other ways, we fly to thee alone for
succor; Lord let it come speedily, give us a Clear Proof of thy Divine
Omnipotence and Faithfulness; we are in great straights, great to us, but
slight and inconsiderable to thee. The Sea is thine that stops our Progress,
the Mountains that shut us up are thine, thou can divide this Sea, or turn
its Waves into firm Land, and make us find a safe passage through the devouring
Deep: or if thou think fit, thou can make us march in Triumph aloft
through the open Sky: This was a Noble Faith, this was indeed an Expectation,
almost as wonderful as the success it met with: But then, it was no less
rational than successful, their Condition was capable of no Deliverance but a
miraculous one, and it was their Obedience to the Divine Commands had reduced
'em to this Condition: This is a safe Rule to guide our Faith and Relyance by,
in all our Distresses and Difficulties, we must have recourse unto God, for
these are the times wherein Humane infirmity requires the Support and Comfort
of Divine Assistance; The utmost Strength and Perfection of Virtue is too weak
to bear the shock and brunt of Calamity alone, Max. Tyr. Disser. 26.
(...), it must be reinforced by Power from above. But then these Difficulties
must be such to which our Vice has not betrayed us; and our own Courage and
Industry must be as vigorous as our Prayers; for in vain do we beg new supplies
of Strength, if we use not what we enjoyed before. Divine Bounty does never
supersede Man's Industry, fruitful Showers, and enlivening Rays do not
prevent, but second the Labors of the Husbandman: God observes the same Method
in the Production of a nobler sort of fruit, Wisdom and Virtue: the Soul, as
well as the Field of the Sluggard shall be o'rerun with Weeds; there only shall
the Divine fruit of Philosophy and Happiness grow where Religious Discipline
Tills the Ground, and wakeful Study sows the seeds of thriving Truths among the
furrows. Accordingly, if we consider the lives and practice of Excellent Men,
none were ever so much Favorites of Heaven, that its Gifts grew up in 'em,
like Corn and Wine in the Golden Age without Culture or Dressing: Inspiration
it self did not exempt Man from the Necessity of Industry, but oblige him to a
greater: Thus under the Old Testament a Prophetic life was a life of greater
strictness and retirement than that of others; and in the New, not to mention
the Watchings, the Fastings, the Retirements, the Prayers of our Lord and
Master, that account of himself which St. Paul gives us, will inform us, not
only what his life was, but what it was expected the life of every one should
be that shared with him in the Ministry and Dignity of an Apostle. But in all
things approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much Patience, in
Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses: -- in Labors, 2 Cor. 6.
in Watchings. By Pureness, by Knowledge. Amongst the Heathens whatever
Perfection and Excellency they attributed to Humane Nature, whatever they
attributed to an (...), a Contexture and frame of Nature more than Common,
whatever lastly they attributed to the favor, the Extraordinary favor of God;
yet did they always judge a strict life and indefatigable Industry necessary to
the acquiring of true Philosophy and Happiness: their Pythagoras so dear to
their Gods, that it seemed to be a doubt among'st 'em, whether he were not
himself a God incarnate, not content to have been the Scholar first of
Pherecydes Syrus, and afterward of Hermodamas, travailed first into Egypt, and
afterward to Babylon, and I know not whither, pursuing Wisdom and Happiness
with great Industry, and as great Abstinence. Socrates, however inspired by his
Genius, did yet learn Music of Connus, Poetry of Evenus, Agriculture of
Ischomachus, Geometry of Theodorus, etc. And to all this he added the Religious
Discipline of Mortification even to a voluntary Poverty: what should I multiply
Instances? there is not a Man amongst the Gentiles remarkable for Wisdom or
Virtue, that is not as remarkable for that Travail and Self-denial by which he
purchased both; I add Self-denial, Industry alone being not judged sufficient;
for,

Secondly, It Is easy in the next place to infer from the Sanctity of God, that
they who expect his Assistance should endeavor to be Good and Holy: it is
Virtue that constitutes a Man a Subject of the Heavenly Kingdom and a Favorite
of God, and therefore it is this that gives him the best Claim to his Protection
and Patronage: Vice is a state of Rebellion and Defiance against God, and he
that has put off his Allegiance, cannot expect rationally the Benefits of that
Government which he refuses to be under. It Is true, the Infinite Goodness and
Clemency of God which is not easily vanquished by Man's Ingratitude, may pursue
such a Man with repeated overtures and tenders of Grace and Pardon, and may
leave him in the possession of common Benefits, such as Health, Plenty,
Friends, etc. but God will never confer upon him the most Excellent Gifts, the
marks of his especial Presence, and particular Favor, he will withdraw from
him the aids of his Spirit, and leave him to himself a blind indigent, and
forlorn Creature: Wisd. 1.
The Holy Spirit of Discipline will fly Deceit, and will not abide, when
unrighteousness comes in. Which is nothing more than what the Heathen by the
Light of Nature did affirm concerning his Genius, Max. Tyr. Dissert. ^6.
(...), Wicked Souls have no good Angels sojourning with 'em or presiding over
them. Our Souls, like Temples must be prepared and consecrated to him, if we
would have God dwell in them: Righteousness and Holiness are the only things
that Charm and Captivate God, nothing else can invite him to dwell with Man,
this very Reason Maximus Tyrius assigns for the Residence and abode of a Demon
with Socrates after so extraordinary a manner. Idem ibid.
(...). Do thou wonder that a Prophetic Spirit should dwell with Socrates so
intimately united, so friendly, so inseparable, that he seemed only not mixed,
and become one with his own mind? with Socrates whose Purity of Body, Charity
and Goodness of Soul, strictness of Conversation, depth of Judgment, Melody,
and perswasiveness of Speech, Religion toward God, and Integrity toward Man,
rendered him worthy of such a Guest, such a Friend? From all which it is Evident,

Thirdly, What different Rates we are to set upon the different Gifts of God:
James ^.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift comes down from above; but every Gift
is not equally Good, equally Perfect, being neither equally necessary, nor
profitable. Wealth, Power, Friends, Relations, Health, Strength, Beauty, Wit,
Discretion, Virtue, are all good; but not all equal, their value is different,
and therefore the Degrees of our Importunity and of our Faith or Reliance upon
God, must be proportioned accordingly: a confident Faith, and an almost
impatient Zeal does well become us when we seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the
Righteousness thereof; when we seek of God the Divine gifts of Wisdom and
Virtue; but an humble Modesty, and a most profound Submission is the Ornament
and Beauty of those who are Petitioners for inferior temporal Blessings: for
God has promised the former to all that earnestly sue for them, peremptorily
and without any Tacit Reservations; but his promises of the latter do always
imply this Condition, If they shall be for our Good; for the Perfections of the
Mind are Moral and Immutable Beauties; but those of the Body, and all the gaudy
things of Fortune are like the fading Beauties of a Flower, the heat scorches
it, the cold nips it, every little chance cracks the stalk, and the hand of a
Child, will serve to crop it: Nothing therefore is more acceptable to God than
the modesty of our Petitions for these good things, and the fervency of them
for the other, nothing more delightful to him, unless the granting of them: the
things therefore that we are to beg of God, not only with the greatest
Importunity; but also in the first place, are those which Maximus Tyrius
thought the subject of Socrates his Prayers, Max. Tyr. Dissert. 30.
(...), what were these? a virtuous Mind, a quiet State, an unblameable Life,
and a cheerful Death full of good Hopes. These were the matter of his requests,
not Wealth, or Honor, or Popularity, or Power, or Sovereignty. This at once
brings to my thought another Objection raised against the possibility of
attaining Happiness, and instructs me how to answer it.

A Second thing which Men charge Indolence, and because I have already cleared
two great Truths, which are of themselves abundantly sufficient to baffle and
defeat this trifling Objection, Namely First, That Virtue and Vice, Wisdom and
Folly, are the things to which generally speaking, we owe our Temporal
Prosperity or Adversity: and consequently that those, supposing the Ordinary
assistance of God being in our Power, these must be so too. Secondly, That we
are assured of the Assistance of God even in these things, as far as he shall
see them truly subservient to our Good. However, because the persuasion of the
Usefulness, nay absolute Necessity of the favor of Fortune has taken such deep
root in the Minds of Men, that it would be thought little less than a
Contradiction to imagine that a Man can be Unfortunate and Happy, (so that even
Seneca himself has let fall one of the greatest Paradoxes, a Stoic was ever
guilty of) such an Expression as this better becoming the mouth of a Peasant
than a Philosopher. Seneca de Vit. Beata.
Sed ei qui ad Virtutem tendit, etiamsi multum processit, opus est tamen aliqua
Fortunae Indulg^ntia, adhuc inter humana Luctanti, dum Nodum illum exolvit, and
omne vinculum Mortale: That not only Beginners but Proficients in Virtue, till
they have put off Mortality, will stand in need of some Indulgence of Fortune;
and few Men find any belief with the World, when they talk of the contempt of
Wealth, it being generally interpreted either the Laziness of an unactive and
degenerous Mind, or the Dissimulation of one who affects to be thought to defy
Fortune, while he does secretly and inwardly repine and fret at the Neglect and
Coldness she expresses toward him; I will therefore bestow a little time on
the Consideration of this Objection.

Fortune cannot prevent our Happiness.
What do thou mean by Fortune? If mere Chance, then to envy the Lot of others,
or murmur at thine own, is Folly: if Providence, then it is Impiety; for
whatever goodness guided by unerring Wisdom does, must be so well done, that it
cannot be mended: and whatever is merely in the Power of a blind, giddy, and
inconstant humor, (which is the Notion, by which Men choose to express
Fortune) can neither be prevented, fixed nor regulated: But what is it
Secondly, thou do put in the power of Fortune? the Understanding and Liberty
of men's Minds? Wisdom, Temperance, Industry, Courage, and in one word Virtue?
if not, she has no Influence on thy Happiness, she cannot prevent thy
attainment of it, nor bereave thee of it when attained: If thou do, thou do
enlarge the Empire of Fortune too too far, let her rule and insult over
Soldiers, Courtiers, Lovers, Factious Demagogues and Time-servers, but not over
Philosophers: Let those who are her Minions be her Slaves: Let her dispose of
Money, Lands, Farms, Commissions, Benefices, Honors, Graces, Fame; nay, if you
will, Crowns and Scepters too: Virtue, and Happiness, and Souls are too
precious Commodities to be the Sport and Traffic of Fortune: Solom^^ observed
long ago, Wisdom cries out, (...) utters her voice in the streets; Prove. 1.
(...) cries in the chief place of Concourse, (...) the openings of the Gates;
in the City she utters her words. John 7.
Our Savior (...) the great Day of the Feast cried saying If any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink: which is an Invitation of the same Nature with
that in the Prophet, Isaiah 55.
Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money:
come ye buy and eat, buy wine and milk without money, and with out price. This
ever was, and ever will be true; a great Fortune is not necessary for the
Attainment of Faith Hope, or Charity. And he that is endowed with these, cannot
be miserable: you may learn the whole Systeme of Divine and Important Truths,
you may acquaint your self with all the Beauty and Enjoyments of Virtue, at a
very cheap rate, and you may learn Temperance, Fortitude, Justice, Modesty,
Constancy, Patience, Contempt of the World, without the Assistance of much more
Wealth than will serve ^o Feed and Cloth you: and can ^hou not be content
with these Possessions? is not this a sort of Merchandise to be preferred before
that of fine Gold? I kow the greater part of those who accuse their Fortune of
their Misery do at least pretend that their Condition and Circumstances of life
are so incommodious, that they have not time to attend to the great Interest of
the Soul, or at least not with that Application which they should. Alas, thus
not the mean only, but almost all talk, from the Porter to the Prince, the
Circumstances of one are too strait, too narrow; of another too full of
Trouble, because too full of State: one complains that he is withdrawn from his
great End, by the many allurements and sensual temptations, to which his rank
and quality in the World exposes him: another that he is daily fretted and
indisposed by the little cross Accidents and the rugged Conversation which he
is necessarily obliged to bear with: one complains of too much Business,
another of too little; the hurry and multitude of things distracts the one,
Infidel Fears, and Anxious Despondencies the other. One complains that his
Acquaintances and Friends are too numerous; and entrench too far upon his
precious hours; another's querulous melancholy, and peevish, because he looks
upon himself either for his meanness neglected, or for his misfortune deserted
and forsaken: Company is burdensome to the one, and Solitude to the other. Thus
all Conditions, are full of Complaints from him that trudges on his clouted
Shoo, to him who can scarce mention the Manners or the Fortunes of the
Multitude without some Expressions of contumely and disdain. Thou Fool, do
thou not see that all these Complaints are Idle and Contradictions? for shame
correct the wantonness of thy humor, and thou will soon correct thy Fortune;
learn to be Happy in every state and every place: learn to enjoy thy self, to
know and value the Wealth that is in thine own Power, I mean Wisdom and
Goodness: learn to assert the Sovereignty and Dignity of thy Soul; methinks
that if Philosophy could not, Pride and Indignation might conquer Fortune: it is
beneath the Dignity of a Soul that has but a grain of sense, to make Chance,
and Winds, and Waves, the Arbitrary disposers of his Happiness; or what is
worse, to depend upon some Mushroom upstart which a chance-smile raised out of
his Turff and Rottenness, to a Condition to which his mean Soul is so unequal,
that he himself fears and wonders at his own height. O how I hugg the memory of
those honest Heathens, who in a rugged Gown, and homely Cottage, bid defiance
to Fortune, and laugh't at those pains and hazards, the Vanity and Pride of
Men, not their Misfortune drove 'em to! Men may call this Pride, or spite in
them; as the beggarly Rabble does usually envy the Fortune which it does
despair of; But there were a great many of these, who laid by, envied
Greatness, to enjoy this quiet, tho generally-despicable meanness: But let the
Contempt of the World be, what it will, in a Heathen; let it be Pride or
Peevishness, Vainglory or any thing, rather than a Reproach to Christians,
what say you to the followers of our Lord and Master? Then said Peter, Silver
and Gold have I none; Acts 3.
None? what have thou then, thou poor Disciple of a poor Master? a true Faith,
a God-like Charity, and unshaken Hope: Blessed art thou amongst men, nothing
can make thee Greater, nothing Richer, nothing Happier, but Heaven. You see
plainly then, a Man may be virtuous, tho not wealthy, and that Fortune which
prevents his being Rich, cannot prevent his being Happy. This Discourse will
never down; This is not calculated for this Age; Philosophy must be a little
more mannerly, and Religion a little more gentile and complaisant than
formerly, 'ere it can be adapted and accommodated to the present state of
things. Go on then, let us try how far it will be Necessary to condescend; You
cannot be Happy, why? because you are not Rich; go then to God, and beg you may
be Rich; I have not the face to put up such Arrogant and Intemperate Requests
to God; it is plain then, it is not necessary to be Rich in Order to be Happy:
for whatever is necessary to this, thou may with good Assurance beg of God.
But thy Desires are more humble and modest, thou aim'st at nothing but what is
very Necessary, a fairer House, another Servant, a dish or two of Meat more for
thy Friends, a Coach for thy Convenience and Ease, and a few Hundred Pounds a
piece more for thy Children: O Heavenly Ingredients of a Rational Pleasure! O
Divine Instruments of humane Happiness! O the humble and mortified requests of
modest Souls! well, if these things be so necessary, and these desires be so
decent and virtuous, if thou can not be Happy, and consequently must be
miserable without them; put up a Bill, represent thy Condition in it, Such a
one -- wants a more Commodious House, more Servants, more Dishes, etc. and
desires the Prayers of the Congregation for Support under this Affliction: you
are Profane; far be it from me; I would only let thee see the wantonness of
thy Desires: if thou think this would expose thee to public Laughter, go to
thy Minister, unfold thy Case to him, let him Pray for thee, he is a good Man,
and his Prayers will go far: you rally and ridicule me; Enter then into thy
Closet, shut thy Door, thou may trust God, he Pities and Considers even
Humane Infirmities, I could even almost in my Mind desire it of him, but I am
ashamed to do it in a Set and Solemn Prayer, I could almost make the Petition
in the Gross, but I blush to think of Descending to Particulars. Well, then I
see plainly that Wealth in any Degree of it is so far from being necessary to
our Happiness, that it has so little of Usefulness, or Convenience in it, that
in thy Conscience between God and thee, thou can not think it fit to
complain of the want of it.

Every Man the Architect of his own Fortune.
But this Answer will never satisfy him who complains of Want, or of being
engaged in continual Troubles, and toss't by the daily Changes and Revolutions
of the World: I confess it, it will not; But I must tell such a one, if
Solomon's Observation be true, Prove. 10.
The hand of the diligent makes Rich, and that other, Prove. 22.
See thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings, he
shall not stand before mean men: then his Poverty is his Crime as well as his
Calamity, he must redeem himself from this his Punishment by Industry and
Prayer: As to Calamities, this must be acknowledged, that the Mind of a good
and great Man which stands firm upon its own Basis, a good God, a Good Savior,
and a Good Conscience, may remain unmoved, when the Earth trembles and the Sea
roars round about him; Changes indeed befall things Temporal, but he leans not
upon them; I may say farther, that he who upon mature Deliberation, and upon
necessary Obligations of Duty engages himself in a just Cause, may be
unfortunate, but he cannot be miserable; his Sufferings carry a secret Pleasure
in 'em, and his Misfortunes are full of Hope and Glory, if he consider, if he
reflect, if he do not feed on vain and airy Projects, and suffer himself to be
unwarily transported by very irrational, tho seemingly just Passions: I must
lastly add, that it is not the Necessity of their Affairs, nor the Iniquity of
Times, which does commonly involve and entangle Men in public or private
Calamities, but some secret Vanity, some blind impetuous Passion, some ill-laid
Project, or some treacherous or dishonorable fear. The State of Rome never felt
more or greater Changes than in the life of Atticus, as is obvious to any one,
who shall reflect upon the History of his time, and yet in all the turns and
mighty Changes of Fortune, Atticus enjoyed a constant Tranquillity and
well-settled Peace, being scarce ever reduced as much as to the Necessity of a
Retirement but once, as I remember: nor was it the meanness of his Quality, or
the narrowness of his Fortune that secured him, he was a Man great in both; nor
was it the secrecy of a private life, or the sluggishness of a stupid Mind,
which rendered him unworthy of any Man's fear, and unable to provoke a Danger;
No, he was a Man, as well for the Eminence of his Parts, and Vigor of his
Mind, as for the Largeness of his Fortune, well known to the greatest and most
Active men of all Pa^ties; and yet steering his life by the Rules of Virtue and
true Wisdom, he lived untouched by, unconcerned in, the strange Alterations of
so long a life as his, which were such and so many, that the Historian has
observed, that they who were one day in the height of Power and Honor, were
the next in the Gulf of Danger and Despair; so that his Remark is generally
very true, Corn. Nep. in Vita Attici.
Sui cuique mores fingunt Fortunam. Every man may fashion and shape his fortune
as he will his manners. Nor was the success of his Behavior less in private
than public. For Cornelius Nepos has observed in his Life, That those
Friendships he entered into, he was very Happy and Constant in; nay, such was
the Gentleness, such the Discretion of his Behavior, that it preserved him in
the favor of an Uncle (I think) of his, who was so sour and peevish that none
could please him, such a Nabal a man could not speak to him, nay he not only
kept in with him, but possessed him so entirely, that he was left his Heir. Nor
was all this in Atticus, the Effect of Temper or Nature, but of Virtue: Ibid.
Neque id fecit natura Solum, quanquam omnes ei paremus, sed etiam Doctrina:
nam and Principum Philosophorum ita percepta habuit praecepta, ut iis ad vitam
agendam, non ad Ostentationem utebatur; For he had studied Philosophy not for
Ostentation, but the Conduct of his life. I might now presume. I had given
satisfaction to this Objection, especially, since I oblige my self to take the
Case of Temporal and outward Calamities into full Consideration hereafter. But
the infection is got into the mass of Blood, and has diffused it self through
Mankind, and it is not a slight and weak Medicine that can Purge it out;
therefore I have observed that the Heathen were never more copious or more
vehement than in the Refutation of this Error, our Baptism does scarce
proclaim a more solemn War against the Pomps and Vanities of the World, than
Philosophy did in all Ages: No doubt therefore the Expugning this Fancy which
makes Man's Happiness depend upon his Fortune in the World, must needs be a
matter of great Importance, since both Revelation and Reason have so earnestly
and solemnly endeavored it; I shall not therefore I hope seem impertinent or
tedious, if looking upon this Objection as considerable, in Opinion tho not in
it self, I treat it with more Respect and Solemnity than it really deserves.

My Design here is to examine what real Good or Convenience there is in Wealth,
how Valuable, Fortune not necessary to Happiness.
or how Necessary it is, and that not in a Declamatory or Sophistical, but such
a sober and rational manner as may be Satisfactory and Convictive to every
unprejudiced Mind. First therefore, I Secondly, I will state what Thirdly, I
will consider what the natural tendency of Wealth is. From all which, it will
easily appear, what Connection and Dependence there is between our Fortune and
our Happiness.

If we enquire whence it is, Men are so intent upon the World; one Reason is, a
secret Infidelity, Men are desirous to lay such a Foundation as Time cannot
wear, nor Winds and Tempests overthrow: they cannot trust Providence, till they
see, or at least fancy themselves in a Condition to defy it: and this they
look upon as a great piece of Prudence, to provide for themselves a safe
Retreat at once from the Storms and Changes that generally pursue Mankind; and
the Contempt which unjustly pursues those: I cannot tell which is the greater,
the Folly or the Impiety of this Humor; for it is a wretched Folly to flatter
our selves with the vain hopes of a Security which is not to be found any where
beneath Heaven; or to imagine that a great State is less liable to the blasts
of Fortune, than a small one; or to fancy that the Contempt which attends those
who never rise, is more insupportable than that which attends those who fall:
Nor is the Impiety one jot less than the Folly; for what can be more wicked
than amidst so many visible and undeniable proofs and assurances of a God, and
Providence, to let the same anxious and jealous Fears fill and disturb our
Minds, which would scarce be pardonable, if there were neither? what greater
Affront can we offer to the Goodness, the Wisdom, the Omnipotence and
Faithfulness of God, than to refuse to repose the Care, the Trust of providing
for us upon him, when he not only offers, but presses himself upon the
Employment? a second Cause why we so eagerly pursue Wealth, is Sensuality;
Being Strangers to the Peace and Joy of Faith, insensible of the Divine Delight
of Charity, incapable of the Ecstasies, of the full Assurance of Hope, and in
general of the Rational Pleasure of a Philosophical Mind; what can be expected
but that both Wind and Tide should drive us violently on another shore? I mean
the whole Force and Inclination of our Nature should impetuously tend toward
sensual, worldly Pleasures and Enjoyments; and consequently toward Wealth, as
the Necessary Instrument of Both: you grant therefore that Wealth is Necessary
to a pleasurable life? To a pleasurable one it is, to a pleasant one it is not.
The sensual Pleasure of a sensual Man, i. e. one who is all Body and Fancy
requires a good Fund of Wealth, but the Temporal Enjoyments of a virtuous Man
do not: I grant, that ease and rest are Necessary to the Sluggish, state and
height to the Proud, variety to the Intemperate and the Wanton, and to all this
Wealth is Necessary; but I deny that Sloth or Pride, Intemperance (I will add
Niceness) or Wantonness is Necessary to our Happiness; nay, I will confidently
affirm, that a vigorous Mind and active Body is a much greater Pleasure than
sluggish Ease; that an humble, if contented state is much more easy than Proud
Grandeur and the (...), or the Ostentation of life in St. John, that sober and
thrifty Temperance is a far greater Pleasure than Variety, and the Modesty,
Constancy, and Friendship of a Virtuous affection is not only a more calm,
generous and steady, but a more transporting satisfaction than the fancyful
Rambles of a wandering Lust: And I hope none will be so fond as to judge Wealth
Necessary to the obtaining these Virtues; if any are, their Silliness and
Vanity is to be exploded and laughed at, not seriously confuted: For who in his
Wits can believe, that Ease is the best Nurse of Industry; that affected State
and Ambitious Grandeur, are the Parents of Humility and Contentment; That
Affluence and daily Delicacies are the most Effectual Instruments of
Abstinence; and that Variety is the Mother of Chastity? If not, then it is
apparent how far serviceable Wealth is, for all that lies in its Power is to
provide for us these Temptations: But tho a Wise and Virtuous Man wants no
Wealth, I deny not but that he needs a Competency; what this is, is the next
thing to be inquired: for this pretext of Having what is enough, is frequently
made use of to justify and legitimate Avarice and Ambition.

The measure of Competency is the Necessities of Nature, 2. Competency.
not the Extravagancies of Fancy: A little Heap, where frugal Temperance and
humble Industry are the Stewards, is a plentiful Provision; But wherever
wastful Luxury and wanton Fancy rule and govern, Plenty it self is a mere
Dearth: what Treasures would not the Expensive Riots of Apicius, Orata, Clodius
exhaust? how small a Particle of which would have been ample Revenues to
Curious, Aemilius Pappus, or Fabricius? Competency then is that Provision which
the Virtuous Man needs as his Viaticum, as the Support of Life, and Instrument
of Virtue, the modest wish of Jacob, Genesis 28. Bread to eat, and Raiment to put
on: The Use and Advantage of this, is not to keep us or our Children from being
exposed to the Contempt (that is too slight an Evil for a Christian or
Philosopher to dread) but to the barbarous Pity or Charity of Rich and great
Friends. A second Use or Advantage of it is, that it helps to keep the Mind
erect and free; that it puts us into a Capacity of Employing our Reason, and
enjoying our selves our own way; and leaves us not under any Temptation to
unmanly Compliances, or Unchristian Jealousies and Fears: for he whose Ambition
goes not beyond this, will easily trust Providence, if he believe there be any;
or his own Industry, if he believe none: how he that divides and separates
Providence and Industry will thrive in this matter, I know not; but he that
joins his own Industry with God's Blessing obtained by Prayer, can never miss
of this his aim. Having proceeded thus far, I shall be more easily able to
resolve,

Thirdly, What the Value, The Tendency of Wealth. Sermon. 89. ex Tele^e.
what the Necessity of Riches is. It Is a pretty Speech which Pluto in Stobaeus
makes in the Defense and Commendation of Wealth; but in the first place, I do
not call every thing Wealth, that is not mere Beggary; I have allowed of a
Competency as very Convenient even for a Virtuous and Wise man; in the next
place, I trouble not my self about the Grandeur or Security of Kingdoms, tho
Peradventure the Scythian Poverty, or Roman Virtue is a stronger Bulwark, a
better Guard of these than the Riches of Asia: And in the last place, I do not
enquire, what use Wisdom and Virtue are able to make of Wealth, which can
extract Pleasure and Happiness even out of Troubles and Afflictions, but what
the Natural tendency of Wealth is; these things being observed, that and all
other Discourses of the like Nature will appear to contain very little of solid
Truth, and to have very little of weight in them: let us come to a trial of the
Matter. If Contentment and Security were the natural Effects of Wealth, if to
be Rich and to be Happy were the same thing, then it were not to be wondered at,
that Wealth should be the great Idol and Ambition of Mankind; but if it neither
free Men from those Passions of the Mind, nor those Diseases of the Body, nor
other Calamities which imbitter life to the Inferior part of Mankind; what
then is the Advantage of it? Let us then stand still and consider this, do not
Hatred and Anger, Envy and Anxiety, Ambition and Lust reign more frequently and
more insolently in the Bosom of the great and wealthy, than of the laboring
Cottager? Nay, I believe upon a narrow search we shall find that some Passions
are the Prerogative of a proud and insolent Fortune, and are not incident to a
mean one, such as haughty Anger, irreconcilable Hatred, an unlimited Ambition
and an uneasy Wantonness: the Plowman and the Artist, the Labourer and the
Hind know none of these; Ambition does not break their Sleep, nor a fastidious
Niceness make 'em disgust and nauseate their best Meals, Nor are they troubled
with wild and ungovernable Lusts, bred by Excess, and nursed by gaudy Bravery,
deluding Arts and more deluding Fancy: Nor are the Rich more Exempt from the
Diseases of the Body, than from the Passions of the Mind; excessive Meals,
disorderly Sleeps, much Sloth and much Wantonness, as they are the privileges
of a gay Fortune, so are they the sources of Innumerable Diseases: Scurvies,
Gouts, Rheumatisms, Surfeits, Putrid Fevers, and I know not what are the
Consequences of Proud Idleness, and Excessive Enjoyments, i. e. of ill governed
Wealth: whereas a plain Table and a sober Life, Regular and Cheap Pleasures and
moderate Labor beget and improve an entire Habit of Health, and prolong life
to the utmost Period of Nature: This is a second great Advantage of Wealth,
that it gives us a diseased Body, and a short Life: Sure then, the Rich are the
Minions of Fortune, and the Disasters which oppress the rest of Mankind touch
not them: On the quite contrary, all Annals are stuffed with the Calamities and
Misfortunes of these Men, rifled Wealth, defeated Hopes, baffled Ambition,
blasted Honors, broken dejected Power, and in a word mighty Changes are the
Argument of Tragedies, and the Subject of a loud and raving Passion: whereas
the Strokes of Fortune are soft and gentle, when they light upon the mean,
these are not capable of Tragical Alterations; their Minds are of a stronger
Temper, their Bodies firmer, their Senses not nice and delicate, and their
little Sufferings draw not after 'em the mournful Pomp and State which attends
the fall, I may call it, the Funeral of a great one: Here Envy insults not,
Malice traduces not, the petulant Multitude do not follow the Corpse with
confused Clamours and Censures: Nor do Acquaintance flock to express outwardly
a Cold and formal Regard, while they feel inwardly a secret Joy, for that Man's
fall is always unpittied whose Power was a barren and useless Title: But to
come closer yet, what is it that makes up the Comfort of Humane Life? a quiet
State, faithful Friends, good Wives and good Children? if we consider it, we
shall find the Life of Man a little beholden to Wealth in these Points: in all
Changes of time, are not the Rich the greatest Sufferers? the mark of Envy, the
prey of Violence and Usurpation? have they not more Enemies as well as more
Friends than other Men? Friends did I say? they have None. They have
Dependents, Flatterers, Companions and Ministers of their Pleasures, no
Friends. Hence is it, that nothing is more Common, than for those above us to
wish for the Content, the Ease, and Enjoyment of those below 'em: for the truth
of it is, (if we proceed) Relations which are the pleasure of Men of Middle
Fortune, are the Burden and Encumbrance of the Rich and Great, for in all their
Contracts and Disposals, they are Servants to their Fortune, not their
Inclination, Marriages amongst these are the Matches of Estates, not Minds; and
therefore they attend not to the Temper or the Honor of the Families they link
with, nay, what is worse, they have no regard to their Education, or Virtue, or
Wisdom: But Money weighs all down, whatever Objections are put in the opposite
Scale; in the whole Method of their Lives, they are Slaves to their Fortune,
and to their Reputation in the World, judging themselves obliged to live, not
according to their Reason, but their quality and the Humor, that is, the Folly
of the Age, and of the Acquaintance they converse with: Nor dare they walk by
any other Maxims, in the Government of the nearest to them, or in the Education
of their Children, in all these things they must do what becomes Men of their
figure in the World, not what becomes true Wisdom. Who sees not now that upon
the whole, there is in this State or Condition of life more encumbrance and
less true freedom; more of show, and less of Enjoyment than in any other? If
all this be true, you will be apt to conclude Mankind is Mad, if Wealth neither
makes us more Wise, nor more healthy, more free in our selves, nor more
fortunate in our Relations, what bewitches Men into this Extravagant Dotage?
what makes the World gaze upon and envy the Rich, as the only Happy Creatures?
what makes us fawn upon 'em and flatter 'em, as the only Powerful and great
things the World has? Something there is in it, and that is this, we see the
outside, the Pomp and the Pageantry of Wealth: we see the gilt Coaches, the
rich Liveries, the little Town of Buildings, gay Furniture, and a whole
Squadron of Dishes; and together with all this, the gaudy Trappings the Happy
Man's bedight with; the Port, the Grace, the Confidence that all this gives to
Ignorance and Nonsense: But if you will consider this truly, you will find all
this mere Pageantry and Apparition, nothing solid nor real in it. As for gay
Clothing; it is an Advantage not worth the speaking to, it is the Pride of
Children, and the weakest of Women, the little Soul that converses no higher
than the Looking-glass and a Fantastic Dress may help to make up the show of
the World, but must not be reckoned among the rational Inhabitants of it;
serving only as Painture, Images, and Ornaments to the Stage, not Actors on it:
as to all the Rest, they seem to enjoy some Pre-eminence, but does not; the
mean Man eats his Morsel with more Pleasure, because more appetite; and sleeps
with more delight, because with more ease, neither oppressed in Body by Luxury,
nor in Mind by Care: Eccles. 5.12.
The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much; but the
Abundance of the Rich will not suffer him to sleep: All the rest, as numerous
Attendents, many Dependents, Flocks of Parasites, and the like, are but mere
encumbrance, the unwieldiness of a gross and heavy Body: all these serve to
increase the Noise and Hurry, the Care and the Pomp, but not the Pleasure or
Enjoyment of the Wealthy. Hence was that Observation of Solomon, If Riches
increase, they are increased that eat them, Ibid.
and what profit has the owner thereof, saving the beholding of it with his
Eyes? a most Extraordinary Happiness, this, to be the Host of the
Neighborhood, to have one's House the Rendezvous of the Idle and the
Gluttonous, of Buffoons and Flatterers, and yet if the Rich live otherwise,
presently they grow infamous and stink, they are looked upon as Indian Graves,
where Wealth is not laid up, but lost and buried: they are loaded with the
Curses of some, with the Hatred of others, and with the Censures of all; and
this is almost as bad as to be pestered with Impertinences and Flattery; This
is the whole of the matter, if People gaze and admire, it is their Ignorance: if
they fawn or flatter, it is their Baseness; but still remember, it is the People,
it is the Crowd that does this: should a Man of Letters or of Spirit, be
overawed by the Laws of Custom or some unhappy Necessity into the Commission
of this Idolatry, he could not but despise the Idol he bowed down to, and see
it a mere lump of Wood or Stone, notwithstanding its gaudy Dresses; tho I
acknowledge, I comprehend not, what can reduce a Philosopher to this piece of
shameful Dissimulation; the Soul that is great in it self is so in despite of
Fortune: he that can live virtuously, can live Happily in the lowest Sat: he
that desires but little, has no need of much: he that can despise Riches, can
despise the Insolence and Pride of the Rich: in one word, he that can Command
himself, needs be a slave to none. After all, I think it were possible to
evince the mischievousness of Wealth as plainly, as I have its uselessness; but
that were to press the point further than my present Design requires, for my
Business was to show, either that Fortune, was not necessary to our Happiness,
or as far as it is, that it is in our own Power: both which I may now presume my
self to have sufficiently performed. I will therefore pass on to the

From Fate answered.
and at once to excuse and enjoy their Lusts, this is none of the least that
they impute all to Fate, not only the Events that befall 'em, but, even their
Crimes and Follies, as Juvenal did the Dissoluteness of Peribomius; that is,
they believe or would be thought to do so, that all our Affections and Actions,
and all Events that befall us are fatal and inevitable; That no Prudence can
prevent, no Industry frustrate the Decrees of Fate, against which we struggle
but in Vain. This is the popular and general Notion of Fate taught first by
Democritus, Empedocles, Heraclitus and Leucippus, and so derived down from Age
to Age, and prevailing mostly amongst the Multitude. Thus Bacchylides in
Stobaeus his Eclogee expresses the popular Notion of Fate, Stob. Ec. Phys. c. 9.
(...). It Is not in Man to choose his state, whether wealthy Peace, or
Inexorable War, or all-confounding Sedition; but Fate the Sovereign Arbiter of
Each, leads us on blind and hood-wink't to our Ruin. And Euripides expresses
the other part of the opinion containing the Adamantine Chain, the insuperable
Necessity of Fate thus, (...). It Is not permitted us to shun our Destiny, nor
can any Humane Prudence ward its blows, nor can any thing but endless and
fruitless troubles attend our Contention with it. It Is a sign of a Desperate
Cause or Desperate Impudence to dispute against our Common sense, and to defy
the daily Experience of Mankind; and yet all this, the Abettors of an Universal
Fate (such as this is) are guilty of; for they deny that Liberty in Man which
all Laws Divine and Humane, all Exhortations and Advices, all Commendation and
Reproof, i. e. plainly God and Man, do suppose; for if the Mind of Man were
o're-rul'd, if his present and future State were fixed and determined by a Fatal
and Inexorable Necessity; then as Laws, Advice and Exhortation would be useless
and impertinent, so all Reproof and Punishment would be unjust, and all Praise
and Reward undeserved: and yet tho the Assertion of Fate be oppressed and
o're-born by all these Absurdities, yet it wants not at this Day its
maintainers and sticklers; For there are who maintain a Necessity in humane
Affairs, and Events derived from the Influence of Heavenly Bodies, which Notion
of Fate take in the words of Manilius: Fata Regunt Orbem, Manilius
Astronomicon. 4.
certa stant omnia Lege,
Longaque per Certos signantur tempora Cursus,
Nascentes morimur, Finisque ab Origin pendet.
Fates Rule the World, fixed Laws do all things guide,
And long Times through their certain Channels slide.
Death of the Birth of the Beginning the End,
And all the Events of Humane life depend.
And there are others, who tho they condemn Judicial Astrology in set Treatises
writ against it, do yet maintain such Eternal Decrees as Employ a more
inflexible Fate than any Pagan but Democritus, and those just now mentioned
with him, did ever hold; Nay, a Fate more impious than that of Democritus, for
what he imputed to senseless matter, these do to God; and as much more rigid as
it is more impious than his, for he never thought of another life wherein
Eternal Misery should punish those Actions that were unavoidable in this.

Now the Reason why this Doctrine of Fate, this absurd and baffled Doctrine is
so greedily embraced and eagerly defended by many, is very plain; it feeds the
Vanity and Curiosity of some, and the Pride of others, it is a luscious Pleasure
to curious and vain Minds to fancy themselves Masters of the starry Cabala,
able to spell out and interpret the Laws of Fate, and pry into the Destinies of
future Ages, which are covered with thick Clouds and Impenetrable Darkness to
all but them alone; it is a delicious pleasure no doubt of it, to the Proud and
haughty, and ill-natured, to see themselves caressed and exalted by God as his
particular Favorites, while the miserable Multitude, the rest of Mankind are
excluded from the Capacity and much more, the Hopes of Happiness and Heaven:
and in general it is an acceptable opinion to the loose and profligate, since
it is a ready Apology for Idleness and Lust, and all manner of Sins: for Men
might Sin confidently and without remorse, if they did Sin fatally; or rather
nothing could be branded with the Infamy of Sin and Shame, when whatever Men
did, were the Effect, the unavoidable Effect of Nature and Necessity, an act of
Obedience to those Fatal Laws which they could not transgress. Tertullian
therefore speaks very properly when he says, Tertul. Apol.
Mentis malae impetus vel Fato vel Astris imputant, nolunt suum esse quod malum
agnoscunt: They impute the Heat and Sallies of their Lust to Stars and Fate,
being unwilling to Charge themselves with the guilt of that which they own to
be Evil. This is the use Cerealis makes of this Doctrine of Fate in Tacitus,
Donec Cerealis mulceret animos, Fato acta Dictitans quae militum Ducumque
Discordia, vel fraud Hostium evenissent. Tacit. l. 4. Histor.
the Roman Legions had behaved themselves very unworthy of that Name and
Reputation they possess't, and were extremely dejected under the Conscience of
it; therefore he to cheer and encourage 'em, and to wipe off the stain and
dishonor of their Misdemeanour, imputed to Fate, that which ought with truth
to have been imputed to the Dissension of their Leaders and themselves, and to
the Fraud and Cunning of their Enemies. From this little that has been said, as
it appears why Proud and Vicious Men contend for Fate; so does it likewise of
what importance it is, to free Men's Minds from a persuasion so pernicious to
the Interest of Virtue, the Peace of the Public, the Happiness of Man, and the
Honor of God. To which purpose that I may contribute all I can, First, On
which side stands the Advantage of Authority, Secondly, what plain Reason and
as plain Revelation do dictate in this Point.

As to the first, I will not pretend to make a just and intelligible Collection
of the Different Notions which have been taken up of Fate, it is Evident from
that which Grotius has done of this kind, not only how tedious and voluminous,
but also how obscure and confused the Discourses of Men have been on this
Subject; I shall only therefore as far as my Memory will serve me, consider
their Opinions in such a manner as the Nature of this present Enquiry shall
oblige me. Most Philosophers do agree in one general Notion of Fate, that it is
a Connection or Series of Causes successively depending upon one another,
Nomesius.
and producing a Necessary Effect or Event, (...); But their Opinions
concerning the first Ground or Original of this Necessary Connection or
Dependence were very Various, some ascribing it to Demons or Spirits, some to
the Influence of Stars, some to the Circumaction or whirling about of the
Heavens, some to an Universal Soul, some to the Force of Motion, some to the
Contexture and Contrivance of Nature, others to Atoms, and others to God; and
indeed since Matter or Mind, are the two only things into which all
Philosophers have ultimately Resolved their Search and Enquiries after the
Original of all things, they ought to have looked for no other Original of Fate
than one of these two: but this concerns my present Question but very little,
for if Man be overruled and determined by Fatal Laws, it matters little how he
came to be so: Nor did I mention this variety of Opinions for any other Reason
than this, that it gives us just Occasion to suspect Fate it self as an
Erroneous and ill-grounded Position; for obscurity and intricacy and
multiplicity of different Notions about the same thing are the general Marks of
Falsehood and Error: but there are two things very material to be inquired.
First, How far the Empire or Dominion of Fate was generally extended: And
Secondly, what kind of Necessity, or what degrees of it were generally supposed
to constitute Fate. As to the Extent of its Power, this one thing is very
Remarkable, that the Heathens did Exempt the Mind of Man from its Sovereignty.
Democritus indeed believed the Soul of Man as Necessarily and Fatally moved by
the Impression of his Atoms as any other Natural or Irrational Body, but
Epicurus deserted him in this, and following the Conduct of common Sense and
Experience, acknowledged the Liberty of the Soul of Man, and labored (as
Plutarch tells us) with all his might to assert it, and to preserve the
Distinction of Virtue and Vice, which Fate destroys; to serve this Hypothesis,
it was that he invented that new Motion of his Atoms, called by Lucretius
Clinamen, sufficiently exposed by Tully, and how well defended by Gassendus, I
am not concerned to Examine; for I have produced his Opinion only as an
Instance of the clearness of this Truth, That the Soul of Man is not subject to
Fate; for had not its Liberty been undeniable and self-evident, the Principles
of Epicurus his Philosophy had certainly obliged him to follow Democritus in
this, as in all other Points, and to have believed the Soul it self, o're-rul'd
by Fate. The Poets indeed made the Monarchy of Fate so Universal, that they
believed the Gods themselves subject to it. Thus Jupiter in Homer bemoans the
Fate of his Sarpedon, which he could not prevent: And thus another Poet
represents Apollo striving in vain by all the Power of Art, and Virtue of Herbs
to restore life to his Hyacinthus. Nor was this only a Poetic Fancy, it is usual
with Plato to extend the Dominion of Fate over the Gods themselves; but this
was no wonder, for Fate with him imports the immutable Laws of the Supreme God,
and God's those Spirits that were created by him. The Stoics indeed (at least
some of them) assigned a worse Reason for this Sovereignty of Fate, namely,
That the Supreme Architect could not Correct the Defects and Incapacities of
Matter. De Civ. Dei l. 5. c. 1.
After all this, it is no wonder that St. Austin should take this to be the
general Notion of Fatal Events, that they were such as proceeded from the
Necessity of I know not what Order, maugre God and Man: But all this while, it
must be remembered, that this Dominion of Fate, tho it limited the Power, did
not overawe or necessitate the Will of their Gods. And no wonder, for I never
find as I remark't before, that any but Democritus and his Tribe, did extend
the Dominion of Fate over the Soul of Man: Hierocles makes the Pythagorean Fate
nothing else but the Execution of that immutable Divine Decree, That the
Virtuous should be rewarded, and the Vicious punished, and at the same time
does utterly deny that Man is any way necessitated or overruled in his Choice
or Actions. De Decret Platonicis, c. 19.
Alcinous representing the Platonic Fate, determines indeed the Events of
things fatal, but at the same time, he leaves the Minds of Men possess't of
their just and natural Liberty. And whatever unavoidable Connection of Causes
the Stoic talked of, no one did more exalt and magnify the Liberty and Power
of the Mind of Man: So that (...), Nemes. c. 37.
Nemesius might very well in general affirm, That the wisest of the Greeks
believed Men's Minds free, and the Events of their Actions Fatal, whether he had
respect to the former or the Latter. Thus far then, the Pythagorean, Platonic,
and Stoic agreed, That the Mind of Man was free, That Events were Fatal: Now
it is not to be wondered at, that they who did not judge the Calamitous or
Prosperous Issues of outward things to deserve the Name of Good or Evil, should
place such Events wholly out of our own Power, and deem 'em no way dependent
upon our Behavior: it is enough that they left Man's true Happiness, i. e.
Wisdom and Virtue in his own Power, Marcus Antor, l. 2.
which they always did. (...). (scil. (...)) (...). And it deserves here to be
remembered that they confined this Fatality of Events to this life, for such of
them as did believe the Eternal Duration or Immortality of the Soul, did also
believe that its Misery or Happiness in that State, did depend on its Behavior
in this. But how came the Platonics and Pythagoreans, who set that Value upon
Temporal things which they deserved, to agree thus far with the Stoics in
Asserting the Fatality of Events? or how came the storm and fury of all Writers
to Light so heavily only upon the Stoic's Fate, if these taught the same thing
with Pythagoras and Plato? they did indeed all of 'em acknowledge Events Fatal,
and yet they differed widely in their Notion of this Fatality; for first the
Stoic Fate depended partly upon Matter, partly upon God, whereas the Platonic
Fate depended wholly upon the Will of a Wise Powerful and good God. Secondly,
The Pythagorean and Platonic did believe Good and Evil to be dispensed by a
Divine and immutable Law, but so, that the one should be the Reward of Virtue,
and the other the Punishment of Vice: So that Fate with 'em was nothing else
but the Execution of that Decree of God in the Prophet, Say ye to the Righteous
that it shall be well with him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.
Woe unto the Wicked, Isaiah 3.
it shall be ill with him; for the Reward of his hands shall be given him. But
the Stoics in their Assertion of the Fatality of Events had no such Regard to
the Virtue or Vice of Man; nor did they settle or suppose any such Necessary
Connection or Dependence between Vice and Virtue of Man on the one hand, and
Punishment and Reward on the other. Thirdly, tho the Platonics taught that all
things were comprehended within the Compass of Fate, that is the general and
immutable Laws of the Supreme Being, yet did they not believe that all
particulars were decreed and determined, whereas the Stoics (if we follow the
Common Opinion) did not exempt any particular Event from the Overruling
Necessity of Fate.

Sen. Oed.
Quicquid patitur mortale genus,
Quicquid facimus venit ex alto;
Whatever ill unhappy Man sustains
Whatever he Does, it is what his Fate ordains.
And lastly, The Necessity of the Stoic Fate was Rigid and Inflexible, but that
of the Platonic was not, or at least not in all Cases. And this puts me in Mind
of the

Second thing Considerable in the Notion of Fate, i. e. what kind of Necessity
or what degrees of it are supposed to render an Event Fatal? The Stoics. did
indeed think that the Necessity of Fate was uncontrollable, irresistible,
inevitable; tho I cannot deny but that the Opinion of Chrysippus and Seneca too
(as he explains it somewhere in his Natural Questions concerning Fate, if
placed in an advantageous Light would look with a more pleasing and favorable
Aspect upon the Liberty of Man; but let the Stoics think what they will, I do
not find that others thought such a Necessity as this alone, and nothing less
sufficient to make up Fate; for the Egyptians which supposed an Astrological
Fate, or o're-ruling Influence of the Stars did yet believe that the Evil they
threatened might be diverted by Prayers, Sacrifices and other Religious Rites,
according to that of Nemesius, Nom^s. p. 262.
(...) (...). Which is, There are no Influences, no Aspects of Stars so froward
and Malignant, so fatal and irresistible, but that Prayers and Expiations may
sweeten and mitigate them, or else prevail with those Powers which govern them
to divert their Menaces. Besides this, the Distinction of Fate into
Denunciative and Peremptory or Conditional, was very well known to the
Heathens; this Last was a Fate whose Necessity depended upon some Antecedent
Conditions, upon some Suppositions which might or might not be fulfilled: This,
Servius discourses largely of upon that place of Virgil: Nam quia nec Fato,
merita nec morte peribat,
Sed misera ante Diem --
Before her Day fell the Unhappy Maid
By Love, not Fate, nor her own Crimes betrayed:
Where he that pleases may see many Instances of this Conditional Fate; and to
come to an End, the Necessity of Fate in the opinion of Aristotle and Epicurus,
if Gassendus represents it rightly, was not an inflexible, uncontrollable one,
but one subject to Alteration and Change, to Chance and many Impediments, being
nothing else but that Energy or Efficacy in Natural Bodies, which the Wisdom of
Man did often prevent, the Industry and Courage of Man did often master, and
Chance did often hinder and overruled. By all this we see plainly how careful
the Heathens were, that the Necessity of Fate might not destroy the Liberty of
Man, how earnestly they contended for such a Fatality of Events, as might not
cancel Man's Obligation to Virtue, nor discourage him from the Expectation and
Pursuit of Happiness; for now to draw to a Point, and to make some use of this
tedious Recital of the Pagan Notions of Fate: If we assert a Stoical Fate, we
yet leave the Wise Man whatever Encouragements he can derive from the Rewards
of another life, and whatever Satisfaction he can derive from Virtue it self in
this. And certainly tho temporal Events were Fatal without any Connection to, or
Dependence upon the Choice and Actions of Man; yet even on this Supposition,
Virtue were eligible, as that which teaches us to enjoy Prosperity, and bear
bravely that Adversity which we could not prevent: But if with other
Philosophers we did believe, not only that the success of another life, but
even that of this too, did depend wholly upon our behavior, and that Events
were therefore only Fatal, because those Decrees of God which did award
Happiness to the Virtuous, and Misery to the Wicked, are fixed and immutable;
then we could not desire more powerful Encouragements to Virtue, or more
Evident proof that it is in our own Power to be Happy. If we grant the
Necessity that makes up Fate flexible and mutable, or if we suspend a fatal
Event upon Conditions, as it were but reasonable to imagine that all Evil ones
are suspended: there will be no Reason to question whether Man's Happiness be
in his own Power. If we make the Necessity of a Denunciative Fate, which even
Wisdom and Virtue cannot surmount, extend it self to some few things; and that
Fate or Fortune, which drags only Fools and Sluggards in Chains after it, more
general and universal, which is a Notion Caelius Rodiginus seems to have taken
from the Platonics; Celius Rodigium, l. x. c. 20.
we meet with nothing in all this which can rationally deter the Industry and
Hopes of any Man. If lastly, with Aristotle and Epicurus, we attribute no more
force or strength to Fate, than to that Efficacy of Natural Causes, which we
experience every Day, is not irresistible (for the Mind over-comes those
Inclinations we derive from Natural Temper, and life may be lengthened or
shortened by Temperance or Luxury, it being a flame which is not of it self so
inextinguishable, but that it requires our Care to cherish it, and barren
Grounds may be improved and cultivated, etc.) then nothing is more Evident than
that it behooves us to act like Men, since our Reason and Virtue have their
Necessary tendency and efficacy as well as any other natural Causes; and since
the Concurrence of our Endeavors may so much more properly be supposed
Necessary to promote our Happiness than the Influence of Stars, as it has a
more direct and immediate operation upon our Affairs, than the Motion of those
Heavenly Bodies can have. And now who would expect to find that Fate in the
Christian which was banished the Pagan World? who would expect that the Mind of
Man should be fettered and bound by a more inexorable and deplorable Necessity
now in this Age of Light and Grace, than ever it was in the thickest Darkness
of Paganism? who could now believe that Man's Eternal success, in another life,
should be as Fatal as ever the Stoic did believe his Temporal one in this? or
who could ever imagine that Christians would Charge that upon the Decrees of a
Wise and Good God, which the Heathens out of their Honor for him, did ever
refuse to do? for those of them who made Fate entirely the Decree of God did
believe that in the Dispensation of Evils God did wholly regard Men's Crimes
and Sins; that there was no other Fate attended any Man than what he was
himself the Author of. And they who did believe a Fatality of Events without
any dependence upon the Behavior of Man, did impute it to Matter, not to God,
to the deficiency of the one, not to the Will of the other.

It Is true, such a Fate is not to be found in the Scriptures, as we shall see
anon; nor is it to be found in the Fathers of the Church, we may find Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, Lactantius, and St. Austin himself, (however accused by
some as a Fatalist) zealously Disputing against the Pagan Fate: what would they
have done, had there been then such a Notion of Fate, as has since prevailed
amongst some Christians, which is briefly this, That the Eternal misery of
Nineteen Parts of the World, (I speak modestly) and the Eternal Happiness of
the Twentieth, is Fatal; that the means conducing to these Ends are Fatal; the
one being shut up under the invincible Necessity of Natural Impotence, and
Rejection from sufficient Grace: the other being called and acted by Grace,
Irresistible. That this Necessity of Fate is the Result of a Divine Decree,
That this Decree proceeded from mere Arbitrary Will, without any regard to the
Behavior of Man, they that cried out against the Pagan Fate, that it subverted
Humane life, that it defeated all Laws, that it left Man no use of his Reason,
that it left no place for rational Hopes or Fears, with what bitter invectives
must they needs have assaulted this Fate? the Pagan Fate left the Will free,
this bound and fettered, not only bereaved of Natural Power and Liberty (for we
contend not about that) but destitute of Grace and Divine Assistance: The Pagan
Fate in the Opinion of a great many, if not most, did not teach a rigid and
inflexible Necessity, this does: they amongst the Pagans who taught the
Necessity of Fate inexorable, understood it of Necessity in Temporal Events,
but this Fate extends it to Eternal ones. The Stoic the great Assertor of Fate
acknowledged, nay, eagerly contended, that Man might be Virtuous and Happy in
despite of Fate, but these Men make humane Happiness and Virtue the very
Object of their Fate, making Sin and Misery, Virtue and Happiness as Fatal as
any Events whatever. In vain now shall any one of 'em think to excuse their
Doctrine from the Imputation of Fate, by telling us (as Calvin. brevis
Responsio, etc. in Praef.
some do) that Fate in the Pagan Notion did involve God as well as Man within
the Compass of its Necessity; that what they teach, is nothing else but God's
voluntary Decree: this is a miserable shift, for this does not at all lighten
the weight of that Fatal Necessity that lies upon unhappy Man, to think that
God is not subject to the same: Nay, on the quite contrary, the Pagan Notion
was more easy to the Mind, and whilst it freed God from the guilt of Man's
Ruin, it frees Man from all hard and irreligious thoughts of God.

Numina cum videas diris obnoxia Fatis
Invidia possis exonerare Deos. Mart.

Since Heavenly Powers to Curs't Fate subject be,
The Gods you cannot but from Envyfree.
It was pure Piety in the Stoic, to impute that Fatality of Event, which he
thought independent of the good or ill-behaviour of Man, to any thing rather
than to God, what Impiety! -- But I have done, I have sufficiently considered
which way the stream of Authority runs, and it evidently appears to be against
all such Notions of Fate, as put it out of a Man's Power to be Virtuous and
Happy, and determine his Sin and Misery wholly Necessary and unavoidable. I
will now proceed to consider,

Reason and Revelation against Fate.
Secondly, What plain Reason and as plain Revelation do dictate in this point.
Thou do believe Fate, and therefore do despair of Happiness; Thy sense must
be plainly this, All is in the Power of Fate, nothing in thine own, there is
nothing in thee to do that can contribute to make thee Virtuous or Happy.
Whence can this Necessity, this Fate proceed? there are but two Principles that
were ever fancied to be the first Causes of all things, God and Matter. Do
thou believe this Necessity proceeds from Matter, from the Motion of Atoms, or
the Influence of Stars? This belief as St. Austin argues, does subvert the
Foundation of all Religion, for he who believes that he depends upon Fate not
God, can have no sufficient Reason for the Worship of that God, on whom he has
no Dependence: but this is that peradventure thou would have; well, when thou
art able to prove Reason and Understanding to derive themselves from senseless
Atoms, when thou can find out any kind of Natural Motion of Matter or Atoms,
which can be the Cause of Liberty or Freedom in the Will, any Motion that can
at once be Necessary (for so all Motion of Atoms must, be it of what kind it
will) and yet free too, for such all my Deliberations and all my Choices I
make, prove the Motion of the Mind to be, then I will acknowledge a Fate, not
only independent from, but if thou will, Superior to God; then I will forbear
all farther attempts of Charity, as vain, and leave thee to thy Fate and
Misery: But these are Notions so absurd in themselves, that no Similitudes, no
Arguments, can make 'em appear one jot more ridiculous or irrational than they
do to all Men of sense at the first hearing. There are some Errors as well as
Truths that are self-evident, there needs no Demonstration to convince us that
the one are Errors, and the other Truths, and of this kind are the Errors we
are speaking of; if a Man should assert that Death is the Original of Life,
that senseless Matter gives Being to an Understanding Mind, that Necessity is
the Parent of Liberty and such like, it were an unpardonable weakness in any
Man to think, that such assertion did stand in need of a laborious Confutation.
But there are who suppose God the Author of all things, and yet suppose Events
fatal too, the former Opinion was ridiculous, this is impious; for suppose
Mankind fatally guided by the Influence of the Stars, and these Stars to have
received this Power and Energy from God, is it not natural for every Man to
break out into the words of St. Austin, Aug. de C. D. l. 5. c. 1.
Illi vero qui positionem Stol. larum quodammodo decernentium qualis quisque
sit, and quid ei proveniat boni, quidve mali accidat, ex Dei voluntate
suspendunt, si easdem stellas putant habere hanc potestatem traditam sibi a
summa illius potestate, ut volentes ista decernant, magnam Coelo faciunt
Injuriam: in Cujus velut Clarissimo senatu ac Splendidissima Curia scelera
facienda decerni, qualia si aliqua terrena Civitas decrevisset, genere humano
decernente fuerat evertenda. How outragiously do these Men reproach Heaven
whilst they believe those Crimes and Villainies decreed by that August Senate
and glorious Court in Heaven, which had any City upon Earth decreed, it had
deserved to have been damned by the Common Vote, and razed to the ground by the
united Arms of Mankind. When I consider that the Stars are the Work of God,
that their Order and Motion was prescribed by him, that whatever Vigor and
Efficacy they have, they have received it from him; and then Remember that God
is a most infinitely kind and good Being; I should easily suffer my self to be
persuaded that they could shed no influence upon this lower World, but what
were extremely beneficial to it, that they could have no Aspects but what were
favorable and benign: I could easily believe that all the Inclinations they
form in the Body (if they form any) could be no other than Innocent and
Virtuous; I can never believe that Lust or Falsehood, Malice or Cruelty can come
down from above; or that our Minds should be impregnated with Sin and Folly by
the Influences of Heaven. No certainly, if there be any Virtue in the Stars
that extends it self to Man, it must rather be the seed of Life, and Health,
and Virtue; than of Diseases, Death or Vice. Antiq. Lect. l. x. c. 20.
I can easily fall in with the opinion of those Learned Men in Coelius
Rhodiginus, who thought that that Virtue of Celestial Bodies, which tended of
it self to excellent Ends, was marred and perverted by a vicious Education. And
so the Gravity of Saturn did degenerate into Sullenness, Niggardliness and
Melancholy. The Magnanimity of Mars into Rashness and Fool-hardiness. The
Sharpness and Sagacity of Mercury into mischievous Craft and deceitful
Subtilty. The Sweetness and Gentleness of Venus into filthy Lust, and so on:
And this Thought does well become every one that pretends to any Religion,
whether Revealed or Natural; for this is Consonant to the excellency of the
Divine Nature; But this sort of Fate springing from the Influence of any
Natural Bodies, is not only repugnant to Reason, but to our Sense and
Experience: for nothing is more plain than this, that any such Influence cannot
affect the Mind, but through the Body, and we do frequently find our Reason
asserting its Power and Dominion against all the force and strength of the
Body: Nor does Reason only but in every Nation, Law and Custom triumph over the
strongest Inclinations of Nature. As the Innocence of the Seres, the Chastity
of those in Arabia and Osroene, the Abstinence of the Brachmans, and numerous
Instances which he that pleases may see in Bardesanes the Syrian, and others,
does abundantly manifest, that their manners are the Effects not of the
Influence of those Planets that Rule their Birth, but of those Laws and Customs
that Rule their Country. Since therefore that Necessity which our Natural
Tempers and Inclinations do impose upon the Mind, is the utmost Fate that we
can imagine to proceed from the Influence of any Natural Bodies, it is Nonsense
to suppose that Fate insuperable or incontroulable which we see baffled and
defeated every day, and in every Nation.

The sum of those Reasons I have offered against Fate is this, If we make God
the Author of it, we impiously Charge him with what is repugnant to his Nature,
for a Good God cannot be the Cause of Man's Sin and Misery: if Matter, we
ridiculously suppose, that what is it self senseless and inanimate should
produce and govern a Being endowed with Life, Understanding and Liberty: If the
Stars, we run again into the same absurdities; for if they have their fatal
Influence from God, then properly speaking, God is the Author, they but the
Instrument of our Fate. If from themselves, then our Dependence on, and Worship
of God is vain, and besides we absurdly subject the Reason and the Liberty of
the Mind of Man to the senseless Tyranny of Atoms. If from the Consideration of
the Causes of Fate we descend to examine what our Experience teaches us, what
common sense informs us, each of 'em bears witness to the Sovereignty and
Liberty of the Mind of Man. If we should come in the last place to Examine what
would be the Consequences of a Fatal Necessity overruling Man and Humane
Affairs, they are such as are not only grossly Contradictions in themselves, but
Fatal and Destructive both to the public and private Good of Mankind. It Is
true, were the Liberty of doing Evil taken from Man, we should have no Reason
to complain, for then there would be nothing wanting to make the state of Man
Happy as that of Angels, but Immortality: But to bereave Man of all Power to do
good, to necessitate and compel him to be wicked, how dreadful are the Effects
which must follow this? he that stains his hands in the Blood of his Sovereign
or his Parent, will accuse his Stars not himself; he that pollutes himself in
the incestuous Embraces of a Mother or a Daughter, may defend his action as his
Fate not Choice; and how readily shall we do all that Rage or Lust invites us
to, when there is an Excuse prepared for all we do? for he is no more blameable
who commits the Evil which he could not help, than he is worthy of Praise who
did the Good which he could not forbear. Were it true, that whatever mischief
Man did, he were necessitated to do, we might with more Justice arraign the
Stars and Atoms, than Malefactors; and all the Instruments of Mischief would be
every jot as Guilty and Criminal, as the Man that used them. Were this true we
might as properly betake our selves to Magic and Enchantments, as to Advices
and Exhortations, when we would reclaim the vicious; nor yet could the one be
more Effectual than the other; for what could alter what is unalterable? and
for the same Reason, we might forbear our Sacrifices and Prayers, since what
will be, must be, and cannot be otherwise.

Desine Fata Deum flecti sperare precando.
You strive in vain with Prayers to move
The inexorable Fates above.
Repentance and Tears may be what Seneca calls Expiation on this Supposition
Aegrae mentis solatia, The deluding Dreams of a superstitious Mind; but could
never procure us any real Advantage; so that on this Supposition, what is now
thought the only Wisdom, would be then the only Folly of a Sinner, Repentance.
I think I may conclude here, for if it be not by this time Evident, whether
Reason be for or against Fate, we may justly despair of discovering what Reason
dictates in this or any other Question. I will now proceed to Examine,

What plain Text of Scripture speaks in this Point. And here in the first place
we are to expect no other Fate than what depends upon God, for the Scripture
makes all things derive their Original from him, and all things depend upon
him, there is but one Creator, and one Lord, and therefore the Creature can be
subject to no Laws but such as he Enacts; so that whatever Fate we now lie
under, must be imputed to the voluntary Decree of God. Is then the Eternal
Ruin of Man Fatal and unavoidable? If we enquire into the Original of this
Unhappy Necessity, it must be ultimately resolved into the Divine Will; when
God then decreed the inevitable Ruin of Man, under what Notion did he consider
his Ruin? under that of Misery? or that of Punishment? If under the Notion of
Punishment, this Implies plainly, that we are to thank our selves for our
Ruin: for Punishment is nothing else but the Infliction of that Misery which
our Sin and Folly have deserved. But if under the Notion of Misery, how can
this consist with the Infinite Goodness or Wisdom of God? Alas! how
Contradictory is this to Scripture? there God swears that he delights not in
the Death of a Sinner, This Decree would suppose him to delight in the Death of
the Innocent: there he is represented full of Compassion, and slow to wrath,
even upon repeated Provocations, this Decree represents him so addicted to
Wrath, and Cruelty, that he made a World on purpose to have whereon to exercise
it, and does exercise it merely for the delight he takes in it; The Scripture
finally represents him full of Divine love for Mankind, and not only not
desirous that they should perish, but extremely desirous that they should be
partakers of Everlasting life; this Decree supposes him so utter an Enemy to,
and hater of Mankind, that he made the far greater part to no other End, but
only to make 'em miserable. Let any unprejudiced Man judge now, whether this be
not as Contradictory to Scripture as it is to Sense: Nor is it possible that
any unprejudiced Man should look into Holy Writ, and not discern evidently that
Man's Ruin is the Effect of Sin, not only wilfully and presumptuously
Committed, but also obstinately and impenitently persisted in: and that God is
so far from being fond of our Sufferings and Calamities, that he is ever and
anon bewailing the Disappointment of his Love, the defeat of his Grace and
Mercy by our Obstinacy and Impenitence: it is the voice of his Son, it is the
voice of God. O Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent
unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not! If therefore we desire
to know what the Will of God is, with respect to Man, this is a full and plain
Declaration of it; there can be no other, much less any Contradictory to this,
if I may not confidently rely upon this Declaration of the Divine Will, there
is no revealed Truth that I can depend upon; Nor can Revelation stand us in any
stead, for nothing can be asserted with greater perspicuity or stronger
Asseveration. But I have no Scruples in me about this Matter, I have no Fears
nor Jealousies of any secret Decree or Latent Will repugnant to his declared
one; I am as sure that God is Good and True as that he is Eternal or Almighty:
and were he not, we could reap but very little Comfort from all his other
Attributes how great or glorious soever in themselves. But blessed be God, if
we proceed from examining those Declarations of his Will, which God has made us
to examine the Manner and Method of his Government as it relates to Mankind
(which is another and the only way left us to judge of his Will and Decrees) we
shall find no Instance in the whole Series of Divine Dispensations, which can
create in us the least Suspicion of lying under an Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Fate; nay, if we consider the Acts of Divine Providence, we shall find the
quite Contrary, that God so governs the World, that the Issues of things are
not fatal and unavoidable, but dependent upon our selves, that God is free, Man
free, and the Events of things free from any inevitable Necessity; God indeed
is ever bound to do what is best, what is wisest, and can do no otherwise; This
is the only Fate that God is subject to; But a possibility of Different Events
is no way repugnant to his Wisdom, Justice, or Goodness. In a proper sense
therefore there is no Fate above him, that can impose a Necessity upon him, nor
does he impose any upon himself: if there were in any part of his Government, a
fatal and a peremptory Necessity, we should certainly find the tracks and
footsteps of it amongst inanimate and sensitive Beings: how great a Liberty
does God make use of in this part of his Government; Josh. x.
The Sun, whose Course seems certain and invariable as the Imaginary Laws of
Fate, shall if need be, stand stock still, or what is more, move backwards
toward it is East. An instance of both we read of in Scripture, when God
thought fit to execute his Judgments upon the Amorites, ^ Kings 20.
and condescended to give Hezekiah a miraculous Assurance of his Mercy: The
fire shall not exert its natural Heat, but shall cease to burn and consume,
Dan. 3.
and when he sees fit (as in the case of the three Children) become as harmless
as the morning light: The Waters shall cease to flow as did the Red Sea, when
the Army of Israel marched through it, and saw with horror and delight, the
rolling Waves stand fixed and unmoved, as the Rocks and Shores that bounded
them; and yet what Necessity, what Fate can we conceive more immutable, what
ever Connection of Natural Causes it be produced by, than that which makes the
Sun move, the Fire burn, the Water flow? If we consider his Government of
Kingdoms, where if any where the Periods and Revolutions of Misery and
Prosperity should seem Fatal and immutable; here again we shall find the
footsteps of unquestionable Liberty: Let us for Instance consider God's
Government of the Jews, what are the Laws which God obliges himself to observe
toward them; If ye walk in my Statutes, Levit. 26.3, 4, etc.
and keep my Commandments and do them; then I will give you rain in due Season,
and the Land shall yield her increase; and the trees of the field shall yield
their Fruit. And your threshing shall reach unto the Vintage, and the Vintage
shall reach unto the sowing time; and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and
dwell in your Land safely, etc. But if ye will not hearken unto me, and will
not do all these Commandments. And if ye shall despise my Statutes, or if your
Soul abhor my Judgments, so that you will not do all my Commandments, but that
ye break my Covenant. I also will do this unto you; And 14, 15, 16, etc.
I will even appoint over you Terror, Consumption, and the burning Ague that
shall consume the Eyes and cause sorrow of Heart: and ye shall sow your seed in
vain, for your Enemies shall eat it, etc. Does not God here lay Life and Death,
Good and Evil before 'em? is not the one and the other to be the Effect of
their own Choice, their own behavior? are we not reasonably to suppose the
Israelites at the time of entering into that Covenant, whereof these are the
Sanctions, as capable of Happiness, as they were of Misery? what was finally
the Issue of things? the Jews rebelled and revolted from God, and as he
threatened they were harrassed and exhausted by continual Plagues and
Punishments. Well, did this happen so, because it could not happen otherwise?
was this the Event, the fatal Event of things which God did really Will, and
immutably and peremptorily resolve from the beginning, notwithstanding whatever
Professions he might make of his sincere desire of the welfare and prosperity
of that People? Let God himself be the Judge, who best understands his own
Mind. Psalm. 81.
O that my People had hearkened to me, and Israel had walked in my ways! I
should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my hand against their
Adversaries: the haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him,
but their time should have endured for ever. By this sure, if we can judge of
the meaning of God by any of his Expressions, we may safely conclude, not only
that the Obedience and Prosperity of Israel were things possible, and
consequently their Disobedience and Ruin was not fatal; but also that their
obedience and prosperity were the things which God did most heartily and
sincerely desire If we come to God's Government of particular Men, we may be
sure that this is of a piece with his Government of Mankind or Kingdoms, it
being nothing else but a more particular Application of those Universal Laws of
Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice by which he Rules: An Instance of Liberty in
Temporal Events, we meet with in that Voyage which St. Luke describes Acts 27.
Acts 27.
Verse the Tenth, we have St. Paul foretelling the Fate that was like to attend
themselves and their Ship, if they pursued the Voyage they had resolved on:
Verse 19. we meet with the Accomplishment in part, of his Prediction, Darkness
and Horror invades 'em, Seas break in upon 'em, and at the same breach had
Death entered, had not Divine Providence interposed in favor, and at the
Request of St. Paul. Was this their Suffering fatal? was it unavoidable? had
they not escaped the Tempest, if they had believed St. Paul, and not departed
from Crete? or was their obstinacy or unbelief as fatal as the Danger and
Damage which attended it? The Expostulation of St. Paul, Ver. 21. will easily
clear this Doubt, Ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from
Crete, and to have gained this harm and loss. What then! Shall we think the
Issues of Eternity fatal, when those of time wherein we are comparatively so
little concerned are free? Shall God not only leave us the use of our Reason,
but also assist us by the Aid of his Providence for the avoiding temporal
Evils, and will he allow us neither for the avoiding of Eternal ones? must
temporal Ruin be the Effect only of our sinful Choice and Obstinacy, Eternal
Ruin the Effect not of our Folly or Sin, but Fate? No surely, how often do we
find God in the Revelation respiting his final Sentence, and giving Men space
and time to repent? but they repented not: it is true, and this was their
Obstinacy, not their Fate; for if Repentance had been impossible, to what
purpose did God allow 'em time for it? that they might fill up the Measure of
their Iniquity: an excellent Paraphrase! whom shall I believe? God says, he
gave the Sinner, time to Repent; thou say he gave him time to Sin: God says,
he gave him time to make himself capable of Mercy; thou say, he gave him
time only to increase his Guilt and Punishment: How cruel are the Mercies of
some Men! this is just such a Grace or Favor as griping Usurers vouchsafe the
careless Debtor, whose Fortune and Estate they would swallow up and devour.

I have now I hope dispers't those Clouds which seemed to hover over our heads
big with Storm and Ruin; I mean those melancholy Imaginations which scare and
terrify the weak and superstitious Minds of Men: we may now boldly pursue, and
possess our selves of Happiness; the way to it is open, there is no cruel
Deity, no spiteful Fortune, no inexorable Fate that will oppose us; there is no
God but one of Love and Goodness, which moderate his Almighty Power, and temper
the Severity of his Justice; a God who passionately desires our Happiness, and
delights in nothing more than in promoting it; All is lightsom and cheerful
where he is, Perfection and Happiness dwell with him, Psalm. 16.
in his presence is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are Pleasures for
evermore. He scatters and dissipates Evil, and troubles by the Light of his
Countenance, Death and Hell fly far from before him, and hide themselves in
their own Darkness. What can we apprehend from such a God as this is! how can
he delight in our Misery who is all Love! No, nothing but our guilt or folly
can raise our Fears, we may rest secure of his Favor, if we do not despise it;
nor can he ever be made our Enemy, unless we first become the Enemies of Virtue
and Goodness: what then have we to fear? there is no Fate but the immutable Law
of God, that Universal Law which adjudges Happiness to the Righteous and Misery
to the Wicked: there is no Fortune but his Providence; which is nothing but the
Execution of that one general Law, and the Application of its several parts, in
particular Instances: it is plain therefore we have nothing now to fear but our
selves, if we be but true to our own Reason, and faithful to our own Interest,
we may confidently presume both of the Assistance and Reward of Heaven; there
is therefore nothing left now to excuse us from the guilt of our own Ruin; but
only that which is wont to be objected by such as are enslaved to some impious
Lust, and groan under the weight of those Chains which they made themselves, I
mean an Incapacity of Happiness, which is a fourth Objection against the
possibility of Attaining Happiness, and is now to be considered.

Incapacity of Happiness.
and the bliss that will one Day or other Eternally reward it: they
acknowledge, could they but be Virtuous, they should be Happy; but they despair
of obtaining such a Conquest over their Vices as may suffice to render their
life smooth, equal and steady; and preserve the Peace of their Conscience by
giving 'em an unquestionable proof of their Sincerity toward God; without
which it is impossible that they should be filled with a rational Joy and Peace,
or abound in a rational Hope. This therefore must be the supposition of my
following Discourse.

There may be three different kinds of Incapacities fancied, which for
Distinction sake I Will call Natural, Moral, and Penal: each of which may be thus
explained in the Notion the Objector forms of 'em: Penal Incapacity is that
desperate state wherein Man is by God immutably rejected both from Pardon and
Assistance. Moral Incapacity results from the Strength and Absoluteness of that
Dominion which Sin has established over some Men, through a long and continued
course of Wickedness. Natural Incapacity consists in such an inteachable
stupidity of Temper, or in such violent and invincible Inclinations to Vice, or
in such a slightness, levity and inconstancy of Mind, as render Men utterly
unfit to receive any lasting Impressions of Virtue, or to make any steady and
resolute Attempt of attaining it. No Incapacity from Nature.
I Will begin with this first, and here I desire to be excused if I do not take
upon me to mark out the distinct bounds and limits of Nature and Grace; These
two Sisters are not like those Chaldee Brethren Genesis 13.
Abraham and Lot, that were too mighty to dwell together. No, they delight to
mix in loving Embraces, their Wealth and Power increases by being United; and
like some Plants I have read of, they never thrive when divided: I shall not
dispute, what Power in Man is a Birthright, what a Donative; for alas! Every
thing he possesses is a Grace, a Favor of his Prince: his Natural Abilities
are so many Graces he derives from God, and as properly such as any accession
to 'em which is inspired afterward: So that when ever I contend that any thing
is in the Power of Man, I desire to be understood of all that Power which God
has invested him with, whether Natural or Supernatural.

Did Men decry and vilify Nature, to beget in themselves the more profound
Humility, and the more wakeful and solicitous Industry, did they like the
Semnones, in Morib. German.
Tacitus, load themselves with Chains as the Badge of their subjection to and
dependence upon the Deity, did they magnify Divine Grace, in order to convince
themselves of the Necessity and Efficacy of it, and so to inflame their
Importunity and Industry in Quest of it; This were Piety and Devotion, not
Error; or however they might exaggerate the Impotence of Nature beyond strict
Truth, yet this would be a Safe and Pious Error, as all humble and modest ones
are: But when they Endeavor to represent Nature vile and corrupt, on purpose
that they may the more licentiously pollute and abuse it, when they magnify
and exalt Divine Grace out of a most contradictious and preposterous Design to
justify their Neglect and Contempt of it, for they would fain have all to be
so entirely imputed to Grace, that they would not themselves be put to as much
as the trouble of seeking it, it is not only an Error, but a pernicious and
fatal one: for he that abandons the use of his Reason, renders himself
incapable of any Heavenly aid; God gives his Grace to Men, not Beasts; I must
therefore oppose this Fancy and Endeavor to persuade Men, that it is in their
Power to be Virtuous and Happy: Nor can I think this Assertion any way
injurious to the Honor or Goodness of God, if it be remembered, that whatever
Power I attribute to Man, I acknowledge derived from God. I will therefore with
good Assurance proceed and try whether I cannot take in and demolish this Fort
which stops our way to Happiness.

They who affirm a great part of Mankind incapable of Virtue, forget that they
dishonor God whilst they reproach their Nature: for were it so, To what End
could we imagine such Men endowed with Reason and Understanding? not to worship
but defy their Maker? and was it for this End that they were made immortal
too? had God made Man only to take his Pastime in the World, like the Leviathan
in the Waves, such a Soul as that which moves the Fish of the Sea, or the
Beasts of the Earth, a Sensitive Soul had been most proper for this End; Then
might he have enjoyed himself without Reluctance, without Control, without
Remorse, without Shame: what can be the proper work of a rational Creature, to
which you allow not a Capacity of Virtue and Religion? till you can show me
this, I can never believe that God should endow Man with a Rational and
Immortal Mind out of any other Design than such a one as might become such a
Being Created after his own Image, which is the Practice of Holiness and
Virtue. But what should I wonder that Men should not be aware of their
contradicting Reason when they seem to be insensible of that Contradiction even
to the common Sense and Experience of Mankind which they are guilty of? To what
purpose are there so many Schools of Learning and good Manners founded? To what
purpose are there so many Treatises of the Education of Youth writ? To what
purpose does the wakeful Parent strive to inculcate the Seeds of Virtue into
the Child, and train him up by a wise Discipline to the Practice and Custom of
Virtue? To what purpose is the proposal of Rewards and Punishments, and the
Restraint of Laws, if either they do not raise those Hopes and Fears they aim
at, or if Hopes and Fears be altogether useless and ineffectual, if no
Instruction no Discipline can mould and fashion rough, unpolish't, crooked,
incorrigible Nature? Now here tho any Man might have confidence enough to
disparage the judgment of Mankind, and attribute all the Pains they take in the
Education of Youth, or the Government and Direction of riper Years, to Custom
not to right Reason; yet surely he would not so far disparage his own
Observation and Knowledge as utterly to deny the success of these means; for
not to instance in particulars, it is not unknown to any one the least versed in
the History of the World, that there have been National Virtues as well as
Vices, That there have been times wherein Learning and Religion have been as
much in Fashion and Reputation, as Wickedness and Barbarism in others, shall we
say, those Nations, those times bred none of those Natures, which the Objector
affirms are incapable of Virtue? Let 'em show what Heavenly Influences, what
miraculous Power produced this Change in Nature: what should I urge the Power
of vain and false principles, the mighty force even of irrational Customs,
vanquishing those Inclinations which are more deeply rooted, more closely
interwove with our Blood and Spirits than any Inclination to Vice and Folly can
be? Such are for Example the love of Life, and the Abhorrence of Pain; and yet
what a Contempt of Death is to be found even in the most timorous Sex, as in
the Indian Women! what a Contempt of Pain even in the weakest Age, as in the
Spartan Youth! And all this having no stronger Foundation than irrational
Custom, and vain Phantastic Principles: why should we therefore be unwilling to
attribute to excellent Principles and virtuous Customs, blessed and aided by
Heaven, as much Power and Virtue as we do to such as these? if the Natural
tendencies of Man to wickedness can be curbed, if his most furious and violent
Passions can be restrained and stifled, then I think, it may be as reasonably
supposed that Divine Truths, Religious Discipline, together with the Grace of
God may effect this, as any thing else whatever. If the pressing Necessities
and Perplexities of the State could change the softness and luxury of Otho into
Military Hardship and Courage; I know not why a rational sense of the true
Honor and Glory of Virtue, and of our Eternal Interest, and innumerable other
Considerations which the Gospel lays before us Christians, should not be able
to work the same wonders? if the Reverence of Seneca or the Senate, or any
other Motive could produce a Quinquennium Neronis, could restrain the violent
Inclinations of that wretched Man, so that his Government for so many years,
should be as gentle and just as that of the most Gracious and Virtuous Princes,
why should not the Reverence of God and the Terrors of Eternity be able to awe
and curb the most vicious Nature? This methinks ought well to be weighed by all
who assert Man's Impotence and Incapacity of Virtue, they disparage the Gospel
and reproach Grace as well as Man with Impotence and Insufficiency; and yet
both the one and the other is the Power of God, and that in order to Salvation:
do you Consider, that if you suppose Man by Nature unable to do any thing that
is Good, and then deny him, and utterly debar him from God's Grace, you
introduce Fate? for what more fatal Necessity can a wretched Creature lie under
than Natural Impotence utterly destitute and for ever forsaken of Divine
Assistance? or if you bereave not Man of Grace, but yet bereave Grace of its
Sufficiency, do you not understand that the fatal Necessity continues still the
same? there is no Change in the Man's Condition, only in this Hypothesis, Grace
is dishonored and reproach't as well as Nature: and this reflects very rudely
too upon God, it calls the Wisdom, the Goodness, the Sincerity, the Power of
God into Dispute: it is inconsistent with the Power of God not to be able by his
Spirit and Truth to subdue and overpower the Corruptions of Nature; it is
Inconsistent with his Goodness, not to be willing to aid his poor Creatures,
when they call upon him; inconsistent with his Sincerity to afford 'em such aid
as must tend to their greater mischief not good, as Grace its self would, if it
were only sufficient to increase their Guilt, but not to subdue their Sin: This
were indeed when a Child ask't Bread to give him a Stone, Matthew. 7.
and when he ask't Fish to gie him a Scorpion. It Is lastly, as inconsistent
with the Wisdom of God to confer Grace to no purpose, as it was with his
Goodness to confer it to an ill one. These with many others are the absurd
Consequences which attend the Denial of the Universality or Sufficiency of
Grace; but if on the other hand, we do grant that God Almighty is ready to
assist every Man who calls on him in his Endeavors after Virtue and Happiness,
and that his Assistance is sufficient to the End, for which it is designed; then
we must needs acknowledge that it is in every Man's Power to be Good and Happy:
for it is no more than to acknowledge that Man can do what he can do, or which
is all one, what God has put in his Power to do. By what a crowd of Arguments
might I confirm this Truth, sufficient to bear down and even shame the most
Impudent Caviller? why are not Men Good? why are they not Happy? shall we say
that God does not Vouchsafe 'em his Grace? shall we impute Men's misery to God?
shall we charge that glorious and most perfect Being with want of Compassion or
Sincerity toward his poor Creatures? how easy will it be for him to appeal to
the Sufferings of his Son; to the vigorous Attempts and Endeavors of his
Spirit; to Heaven and Earth stamp't with the Impress of his Power and Goodness,
on purpose to teach, invite and almost compel us to worship and obey him; to
the various Methods of his Providence contriving and pursuing our Happiness?
How easily lastly may he appeal for his Purgation to our own Consciences? And
these will tell us, as they ever do, in the Distresses of our Fortune, and the
Approaches of Danger and Death to what we are to impute the Cause of our Ruin:
what shall we say then? does God vouchsafe Men his Grace, the Revelation of his
Truth, and the Assistances of his Spirit, but that this Grace is not sufficient
for us? Alas! how easy were it for any of us to refute this Fancy by appealing
to the solemn Covenant of our Baptism, to the Characters and Descriptions of
Good Men in the Gospel, to the Effects which our Reason teaches us, must be
Natural and Inseparable from a true Faith and Divine Assistance? But I will
choose to make use of one Argument which St. Paul furnishes us with, Heb. 11.
Heb. 11. there the Apostle proves the possibility of pleasing God by Faith
from undeniable Instances of Matter of Fact, inferring from what Men have
actually done, what it is still possible for 'em to do. Omitting the miraculous
and extraordinary Effects of Faith, I will reduce the Instances of this Chapter
to three Heads. First, Such wherein Faith appears victorious over the
Temptations which arise from the vicious Customs of the Place Men live in, from
the prevalency and fashionableness of Sin amongst those they Converse with.
Secondly, Such Thirdly,

I will begin with the first sort of Instances. It must be confessed that
considering the Propensions of our Body and the Vanity and Sensuality which the
Mind naturally derives from it, and from its Commerce with the World, that it is
a difficult thing to encounter Temptations naked and alone; how much more
Difficult when backed and assisted by Custom and Fashion, when universal
Practice gives Authority and Reputation to Sin and Folly; and the poor Man is
left destitute of the Assistance of Good Counsel and the Encouragement of good
Examples to encounter not only the Difficulty with which the Reluctancies of
our Nature, but also the Reproach with which the popularity and prevalency of
Sin cloggs and imbitters Virtue: And yet behold Enoch in a World (it seems)
given up to Sin, did not only keep up in private to the Practice of despised
forsaken Virtue; but was openly and in an extraordinary manner Eminent and
Exemplary in it; and therefore was his End as extraordinary as his Life: for
having obtained this Testimony that he pleased God he was translated. This was
owing to his Faith, he was content to endure the Reproach of the World, that he
might obtain the Approbation of God; and despise the Honor and Applause of
popular Vice, and fashionable Compliances that he might gain the Kingdom
wherein dwells Righteousness. Such an other Example was Noah, his
Righteousness, was like his Ark afterward, raised above a Deluge not of Waters
but Impiety; he lived in a World so wicked, that it grieved God at his heart
that he had made it; in this World he was a Preacher and Example of
Righteousness, and his Zeal by an Antiperistasis, was not quenched but
enkindled by the wickedness of the World he lived in: This too was owing to his
Faith, he feared those threats which that Impious World scoffed at, and so
prepared an Ark to the saving of his House, C. 7.
by which he Condemned the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is
by Faith. No doubt when this strange Building was preparing, Noah was assaulted
by all the Raillery and Contempt by all the shows of Wit and Reason, Lust and
Profaneness could furnish an impious Age with: This Man (say they) has ever
been Singular and Fantastic in the whole Method of his Conversation; there
wanted but such a prank as this to complete Fancy into Madness: He ever dreamed
of Judgments, and yet we (he threatened) continued our Mirth and Pleasure, he
alone in Fears and Anxieties has suffered the Evils which his Melancholy Fancy
created, and which are all that we shall ever see: for how long has he been
Preaching dreadful things, and yet still the Sun shines, the Heavens are fair
and clear, our Feasts and Lusts have the same relish still: nor does our
Experience only convince us of the Falsehood, but our Reason of the
Impossibility of this Man's Dreams; for which way shall the fixed state of
Nature be turned upside down? Whence will this universal Deluge come? will his
God break up the Fountains of the Deep? or will he open the Cataracts of
Heaven? but while they thus profanely scoffed and measured the Divine Power by
their depraved Fancies, Noah religiously feared who had a different sense of
the Majesty of God and Provocation of Sin: he knew that as Mercy, so Wrath is
with God: That as he is mighty to forgive, Eccles. 16.
so is he too to pour out Displeasure. And by this Faith he preserved himself
as from the Impiety so from the Punishment of the Old World: for tho he was not
like Enoch translated, yet being preserved out of a general Ruin, he lived to
see an End of the Old World, and give beginning to the New. -- To these I might
add Lot, whose righteous Soul was not infected, but provoked and grieved by the
Impieties of Sodom. Joshuah, as Eminent for his Faith, as Victories, who
resolved whatever Course the Israelites would take (who to the last stood in
need of as great Prodigies to rescue 'em from Idolatry, as once from Egypt) He
and his House would serve the Lord. Josh. 24.
These Instances are sufficient to show the Power of Faith in its Victory over
popular Errors and fashionable Sins, and by Consequence, over many Inclinations
at once; for the popularity and prevalency of any Sin is a bait appropriated to
our Pride and Vanity, which makes Men affect Precedence and Superiority in all
things which the World admires and applauds; nor is this all, it awakens our
Natural Inclinations, and Invites us to gratify 'em, nay, it enrages Natural
Appetite by giving it Security and Confidence, and by working upon the Fancy
and Imagination: for the Sin is always wonderfully set off, that is prevailing
and fashionable. I will now pass on to the

Second sort of Instances, wherein we may behold the Strength and Power of
Faith in its Victory over all Temptations which sensual Pleasure can present
us. Numerous are the Instances of this kind which I might produce among the
Heathens, where we may find a sense of the Dignity of Humane Nature, of the
Decency and Honor of Virtue, and a persuasion of the Necessity of Purity in
order to a future state, atchieving most manifest Victories over all Carnal and
Sensual Lusts; but I will confine my self to two in this Chapter: The first is
that of Moses, and this is a very full and Comprehensive one. His Station being
so near the Crown of Egypt presented him at once with all that the World can
entertain sensual Man with: There was Pleasure the Snare of the Soft: There was
Power and Wealth the Temptations of the Ambitious Mind; (falsely called great)
and there was Honor the airy Bait of vain unballasted Minds. These each of 'em
single and Stone have like Saul and David slain their Thousands and ten
Thousands; and yet that it may appear that their overthrow is to be imputed to
their own Negligence and Folly, behold here Moses triumphing by Faith over all
these, i. e. over all the strengths and forces of sensual Pleasures joined and
united together: when he was come to years, he refused to be called the Son of
Pharaoh's Daughter, and so deserted a Station wherein nothing was bigger than
his present Enjoyments if he had pleased, unless his future Hopes, which is the
utmost Felicity of a state of sensuality. And what is more yet, what was it he
did quit all this for? what was it that he did choose in Exchange? was his Soul
too little to fill the great place he left? No, Moses his Courage was great as
any thing, but his Meekness and Humility; was that height too open and too
busy for sensual Enjoyments, and so he retired like Tiberius to Capria, that
he might indulge himself with more security and freedom, and fewer
Interruptions? No, he changed Pleasure for Affliction, Treasure for Reproach,
the Court of Egypt for the Desert of Midian, he chose rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
season: Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of
Egypt. This was all the great work of Faith: his Mind was betimes possessed
with a just Notion of, and awful Reverence for the God of his Fathers, the God
of Heaven and Earth; and therefore beyond the Wants and Dangers of the Desert,
he discovered the Peace and Plenty of a Canaan, and beyond both the Glories of
Eternity; and therefore reasonably concluded that it was more eligible to be
the Son of God than of Pharaoh's Daughter, to be the Heir of Heaven than of the
Crown of Egypt; all this is intimated Verse 26. for he had respect to the
Recompense of the Reward.

I will add but one Instance more to that of Moses, and indeed there can be but
one Instance added that is greater, which is that of Abraham offering up Isaac.
In the former we have seen Faith triumphing over superfluous and unnecessary
Pleasures; in this we shall see it triumphing over the Natural and inseparable
Appetites of Man. What might not Abraham, if he had been under the Power of any
Principle but that of Faith, have objected against this Command of God? what,
shall I sacrifice my Son, my only Son? This is a Sacrifice might become Baal or
Moloch, but how unsuitable to the Nature of that God I worship? Nor is this
less repugnant to his Veracity than his Goodness; Shall I sacrifice the Son of
the Promise? is it for this I have forsook my Home, my Country, my Birthright,
and followed God through Inhospitable Deserts, and more Inhospitable Nations?
are all my Expectations of a numerous and glorious Posterity come to this at
last? Thus might Abraham have argued, but having a firm belief of the Power,
Goodness, and Faithfulness of God, he would not go about to prescribe his
Wisdom Methods, or to limit his Omnipotence by unbelieving Fancies, or
derogatory Conceptions concerning it, but firmly believing that he could do
whatever he pleased, that he would do whatever he proms'd; he that had received
the promises offered up his only begotten Son, of whom it was said, That in
Isaac thy Seed shall be called, accounting that God was able to raise him up
even from the Dead; from whence also he received him in a Figure. We have seen
Men vanquishing all the Pleasures that the World can present us with, and
consequently all those Inclinations and Appetites by which we are carried
toward 'em. Faith in these Men encountered and defeated whatever strength and
force can be supposed either in Fancy or Imagination or in sensual Appetite, or
in Natural Affection. The Conclusion deducible from hence is, That there is no
desire of worldly Pleasure in Man so vehement, but that it may be conquered;
and consequently that we cannot be necessarily betrayed into Sin by any inbred
Inclination of this kind: there is but one Natural Principle more, from whence
we can imagine any Necessity of sinning to arise, which is an Aversion to all
Pain or Trouble: there are therefore Temptations suited to this Principle in
us, such as deter us from our Duty, either by the sense of present, or the fear
of impending Evil: And it is thought to be the highest and difficultest trial
of Virtue to surmount these Temptations, i. e. to be virtuous when Virtue is
immediately attended or visibly threatened with great Evils. And yet behold,

Thirdly, In this Chapter numerous Instances of as great Constancy in suffering
Pain, as we have seen before of Continence in Rejecting Pleasure, Verse. 35, 36,
37. Others were tortured not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection. And others had trial of Cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea
moreover of Bonds and Imprisonment, they were stoned, they were sawn asunder,
were tempted, were slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheepskins and
Goat Skins being destitute, afflicted, tormented. See here Faith triumphing
over all those things that are the Dread and Terror of Humane Nature,
Reproach, Imprisonment, Banishment, Death, Death in all its most affrightful
Shapes, Death in all its variety of Torments, nay, many Deaths in the lingering
Torments they were frequently put to; how strong, how firm is this frail weak
Nature when supported by a Divine Faith! All these expected a Happy
Resurrection, they saw beyond these Midnight-Clouds the Dawnings of Eternity,
and unspeakable Comforts ready to swallow up and extinguish the memory of their
Sufferings; and in this Confidence they out-brav'd all sorts of Evils. Nor is
it to be wondered at, if Faith which overcomes the sense of present Evils should
disperse the fears of future ones: Hence it was that the Parents of Moses
despised the Menaces of Pharaoh, a Prince Arbitrary in his Power, Cruel in his
Temper, resolved and bloody in the Execution of Mischief. -- Hence it was that
Moses in the same manner despised the Wrath of this King, and well knowing that
no place would be able to protect him from his Power and Cruelty but the
Desert, he forsook Egypt, and fled thither; where he could not but foresee he
was to encounter insuperable Difficulties; but he endured, as seeing him who is
invisible, and knew that the God of Heaven was every where present, and that in
despite of every thing under his Protection he should be both Safe and Happy.

Now since there is no Evil the World can threaten us with equal to that of
Torments and Death, it were vain and superfluous after we have seen these
Conquered, to fancy other Evils of a much slighter Nature unconquerable; it
were absurd to think that that Man could be frightened from his Duty by popular
Reproach, or the Displeasure of great Men, or the Diminution of his Estate, who
cannot by Death it self? 'twere absurd to Fancy that he who despises
Imprisonments, Stripes, Hunger, Nakedness, Torment in Obedience to his Duty and
respect to its Reward, should be discouraged by any little Austerities or
Hardships which Virtue may sometimes exact from him.

Tell me now then, you who complain of the Corruption and Impotence of Man, you
who magnify the Force and Power of Temptation, and from both infer the
Impossibility of being Virtuous and consequently of being Happy, what have you
to answer to these things, these Matters of Unquestionable Fact? you see
Resolution and Faith in these Examples raised to that height and strength,
which no Worldly no Carnal Temptation can resist; tell me then why should the
Faith of a Jew out do that of a Christian? were their Promises more Glorious
and therefore more Efficacious than ours? Look how far short Time is of
Eternity, Corruption of Incorruption, so far was their Canaan of our Heaven:
But suppose they had (as these sure had) a Prospect of the same Heaven, had
they a clearer sight of it; or more convincing Evidence of the certainty of it
than we have? Alas their Shechina, Bath-col, the Thunders and Lightnings of
Mount Sinai, their Pillar of Cloud and Fire were not half so clear assurances
of God amongst 'em, as that Glory which shun in the face of Jesus Christ, that
Power Communicated from above to his Apostles, the Resurrection of Jesus from
the Dead, and his Ascension into Heaven, were a manifest Testimony of God,
asserting and bearing witness to the truth of our Religion, and particularly of
that Fundamental Article in it, the Resurrection of the Body, and Everlasting
life. What then, are our Temptations greater than theirs? the Confidence of the
most sensual Sinner dares not arrive at this Plea: Let the Voluptuary, the
Ambitious confront his Temptations with the Enjoyments or the Hopes of Moses:
Let the most afflicted, miserable Man balance his Temptations with Abraham's
Sacrifice of his Son; or with the Sufferings of those Righteous Men mentioned
in the latter part of this Chapter, and he must confess, that his Temptations
are as much weaker than their's, as is his Faith. What then can be said?
nothing, unless plainly this, that our Case is not the same with their's either
in Respect of our Inclinations or our Assistances: if this were so, then how
could these Men stand as a Cloud of Witnesses against us in the last Day? which
St. Paul intimates in the beginning of the following Chapter: how Natural would
it be for us, to wipe off any Accusation or Reproach which their Virtue could
fasten upon us by this easy answer? It Is true we were foiled and overthrown by
those Temptations which these Men conquered, and well might this happen, for
neither had they our Infirmities, nor we their Grace; their Nature was not so
depraved as our's, nor our Grace so sufficient as their's. Were this so, the
Sinner might be more unfortunate, but not more Criminal than the Saint; the
different Event of things at the last Day were to be imputed to the different
Dispensation not different use of Grace, i. e. to the partiality of God, not
the negligence or wilfulness of Man, than which nothing can be more impiously
or absurdly affirmed.

And now, let not hereafter a fancied Impossibility of Virtue discourage the
Weak, nor a pretended one excuse the wilful; nothing is more Evident than that
there is no Inclination in Man that is Incorrigible, nor any temptation
Incident to our State which is Insuperable: Let any Man that pretends the
contrary, consider what Reason has done in some, what Custom, what Faith in
others; Let him himself try, what Reason, what Discipline, what Faith, (from
all which I never separate Divine Assistance) can do in him, and I am
Confident, he will not then stand in need of any further answer to his
Objection; his own success as well as that of others, will be a sufficient
proof of its weakness: Thus I think I have in general given a satisfactory
answer to as many at least as plead Natural Incapacity against the Possibility
of being Happy: however that no Discouragement, no scruple may remain, I will
give a particular and clear tho brief answer to each part of this Objection.
There are three things supposed by it to render Man naturally incapable of
Virtue and Happiness. First, Violent and invincible Inclinations to Vice:
against this, as the most considerable part of the Objection, the whole bent
and force of the precedent Discourse was levelled, and therefore this needs no
farther answer, only here it will be worth our remarking, That those
differences that are in the Natures and Tempers of Men are not Essential, but
Accidental, and consequently they may make the way to Happiness more difficult
to some than others, but impossible to none. The strongest Inclination to
Virtue (I speak of that which is the result of Natural Temper) seems to me but
a weaker Inclination to Vice, every Man has naturally a propension to Pleasure,
and consequently the sensitive Part of us to sensitive Pleasure; how much finer
mould our our first Parents were made of than we are, I know not; but this I
find, the Desire of Pleasure was Natural to 'em even in Innocence; This was
that which the Beauty of the Apple did easily inflame, and that was such a
Degree, that I am not able to discern by the Text, to which I should rather
impute their Sin and their loss of Paradise, to the Desire of Knowledge, or the
Desire of Pleasure: This tendency of the Sensitive Part is Natural to all, but
in some it is more, in some less violent; unless we may say upon one ground,
it is equal in all, for the difference of Temper discovers it self rather in the
different kinds of Pleasure we pursue, than in the different degrees of our
Inclination to it; we are all equally allured and drawn, yet not by the same
but several Objects, so that if Lust prevail in one, Ambition as much prevails
in another, and Covetousness in a third, and in others Intemperance or Sloth:
So that the difficulty of Virtue seems much the same to all the Sons of Adam,
the strength of Temptation consisting especially in our weakness; not in the
Excellency of the Object we are taken with, but in our Inclination to it: hence
is it as Difficult for one Man to overcome his Covetousness, as to another to
overcome his Lust; and restless toilsom Ambition is as luscious and taking with
some tempers as lazy and delicious Luxury with others: if this were
well-weighed, it would make us more mild and gentle in our Censure of others,
and not so soft and easy in excusing our selves. It Is further worth our
observing here, that every Man's Virtue derives some tincture from his
Constitution and Temper, so that generally speaking, it is not difficult to
guess a Man's Natural Constitution by the Complexion of his Religion; however
Virtue ceases not to be Virtue; nor will that slight Allay of the natural
Constitution extinguish its Vigor and Merit, tho it behooves every Man to keep
a strict and jealous guard upon his Inclinations, for Nature soon revives even
after it has been some time Buried, and to labor most after that Perfection
which does most contradict and oppose the particular Vice of his Constitution;
for it will be otherwise morally impossible to gain a Conquest over it, and as
impossible to gain a Rational Peace and Security without this Conquest.

A Second thing which is supposed in the Objection to incapacitate Man for
Happiness is an unteachable stupidity, consisting in a slow Conception and
treacherous Memory: It Is true indeed, the Heathen Philosophers did require in
their Scholars the Knowledge of many abstruse and difficult Matters, as
antecedently necessary to Virtue and Happiness, Skill in Mathematics fitted a
Man for the Platonic Philosophy, and the Knowledge of Natural things was the
Foundation on which the Epicuraean pretended his Divine Happiness and Virtue
was to be built; and Seneca reckons the unthinking Crowd amongst the Beasts
that Perish: all of 'em did with one consent require three things to Complete a
Virtuous and Happy Man; Nature, Education or Instruction, and Custom. To the
First, they attributed the Disposition to Virtue; To the Second the Beginning;
To the Third, the Easiness and Constancy; and to all three together the
Perfection of it. And hence it is that they did distinguish between Perfect and
Imperfect, between Political or Social and Philosophical Virtue, and did not
deem every Nature Capable of that Virtue which was Perfect and Philosophical.
But our blessed Lord and Master the Author of the Christian Philosophy requires
no such qualifications in those who will be his Disciples; All that he
requires, is, an humble and an honest Mind, freed from proud Prejudices,
possessed with a sincere Love of the Truth, and a sincere Resolution of obeying
it: accordingly St. Paul observes that such were most wrought upon by the
Preaching of the Gospel: 1 Cor. 1.
Ye see your Calling Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called; But God has chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the things which are mighty: And base things of the world,
and things that are despised has God chosen. Nor will any one imagine that
Acute and Eminent parts are Necessary to render a Man capable of Being a
Christian, who shall consider the Brevity and Plainness of the Christian Faith
and Law: does it require a deep and penetrating Judgment, or a firm and
tenacious Memory, to enable us to understand or remember that plain and short
Summary of Christian Practice? The Grace of God teaches us to deny all
ungodliness and wordly Lusts, Titus 2.
and live Righteously, Soberly and Godlily in this present world: or that as
brief and perspicuous Abridgment of the Christian Faith? John 17.
This is life Eternal, to know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent: or that excellent Abridgment of both by St. Paul? Acts 20.
Repentance toward God and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. It Is true all
things are now ravell'd and entangled, and the Faith and Virtue of Christianity
is not half so conspicuous amongst Christians as their Theological Wars,
Tumults and Factions; But this is owing to Man, not to the Gospel, to the Pride
and Superstition of the one, not to the Obscurity of the other: Nor may any one
here with any show of Reason object, That tho the substance of the Christian
Faith and Practice is clear, yet the Reasons of both are not so; for who can
ever imagine such a Stupidity of Nature as can disable any one to understand
the Proofs by which the Scripture establishes the great Fundamental Article of
our Faith, That Jesus is the Christ, the Messiah or Mediator between God and
Man? or what Stupidity of Nature can render it an impossible Task to us to
comprehend the two Fundamental Reasons of Evangelical Righteousness, namely,
the Subserviency of it to the Happiness of this, and of another Life, and the
Holiness of the God we Worship? I do not write this as if I meant hereby to
represent Industry in search of Divine Truths, as Superfluous and un-necessary;
but to assure all of how mean Capacities soever, of the success of it. I am not
Ignorant how much some applaud themselves on the account of acquired Knowledge
of doubtful or abstruse things; how much others value themselves on a peculiar
sort of Politics remote enough indeed from Virtue; and others on
Accomplishments as remote from Reason, as the others Politics from Virtue; and
how much all of 'em do despise the dullness of those who cannot, and the
simplicity of those who strive not to equal 'em in these Seize: But all
this does not beget in me the least Scruple or Suspicion of the Truth I have
before asserted; I know that our Duty is plain, and that the Path of Duty is
the most direct and Compendious one to the Happiness of this life and of
another: for I know that nothing is so taking with God as an humble Faith,
Devout, Pure, Peaceable and Charitable Religion. As to worldly Happiness I know
that a Man's own Virtue supported by God's Spirit, and guided by his Truth is
the safest and the plainest Guide he can follow in Dark and Tempestuous times;
true Policy consists not in that Address or subtilty of Spirit, which furnishes
a Man at all times with plausible Shifts, but in that Integrity and Virtue that
needs none: and the Beauty and Life of Conversation consists not in Artificial
Faces, Fantastic Dresses, Mechanic Motions, Shrugs and Cringes, much less in
Mechanic (for so I may call set forms of Chat) but in an humble, diligent and
faithful discharge of the Duties we owe to all those several Relations we stand
in, and the observance of those Laws of Conversation which true Philosophy
prescribes; This is that which will make us acceptable to all, and dear to the
Wise and Good; Slights, and Tricks, and Arts may divert and entertain, but
Virtues do charm and captivate, those may open us the way to men's Houses and
their Tables, but these to their Bosoms to their Hearts. The sum of all is,
Great Endowments of Nature seem to be Necessary for the Attainment of
Unnecessary Accomplishments, common Endowments are sufficient to make us
capable of Virtue and Happiness. This Marcus Antoninus had well observed, and
has as well expressed in several places, more fully, Lib. 5. Sect. 3. more
briefly elsewhere thus, Marc. Ant. lib. 7.. 41.
(...). Though thou despair'st of being a Logician, a Naturalist, a
Mathematician, a Courtier, a State-Empiric, a Talkative Bigot, or a Mimical
Fop, (for these too pass for Accomplishments with some) yet despair not of
becoming a Wise Man and a Philosopher; though thou have not Abilities big
enough to make thy Confidence pass for Wit and Demonstration, though thou have
not the Art of Wheedling, nor the Talent of shifting and deluding, though thou
have no faculty for deep Dissimulation nor slight Insinuation, though thy parts
lie below all these and a great many other Perfections, yet for all this
despair not, thou have Parts sufficient to make thee Happy, thou may be free
(Redeemed from the Servitude of Vice) Modest, Humble, Charitable, and
Obsequious to God, And in these very few things consists (...), The Blessedness
of Life.

A Third thing wherein the Objection supposes Natural Incapacity to consist, is
such a slightness, levity, and inconstancy of Temper as seems to render Men
neither fit for any close Application, nor susceptible of any deep and lasting
Impression; it cannot be denied but that some are of such an airy, volatile,
and various Temper, that they seem to be designed for nothing serious, nothing
great, as if like Flowers, they were the Sport not Work of Nature, made not for
Use but Ornament: But I have always observed, that Nature makes up defects of
one kind by Advantages of another; Thus it happens here, those Constitutions
which do most want solidity and strength do most partake of Softness and
Tenderness; so that they are as much more apt to receive Impressions, as they
are more unapt to retain 'em than others, like yielding air which the gentlest
stroke does as easily divide and part, as it does easily return and unite it
self again. Hence it is generally observed, that that Age and that Sex which are
supposed to have least of fixtness and Constancy, have most of Heat and Passion
in Religion, and those Minds which are worst furnished with Courage and
Experience, with Judgment and Resolution are most apt and easy to be moved and
wrought upon by Religious, or deluded by Superstitious Fears; and as apt to be
tenderly affected by the Representations of Divine Goodness and Compassion; so
that like Bodies which have less bulk, but more agility, their Motion's
nimbler, tho their, force and strength be less. Now if this be so, then the
Disadvantage of this Temper is not so great as it is fancied, for though their
Passions last not long, they are easily raised; and consequently, if our
Addresses to such a Temper be but a little more frequently repeated, they
cannot but prove successful, and such Persons by the frequent Returns of Holy
Passions will grow habitually devout, and their Devotion will be as steady and
more elevated than that of a slower and firmer Constitution: But after all
wherever there appears an Exuberancy of this Humor, this is to be imputed
rather to their Fortune than their Nature; a wanton Fortune and too indulgent
an Education is generally attended with a gay, wanton and unfix't Mind. And
it is true that it is a difficult Matter for such Minds as these to attain to
Wisdom and Virtue, but it is not because they cannot consider, but because they
will not; let but such exchange their haunts of Pleasure for the House of
Mourning; let 'em but now and then intermix the Conversation of the wise and
serious with that of the giddy, fanciful, and frolicksom; and they will soon
find their Humor much corrected, and their Minds better fixed; to all this, if
they could be persuaded to add the Contemplation of a suffering Savior, of a
Holy God and of a Judgment to come; and to this the Devotion of the Closet made
up of serious Reflection on these Subjects and their own Eternity, this would
soon reduce their loose and scattered Desires, it would soon recall the roving,
wandering Mind, and make it delight to dwell at home in the Company of Wise,
Devout and Important Thoughts.

And now I think, I have left no part of this Objection founded upon Natural
Incapacity unconsider'd. Do Men complain of their heaviness and stupidity?
acute Parts and a tenacious Memory are not necessary to make us Virtuous or
Happy; do they complain of their violent Inclinations to Sin? I have showed 'em
Reason, Custom, Faith, curbing and subduing the most Natural or the most
outrageous and ungovernable Appetites of Man: do they Complain of the Levity
and Inconstancy of their Temper? let 'em retire from the Flatteries and
Caresses of a wanton Fortune, and a wanton Conversation; let 'em acquaint
themselves with the Wise or the Afflicted, with Divine Truths and their
Closets, and this will soon work a Happy change upon 'em, if they are too soft
and delicate for the bitterness and severity of these Prescriptions, nothing
but the much severer Discipline of Afflictions and Judgments can effect their
Cure. Under this Head of Natural Incapacity that other Objection from Moral
Incapacity has been sufficiently answered, for Custom is at most but a second
Nature; and I have at large discoursed of the Power of Reason and Faith over
Nature; I have produced many and unquestionable Instances, wherein we have seen
'em overcome our most natural and most necessary Appetites, such as are, our
Aversion to pain, our love of Life, and such like. Nor is it possible that any
vicious Custom should have taken deeper Root in us, or united themselves more
closely with our very Beings than these, and therefore it were absurd to fancy
'em more violent, stubborn, or insuperable; That Expression of the Prophet,
Jer. 13.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? Then may ye also
learn to do Good, who are accustomed to do Evil; is but a Pathetic Exaggeration
(which is usual in a Prophetic style) of the Difficulty, not an Assertion of
the Impossibility of an habitual Sinner's Change; what has been done, and daily
is done can be done, and it is in vain to prove what no Man can deny; St. Paul
when he had recited a Catalogue of such Sinners as should not enter into the
Kingdom of God, does afterward add, 1 Cor. 6.
and such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And
Tertullian does appeal to the Power and Efficacy of the Christian Religion
visible in the Extirpation of vicious Habits wrought by it, as a proof of its
Divine Original; nor are such Instances as these wanting this Day, These, as
they do now refute all the Idle Excuses of Sinners, so will they one Day be
urged in Judgment against 'em to convince 'em that they owe their Ruin to
their sloth and obstinacy, not their Impotence; tho these Men ought to remember
too, that Moral Impotence is ever derived from a voluntary Neglect or Contempt
of all the means of Happiness and Virtue: I think I might now dismiss this
Objection, having given full satisfaction to all scruples that might disturb or
discourage any well-meaning and honest Mind: and evidently defeated the
pretenses of such as would fain shroud and shelter their voluntary Sin and
Folly under the feigned Excuses of Impotence, Incapacity and insupportable
Infirmity or insuperable Temptations: for all these are mix't and combined in
every part of the former Objection, and receive one and the same Answer. But I
foresee, I shall be thought in this whole Discourse to have had too little
regard to our Original Corruption, and Divine Assistance; and therefore tho I
endeavored to guard it in the beginning against all sinister Interpretation, I
will here add a brief account of both; especially as far as it shall appear to
me to concern my present Enquiry.

First, The Corruption of Nature Considered.
As to the Natural Corruption of Man, if Corruption may be called Natural, on
the account of the Tendency of our sensitive Inclinations; some things are very
plain, some very obscure; what is plain is this, what the present state of Man
is with respect to that Righteousness which the Gospel requires; what is
obscure is this, what the state of Adam before the Fall was, without a clear
knowledge of which it is impossible to determine how much our Nature is now
degenerated (as is supposed) from the Primitive Purity and Excellency of its
Creation. Secondly, how Guilt and Corruption could be transmitted or derived
from Adam upon his Posterity; Third^y, What can be supposed properly speaking
to be the Demerit, Offense, or Provocation of Original Corruption; what
Punishment can be due to it, divided and separated from Voluntary
Transgressions: These and a great many things of the like Nature I purposely
pass over, as either of no great Importance in themselves, or at leastwise of
no great Use to my present Enquiry, and go on to what is Plain and Necessary,
and that is, What the present state and Condition of Humane Nature is, for
nothing can be more Evident than that the Flesh lusts against the Spirit,
Gal. 5.
and the Spirit against the Flesh; These two being contrary one to another in
their Tendencies and Inclinations, This Conflict or Opposition of Spirit and
Body discovers it self the more, the more pure and perfect the Law is, that we
are under; This tendency of the Body is so apparent and undeniable, that it was
ever acknowledged by all Wise Heathens. Hence the Plotinus Ennead. 1. lib. 1.
c. 9. Enn. 2. lib. 3. c. 15. Enn. 3. lib. 1. c. 8. Aug. de Civ. Dei.
Platonics frequently impute the Diminution of the Power and Liberty of the
Soul of Man to its Conjunction with the Body; and Hence it was that some of 'em
whom St. Austin refutes by giving an Account of the Nature of the raised Body,
rejected the Christian Doctrine of the Resurrection, judging the restitution of
the Body, rather a diminution of than accession to the Happiness of the Mind.
The Pythagoreans looked upon the Body as the Prison and the Punishment of the
Soul, and in short the Philosophy of the Heathens did consist chiefly in this,
the subduing the Appetites of the Body to the Reason of the Mind: and this
appears most plainly to be the Drift and Scope of Christian Philosophy; From
whence it follows, that the Disorder of Humane Nature (call it Original
Corruption or what you please) consists in the (...), the Lust and
Concupiscence of the Flesh, This is Evident from all the Writings of St. Paul,
especially Romans the 7th, and this is the sense of our Church Art. the 9th;
Nor indeed are we Capable of Imagining any other Corruption in Man; for if
there be a Conflict betwixt Right Reason, and Carnal Appetite, if the Tendency
of the Body and the Mind be opposite and controdictory, it is Nonsense to
suppose both Corrupt and Sinful; for then the Contradiction and Conflict would
cease: From hence it follows plainly, that we are born with Capacities of and
Inclinations to Virtue as well as Vice, tho nothing be more manifest than that
the Appetite of the Body exerts it self first, grows up to Strength and
Maturity soonest, and does more powerfully and forcibly move than the
Suggestions and Persuasions of Reason: Secondly, It is from hence plain, that a
state of Righteousness consists in the prevalency of the Mind over the Body,
and a state of Sin in the prevalency of the Body over the Mind. And from hence
appears the Necessity of Divine Assistance or Grace Considered.
Divine Grace or Assistance; for since the Dominion of Righteousness cannot be
Established, but in the subjection of the Body, and the Body does in Power so
much o'rematch the Mind, the Appetites of it being both more forward, more
violent, more constant, I had almost said, more Natural, than the Dictates of
Reason; and this Power receiving daily increase and augmentation by a sensual
Education, and by a daily and unavoidable Commerce with the World, and those
Temptations which awaken, gratify and inflame the Appetites of the Body, it
were morally impossible that the Mind should master and overcome the Body, if
it were not aided by Divine Grace and Assistance; but then it must be
remembered, that it is repugnant to the very Notion of Aid or Assistance, that it
should make void the Necessity of our own Endeavors; as the Light of
Revelation does not extinguish that of Reason but increase it; so neither does
the strength of God's Grace render our Natural strength useless, but improve
and help it: This added to what I have said before, comprises all that is
necessary to be known concerning Grace, and may be reduced to these three or
four Heads. First, That the Grace of God is necessary to enable us to live
Virtuously and Happily; Secondly, That Grace does not extinguish Nature, or
cancel our Obligation to Industry or a careful use of that Natural Power God
has invested us with; Thirdly, That God is most ready and desirous to further
and assist all Men in their Endeavors after Virtue and Happiness: And lastly,
That the Grace of God is sufficient for us, or, that we receive by it as great
an addition of Strength or Spiritual Aid, as being joined with our sincere
Endeavors, is necessary to make us Virtuous and Happy: if we deny the first of
these, we subvert the Foundation of Prayer to and dependence upon God, we can
give no tolerable account of at least one third part of the Gospel of Christ,
and we unavoidably discourage Mankind from all hopes of Happiness; if we deny
the second, we destroy the very Nature of Man, render all Laws, Exhortations,
Admonitions, Rewards and Punishments useless, silly and impertinent; and make
Divine Grace the very foundation of carnal Security, of desperate and
destructive Negligence and Sloth: if we deny the third or fourth, we must
unavoidably affirm, either that the Happiness of Man does no way depend upon
the Grace of God, or that his Misery is fatal and unavoidable: All which are
Absurdities gross and palpable to all Minds which lie not under the thickest
darkness of blind Superstition and Prejudice. Whoever shall now reflect upon
all that has been said will easily be able to conclude, that we have no Enemy
without us, none within us that can necessitate and compel us to be miserable;
Misery may be our Choice or Punishment, it can never be our Fate: Our natural
Corruption may invite and incline us, but can never force and compel us to be
wicked: for there is no Temptation, no Inclination, which God's Grace and our
Industry are not able to resist and overcome: So that now there remains at last
no other Incapacity of Happiness than what is Penal, which is the next thing to
be spoke to.

Of Penal Incapacity.
Penal Incapacity consists in God's final and immutable rejection of Man from
Grace and Pardon. The matter of this Objection shall be fully handled, Vol. 3.
where I shall be obliged to treat of the Troubles of the Mind, and their Cure;
In the mean time, all that is Necessary to be observed here is, First, That
this state of final Rejection from Grace and Pardon is Penal, a state to which
no thing but Men's voluntary Transgressions can betray 'em, and those too
Transgressions of the deepest guilt, and most crying aggravations; for surely
nothing less can provoke a God who delights to exercise loving Kindness and
Mercy, a God of infinite long-Suffering and Patience, to pass a Sentence, an
irreversible Sentence of eternal Ruin and Damnation upon any of his Creatures.
Secondly, That no mistaken Fancies of the Unpardonableness of our state may
either tempt us desperately to renounce God, our Savior, and Virtue; it
behooves us to consider what ought to be the proper Influence of this Persuasion
that there is such a Penal state on this side the Grave.

First, If they who believe such a state will act consonant to their own
Opinion, they must not allow themselves in a course of wilful Sin, lest they be
insensibly betrayed into that dreadful state.

Secondly, Since Impenitence and Hardness of heart is a Necessary and
inseparable Consequence of that dreadful Sentence which excludes Men from Grace
and Pardon; therefore no Man can rationally conclude himself in this state,
till he has made all possible attempts to recover himself from his Sin, and
that without success; And because,

Lastly, No man can conclude his Endeavors unsuccessful, till Death surprise
him in an Obdurate and Impenitent state; for habitual Sinners have become
eminent Saints, and laps't Christians, nay Apostates have not only recovered
their former state, but redeemed their Crimes by more than Ordinary degrees of
Repentance, Devotion, and Charity, and by undeniable Consequence have been
restored to God's Favor; for Grace is in order to Pardon, Sanctification in
order to Justification, Virtue in order to Glory; therefore no Man must give
over his Attempts of appeasing God, and subduing his Corruptions, while God
continues him in the Land of the Living: These Rules if observed will, I
question not render the Persuasion of such a Penal state, as the Objection
supposes, very profitable and useful to some, and not pernicious to the eternal
Interest of any: For he who by the Dread of such a state, is deterred from bold
and provoking Sins, and from an habitual Course of wilful Impiety, reaps an
Unspeakable Advantage by it; and he who adheres to Religion and Virtue, and
continues to his life's End, sincerely endeavoring to please God and obtain
his Pardon, shall never suffer any Prejudice in another life by his melancholy
and mistaken Fancies in this. I have now spoke to all those Objections which
seem to oppose and assault my Position of the Possibility of Attaining
Happiness with any show of Reason. It is now high time I should proceed.

SECT. II.
TO answer those who against this Assertion oppose not Reasons and Arguments,
but Observation and Experience; they do not find that ever any have been Happy,
and therefore they conclude that none ever can. The Answer to this Objection
will be a most convincing Argument of the Truth of my Position, That Happiness
is attainable in this Life; for if I prove this Observation false, and can
produce undeniable Instances of Happy Men, the Dispute falls of it self.
Instances of Happy Men.
But where shall I find them? Shall I present you with the Envied Happiness or
Glory of Mighty Princes? Alas! the Wisest of the Heathen Gods preferred the
Happiness of Aglaus Sophydius before that of Gyges! And the wisest of Men (in
his time at least) preferred the Happiness of Tellus before that of Croesus!
And this Sentence seems not only to deny those particular Princes Happy but
also to pronounce the very state of Royalty incapable of Happiness, or at least
less capable than that of a Plough-man; indeed this state when active and
glorious is full of Fears, and Cares, and Hazards; when sluggish and unactive
full of shame: what can be the Happiness of a state too big for Friendship or
for Pleasure? for love is the Business and Enjoyment of Equals; Obedience is
all Subjects can offer, or indeed Monarchs can receive; All higher and nearer
approaches to the Throne are but Intrusions of Ambition and Design: Nor can I
possibly discern what Satisfaction the great Mortal can take in any Expressions
of Duty or Affection, which he can never distinguish from the fawning and
flattery of those who in their hearts despise and hate him: How shall he know
that any truly love him, when none dare slight him? or how shall he discern who
serves him out of Duty, where every Man even obtrudes himself upon his Commands
out of Interest? In a word, the Passions of a Prince are so much greater than
other Men's as is his Mind and Fortune; his Conversation is not with the Minds
of Men, but with Faces, or rather Masks and Disguises. And as to his Pleasures,
his gust of 'em is very flat, being cloyed and surfeited by his Affluence: And
whereas all other Men as the Ambitious, the Vainglorious, the Covetous, the
Lover seem to ascend and rise above themselves in the Acquisition of those
Pleasures they aspire to; the Monarch debases himself, descends and stoops
below his Fortune to meet his. And yet I am not of Apollo's nor Solon's Mind, I
cannot think there is any great Happiness in the Ignorance and the quietness of
a laboring Cottager, such as Tellus or Aglaus Sophydius; I love Security, but
not that which Contempt breeds, I would have my Security owing not to the
Littleness of my Fortune, but the Greatness of my Mind: I love a Quiet, but a
Philosophical life, I would have my Tranquillity spring not from the Ignorance
but Reason of my Mind; from the Right Government of my Passions, not from the
Meanness of my Education or Fortune. For the same Reason I do not call Men
happy, whose slow and easy Temper like the waters of the Dead Sea, is not to
be moved even by Wind and Storm: I do not call Stupidity a Calm, the Soul that
is insensible of Trouble, is so of Joy too: whoever is incapable of any deep
Impression, is so of any serious Reflection too, and what is the state of such a
Man? I would not have my life pass by like a Dream, whilst fleeting or
imperfect Images of things do scarce awake, and too too slightly affect my
drouzy or dazzled sense. In a word, the Happiness I seek after is such a one
which is owing neither to Natural Constitution, nor to Fortune: for then, it
would not be in our Power. The Men then whom I call Happy, are such who are
possessed of true and solid Goods, and those such which Fortune cannot give nor
take away; such were Christ and his Apostles, and such are all those at this
Day as are transformed into the Glory and Image of the Divine Nature by the
mighty Energy of the Divine Spirit and Divine Truths. Let us consider therefore
what the state of Christ and his Apostles was in this Life: I will not take
notice of those Ecstatic Pleasures which they felt when they did those God-like
Works which we call Miracles, what Triumph could be equal to theirs who saw
Diseases, Devils and Death subject to their Commands? what joy could be equal
to theirs, when they gave Life to the Dead, Sight to the Blind, Strength to the
Lame, etc? To what a height was Wonder and Delight raised in each of these
Performances? for nothing could be more wonderful than the Power, or delightful
than the Charity conspicuous in 'em: but this I pass over, because this Power
is not to be attained by us: Let us come to that which is, I mean the Virtues
of Christ and his Apostles; He had not a hole where to lay his Head: it is true,
but how truly great was he in himself? how much above the mean and unmanly
desires of Ambition, Covetousness, or Lust? he indulged himself in no sensual
Carnal Pleasures, it is true, but how Calm that Soul which no Angry or Envious
Passion disturbed, where nothing but sacred Love dwelt? the love of God, the
love of Man, and the rational and wise love of himself? how Happy that Soul
which was illuminated with Divine Knowledge, supported by an unshaken Faith,
filled with joyful Reflections and glorious Hopes? that Soul which in the
silence of the Night, and the Retirements of the Mount did pour forth it self
in Prayers and Hallelujah's, that Soul which full of God and full of Heaven,
had no room for uneasy Cares or afflicting Sorrows? it is true, our Savior met
Death with pale looks and melancholy pangs of Soul; but it is as true, that his
Faith surmounted his Fears, his Agony endured but for a little while an
undisturbed Peace, and a well-settled serenity of Mind immediately followed it,
and his trouble and Pain in Death, like the Eclipse that attended it, did but
o'recast and darken the joy, the light within, not extinguish it: who could
finish the last Act of Life with more humble Majesty, or with more settled
Peace? in the Life and Death of our dear Lord we behold that of his Disciples,
for they were all Followers of him, as they desired we should be of them: what
can be happier than their state here was? their Life was Regular and
Philosophical, their Joy steady and Rational, their Love of God vigorous, their
Charity to Man servent and Diffused; their Desires, as to the World, modest;
their Minds resolved and brave in Afflictions, Cheerful and Composed in Death
it self.

Let it stand then as an unshaken Truth, That Happiness may be attained in this
Life; for what the Followers of our Lord and Master attained to, that may we;
their Natural Passions and Infirmities were the same with our's, our Trials and
Temptations are far less than theirs; we serve the same God, we are guided by
the same Truths, supported by the same Power, elevated by the same Hopes; we
have the same Peace bequeathed us, the same Spirit, the same Heaven promised
us, and we march under the Conduct of the same Captain of our Salvation, who by
his Death has Abolish't Death, and brought Life and Immortality to Light. Nor
ought this to seem to us an over-daring or presumptuous Position, since the
Possibility of Happiness is a Notion Consonant to the Common sense of all
Mankind: for it is Happiness which Laws enacted for the Government of the
Multitude, and Philosophical Rules prescribed for the Government of our
Passions, do aim at; All Lawgivers have ever promised the people Wealth, and
Peace, and Glory, and Security, as the fruits of their Obedience: and all
Philosophers have ever promised Tranquillity of Mind and Rational Pleasure to
their Followers as the Rewards of Conformity to their Precepts: And as it
cannot surely be denied, but that the Kingdom is most Happy, which by just Laws
and a well-tempered Authority, is freed from those Fears and Distractions, from
those Mischiefs and Confusions to which others are exposed by Anarchy or
Tyranny by the Insolence of the Multitude, or the Impotence of the Prince; so
it cannot be denied, but that the Man is most Happy, whose well-settled Peace
is established upon solid Grounds of true Wisdom; being neither oppressed by
the Tyranny of Superstition, nor vex't and disquieted by the Insolence of
unruly Passions, to which the weakness of Reason subjects Men. As to Religion,
which is a third governing Principle, this only proposes a more perfect
Happiness, and a more plain and direct way to it, than Nature of it self could:
it only relieves and recruits our Natural Power by that of Grace, and increases
the Light of Reason by a participation of new Rays of Revelation. If then
Happiness be the great End which Law and Philosophy, Revelation and Reason, God
and Man, do unanimously propose to us, how absurd and palpable a Contradiction
were it to all these, to deny the Attainment of it possible?

To look back now upon this whole Chapter, The Conclusion
and sum up the substance and force of it, it is this, God who made us, made us
on purpose to be Happy; for what other design could Infinite Love propose to it
self in our Creation? and proposing to himself this End, he endowed us with
Faculties and Capacities that might fit us for the Contemplation and Enjoyment
of himself, and of his Works: The World provided by him for our Entertainment,
he filled with all things that could Minister either to our Necessities or
Delights: here God has planted us, not as Inhabitants but Sojourners; for this
is but our state of Probation, Angels had their times of Trial, so have Men;
here he would have us aspire after, as near as we can, that life Angels lead in
Heaven; for we are one Day to be equal to 'em: here he would have us learn and
practice those Virtues which fit us for the Society and Enjoyment of that
Kingdom wherein dwells Righteousness, for that is the blessed End and
Consummation of all our Endeavors, Desires and Hopes; but when we make Heaven
the Abode, the Seat of Perfect Happiness, we do not thereby suppose that it is
banished from the Earth, but rather on the contrary, if that state be the
Consummation of all things, it is Necessarily to be concluded that every step we
advance nearer to it, we mount and ascend higher, into brighter, calmer and
purer Regions: Heaven is like a Glorious Building, whose access is full of
Delight and Beauty; for as that Youth which precedes our Manhood, has its
Sweetness, its Beauty, its natural Perfection and Pleasure; so has this
mortal-state which precedes our Angelical, its proper Degree of Perfection and
Blessedness: and this is no small one neither, for as we are created but a
little lower than the Angels in respect to the Dignity of our Nature, so surely
our Happiness begins nearly to approach and resemble theirs: When our Mind
filled with Divine Truths, Charity and Hope becomes Free, Generous, Resolved,
Constant, Cheerful, Meek, Gentle, Devout Heavenly: when it has so accustomed it
self to Virtue, and familiarly acquainted it self with Heaven, that the Sins
and Pleasures of the sensual Part of the World look like the Manners and
Entertainments, not only of a Foreign, but Barbarous and Impoverish't Country;
and when lastly by its frequent Retirements from the Body and daily Commerce
with Rational and Spiritual Pleasures, it not only asserts its Sovereignty over
it, but begins to live so independent of it, that at the last when it shall in
Death mount up upon the Wings of pure Flame to Heaven, it shall not suffer as
if the Body needed to be torn from it, but shall let it fall, as Elijah did his
Mantle. Those Complaints therefore which we make against our present state, and
those Reproaches with which we outrage and vilify our Nature, are false and
unjust, for we are by God created and designed for Happiness, and this
Happiness God has been pleased to put in our own power to place within our
reach: There is no Fate, but what God has made us our selves Arbiters of; we
lie under no Necessity, no Fatality, but what our own Vices betray us to; Nor
do we stand in need of the Indulgences of Fortune, the Tranquillity and
Pleasure of a Virtuous Man is an Image of God's own; it springs from within,
not from without; it is true there are Difficulties which obstruct our Progress
to Happiness; but they are such as all Wise and Good Men have conquered: it is
true, Nature labors under its Infirmities, that is, sensual Propensions and
Inclinations; but it is strengthened and supported by Reason, by Revelation, by
Grace: we may fall ('it is true) a Sacrifice to God's Wrath, but it must be after
we have lived long in Contempt of his Mercy, and obstinate Defyance of his
Grace. Methinks these Considerations should raise and exalt the Mind of Man,
they should inspire us with Desires and Hopes worthy of Rational and Immortal
Souls, like the Israelites when they marched out of Egypt, we should dream of
nothing but Triumph, Glory, and Happiness.

CHAP. III. Of the Causes of Man's Misery.
The Deviation of our Lives from Right Reason, the true and Universal Cause of
Man's Misery: This Deviation discovers it self, First, In our proposing to our
selves some false and irrational End of Life. Secondly, In our Insincerity in
pursuing our true and Rational End. The Reasons of both these, are, 1. The
Frame, and Contexture of our Nature. 2. Vicious Education. 3. A vicious
Conversation and Course of Life; from whence proceed, Inconsideration,
Insincerity, False Notions, Vngovernable Passions, Remissness and Inconstancy.
A Representation of the whole Matter. From all inferred, First, What Happiness
in general is. Secondly, Two general Rules for the Attaining of it.

WEre the Happy, like Quem adhuc nos quidem vidimus Neminem, sed Phylosophorum
sententiis qualis futurus sit si modo aliquando fuerit, exponitur. Tusc. Quest.
l. 2.
Tully's Wise man, a mere Idea, something no where to be found but in the
Characters and Descriptions which Philosophers give us of him, this were an
unconquerable Discouragement; no Briskness of Wit, no Charms of Fancy, no force
of Eloquence, no height of Spirits or heat of Confidence were sufficient to
remove it, and to engage Men in such a Desperate and unaccountable Enterprise
as this Supposition would render the pursuit of Happiness: for how fond and
groundless a Presumption were it to pursue that which all Mankind had ever as
Unsuccessfully as Earnestly and Indefatigably attempted? I have therefore
endeavored with all my might in the former Chapter to free men's Minds from
any Suspicion or Fears of this Kind, answering all Objections that might seem
to represent Misery fatal, or Happiness unattainable, and by undeniable proofs
Confirming the Opposite Truth. But if this be true, that Happiness is
attainable, and if it be as true, as certainly it is, that there needs no
Eloquence to enkindle in any Man the Desires of Happiness, or to incite and
spur him on to Endeavor its Attainment, all Mankind being carried on toward
it by Natural, and therefore Constant and Passionate Inclinations: will it not
be Natural to demand, Whence is it that so few are Happy? Whence is it that
Misery and Trouble, Affliction and Sorrow fill almost every place and every
Bosom? Not only no Kingdom or City, but no Town, no Village, no Family, I
might almost add no one particular Person, being exempt and free; no place or
person is priviledg'd against Grief and Trouble, it invades the Tribunal of
Judges, the Thrones of Princes, and what is almost as sacred as either, the
Retirements and Closets of the Devout and Learned; nay scarcely is the Church
and the Altar a secure Sanctuary against it.

This will not be difficult to Comprehend, if we do thoroughly weigh and soberly
consider the true Causes of Man's Misery; but the particular and distinct
Discussion of each of these will fall in, in its proper place in the following
Treatises, and therefore I shall Discourse of 'em here only generally and
briefly, as the Nature of an Introduction requires.

Many are the particular Causes of Humane Misery, Deviation from Reason the
general Cause of Man's Misery.
but they may all be reduced to this Universal and Immediate One, Namely, That
we do not live Conformable to our Reason.

-- Quid enim Ratione timemus aut Cupimus -- When do our Affections spring
from, or when are they governed by Reason? When are our Desires or Fears, our
Joys or Sorrows Wife, and Just, and Rational and Holy? how frequently are our
Actions nothing else but the brutish and blind Sallies of foolish Passions,
and our lives are generally nothing else but the Wanderings and Rambles of
deluded Imaginations? How commonly do we act what we our selves Condemn? and
how commonly does the whole Course of our Lives displease our selves as much as
others? and yet we live on in Contradiction to our Reason, and sometimes to our
Inclinations too: How unlike are we in our Conversation to our selves in our
Retirement? how unlike are we in the Devotions of our Closets to our selves in
the Employment of our several Professions? how calm, sedate, wise, holy, and
resolved in the one? how anxious and uneasy, how foolish, earthy, and
inconstant in the other? but in nothing does our Deviation from Reason more
evidently appear than in two things.

This Deviation discovers it self in our false Ends and Insincerity.
First, In our proposing to our selves false and Irrational Ends of Life; and
Secondly, In our Insincerity in pursuing the true and rational one, that is
Happiness. As to the first, who sees not how the Life of Man is perverted, the
force and tendency of Nature crook't and bowed to Designs utterly unsuitable to
the Capacities and Faculties of a Rational Mind, and to the great End of our
Creation? who can look into the Life of Man, and not easily conclude that his
chief Aim is Wealth and Greatness, not Happiness? or which is something
sillyer, that his Design is some unnecessary Accomplishment, not Virtue and
Goodness, or a vain Esteem and popular Applause, not the Peace and Wisdom of
his Mind? who sees not how greedily Men pursue those sensual Satisfactions
which naturally tend to enslave the Soul, and to extinguish the rational
Pleasure and Vigor of our Minds? In a word, Wealth, and Honor, and Power, and
Pleasure, are the Idols of Mankind, these are the things for which they live,
for which they love and value life; these are the glorious Possessions which
inflame our Emulations and our Industry; these are the things which the
Unfortunate man Envies, and the Fortunate Honors; these are the things which
distinguish and discriminate Mankind into their several Ranks and Degrees, the
Contempt or Esteem of the World, the Respects and Affronts, the Love and Hate
of Mankind being ever proportioned to the Degrees of Wealth and Power which
they fancy others possessed of. To these noble Ends the sage and experienced
Parent trains up his young ones, instilling daily into 'em all the subtle
Maxims of Covetousness and Ambition, and judging of their Proficiency and
Hopefulness by the Progress they make toward these Ends, that is, the more
enslaved they are, the more Hopeful, the more promising is their Youth; Nor are
Men more Zealous in pursuing the false, than insincere in pursuing the true
Ends of Life, Virtue and Happiness. This is too too Evident to any one who
shall consider how fond we are of our Diseases and our Errors, how Impatient of
that Instruction or Reproof which tends to Cure, undeceive and disabuse us, how
sluggish we are in the study of Important Truths, how listless and remiss in
the use of those means which conduce to Virtue, to the freeing our Minds, and
to the Confirming our Resolutions: and therefore lastly how light, wavering and
unconstant we are in the Practice of those things which Right Reason convinces
us to be our Duty. All this is plain and Evident, we see and feel it and bemoan
it, but yet we live on in the same manner still; whence therefore is this
Infatuation of our Understanding that enslaves us to false and irrational Ends?
whence is that Impotence of Mind? whence is that Insincerity that deludes our
Desires, and produces nothing but feeble and unsuccessful Endeavors? neither
is this a difficult Matter to discover; that we live and act irrationally
proceeds evidently from three Causes. First, The Contexture and Frame of our
Nature. Secondly, A vicious Education. Thirdly, Vicious Conversation.

The first spring or source of Irrational Desires and Actions is the
Contrivance and Composition of our Nature; The Contexture of Nature the first
Cause of an Irrational Life.
our sensual and brutish Appetites have their Foundation in our Natural
Constitution as well as our rational Affections; for we are made up of Body, as
well as Soul; Hence it is that there is in Man a doubtful fluctuation and
indetermination to different Objects, the Reason of the Mind, and the Appetite
of the Body distracting and dividing him by their different Proposals. The
Impressions of sense and Representations of Reason, successively awakening in
him very different and generally very contrary Desires: Whereas Angels by the
Perfection, and Beasts by the Imperfection of their Nature are determined and
confined to their Proper and Necessary Objects; Man is left to a strange
uncertainty, undetermined by the Reason of the Mind, or the Instinct or
Appetite of the Body, moved indeed successively by each, perfectly governed and
overruled by neither. But it were well for Man that the Inclinations of these
two different Principles were so justly poised, that he were naturally left in
a true Liberty and pure Indifference equally able to follow the Dictates of
Reason, and the Appetites of Flesh and Blood: But alas! how Impetuous are the
Lusts of the Body! how Irresistible are those Passions which the Objects of
Sense aided by a Carnal Imagination raise in us! On the other side, how Cold
are the Representations of Reason, when we most need its Assistance and
Authority! how faint and feeble the Natural Inclination of the Soul to what is
truly good and great! how remote and distant the Rewards of Virtue, and
consequently how weak and cold their Influence, and how faint and imperfect is
the Pleasure that attends it abstracted from future Rewards in all other Minds
besides those who are arrived in some sort at Perfection! it is true, at some
Seasons, and upon some Occasions the Remonstrances of Conscience are so sharp,
its Reproaches so bitter, the Disdain and Confusion of the Mind so unsufferable
that they render that which is a Pleasure to the Sense, a Torment to the Soul,
and its agreeableness to our Imagination cannot make amends for its harshness
and Contradiction to our Reason. But alas! these are but short-lived Fits which
soon pass over, for Business diverts, Pleasure inchants, and Repeated Violence
offered to our Reason stupifies and deadens the Natural Conscience, and what is
worse than all this, a silly and vicious Education does generally so corrupt
our Judgments, and prepossess us with vain and foolish Affections that the
Checks of Conscience are extremely seldom and extremely faint, unless the
Commission of some gross Sin do awaken it by a deep and Deadly Wound. This is,

Education a second Cause of Man's Misery.
2. A second Cause of that general Apostasy and Defection from Reason so
notorious in the World, A silly and vicious Education. How well does it fare
with Children when they derive only their Original Corruption from their
Parents? Ah! how often are their weak Dispositions to Vice nursed and cherish't
by their Parents into an Absolute, uncontrollable and settled Tyranny. Nay,
what is worse yet, how often are the seeds of Virtue, those towardly
Dispositions which many bring into the World with 'em choked and stifled, not
only by the Neglect, not only by the Indulgence, but even by the Example and
Authority of Parents?

-- Velocius and Citius nos
Juven. Sat. 14.
Corrumpunt Vitiorum Exempla Domestica, magnis
Cum subeant animos Autoribus --
Ah, with what speed must the Infection spread,
When Youth by Parents Crimes are warranted,
And Tempted on to Sin! --
When Corrupt Inclination is ripened into a second Nature, when our innate
weaknesses and Follies are confirmed by those false Principles, and that
vicious Confidence which we derive from Education, then we are sent into the
World left to our own disposal, abandoned to our own Government; Poor
Creatures! not only exposed unarmed, unguarded to Temptations, but like Sampson
to the Philistines tied and bound too: Ah! could we so easily burst our Bonds
as he did his! but whence should we recover our lost Liberty? Conversation,
Conversation a third.
instead of being an Assistance to us in our Endeavors after Happiness, does
generally tend to promote our Misery; Philosophy is not now the business of
Conversation, nor is Friendship any way useful or serviceable to the great End
of Life: the Ligament of Society is Riot and Revelling or sordid Profit and
Interest, or peradventure folly, trifling, and impertinence: these are the ties
and bonds of our Confederacies; so that whatever Authority our Friends and
Acquaintance have over us, whatever influence they have upon us, is employed to
no other purpose but to recommend and endear Vice to us, to render it, if not
beautiful and lovely to us, at leastwise less deformed and ugly than it is:
Hence it is that retirement is so generally recommended to those who design to
make any Progress in true Wisdom, and that such as are truly Virtuous do so
passionately Complain of the Disadvantages they suffer by Conversation with the
World: for the truth is, Wisdom and Goodness are such unfashionable Theams of
Discourse, such unusual, nay, I may add unwelcome Subjects of Entertainment,
that the Company deserves now to be praised, which is only barren and
unprofitable not hurtful, and wherein we suffer no greater loss than that of
our time.

It is now easy to imagine what fruit a Corrupt Nature must bring forth, when
not only left destitute of Necessary Cultivation, but depraved yet more by a
vicious Education, and vicious Conversation; what can all these together bring
forth, but a loathsome brood of Diseases and Vices such as these, Rashness,
Precipitancy, Heedlesness, and Unthoughtfulness, False Notions,
Ungovernableness and Impotence of Will, Insincerity, Levity and Inconstancy,
which are the Plagues of Humane Life, and the fatal Obstacles of our
Tranquillity? for either they obstruct our true Happiness by preventing our
search after it; or delude our search by Corrupting and Perverting our
Understanding; or else they frustrate and defeat the Influence of its Discovery
by Obstinate Reluctancies in the Body, and an Unhappy Impotence in the Mind:
All this is manifest upon the most transient glance we can take, of these
particulars. To begin with Want of Consideration: Inconsideration.
This is a Necessary Effect of that Corruption and Depravation which I have
ascribed to Nature, Education, and Conversation; The Body unaccustomed to obey
is Impatient of Deliberation when its Pleasure is in view, and a taking
Imagination overrules whatever weak Plea Reason makes; Nay, what is worse, the
very difuse of Reason in Men abandoned to the Conduct of Custom, and swayed by
the Enticement of Inclination, and Authority of Example, bereaves 'em almost of
the Faculty it self: So that their Life and Actions are not the Effects of
Judgment and Deliberation; but injudicious, unweigh'd Custom; or more rash,
heedless and precipitant Passion: And can any Man think, that when the meanest
Art or Profession is not learned without Right Instruction or just Diligence,
Wisdom the great Art of Living Happily should be attained without as much as
just Consideration? when a Man cannot grow Rich or Prosperous without
Contrivance and Industry, is it probable he should grow Happy by Inadvertency
and Chance? it is impossible; for Innumerable will be the false and pernicious
Notions which such a one corrupted and depraved, False Notions.
rash and unadvised must be betrayed into and confirmed in, there is no
Principle so false, no Practice so absurd which such do not readily entertain:
Hence it is that Men do so generally live by Rote, that Men's Principles are the
fashionable ones of the Neighborhood or Nation, that their manner of Life
takes that shape which their Rank and Quality, and the Chance of their
Conversation gives it; and their very Religion it self is the Native Commodity
of the Soil they are planted in: Hence it is finally that Men are Unrighteous
and Wicked, careless and unconcerned, notwithstanding all the Calls or
Invitations, all the Rewards and Menaces of the Gospel, Convictions of
Conscience, Impulses of Grace, Mercies, Threats and Judgments of God: and
Covetousness, Luxury, Uncleanness, Profaneness, Ambition are as constantly
practiced in Court and City as condemned in the Pulpit and Press; nor is it to
be expected otherwise, for false Notions give Countenance and Authority to our
Follies, and fortify us in all our wretched Miscarriages against the Assaults
of Law and Reason, of Conscience and God himself: No Condition is so
desperately forlorn as that of Sin and Folly, backed and authorized by
Inveterate Principles! These render our very Industry not only useless and
unserviceable, but even fatal and destructive to our Happiness: these defeat
the very tendency of our Nature toward Happiness, and turning it into a wrong
Channel, Vngovernableness and Impotence of will.
make it run with Violence toward our Misery: these help to render our Passions
both numerous and ungovernable by representing some things as Evils which are
not, and by augmenting real Evils beyond their Natural proportion: and herein
consist the very Essence and being of humane Misery, or at least a part of it,
when our own folly increases both the Number and Weight of Evils, and our
numberless Passions do exceed all just and natural bounds: and this is a
Constant truth, the less Understanding there is in any Man, the more violent is
his Passion, the Passion of a Fool being like the Zeal of a Bigot, the more
blind, the more furious. All this makes good the Observation of the * Poet, Non
qui Sidonio contendere Callidus Ostro,
Nescit Aquinatem potantia vellera fucum,
Certius accipiet Damnum, Hor. l. 1. Ep. x.
propiusque Medullis,
Quam qui non poterit vero distinguere falsum.
Not the Deluded Trader who does buy
Caunterfeit Aquin for the Tyrian dye,
His folly shall more surely or dearly Rue,
Than he who does, false Notions take for true.


Insincerity is another fruit of the Corruption of our Nature, Insincerity.
and the Depravation of Education and Conversation. This is that which makes us
Lazy in our search after Truth, and Partial in the Examination of our Opinions
and Actions; for when the bent of our Nature runs toward Carnal Pleasures, and
this is confirmed by Education and false Notices of things, we shall be apt to
take up and carress our selves with present, easy and ready Entertainments. We
shall not extend our Care or Prospect very far, but be Content to enjoy the
sweet in every present Circumstance and Event, without Regard to their future
tendency, which was the Happiness (if my memory deceive me not) of the
Cyrenaics: the same distemper prevailing, we shall be apt to think every thing
healthful that is pleasant, and easily admit those principles most true, which
are most grateful to our Appetites. It Is not therefore to be wondered at, if the
same Humor which makes us greedy of Embracing, make us obstinate in defending
pleasing Errors. For the same Fondness and Partiality renders us incapable of
Instruction, and Impatient of Advice, tho designed by the most faithful
Affection, and managed with the most Prudent Tenderness.

Hor. l. 1. Ep. 8.
Fidis offendar Medicis, Irascar amicis
Cur me funesto properant arcere veterno?
Quae nocuere sequar, fugiam quae profore credam.
The Plainness of Physicians and of Friends,
Tho by Affection moved and Truth, offends;
Cannot I enjoy my Fatal Rest for you?
Let me alone my Ruin to pursue
And fly my Happiness. --
It is easy now to judge what must be be the state of that Man who is
insincere and false to himself in all his Deliberations, and Obstinate in the
Defense of his Errors, who is partial in all his own Reflections, and Impatient
of the faithful Reflections of others: how is it probable that that Man should
attain to any Rational Happiness who is incapable of using his own Reason
aright; or enjoying the benefit of another's.

But it is not the only Mischief we suffer by these Diseases of the Mind that
they render us incapable of Discovering true Happiness, Levity and Inconstancy.
they do also disable us to pursue it when discovered with that earnestness and
vigor which the Importance of the thing requires; for they must needs beget in
us a slothful Remissness in our Endeavors, and an unhappy Levity and
Inconstancy in all our Designs and Purposes: it is very improbable that we
should be steady and immovable in those purposes which are not founded upon
clear and solid Reason, or Zealous in such as are encountered with violent
Opposition from our selves: Quidam alternis Vatinii, alternis Catones; and modo
parum illis Severus est Curious, parum pauper Fabricius, parum frugi and
contentus vili Tubero. Modo Licinum Divitiis, Apicium Coenis, Mecaenarem
deliciis provocant. Maximum Judicium est malae mentis Fluctuatio, and inter
simulationem Virtutum, amoremque Vitiorum, assidua jactatio, Sen. Epist. cxx.
Hence it is that the Scenes of Man's Life are so various, so frequently
Changed, that every Man does so often shift his Person, and appear a very
different Actor on the Stage. Thus we meet with Epicurean and Stoic, Clergyman
and Merchant, Devoto and Statesman, Enthusiast and Parasite, all acted in their
turn by the self-same Man; who is tossed to and fro by the sudden Sallies or
Gusts of various Desires and Passions. Nor is it any Man's Wit or Sagacity that
turns him into all these different shapes, but his Vice and Folly, for being
ignorant of the true good, the true Happiness of Man, he catches at fleeting
Shadows, and Courts thin, airy Dreams, and uncertain Apparitions; and therefore
daily sets up New Projects, and those too, repugnant to the Old: And thus, Man
wearieth out himself by vain and unsuccessful, because unconstant vanishing
Attempts. This were tolerable, did it befall us only in Temporal things, whose
Emptiness makes our success it self frustration and disappointment; but alas we
suffer the same thing in the weighty Concerns of Virtue and Happiness, our
Religious purposes do generally die strangled in the Birth, and all our
glorious Designs dash and break themselves to pieces against the next
Difficulty or Temptation; and yet relaps't into a state of Folly, and Sin, and
Danger, we would again return to that narrow Path whose steep and rough ascent
discouraged us; wandering in Night, and Fogg and Storm, fain would we reach the
Happy Region where calm light and cheerful day does ever dwell: plainly and
without a Metaphor, when we resolve to be good and virtuous, we are kept from
it by the seeming Ease and Pleasure of Sin, and the hardships necessary to be
undergone in the attainment of Virtue; and yet the Remorse, and Danger, and
Dissatisfaction which do always accompany a Negligent and Sinful Life, make us
wish for the Peace and Comfort, the Security and Rewards of Virtue. But, Oh!
how seldom do we proceed further than wishes or some Attempts more lazy and
dis-spirited than our Wishes! The Reason's plain, Virtue is more Rational, Vice
is more grateful; The Understanding is convinced, but the Will is enslaved; The
flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. A Sinner
cannot purchase the Pleasures of the Mind, but by some uneasy Penances, and
Severities of the Body, nor enjoy the Pleasures of the Body without the Checks
and Reproaches of the Mind; and this makes him unsteady and irresolute in all
his purposes.

A Scheam or Representation of the whole.
Would you see an Instance of the whole Matter? you feel it, better than I can
describe it, and yet it is not difficult to make a tolerable Representation of
that which I have in my self often proved and often bewailed: Nor can I see,
why I should blush to own those frailties which are so incident to Humane
Nature, that the greatest Glory and Happiness of mortal Man is not to have been
never subject to 'em, but to have conquered 'em.

One while moved by the gaze and wonder, the respect and reverence, with which
the World treats greatness, and by those Opportunities of Pleasure which I saw
Wealth and Power put into Men's hands; I resolved to rouse all the Strength, to
employ all the Force and Power of Mind and Body for the Attainment of Wealth
and Greatness; I flattered my self, I knew how to merit, nor did I think my
self incapable of practicing all the subtle humble Arts of Candidates and
Dependents, could I once prevail with my self to stoop to 'em; but when the
toil and Difficulty and Meanness too of this attempt had given me a little
disgust; and the Pleasures of Friendship and Fortune, (by neither of which have
I ever been utterly deserted) incountred my Natural Inclinations to ease, and
softness, I soon exchanged my former Notion of Happiness for a more calm and
quiet one: I began to think it wise to live to day, and to prefer my present
Blessings in Possession before the uncertain future ones of Opinion and
Expectation. I wished for an Opportunity to retire from every thing that might
awaken my Ambition, or interrupt my quiet, and thought that in a lazy shade,
and obscure retreat, I might with most freedom and truest Contentment enjoy my
self, a cheap Pleasure, and an humble Friend, and laugh at the Ambitious
restless part of Mankind.

Sometimes springing a thought of light, and lost in the Pleasure of a
Speculation, I have resolved to devote my self entirely to a Studious Life, I
adored the Memory of those great Souls whose Works have given 'em an
Immortality here below, I looked upon the Learned (as Epicurus words it) as
Gods amongst Men, I did not question but Contemplation which once seemed to me
to be the Business of Angels, must needs be the Joy and Delight of Man, but
alas! that I must say it, all that Learning which is purchased with toil and
Difficulty is but a vain, uncertain Amusement of the Mind, it has much of Pomp
and Ostentation in it, but is of very little use: I would it were not true that
those parts of Learning which are of most Use have least of Certainty and
Demonstration, and those which can justly pretend to most Certainty make Men
the worst Return of their Studies, and are of least use. I have observed
accordingly that the most Learned are not always the most serviceable to the
World, not only for this Reason, but also Thoughtfulness and Retirement
rendering Men very Commonly as unfit for as a verse to Business, bereaving 'em
of that Sufficiency and Skill, that Address and Presence of Mind, which is not
to be gained but by Conversation and Experience: and it was easy for me to
remark that the active and busy Man was not only more Skilful, but more
Eloquent too than the Contemplative, as having a much clearer insight into the
Humors and Passions of Men, and the secret Springs and Interests by which they
are moved, and being able to manage 'em with a more popular Dexterity and more
cleanly, gentile Insinuation. And now I began to esteem of Learning as a pretty
Ornament of Life, but not fit to be the support of it, I thought it might serve
to fill the void and empty spaces, but not to be the Business and Employment of
Life.

I have been sometimes ravished with the Beauty of a Noble Action, and resolved
to lead a Life severe and Virtuous, spent, not in private Ease, and lazy
Divertions, but in the Honor and Pleasure of doing good. But good God! how
weak is Nature! how slight are such Impressions! how numerous the Temptations!
how prevalent the Inclinations which carry us another way!

This has been a long time my state, toss't on uncertain Seas, and hoysing Sail
to every Wind that blew, and I find that neither greatness of Mind nor Fortune
does raise Men above this Inconstancy. For I meet with my own Reflections, my
own Passions in the Excellent De Tranquillitate animi.
Seneca; only the Character of himself he there presents us with, is expressed
with more life and briskness, and exalted as much above this of mine, as was
the Nature and Station of that great Man above mine. I cannot say that I have
yet made my Port, but I have discovered it, and I Sail tho slowly, yet in a
direct Line, having my Happiness, my Haven all along in ken.

From this Account of the Rise and Progress of Man's Misery, The Nature or
Universal and Immediate Cause of Happiness Inferred.
it is easy to infer what it is, wherein the Happiness of this present life
consists, or at lest what the Universal and Immediate Cause of it is, namely a
Conformity of our Minds and Lives to true Reason and sound Philosophy; this is
a state of Light and Knowledge, of Peace and Security, of lasting and rational
Delight, This invests the Understanding in its just Sovereignty and Dominion,
and restores the Will to it is true Liberty, this makes our prospect of the
future taking and inviting, and our Reflection on the time past easy and
comfortable, This lays a solid foundation for our Reliance on the Merits and
Intercession of our Mediator, and raises our Hope as high as Heaven; this
prevents our Misfortunes and Calamities or, what is more Happy, enables us to
Conquer 'em: In a word, this makes us great in Life, but much more great and
venerable in Death, Righteousness and Goodness revealing its Beauty and Glory
most then, when all things else do shrink and fade.

Two general Rules for attaining Happiness inferred.
We see the Happiness that springs from our Conformity and Subjection to Reason,
and it is easy from those two things wherein especially I have declared the
Sinners Deviation from Reason to consist, to infer, what we must We must
propose to our selves a Wise and Secondly, We must pursue this End with Life,
and Spirit, and Constancy. These I laid down as the first and most
Comprehensive Rules for the Attainment of Happiness, I will therefore say
something of each, but briefly and in general terms as the Nature of this
Treatise requires.

First, We must propose to our selves a Rational and wise End of Life; that is,
the true Happiness of a Rational Creature: When we have done this, when our
Understandings are fully convinced and persuaded of the Excellence and
Necessity of it, and when we have possessed our Minds with a sacred Reverence,
a firm and devout Love for it: This like the Eastern Star the Magi, will lead
us through all the windings and turnings of Life to Bethlehem and Happiness;
this will soon disingage us from that Labyrinth of Contradictious Desires and
wild Opinions, in which the Fool and Sinner is endlesly entangled. When we have
done this, we shall find every place a School, every one we Converse with a
Tutor, and every passage of our Life, or another's full of Instruction: Not a
look whether Cheerful or Melancholy; not a word whether wise or foolish; not a
Sigh that an oppressed Heart vents, not a Joy that smiles in the face but will
teach us Philosophy; show us the Use and Beauty of Divine Truth and Divine
Virtue; for in the Vicious, we shall see what false and fading Pleasures, what
idle fears, what vain sorrows, false Principles, and the Tyranny of Sin fills
their Minds with; in the Good we shall see, what true Peace, Virtue creates in
the Mind, what Constancy and Majesty in the Life, what Courage and Hopes it
inspires in Affliction, what Magnanimity and Humility in Prosperity; and in a
word, what Light, what Serenity it diffuses through the whole Man: we shall see
in many Instances every Day, what the Mischief of irrational Desires and
ungovernable Passions are; and on the contrary, how great the Advantages, how
charming the Beauty of Truth and Virtue, of Wisdom and the Due Government and
Regulation of all our Passions: Nor is the Instruction and Illumination of our
Understanding promoted by every Accident which falls under our Observation, and
by all sorts of People, with whom we converse: the only Advantage which we
shall reap from the prefixing our selves a rational End of Life, and the
possessing our Souls with the Love of it; for when we have done this, we shall
be actually freed from the greater part at least of the Troubles and Calamities
of Life, we shall be raised above all senseless silly Desires, and consequently
above all senseless, silly Vexations and Griefs, and unmanly Complaints: for
when we have set our Hearts upon true and rational Happiness, how unnecessary,
nay how despicable will most of those things appear which we now admire and
Covet: we shall not then think it reasonable to sigh and toil for this House or
that Land, for this Preferment or that Trade, this Honor or that Beauty, for
these are no Essential, no Necessary Ingredients of a Rational Happiness. Nor
is this all, thy Joys and Pleasures will grow and increase upon thee; for by
approaching every day nearer and nearer to thy great End, thou will be
wonderfully surpised with fresh Delight, whilst thou do behold the fruit
of thy Travail, the Advantage of thy Philosophy, and the daily increase of thy
Wealth: thou will see thy self, like a thriving Plant grow up daily more strong
and beautiful: the toil of others sorts to no Happy End, The Covetous Man grows
not Richer by Heaping up, nor the Ambitious Man greater by rising higher, or at
least neither grows Happier by being either Richer or Greater; but thou will
every day grow wiser by study, more Virtuous by Practice, Calmer and Happier by
both. O to what a height and Perfection will thy Pleasure rise, when thy store
shall grow big enough to Feast and Entertain not thy self only, but all Men
else; when the thirsty shall come and drink at thy Streams, and the scorch't
shall refresh themselves under thy shade; when thou led by the same Spirit with
our great Lord and Master shall open the Eyes of the Blind, and the Ears of the
Deaf, shall cast out Devils and strengthen the Feet of the Lame; I mean, when
thou shall teach the foolish Wisdom, when thou shall persuade and Charm the
Obstinate, when thou shall deliver the Unclean and the Passionate from the Evil
Spirits, the Vices that possessed 'em, and when thou shall teach the Enslaved
and Impotent Sinner, how to overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, thou will then indeed, as thou art the Image, so do the Works of God, thou will be a
Heavenly and Tutelar tho mortal Angel amongst Men; and wherever thou do,
there Wisdom, Virtue, and Happiness will dwell too. But to attain to this
state, it is not only Necessary to prefix our selves a Rational End of Life; But
also

Secondly, We must pursue this End with Life, and Spirit, and Constancy. It is
not a good Fit or a Devout Passion that will make us either Virtuous or Happy,
there must go more than this to conquer an ill habit, or implant a good one;
it is not one brisk Sally, or one warm Charge that will subdue the World and
Flesh, and put us into an entire Possession of Victory and Security; No, when
Warmth and Passion have made a prosperous Impression on the Enemy, a sober
Patience must make good the ground we have gained, a steady and resolved
Courage must urge and press the Advantage to an Issue; without Vigor, Patience
and Constancy to carry us still forwards, the warmth and Passion with which we
begin the Course of Virtue, will stand us in little stead; Ah! how many have
marched out of Egypt, and perish't in the Wilderness! how many have wreck't
within sight of Shore? How many have lost their Reward of Repentance by their
Relapse and Revolt? how many have fallen by Negligence, Security, and Sloth
into that wretched state, out of which they had once delivered themselves by
Courage, and Resolution, and Self-denial? Nor is the Necessity of Vigor,
Patience, and Constancy, in our pursuit of Happiness, the only Motive to it;
the Certainty of Success and the Greatness and Eminence of the Advantages,
which attend it are sufficient to animate and encourage any Man that seriously
Considers it: the Labor and Hope of the Husbandman is lost, unless the
fruitful Earth, and fruitful Seed be blessed with fruitful Seasons too; The
Trade of the Merchant is properly but Adventuring, and his increase depends as
much on Winds and Waves, and other as uncertain Chances, as on his own Skill
and Diligence: Fortune must assist the Courage and the Conduct of the Soldier,
or else Poverty and Dishonor will be the only purchase of his Blood and
hazard; But it fares not thus with Man in his pursuit of true Happiness, the
Traffic of the Philosopher depends not upon Winds nor Tide, the Seeds of
Virtue, if the Ground be well Cultivated will thrive in any Weather, and
sometimes better in Storms than Sunshine, and finally the success of our
Conflicts against Sin and Misery depends not on our Fortune, but our Courage
and our Industry. How unspeakable a Pleasure is it now to think that we cannot
be disappointed in our Travails, nor defeated of our Hopes, while we Labor for
Virtue and Happiness, if our Endeavors be sincere and persevering, our success
is certain and unquestionable; but what an accession does this Pleasure receive
when we consider, what will be the glorious fruit of this Success,
Tranquillity, Cheerfulness, Greatness and Enlargement of Soul, Indolence,
Pleasure, Life, Immortality, Security, and in one word Happiness. O Glorious
reward of our Conflict and our Victories! what neither Wealth nor Greatness,
nor Honor nor Crowns; what neither Blood nor Toil, nor Cunning nor Fortune can
give! that Rational and sincere Endeavors after Wisdom and Virtue will give
the meanest Man upon Earth, that is, Happiness! O Blessed Issue of
Philosophical, that is, truly Christian Travail! the Rich, the Great the
Honorable, the Mighty may Complain even of their success, and repent 'em of
the Purchase they have made at too dear a Rate; but the Philosopher, the
Christian can never repent of the success of his Study, his Self-denial, his
Patience, his Prayers: for how is it possible to complain of being Happy, or
repent of being Wise and Virtuous? there is nothing Empty, nothing Evil,
nothing Mean, nothing Uncertain in true Wisdom, in Rational Happiness.

This brief and general Account of Happiness, and of the way to it, does
naturally instruct us how we are to treat the Body, and what it is that a
Rational Education, and wise Conversation ought to design and aim at, if our
Conformity to Reason be either the Happiness of this present Life or the
Immediate Cause of it, (for I will not trouble my self with Nice and subtle
Distinctions in Moral Discourses) then it is plain that we are obliged to such a
kind of Discipline and Government of our selves as may render the Body most
Obsequious to the Mind, and may exalt and establish the Power and Dominion of
Reason; for whatever tends to obscure our Understanding, to enfeeble the Will,
to cherish our sensual Inclinations, and augment their force and violence, does
so far Necessarily tend to deprave the Nature of Man, and to subvert and
overthrow his Happiness; and from hence it appears that the Excellence of
Education consists in possessing the Minds of Youth with wise Principles, with
true Notions of Good and Evil, and informing and moulding their Minds into an
Esteem and veneration for Wisdom and Virtue. The first Virtue I conceive a
Child capable of is Obedience, and this is indeed the Foundation of all Virtue:
to this let him be inured and trained up betimes, he that finds it easy to
obey another's Reason, will not find it difficult to obey his own; for when the
judgment comes to be formed and ripened, when it comes to exercise its
Authority, it will find a Body not used to give, but receive Commands; from
this virtue of Obedience he is to be led gently on to a Rational and voluntary
Choice of what is good, he must be taught gradually not only his plain Duty,
but the Motives to it; for it is as necessary to his Happiness that he should
love, as that he should know his Duty: But this we strive in vain to instill by
Art and Instruction, if we do not instill it by the Influence and Authority of
wise and excellent Examples too.

As to Conversation it is plain, that it ought to be the Practice of those
Virtues which a Pious Education instilled, and that we ought to have no less
Reverence for our Reason, when we are at our own Disposal, and under our own
Government, than we had for the Authority of our Parents when we were under
their's: what ought to be the tie and Ligaments of Friendship, what the Rules
of Conversation, and what the great Ends of Society, is abundantly manifest
from the Nature of that Happiness which it behooves us to propose as the great
End of Life; what is the great End of Man ought to be the Design of Society;
and therefore it is plain that Wisdom and Virtue ought to be the foundation and
bond of those Friendships which we enter into, voluntarily and of Choice, That
Conversation should be so regulated that we may grow by it more Wise and
Virtuous, or at least that our Discourse, if it be not profitable should be
innocent, and that we should do and say nothing in Company which we should have
Reason to blush at, or repent of in private.

I have now finished this Discourse which I designed only as an Introduction
to, or Preparative for those which are to follow: I do not think, that it is now
Necessary for me in a Pathetic Conclusion, to persuade Men to endeavor to be
Happy; the Desires of Happiness are inseparable from all Beings, at leastwise
it is impossible to be Rational and not desire to be Happy: if I have therefore
sufficiently proved that it is possible to be Happy, and if I have showed that a
diligent Enquiry, a vigorous and persevering Industry is Necessary to the
Attainment of it; if I have pointed out the general Causes of Humane Misery,
and together with 'em their general Cure and Remedy. I have done en^ugh to
enkindle those Desires and beget those Resolutions in my Reader, which if they
do not make him actually Happy, will at least dispose and prepare him for a
further Enquiry after Happiness, which was the utmost design of these Papers; I
have therefore nothing more to put him in mind of now, but this, That as I do
all along suppose the Grace of God Necessary to second and enforce our Reason,
so I would ever be understood to urge and press the Necessity of our Prayers as
much as that of our Endeavors, the Fervency of the one, as much as the
Sincerity of the other.

FINIS.

