REPORTS in the Court of EXCHEQUER, Beginning in the third, and ending in the
ninth year of the Reign of the late KING JAMES.

By the Honorable RICHARD LANE Late of the Middle Temple, an eminent Professor
of the Law, sometime Attorney General to the late PRINCE CHARLES.

Being the first Collections in that Court hitherto extant.

Containing several Cases of Informations upon Intrusion, touching the Kings
Prerogative, Revenue and Government, with diverse Incident Resolutions of
Public Concernment in Points of LAW.

With two exact Alphabeticall Tables, the one of the Names of the Cases, the
other of the Principal Matters contained in this Book.

LONDON, Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at
their Shops in Fleetstreet, 1657.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE of the names of the Cases contained in this BOOK.
A.
AIrie against Alcock, p. 33 Arden against Darcie, p. 68 Sir Anthony Ashleys
case, p. 83
B.
BRet against Johnson, p. 1 Bates in an information, p. 22 Bently and others
against Leigh, p. 71 Brown Sir Henry, p. 81, 86 Bromleys case, p. 90
Brockenburies case, p. 91 Beckets case touching rec^sancy, p. 91 Bents case, p.
96 Beckets case, p. 118
C.
CAtesbies case, p. 3^ Cumberland, the Earls case, p. 39 Calvert against
Kitchen and Parkingson in Simony, p. 71, 100 Carew against Broughton, p. 79
Clare Sir Henry, p. 96 Clerk against Rutland, p. 113 Chamberlains case, p. 117
D.
DEnnis against Drake, p. 20 Dimoek Sir Edward in an information for intrusion,
p. 31, 35, 60 Doille against Jolliffe, p. 48, 52
E.
EWer against Moile, p. 83 Edwards case, p. 98
F.
FOrtescue, see Isabell, p. 91
G.
GIbsons Case, p. 90 Gooches Case, p. 99
H.
HUddlestone and Hills case, p. 16 Halseyes Case of Recusancy, p. 104
I.
INformation, See Page, p. 19 Information, See Page, p. 21 Information, see
Bates, p. 22 Information, see Dimock, p. 31 Jacksons Case, p. 60 Isabell
Fortescues case, p. 91
K.
THe King against the Earl of Nottingham and others, p. 42 Kent and Kelway, p.
70
L.
LIttleton Sir John, p. 56 Levison against Kirk, p. 65 Leazure Sir Stephen, p.
100
M.
Mayor of Lincolnshirs Case, p. 16 Mary Reps against Babham, p. 17
N.
NOrton Sir Daniel, p. 74
O.
OVerburies Sir Thomas, p. 55
P.
PAges Case an information, p. 19 Phillips against Evans, p. 33
Q.
QUeens College in Oxfords Case, p. 15, 33
R.
RIchards against Williams, p. 18
S.
Skeleton against the Lady Airie, p. 17 St. Saviors in South warke in an
information, p. 21 Shstabey against Walker and Bromley, p. 49 Sweet and Beale,
p. 56 Sawyer against East, p. 74, 108 Smith and Jennings Case, p. 97 Scot and
his Wife against Hilliar, p. 98
T.
TRollops Case, p. 51
V.
VAuxs against Austin and others p. 59
W.
WIkes case, p. 54 Worslin Mannings Case, p. 58 Wentworth and others against
Stanley, p. 93 Wickham against Wood, p. 113
Y.
York and Allein, p. 20
ERRATA.
In page first l. 31. for Nay, 1. Noy. 37 fol. 32. Hill left out in the Margent
until 37. fol 37. in the margent. T^^th for Trin. 111. for 101.

MICHAELMAS 3 Jac. in the EXCHEQVER.
Bret against Johnson.
IN an information for the King by the Attorney General against Sir Robert
Johnson for entry into a house, and Close in Buckingham Town, called the
Parsonage Close, in February 4. Iac. upon not guilty pleaded a special verdict
was found to this effect: that Queen Elizabeth was seized in fee, in right of
her Crown of the late Prebends of Sutton Buckingham, Horton, and Hordley in the
County of Buck, whereof the place where etc. is parcel, and she 20 February
11. Eliz. granted to Henry Seymor Lord Seymor the said Prebends for life
rendering 11. s. 4. for rent, and the Jurors say, that these Letters Patents, by
the command of the said Lord Seymor were restored to be cancelled; and he being
seized pro ut lex postulat, Queen Eliz. 21. Mar. 37. Eliz. reciting the former
Patent, Quas quidem litteras patentes, et totum jus, statum, titulum, terminum
et interesse de et in praemissis praefatus dominus Seymor modo habens, et
gaudens surfum rediddit et restituit cancellandum, to this intention
nevertheless that we should make to him another patent, which surrender we
accepted of by these presents; she by her patent under the great Seal as well in
consideration of the said surrender, as for other causes and considerations,
demised and granted to the said Lord Seymor the said four Prebends for his
life, the remainder to Anthony Wingfield for life, the remainder to Robert
Johnson for life rendering 90 l. 3 s. 3. d. for rent, and they found that there
was not any actual surrender, or cancellation of the said Letters Patents of
11. Eliz. but restitut. ad cancellandum as before the making, and acceptance of
the second Patent of 37. Eliz. and they found that there was not any Vacat made
upon the inrolment of the Patent of 11. Eliz. and they found that 10. April 37.
Eliz. Anthony Wingfield, and Johnson granted to the Lord Seymor for 90. years
to commence after his death, or forfeiture of his estate, if Wingfield, or
Johnson, or one of them should so long live, and 20. April the same year the
Lord Henry Seymor granted to Sir Robert Johnson for 60. years to begin after
the death of the said Seymor, rendering 400. l. rent to him his Executors or
assigns; the Lord Seymor died 4. Iac. and Sir Robert Johnson entered, upon
which entry this information was brought: nay, that the Defendant is guilty,
and he divided the case into two points. First, if there be any actual
surrender of the patent of 11. Eliz. because there is not any record thereof,
and the King cannot take by bargain or contract if there be not a record of it,
as appears by 5. E. 4. and 7. E. 4.6. and Plowden in the Duchy of Lancasters
case, for as it is there said, it agrees with the Majesty of the King to have
a record of things made by him, Mich. 3. Jac. in the Exchequer.
or to him, and if a grant is pleaded to be made to the King, it is good to say
quod non habetur tale Recordum, and here is no record, but a memorandum made
upon it, for otherwise leases made by Abbots before the dissolution shall be
said to be of record, because after the dissolution they were all put in the
Tower amongst the records, but questionless those leases are not of record,
because there is not any Memorandum made upon them: also in the Lord Latimers
case 12. H. 7. in Kelloway, where Baron and feme seized in right of the feme in
fee granted to the King, this is not good if the deed be not enrolled, for
there they of the other side would have concluded the Tenant to say the
contrary, but that the deed was enrolled, and so by way of admittance confess
that a grant to the King is not good, if the deed be not enrolled: 3. Eliz.
Dyer the Lord Dacres surrendered a patent of an office granted to him before Sir
Nicholas Hare Master of the Rolls, but the surrender was not recorded, nor the
patent Cancelled, nor a Vacat entered upon the inrolment, this is void, and
shall not be aided now after the death of Sir Nicholas Hare per optimam
opinionem; in Kemps case Dyer 195. but it will be said that it appears not
there, that the surrender was made in Chancery, and therefore differs from our
case; but see 19. Eliz. Dyer 355. which is direct in the point, where an
exchange of land was with E. 6. by deed acknowledged to be enrolled etc. but
not enrolled, it cannot after nor be enrolled, nor vest any interest in the
Queen either as heir, or Purchasor, so hereby it appears that before inrolment,
an estate vests not in the King, and he said that he had heard Popham late
chief Justice say, that the opinion of the Judges was, that in this case
nothing vests in the King until inrolment, and for that there was a private Act
made in 39. Eliz. to relieve this particular case, so the Memorandum makes the
record, and not the delivery of the patent to be cancelled, but the opinion of
Davers in 37. H. 6.10. may be objected against me, where he says, that if a
man make a feofment to the King, and deliver the deed in the Exchequer, or at
the Kings Coffers, it is good without inrolment, which by the Court is intended
for goods, and not to a feofment made to the King, for this is only the opinion
of Davers, which I deny to be law, and also all this may be admitted for law,
and yet prove nothing, for when the party surrenders to the King, and delivers
the deed to be enrolled, so that he had done all which in him is to pass the
land to the King, then it may aptly be said in common speech, that the right of
the land is in the King: because he of right ought to have it after inrolment,
although he had not the property of the land before the Deed be enrolled, then
if nothing vest in the Queen in the principal case before the patent made in
37. Eliz. the words subsequent in the patent will not help the matter, viz.
quam quidem sursum redditionem acceptamus per praesentes, because the King had
taken nothing before, and the recital in the patent concludes not the Queen; it
has been said that the not making of a Memorandum is the fault of the Clark,
and this shall not prejudice the party in so great a mischief, but I answer
that the same mischief will ensue, where a man sells land by indenture, and
delivers it to the Clark to be enrolled, and he inrols it not within 6.
months, nothing shall pass by the sale, yet this is only the fault of the
Clark, but in this case he may have his action upon the case against the Clark,
if so it be that he had paid all his fees, the fame law in the principal case,
but admitting that, yet great mischief will ensue if it be so that the estate
shall pass to the King before inrolment, for then the estate and interest shall
be tried by the Country, and not by the record, and then also in what place
should a man search to find the Kings estate, and perhaps for want of
knowledge thereof every grant of the King will be avoided, and this would be a
great mischief to the subjects, but admitting that this should be a good
surrender without a Memorandum, or Vacat, yet this is not showed in this case,
for it appears not here that his intent was to surrender it, for although he
deliver up his Letters patents, yet his estate remains; and then the
consideration of the patent in 37. Eliz. being of a surrender of the first
patent, and also of a surrender of the estate, if the estate be not surrendered
as well as the patent, the consideration is for that false, and then the patent
is void, and to p^ove that the estate remains although that the patent be
surrendered, it appears by Fisher 12. H. 7.12. where Tenant in tail of the gift
of the King loses his letters patents, his heir is not at a mischief, for he
may have a Constat, and this shall be good in evidence, but he cannot plead it,
and this appears by the Preamble of the Statute of 13. Eliz. cap. 6. Dean and
Chapter Lease land, this shall be by Deed, and in this case although that the
lessee redeliver his deed, it is no surrender of the estate, but he shall not
plead it without showing a Deed of the assent of the Chapter; but he shall give
it in evidence, and good, because he had once a D^ed thereof, as it appears by
32. E. 3. Monstrance of Deeds, and it appears by 32. H. 8. Patents Br. 97. that
if the Kings Patentee lose his letters Patents, he shall have a Constat, and by
32. H. 8. surender Br. 51. and 35. H. 8. tail: that if the King give in tail,
and the Donee surrender his Patent, the tail thereby is not extinct, so
although letters Patents are necessary for pleading of the Kings Grant, yet
they are not requisite for the essence and continuance of the estate: also it
is found that the said Patents were restored to be cancelled per mandatum
Domini Seymor, and it is not found what manner of authority the Lord S. gave,
nor found to whom the letters Patents were delivered, nor at what time, and
peradventure they were delivered after the second Patent made, and then is the
second Patent false, because then there was no surrender, and this is one of
the reasons put it Kemps case 3. Eliz. 195.

The second point admitting that there is no actual surrender, if
notwithstanding that, the Patent of 37. Eliz. be good, and as to that, I say if
this Patent be good, it is because the Queen had recited the particular estate;
and therefore is not to her damage, or because the second Patent is a surrender
in law of the first, and the rather because it appears to be the intention of
the Queen, that the acceptance should be a surrender by these words, quam
quidem sursum redditionem acceptamus per praesentes; and as to the first reason
it seems to me, that the Queen recites this as a particular estate determined,
and not as an estate continuing, for by these words modo habens et gaudens it
appears that the meaning of the Queen was, that the Lord Seymor had not an
estate continuing in the intent of the Queen at the time of the making of the
second Patent, but the Lord Chandos case in Coo. 6. fol. 55. seems to impugn
me in this opinion, where the King made a gift in tail, and afterward by Patent
reciting the former Grant, and also that the Patentee had delivered up the
Patent into the Chancerie to be cancelled, by virtue whereof he thought himself
to be seized in demeasne as of fee, did grant the lands unto the said Donee in
fee, in that case it was adjudged that the reversion did pass unto the Donee,
although the words of the reversion were not contained in the Patent: although
that the King in that case did think that he granted a possession, but the
reason of that was, that although the Patent was not enrolled, yet by law it
should have been surrendered unto the King, nevertheless because that was the
collection of the King, and not the suggestion of the party that the King was
seized by virtue etc. therefore the collection being false shall not make the
Patent void, for all there that came of the suggestion of the party is true,
but our case is otherwise, for here the intention of the King was, that he had
the land in possession when he had made the grant, and in truth he had but a
reversion: also if the Patent should be good, great prejudice would or might
ensue to the Queen thereby, for put the case that the Queen had annexed a
condition to this lease, or that she had reserved a greater rent upon it, this
condition, or increasing of the rent was the cause that the Queen had made this
grant, and that if the second grant should be good, and the first not
determined, that the Grantee may claim his first estate, and so defeat the
Queen of her rent, and of his condition to have benefit of either, and this was
the reason why the Patent was adjudged void in the case of Barwick Coo. lib. 5.
fo. 94. because some parcels were not surrendered to the Queen, and therefore
they were not subject to conditions, or rent reserved upon the second Patent:
and for a second reason he argued that the acceptance of the second Patent is
not a surrender in Law of the first Patent, because the first Patent is merely
void, as it appears in Fulmerston and Stewards case Plowden 107. that the
reason why the taking of a second lease shall be a surrender of the former is,
because both the estates cannot be in one and the same Parson at one and the
same time, but this reason holds not in our case, because no estate passes by
the second Patent in regard it is void, and therefore this case may be
resembled unto the last case in 23. Eliz. Dyer, where a man taking a second
benefice incompatible without dispensation, does not make the first benefice
void by the Statute against Pluralities, because he never was a lawful Parson
of the second benefice in respect the never subscribed to the Articles
according to 13. Eliz. cap. 12. and in Harries and Wings case the second Patent
was void: but a third reason was, he thought that these words Quam quidem
sursum redditionem acceptamus have not aided this Grant, for the second Patent
is made in consideration of a surrender made by the Patentee, and therefore
there ought to be a good surrender made by him, or otherwise the consideration
is false, for the King in consideration of a surrender made does grant lands
where in facto there was no surrender, as if the King grant black acre in
consideration of a surrender of white acre, which in facto was not done, this
grant is void: also this appears by these words modo habens et gaudens sursum
reddidit et restituit etc. that the intention of the Queen was, that the Lord
Seymor had surrendered before, and that he had no estate at this time of the
making of the grant, for these words modo habens et gaudens ought to be
interpreted according to the rules of Grammar, and for that in 9. H. 7.16. b.
the Court consulted with Grammarians touching the exposition of Latin words
and was by them directed, and he said that this word modo had diverse
significations, for this signifies nuper, interdum, aliquando, but most
properly it signifies nuper, or interdum, modo Paratus e^at, Codrus erit
subito, qui modo Craesus erat, modo ad hunc diem etc. there it signifies the
present Tense, or time, but in the principal case, if modo should signify the
present tense, then it would not stand with this word sursum reddidit which is
the preter tense, but if here it be construed that modo signifies the present
tense, this may well stand with sursum reddidit, and the meaning of the Queen
ought to be taken to be that the Queen was deceived, and the Patent void,
although in the principal case here was a good surrender before the second
patent, yet until agreement nothing vests in the Queen, and therefore if a man
pleads a surrender made by the lessee to him in reversion, he ought to plead an
agreement to this surrender, and 13. H. 4. that this is not in him before
agreement and entry, and 32. E. 3. Bar 262. that until agreement nothing vests
in him; it was lately adjudged in the Common Pleas, where an incumbent had
resigned yet until the ordinary did agree unto it, he remained an incumbent
still, and for that in as much as the Queen had not agreed before the second
Patent made, nothing vesteth in her till then, and then she was deceived, for
she thought that she was in possession thereof at the time of the grant, and
therefore he concluded that he conceived the Patent was void. Brock to the
contrary, and he divided the case into three points. First, whether here be an
actual surrender found to be made in Law. Secondly, if the acceptance of the
second lease be good, or if the Queen reciting the estate, and that he had
surrendered which the Queen had accepted, and that in consideration thereof she
made the Grant, whether this be made good although there be no actual
surrender. Thirdly, admit that here he no actual surrender in facto, whether
this grant be aided by the Statute of 43. Eliz. cap. 1. but first before he
would enter into his argument, he said that he would wash away the Rubs cast in
his way to make his way the smoother, and first where it has been said, that
if the Queen should take by contract, or bargain without record that great
mischief would ensue, for by that means the Queens title should be tried by the
Country: and in proof thereof he cited the Lord Latimers case in 12. H. 7.10,
11. which he thought to be no authority for that purpose, for there the
opinion of the Court was delivered concerning the showing forth of Letters
Patents, but not concerning matter of inrolment, also the case was of an estate
of inheritance to be conveyed from the King, but the case now in question is
but for an estate for life, which may in law more easily be determined than an
estate of inheritance conveyed: also the case of 19. Eliz. Dyer 335. cited of
the other part proves not this case, for first the question was not there
whether the King took any thing without inrolment, but whether the Deed may be
enrolled in the time of another King.
Secondly, if this be confessed that the King there should take nothing without
inrolment, yet this is not like to our case, for here this is but to merge a
particular estate which differs much from the case of conveying of an
inheritance: also this is confessed if there had been a Memorandum made in the
Margent, then the surrender had been good: and the want thereof is the laches
of the Clark, and then if it should not be a surrender before the Memorandum
made, the Clark should make the surrender, and not the party: and as to the
Book of 37. H. 6. it is not answered, for to say, that the King has no right
to the thing granted before inrolment, but that he has the property, that
cannot be: and to that which has been objected, that there does not appear any
intention of the surrender, because that although the Patents are surrendered,
the estate remained, the Book of 32. E. 3. Monstrance of faith 178. proves
nothing, for there it is said, that a man may plead, that a Dean and Chapter
did not lease modo et forma without showing any Deed, for there this pleading
is not to divest any thing out of etc. and also it appears in the principal
case, that his intent was to surrender, for the Jury do find that the Letters
Patents were restored by the command of the Lord Seymor to be cancelled: and to
that which has been objected, if the second Patent should be good; that the
Queen might lose her Rent, or condition, because the first lease has his
continuance; to that I give answer, that the first lease has not his
continuance, and therefore no loss can grow to the Queen: and to that which
has been objected, that the Queen is deceived, it appears by these words modo
habens etc. restituit etc. that the intention of the Queen was, that the Lord
Seymor had surrendered his estate before, and that he now had nothing, because
that the word modo being joined with the word reddidit signifies the time
past, but as to that it seems to me, that although (modo) poetica licentia in
the strict construction of Grammar may signify the time past, yet the
signification thereof shall not be so taken in the letters Patents, for there
it shall be taken in common construction, and not to the deceit of the King,
and therefore in the Dean and Chapter of Bristols case 7. E. 6. Dyer the words
are nuper in Tenura I. S. et modo in Tenura A. B. there nuper is taken for the
time past, but modo for the present time: and in 11. H. 7. Rogerum Townesend
modo militem is to be intended that he is now Knight, and not that he was a
Knight in time past, and not now; also it is so to be observed here, that these
words (habens et gaudens) are annexed to this word modo, both which are in the
present time, and restituit comes afterward, and so modo is not annexed to
restituit, but unto habens et gaudens, also although the word shall be referred
unto restituit, yet all may well stand together, for restituit may be referred
unto the time present, as siquae fuerint in 35. H. 6.11. and to that which has
been objected, that until the Queen agrees unto the surrender, the estate is
not in the Queen, he thought that where Tenant for life surrenders before
agreement, he in the reversion is Tenant to the Praecipe, although he shall not
maintain a Trespass before entry, for by 21. H. 7.12. it appears that an
estate for life may be determined as well by word as by surrender, so in 9. H. 7.
where the Tenant dies without heir, the freehold is immediately in the Lord,
but yet he shall not have an action of Trespass before entry: now as to the
first point he conceived it to be an actual surrender although there be no
Vacat made, nor any Memorandum, and to examine it he did relate what Acts might
make a surrender, and to that purpose he said, that words being used which do
prove an assent of the Tenant, that he in reversion shall have an estate, that
shall be a surrender without express words of a surrender, for a man may
surrender by these words Remisit, or resignavit, for the words are not
material, if so there be substance, as in 40. E. 3. placito 14. and 40. Assizes
pl. 16. if a lessee for life says to his lessor, that you shall enter, and I
will that you shall have this land, this is a good surrender. So in 28. H. 8.
Dyer 33. if a Termor agree that he in the reversion shall make a feofment, that
is a surrender, so in 8. Eliz. Dyer 251, 252. lessee for life is content that
he in the reversion shall have the land, and his interest, that is a surrender,
but in that case it appeared that a rent was reserved, and an agreement that
the lessee should have it again, if he survived the lessor, and therefore
appearing plainly that it was not intended to pass by way of surrender, it was
at the last adjudged no surrender, so in 14. H. 8. the Grantee of a Rent did
surrender the Deed, and that held to be a good surrender of the Rent: it is
daubted in 2. Eliz. Dyer in Sir Maurice Barkleys case 156. if the surrender of
the Patent of an Office, unto a master of the Chancerie out of the Court be
good without beliverie of the Patent to be cancelled, but that Book proves
nothing, but that a delivery of a Patent to be cancelled shall be a good
surrender, though the Patent be not cancelled in facto: it has been objected,
that it matters not what commandment the Lord Seymor did give, nor in what
Court the Patents were given up, nor before whom; but to that he said in as much
as it is found, that the Patents were given up by the commandment of the Lo^d
Seymor to be cancelled, that being it was by his command, it was his own
surrender: also it appears that the letters Patents were under the great Seal
of England, which always issues out of the Chancery, and therefore it cannot
be cancelled in any other Court, and it shall be intended, that they were given
up to be cancelled there, also this word restituit signifies to restore, and a
man cannot restore any thing but where he had it, and he had it out of the
Chancery, and therefore it shall not be otherwise intended but to be there
restored, so in Baggots Assise 9. E. 4.7. it is pleaded Quod restituit litteras
Patentes Cancellandas, and shows not to whom, nor where, and it was held to
be very good: but it is there pleaded Quod sursum reddidit Patentes Domini
Regis, and showed in special to whom they were surrendered, because it may be to
any that has power at the time of the surrender, but a man cannot restore unto
any, but such a one who granted unto him, and therefore needs not show unto
whom he did restore: and these words restituit Cancellandas are no new words,
but usually used in surrenders of Patents, as it appears by 9. E. 4.7. and in
Altonwoods case Cook lib. 1. and there the not entering of a Vacat does not
hurt, for it was the fault of the Clark: and Sir Maurice Barkleys case in 2.
Eliz. 176. cited before does not question it, that the entering of a Vacat
should be material; but the question here is, because he did not deliver them
up to be cancelled; in the Lord Darcies case Dyer 195. the jury did think that
there was no surrender at all, but the Book-doth not marrant but that there may
be a surrender without a Vacat: and he said, that at this time the matter is
depending for Saint Saviors in Southwark if it be a good surrender without a
Vacat entered, and no opinion as yet given in that case: and where it has been
objected, that there is no actual surrender until that the Queen has agreed,
and 8. and 21. H. 7. cited, that where a man pleads a surrender, he must also
plead an agreement, yet because the agreement cannot appear by any Record, that
the party can procure to be made of it, it shall be good, although there be no
record made of that agreement; yet in this case, the Queen does agree, as
appears by the words in the second Patent, Quam quidem sursum redditionem
acceptamus etc. Secondly, admitting there is no actual surrender in this case,
yet if when the Queen did recite the particular estate, and that she had
accepted the surrender thereof, and in consideration of it she makes a grant,
whether this second Patent shall be good, and it seems that it shall: and
therefore it appears by 37. H. 6.18. that the taking of a second lease shall
be a surrender of the former: and in Corbets case 11. Eliz. Dyer 208. and 4.
Mar. Dyer 140. although the first lease be by deed indented, and the second but
by word: and in Ives case Cook lib. 5.11. acceptance of a future lease is a
surrender of a lease in possession; and to that purpose is 21. H. 7.14. H.
8.15.31. Assizes placito 26. and other Books, and in 3. Eliz. Dyer 200. the
King granted a house for years, and after did grant to the Patentee the custody
of the house with a fee, and the Patentee accepted the fee, and it is there
doubtted it that shall be a surrender of the Term, and the matter was
Compounded, but he said that he heard that the opinion of the Judges was, that
the acceptance of the custody and fee was a surrender of the Term, by that I
do infer, that there shall be a surrender by implication as well where the King
is party, as where a common person only, first, if a surrender be effectual,
it is sufficient although it be not formal, because it works as much profit
to the King, and the surrender in this case was at the same instant that the
Queen did Seal the letters Patents, for the estate passes from the Queen
without delivery: and it appears that the intention of the Queen was not to
have any actual possession of that, by these words (modo habens et gaudens:)
but it has been objected in as much as this surrender was at an instant, that
it should be void; because that in instants the best shall be taken for the
King, yet it seems to me that it is good, as in the case of 49. E. 3.5. a. a
man devises Burgage land holden of the King, and dies without heir, this
devise is not good against the King, because the devise. takes not effect
until the instant of the devisors death, and at that instant also does the
title of the King begin by death without heir; and he cited Plowden 108 and
109. in Fusmerstons case, for the exposition of these words (not now in being)
within the Statute of Monasteries; and if in that case issue had been taken,
whether it had been a surrender or not, it should have been found to be a
surrender, because it is a surrender in the law, as it was in Thetfores case in
the Common Pleas p. 28. Eliz. Rot. 122. in wast, Baron and Feme Donees in tail
make a lease for life, the husband dies, and the wife disagreeth to the lease,
and the issue was, if the husband and wife did lease, and it was found that
they did not lease, because now by her disagreement it is become in law not the
lease of the wife; Cook lib. 3. Butler and Bakers case accordingly fo. 27. and
28. but if the King be to sustain any loss by the consideration if that were
false, then shall it make the Patent void: as it is in 9. H. 6. where the King
was deceived in the value, so 18. Eliz. Dyer 352. where there was a loss in
esse; but it is contrary where there grows no loss to the King as 26. and 28.
H. 8. of a thing passed: because the King is not to have benefit of it, the
Lord Chandos case is not answered on the other side, for there the King did
intend to have the actual possession where in facto he had not, yet because
that was only a recital and Collection, in the matter in law it does no hurt,
so in the principal case, and so if the King grant a Manor although he has
but a reversion of it, yet it shall pass without the word reversion 7. Eliz.
Dyer 233. and the Kings Patent also shall be so construed, that one part may
stand with another, viz. that the Lord Seymor now having the estate etc. does
restore unto us, etc. the which we do accept etc. as in Sir John Molins case
40. Eliz. Cook 6. Lord, measne, and Tenant, the Tenant was attainted of
Treason; and the King did grant the laud, tenendum de nobis etc. suis noftris
et aliis cap. dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita, et de jure
consueta. He shall in that case hold of the mesne as the Tenant held before,
for if he should hold of the King, the words subsequent would be void; and for
that cause such a construction shall be made that all may stand together; now
for the third point, admit that the surrender is not good, yet it is aided by
the Statute of 43. Eliz. cap. 1. which aides all grants and surrenders etc. to
or from the Queen: the clauses for conveyances to the Queen are with restraint,
but for the conveyances of the Queen there are certain exceptions, our case is
within that part of the Statute which relates unto the 25th. year of her Reign,
and our case is within the words of the Statute, viz. surrenders, and
surrenders within the Statute are such as are surrenders to a common intent,
and therefore where the party has done that in him lies, but some thing is
to the perfection of a surrender, that is aided by the Statute: also by this
word assurance in the Statute a purchase without deed is not aided, by a good
assurance a surrender without deed is aided within the Statute, or else the
Statute should serve for little or nothing, the Statute of confirmations of
letters Patents has the same words. That the Statute of 43. Eliz. has, and
upon 18. Eliz. it was resolved in 27. of Eliz. in Husseys case, that if Tenant
in tail be and the reversion is granted to Queen Eliz. this is good, and aided
by the Statute, so if a man grant lands to the King, but the Deed is not
enrolled, this also is aided by the Statute, and where a grant shall be good at
the Common Law by a Commonperson, there the like grant made by the King is made
good by the Statute, and there was a case in the Duchy Chamber Trin. 37. Eliz.
between Cavendish and Bateman, where the Queen did grant Turbary within the
Manor of Lady Meadows within the County of Darby unto Bateman for 21. years,
Bateman thereof makes a meadow, and afterward the Queen in consideration of
the surrender of the first grant, does grant the same unto him for 40. years by
the name of a meadow, and although he made no surrender, yet by the taking of
the grant it was resolved that it was a good surrender, because there it was
but of a particular estate, but otherwise if should be of fee, for a fee cannot
be surrendered by implication: Dodderidge Sergeant of the King, argued that the
Defendant is guilty of intrusion: and he divided the case into two parts only,
the first whether there be a sufficient consideration at the Common Law, to
make the second Patent void, the second point admitting that there is not a
sufficient consideration by the rule of the Common Law, whether the defect
thereof be aided by the Statute of 43. Eliz. and he argued that the surrender,
which the Queen intended to be the consideration of the grant, was an actual
surrender already perfected before the grant, which does plainly appear to be
so as he took it by the word sursum redditionem, and he said that he could not
so have that word in the Preterperfect Tense, as it would be supplied by an act
of the Present Tente as is pretended, viz. that the surrender is to be made by
the acceptance of a new grant: and he vouched 35. H. 6. also he thought her to
intend an actual surrender for an other reason, viz. for the words nobis sursum
reddidit et restituit cancellandum, the which cannot be performed without an
actual surrender, for otherwise there is no restoring: and he vouched 18. Eliz.
fo. 437. and 43. E. 3. fo. 19. where it is observed, that if a wife do not
remain with an Adulterer with her own accord etc. another reason, the Queen did
intend an actual surrender, because of the words (ea intention) which implie a
surrender to have been actually precedent; another reason was for that hereby
the acceptance of the second Patent there is no surrender wrought of the former
estate in the Law, until after the acceptance of the second letters Patents,
and so the Queen deceived in the time: and he vouched the case of Totnes in 40.
Eliz. in the Kings Bench, and Savages case in 9. H. 8. Carrels Rep. fo. 195.
and here it appears, there was no surrender upon record precedent unto the
second grant: also it ought to have been found by a special verdict. that the
second letters Patents were granted at the suit of Seymor, or otherwise the
granting of them to him makes no surrender of his former letters Patents, and
then it follows that they are not surrendered yet. And where it has been
objected that the Queen uses these words in the second letters Patents, quas
quidem litteras patentes praedictus Seymor modo habens et gaudens, and
therefore it must be intended she takes notice that the first letters Patents
were not yet surrendered, for then she would not say (modo habens et gaudens) he
answered that this word modo signifies the time passed, or the time presently
for to pass, and the word habens cannot be taken in a legal sense, no otherwise
then the word being is taken in Dockwrais case, 27. H. 8. fo. 19. and so these
words modo habens et gaudens, signify no more but that one he had an estate;
also the Queen is deceived in this word acceptamus, for she cannot in the Law
be said to accept of that which by the Law is not vested in her: also he said
that an actual surrender ought to be an actual giving up of so much as the
Patentees received of her grant, as it appears 14. H. 8.21. E. 3. Brook
Prerogative 90.7. E. 6. Dyer Sir Maurice Barklies case 2. Eliz. 159. Sir Ralph
Sadlers case, that a duplicat is not sufficient if the letters Patents be
surrendered and cancelled 3. Eliz. Dyer 195. and he said that the surrender
which the Queen intended, ought to pass an estate from the party surrendering
which is not so done here: and where it has been objected that the very
delivery in the Court made of the letters Patents is a surrender of them, by
the opinion of Davers in 37. H. 6. fo. 10. he said that this book was no Law as
it may appear 12. H. 7. fo. 12. Carrels Reports: although in that book also
Vavasour agrees with Davers: and where it has been objected that here is an
actual surrender made, yet the intention of the Queen ought to be observed to
make it an effectual surrender, or otherwise though she has no loss by the
surrender that is made, yet is it no effectual surrender, as appears by 18.
Eliz. Dyer 352.. and so also was the case of the Isle of Man: also Sir Henry
Seymor did not in this case all that he might have done for the perfecting of
this surrender, for he ought to have seen this his surrender recorded, as it
appears by the book case of the 11. H. 4. where it appears that if I be bound
to levy a fine I ought to sue forth a writ of covenant or dedimus potestatem,
and do all such other acts as it may make it a good and perfect fine in Law.
Secondly, he took it that the Statute of 43. Eliz. did no whit aid this case,
for that makes no surrender to the Queen to be a good surrender, but only an
actual surrender which here is wanting, and the Statute in no sort extends to
a surrender in the Law, for the surrender which this Statute intends to aid,
ought to be a surrender conveying and assuring etc. and this surrender in the
law conveyeth nothing but only extinguisheth, and for that purpose he put this
case, if A. take a new lease of the Queen in 27. by indenture and this is of
his own land, this Statute of 43. Eliz. does not make such a kind of conveyance
in the Law, by Estoppel good to vest the land in the Queen by this Estoppel
which is a conveyance in the Law, unto the which the Lord chief Baron Tanfield
said, insist not upon a labor of that kind for it is plain enough, because
the Queen being party there can be no Estoppel as to any part in that case,
also as to that part of his argument Mr. Walter agreed on the other side, and
also he said, that if a grant of the Queeen were void at the Common Law for
default of want of consideration, this Statute aids not; Walter for the
Defendant, and he divided the case into four points, the first whether the
Tenant for life by the Kings gift by surrendering his letters Patents has also
surrendered his estate. Secondly, if the surrender in this case made be
defective only for want of matter of circumstance as the inrolment etc. whether
such defects are saved by the Statute 43. Eliz. Thirdly, whether in this case
an actual surrender be the consideration merely which moves the Queen to
grant, or what shall be intended the consideration in this case. Fourthly,
admitting that an actual surrender is the sole consideration in this case, then
whether a Patent shall be adjudg'd void for default of such consideration, for
a false consideration does not avoid a Patent, but a false surmise does first
when the Kings Tenant for life does surrender or give up his Patent (although
without deed) yet with such circumstances as the law requires, the surrender
is good: for although a surrender of letters Patents made by the Kings Tenant
in tail will not make estate tail void or determine, as it appears by the book
case of 35. H. 8. title surrender and Cook 6. the Lord Chandos case, yet the
bare giving up of the letters Patents by a Tenant for life is a surrender of
his estate, so here in this case is some proportion between a Tenant for life
of the Queen, and a Tenant for life of a Common person to amount to a
surrender, and therefore it appears by 43. E. 3. that a Tenant for life may
surrender without deed; and without livery and from the land, but a Tenant in
tail may not do so: also if a Common person has a rent or other thing which
cannot pass but by deed, yet a surrender of such a rent shall be good by a bare
deliverie up of the deed if he has but an estate for life in the Rent: and
this also, although it be but to the disseissor of the land out of which etc.
the same Law, he took it of a particular Tenant for life of years: also 32. H.
8.
Brook Patents 97. it is made a doubt whether the estate tail of the Kings
Donee be determined and gone by surrendering of the letters Patent, and he
referred that if thought worthy of a doubt whether it should be a good
surrender of an estate tail, they would hade held it clearly a surrender for an
estate for life: and it was admitted 3. Eli 2. Dyer fo. 193. Mack-Williams
case, that if in the principal case if a Vacat or cancellation had been, the
surrender had been good actually without question: and Sir Maurice Barkleys
case cited on the other part proves the same also, for there it is admitted,
that if the letters Patents had been given up, there had been a perfect
surrender. And 40. H. 3. fol. 5. Belknap held that a surrender may be by word,
which is to be intended by giving up the Patent: and that appears by Rolfs case
in Dyer, that a voluntary surrender needs no Conftat: also where it has been
objected that the special verdict in this case has not found in what Court the
surrender was made, he answered, that the Law shall intend it to be made in the
same Court from whence the letters Patents did issue, for a surrender cannot be
good being made in another Court, and therefore it must needs be intended the
same Court: and he vouched 11. Ed. 3. fo. 1. and 18. Eliz. Plinies Case and
Covel and Cabels Case in Banco Regis 38. Eliz. wherein a special verdict it was
holden that all things necessary for the perfecting of that the Jury has found
to be done, must be necessarily intended concurrent. Secondly, the want of
circumstances in a surrender are perfected and supplied by the Statute of 43.
Eliz. for although matters of substance are not aided within this Statute, yet
matters of circumstances are aided. And he said that all the defects in this
Case are matters of circumstance, and to prove that the defects in this Case
are only in circumstance, he said that there are three principal defects in
conveyances which are merely matters of circumstance and aided within this
Statute, the first is merely want of form in a conveyance, and that such a
defect is aided, he cited Hussies Case to be adjudged accordingly; the second
is where words are wanting in a conveyance, and that such a conveyance is aided
by this Statute, he cited the opinion of Popham and Gaudy in 44. Eliz. in a
cause depending in the Chancery: the third matter of circumstance is where
there is want of some matter concerning the executing of an estate, and that
such defect is only matter of circumstance and aided within this Statute he
cited Morley and Whartons Case to be adjudged 7. Eliz. in the Common Pleas,
that the default of not inrolling is aided by this Statute, and Mack-Williams
and Kemps Case cited in Dyer before, proves this to be but matter of
circumstance, and for that he thought the surrender in the principal Case
wanting nothing but inrolment is aided by this Statute: also in the argument of
the second point he shows what defects in conveyances should be accounted
matter of substance and so not aided by this Statute of 43. Eliz. and to this
purpose he held: that all disabilities of the person in a grant is matter of
substance, and so not aided within this Statute; and he cited Twynes Case 32.
Eliz. in the Exchequer to be accordingly.
Secondly, he held that the nature of an assurance is not aided by this
Statute, and therefore if a man has power to grant an estate by fine, and he
does it by Deed, this is not aided by the Statute, for this is defective in
matter of substance, and he cited Wisemans Case, and Sir Hugh Cholmleys Case in
Cook l. 2. also he said if a man give land to the King and his heirs to have
ten years after such grant, this is not made good by the Statute. Thirdly,
whereas it may be Collected, that because it is found in the special verdict
that an actual surrender was the cause which moved the Queen to grant, or that
it appears to be the cause, he held that no consideration plainly appears but
only by relation to a consideration before mentioned, and he said that these
words used by the Queen viz. (modo habens et gaudens) show that the Queen took
notice the state was still enjoyed notwithstanding the delivery up of the
letters Patents; and therefore it cannot be intended by the verdict that the
Queen intended an actual surrender before made for the consideration: but
whereas it has been objected of the other part, that the word modo does often
signify the time past, and some instances according to Grammatical
construction were given in proof thereof; and thereupon they would infer that
the Queen by these words modo habens did intend no other but lately having or
enjoying: to that he gave a double answer; to the first he said, that there was
no cause showed or instance given. That modo habens joined together will
signify a time past, though taken ^everally that may signify so much, which
makes a plain difference betwixt those instances, and this present case.
Secondly, admitting in a Grammatical construction they did signify as the
other side would have it, yet the judges ought to adjudge thereof according to
the most natural sense of these words in Common understanding, and that so it
may be done, he vouched one Talbots Case in 32 Eliz. in Banco Regis, in which
after the Judges had conferred in the Court with diverse learned Scholars
touching the Grammatical construction of a word used in a Convey ance, they
afterward notwithstanding did wave the Grammatical construction, and adjudged
the word to signify in Law according to the Common received sense of the word,
and according to this he vouched 12. H. 8. where the word uterque received the
like construction: also he vouched the 20. Eliz. Dyer fol. 262. where it is
admitted, that the word modo is to be taken in the present Tense, and to this
purpose he also vouched Billings Case in 38. H. 6. and Bozuns Case Coo. lib. 4.
and then he concluded that in as much as the special verdict had definitively
found no consideration, but generally for the consideration above expressed, he
held that the second Patent was good, for a Patent cannot be void, because
there is no consideration to move the King to grant, but a Patent may be void
as is pretended for a false consideration, which is not in this case, and
therefore etc. Fourthly, admitting that the consideration in this Case was for
an actual surrender before made, and that in this case no such actual surrender
was before made, yet he held that in this Case the second lease is good:
notwithstanding the false consideration, for it appears by 37. H. 8. Brook
title patents 100. that a Patent shall never be void for a false consideration,
but by reason of a false surmise it may; but he confessed this difference was
generally denied, because a Patent shall be void by reason of a false
consideration, but he said that the differences were infinite also upon this
ground, for some take a difference where a consideration is real, and where it
is personal, and they hold that a real consideration being false shall not
avoid the grant, but otherwise of a personal, and so they take the Book of 37.
H. 8. before cited to be good Law; and upon this difference others also have
taken a difference where the consideration is to come to the King himself, and
where it is to come to a stranger: others also have taken a difference where
the consideration is of a thing valuable, and where it is not of value, yet
they take a difference where that is past and executed, and where it is to come
or Executorie; but he said that although diverse of these differences seemed to
be good with great reasons, and were backed with some Authorities, yet he
needed not to take advantage of any of them for the maintenance of this Case,
and for that he took this general difference for the maintenance of this
Patent, viz. that if the consideration be such which brings a benefit or
commonditie to the King, and this is false, that this avoyds the grant; but if
it bring no commodity to the King, although it be false, yet the grant is
good, and to prove this diversity, he cited Harris and Wings Case to be
adjudged in Banco Regis, and Barwicks Case Cook lib. 5. and Sir Hugh Cholmleys
Case Cook. lib. 2. to be adjudged accordingly of a false recital, and he said,
although it be admitted that the consideration which the King intended to have
was an actual surrender, yet in as much as this cannot be intended a thing more
to his advantage, then a surrender in Law, the which plainly appears to be in
this case, that the Patent is good, and for that he held that the second lease
shall not be avoided for such a falsitie, and also he said that this Case is
more strong of his side then any Case which may be cited, in as much as the King
had no discommoditie or loss by the falsitie of the consideration, but in this
Case also he should be at a loss if the second lease were not good, for the
second lease reserveth a greater rent to the King, then was reserved by the
first, and therefore it is for his benefit, that the Law should allow of the
second lease, to the intent it may make a surrender of the former lease, for
the Kings advantage, and if the King grants probis hominibus de O. rendering
rent they are by this grant impliedly made a corporation for the benefit of the
King to render him the rent, whereas otherwise the grant would be void; and so
he took it in the principal case although the grant should be void, by reason
of the false consideration, yet it should be good to this purpose for the Kings
benefit: and after Termino Mich. Anno Sexto Jacobi Regis this Case was argued
again, and Nicholas Sergeant for the Defendant said, that the sole point of the
Case is, if the consideration of the lease made in 27. Eliz. be good or not,
and this is expressed to be Tam in consideratione sursum reddditionis praedict.
quam pro aliis Causiis, et Considerationibus etc. then it is to be considered
if here be such a surrender as is meant to be within the intent of the
Consideration of the Queen, and he said that in this Case here was a good
surrender in law clearly by the Book of 37. H. 6. for in all Cases where a
Teimer for years accepts a lease of him in Reversion as here the Lord Seymor
did, then this is a surrender in Law of his first interest, but the Earl of
Salisbury Lord Treasurer said, that this is not properly a surrender of this
Ancient Term, but an extinguishment thereof, to which the Lord chief Baron
Tanfield agreed: and Sergeant Nichols further said, that the Consideration
which moved the Queen to her grant was only the sufficient surrendering of the
precedent estate of the Lord Seymor, and not the restoring of the letters
Patents, and therefore although it be admitted, that here was not a sufficient
restoring of the letters Patents, nor an actual surrender by this means, yet
here is an effectual surrender by the operation of Law, and then this being the
sole Consideration which moved the Queen to her grant, the not sufficient
restoring of the letters Patents is not material, for he said, it seemed to him
that in rei veritate the particular estate cannot be sufficiently surrendered by
this bare giving up of the letters Patents by the Tenant for life, as it
appears by Walshes Case cited in Altonwoods Case Cook lib. 1. and therefore he
insisted not upon that. Secondly, he argued that a recital in the Kings Patents
of a thing material if it be false, and come by information of the party is
all one as a false Consideration and not otherwise: and he said that it appears
by Brook tit. Patents pla. 100. that all Considerations valuable, although they
are false do not avoid a Patent, as where the King grants lands prodecem libris
sibi solutis, although that in facto this is false, yet the grant is good: also
it appears by 26. H. 8. and Sir Thomas Wrothes Case, and by 21. E. 4 fol. 48.
that a consideration executed avoideth not a grant although it be false, but he
said that it appears by the Case of 18. Eliz. Dyer 352. that if the King make a
lease in Consideration of a surrender of a precedent lease which in truth was
void, by some that the King may avoid the lease, but others contrary, because
it was not done upon the suggestion of the party, but for a consideration
executed, and the surrender of the estate precedent was the material cause and
consideration of the grant: and he said, that although in this Case there be
not a good surrender of the letters Patents, yet the Consideration being only
the surrendering of the estate, that is not material, for as it is said in
Altonwoods Case Cook lib. 1. if the King in Consideration only of the surrender
of precedent Patents makes a grant, in this Case there needs no averment of an
estate, for the surrender is not material of the letters Patents. Also it
appears Cholmleys Case Cook lib. 2. that if the King recite an estate to be
made with Condition, although that at the same time of the recital this is not
Conditional, yet if once this were Conditional the King is not deceived,
although the condition be now released, and he cited also the Lord Chandos Case
Cook lib. 6. where it appears that if the King recite a thing untruly which
comes not of the information of the party, this shall not hurt the Grant,
except it be part of the consideration, and he said, that Harris and Wings Case
differs from this Case, for there the King had a Tenant who held a Tenement by
the yearly rent of six pounds, and another Tenement of him by the yearly rent
of nineteen pounds, and he made a new lease of both those to the said Tenant,
without any recital of the former leases reserving but Nineteen pounds for
both, and there it was adjudged, that the second lease was not good, but he
said, that the reason of that judgment was, not because the ancient lease was
not recited, but by reason that a loss in the rent came to the King, and so by
intendment he was deceived, and this was also upon the matter the reason of the
resolution of Barwicks Case, and also in Mack-Williams Case, for there was not
a surrender of the estate as the King intended, which ought to be, but in our
Case the estate is well surrendered clearly, and he thought that these words
(modo habens) may well stand with the Kings intent as well to a surrender in Law,
as to an actual surrender. The Attorney general to the contrary. First for the
recital, that the information of the party was, that the King should have an
actual surrender, and so was the Kings intent collected upon the information of
the party. Secondly, that here is not any actual surrender. Thirdly, that by
consequence it follows that the Queen is deceived. Fourthly, here is no
surrender in Law in this Case. Fifthly, although here were a surrender in Law,
yet that is not sufficient to make the grant good: to the first point be said,
that always a familiar construction ought to be made of the Kings grants, and
therefore if the King grant all his portion of Tithes in D. this does not pass
his Parsonage in D. although he had no other Tithes there;
so if the King grant all his Titheable lands within the Manor of B. although
the lands of Coppiholders are parcel of the demeasnes of the Manor of B. yet
these lands in such Case do not pass, Cook. lib. 1. Bozuns Case, and Cook lib.
1. Altonwoods Case fo. 46. also it appears by the pleading in Plowden in
Wrothesleys case, and in Adams case, and also in Fulmerstons case; that
although the ancient particular estate be gone in Law by the acceptance of a
new estate, yet it ought not to be pleaded as a surrender, and therefore it
shall not be construed that the King intended such a surrender, which pleaders
in their pleading do not account a surrender: also he said, that in regard that
the Queen says, quam quidem sursum redditionem acceptamus it seems by that,
that she did not intend a surrender in Law, and therefore accepted nothing, but
gave an estate etc. and must be meant such a surrender, to which she is party
by her acceptance: also where the words are, modo habens et gaudens, and
therefore it is inferred that the Queen intended an estate containing in the
Patentee this is true, for although that the Queen intended an actual surrender
precedent to be made by the Patentee, yet his estate continues against the
Queen until an acceptance of a surrender by her, although also this may be
called a surrender like unto a surrender of a benefice, until an acceptance by
the ordinary: also although it was found that the Queen made a new lease or
letters Patents of the said Land to the said Lord Seymor, yet it appears not
that the new letters Patents were accepted by the Lord Seymor until a month
after the making of them when he made a lease to Johnson, and until that time
without question there was no surrender either in fact, or in Law; and where it
has been objected that these words (modo habens) implie only the present time,
he said that the word modo will always signify such a time as the Verb with
which it is joined will signify, and therefore Cicero says, modo hoc malum in
hanc Rempublicam invasit: also the words Jam et nunc, are of such signification
as this word modo is: and these words are always governed by the Verb, as Jam
venit etc. so in the Bible the story of Naaman and Gehesey, Jam modo venerunt
duo, behold two young men are come to me etc. and as to the second point it is
clear, that here is not any actual surrender, for the King cannot take by an
actual surrender without matter of Record. And therefore it was holden in the
Lord Stanleys Case, that the King took nothing although his officers, by his
command did feise a man's lands into their hands for the Kings use: also he
said, that this appears by the 11. E. 4. and 2. Eliz. Dyer, if a man comes and
says, that he surrenders his office, and a Memorandum is recorded thereof, but
the Patent is not delivered up, it seems this is not sufficient to make a
surrender, so on the other side, if the Patentee make a deed purporting as much:
yet it appears by 19. of Eliz. Dyer, if the deed be not enrolled it is a good
surrender, and he agreed to that which has been objected against him, that
although that the Jury did not find in what Court the restoring of the Patent
was, yet it ought to be intended to be made in Chancery, but he said that the
Jury did not find any time when the surrender was made, and that is a thing
material to be found as it appears in Kemps Case, and Mack Williams Case
before. Thirdly, an actual surrender being in the King, new letters Patents
urged to be made shall be intended to be part of the consideration which moved
the King to a new grant, and he vouched 18. Eliz. Dyer 352* where a lease was
recited which needed not, and in facto, the said lease was a void lease in Law.
And therefore the new lease made was also void a fortiori here where an actual
surrender is recited to be made. Fourthly, he said, that the sole reason in
Harris and Wings case was, that the first lease ought to have been recited, for
if the King makes a lease, and after makes another lease of the same land to
the same lessee, the first lease is in being at the time of the acceptance of
the new lease, as appears by Fulmerstons case in Plowden, and therefore if in
such case there be not a good recital of the lease in being, the second lease
is not good, and so the acceptance of it makes no surrender of the former
lease, and he said that the recital of the Queen in the principal Case is a
showing of a former lease destroyed, and not in being, and then no actual
surrender being made, the said former lease contrary to this recital is in
being still, and so the recital is false, and consequently the second lease is
a void lease, and so this works no surrender in Law of the old lease, and so
he concluded the fourth point, that here is no surrender in Law, and he held
that if there had been a good surrender in Law, yet this had not made the
Patent good, and where it was objected, that a consideration executed though
valuable being false avoyds not a Patent, he said it appears in 6. Ed. 2. tit.
pardon Brook 79. that a consideration of service in the Kings Patent ought to
be alleged to have been performed, nevertheless it appears in Sir Thomas
Worths case in Plowden, that such a particular service being alleged in the
Patent to be executed needs not an averment that it was performed, for the
Patent is good although such consideration be false; but he said, that in this
Case the precedent surrender is the material consideration, and therefore there
ought not to be any material variance in the form of the consideration, and so
is the difference betwixt this Case, and Worths Case, and therefore if the King
make a grant to A. in consideration, that he had released by deed enrolled, and
he had released by fine, here is a failing of the consideration, that he had
released by deed enrolled, when as he had released by fine, and so the grant is
void, and he said that as it appears by the judgment given in Welshes Case
cited in Altonwoods Case, that no equity ought to be observed in the Kings
grant against his express words, so here no equity ought to be observed
against the King, otherwise then his plain words import, and therefore here his
words import and intend an actual surrender precedent, which ought not to be
satisfied with a surrender subsequent: and after upon the motion of the Earl of
Salisbury Lord Treasurer of England, this Case was referred to the Lord Privy
Seal, and the Lord of Worcester, who awarded to Sir Robert Johnson 200 l. per
annum during his life, and the life of his wife for all his interest; but the
Earl of Salisbury Lord Treasurer seemed that the matter in Law was against Sir
Robert Johnson, although that equity was for him, to which opinion Tanfield
chief Baron also inclined, in regard there was not here any surrender in the
Case, but an extinguishment only.

Hill. 4. Jac. in the Exchequer.
IT was moved by one, whether the Kings Patentee of Pirates goods, seizing some
goods of Pirates should pay custom for them or not, and it was holden by the
Barons, that he should pay none, for in as much as they are goods given by Law
unto the King, no reason that he should have custom for his own goods.

The Case of Queens College in Oxford of Minosmer.
UPon a special verdict the Jury found, that Queens College in Oxford was
incorporated by the name of Provost and Scholars of the Hall of the Queens
College of Oxford, and they were seized in fee of an advowson whereof the
place is parcel, the Church being void, the Provost and Scholars aforesaid did
by the name of Provost of Queens College in the Universitie of Oxford, and the
fellows and Scholars of the same present one A. to the same avoydance, who
after admission etc. made a lease for years, yet to come to the Defendant,
which was confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, and that afterward A. died,
and the Plautiff was presented admitted, instituted, and inducted, and the
Defendant entering claiming his lease, the Plantiff had brought this Action.
Harris Junior Sergeant for the Plantiff seemed, that the presentation of the
lessor of the Defendant was not by the true name of the Patrons, and so the
lease void, and therefore the Defendant a Trespasser as to the Plantiff, and he
said, that the name of a Corporation is not like to a man's surname which
grows by nature, but is like to a name of Baptism which grows by polity,
and therefore ought to be truly observed in their grants and presentations, as
appears by 35. H. 6. fo. 5. and it is there said, if a man be baptized by the
name of Posthumus, if this addition of Posthumus be omitted, this abates the
writ, but yet he agreed that variance of the name of a Corporation in some
manner of Surplusage hinders not, as in Plowden Crofts and Howels Case, and it
was in Fisher and Boys Case ruled, that Custos for gardianus was not any
material variance, but he said, that in Mich. 29. and 30. Eliz. in Banco Regis
in Merton College Case, where the title was, that the said College was
incorporated by the name of the College of Scholars of the house of Merton
College, and in a lease by them this word Scholars was omitted, and holden
void, for that cause, and so it was betwixt one Wingate and Hall, the Dean and
Canons of Windsor 22. E. 4. were incorporated by the name of Dean and Canons of
the Kings free Chapel of St. George the Martyr within his Castle of Windsor,
adjudged the variance (of the Kings and Queens free Chapel) was material
although the lease was made in the time of Philip and Marie. And he vouched
also 44. E. 3. fo. 3. and 38. E. 3. fo. 28. and he said, that it seemed to him,
that this presentation by another name had gained an usurpation by the Provost
in his natural capacity: also it seems that notwithstanding it is not found,
that Doctor Airie was presented, instituted, and inducced; yet the special
verdict is good enough to have judgment of his part, but he agreed, that if
the truth of the Case had been discovered by the pleading, then it ought to be
precisely showed, that such exact finding is not necessary in a special
verdict, as in pleading, and he vouched Allens Case 33. Eliz. Banco Regis where
the Jury found, that Tenant for life made a lease for years, and found not the
lessor living nor dead, and yet in this Case he was intended living. and he
cited also Haydons Case Cook lib. 3. and Hunts Case 5. Ma. Dyer 153. and he
voucht the Case of West against Munson in a writ of error in the Kings Bench,
wherein the first action being an Assise in the Common Pleas, it was alleged
for error that the Jury did not find the Plantiff was disseised, but only the
Defendant disseised him, and yet the judgment was affirmed: Dodderidge the
Kings Sergeant for the Defendant, he agreed that the name of a Corporation is
essential to be always used in their grants, for thereby they are
distinguished from other Corporations, but he conceived that in this Case here
is a sufficient supplying of that part of the name which is omitted, and he
said that although the special verdict in one place mentions the name of Queens
College, yet when they nominate the Corporation, it calls them the Provost and
Scholars of the Hall omitting the words (Queens College) and then they find
that the Provost and Scholars by the name of etc. and he said, that in so much
the Jury found precisely that the same Corporation made the demise, it is not
material by what name they made it, and therefore he said that if a Jury find,
that I. S. had made a feofment by the name of R. S. this is good enough, as it
was holden in Shotbolts Case 10. and 11. Eliz. and so in 13. E. 2. fitz. tit.
Bastardy pl. 25. a Jury found that two daughters were heirs, and that the
Defendant was born in espousals, a non suit, and so 20. Eliz Dyer 361. the Jury
found that Executors received rents incident to the reversion, and so assets in
their hands, and he cited also Dyer 372. to the second matter he thought that
the omitting of the name precisely of Doctor Airie made the special verdict
vicious, and will inveigle the Judges, so that they cannot give Judgment, for
it may be that Doctor Airie was presented by the same name of Corporation as
the other presentee was, for he said in truth the Case was so: also the special
verdict is vicious, because they found not any time of the Presentation of
Doctor Airie, for peradventure he was presented by the said College, when he
was Provost thereof, and then his presentation is not good, by 22 E. 4. and to
this purpose he cited Heckers case in 12. H. 8. and one Fuljambes case in 6. E.
6. in Bendlows, and then admitting that Doctor Airie should be intended an
usurper if he shall avoid this lease: it was also moved, that if a Corporation
by a false name present, and admission, institution, and induction is made by a
true name, if this make a Plenartie: and Boswel and Greens case Cook lib. 6.
was cited: See more after fol.

The Mayor of Lincolns Case.
Huddleston and Hills case.
IN an Attachment against the Mayor of Lincoln, and the Steward of the Court
there being Colshil, it was said, that if a writ of error be directed to an
inferior Court, they ought to execute it in all things although that their fee
be not paid, nor tendered to them, and Mr. Man Secondarie to Roper said, that
the fee which is demanded by them ought to be indorsed upon the return of the
writ of error, so that the Judges may judge of it if it be reasonable, and
diverse presidents warrant that accordingly.

Huddleston and Hill against Bows, an Elegit upon a judgment issued at the
suit of Hill, and after Hill died, and his eldest son sued a scire facias upon
the said judgment, and holden that it lies not.

If a man sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes of Headlands, the
Defendant may have a Prohibition, but by some he ought to suggest that they are
but small Headlands, and that there is a custom of discharge in consideration
that he paid Tithes in kind of Meadows, and in this case Williams said, that
if a man keep sheep in one Parish until Shearing time, and then sell them into
another Parish, in this Case the Vendee shall pay the Tithe wool to the Parish
where they were depastured in the greater part of the time of the growing of
the wool. See the Tithing Tavle the fifth question.

Skeleton against the Lady Airie.
IN a Prohibition the Plantiff says, that -- was seized of the Manor of
Calthrop, and also of the Rectory of Haughton Calthrop, and that the land
whereof the tithe is demanded is Coppihold, and holden of the said Manor, and
that this was also found by special verdict accordingly, and that it had been
always discharged of payment of Tithes, and it was argued, that the Prohibition
did lie, for it was adjudged Mich 34. and 35. Eliz. that a perpetual union of
the Parsonage, and the land charged is a sufficient discharge of the Tithes,
and a prescription may be well enough to be discharged of the payment of
Tithes, as it appears by a Case put in the Archbishop of Canterburies Case:
Cook lib. 2. George Crook of Counsel on the other side, and he conceived that a
perpetual unity was no perpetual discharge, and he said there was no judgment
given in the Case cited before, and he also said, that the Jury in this Case
found not a discharge of payment of Tithes, but only a new usage to pay by
unity of possession, and he cited 10. H. 7. or 6. where the manner of Tithing
is set down; also he cited the Bishop of Winchesters Case Cook lib. 2. and he
cited the Prior of D. Case to be resolved in 40. Eliz. that a Coppiholder may
prescribe to be discharged of Tithes by pleading that he was always Tenant by
Copy to a spiritual Corporation: also he cited the Case of Pigot and Hern
mentioned in Cook lib. 2. in the Bishop of Wintons Case fol. 45. and he said,
that it was adjudged in Sheddingtons Case, that if a man prescribe to be
discharged of payment of Tithes by reason of payment of another kind of Tithe,
that this is not good.

Marie Reps against Babham.
MArie Reps by her Guardian was Plantiff against Babham in an action of Trespass,
the Case was, that a feofment was made to the use of husband and wife for their
lives, and after to the heirs of the body of the wife begotten by the husband,
and if this was an estate tail general in the wife, or an estate in special
tail to the husband it was demurred: Richardson argued that it was a general
estate tail in the wife, and that the husband had but for life, and he vouched
11. E. 3. Fitz. tit. Formedon in proof thereof: Henry Yelverton thought it was
an estate tail in both, and he said, that the Case in the 11. E. 3. is not like
to this Case, for there the Prior cannot take but as Tenant in Common, and he
vouched of his part 17. E. 2. title -- where the inheritance is limited no more
to the body of the one then of the other, there is an estate tail in both out
of which Littleton took his Case; and Fitz. not. Brevium fol. 193. G. where he
puts the very Case in effect 41. E. 3. fol. 24.3. E. 3. fo. 90. Rips Case 21.
E. 3. fo. 41.4. E. 3. fo. 145. and 15. Eliz. in the Common Pleas was, that a
gift was made to husband and wife, and to the heirs of the body of the
husband, of the body of the wife begotten, and this was holden an estate tail
in both, if the word husband follows immediately, the word heir it is an
estate tail in that person only, but if the word (with) be interpreted it
alters, but the word (or) interposed makes no difference, no more then if
the word husband had immediately followed 19. H. 6.75.

Pasch. 4. Jac. in the Exchequer.
Richards against Williams.
IN an action of Trover and conversion, betwixt Richards and Williams for two
loads of Barley, the Defendant says, that the Dean; Archdeacon, president,
and Chapter of Landaffe was seized of a Personage in fee, and by the said name
had leased unto the Defendant, to which the Plantiff replied, that the
Archdeacon and Chapter of Landaffe were seized in fee, and leased unto him
without that, that there was any Corporation as Dean, Archdeacon, president,
and Chapter, whereupon the Defendant demurred: George Crook argued, that the
Replication is good, and he made two points. First, that here is a good
inducment to a Traverse. Secondly, that there ought to be a Traverse in the
Case: to the first he said, that if the Defendant entitle himself by one name,
and the Plantiff by another name, here is a good inducement for a Traverse, and
he cited Croft and Howels Case in Plowden, where the Cooks were incorporated:
by E. 4. by the name of Master and Governous;
and they made a lease of lands by the name of Master and Wardens, and this was
holden a void lease, and he vouched to this purpose also 21. E. 4. fol. 56.
where a Corporation was of Dean and Viccars, and a lease was made by them by
the name of Dean and Priests, and 30. Eliz in the Kings Bench, and Windgate
Hals Case, and Eaten College Case in 3. and 4. Ma. Dyer 150.2. that in this
Case the Plantiff ought to take a Traverse, and he cited 44. Assise pl. 9. and.
44. E. 3. fo. 26. where one pleaded, that the Prior of the Hospital of St. etc.
and the othersaid that the Prior of the house etc. and an averment was made,
that it was known by the one name and by the other, or otherwise the plea had
not been good without a Traverse: also he cited the Case of Raunce, and the
Dean and Chapter of Chichesters Case in the Kings Bench, where Raunce took such
an averment, or otherwise he ought to have taken a Traverse, and he cited the
Lord Barleys Case in Plowden, and 5. H. 7. and he said, that the Plantiff by
his Replication alleged other matter in fact then the Defendant did, and
therefore there ought to be a Traverse 12. E 4. also if a man brings an action
by the name of Guardian, and the other says he is Prior, this is not good
without a Traverse that he is not Guardian, 4. E. 4. fo. 6.32. H. 6. fo. 4.38.
E. 3. fo. 34. an account supposing the Defendant one of the company of M. and
it is there said, that the Defendant not being sued in the action, as one of
the company, but this is only used for an addition, therefore there ought to be
no Traverse: and after this argument Tanfield chief Baron said, that the
argument now made touched not the point in this Replication, for the point is
not if there needs a Traverse in the cause, but what thing is Traversable
therein, videlicet, what is the principal matter alleged for the Defendant,
and therefore he put this Case, Prior and Covent of D. claim an Annuity by
prescription, the Defendant says, that within time of memory they were
incorporated by the name of etc. in regard that it is within time of memory,
Quere what thing is Traversable here, that is to say, what thing is the
principal matter: and after at another day Walker to the contrary; and first he
said, that it is not alleged in fact by the Defendant, but by implication.
That there was any such corporation as Dean etc. and that which is alleged,
but by implication ought never to be Traversed, and he vouched Dyer 365. and
27. H. 8.27. The alleging that the Dean etc. is but matter of induement to the
Plea in Bar, and therefore is not Traversable, for the lease supposed to be
made by them is the matter of substance, and he vouched a Case between
Richarson and Sir George Heart 31. Eliz. to be, where in an action against the
Sheriff, for suffering an other to escape who was in Execution at the Plantiffs
suit, and the Sheriff said, that he never arrested him, and he vouched also 10.
H. 6. fo. 13. thirdly, he said, that the Plantiff does not Traverse in the same
manner as is alleged by the Defendant, and therefore the Traverse is not good,
and he vouched 27. H. 8. fo. 26. where in Trespass the Defendant says, that I.
S. is seized in fee etc. the Plantiff says, that his father was seized in fee,
without that that he had, any thing, this is no good Traverse, and Thompson
thought it no good Traverse; it is alleged in fact for the Defendant, that
such a Corporation made a lease, therefore there was such a Corporation, and he
said that a man may Traverse by a Negative prayer, or by a Negative pregnant 9.
H. 7. and 27. H. 6. where a Trespass was brought by I. and G. his wife, the
Defendant said, there is no such G. his wife, and this is good: and so in 40.
E. 3. fo. 36. and 37.11. H. 4. fo. 10.45. E. 3. fo. 6. in a quare impedit
praesentare to the Church of D. the Defendant says, that there is no such
Church, 22. E. 4. fo. 34. an action was brought against I. S. Mayor of D. and
he Traversed that there is no such Corporation; Tanfield chief Baron said, that
if in an action of Trespass the Defendant says, that I. S. was seized in fee,
and infeoffed him without that etc. and the Plantiff says, that I. S. was
seized in fee, and infeoffed me without that, that there was any such person as
I. S. in being, this is no good Traverse: Hern Baron seemed that this Traverse
is good in the principal Case, but he was once of Counsel with the Plantiff;
and it was moved that the Case should be Compounded.

An Information against Page.
IN an Information against Page, and another upon the Statute of 3. and 4. E.
6. cap. 21. for buying of Butter, and selling of the same by retail contrary to
the form of the Statute, upon not guilty pleaded, the Jury found one of them
only guilty both of buying and selling, and the other not guilty: and it was
moved, that no judgment may be given in this Case, in as much as the action is
conceived upon a joint buying by two: and it appears that this is but by one,
but it was argued, that judgment ought to be given, for it cannot be intended
in Law, as to this purpose a joint buying, for the wrong is several, and in
proof thereof was cited 36. H. 6. fo. 27. the 11. H. 4. Dyer fo. 194. or 195.
accordingly; also this action is for a wrong done to the Commonwealth, which
is a several wrong by either; and to this purpose was cited 40. E. 3. fo. 35.
and 36. H. 6. cited before, and 5. H. 5. fo. 3. where an action de
malefactoribus in Pareis was brought against three, and one only was found
guilty, and judgment was given against him, and there is no difference as to
this purpose between this Case, and an action of debt upon a joint contract
made by two, as appears by 21. H. 7. and Partridges Case in Plowden, where it
is said, that the bargaining is but matter of conveyance to the action, and
according unto this was cited 33. H. 8. Brook tit. issue: and also 28. H. 6.
fo. 7. and 36. H. 6. fo. 29. and a Case was adjudgeed in Mich. 35. and 36 Eliz.
in the Kings Bench, which proves the same also: where an information was
brought supposing the Defendant to have bought Cattle of two, contrary to the
form of the Statute, and it was found that he bought them but of one, and yet
judgment was given: Hitchcock to the contrary. and he argued, that no
judgment ought to be given, for he said, that if an information be brought
against two upon the Statute of usury, and one only is found guilty, yet no
judgment may be given in this Case, to which the Court agreed: and he cited
Dyer 160.5. Ma. where two sued in the Court of Admiraltie one, for an offense
triable within the body of the County, contrary to the Statutes of 13. and
15. of R. 2. and an action was brought against one of them only, and good, and
he vouched also 22. Eliz. Dyer fo. 370.2. R. 3. fo. 18. where three brought an
account against one, he pleads he was never their receiver, and the Jury found
etc. and he cited a case to this purpose, an information was brought against
two for buying of Cattle of one B. and for selling of them contrary to the form
of the Statute, and in this Case the Jury found the Defendant not guilty for
the buying them of B. but that he bought them of one P. and upon an attaint of
the Jury the opinion of the Court was in this case, that though the verdict was
affirmed, yet no judgment ought to be given thereupon, and this was the true
Case of Lidwood and Pearpoint cited before on the other side, as George Crook
said.

York and Allein.
A Man recovered damages in an action upon the Case against B. who at the time
of the judgment was jointly seized in fee with C. and that after B. and C.
aliened, the party who recovered is outlawed, the King eight years after this
outlawry extends the moitie of this land for these damages recovered against B.
and it was moved, if he shall have them in extent for them, or not, also if he
shall have it without a scire facias; and the Barons were clear in opinion that
he shall have it in extent, for it was liable to the extent of the party
outlawed before the Alienation, and then when it comes to the King by the
outlawry, although it be after the Alienation, it continues extendible for the
King, although the Alienation was before the outlawry.

It was admitted by all the Barons, that if a Coppiholder surrender to the use
of a younger son, and dies, that this younger son cannot bring an action until
admittance, but if the Copihold had descended to the heir, he may have an
action before admittance: see Cook Coppihold Cases lib. 4. fol. 22. and also it
was said, that all Coppiholders of the Kings Manors may now have admittance
into their Coppihold estates well enough, and the order for the stay of their
admittances which was made heretofore is now dissolved and quashed.

Dennis against Drake.
DEbt was brought by Dennis against Drake Sheriff for an escape, a man had
judgment in the Kings Bench, and a writ of error was brought within the year,
and after the year passed the judgment was affirmed in the Exchequer Chamber,
and within a year after the affirmation a Capias issued to the said Drake the
Sheriff, who took the party and suffered him to escape, and this being the
Case upon the declaration in this action the Defendant demurred, and all the
Barons said, that there is no question but a Capias may well issue within the
year after judgment affirmed without a scire facias, though it be more then a
year after the first judgment, and it seemed to them, that there was no
difference, though that the writ of error was not brought until after the year
of the first judgment given, although in such case there be an apparent
neglect in the party, who had not sued his execution within the year, and
therefore he was enforced to a scire facias thorough his neglect, whereas if
error had been brought within the year, he had never been driven to his scire
facias in this Case, yet for as much as when the judgment is affirmed, this is
all one as a new judgment, they conceived it made no difference, and Tanfield
chief Baron said, that it had been often so judged in the Kings Bench.

It was said here, that if a man be instituted to a benefice he ought to pay
the first fruits before induction by the Statute, but by the Common Law it was
otherwise, for he is not to have the temporalities until induction, and
therefore he could not pay the first fruits, but another person cannot be
presented to this benefice during the continuance of the first institution, see
Cook lib. 4. in Digbies Case fol. 79. that the institution to a second benefice
is a present avoydance of the first.

Saint Saviors in Southwark in an Information.
IN an Information of intrusion against A. and B. the Defendants claim and
justify by force of a lease made unto them by the Queen of the Rectory of
Saint Saviors in Southwark in the year 33. Eliz. and the truth of the Case
was, that the Churchwardens of the Church of Saint Saviors, and their
successors were incorporated by letters Patents, in which Patents, it was
contained that the Parishioners or the greater number of them, every year
should elect two Churchwardens, and that the said Churchwardens and their
successors are a Corporation capable to take, purchase, and sell, and after the
said Charter so made in regard of the great number of the Parishioners of the
said Parish, the Bishop of the Diocese made an order, that the Parishioners
should appoint a certain number of the said Parish to be called Vestrie men,
the which Vestrie men, should have the election of the Churchwardens from time
to time, for and in the name of the whole Parish, and after it was used, that
the said Vestrie men elected the Churchwardens accordingly for a long time,
and that A. and B. being so elected the Queen Anno 33. Eliz. made a lease to
them for years by the name of A. and B. Churchwardens of the Parish of Saint
Saviors etc. and their successors rendering rent, and this appearing to be the
Case upon evidence to the jury; the Barons moved two points. First, if the
election made by the Vestrie men were a good election to make them a
Corporation capable to purchase within the intent of the Kings Charter, in so
much that says, that they shall be elected by the greater number of the
Parishioners, and here but a small number that is the Vestrie elected them; and
as to that it seems by the Barons, that in regard it was not given in evidence
that others of the Parish to a great number did withstand, or gainsay the said
election or nomination, it being made at a day usual and place certain, and
therefore all the Parishioners by intendment were knowing of it, or might by
intendment of Law have been present at the said election, it being in an open
place where every Parishioner might make resort, and did not, therefore it was
held that this election was as good as if all the Parishioners had met and
elected them, for it were hard in Law, if the election by these that are
present should not be good when the residue are wilfully absent, and therefore
Tanfield chief Baron cited a Case, where the King did grant that the
Parishioners of Wallingford should be a corporation to bargain and sell, and
that the greater number of the Parishioners there did make leases and estates,
and there was an usage, that at the time of meeting for the making of any such
leases by them, they did use to Ring a bell, by the which notice was intended
to be given of the assembly: and that after such Bell rung 20. of the
Parishioners then present did make a lease, there being 100. others in the
Parish not present, and yet this was adjudged in the Court 32. Eliz. to be a
good lease, and he said, that if there be a day and place by usage certain for
their meeting, in such case there needs no warning; and therefore in the
principal case, the election was good, but as for any order made by the Bishop
that had been of no force to this purpose. Secondly, it was moved, that
although this were not good to make them Churchwardens within the intent of
the Kings Charter of Corporations, yet that this lease made by the King, should
amount to make them a Corporation, and to a lease unto them also, that being by
intendment for the benefit of the King, inasmuch as a rent is reserved; like as
when the King makes a lease, to the honest men of Islington rendering rent, but
unto this Tanfield the chief Baron said, that he held, that this lease should
not make a corporation where the King conceived, that there was no corporation
before, but that the King should rather be said to be deceived, for he took a
difference where there is a reputed Corporation in being and where there is
not, and thereupon the Barons directed the Jury to give a general verdict.


In this case it was agreed by the Barons, that if the King make a lease for
years to A. and after he makes a lease of the same land to A. for more years,
this second lease is merely void, and therefore the acceptance of it shall not
cause a surrender of the other lease, and they said, that it was holden
accordingly in Harris, and Wings Case; see Plowden, Fulmerston and Stewards
Case, in which case the second lease was one good, although it was void after
by relation.

It was held for Law, that if a man do make a feosment to A. to the use of B.
for the life of C. and that if B. and C. die, then the remainder over, this is
a Contingent remainder by Borastons Case in Cook lib. 3. and also by Colthirsts
Case in Plowden.

It was also held, that if a man does in consideration, that his son shall
marry the daughter of B. covenant to stand seized to the use of his son, for
life, and after to the use of other his sons, in reversion or remainder, these
uses thus limited in remainder, are fraudulent against a putchaser, though the
first be upon good consideration, viz. for marriage, also it was holden, though
the consideration of marriage be a good consideration, yet if a power of
revocation be annexed to it, it is void as unto strangers.

By Standon and Bullocks Case cited in Twins Case Cook lib. 3. if a man
reserved a power of revocation by assent of a stranger, this is fraudulent, but
if there be a consideration to be paid before the revocation it is otherwise.

Mich. 4. Jac. in the Exchequer.
An Information against Bates Mich. 4. Jac. in the Exchequer.
AN Information was exhibited against Bates a Merchant of the levant, and it
was recited, that the King by his letters Patents under the great Seal had
commanded his Treasurer, that he command the customers, and receivers, that
they should ask and receive of every Merchant denizen, who brings within any
Port within his dominions, any Currants five shillings a hundred, for impost
above two shillings and six pence, which was the Poundage by the Statute of
every hundred, and it was alleged; that Bates had notice thereof, and that he
had brought in Currants into the Port of London, and refused to pay the said 5.
s. in contempt of the King, whereunto Bates came, and said, that he is an
English Merchant, and an venturer and a denizen, and that he made a voyage to
Venice, and there bought Currants, and imported them into England, and he
recited the Statute of the first of King James cap. 33. which grants 2. s. 6.
d. for Poundage, and he said, that he had paid that, and therefore he had
refused to pay the 5. s. because it was imposed unjustly, and unduly against
the Laws of the land, whereupon the Kings Attorney demurred in Law; this
matter had been diverse times argued at the Bar, and at the Bench, by Snig, and
Savil, Barons, and now by Clark and Flemming chief Baton whose arguments I only
heard, and Clark, who argued first this day said, that this Case being of so
great consequence great respect, and consideration is to be had, and it seems
to me strange, that any subjects would contend with the King, in this high
point of Prerogative; but such is the Kings grace, that he had showed his
intent to be, that this matter shall be disputed and adjudged by us according
to the ancient Law and custom of the Realm, and because that the judgment of
this matter cannot be well directed by any learning delivered in our Books of
Law, the best directions herein are presedents of antiquity, and the course of
this Court, wherein all actions of this nature are to be judged, and the Acts
of Parliament recited in arguments of this Case prove nothing to this purpose,
the best case in Law, is the Case of Mines in Mr. Plowden Com. where this
ground is put, that the precedents of every Court, ought to be a direction to
that Court, to judge of matters which are aptly determinable therein, as in the
Kings Bench for matters of the Crown, in the Common Pleas for matters of
inheritance and Civil contracts, and in the Exchequer for matters of the Kings
Prerogative, his revenues, and government, and as it is not a Kingdom without
subjects and government, so he is not a King without revenues, for without them
he cannot preserve his dominions in peace, he cannot maintain war, nor reward
his servants, according to the state and honor of a King, and the revenue of
the Crown is the very essential part of the Crown, and he who rendeth that from
the King pulls also his Crown from his head, for it cannot be separated from
the Crown, and such great Prerogatives of the Crown, (without which it cannot
be) ought not to be disputed, and in these cases of Prerogative the judgment
shall not be, according to the rules of the Common Law, but according to the
Presidents of this Court wherein these matters are disputable and determinable,
as for Example, an action of account lies not by the Common Law against him,
who had the land of the accomptant by mean conveyance, but if one be an
accomptant to the King, and had land in fee, and alien it unto A. who alien it
unto B. B. by reason of this land shall be charged with this account: in 14. E.
3. a Coroner was elected by the Kings writ as he ought to be, by the County,
and after be was amerced, and because he was not sufficient to answer the
Amercement the County was charged therewith, and that appears of Record here,
and in 30. E. 3. Rot. 6. as appears also of Record, in this Court one William
Porter was Magister monetae, and had received Bullien of diverse Merchants, and
Coined it in the Kings Mint, and did not restore the Coin to the Merchants,
but was insufficient, and the King paid the Merchants, and inquired of the
suerties for the Coin, and it was found that he had none, then it was inquired
who recommended him unto the King, and it was found by whom he was recommended:
and they who only recommended him as friends, were charged with the Debt, and
if one be outlawed in a personal action, and Debt is due to him upon a
contract, this shall be forfeited to the King, and this is ordinary by the
Presidents of this Court, and yet this seems to be contrary to Law, and is
against our Books, and the Kings Debtor shall have a quo minus against
Executors upon a simple contract, and therein he cannot release, nor be
nonsuited, and I put these cases to prove, that the presidents of this Court
ought to be pursued and observed, although they seem to cross the Common Law,
and the Books thereof: a case was here betwixt the King and Jourden, Jourden
was receiver, and sold his office to one D. and he not being able to pay
Jourden for his office at the day limited, it was agreed, that Jourden should
come to the next receipt, and when D. received the Kings money, that Jourden
should take it for his office, which was done accordingly, after D. was
indebted to the King, and this matter appearing as above etc. Jourden was
charged with the money which he had received, and as Stamford in his first cap.
of Prerogative says, that the King is the most worthy part of a Commonwealth
so is he the preserver, nourisher, and defender of the people, and true it is,
that the weal of the King is the public weal of the people, and he for his
pleasure may a forest the word of any subject, and he thereby shall be subject
to the Law of the Forest, and be may take the provision of any man by his
Purvieour, for his own use but at reasonable prizes, and without abuse, the
abuse of which officer has been restrained by diverse Statutes, and the King
may take wines for his provision, and also Timber for his Ships, Castles, or
houses in the wood of any man, and this is for public benefit, and the King
may allay, or inhaunce Coin at his pleasure, for the plenty of the King is
the peoples peace, and these imposts are not only for the benefit of the
people, and for the Kings profit, but are also imposed many times for the
increase of Merchandise, and Commerce, as the Statute of, Aulnageors made in
the 2. E. 3. cap. 14. which was made principally to make clothes more
Vendible, and so Corporations are granted by the King with immunities and
privileges, and to seclude other subjects from them, are well limited and
good, for it is for the increase of the peoples wealth, and thereby the Kings
revenue is increased, and sometimes there is contained in grants a Prohibition
to other subjects, that they usury not upon the privileges of such
Corporations upon a pain, as in the custom of Foreign bought, and Foreign
sold in London, and York, and diverse customs are permitted to such
Corporations, as in the Chamberlain of Londons Case, Cook 5. and the breach or
violation of these customs is a decay of the Corporations, and so an impairing
of the revenues of the Crown, and therefore the King may make them, and also
give them privileges, and make inhibitions to others, not to Vsurp upon them:
King Edward the third in the sixteenth year of his Reign proclaimed, that no
man should sell Wool-fels, or Leather under such a price, so that these staple
commodities might not be debased, and this at no place, but at Northampton and
Anwick, and this proclamation was the cause wherefore the Merchant in 43.
Assise 38. was punished for using the slight to abate the prices, and for
presidents in this matter of Impost, there are many of antiquity, and first
for Wines in 16. E. 1. the custom for a Tun of Wine was 4. s. and 21. and 24.
E. 3. it was increased to -- and 12.13. and 14. of H. 8. it was increased to
17. s. the Tun, and after in the 4th. of Mary it was increased to 4. Marks, and
as it appears by the Records of this Court, it was answered upon account, for
all this time according to that rate, and it is apparent, that no act of
Parliament gave this to the King, but that it was imposed by his absolute
power, and shall it now be doubted if it be lawful? God defend Prisage, that
the King shall have one Hogs-head before the Mast, and another Hogs-head
behind, is not given to the King by any Statute, but was only an Impost by the
Kings power, the Impost upon clothes in 31. E. 1. was two shillings for a
Scarlet, and 18. d. for other clothes in Grain, and after in the 37th. year of
E. 3. it was raised again and in the 37. E. 3. an Act was made for the length
of clothes, in the 33. H. 8. it was raised again, and in the time of Queen
Mary, because that the making of so many clothes made the Impost of Wool to
be of so small value, therefore the Impost of every cloth was raised by her to
a noble, and in the first of Eliz. an Impost was imposed, for the overlength of
clothes, and it appears in 30. E. 3. that the Impost of one Cloth was for a
stranger 2. s. 8. d. and for a denizen 1. s. and all for clothes: another
Impost was for Woolfels, and Leather, the 31. E. 1. it was for Wool half a
Mark for a Sack, and after that to 10. s. and in the time of E. 3. to 20. s.
and after to 40. s. and after to 3. l. and so of Woolfels and Leather, and as
the benefit and price of commodities did rise, so was the Impost raised, and no
Act of Parliament for the first imposing, and increase thereof, and so much for
Woolfels and Leather. Now for allom, upon every kintal of allom was imposed 3.
s. 4. d. which was answered upon account, and in the case of Smith it was not
doubted if it shall be paid as here it is, but if it were contained in Smiths
Patent or not, the imposition imposed upon Coals, now the 1. s. increase is
paid, the imposition upon Tobacco was never doubted to be unjust as this is,
and so much for presidents. And now for Statutes, the Statute of Magna Charta
cap. 30. which was objected, that thereby all Merchants may have safe etc. to
buy and sell, without all Tolluets, but there is a saving, viz. by the ancient
and old customs: the Statute of Articuli super chartas cap. 2. has a saving in
the end of it, that the King or his Council did not intend thereby to increase
the ancient prices due and accustomed; so are all the other Statutes of
Purveyors, the Statute of the 45. E. 3. cap. 4. which has been so much urged,
that no new imposition shall be imposed upon Woolfels, wool, or Leather, but
only the custom and subsidy granted to the King, this extends only to the
King himself, and shall not bind his successors, for it is a principal part of
the Crown of England, which the King cannot diminish, and the same King 24. of
his Reign granted diverse exemptions to certain persons, and because that it was
in derogation of his state imperial, he himself recalled, and adnulled the
same; as to that which was objected, that the Defendant had paid poundage
granted by the Statute of the first to the King, that is nothing to this
purpose, for that is a subsidy, and not a custom, for when any imposition is
granted by Parliament, it is only a subsidy, and not a custom, for the nature
thereof is changed, and the impost of Wine is paid over, and above the
poundage, and so should it be here, and whereas it was objected, that if it
were in the time of war, it is sufferable, but in peace not, this seems no
reason, for the King cannot be furnished to make defense in war, if he provide
not in peace, and the provision is too late made, when it ought to be used, and
as to that which was said, that the subject ought to have recompense, and
valuable satisfaction, it seems to me that he had; for he has the Kings
protection within his Ports, and his safe conduct upon the land, and his
defense upon the Sea, and all the Ports of the Realm belong to the King, and in
this Court, there is a president where one in the time of Queen Eliz. claimed
to have a Port to himself as his own, and it was adjudged that he could not,
for it belonged to the Queen, and it could not be severed, and the King only
shall have the customs, for landing throughout all the land, and in the 17. of
E. 3. there is a notable president, where he recites all the benefits, which
the subject had in his foreign Traffic, by the Kings power and protection,
and therefore he imposed a new Impost: the writ of ne exeat Regnum comprehends
a probabition to him to whom it is directed, that he shall not go beyond the
Seas, and this may be directed at the Kings pleasure to any man, who is his
subject, and so consequently may he prohibit all Merchants, and as he may
prohibit the persons, so may he the goods of any man, viz. that he shall
export or import at his pleasure, and if the King may generally inhibite, that
such goods shall not be imported, then by the same reason may he prohibit
them, upon condition or sub modo, viz. that if they import such goods: that
then they shall pay etc. and if the general be lawful the particular cannot be
unjust, and the words in the writ of ne exeat Regnum, viz. et quam plurima
nobis, et Coronae nostrae praejudicialia ibidem prosequi intendis are not
traversable by the subject, but he ought dutifully to obey his Sovereign: as to
that, which is said, that this command to the Treasurer is not sufficient under
the great Seal, that is otherwise, for before the Statute of R. 2. for matter
of customs no command was directer to the Treasurer, but always the King
signified his pleasure to his customers under his privy Seal, and this gave
authority to them to collect customs, and the same authority is given now to
the Treasurer, and derived from him to the customers, as to that which is said,
that the conclusion is evil, because it is in contempt of the King, without
doubt it is a contempt, for the King may inhibit Traffic into any part of the
world, if he will, or inflict a pain upon any, who shall Trade into such place
inhibited, so may he do upon any commodity either inhibit it generally, or
upon a pain or Impost, and if a subject use the Trade after such inhibition, or
import his wars, and pay not the impost, it is a contempt, and the King shall
punish him for it, at his pleasure; and as to that which is said, that it is a
burden to the Merchant, that is not so, for the burden lays it only upon
the better part of the subjects, and if it were a burden, it is no more then
they themselves imposed, which was in their hands by commission in the time of
Queen Eliz. and they have raised the prices to subjects more then the value of
the Impost; and it is not to be intended, that the King by any Impost will
prejudice the cause of Merchants, for the Trade in general is to him more
beneficial, then any particular Impost: the case of the 11. and 14. H. 4. of
Aulnageor, is not to be compared to this Case, for there the King had made a
grant to a subject, and it was also of a thing which was granted before to a
Mayor, and also of a commodity within the land, and not transported, and for
the case of Darcy: for the monopoly of Cards it is not like, for that is of a
commodity within the land, and betwixt the Patentee, and the King, and not
between the King, and the subject, and as to the exception taken to the
Information, that it is Vsitar. and does not prescribe, this needs not, for
it is a prerogative wherein lies no prescription, for every prerogative is as
ancient as the Crown, and as to the conclusion of the Information it was
objected, that it is not good, for the informer ought to pray the forfeiture;
but this belongs to the Court to Judge of what shall be lost or forfeited, the
offense being a contempt, and therefore the conclusion good enough, and so for
all these reasons, judgment shall be given for the King. Flemming chief Baron,
touching the exceptions to the Information they are of no force, for the first
Vsitat etc. it has been well said, that the King needs not prescribe in any
prerogative, for it is as ancient as his Crown is, 2. E. 3. and for the
conclusion viz. that he in contempt etc. that deserves no other answer, but
that which has been given before, for it is enough, without doubt warranted by
infinite presidents, but for the Bar, it is an increase of the Defendants
contempt, and no sufficient matter to answer an indigested and confused tale,
with an improper and disobedient conclusion, and there is in it multa non
multum, but the conclusion is without president, or example, for he says, that
the imposition which the King had laid, is indebite, injuste, et contra leges
Angliae imposita, and therefore he refused etc. in the case of Smith for Allom,
the conclusion was moderate, and beseeming a subject, judgment if he shall
have Impost by his grant, and in the case of Mines, the Defendant being a great
Peer of the Realm, concluded upon his grant and interest in the soil, and that
he took the Metal, as it was lawful for him, and did not confront his
Sovereign with terms of injuste, indebite, and the like, and the King as it is
commonly said in out Books cannot do wrong, and it the King seize my land
without cause, I ought to sue to him in humble manner, Humillime supplicavit
etc. and not with such terms of opposition in the Information, and all his
matter had been saved to him then as well as now, or he might have pleaded his
matter, and said wherefore he refused, as it was lawful for him: but for the
matter it is of great consequence, and has two powerful objects, which it
principally respects, the one is the King, his power, and prerogative, his
Treasure, and the Revenues of his Crown, and to impair and derogate from any of
these was a part most undutiful in any subject, the other is the Trade and
Traffic of Merchantdise, transportation in and out of the land of commodities,
which further public benefit ought much to be respected, and nourished as much
as may be; the state of the question is touching a new custom, Impositions or
customs, are duties or sums of money newly imposed: by the King without
Parliament upon Merchantdise, for the augmentation of his revenues, all the
questions arising in the case are, aut de personis, de rebus, vel de
actionibus, viz. form and proceeding, the persons are first the King, his
power, and authority. Secondly, not Bates the Defendant, nor the Venetians,
but all men who import Currants, the imposition is properly upon Currants, and
for them, and is not upon the Defendant, nor his goods, who is a Merchant, for
upon him no imposition shall be, but by Parliament. The things are Currants a
foreign commodity, and a Victual; the 5. s. for impost which is said to be
great, the action formed or Process is the command by the great Seal, and the
word therein are Petere et recipere, if they be sufficient, and if good without
Proclamation or other notice, and how notice shall be given, and if it be good
without an ad quod damnum, and the case of Mines in Plowden, which is the sole
case in the printed Books of Law, to this purpose has in it, four reasons of
the judgment. First, the excellency of the King, or his person. Secondly, the
necessity of Coin for his state. Thirdly, the utillitie of Coin for commerce.
Fourthly, the inconvenience, if the subject should have such royal possessions;
and these reasons are not extracted out of the Books of Law, but are only
reasons of policy, for Rex est legalis et politicus, and reasons pollitick, are
sufficient to guide Judges in their arguments, and such cases and presidents
are good directions in cases of judgment, for they are Demonstrations of the
course of antiquity, where upon my judgment shall consist upon reasons
politic, and presidents; the case in Dyer 1. Eliz. fo. 165. was not like to
the case in question; but only a conference, and the case there was, for an
impost upon cloth, a domestic commodity; in this case, are recited their
Grievances, but it was paid, and it is denied here; but there was no resolution
thereof: at the same time, was the impost of Wines increased, and paid, and no
petition or complaint thereof, and the custom of Englands commodities, were at
the first imposed by the Kings will, for no Statute gives them, viz. for Wool,
Woolfels and Leather, and it was called the great custom, and that it was
paid, it will not be denied, and yet now it is doubted, if the King can impose
it upon foreign commodities, the King may restrain the person as it is in
Fitz. Not. Br. a fortiori he may restrain the goods; there was no custom for
home Commodities, but the great custom aforesaid, which was after increased by
Parliament, which was called the petit custom: it is a great grace in the King
to the Merchants, that he will command, and permit this matter to be disputed
between him and his subject, and the most fit place is in this Court, and the
best rules herein are the presidents thereof, and pollitick reasons, which I
shall give, and apply them to the particulars before recited, and first, for
the person of the King, omnis potestas a deo, et non est potestas nisi pro
Bono, to the King is committed the Government of the Realm and his people, and
Bracton says, that for his discharge of his office, God had, given to him
power, the Act of Government, and the power to Govern: the Kings power is
double, ordinary and absolute, and they are several Laws and ends, that of the
ordinary is for the profit of particular subjects, for the Execution of Civil
Justice, the determining of Meum, and this exercised by equity end Justice in
ordinary Courts, and by the Civillians is nominated Jus privatum, and with us
Common Law, and these Laws cannot be changed, without Parliament, and although
that their form and course may be changed, and interrupted, yet they can never
be changed in substance: the absolute power of the King is not that which is
converted or executed to private use, to the benefit of any particular person,
but is only that which is applied to the general benefit of the people, and is
Salus populi; as the people is the body, and the King the head; and this power
is guided by the Rules, which direct only at the Common Law, and is most
properly named policy and Government, and as the constitution, of this body
varieth with the time, so varieth this absolute Law, according to the wisdom
of the King, for the Common good, and these being general rules and true as
they are, all things done within these rules are Lawful; the matter in question
is material matter of state, and ought to be ruled by the rules of policy, and
if it be so, the King has done well to execute his extraordinary power; all
customs be they old or new, are no other but the effects and issues of Trades,
and commerce with foreign Nations, but all commerce and affairs with
forrainers, all wars and peace, all acceptance and admitting for Current
foreign Coin: all parties and Treaties whatsoever are made by the absolute
power of the King, and he who has power of causes, has power also of effects,
no exportation or importation can be, but at the Kings Ports, they are the
Gates of the King, and he has absolute power by them to include or exclude
whom he shall please, and Ports to Merchants are their Harvours, and repose,
and for their better security he is compelled to provide Bulworks, and
Fortresses, and to maintain, for the collection of his customs and duties,
collectors, and customers, and for that charge it is reason, that he should
have this benefit: he is also to defend the Merchants from Pirates at Sea in
their passage, also, by the power of the King they are to be relieved, if they
are oppressed by foreign Princes, and his Treaty, and Embassage, and he be not
remedied thereby, then lex Talionis shall be executed, goods for goods, and Tax
for Tax, and if this will not redress the matter, then war is to be attempted,
for the cause of Merchants: in all the Kings Courts, and of other Princes, the
Judges in them are paid by the King, and maintained by him to do Justice to the
subjects, and therefore he has the profits of the said Courts: it is
reasonable that the King should have as much power over forrainers, and their
goods as upon his own subjects, and if the King cannot impose upon foreign
Commodities a custom, as well as forrainers may upon their own Commodities, and
upon the Commodities of this land when they come to them, then foreign states
shall be enriched, and the King impoverished, and he shall not have equal
profit with them, and yet it will not be denied, but his power herein is equal
with other states, and so much for the person of Bates the subject: it is said,
that an imposition may not be upon a subject without Parliament: that the King
may impose upon a subject, I omit, for it is not here the question, if the King
may impose upon the subject or his goods, but the impost here is not upon a
subject, but here it is upon Bates, as upon a Merchant, who imports goods
within this land, charged before by the King, and at the time when the impost
was imposed upon them, they were the goods of the Venetians, and not the goods
of a subject, nor within the land, but only upon those which shall be after
imported, and so all the arguments which were made for the subject, fail; and
where it is said, that he is a Merchant, and that he ought to have the Sea open
and free for him, and that Trades of Merchants, and Merchandise is necessary to
export before, the Surplus of our commodities, and then to import other
necessaries, and so is favorably to be respected, as to that it is well known,
that the end of every private Merchant is not the common good, but his
particular profit, which is only the means, which induces him to Trade and
Traffic, and the impost to him is nothing, for he rateth his Merchandise
according to that, the impost is imposed upon Currants, and he who will buy
them, shall have them subject to that charge, and it is a great contempt to
deny the payment, and so much for the person: I will give a brief answer, to
all the Statutes alleged on the contrary part, with this exposition, that the
subjects and Merchants are to be freed of Maletolt, and this was Toll unjustly
exacted by London, Southampton, and other Ports within this Realm, but they are
with this saving, that they pay the duties and customs, due, or which
hereafter shall be due to the King, which is a full answer to all the Statutes;
the commodity of Currants, is no commodity of this land, but foreign, and
whereas it is said, that it is Victual and necessary food, it is no more
necessary then Wine, and impost for that has been always paid, without
contradiction, and without doubt, there are many drinkers of Wine, who are also
eaters of Currants, that which should be said Victual for the commonwealth is,
that which arises from Agriculture, and of the earth within this land, and not
nice and delicate things imported by Merchants, such as these Currants are, and
are rather delicacy or Medicine then a Victual, and it is no reason that so
many of our good and staple Commodities; should be exported to Venice, for such
a slight delicacy, and that all the impost shall be paid to the Venetians for
them, and the King should have none for their Commodity, and although that the
price be thereby raised, this hurts not the Merchant, nor no other, but only
a small number of delicate persons, and those also who are of most able and best
estate, for their pleasure, but when the King is in want, he is to be relieved
by a general imposition or subsidy upon all the subjects; the imposition which
is here said, to be so great, and intolerable, is an evil president, for if he
may do so much, he may do it in infinitum, and upon all other Merchandise: for
the Imposition I say, that it is reasonable, for it is no more then four times
so much then was before, and that there has been as much done in ancient time
in other Imposts, as in that of Wool, which was at first but an Noble a fack,
and is now at 50. s. the Impost of Wine was in ancient time 3. s. 4. d. a Tun,
and now is four Marks, the lessening of custom and Impost is much to be
guided, by intelligence from foreign Nations, for the usage and behavior of a
foreign Prince may impose a necessity of raising custom of these Commodities,
and so it was in the particular of Currants, the Duke of Venice Imposed upon
them a ducket by the hundred, which by the wisdom of the state was foreseen to
be a means, that in time will waste and consume the Treasure of the land,
whereupon the Queen writ to the Duke, that he would abate his custom, which he
refused, wherefore to prevent, that so great a quantity of this Commodity
should not be imported into the land, the Queen granted to the company of
Merchants of the Levant, that none should bring in Currants, but by their
License, and those Merchants Imposed upon them who did Import, which were not
of their company, if he were denizen 5. s. if he were a stranger 10. s. and
this was paid by the Merchants without contradiction, but there was a clause in
the Patent, that when the Duke of Venice abated his Impost, that the Patent
should be void, and after the Duke was Solicited again, that he would abate the
Impost, but he refused, and the first Commission was recalled, and after a new
grant was made, which was executed all the Queens life time, which was as
aforesaid; and whereas it is said, that if the King may Impose, he may Impose
any quantity what he pleases, true it is, that this is to be referred to the
wisdom of the King, who guides all under God, by his wisdom, and this is not
to be disputed by a subject, and many things are left to his wisdom for the
ordering of his power, rather then his power shall be restrained, the King may
pardon any fellon, but it may be objected, that if he pardon one fellon he may
pardon all, to the damage of the Commonwealth, and yet none will doubt, but
that is left to his wisdom, and as the King may grant a Protection for one
year, so it may, be said, that he may grant it for many years, which is a
mischief, and so ought to grant none, which will not be denied but that he may,
so it may be said, that the Queen may grant a safe conducted a stranger, for if
she may do that, then she may grant to all, which would be but then same to the
inhabitants, and yet it will not be denied; but that she may grant to any or
all, as in her wisdom shall seem convenient, and the wisdom and providence of
the King is not to be disputed by the subject, for by intendment they ^^mot be
severed from her person, and to argue a posse ad actum to restrain the King and
his power, because that by his power, he may do ill, is no argument for a
subject, to prove the power of the King by presidents of antiquity in a case
of this nature may easily be done, and if it were lawful in ancient time, it is
lawful now; for the authority of the King is not diminished, and the Crown
has the same Attributes, that then it had, and in ancient time such Imposts
were never deuied, and that which is given by Parliament is not an Impost but a
subsidy: in ancient time small Traffic or intercourse was betwixt the
inhabitants of this land and foreign Nations, so that the principal custom was
of the Commodities of this land, which were Wolfels and Leather, and that the
custom for Wools was an Noble for a Sack, was an imposition, as it appears by
the Statute of the 14. of Ed. 3. cap. 21. it is objected, that Merchants cannot
be restrained, but only persons suspected, as the writ of ne exeat Regnum is,
but as it is said in Dyer, before cited, it is without doubt, that the cause is
not Trasable, and that the King may inhibit any man, for if it be not
Traversable, it is not material, and the reason wherefore any man may be
restrained, is for defense of the Realm, and it may be done by privy Seal,
privy signet, great Seal, or Proclamation, and that appears by the writ of
licentia Transportandi in the Register which contains license for one to
Travail, and limits him to what place he shall go, and when he shall return,
and with what goods; that the King may prohibit body and goods, and when a man
is beyond the Seas, the King may command him to return, and if be does not obey
such command, he shall forfeit his good: now (...) restraint of commodities
many presidents are to prove it in the time of H. 3. and E. 1. it was
forbidden, that no Wool should be Transported into Flanders, and in E. 1. a
Comu^^ssion was awarded to inquire, who had done against this ordinance, and
the goods of one Freeston were seized, therefore, an Attachment awarded against
the Ships of Hull, for Transporting contrary to the ordinance, in the 22. E. 1.
there it was forbidden, that no Merchant should Trade with France, for, Trade
with forrainers is a foreign thing which is only referred to the King: in the
17. H. 6. all Merchants were forbidden to import wares from Flanders into this
land, and the Citizens of London complained of certain Merchants, which had
done contrary to this ordinance to the Lords of the privy Council, which I
have here ready; for the Record mentions it, and the Kings Attorney was
commanded to exhibit an information against the Merchants, which he did, and
they pleaded that the Proclamation was made, here upon Easter Eve, and that
they were then at Bruges, and upon the Wednesday after Bruges Market they
bought the wares before notice of the Proclamation, and before it were
possible, that they could have notice of it, and pray judgment etc. and so
much for restraint of the person and goods, by the Statute of 31. E. 3. Cap. 8.
times were appointed in which Wools should be Transported, and also Cap. 9.
Authority was given to the Chancellor and Treasurer, to defer the passage at
their pleasure, but that this was the Common Law, and that the King by his
supreme Authority might do it, it seems to me it is apparent by the Statute of
the 26. H. 8. Cap. 10. which gives power to the King by his letters Patents, to
limit the time for importing of Wines against the Statute of 23. H. 8. Cap. 7.
which was no more but a restoring of his power abridged before, and so was the
Statute of 31. E. 3. for otherwise the Parliament would never have given him
Authority to contradict an Act of Parliament by his letters Patents, or to
revive these Acts: Impositions are merely a new custom, and so are they styled
in the Margent of the Roll of the 3. E. 1. in this Court, where it is Recorded,
that the King had assigned Merchants to receive (using the same words which are
used here) half a Mark for every Sack of Wool, and a Mark of every Last of
Leather, and that if the Merchant who is so appointed Transport any after, that
it shall be forfeited, and out of this record I observe, that three hundred
Pelts make a Sack of Wool: from the 21. Ed. 1. unto the 28. E. 1. the customs
for Wools was 40. s. a Sack, and in 25. E. 1. the Imposition of Maletolt was
repealed by Act of Parliament, which Maletolt was an increase of Impost upon
staple commodities, and therefore was given to the King a great subsidy with
this cause, that it should never be drawn into president; which shows, that
this Maletolt was rightly imposed, otherwise the Parliament would never have
given him so great a Recompense for the Abrogation of it: but after in the 13.
of E. 3. because it was a thing of so great consequence to the Crown. it was
revived and made 40. s. for Wool, and Woolfels, and 3. l. for Leather for
denizens, and double for strangers: in the 14. Ed. 3. a Petition in Parliament
to abate it, and for a great subsidy it was released, and in the 18. of Ed. 3.
it was again revived, and a new petition was made in Parliament, and this
petition was continued until the 36. of Ed. 3. and then it was abated, and also
by the 45. E. 3. it was again abated, so that it seem, that between these times
it was revived, but after it did not continue long, for in 48. E. 3. it was
again revived, and for Wool the Impost was 50. s. et sic de singulis, and in 1.
R. 2. after it was answered to the King, as it appears in the accounts here,
and in 5. R. 2. it was again suppressed by Parliament for a subsidy granted to
the King with a saving of ancient rights: all these Statutes prove expressly,
that the King had power to increase the Impost, and that upon commodities of
the land, and that he continually used this power notwithstanding all Acts of
Parliament against it, and so much for commodities of this land: but for
foreign commodities it appears by no Act of Parliament, or other president that
never any petition or suit was made to abate the Impost of foreign commodities,
but of them the Impost was paid without denial; as for example, for Wines in
the 16. E. 1. as appears in this Court upon Record, it was commanded to the
Bailiff of Dover to levy and Gollece of every Tun of Wine of a stranger 4. s.
and in the 22. E. 1.2. s. thereof was released, at the suit of the French
Ambassador, in the 26. of E. 3. the King granted privileges to Merchants
strangers, but there was given for it an increase of custom, and this was
answered as it appears upon account in the times of E. 1. and E. 2. the case of
Allom was as it has been recited by my brother Clark: it is objected, that the
Merchant ought to have free passage upon the Sea, but that both not conclude
the King, but that he shall have his Impost if he comes into his Ports, and
here the question is for Merchandise after that they are brought into the Port,
but it is said, that they cannot come into the Port but by the Sea, that is
true, but if this reason should hold then the King could not grant Murage,
Pontage, and the like, because the common Channel to them is free, and Average
is for security as well as Ports: another objection, that the Defendant here is
not restrained, but that is answered, for if a pain be inflicted upon them who
import, this is an inhibition upon a pain to all; another objection was, that
there was no consideration of the Imposition, and if it be demanded what
differences between the cases; I answer as much as is between the King, and a
subject, and it is not reasonable that the King should express the cause and
consideration of his Actions, for they are arcana Regis, and no satisfaction
needs, for if the profits to the Merchant fails he will not trade, and it
is for the benefit of every subject, that the Kings Treasure should be
increased: an objection was made against the form of proceeding, because it was
by the great Seal to the Treasurer, and that he by the customers, Peteret et
reciperet, and this could not be better, as it was answered before: it was
objected that it should be by Proclamation, and that needs not, for it touches
not all the subjects, but only those who are Traders in Merchandising, the best
and aptest means to give them notice by the customers, and it is alleged by
the information expressly, that he had notice. It was lastly objected, that
there ought to be a quod damnum in the case before the grant, that is not so,
for that shall be only when the King grants any thing which appertains to
his prerogative, and not when he makes Charters, to his servants to levy his
duties due to his Crown, wherefore I think that the King ought to have
judgment, which was after given accordingly.

6. Jac. in the Exchequer.
An Information against Sir Edward Dimock.
THe Bishop of Carlisle called John May in A. 26. Eliz. made a lease in
reversion to Queen Eliz. of the Manor of Horncastle, whereof the Bishop was
seized in right of his Bishopric, and this was for 4. years, and it was
acknowledged before Commissioners appointed for this purpose, and the Bishop
prayed it to be enrolled, and this prayer is indorsed but not enrolled, and in
37. Eliz. this lease was confirmed by the Dean and Chapter in the life of the
lessor, and in 44. Eliz. the successor Bishop leased this land to Sir Edward
Dimock, the Statute of the 43. of Eliz. has a proviso, that it shall not
extend to any lease before made by the Bishop of Carlisle to Queen Eliz. then
not enrolled, and after the death of the Queen, viz. 5. Jac. this lease in 26.
Eliz. is returned, and certified to be acknowledged, and is then also enrolled,
and Sir Edward Dimock had entered, and was in possession by virtue of his lease,
in the 3. Jac. and the information was for entry and intrusion in 3. Jac. and
upon the Bar all this matter was discovered, and a demurrer joined George Crook
for the King, conceived that the lease made in the 26. Eliz. is good, first he
said, that although the Queen cannot take an inheritance of freehold without
matter of Record, yet she may take Chattels upon a surmise made, that they were
granted unto her, and therefore he vouched 21. H. 7. fo. 19 that an Obligation
may be granted to the King without inrolment of the grant, and 40. Assise pl.
35. Brook tit. suggestion pl. 5. it appears that the King shall have a Chattel
by a demise by parol upon a suggestion made thereof in the Exchequer, without a
Record, and in the 15. H. 7. fo. 15. the Kings Baylie who is not of Record, may
be compelled to account upon a suggestion made, Brooks suggestion pla. 31. and
in the 37. H. 6. fo. 7. and 18. if the King gives goods with his hands, this is
good, although no record be made thereof, because it is but a Chattel, and by
the same reason he inferred, that he may also accept of Chattel without a
Record: but admitting that he cannot take without a Record, it seems that
here is a thing well enough Recorded, to entitle the King after the return made
by the Commissioners, for the Commissioners are officers of Record to this
purpose, and they endorse the prayer of the party to have it Recorded, and
this being after the return is a sufficient Record to entitle the King, and he
vouched the 2. H. 7. fo. 10. where the servant of Justice Catesby after the
death of the Judge made a return, and this was good, and the 8. H. 4. a Record
certified by a Judge after he was displaced, and 43. Assizes if a Coroner makes
his Rols and dies before he certify them, they may be certified after his
death, and so here, this acknowledgement and prayer being certified may at any
time after be enrolled, and although it seems by the Book in the 19. Eliz.
Dyer fo. 355. that a grant being made to the King and acknowledged before one
of the Masters of the Chancery, and enrolled in the time of another King makes
not the Grant good, yet he said, that it was adjudged for another grant made to
the King by the Duke of Somerset, and acknowledged before one of the Masters of
Chancery, and enrolled in the time of another King was good enough to perfect
the grant, and this was by a grant made by the Duke of Bozoms Inn in London,
and he said, that it is not reasonable, that the Law should adjudge otherwise,
for it may be, that the Clark will not inroll it until such a time, viz. a
month, within which time the King may die, should it now be reasonable, that
it should not be enrolled at all, he said it was unreasonable, and he said,
that it appears by the 37. H. 6. fo. 10. that a deed delivered at the Kings
Coffers is good enough to avoid his lease made in the 44. Eliz. for although
that it be true that a grant of a reversion shall never operate to the
destruction of a right of a third person, yet it seems that an Act commenced,
may be confirmed well enough to the destruction of a mean interposed Act, and
it seems that the inrolment here, is but a confirmation of a precedent lease,
and not a relation to make a thing which was not before, and therefore to
examine what thing an inrolment is, and it seemed to him that it is no matter
of Record, as it appears 24. E. 3. and 29. H. 8. fo. 15. and therefore it
appears by Wymacks Case Cook L. 5. that a deed enrolled ought to be pleaded,
hic in Curia Prolat. which proves, that the deed, and not the inrolment
thereof is the thing which passes the estate, and therefore he vouched the
case in the 6. E. 6. Brook title faits, if one joint Tenant sells all his land
in D. and after his companion dies, and then the deed is enrolled, yet a
moitie only shall pass: and 41. Eliz. Cook Perimans Case lib. 5. if a man make
a feofment of lands, and inroll the Deed within the Manor, as by the custom
it ought to be, yet the inrolment shall pass nothing, and therefore it is there
said, the inrolment may be good enough after the death of the parties, so by
the same reason aforesaid, it is put in the same Case of Perimon, and also in
Butlers and Bakers Case Cook lib. 3. that if a man deliver a writing as an
escrow, to be his Deed upon certain conditions performed, and after the
Obligor, and the Obligee die, and then the Conditions are performed, the Deed
is good, for there was traditio inchoata in the life of the parties, and this
being after consummated, takes his effect by force of the first delivery and
acknowledgement, and therefore also he said, that it was lately adjudged, that
if two men are mentioned to be bound by one Obligation, and the one seals at
one day, and the other at another day, this is as good, as if it had been at
one day, and therefore he said, that there is no doubt but if a lease be made
to the King by a Bishop, and after another lease is made also of the same land,
or if the Bishop die, yet if after the first lease be enrolled, this is good,
and therefore also he cited a case to be adjudged in Banco Regis 41. Eliz.
between Collins and Harding, that if a man be seized of freehold, and Coppihold
land, and makes a lease of both for years with license rendering rent, and after
he grants the reversion of the freehold, and makes a surrender of the
Coppihold, to the use of the same person, and an attornment is had for the
freehold, and the presentment of the surrender for the Coppihold, is not made
until a year after, yet he in reversion shall have an action of debt for all
the rent, for the presentment of the surrender is but a perfection of the
surrender before made, also he cited the case as I observed him to this effect,
in the 9th. of Eliz. in the Abbot of Colchesters Case, where he said, that the
Abbot of Colchester committed treason, and after made a lease for years, and
then he surrendered to the King all his lands, and after an office found the
treason, and it was holden the lease is good against the King, who took by the
surrender, and not by the treason committed before, but as Walter said, the
case was adjudged, that the King should avoid the lease, for now he is in by
the treason paramount the surrender.

Phillips against Evans.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought up three acres in the forest of Kevington in
the County etc. the Defendant pleaded not guilty, and the Venire facias was
awarded de vicineto of the forest, and the Defendant moved in arrest of
judgment, because the Venire facias de vicineto of the forest was not good,
for as Stephens, for the Defendant said, that a forest and the name thereof,
is but a place privileged for Venison, and not a place certain from whence a
Venue may come, and it was said, that in the 16. Eliz. in Banco Regis in the
Lord Padgets Case a Trespass was brought of 3. Acres of land in Beer-wood, and
the venire facias was awarded de vicineto, de Beer-wood, and the chief Baron
Tanfield said, that in this case the venire facias was not well awarded; and so
it was holden in the Kings Bench, and therefore he would be advised in this
Case; and after at another day it was moved, and then the chief Baron said,
that he had perused the Books touching the Case in question, and that it
appears by the 47. E. 3 fo. 6. by Fuchden, that a forest is many times out of
any Parish, and therefore shall not be intended to be within any Parish, and he
said, that the Defendant in this case ought to have pleaded, that the forest
was within such a Parish, and demanded judgment, if he shall be answered
without alleging it to be within a Parish, and that otherwise judgment ought
to be given for the Plantiff, and so he said, that it was now lately adjudged
in the Kings Bench, where a man was indicted for Hunting in a forest, and a
venire facias was awarded de Foresta and good, and he vouched also the 8th. of
H. 8. in Savages Case, and the 7. of E. 3. and Baron Altham Accorded; and he
vouched also the Book of the 18. of E. 3. fo. 36. where it is said expressly,
that if shall not be intended to be within a Parish, except it be showed in the
pleading on the other side, and he vouched also 27. H. 8. fo. 12. and then all
the Barons agreed, that judgment shall be given for the Plantiff.

Airie and Alcock.
THe Case was argued again, between Airie and Alcock concerning the misnaming
of Corporations, which was argued before, as appears fo. and Thomas Stephens
the Princes Attorney argued, that the lease is void by the reason of the
misnosmer, and he observed the Misnosmer to be principally in these two
material things. First, where the foundation was, by the name of the Hall, or
the College of the Queen etc. the presentation of the Parson, and also the
confirmation of the lease made by the name of the Queens College etc. omitting
the word (Scholars) which should immediately precede the word Aulae Reginae
which he held a material variance; the second variance he observed to be thus,
that where the foundation was by the name of the Hall or College of the Queen
in Oxford, the presentation and confirmation of the lease was, by the name of
Provost of Queens College in the University of Oxford, so that the word
University was added, which was not in the foundation, and to prove that these
variances were material for the avoiding of leases, he cited the case often
remembered, in the argument before, which conceived Merton College in Oxford;
and the parties to this case, were Fish and Boys, which was in Trin. 30. Eliz.
Banco R. Rot. 953. wherein the case was, that the said College was
incorporated by the name of Warden and Scolers of the house or College of
Scholars of Merton in the University of Oxford, and that they made a lease by
the name of the Warden, and Scholars of the house or College of Merton
College in Oxford, so that the word Scholars, which did immediately preceed
the word Merton in the foundation is omitted in the lease as in the principal
Case: also where the word University was added in their Corporation the same
was omitted in the lease, whereas on the other side, this was not mentioned in
Airies Case to be contained in the foundation, but added in the lease, and he
said, that for these variances in Merton College Case, the lease was holden to
be void, which he held to be all one with our case; but he agreed, that in
diverse cases variances in addition of surpluage shall not be hurtful in a
lease, as appears by 21. and 22. E. 4. and therefore though in the principal
Case, the word fellows was added in the lease, which was not in the foundation
he would not argue, that this should be any variance to hurt the lease; Hern
Baron seemed, that the verdict is not sufficient to move him to give judgment
for the Plantiff; for he said, although it be admitted, that the lease by
reason of the variance is not good, yet the verdict does not sufficiently find
that Doctor Airie is a person, who may take advantage of the invaliditie
thereof, for it appeared not, of whose presentation Doctor Airie came, to have
the Parsonage, for although that it should be admitted, as it is said in
Heckers Case 14. H. 8. that here might be Parson of his own presentment, yet it
is not found that he did so here, and he said that in every quare Impedit it
ought to be expressed, what person made the presentation; to the variance he
thought the lease to be good, notwithstanding that, for he said, that the word
(Scholars) is not added in the foundation as a part of the name of a
Corporation, but only to express what kind of College this should be, viz. to
distinguish it from a Merchants Hall or College, and therefore though the word
Scholars be put in, yet we properly call it the Queens College, and not the
Queen Scholars College, for it is not of necessity that the Scholars of the
said College, should he the Queens Scholars, but that they are Scholars of the
Queens College, and he vouched 2. H. 7. Fitz. Titles Grants, and as to the
case of Merton College cited by Stephens he said, that in that Case, there was
a main imperfection in the verdict, which as he thought might move the said
judgment to be given as it was, and not the matter in Law, for they did not
find, that the lessor was warden of the College at the time of the lease
made; also he vouched Cook lib. 6. Sir Moil Finches Case, and he vouched Sir
Peter Seawels Case, where in a lease made by a Corporation, that these words ex
fundatione Regis E. 6. which were part of their foundation were omitted, and
yet the lease good, and he cited also the case of the Bishop of Peter Bourough,
where the Corporation was by the name of Episcopi de Burgo Sancti Petri, and a
lease was made by the name of the Bishop of Peter Bourough, and the lease good,
and that no difference in substance, and if a Corporation were made by the name
of Scholars and fellows, and in a lease the word fellows is omitted, yet it is
good; and therefore in the principal Case, it seems, that the omission of the
word fellows is not material: also he said, that the addition of the word
University, which is no part of the Corporation, is not fatal to the lease,
for in the Lord Norths Case 36. and 37. Eliz. the addition of the word
University, or the omission thereof, was holden of no force to avoid the
lease. Altham Baron Contra for the matter in Law: but for the insufficiency of
the verdict he thought, that there ought to be a new venire facias, for no
judgment may be given for any party; for the insufficiency of the verdict,
for it is not found, that Doctor Airie was presented. And therefore he cannot
have an action, for it cannot be intended, that his presentation was by a
better name then the other presentation was, and he cited the 11. H. 7. fo. 8.
and 17. E. 3 title quare impedit, he who will avoid a presentation, ought to
entitle himself. Secondly, it is not found here that the Church is void
sufficiently, he said, that if a Provost present himself, this is void merely,
and he cited Heckers Case, it is not found here that Doctor Airie entered post
inductionem, for it is said, that he entered ante praedictum tempus quo etc. but
not that he entered after induction, and therefore it may be he entered before,
and then it is not good: but for the matter of Misnosmer it seems, that this
avoids the lease contrary to Baron Herns opinion, wherefore the chief Baron
Tanfield advised the parties to agree, to have the true case rightfully found
by a new special verdict, for he said to Doctor Airie, that no judgment can be
given for him, what opinion soever himself, and Baron Snig should hold, the
which they would not deliver, for Snig Baron said, that by 40. Assise that if a
man be indebted to the King, and devises all his goods to A. and the Executor
assenteth, and after this debt is demanded, the Legatee in this Case shall be
charged for this debt, and so was it ordered by him and Tanfield as reasonable
and equal: but Hern and Altham contrary, for it was the folly of the Executor
to assent to the Legacy, and they said, that it was so adjudged, and resolved
in Sir William Fitzwilliams Case in the Exchequer Chamber by an English Bill.

Upon a motion made by Walter, it was showed by him out of a Record in the
Tower, that in the 31. E. 1. a Statute was made to discharge Merchants
strangers from the payment of Prisage of Wine, and allowed by the Court, that
no Merchant shall be chargable for the prisage of Wines: see more of this Case
in the Tit. of Doublin in Ireland.

An Information against Sir Edward Dimock.
THe Case of the Information against Sir Edward Dimock, which was the fast
Term, was now argued again by Thomas Crew for the King; but his argument I have
not written. Walter for the Defendant said, that the Commission for taking of
the acknowledgement of the lease, was not returned in the life of the Queen,
nor the case was not put in this case in the Queens life time, as it was in
diverse of the cales cited of the other side, and therefore it differs from
them: in this case he observed four points. First, if this lease should be
good, if it were never enrolled. Secondly, admitting that it cannot, if here be
such an inrolment as is requisite. Thirdly, admitting that the fease is good
without inrolment, or with this inrolment, then if this can avoid the lease
made in the Interim. Fourthly, if no lease be good until inrolment, then if the
confirmation being made before the inrolment can be a good confirmation.
And as to the first, he conceived, that the Cases put of personal Chattels,
vested in the King without Record are good Law: but here it is of a real
Chattel, and he said, that there are three reasons to prove, that personal
Chattels are in the King without Record. First, they are in judgment of Law
trivyal. Secondly, they are perishing, and of no continuance. Thirdly, the
Records would be infinite, if they should be of Record, but there are no such
reasons to prove, that real Chattels should not be of Record, for in the
judgment of Law, they are of greater value, and are also more permanent, and
therefore Thrope says in the 18. E. 3. that it had been adjudged, that Livery
ought to be made upon a lease for 100. years, also lessee for years shall have
aid;
but lessee at will shall not, also it appears by Cook lib. 4. in Sir Andrew
Corbets Case, that a Guardian shall not avoid a lease for years: also the
Statutes regard leases for years, and it was holden in Gravenors Case, in the
23. Eliz. in the Court of Wards, that a woman shall forfeit her jointure, for
making of a lease for 40. years by acceptance of a fine, and reservation of a
rent: also lessee for years may falsify a recovery: also it is agreed of the
other part, that the King cannot take an use without Record, and 6. E. 6. Dyer
Bourchers Case, the King cannot take an use without record: also he said, that
in every case, where a Deed or Record is requisite for a freehold, the same
conveyance is also requisite for a lease for years: and therefore if a freehold
be conveyed to a body politic, it ought to be by Deed, the same Law if a lease
for years be conveyed to them, and so if a lease for years be made, of a
hundred or rent; this ought to be by Deed, by 15. H. 6. fo. 38. also in Bays
and Norwoods Case 41. Eliz. it was adjudged, that a lease for years cannot be
made to a corporation without Deed, 2. E. 6. Brook Tit. Recognizance 19. a man
cannot make a surrender to the King without Record: the second point he said,
that the inrolment being made after the death of the Bishop, Lessor, or of the
Queen Lessee, is no sufficient matter of record; for in judgment of Law
nothing shall pass out of the Lessor until the inrolment, and therefore the
inrolment is the thing which makes the estate, and not only which perfecteth
it, and in all cases, as appears in Say and Fullers Case, the thing which
makes the estate or which perfecteth it, ought to be in the life of the
Lessor, and therefore if a reversion be granted, attornament ought to be made
in the life of the grantor, 40. Assizes pla. 19. and 16. Assizes pla. 15. and
Cook lib. 2. in Tookers Case, and to prove further, that the thing which ought
to perfect the estate, ought to be in the life of the grantor, or feoffor, he
vouched 31. E. 3. tit. abbe 10. and 41. E. 3. and temps H. 8. tit. feofments,
if a feoffe enter not by force of a livery within the View, this is not good,
and if a Bishop make a lease, and the Chapter do not confirm it until after his
death, it is not good, by 31. E. 3. tit. Abbe 10. also here to prove, that in
respect of the Queen Lessee died before inrolment, that the lease is not good,
for this purpose he vouched 24. E. 3. and the 11. E. 4. and the 7. H. 4. and
21. E. 4. that Chattels granted to the King shall go to the successor, and not
to the Executor; and because nothing vested in the Queen, nothing can vest in
the King as successor, for a thing cannot be vested in one as heir or
successor, which was never vested in the Ancestor, and he vouched Bullocks case
in 10. Eliz. Dyer and 21. Ed. 4. of election: also it cannot vest in the King
Primarily, because he was never party to the Iudenture of lease, and he cited
a case to be adjudged accordingly, betwixt Founds and -- 29. Eliz. and 11. H.
7. that he who is not party to the Indenture, shall not be primarily bound,
nor shall primarily take by the same Indenture, and it is inconvenient, that
this should be a good inrolment, and where it was said of the other part, that
a bargain and sale is good enough, although it be not enrolled in the life of
the parties, so that it be enrolled within 6. months, to that he well agreed,
for by the bargain and sale an use passes at the Common Law without help of
the Statute, and this without inrolment, and the Statute of inrolments
restrains it not, but that it may pass well enough at this day, and so the
Statute perfects it, so that it be within 6. months indifferently, and
therefore it is good, notwithstanding the death of the parties, and he
concluded with the Book of the 19. Eliz. Dyer fol. -- and whereas it was said to
be resolved contrary in an authority not printed, he said that he believed the
printed Book, and vouched also the case cited before, in Butlers and Bakers
Case, Cook lib. 3. to the third point it seemed to him, that although the
inrolment be good; yet that should not avoid the estate by relation, for a
relation is not good to avoid mean conveyances, without an ancient right, as if
the Kings Villein purchase lands, the King now has right, and therefore an
office found after, shall relate to avoid all mean conveyances, and he said,
that relations are not so certain, wherefore a man may make a ground, for every
case has his particular reason, and therefore to some purposes, an attornament
ought to relate; but to other purposes it ought not to relate, and therefore an
attornament cannot relate, to entitle a grantee to rents due between the grant
and the attornament, and so in this case, if the inrolment had been in the life
of the Bishop and of the Queen, yet it could not have given to her the mean
profits between the grant and the inrolment, and he vouched a case in Butlers
and Bakers case, and the 11. H. 7. that a relation shall never be prejudicial
to a stranger for his estate lawfully executed, and therefore if a feofment be
made to a husband and wife, and to a third person, and after the husband and
wife are divorced for a precontract, yet they shall take but a Moitie, as if
they were married, also it is a rule, that an estate vested cannnot be made
Tortious by relation: see Butlers and Bakers Case; and he vouched a case to be
adjudged, betwixt Wind gate and Hall in the Kings Bench Mich. 31. and 32. Eliz.
that if a Statute be acknowledged to a Common person, and another Statute to
the King by the same Conusor, and after the Statute acknowledged to the common
person is extended, and the Conusee in possession, and also the King sues
execution of his Statute, he shall not avoid the estate lawfully executed in
the first Conusee, as it was there holden, but the Barons said, una voce, that
if such a case should come in question before them, they would hold the
contrary for the King; and for the fourth point, viz. if the confirmation were
good, being made before inrolment of the lease, and so upon the matter before
any lease in being, to which the Counsel of the one part nor of the other were
provided to speak. Walter said, that the confirmation was not good, for
Littleton says, that a thing or estate which is not in being cannot be
confirmed; and Tanfield chief Baron said, and others also, that this was the
principal point of the case, and the great doubt is of the other part, viz.
that this is not good, and therefore advised them to argue it at another day,
and Walter said, that the confirmation is not good, in regard it is not of
record nor enrolled, and he vouched the 26. of E. 3. fo. 20. that the King
cannot take notice of any thing without record; the next Term upon the first
Tuesday it was appointed to be argued again: and Doddridge the Kings Sergeant
observed four points. First, if any inrolment be necessary in the case.
Secondly, admitting that the inrolment be requisite, if here be a good
inrolment, being made after the Kings death. Thirdly, if the confirmation of
the Dean and Chapter be of necessity to be enrolled. Fourthly, admit that the
confirmation need not to be enrolled, and that the lease ought to be enrolled,
then if this confirmation be good, because it was before the inrolment of the
lease: as to the first he conceived, that as well a Chattel real as a thing
personal may vest in the King without Record, for it should be inconvenient,
that Chattels should be enrolled. First, for the infinitness. Secondly, for the
small value of them in the judgment of Law, and he vouched 40. Assizes pla.
35. of a Legacy devised to the King, and 37. H. 6. fo. 10. if a Chattel be
given to the King, there needs no record, and the 28. E. 3. fo. 23. the King
brings a quare impedit upon a grant of the next presentation without record,
and yet it was good 21. H. 7. fo. 19. an obligation may be granted to the King
without record 35. H. 8. Brook prerogative, and 33. H. 6. the Baily shall have
aid of the King, and he vouched also 2. E. 6.

Brook prerogative, and 35. H. 6. fo. 3. Fitz. villinage, and Brook
prerogative, and the 21. H. 7. fo. 8. if a man possessed of a Term be outlawed,
this Term is in the King by outlawry without Record: to the second point, he
thought that the inrolment was good after the Queens death, for the inrolment
ought to relate, as it appears by 1. H. 7. fo. 28. and this relation
disaffirmeth the mean estate, and gives also the mean profits, and as to the
point of relation, he vouched Nichols Case; Plowden where the entry of the
heir once lawful was made unlawful by relation, and he vouched also 14. H. 8.
fo. 18. in the end of Wheelers Case, and by the 4. H. 7. fo. 10. a man seized
of land is attainted of Treason, the King grants this land to A. the person
attainted commits a Trespass, and is restored by Parliament, the Patentee shall
never have an action of Trespass, because this restitution takes away the cause
of action, and to prove that the inrolment may be well enough after the Queens
death, he said, that the said case put to be resolved in the 19th. of Eliz.
Dyer fo. 355. concerning the Duke of Somerset, was after adjudged contrary to
the said resolution, and he said, that the case concerning parcel of the land
contained in S. the Deed come in question in Parliament, in the 43. Eliz. and
it was then commanded, that the Deed should be enrolled, and also he compared
it to a case put in Shelleys Case, that the heir shall have land as by descent
from his father, although that the conveyance be not enrolled in the life of
the father: also he said, that the Queen dies not as to her body politic: to
the third point he said, that the confirmation need not to be enrolled, for it
passes nothing and is but a bare assent, and therefore differs from the case
of Patron and Ordinary, and of a disseissee, for the disseisee has right to
grant, end the Patron and Ordinary have interest in R. but Bishops are seized
in their own right, and therefore their lease wants the approbation only of the
Dean and Chapter, and he vouched Cook. lib. 3. the Dean and Chapter of
Norwiches Case, and the writ of Sine Assensu Capituli in the Register proves
it, for the tit. confirmation pl. 30. observes, and Littleton in the end of his
chap. of discontinuance says, that a parson may charge the Gleab by the assent
of the Patron and Ordinary, and the opinion of Brook in the case of the 33. of
H. 8. tit. confirmation pl. 30. agrees to this opinion, and so are some
opinions in the 7. H, 4. fo. 15. and 16. and he said, that this point was
adjudged accordingly in the first of Ma. but he had not the record thereof; and
therefore he would not insist upon it, and he vouched 1. and 2. of Ma. Dyer fo.
106. and Cook lib 6. fo. 15. Hodges Case, that the acceptance of the Patron is
good enough to make a confirmation; to the fourth point he said, that the
confirmation was good, notwithstanding it be before the inrolment of the lease,
for the lease shall stay his operation, until all the Ceremonies be used for
the perfection of the estate, and he vouched Littleton fo. 122. and 6. E. 6.
Dyer fo. 69. where a parson made a lease to commence after his death, the
Patron and Ordinary in the life of the parson confirmed it, and this is good,
and he vouched also, Anne Maiowes Case Cook lib. 1. where the father confirmed
the sons grant when he had but a possibility, and yet good, and he vouched
Dyer 2. and 3. Eliz. fo. 194. where a grant was uncertain, and the inception
was before, the confirmation after makes it good, and therefore he said, if
disseissor and disseissee bargain land, although it be but a confirmation of
the disseisee, which may be well enough without inrolment of the Deed by a bare
delivery, yet this shall hinder the operation until the inrolment of the Deed,
which should pass the estate from the disseisor, and by Cook lib. 5. Fitz. Case
it appears, that one part of the assurance shall stay his operation until
another part has his perfection; and therefore he concluded, that here the
confirmation in judgment of Law, should stay his operation until the lease be
enrolled which passed the estate: see the argument of Sergeant Nichols to the
contrary, and also the argument of Thomas Crew in Easter Term and Trin. 7. Jac.

Pasch. 7. Jac. in the Exchequer.
Catesbies Case Pasch. 7. Jac. in the Exchequer.
TAnfield chief Baron said, that in the year 31. Eliz it was adjudged in Goar
and Peers Case, if Tenant for life infeoffe A. and his heirs to the use of the
feoffee and his heirs during the life of the feoffor, that this is a
forfeiture, because these words during the life of the feoffor shall be but to
the use limited, and he put the case which Sergeant Nichols put at the Bar of
the Lady Catesby, which was, that a man suffered a recovery to the use of
William Catesby and Anne his wife, and of the longer liver of them, and of the
Executors of William for forty years, if one Elizabeth Catesby should so long
live, William Catesby dies, and the reversion came to the King by forfeiture,
and he pretended, that Elizabeth Catesby being dead the estate is also
determined, in regard that these words, if Elizabeth shall so long live, refer
to all the estate; but Curia avisari vult.

It was said by the chief Baron, that if a man plead a deed in writing, and the
other party do not pray Oyer, the same Term he shall not have Oyer in another
Term in the Common Pleas, but in the Kings Bench Oyer shall be granted in
another Term.

It was found by office that Elizabeth Bows was convicted of Recusancy in 35.
Eliz. and that a lease for years was made unto her in the year 36. Eliz. in
trust, and that she had conveyed this lease over according to the trust, and a
question was demanded, if the King shall have this term or not for her
Recusancy, and it seemed that he shall, because she is not capable nor liable
of any trust, and therefore the conveyance made by the Recusant was, as if it
had been without any compulsion by reason of the trust.

If a Coppiholder of the Kings Manor pretends prescription for a Modus
decimandi against the Parson, the right of Tithes shall be tried in the
Exchequer, and a prohibition was granted to the Ecclesiastical Court in this
Case.

Owen Ratliff was lessee for years of the King rendering rent, and he assigned
his Term to Sir Thomas Chichley in trust, for payment of the debts of the said
Owen Ratliff, and after the Debts were paid, Chichley resigned it, but in the
interim between the assignment and the resignment diverse rents incurred to the
King, and the Barons agreed; that these arretages in Law may be levied upon the
land of Chichley notwithstanding the trust, but because the Court was informed,
that the Executors of Ratliff had assets, and continued farmer of the farm at
that time, they compelled him to pay it, and being present in Court, they
imprisoned him until payment made, and allowed him his remedy by English Bill
against Chichley, and that by the agreement, Chichley was to have paid the
rents to the King.

The Earl of Cumberlands Case.
IT was found by diem clausit extremum after the death of G. Eearl of
Cumberland, that King E. 2. gave to the Lord Clifford (inter alia) the Manor
of Skipton in Craven to him and to the heirs of his body, and found further the
descent in a direct line, until the time of H. 6. and that the first Donee, and
all others to whom it descended were seized, prout lex postulat without
determining any estate in certain in the Donee, and they found that H. 6. by
sufficient conveyance concessit Revertionem, nec non manerium de Skipton in
Craven to Thomas Lord Clifford, to whom the estate given by E. 2. was descended
and his heirs, by force whereof the said Thomas was seized prout lex postulat,
and found the descent to the Earl of C. now dead, and found that by fine, and
recovery he conveyed an estate in this land to the use of his brother, that now
is Earl of C. in tail, the remainder over to etc. and died having a daughter
now Countess of Dorset, who moved by Dodderidge the Kings Sergeant in the Court
of wards, that this office was insufficient, for by the pretense of the said
Countess, the first estate given to the Cliffords by E. 2. was a general tail,
and then the fine levied, and the recovery suffered by the last Earl her father
is no Bar, but that it may descend to this Countess as his heir in tail, and
therefore Sergeant Dodderidge said to the Lord Treasurer then present in Court,
that if this should be allowed, that Jurors may find generally a grant made,
and show no quallitie of the conveyance nor any place, or time, but if this
were a grant of reversion or of a possession he said, that many men by such
offices should have their lands given away, whereunto they had no means for
uncertainties to take a Traverse, and as to insufficiency of this office, he
said, that the insufficiency therein consisted first in matter. Secondly, in
form; for the insufficiency of the matter is two fold. First, because that the
office finds only, that King H. 6. by sufficient conveyance not limited any
manner of conveyances, nor any quality thereof: which ought to be showed, and
it is material, because we may give a different answer thereunto; for against
letters Patents we may plead one thing, and against an other conveyance we may
plead another thing, and so our answer differs according to the quality of
the conveyance. Secondly, it is insuffient in matter, because it is found that
H. 6. granted the possession, and that he granted the reversion nec non
manerium which is repugnant, for if the King grant a reversion, then no
possession passes, and if he pass a possession, then no reversion passes: and
therefore it is repuguant to say, that he granted Reversionem nec non manerium
which implies a possession: also he said, that his exceptions to the office as
to the Manor of it, are twofold.
First the office does find any time of the grant made by H. 6. and this is
material, for the grants upon Record take their force from the time of their
date, as appears by Ludfords Case in Plowdens Commentaries, and he said, that
at this time the case is material to be expressed, in respect that H. 6. was for
part of his reign deposed, and after restored, and it might be in the time,
that he was deposed by Edward the fourth; but unto that it was answered by the
attorney of the wards, that the office found, that H. 6. granted etc. that it
was not in the time when he was deposed: the second insufficiency in the Manor
is, because it is not found at what place, H. 6. made the said grant, and that
this is material to be found by office, he vouched 36. H. 6.32. and he said,
that it is very requisite, that in such offices all circumstances ought to be
expressed, in as ample certainty as in a declaration, so that the party
prejudiced by the office may know where to search for the conveyance, but the
Attorney general said, that there needs no such express finding of all
circumstances by a Jury, as it ought to be in pleading, for it shall be taken
by intendment in diverse cases;
but yet he said, that it appears by 1. Eliz. Dyer 174. it is a good plea to
say, that A. granted a reversion etc. to the King, without showing how; much
more in office, which is the Act of the Jurors; and therefore Sergeant Harris
cited the Book of 14, and 15. H. 7.22. where an office found an estate tail
without mention of the Donor, and yet good; and the Attorney general said also,
that it appears by the finding of the Jury, in Fulwoods Case Cook lib. 4. that
the Jury need not precisely to find all circumstances, for if there be
convenient certainty, the residue shall be supplied by intendment, as it is
there said, and the Attorney said, that whereas it has been objected, that the
issue is evil, because it is found that H. 6. granted the reversion, and also
the Manor and Castle aforesaid, and does not limit incertaintie, that the King
granted a reversion, or that he granted a Manor in possession, to that he
said, that it is clear, that the King may after recital of a particular estate
grant the reversion, nec non terras sive manerium, and then be the land in
lease, or be the lease void in Law, yet the land shall pass; and this is his
course always in granting the Kings lands to others, and therefore the Jury
did well, to find the truth, without determining what should pass, for admit,
that there were no estate precedent in being, yet by this finding it appears
plainly, that the Manor and Castle should pass by the grant, in the time of H.
6. to which the Lord Cook agreed for Law, and so he said, it was his use when
he was Attorney general, to which also the Lord Treasurer, Flemming chief
Justice, and Tanfield chief Baron agreed, and the Attorney general said, that
his use was, if A. had a lease from the King of B. acre, which by effluction is
to determine in Anno. 1612. and the said A. doubting that this lease was not
good in Law, prayed to have a new lease; that in this case, he recited the
first lease in the new letters Patents; and thereby granted the land for
twenty years from etc. which shall be in Anno 1612. or from the sooner
determination of the former lease, and the Judges allowed it to be good, and
Dodderidge Sergeant said, that after the difference taken between the pleading,
and the finding of the Jury, it seemed to him, that there is a great difference
between them, but after the finding of the Jury upon an office, as our case is,
and a pleading, there is no difference, for the office is a thing, to which an
answer may be made, but a verdict given upon issue joined between the parties,
has no other proceeding, but to judgment immediately; and therefore such a
verdict shall be diverse times supplied by the construction of the Judges, but a
verdict upon an office, ought to be as certain as an indictment, because the
party may Traverse, and to prove, that upon such uncertain offices, there is
no remedy by Traverse, he vouched the case of 3. H. 4, 5. upon an insufficient
office after the outlawry of A. and no time is found of the outlawry, and he
observed out of the said book, that the party outed by the said insufficient
office had no remedy by Traverse, but was compelled to make a motion to the
Court; and after this case for difficulty was referred to the two chief
Justices, and the chief Baron to consider upon, who the said Term at Sergeants
Inn appointed it to be argued, where Walter of the inner Temple moved, that
the office was insufficient, and he cited one Baylies case to be resolved here,
where an office found, that A. died seized de quodam tenemento, that office was
not good, because of the incertaintie, for it may be a rent or a house, but
otherwise it would be, if it were upon a special verdict after issue joined, as
he said it was there agreed, also he said, that it was there agreed, if an
office finds that A. was seized of B. acre in see, and died, it is not good,
because it is not found, that he died seized, yet in pleading, it is good,
because, when the fee simple is showed to be in a man, it shall be intended to
continue in him until the contrary appears, also in Pasch. 43. Eliz. Morton and
Brigs Case an office found A. to be seized of certain lands in D. holden in
capite etc. it is not good without showing the certainty etc. so if the office
had found, that he was seized of 100. acres in D. and that certain of them were
holden etc. this is not good, without showing which etc. as it was there also
agreed, in 26. H. 8. the condition of an Obligation was, that the Obligor
should make a sufficient estate of B. acre, in debt upon this obligation, it is
no good plea to say, that he had made a sufficient conveyance etc. without
showing in certain what it was: Mich. 32. etc 33. Eliz. between Ireland and
Gold, a man pleaded for title that A. was seized, and by deed enrolled gave and
granted such land etc. this is no good pleading, because no sufficient
certainty therein, also it is not good, because there is no certain time showed
of the grant made, and although that a grant by record is good, as it is in 37.
H. 6. yet in pleading, he ought to show the time of the making of it, 20. H. 7.
also it is specially required to have the time of the making of the grant to be
found here, because there were diverse Acts of Resumption made to nullify
grants by H. 6. in some of the years of his reign, and it may be that this
grant was made, within those times contained in the Acts of resumption; and
therefore etc. Hutton Sergeant argued, that the office finding quod concessit
generally is good, and sufficient without these words, by sufficient
conveyance, and the Traverse may be generally, non concessit modo et forma, and
by 40. Assise pla. 24. it is sufficient to say, that A. was seized in fee, and
committed a forfeiture 5. Ed. 4.10. accordingly, also he said, that it appears
by 14. and 15. H. 7. if an office finds that A. was seized in tail, it is a
good office, but in pleading not good without showing how; also in Knights Case
Cook lib. 5.56. it appears that an office is good enough to entitle the King if
it have substance, although the manner be not formal 3. H. 6. an office finding
that A. died seized, and finds not of what estate, and yet it is good to
entitle the King: Bacon Solicitor general contra, and he said, that they are in
veigled by reason of this office, for the party grieved knows not, where or
how to Travers, because it is not found by what conveyance H. 6. granted the
reversion, for if it be by letters Patents, a man cannot plead to them null tiel
Record, also a verdict upon an office is principally to inform the party who
may Traverse, and not like a verdict upon issue joined, whereunto the party
has no answer, but is only to inform the Judges, who ought to Judge: Hobert
Attorney general contra, yet he agreed, that if a patent be pleaded, a man
cannot say against it null tiel Record; but he said, that Lucies Case 14. H. 7.
is a stronger case then ours, where an office is holden good, finding a man to
be seized in tail, and upon that book he relied much, to prove the office to be
good. Bacon Solicitor said, here is an incertaintie in the conveyance, and also
in the estate, which is not in the 14th. of H. 7. for there is an express
finding of an estate, and a dying seized thereof; but here the finding is, that
he was seized prout lex postulat: Harris Sergeant, that the office is good, and
he vouched also Knights Case Cook lib. 5. vouched by Hutton, and also the case
of Alton-woods Cook lib. 1. that an office there was holden good, although more
uncertain then this office, and here the office is only, that H. 6. granted,
and showed how; and therefore etc. Walter said, that it appears by the argument
of Keeble in the case 14. H. 7.26. where he argued, that where the right of the
estate is to be inquired, there it ought to be certain in all circumstance; but
otherwise it is, if the inquiry be only upon the possession, for there if a
sufficient possession be found it is good enough. And Brian chief Justice said,
the office was void in that case fo. 27. and the Judges in this case would be
advised until the next Term; and the next Term it was recited again, by Nichols
Sergeant for the Earl of Cumberland, and by Bacon Solicitor for the the
Countess of Dorset, at which day the Judges said, that the question in the case
is only this, viz. if an office finds only, that A. was seized of a particular
estate, and that the King granted the reversion etc. without showing how, or
other particular certainties, and to that, if such an office be good or not
they said, that it is not easy to determine, for although it be good in the
case of a common person, yet it will be greatly mischievous to the King, if by
such offices his inheritance should be divested, in respect no Traverse can be
to such an office, but yet they would not award the office to be void, but
advised the Attorney of the wards to grant a special praemunire to the heir
general, who was the Countess of Dorset, Salvo jure cujuslibet etc. and so in
an Action at the Common Law, the Earl might try his right and title, and not
upon the validity of an office; and so it was done.

The King against the Earl of Nottingham and others.
BEtween the King by English Bill, and the Earl of Nottingham and others
Defendants, but concerned Sit Robert Dudley in interest, and was as follows
viz. Sir Robert Dudley intending to travel beyond the Seas, did by indenture
enrolled the 10th. of June, for a valuable consideration expressed, but none
paid, convey the Manor of Killingworth amongst other lands to the Earl of
Nottingham etc. in see, but the Barganees were not privy unto the Deed not till
afterward, and in the Deed there was a proviso, that upon the tender of an
Angel of Gold all should be void, and convenants on the part of the Barganees,
that they should make all such estates as Sir Robert Dudley appointed, and
after Sir Robert Dudley by license from the King Traveled beyond the Seas to
Venice, and after the Barganees made a lease to Sir Robert Lee, to the intent,
that the Lady Dudley should take the profits of part thereof, for ten years, if
the estate of the Barganees should continue so long unrevoked, and after the
King having notice of diverse abuses made by the said Sir Robert Dudley in the
parts beyond the Seas, commanded the said Sir Robert Dudley by privy Seal
delivered unto him the 10th. of April in the 5th. year upon pain of forfeiture
of all his lands and fortunes to return again immediately etc. and after a
Commission issued forth to inquire what lands and Tenements etc. Sir Robert
Dudley had, or others for him in use, or upon confidence, and the Jury found
this special matter, but found not any fraud expressy: and thereupon the King
exhibited his Bill here, against the Barganees, and also against Sir Robert Lee
their Lessee, who truly discovered all this special matter, and that they were
not knowing of the Deed until long time after making of it, and that no
consideration was given by them in this case, for the lands so bargained: and
it was argued by Sir Henry Mountague Recorder of London for the King, if these
lands should be seized or not, he conceived that there are three things
considerable in the case. First, the contempt of Sir Robert Dudley in his not
returning upon the sight of the privy Seal, and of what quality this offense
is. Secondly, what interest the King had by this offense in the land of Sir
Robert Dudley being the offender. Thirdly, if notwithstanding these offenses,
these lands ought to be seized for the King; touching the first point he said,
that it is requisite to examine, if a subject at the Common Law may go beyond
the Seas without License, and in what cases the Law allows a man to go out of
the Realm without License, and as to that he said, that it appears by the
reason in the 12th. of Eliz. Dyer, that at the Common Law every man may go out
of the Realm;
but the Statute of the 5. Richard 2. restrains all but Merchants, noble men,
and Soldiers, and as he conceived this was but an affirmance of the Common
Law, notwithstanding the Book before cited: and to prove that, he said that the
opinion of Dyer in the first Eliz. fo. 165. seems to agree: also it is proved
by diverse Licenses granted before this Statute; see F. N. B. fo. 85. in the
writ de securitate invenienda, quod Se non divertat ad parts exteras sine
licentia regis, according to the 12. Eliz. in Dyer: and he further said, that
there are two reasons to prove, that no man may go beyond the Sea without
License at the Common Law, for by 2. E. 3. and the 16. E. 3. and Glanvil in his
Chap. of Essoynes, by such means the subjects may be deprived of their suits
for debt, and also the King may be deprived of the attendance of his subject
about the business of state, and it appears by the Register fo. 193. and 194.
that religious persons purchased licenses to go beyond the Seas, and it appears
by Littleton in the Chap. of confirmation, that a dissent takes not away an
entry of him who is beyond the Sea, except it be by the Kings commandment, see
the case intended by Littleton in the Chap. of Continual claim, there it seems
to be a doubt to Littleton; then he argued further, if the Common Law allows
not a subject to go beyond the sea without license, but reputes it a great
contempt, this is a great contempt in him, who will not return by the Kings
command, and the Law has always punished such contempt, as it appears by Dyer
fo. 28. and 177. and 19. E. 2. John de Brittons Case: also there is a president
for seizure of all his lands for such contempt, and he vouched the book what
the King had done, where he cited, that the Prior of Oswaldshire forfeited all
his lands and possessions for such contempts, and so concluded the first point
of the quality of the offense, and spoke nothing of the license which Sir
Robert Dudley had of the King at the time, the which as it seems was not
expired, nor the power which the King had to Countermand it within the time, to
which the Attorney general in his argument did speak: to the Second point it
seems, that the contempt gives such an interest to the King, that he shall
retain the land until conformity, for he who dwells in contempt, ought not to
have any possessions here, and he cited the 22. H. 6. and the 21. H. 7. and
diverse other books which are cited in Calvin's Case Cook lib. 7. also he said,
that there is a difference, where the King is offended as King of England, and
where as head of the Kingdom, as this case is, which is a greater offense in
quality; then for any offense for which men should lose their lives, as if
they should stand mute upon their arraignment etc. also there is a great
difference between this contempt, and by outlawry, and therefore in case of
outlawry, he needs no office, but the King is only entitled to the profits of
his lands, which is but a transitory Chattel, in which case an office is not
necessary, but where an interest coms to the King, there ought to be an office,
and he vouched Pages Case in Cook lib. 5. and Sir William Herberts Case, but he
did not endeavor to prove what interest came to the King in this case, for
when an interest comes to the King, there ought to be on office; as to the
second point he said, that trust between parties is fraud, as to the King, and
in this case the badges of fraud are found by the office. First, his purpose to
go beyond the Seas. Secondly, his Barganees are not privy to the Deeds.
Thirdly, no sum was paid by them. Fourthly, here is a power of Revocation.
Fifthly, covenants to execute all grants, as Sir Robert Dudley appointed.
Sixthly, the subsequent Act, that is, viz. his staying beyond the Seas, and his
not returning upon the Kings command, and although in this case there be no
fraud in the parties who are Barganees, and so the fraud is only of one party,
yet it appears by the 19. of H. 8.12. that if an infant has right to land,
and a stranger disseise the Tenant to the intent to infeoffe the infant without
Covin in the infant, yet the infant shall not be remitted, and he vouched
Delamores case in Plowden to be accordingly: also there are diverse cases in our
books to prove the inveterate hatred, which our law bears to all Acts which
are fraudulent, and therefore in 44. E. 3. and 41. Assise pla. 28. it appears
that a recovery upon a good title, although it be in Dower, which is favored
in Law against a Tenant, who comes to the land by Tort and Covin is void, which
cases and many other you may see in Farmors case Cook lib. 3. and the 12. Eliz.
Dyer fo. 294. and as it is said in Twines Case Cook lib. 3. all frauds are
covered with trust expressed, or employed, and here is an express trust, and he
vouched also Cook lib. 5. Gooches Case, and also Englefields case, and
Pauncefoots case cited in Twines case Cook l. 3. fo. 83. also he said, that
this conveyance being void by reason of the fraud, by the Law it is more clear,
that it shall be decreed to be void, here the Deed being in court and course of
equity, and therefore he said, that it has been decreed in this Court for
equity, that if a man outlawed takes bonds in the name of another, that they
shall be forfeited to the King: also it has been decreed in Venables Case,
that where a widow upon good devotion bad devised great sums of money, for
the relief and sustenance of poor silenced Ministers and Preachers, for not
subcribing to the Commons etc. to be ordered and paid to them by the discretion
of the Executors, that the money should be disposed for the maintenance of poor
conformable Ministers, by the discretion of the Executors, and not to them who
retused to subscribe, for when a thing is disposed, to maintain contempt and
disobedience in any, this ought to be ordered and disposed by the Court to a
contrary end and use; and so in the principal case, in so much that the
conveyance was made by Sir Robert Dudley, for the maintenance of himself in
contempt, and for the maintenance of his wife and other uses, this by the rules
of equity shall be decreed to be void, and in regard the King is offended by
the contempt, he ought to have means to punish It, and so he prayed that it may
be decreed for the King.
Hutton Sergeant the same day to the contrary, and he argued first, that this
confidence is as an use at the Common Law, which was not forfeitable: and
secondly, admit that this conveyance be fraudulent, yet it is not now to be
avoided: and these are the grounds whereupon he would insist in the maintenance
of his conveyance against the King; but first, as to that which has been said,
that at the Common Law a man could not go beyond the Sea without the Kings
license, he said, that he thought the contrary; for it appears plainly by the
book 12. Eliz. Dyer fo. 296. and F. N. B. cited accordingly, that any man may
go beyond the Sea to travail, except there be a proclamation, or a writ of ne
exeas Regnum to restrain him, so that he agreed, that every man was
prohibitable before his going, or after by recalling, but without a prohibition
or recalling his departure was no offense: but he agreed, that if a man be
prohibited, or recalled, that for this contempt his lands ought to be seized,
and that the King has interest to dispose of them, as it is proved by the
president of John de Britanies case, in the 19. E. 2. and vouched in the 2. Ma.
Dyer 128. and this is also proved by other presidents, and authorities, as 39.
Assise pla. 1. where it appears, that for a contempt of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, for not executing of the Kings writ, that the King seized his
lands, and held them during the life of the Archbishop, and also Englefields
case in Cook lib. 7. proves that the King has power to seize and dispose for
such a contempt, and therefore he would not argue, what interest the King
should have by such seizure, but for the matters which he intended. First, he
thought clearly, that this confidence betwixt the Bargainor, and the Bargainee
was as an use at the Common Law, and that cestuy que use, should not forfeit
this use at the Common Law, is directly proved by 11. H. 4. fo. 52. where
without an express Statute, an use was not forfeited as he said, and he vouched
accordingly, 5. E. 4. fo. 7. where it appears that cestuy que use, shall not
forfeit the land at the Common Law, and the reason is, because that it is
subject to the forfeiture of the Donees, and it is inconvenient, that the same
land should be subject to several forfeitures at the same time by several men,
viz. the Bargainor and the Bargainees, and he said, although that these uses
were begotten by fraud, as it appears in our books, see Chudleys case, Cook
lib. 1. yet in so much, that without an express Statute they were not
forfeitable, by the same reason a trust or confidence is not forfeitable
(although they are begotten by fraud) without a special Act of Parliament: also
in out case there are not any Badges of fraud, but only as a trust betwixt the
Bargainees, and that a bargain and trust may be without fraud, although the
Bargainor continue possession against his Bargainee, which is another argument,
that there is no fraud in the case, and the estates after made to the Tenants
now in possession, viz. Sir Robert Lee etc. for the Bargains were not made by
the appointment of the Bargainor, but of their own head: also he said, that if
here be any fraud, it is matter of fact, whereof the Jurors ought to have
inquired, and the Jury here have found no fraud, and to prove that the fraud
ought to be found by the Jury, he vouched Wardenfords case 2. and 3. of Eliz.
Dyer 193. and 267. where it is also said, that although a fraud he found by the
Jury, yet if it be found specially not to defraud the King, but the Creditors,
then the conveyance shall be good against the King, and so he concluded the
first point. Secondly, admit that it was found, that this conveyance was
fraudulent, yet it is not void against the King, for it seemed to him, it shall
be avoided by fraud only, by those who have an ancient right or ancient duty,
and if in this case there were any fraud, this was long time before any title
or right accrewed to the King, for that was two years after this conveyance,
and to prove it, he vouched Upton and Bassets case cited in Twins case, in Cook
lib. 3. there it is said expressly, that a conveyance by fraud is void only in
respect of an ancient title: see 22. Assise pla. 72. accordingly;
but the Statute of 27. Eliz. makes such a conveyance void, to those who have a
present right, if there were a valuable consideration as is not in our case;
and therefore we are out of this Statute: and also he said, that he agreed the
case cited of the other part, if a man outlawed purchase goods, or takes an
obligation in trust, the King shall have them, for this is by the Statute of
the 3. H. 7. cap 4. but this concerus not land, and therefore we are at the
Common Law, and as a Statute was requisite to be made, to make an use
forfeitable, which was not forfeitable at the Common Law, it is also to make an
obligation in the name of another to be forfeitable, although it was not at the
Common Law, so if we will have a confidence or a trust to be forfeited: we
ought to have a Statute made to this purpose, and as to Pauncefoots case he
said, that the King had a title by the indictment of recusancy, before the
conveyance made by Pauncefoots; but so it is not in our case, whereby appears
a plain difference betwixt the cases; see the 14. H. 8. fo. 8. the Attorney
general to the contrary at another day, and first he spoke to the quality of
the offense viz. the contempt, and this offense as he said, is aggravated by
these circumstances. First, the command of the King himself came, and not of
any inferior officer, as Sheriff etc. and it is immediately directed to the
party himself. Secondly, the command is, that he shall return upon his faith
and allegiance, which is the strongest compulsion that can be used. Thirdly,
the thing required by the King, is the principal duty of a subject, viz. to be
at the command of the King for service, and not as the common summons in Law is
to answer at the suit of I. S. and he said, that this contempt is to be
accounted in quality of a contempt, from the very time when the privy Seal came
to his hands, for the words quod indilate etc. and it has been in all ages the
course, and use to punish contempts of this kind by seizing their lands, and
he vouched in proof thereof, the presidents of John de Brittons case in 19. E.
2. and of Edward de woodstock, in the time of E. 2. and the case in 2. Ma. Dyer
fo. 128. and 2. Eliz. Dyer Barners case fo. 176. and 23. Eliz. Dyer 375. and
Englefields case Cook lib. 7. moreover he argued in so much it is clear, that
the King shall seize his lands for this contempt, it is to be considered what
estate or interest the King shall gain by this seizure, and as to that he
thought, that the King has an estate at the least; for the life of the
effendor, and that he conceived is proved by the presidents, for these words
are used in the seizure etc. donec aliter duxerimus ordinandum etc. and he said
that this is proved by Englefields case, and also by the way and manner of the
seizure, and disposing of the land for such contempt: in 23. Eliz. Dyer 375. by
the Statute of 13. and 14 Eliz made against fugitives; also he used this reason
to prove, that the King had an estate for life, viz. because the offender by
this contempt, had impliedly deserted his land, and left it to the Kings
dispose, and then it is all one, as if he granted the land to the King to hold,
and use as long as he pleases, and such an express grant will create an estate
for life in the King;
as is proved by 35. H. 6. where it is agreed, that if I give land to A. as
long as he will, this is an estate for life, and so here by this implied Art
etc. also as to that that may be pretended in this case, that the King granted
license in this case to Sir Robert Dudley, to travel for a time certain, which
time is not yet expired, and therefore the contempt qualified, or satisfied by
reason of this license: to that he said, that notwithstanding that was the
case, yet the contempt is all one, as if he had no license at all, in regard it
is countermanded by the privy Seal, which injoyns him to return, and to prove
that this license is always countermandable by the King; he said, that besides
the common usage and obedience of countermands of this kind, he said, that it
was to be proved by reason also and authority of our books; for although here
be a license indeed; yet there is great adversity between a license indeed
which gives interest, and a license indeed which gives only an authority, or
dispensation, as in our case, for the one is not to be countermanded, but the
other is, as appears by 5. H. 7. and 1. Ma. Dyer 92 and admit, that after
this license, and before the departure of Sir Robert Dudley, the King had said
unto him, you shall not go, this had been a good countermand, as seemed to him,
and he vouched 9. E. 4.4. and 8. E. 4. if I license A. to stay in my house for
three days, yet I may put him out in the mean time, but otherwise it is, if I
license A. to hold my land for 3. days, because there an interest passes, and
the reason wherefore this license in our case is countermandable, is because
all licenses of this kind have tacit conditions annexed to them, for no Act
or license will. free a subject from his allegiance, as appears by Doctor
Stories case in the 13. Eliz. Dyer fo. 300. and no man can put off or be
dismissed of duties which belong to a subject, no more then he can put off his
subjection, and this is the reason that an honor or dignity intailed, ought to
be forfeited, although it be intailed; for the honor which is given by the King
has a tacit condition in Law annexed unto it, and it ought not to continue in
him who commits Treason, nor in his posterity, although that the party had
but an estate tail therein; see Nevels case Cook lib. 7. and so had the King
his license, which is but a dispensation for the time, and countermandable by
the King, and he said, that the Book in 2. Eliz. Dyer fo. 176. makes it a
doubt, but he thought it clear for the reasons aforesaid: and as to the
material point, viz. if this land shall be privileged from seizure by reason
of this bargain or not, and he said, that it shall not be privileged, for this
conveyance which is revokable at the will of the Bargainor is merely fraudulent
against any interest of forfeiture, for otherwise the Kings subjects are but as
ferae naturae, which when they are out of their pale, the King had no means to
reduce them, within the Park again; for in this case had no means directly to
punish this offense upon the body of the offender, but by the depriving him of
the means of his maintenance, and although there be no fraud here in the
parties Bargainees, yet the fraud in the Bargainor makes the conveyance void
against the King; for as it appears by our books, the King cannot be an
instrument of fraud, although he may be party thereunto; see 17. and 21. E. 3.
so in the case of an infant cited before by Mountague, all which and many
others to this purpose of fraud are cited in Farmors case Cook lib. 3. fo. 48.
and whereas it was objected, that here can be no fraud intended in the
offender, in regard he had a license to travel, and it cannot be intended, that
he presupposed any countermand of this license, and to commit a contempt by his
refusing to return, and so to save his lands by this conveyance, in respect
this countermand is a thing whereof he could not have divined, to that I
answer, that the contempt subsequent is a sufficient proof of such precedent
conjecture, and that the conveyance was made fraudulently to prevent the
prejudice, which might accrue unto him by such contempt, and this opinion will
appear by the makers of the Statute of 13. Eliz. cap. 3. and 14. Eliz. cap. 6.
made against fugitives, and may well be collected upon the perusal of those
Statutes, and that the Judges here ought to make such construction, upon the
subsequent Act; he vouched the case of Doctor Ellis in Plowden, and Saunders
case in the matters of the Crown, happening at Salop, by which cases it
appears, that the Judges proved the first intent by secondary Actions
subsequent by way of discourse, and therefore in Saunders case, the party
having an express intent to poison his wife, delivered unto her a poisoned
apple, and the wife not knowing it to be poisoned, gave it to her child, who
died thereof: there the indictment against Saunders was that of malice
forethought etc. he intended to murder the child, although this was not his
first intention, so in the other case there cited; if a man intend only the
death of A. and being fighting with him, be a stranger interposeth himself to
part the affray and he is slain, this is wilful murder, although here was no
primer intent to kill B. but this is made an intention by legal collection; and
so in our case, here is intentio Jegalis and not actualis, and yet as well
unavoidable as any other; also although it has been objected, that by the
common Law none shall avoid a conveyance by reason of fraud, except he who has
a former interest, and the Statutes give no authority to any, but to
purchasors, upon valuable consideration, yet I say, that the Statute of 13.
Eliz. is to avoid all fraudulent conveyances, against such as by any means may
be hindered thereby, yet the intention was not to defraud the party, who is
thereby defrauded; but some other, and therefore although it was not to defraud
the King in our case, yet being fraudulent it is void against him by this
Statute, for he should be hindered thereby: also the proviso in this Statute
saves such conveyances only, which are upon good consideration, and bona fide,
and that is such wherein simple and plain dealing are used, but in this
conveyance there was not any simple and plain dealing used, for the Bargainees
paid no money, nor ought to take no profits of the land, nor dispose of any
estate therein; and therefore fraud, for Dolus est Machinatio cum aliud
dissimulat, aliud agit: also the preamble of the Statute of the 27. Eliz.
wills that conveyances shall be void which are made to the use of him, who
makes the conveyance, or otherwise to defraud purchasors, although that the
body of the Act mentions such only, which are to defraud purchasors; and he
vouched the Statute of the 28. Eliz. made against couveyances by resumption,
and he said, that Twines case in Cook lib. 3. proves our case effectually to
be a void conveyance which cannot be answered; but the Lord Treasurer said,
that there was fraud in both parties, and he argued further, and vouched
Goodales case Cook lib. 5. to prove that a Deed shall not be deemed to be good,
except it be free from all fraud or clandestine agreement, as it was there
resolved, that the payment for performance of a condition was not good, as to
strangers, by reason of a precedent agreement, and Burrels case Cook lib. 6.
where it appears, that no fraud shall be accounted bona fide, as to strangers
which is accompanied with trust etc. also although here is not any fraud
expressly found by the office, yet he thought, that the equity of the case
appears plainly: and that it shall be for the King, and he vouched diverse
decrees in this Court to prove it, as 43. Eliz. House was outlawed and took
diverse bonds of Carne in the names of others his friends, viz. of Marlow, and
others in trust; also took Statutes in their names in trust, and it was decreed
here, that the King should have all, vy reason of the fraud, although it be not
found by any office, and in Hoards case it was decreed here, that whereas the
said Hoard betwixt the years of 25. and 32. had sent diverse sums of money to
Sheldon of Bealie, and had taken diverse obligations, and other securities of
him in others names before his conviction, yet it was decreed to the King in
this Court without any fraud found by office; and in Sir Walter Raughlies case
the same year decreed in this Court, that whereas Sir Walter Raughlie being
possessed of a term of 100. years of (...) he having a determination to
purchase the reversion in fee of the same land, conveyed his Term to his
eldest son to the intent it should not be drowned; and therefore about 40.
Eliz. he purchased the fee, and after in the year etc. of our King that now is,
he committed Treason, and was attainted, and it was decreed here, that the King
should have the land discharged of this lease, viz. in possession, and although
no fraud be found in the case, but only it appears by circumstances of
witnesses here examined, that Sir Walter Raughley took the profits of the laud,
and held Courts in his own name until the attainder, yet the said assignment
was conceived to be in trust, and therefore decreed to be void against the King
as for fraud, although he was convicted of Treason a long time after, and so
the Kings title, subsequent to the said assignment; and he vouched Walter de
Chirtons case in 24. E. 3. Rot. 4. also as to Mr. Wardenfords case in 2. and 3.
Eliz. Dyer 193. and the 9 and 10. of Eliz Dyer 267. but our case is different
from them in two material circumstances which alter the law in the cases.
First, we are in a Court of equity by English Bill, where the Judges are only
to adjudge upon the fraud, and there they were in a Court of Law, and the fraud
was the matter of fact, which ought to be expressy found by the Jury, as
appears by the books. Secondly, in that case the Jury found expressy, that the
conveyance was not by fraud to deceive the King of his wardship, but only to
deceive the Creditors etc. but in-our case there is no such negative, and
therefore it differs much: see Dyer 267. and 268. as to the finding in the
negative: at another day in the same Term of Easter 7. Jac. the Barons decreed
for the King, and the Lord Treasurer agreed, and he then demanded of Tanfield
chief Baron, if upon the return of Sir Robert Dudley he ought to have his lands
again of right, or if but upon special grace, and the Lord chief Baron
answered, that he should have them of right: see Bartues case in Dyer, but the
Lord Treasurer said, that he saw no reason to satisfy himself thereof.

Doillie against Joiliffe.
DOillie Plantiff against Joiliffe in an Action upon the case, for false
imprisonment of the Plantiffs wife, the case was, that Leonard Lovies was
formerly Plantiff in an action in the Common Pleas, against Julian Goddard a
feme sole, and in this action the Plantiff and Defendant were at issue: and a
venire facias was awarded, and before the return thereof; the said Julian took
to husband Doillie now Plantiff, and after upon a special verdict found in the
suit, judgment was given in the Common Pleas for the said Julian against the
said Leonard, upon which judgment Leonard brought error in the Kings Bench,
and a scire facias was awarded against Julian by the name of Julian Goddard as
a feme sole, and she appeared by Attorney as a feme sole, and this (as the
Defendant said in his answer) was by the consent of her husband now Plantiff,
and after judgment was given to reverse the judgment in the Common Pleas, and
the entry of that judgment (as it was pleaded by the Defendant here) was,
quod praedict Leonard Lovies recuperet etc. versus praedict. Julianam etc. and
costs and damages were taxed etc. upon which judgment the said Lovies sued a
Capias ad satisfaciendum against Julian Goddard, and by virtue of that writ the
Defendant here the Sheriff or Devon. took the said Julian being the Plantiffs
wife, and imprisoned her until the Plantiff paid 10. l. which was the cost
taxed by the Kings Bench for her deliverance, upon which imprisonment the
husband only has brought his action against the Defendant being Sheriff:
Davenport of Grayes Inn argued for the Defendant; and first he thought, that
between the parties to the error, and the first action in the Common Pleas
there is an estoppel, and admittance, that the said Julian continued a feme
sole, for the process in all the proceedings ought to be as it was in the
Original, and he vouched 18. Assise pla. 16. by which book it appears, that if
a man bring an assise for lands in the County of O. and the Tenants plead a
Common recovery of the same land in the Common Pleas, this does conclude the
party to say, that the lands did lie else where etc. also if an original be
depending, and before the first Capias, or process awarded the Defendant
intermarrieth, and after a capias issues against her as a feme sole, this is
well awarded, lib. 5. E. 4.16. and also 5. E. 3. fo. 9. and 10. also he said,
that such a thing as is done between the plea, and not after the judgment is
not material to alter the proceedings in that course it was begun, for the same
party against whom judgment is given, shall error have against him for whom
the judgment is given, except she had married after the judgment, for then he
agreed, that the writ of error shall be brought by the husband and wife, in
case judgment had been given against the wife while she was sole, 35. H. 6.
fo. 31. and 12. Assise pla. 41. and it also appears by 18. E. 4. fo. 3. if
Trespass he brought against a married wife as against a feme sole, and she
appears as a feme sole, and judgment is given, and execution accordingly, this
is good until it be reversed by error, and the Sheriff in such case never ought
to examine if it be evil or nor, no more then if Trespass be brought against A.
my servant, by the name of B. and A. is taken in execution, the Master shall
not take benefit of this misnaming, admitting that A. should punish the Sheriff
for it; also he vouched one Shotbolts case 10. and 11. Eliz. Dyer and 15. Eliz.
Dyer 318. in the Earl of Kents case, which prove that the Sheriff is to be
excused, for taking me by a false name, and if the Judges admit this false
name, yet this judicial writ ought not to be examined by the Sheriff, and it
was adjourned.

Shoftbey against Waller and Bromley.
SHoftbey brought an action upon the case against Waller and Bromley, and
declared that the Defendants conspired, that the said Bromley should commence a
suit against the Plantiff, and that the Plantiff was then worth 5000. l. and
that he was then dwelling in Middlesex, and that the Defendants knowing
thereof, maliciously and falsely agreed, that the said Bromley should lay his
action in London, and prosecute it until the Plantiff were outlawed in the said
suit, to the intent that his goods should be forfeited to the King, and after
in performance of the agreement aforesaid; the Plantiff suggested, that he was
dwelling in London, and laid his action here, which was prosecuted until the
Plantiff here was outlawed, to his damage etc. Tanfield chief Baron thought,
that if the suggestion was by Bromley, to make the process into a wrong County,
it seemed that the Action should lie against him only; but in regard it is
showed in the Declaration, that the said suggestion was made by him in
performance of the precedent agreement that the action lies against both,
which the Court granted. Godfrey in this action moved in arrest of judgment,
and that for two causes, the action lies not upon the matter here, it appears
by the 4. Eliz. Dyer 214. that a man may say his action wherein an outlawry
lies in London, and then by the Statute of 6. H. 8. cap. 4. proclamation shall
issue into the County where he dwells, therefore the suing of him in another
County is no such act, wherefore an action should be brought, no more then if
before the Statute of W. 2. cap. 12. a man had brought an appeal Maliciose, yet
no remedy before the said Statute, as appears in the 13. H. 7. in Kellawaies
case, because it was lawful to bring an appeal, and so notwithstanding the said
Statute no action did lie against him who brought an appeal if it abated 9. H.
5. cap. 1. also the Statute of the 18. H. 6. provideth remedy for false appeals
or judgment in another County maliciose etc. by action of the case whereby it
appears, that in such case the Common Law allowed no action: also the Statute
of the 18. H. 6. provideth another remedy then that Statute; and therefore no
action lies against us no more then in the case aforesaid at the Common Law.
Secondly, here is no issue joined, if the Defendants be guilty of the
execution of this practice, but only if they be guilty of the agreement, and
this is found for the Plantiff; but clearly such agreement without execution
gives no cause of action, and the word Practizatione comprehends only the
going about, and not the executing of this conspiracy, and therefore the issue
should have been general if the Defendants be guilty or not, and therefore he
prayed judgment might be stayed; and he cited Owen Woods case in Cook. lib. 4.
Tanfield chief Baron, it is true, that the issue should be better, if it were
general not guilty of the Trespass aforesaid, but yet it is good enough in
this case, for the special words comprehend as much as the words not guilty of
the practice, and agreement aforesaid etc. and the word Practizatione
comprehends as well the subsequent Acts of execution, as the precedent
combination; and therefore Tantamounts a general issue, and it was good by the
Court: and as to the action Altham Baron conceived that it lies, although it
be for a lawful cause, for the Law abhoreth fraud, and conspiracy, as if two
conspire to vex me for my land by suit, an action lies F. N. B. yet it is
lawful for every man to sue me without title, and he vouched 16. Assise, and
here it is laid, that the Defendants endeavored to make the Plantiff forfeit
his goods, which are worth 5000. l. and this is reasonable that it should lie,
and 9. E. 2. Fitz. discents 52. is our case directly upon the matter, and
therefore it seems to me that it lies. Tanfield chief Baron said, that 9. E.
2. crosses this case in part, and yet he thought that the action lies, to
which Snig agreed, and it seemed the cases of appeal put by Godfrey did lie
well enough without aid of the Statute of W. 2. if there be such a conspiracy.
Tanfield chief Baron accordingly, if it be legally thought without cause, yet
if without conspiracy the action lies not for it, as it appears in Owen Woods
case Cook lib. 4. and in all cases, where strangers have nothing to do with the
suit brought for the conspiracy, and yet combine with the Plantiff in the suit,
an action upon the case lies for this vexation, and judgment was entered for
the Plantiff by the Court.

An inquisition for the King was returned here, and it was found that
Fleet-wood the Kings debtor, for his office of receiver for the Court of Wards
did purchase a certain Term, and interest of, and in the rectory of Yeading for
diverse years then to come, and that being so possessed he became indebted to
the King, and that this term is now in the hands of the Lady Edmonds, and by
color of this inquisition the land is extended for the Kings debt. Harris
Sergeant moved, that this inquisition is insufficient to extend the land, but
good to sell a term, and he vouched Palmers case Cook lib. 4. to which the
Court inclined, but it was adjourned.

If a Bishop becomes indebted to the King for a subsidy, and dies, his
successors shall not be charged upon the lands of the Bishopric, but the
executors of the predecessor, or his heir, and if they have nothing the King
shall lose it, as chief Baron Tanfield said, which the Court granted upon the
motion of Bridgman, for the Bishop of Saint David's.

Trallops case.
A Scire facias issued against Trallop the father, and Trallop the son to show
cause, wherefore they did not pay to the King 1000. l. for the mean profits of
certain lands, holden by them from his Majesty; for which land judgment was
given for him in this Court, and the mean rates was found by inquisition, which
returned, that the said mean profits came to 1000. l. upon which inquisition
this scire facias issued, whereupon the Sheriff returned Trallop the father
dead; and Trallop the son now appeared, and pleaded that he took profits, but
as a servant to his father, and by his commandment, and rendered an account to
his father, for the said profits, and also the judgment for the said land was
given against his father and him, for default of sufficient pleading, and not
for the truth of the fact; and he showed the Statute of the 33 H. 8. cap. 39.
which as he pretended aided him for his equity, whereupon the King demurred.
Hitchcock for Trallop, seemed that the Statute did aid him by equity, and he
moved two things, the one, that if here be such a debt, that the Statutes
intends to aid it; the other, if the Defendant has showed sufficient matter of
equity within the intent of the Act, and he thought, that it is such a debt as
the Statute will aid, for although that here be au uncertainty of the time of
the judgment given for the King, that being reduced to a certainty by the
inquisition after, it shall be within the intent of the Statute, for id certum
est quod certum reddi potest, and the words of the Statute are, if any
judgment be given for any debt or duty etc. and here although that there was
no certainty, unto how much these mean rates extended, at the time of the
judgment given, yet it is clear, that it was a duty at the time of the
judgment, and then it is within the Statute: also he said, that the words in
the proviso of that Statute explain that the intent of the makers of the Act
was so; for the words are for any thing for which the party is chargable, and
the mean rates are a thing, for which he is chargable: see Cook lib. 7. fo. 20.
and the Lord Andersons case there fo. 22. as to the point of equity there seem
to be two causes. First, he showed that he was but a servant to his father, and
had given an account to him. Secondly, the judgment was given against him upon
a point of mispleading. Tanfield chief Baron said, that the matter in equity
ought to be sufficiently proved, and here is nothing but the allegation of the
party, and the demurrer of Mr. Attorney for the King, and if this be in Law an
admittance of the allegation; and so a sufficient proof within the Statute, it
is to be advised upon, and for that point the case is but this, a scire facias
issues out of this Court, to have Execution of a recognizance which within
this Act, ought by pretense and allegation of the Defendant to be discharged
for matter in equity, and the Defendant pleads his matter of equity, and the
King supposing this not to be equity within this Statute, demurreth in Law,
whether that demurrer be a sufficient proof of the allegation within the
Statute or not, and it was adjourned.

Trin. 7. Jac. in the Exchequer.
Doillie and Joiliffs case again Trin. 7. Jac. in the Exchequer.
CRessey for the Plantiff said, that the Plea in Bar is not good, because the
Defendant justified by force of a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and pleads no
return thereof, and moved that it is not justifiable without returning of the
writ, but the Court seemed the plea to be good, notwithstanding that, but if it
were a mean process, then it ought to be pleaded to be returned: see Cook lib.
5. Hoes case fol. 19. according to this diversity, Tanfield chief Baron
thought that the Plantiff shall recover; for first the writ of error here is
not a writ, but a commission, and therefore false lattin shall not abate it, as
it has been adjudged in the Exchequer chamber, and in this case the scire
facias ad audiendum errores, and all the writ, and this scire facias in our
case, ought to have been made against the said Julian, as against a married
woman, and the writ of execution, which is the warrant to the Sheriff is not in
such words as the judgment in the Kings Bench is upon which it is founded,
viz. that he should take the aforesaid Julian etc. but that he take the said
Julian Goddard, then the Sheriff shall not say in his defense, that all the
proceeding in the writ of error was against the person, and aided himself by
entry in the roll of the Court, viz. quod praedict. Julianum capiat etc. but
he ought to rely only upon the writ, and if in this case he would save himself,
then he should have inquired upon the delivery of the writ unto him by Lovies
who was that Julian Goddard, and if thereupon Lovies had informed him, that it
was Julian Doillie, then the Sheriff should have an action upon the case
against Lovies upon this false information, viz. if A. prosecute a replevin to
replevy his Cattle, and thereupon he cause the Sheriff to deliver unto him the
Cattle of B. for this here B. has his remedy against the Sheriff, and the
Sheriff against A. for this false information: also he said, that if a fieri
facias comes to make execution of the goods of B. if the Sheriff take others
goods in execution, a Trespass lies, and therefore to secure himself, he ought
to impannel an inquest, to find if they be the goods of B. or not, and then as
he conceived it is good; but the opinion of the Judges in the Kings Bench, in
Mich. 5. Jac. in Trespass between Rookwood and Beal was to the contrary; for
there a Trespass was brought by Rookwood, and the Defendant justified the
taking and so forth, as Sheriff by virtue of a fieri facias, as of the goods of
Edward Rookwood father of the Plantiff, and upon the execution of this writ the
Defendant impannelled a Jury, who found the goods to be the goods of the said
Edward Rookwook, for which etc. the Plantiff in the replication Traversed, that
they were his goods absque hoc that the Jury found, that they were the goods of
Edward Rookwood etc. whereby it seems that the finding of the Jury in this
case is not material, and so the Court then conceived, therefore quaere the
opinion of Tanfield chief Baron in that point; and see the 17. E. 2. pl. 373.
and 31. E. 3. Assise pla. 378. and 7. H. 4. fo. 27. Trespass pla. 279. what
acts a Sheriff may justify by reason of a commandment and authority from the
Court, which commanded him. Snig Baron seemed, that the action did lie, for the
writ of capias ad satisfaciendum makes no mention, that Julian Doillie is the
same person against whom judgment was given in the Kings Bench, by the name of
Julian Goddard, and although that the entry in the Roll is against the said
Julian etc. yet the writ is directed, that he should take Julian Goddard, and
then the Sheriff had not done according to the writ in the taking of Julian
Doillie, and he said, that if A. bind himself by the name of I. and judgment
is given against him, by the name of I. without appearing in person, and
execution is granted against him by the name of I. in this case an action lies
against the Sheriff, if he take the said A. in execution, for it appears not to
him that it is the same person; but for the other cause, it seems that the
Plantiff shall not have judgment, for the Sheriff is no such person, who ought
to be privileged here, and therefore the Plantiff should have his remedy else
where, and he said, that such a case has been reversed in the Exehequer
Chamber for error; for the Undersheriff is but an Attorney for a party
privileged, that is for the Sheriff, but all the Clarks of the Court, and the
other Barons were against him in that, and also all the presidents. Altham
Baron had never heard it argued before, and therefore he respited his opinion
till another day, at which day he said, that the arrest is not justifiable, and
so for the matter an action well lies, for by him the arrest ought to be in
this case with a special recital, that whereas judgment was given and so
forth; as in the 1. and 2. H. 6. if an Abbot has judgment to recover, and
after he is deposed, a scire facias lies not against him as Abbot to reverse
this judgment: and see 10. E. 4. a capias against A. the son of R. etc. see
the 19. of H. 6. fo. 12. Summons against John S. etc. see 18. H. 8. fo. 1. a
replevin was brought in the County Palatine against A. widow, and after she
married D. and the plaint was removed into the Common Pleas mentioning her
marriage etc. and so here the scire facias ought to mention all the special
matter, and thereupon the writ of execution upon the reversal of the judgment,
ought to be against Julian Doillie, and not being so, the Sheriff is punishable
etc. but it seemed to him, that in this action the wife ought to have joined
with her husband for the false imprisonment, or at the least, if the husband
had brought the action alone, there ought to have been a special mention of the
loss, which the husband particularly had sustained, as per quod consortium
uxoris suae amisit, or otherwise clearly it lies not for the husband alone,
and he resembled this case to the cases in the 9th. of E. 4. fo. 51.22. Assise
pla. 87.46. E. 3. fo. 3. where husband and wife ought to join in an action, or
at the least the declaration ought to be special as aforesaid, and so are the
books of the 20. H. 7. and Kellaway to be intended; and for this cause he
thought the Plantiff shall not have jugement here. Tanfield chief Baron as I
conceived said unto him, that the writ ought to have been with a special
averment, but a surmise ought to have been made against Julian Doillie as she
now is, for as the writ is, the Sheriff may safely return, she is not to be
found, and thereupon etc. quaere, if he intended the writ of scire facias ad
audiendum errores, or the writ of execution awarded upon the judgment in the
Kings Bench, for he did not mention any particularity of the writ, but it
seems, that he intended the writ of execution, and then the surmise whereof
Tanfield spoke, ought to be made upon the roll of the judgment, given upon the
writ of error, and Tanfield chief Baron said, as to the joining in action, that
clearly for a battery made upon the wife, the husband and wife ought to join in
the action, as the books are cited before by Baron Altham; and so they ought to
join in every action, to which the wife is entitled before marriage; but
otherwise it is here, as he thought: and as to that which has been said, that
the declaration ought to have been special, viz. per quod consortium amisit
uxoris suae, it seems that shall be necessarily intended, without showing of it
in the declaration; but in the case put by Altham, if a man bring an action of
false imprisonment of his servant, he need not show whereby he lost his service
etc. because peradventure he had no employment for him, this is good Law by
him, but otherwise it is in the case of a wife; but yet he would be advised
thereof, as of a thing not mentioned before. Altham Baron, it may be intended,
that the husband was also imprisoned with his wife, and so did not lose her
company except it be showed to the contrary, as well as it may be intended the
Master had no employment for his servant, and after at the next Term Tanfield
and Altham Barons agreed. that the Declaration ought to be special as Altham
Baron conceived, or otherwise the wife ought to have joined in the action,
which had been better, for they said, that in all cases where the action is
brought for such a matter for which the wife by possibility might have an
action after the death of her husband, there they ought to join, and for this
false imprisonment the wife may have an action after the death of her husband,
and therefore they ought to join here. Snig and Bromley Barons, seemed prima
facie, that the action lies well enough, when they join or when the husband
alone brings it: and they vouched -- and Doillies Council said, that they
have heard it to be adjudged in the Kings Benth 28. Eliz. in one Cholmlies
case, and 35. Eliz. in the Common Pleas, that an action lies for the husband
alone, for a battery made to his wife, and so they conceived it good; if they
join or sever in the action, and therefore it was appointed, that the next Term
the presidents should be showed, and the case to be argued as to this point.
Note, that Doillie perceiving the Law against him for this last point or
matter, because his wife did not join, commenced his action of new in this
Court, and this was in Trespass for the beating and imprisoning his wife, and in
this case the husband and wife joined, and declared to the damage of the
husband and wife, and the like Plea was pleaded in Bar as was in the other
action, and the record thereof was read in Court Termino Pasch. 9. Iac. and
then adjourned, and after, it was adjudged for the Plantiff.

Wikes by English Bill in the Exchequer Chamber Trin. 7. Jac.
IN the Exchequer Chamber by English Bill this case was depending, and argued
before all the Barons at Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, viz. the King exhibited
an Information against Wikes for entering into diverse parcels of land, and
Wikes pretending that he had good equity prayed his relief by English Bill, in
the Exchequer Chamber, and the case upon the said Bill was this: Grant made a
lease for years to one Somerfield and John Wintor in Trust, and for the benefit
of the wife and Children of the lessor rendering rent, and after Wintor one of
the Lessees, and also Grant who was the Lessor, were attainted of the
Gunpowder Treason, and Wikes married the wife of the Lessor, and entered, and
upon this information he prayed relief in behalf of his wife and Children by
this English Bill: and first it was agreed by all the Barons, that the King by
the course of the Common Law had the moitie of the land, and no more by the
attainder of Wintor, and that Somerfield the other Lessee, shall be Tenant in
common with the King, but what remedy he should have if the King took all the
profits they agreed not. Secondly, they agreed by the admittance of Wikes his
Council, that the King as to the moity which came to him, shall not be ordered
in equity to perform the trust reposed in Wintor, for the wife of the Lessor,
for the King cannot be seized to another man's use, no more can his estate be
subject to any trust at this day, as the Attorney general had said clearly,
which the Court granted: but Brock of Council with Wikes seemed not to be
satisfied, but that the King ought to execute such trust by equity; but
Tanfield chief Baron said, that before me at another day, you were content to
be concluded, as to this point: that there is no equity against the King.
Thirdly, it was debated, if in this case the King should have the other moity,
which was in Somerfield by equity, for clearly, if the lease had been made in
trust, for the benefit of the Lessor himself, the King should have it by his
attainder, and then what difference, it being made for the benefit of the wife
of the person attainted, for her husband might have disposed of it, being a
trust only of a Chattel as he might have done of a Chattel, whereof the wife
was possessed, and he might have wholly released this trust, and by consiquence
he might forfeit it by his attainder; whereunto Snig and Altham Barons agreed,
and by Bromley his release shall bind but during his life: the Attorney
general said, that he might release all. Brock it should be mischievous that
his release of this trust, should bar the wife of her trust after her husbands
death; for admit that a man make a lease to A. to the use of his wife for 100.
years, if she shall so long live, and this for a jointure for his wife, can her
husband prejudice her of this jointure by release of the trust, as if he should
say no, and then a fortiori in the case here, for the trust is for the wife and
children, and the trust for the children cannot be released by the father, and
consequently not forfeited by him: by the Court there is no such Bill depending
before us, which demands any thing for the King, and the Bill which is here
exhibited by Wikes prays nothing but one moity of the term, viz. that which in
Law belongs to Somerfield, which moity by the Common Law we cannot take from
him, and therefore we will leave you to sue in the office of Pleas, according
to the course of the Common Law in the name of Somerfield; and therefore they
gave no resolution, if by equity the husband shall forfeit a trust, which he
had for years in the right of his wife.

Sir Thomas Overburyes case was opened to be this, viz. Robert Wintor was
seized in see of six Bullaries at Which, and he covenanted to levy a fine of all
his Bullaries, and that for 4. of the said Bullaries, this should be to the use
of John Wintor in tail, and for the other to the use of himself in fee with
power of revocation, and after the said Wintor levied a fine, sur connizance de
droit come, ceo, only of four Bullaries, if this fine and the use of the
estate passed thereby shall be directed by the covenant, it was the question,
and it was moved for a doubt, what Bullarie that shall be intended; whereof the
fine is not levied by reason of the incertaintie; quaere, and it was adjourned.

Nota, that an estreate of diverse fines imposed upon several indictments at the
Quarter Sessions, for several Riots was sent into this Court, and the estreat
here being mentioned not, for what offenses the fines were imposed, and the
records of the indictments were in the Crown office by a Certiorari; and the
chief Baron Tanfield said, that the estreat was insufficient, and we ought not
to send out Process upon them, because they do not mention the quality of the
offense, for which the fines were imposed, and therefore it may be discharged
by Plea, yet if the estreat be not warranted by the indictment, so that the
indictment is discharged, for insufficiency in the Kings Bench the Record
thereof may be certified into the Chancery, and by mittimus transferred hither,
and we may discharge the estreat: and Altham Baron agreed, that the party
grieved by such fine, upon an insufficient indictment may plead all this
matter, and spare to remove the Record, and if the Kings Attorney will confess
the plea to be true, it is as good as if the Record had been removed, which was
not denied.

An Amercement for a by Law.
IT was moved for the King upon a lease holden for him, that I.S. was amerced
10. l. because he received a poor man to be his Tenant, who was chargable to
the parish contrary to a pain made by the Township, and thereupon Process issued
out of this Court, and the Baily distrained, and I. S. brought Trespass, and it
was said by the Barons, and ordered, that if I. S. will bring an action for the
distraining, for this amercement be it lawfully imposed, or not, yet I. S.
shall be restrained to sue in any other Court, but in this, and here he shall
sue in the office of Pleas, if he will, for the Bailiff levied it as an officer
of this Court, and for the matter Snig said, that if I. S. received a poor man
into his house, against a by Law made in the Township, there is good cause of
amercement; but by Tanfield it is nothing to us, that they have a custom to
make by-Lawes herein against a by Law made by us; also a leet of it self, has
no authority to make by Laws, or such an order, but by custom it is good.
Snig and Altham Barons, it is good policy to make an order with a pain in a
Leet, that no person shall receive any such Tenant as shall be chargable to the
parish; but clearly the Steward cannot amerce one, for such a cause without an
order with a pain made before.

Sir John Littletons case.
SIr John Littletons case was, that all the lands of a Monastery were granted
unto one Dudley reserving 28. l. rent yearly for a Tenth of all the laid land
according to the Statute, and after Dudley granted the greater part of this
land to Littleton, and that he had used upon the agreement made between Dudley
and him, to pay 20. l. yearly for the Tenth of his part, and Dudley had used to
pay 8. l. yearly for that which he retained, and after Dudley was attainted,
whereupon his part of the said land came to the King, and now the Auditor would
impose the charge for all the Tenth, upon Littleton, but by the Court, although
the Tenth was Originally chargable, and leviable upon all and every part of the
land, yet it being apparent to them, that part thereof came to the Kings hands,
it was ordered, that the land of Sir John Littleton should be discharged before
the Auditor prorata, and so it was, and Littleton to pay only 20. l. yearly.

Sweet and Beal.
NOta, that in Michaelmas Term 6. Iac. upon a special verdict, this case was
depending in the Exchequer, viz. Anthony Brown devised a term to his wife,
until the issue of the body of the Devisor accomplish the age of 18. years
bringing up the said child. Provided, that if the devisor die without issue,
that then the land shall go to the said wife for term of her life, paying to
the sister of the Devisor 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. yearly, which he willed to be
paid, at two feasts half yearly, and that if it be arrear, then it shall be
lawful for the sister to distrain, and to detain the distress until it be paid,
and the Jury found, that the devisor had issue at the time of his death, but
that the said issue died before he accomplished the age of 18. years, and they
found also, that the rent of 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. payable to the sister, was not
paid at one day in which it was payable, and that no demand was made for it,
and that Moil Beal who was the right heir, entered for the condition broken, and
made a lease to the Plantiff, who being outed by the wife, brought an Ejectione
firm: and Chibborn of Lincolns Inn, argued that the entry of the heir is
lawful; first he said, when he devised to his wife, until his heir come to the
age of 18. years, bringing up the said heir, if in this case the heir die
within the said age, the state of the wife is determined, by reason that the
education was the cause, the land should continue to the wife, and the cause
being determined by the death of the heir, before the said age, therefore the
estate is also determined, and upon that he bouched a case in Mich. 3. Iac. one
Collins devised, that one Carpenter should have the oversight, and managing of
his land, until his son should attain the age of 5. years, and the son died
before he attained the said age, and it was agreed, admitting, that Carpenter
had by that devise an interest, that it is now determined by the death of the
heir: to the second matter, viz. when it is limited: that if the devisor die
without issue, that then the wife shall have it, by that it seems to me, that
the wife shall not have an estate for life, by these words, as our case, for at
the time of the death of the devisor he had issue, so that it cannot be said,
that he died without issue, although now we may say, that he is dead without
issue: but in regard, that the words of the will are not performed, according
to the proper intendment of them, the Judges ought not to make another
construction, then according to the litteral sense, the litteral construction
being properly the words to bear such a meaning, and this, as he said, may be
proved by Wilds case in Cook lib. 6. but more strong is our case, because in a
case which carries the land from the heir, there ought to be a strong and
strickt, and not a favorable construction made to the prejudice of the heir,
and therefore he vouched a case between Scockwood and Sear, where a man devised
part of his land to his wife for life, and another part of his land, until
Michaelmas next ensuing his death, and further by the said will, he devised to
his younger son all his lands not devised to his wife, and adjudged, that by
the said words the younger son shall have only that parcel which was devised to
the wife for life, and not that which was devised unto her till Michaelmas: and
yet by Popham it appears that his intent was otherwise, viz. that all that
should go to his younger son; so there ought not to be a strained construction
made against the heir, and so in our case the words being, that if he die
without issue etc. that then it shall go to his wife, herein as much as he had
issue at the time of his death, it cannot be said that he died without issue,
but that he is dead without issue, and this appears by the pleading in the
Lord Bartleys case in Plowden, and he vouched also a case in the Kings Bench 4.
Jac. between Miller and Robinson, where a man devised to Thomas his son, and if
he die without issue having no son, there it was holden, that if the devisee
had issue a son, yet if he had none at the time of his death, the devisee in
the remainder shall have it, yet he was once a person having a son, and so in
our case, there was a person who did not die without issue, and he vouched also
the case of Bold and Mollineux in 28. H. 8. Dyer fo. 15.3. when a man devises
to his wife for life, paying a yearly rent to his sister, and that if the rent
be not paid, that the sister may distrain, it seems to me, that this is a
conditional estate in the wife, notwithstanding the limitation of the distress,
and he vouched 18. Eliz. in Dyer 348. which as he said proved the case
expressly, for there in such a case it is adjudged, that the devisee of the rent
may after demand thereof distrain, and yet the heir may enter for the not
payment of the rent, although it were never demanded, so that the subsequent
words of distraining do not qualify the force of the condition, although there
be there an express condition, and in our case but a condition employed, and he
said, that it seemed reasonable, that such a construction for the distress and
condition also shall stand, as appears by diverse cases, that upon such words,
the Law will allow a double remedy, and therefore he vouched Gravenors case in
the Common Pleas, Hill. 36. Eliz. Rot. 1322. where a lease was made by Magdalen
College to husband and wife, so that if the husband alien that the lease shall
be void, and provided that they do not make any under-tenants, and to this
purpose he vouched the case of the Earl of Pembrook, cited in the Lord Cromwels
case, Cook lib. 2. where the words amounted to a covenant and a coudition, and
if this word paying should not be construed to be a condition, then it were
altogether void and idle, and such a construction ought not to be made in a
will, and he conceived, that this rent ought to be paid by the wife, without
any demand upon the pain of the condition, and therefore he vouched 22. H. 6.
fo. 57.14. E. 4 21. E. 4. by Hussy and 18. Eliz. Dyer 348. vouched before, and
so it was resolved as he said, in the Court of Wards in Somings case, where a
man made a devise paying a rent to a stranger, this ought to be paid without
demand, and he said, that the Common case is proved, when a feofment is made
upon condition that the feoffee shall do an act to a stranger, this ought to be
done in convenient time without request by the stranger; and so here it
seems, although a demand ought to be made by the sister, yet the wife ought
to give notice to the sister of the Legacy, so that she may make a demand; and
therefore he vouched Warder and Downings case, where a man devised, that his
eldest son upon entry should pay to the younger son such a sum of money, here
the eldes brother ought to give notice at what time he will enter, to the
intent that the younger brother may be provided to make a demand. Edwards of
the Inner Temple contrary. First, it seems, that by this limitation the wife
ought to retain the land until the issue of the devisor should have come to the
age of 18. years, for this a time certain, and as it is construed upon such
words in Borastons case, Cook lib. 3. that the Executors there have an interest
certain, so it should be construed here, to refer to a certainty which is until
the time by computation, that the issue should have attained to 18. years, and
the rather in this case, in respect the devisor had otherwise disposed of the
land until the son should have accomplished the said age. Secondly, it seems,
that the wife has an estate for life, not conditional, in so much as the words
are not joined in the case, the 18. Eliz. Dyer has been vouched: but that was
upon an express condition, but here it is by implication, and then the clause
of distress takes away the force of the implication, which otherwise might be
thereupon inferred; and therefore in 5. Eliz. Dyer it appears, that the word
Proviso annexed to other words makes it no condition in judgment of Law, and
so in 14. Eliz. Dyer 311. and he vouched also 18. Eliz. Dyer Greens case, that
if a man devises lands to his friends, paying to his wife with a clause of
distress, this is no condition as it is adjudged. Thirdly, it seems, that
this sum to be paid to the sister is a rent, and therefore ought to be
demanded, or otherwise in judgment of Law, the condition shall not be broken,
and the 21. E. 4. the case of an obligation to perform covenants etc. and a
case between Wentworth and Wentworth 37. Eliz. that a demand ought to be made
for a rent, which is granted in liew of Dower: for the wife brought a writ of
Dower, for the land of her husband, the Tenant pleaded, that she accepted a
rent out of the land in liew of her Dower, and the wife replied, that the said
rent was granted upon condition, that if it were not paid at certain days,
that it should be void, and that she should have Dower of the land, and she
said, that the rent was not paid at the days etc. but showed not in her
pleading, any demand to be made, and therefore it was holden evil pleading, for
such a rent ought to be demanded, or otherwise the condition is not broken, and
so here. Nota, that this case was appointed to be argued again, but after (as I
heard) the Barons amongst themselves resolved to give judgment for the
Defendant upon one point only, which was, that the estate of the wife of the
devisor is not determined until the issue should have come to the age of 18.
years, and so none of the other points came now in question, and judgment was
given as abovesaid.

Nota, that in Mich. 6. Jac. upon a motion made by Mr. Nicholas Row of the
Inner Temple, it appeared that an inquisition was returned in this Court, by
force of a commission, whereby it was found, that one A. was seized of the
Manor of D. and so being seized of the said A. was attainted of Treason in the
Kings Bench, and of this should be a double matter of Record to entitle the
King, so that the owner of the land shall be forced to his Petition, it was the
question, and by the Court, in regard, that the record of the attainder is not
in this Court, here is not in judgment of Law a double matter of Record, but
if the attainder he removed into this Court, then that and the inquisition
would make a double matter of Record, and the Attorney general moved, that when
an office finds the attainder, that the party ought to plead no such record.

Worselin Mannings case.
AN Information of intrusion was brought against Worselin Manning and others,
and upon the opening of the evidence at the Bar, it appeared that Worsely
Manning was an alien born, and that he was made a denizen by the King, and the
Charter of Denization had this Proviso usual in such Charters of Denization,
that the Denizen should do legal Homage, and that he should be obedient, and
observe the Laws of this Realm, and after by virtue of a Commission under the
great Seal an office found, that the said Worselin after the Denization
purchased the land in question, and it was found also by the same office, that
the said Worselin never did legal Homage, and that he was not obedient to all
the Laws of this Realm, and there was an offer of demurrer upon the evidence,
if the Prviso makes the Patent of Denization conditional, and so for the not
performance thereof, the Charter of Denization shall be void: and Harris
thought clearly, that this proviso for the performance and observation of the
Laws does not make the Patent conditional, but the intent only was, that if he
do not observe them, then he shall forfeit the penalties therein appointed, to
which the Court inclined, and after resolved accordingly.

At another day it was moved in Mr. Rows case, that the possession shall be
awarded to the King, and in this case, Tanfield gave a Rule, that Mr. Row ought
to plead to the inquisition, but no possession should be taken from him, for
although that the attainder make a double Record, yet if the indictment of
Treason be taken before Justices of the peace more then a year after the
Treason committed, as in this case it was, and the party is outlawed upon this
indictment, and the inquisition finds this outlawry generally, yet this is no
double matter of Record, for the outlawry is merely void upon the said
indictment, because the indictment it self is void, and to prove that when an
indictment is void, that is void as to all purposes; be vouched Vauxes case
Cook lib. 4. fo 44. and 11. R. 2. and after in this case the Barons awarded
process to plead, but not to dispossess the party.

Vaux against Austin and others.
AN Information by Vaux against Austin and others, that they did ingross a
1000. quarters of Corn, upon not guilty, the Jury found one of the Defendants
guilty for 700. and not guilty for the residue, and found the others not
guilty for all. Prideaux moved that judgment may be given to acquit the
Defendants in this case, and he vouched the 9th. of E. 3. fo. 1. and 14. E. 4.
fo. 2. where an Information was brought for forgery, and proclaiming false
deeds, and he was found not guilty of the proclaiming, and 3. Eliz. Dyer 189.
in the Lord Brayes case put by the way, and therefore he said, that if there be
an information upon the Statute of Usury against two, and the Jury found the
contract to be but with one of them, both shall be acquitted, and also he
vouched Treports case in lib. 6. where a man declared of a lease made by two,
where in Law it was only the lease of one, and the confirmation of the other,
and therefore evil, 8. R. 2. tit. brief; and if judgment in this case should
be given against one being in a joint information, he could not plead it in Bar
of another information for the same thing, and then he should be twice punished
for one fault. Hitchcock to the contrary, the Defendants plead, that they nor
any of them are guilty, and issue was joined thereupon, and by him this case
is not to be resembled, to the cases which have been put of joint contracts,
for here the parties commit several wrongs, and he said, if in a decies Tantum,
against diverse, if one be acquitted the other shall be condemned, and so in an
action of Trespass, 37. H. 6. fo. 37. touching maintenance, and if in Trespass
against two, one is found guilty for one part, and the other found guilty for
the other part, and 40. E. 3. fo. 35. and 7. H. 6 32. in trespass the Defendant
pleads that John S. infeoffed him and R. S. and the Plantiff says, that he did
not infeoffe them, and the Jury found, that be infeoffed the Defendant, only in
this case judgment ought to be given if either of them be guilty, and
therefore there is a difference between that and Wainwrights case, for the
information was, for the joint buying of butter and Cheese, but here the
information is for engrossing by way of buying, and so he prayed, that
judgment may be given for the King. Tanfield chief Baron, if upon the Statute
of Champertie, a man declares upon a joint demise by two, and it is found, that
one only made the demise, it was adjudged good, and by him this proves the case
in question, and the Barons agreed it to be clear, that if a contract be
alleged to be made with one of them, no judgment for usury ought to be given*
but in the principal case all but Tanfield agreed, that several judgments may
be given, for it is like unto a Trespass, and accordingly judgment was given
in the principal case, against him who was found guilty.

Nota, by Tanfield chief Baron, and all the Court, that where the Statute of
the 23. Eliz. appoints, that if any will inform against A. Recusant, and the
Recusant be thereupon convicted, that the informer shall have one moitie, and
the King shall have another, yet if a recusant be convicted according to the
form of the Statute of 28. Eliz. by indictment, an informer can never have any
advantage upon an information exhibited after, for the Statute of the 28. Eliz.
alters the course of Law, which was upon 23. Eliz. and no informer can have
any advantage upon a conviction of Recusancy by indictment, after the Statute
of the 28. Eliz. according to this opinion, there was a judgment now lately in
the Common Pleas, as the chief Baron Tanfield said, but if a Recusant be not
convicted of Recusancy, an informer may have advantage against him, according
to the Statute of the 23. Eliz. notwithstanding any thing in the Statute of the
28. Eliz.

Jacksons Case.
UPon a motion made by Sir John Jackson in a suit by English Bill, between
Jackson and another; Tanfield said, that it had been decreed in the Chancery,
betwixt one Gore and Wiglesworth, that if A. agree with me to lease black-Acre
for certain years to me, and after before he makes my lease according to his
promise, he infeoffes B. of that Acre for a valuable consideration, and B. had
notice of this promise, before the feofment made unto him, now B. should be
compelled in the Chancey to make this lease to me, according to the promise,
and by reason of his notice, and so the Court agreed upon a motion made in the
like case, by the said Jackson, for as before the Statute of 27. H. 8. a
feoffee upon valuable consideration, should be compellable in the Chancery to
Execute an use, whereof he had notice, so here.

Sir Edward Dimocks Case argued before.
BRomley the puisne Baron, thought judgment should be given for Sir Edward
Dimock against the King, for the matter in Law he argued but three points.
First, that the lease made to Queen Elizabeth in the year 26. is not good
clearly without a matter of Record, for although that he agreed, that personal
Chattels may be conveyed to the Queen without matter of Record, yet Chattels
real can not, for they participate in diverse qualities with inheritances and
freeholds; and therefore if a man possessed of a Term for years demiseth it to A.
for life, the remainder over to B. that this is a good remainder, adjudged now
lately in the Common Pleas, but otherwise it is of Chattels personal, as it
appears by 37. H. 6. the case of the devise of a Grail. Secondly, the
acknowledgement of the lease before Commissioners, and the prayer of the Bishop
to have it enrolled, makes it not a record before inrolment, for it appears by
the 21. H. 7. that if the Sheriff by virtue of a writ does any thing, yet it is
no matter of Record, until it be returned, and so is the 9th. of Ed. 4. fo. 96.
that if the Phillizer of a County enter Process of outlawry in the room of a
Phillizer of another County, this is not a Record in judgment of Law, although
that it be a thing recorded; and so he conceived, that it was no sufficient
Record in regard the Commissioners have not certified this recognizance, and
the prayer of the Bishop: Lessor in the life of the Lessee, and Lessor whereby
as he said, he admitted, that if this were certified by the Commissioners in
the life of the Lessor and Lessee, that then without inrolment this had been a
sufficient record to entitle the Queen, who was Lessee. Thirdly, he argued that
the inrolment subsequent in this case in time of the King that now is, makes
not the lease good, which was made to the Queen, for he thought that the
interruptions hindered the operation of this lease (by interruptions) he meant
the death of the Bishop, Lessor, and of the Queen Lessee as it seems, and the
lease in possession of Sir Edward Dimock by force thereof without inrolment,
and therefore he said it was adjudged, if a man covenant to stand seized to the
use of his wife which shall be, and there he makes a lease of the land, and
then takes a wife, this lease by him is such an interruption, that the use
shall not arise to the wife, but in Wintors case in Banco Regis 4. Jac. and
also in Russels case, although it seemed to be there agreed, that the lease for
years should be good; yet it was not resolved, but that the wife may have
freehold well enough, by virtue of that Covenant, and he also vouched and
agreed to Bret, and Rigdens case in Plowden Com.
where the death of the devisce, before that the devisor died did frustrate the
operation of the will, and so of the death of the Queen being Lessee: also he
vouched the Duke of Somersets case 19. Eliz. Dyer 355. First, as to the
exceptions taken to the Bar, by the Attorney general which were two, it seemed
to him that notwithstanding them, the Bar is good, for whereas it was objected
that the Bar is, that the Commission and acknowledgement of the lease were not
returned by Hamond and Porter, who were the two Commissioners who returned it,
to that he answered, that the information mentions the acknowledgement, and the
return before them two, and therefore there needs no answer to more then is
within the information, also it cannot be intended to be returned by the other
two Commissioners, in regard that they were only to the connizance. Secondly,
as to the other exception, viz. that where the information says, that May
Bishop of Carlisle by his certain writing of demise, had demised etc. for the
Bar is, that the said Bishop made a certain writing purporting a demise, etc.
that this shall not be intended the same writing mentioned in the information,
and 6. E. b. Dyer 70. Ishams case for Ilebrewers Park vouched in maintenance of
this exception, and he said, that it cannot be intended, but that the Bar
intends the same demise mentioned in the information, for here the lease
mentioned in the information, and the lease mentined in the Bar, agree in eight
several circumstances, as it was observed by the Council of Sir Edward Dimock;
see the argument of Bandrip, and 1. H. 6. fo. 6. where a scire facias was
brought against I. S. the Sheriff returned, that according as the writ
required, he had made known to I. S. and does not say, the within named I. S.
Altham Baron accordingly: as to the matters in Law, there are five points to be
considered in the case. First, he said, that the making of the lease to the
Queen without acknowledgement is not good, nor matter sufficient to entitle the
Queen, and he vouched 5. E. 4. fo. 7. and 7. E. 4. fo. 16.4. H. 7. fo. 16.21.
H. 7. fo. 18.1. H. 7.17. and 3. H. 7.3. the same Law when awardship is granted;
and so an use cannot be granted to the King, without matter of Record 6. E. 6.
Dyer 74. that the Kings Lessee for years cannot surrender without matter of
Record. Secondly, it seems that the confirmation of the Dean and Chapter is
good, notwithstanding it wants inrolment, and notwithstanding the
confirmation made before the inrolment, and so before the being of the lease,
for here is only an assentor the Dean and Chapter, for the Bishop has his land
in right of his Bishopric, and an assent may be as well before the lease as
after, insomuch no interest pass^th: so also may an attornement be good, before
a grant of the reversion, but otherwise it should be, if an express
confirmation was requisite in the case, for then it had not been good, and this
difference is, where the parties who confirm have an interest, and where they
have only an assenting power, and this is well proved by 29. H. 8. Dyer 40. the
Dean of Sarums case, and by Cook lib. 5. 81. and 33. H. 8. tit. confirmation.
Thirdly, it seems, that the bare returning of the Commission without an
express inrolment, is no sufficient matter of Record to entitle the King to the
lease, for it is without inrolment, no more but an acknowledgement, and the
Deed ought to be of Record to pass the estate 7. E. 4. fo. 16. but he agreed,
that if the Commissioners return an acknowledgement of a debt, this is
sufficient to make a debt upon Record, 2. H. 7.10. but if Commissioners by a
dedimus potestatem, to take Conizance of a fine, receive the Conizance of the
fine, and return it, yet it is not a fine, until the final Concord be recorded.
Cook lib. 5. Tayes case, and so here, it is no record until the inrolment.
Fourthly, in regard there is no inrolment in the l^fe of the Bishop, and so no
perfect leale in his life, this can never be good, for this circumstance of
inrolment, is as requisire to the essence, is the attornament is to the grant
of a reversion, and is causa sine qua non, for the successor of the Bishop
comes in paramount the Lessor, as the issue in tail comes in, partly by form of
the gift, and this is proved by the writ of de ingressu sine assensu Capituli
in the. Register, and therefore if the Bishop make a lease and dies, this
leale cannot be affirmed after his death, by the Chapter 33. E. 3. entry
Congeable 79.11. H. 7. and yet a lease made by the Bishop is not altogether
void by his death, as it appears in Cook lib. 3. in Pennants case, and he
compared this case to the case of Smith and Fuller in Plowden, where if a lease
be made for so many years, as A. shall name, the years ought to be named
certainty in the life of the Lessor, for otherwise it is not good clearly, and
so here the Lessee ought to come in by the Bishop, who was Lessor, or otherwise
this is no good lease, and it cannot be so in our case, because it wants
inrolment, to make it a lease in the life of the Bishop. Fifthly, he said the
inrolment after the death of the Lessor, shall not have relation to make the
lease good, for the Queen takes nothing until the inrolment made, and therefore
all is but words until the inrolment, and it differs much from the case of a
bargain and sale, for in such case an use passes at the Common Law before any
inrolment, and this may relate well enough if the Deed be enrolled after within
6. months, for the Statute of the 27. H. 8 of inrolments, does not hinder the
relation, for the words are, that nothing shall pals by the bargain (except the
Deed be enrolled etc.) so that if the Deed be enrolled in due time, it passes
from the beginning well enough, but otherwise it is in our case, see the 12. H.
4. fo. 12. so a fine cannot relate but from the recording thereof, for nothing
passes, but by the Record, and it does not relate as a bargain and sale etc.
and as to the exceptions taken to the Bar, he said, that notwithstanding them
the plea is good, for it shall be intended the same writing which the
information mentions, and it is not like to Mary Dickensons case, Cook lib. 4.
fo. 18. where the Plantiff alleged, that the Defendant published a forged
writing, in discredit of the Plantiffs utle, and the Defendant said, quod talis
Indentura qualis etc. this does not answer the Declaration, for no like is the
same, but in our case the Bar cannot be better, for the information is, that by
writing he demised etc. and the Bar is, that well and true it is, that the
Bishop by his certain writing made purporting a demise, which he pretended to
be no demise in fact, and if he should say in express words, as the information
ought to be, then he should confess the thing which is matter in law, and ought
not to take a Traverse to the demise alleged, because it is a matter in Law,
if it be a demise or not: to the second exception he said, that he needs but to
answer the express surmise of the information which is, that two Commissioners
etc. and the Bat is expressy, that they did not etc. without speaking any thing
that the other Commissioners did do any thing, as if an action of account be
brought, and the Plantiff says, that the Defendant accounted before A. it is a
good plea, that the Desendant did not account before A. for though peradventure
he accounted before another, but this shall not be incended, so the Bar is good.
He accepted to the information. First, it does not mention within what time
the first lease was intolled, for the words are, modo irrotulat. Secondly, the
information says not that the deed of confirmation was ever sealed, but that
the Chapter with their seal etc. and says not sealed, and then it is not good,
wherefore upon all the matter it seems, that judgment ought to be given
against the King.
Snig Baron, that the Bar is good, and also the information, first it seems,
that here is no Record to entitle the King to this land by the lease from the
Bishop, for if this deed, which purporteth a lease made by the Bishop, were
found by inquisition to be acknowledged, yet it is no sufficient Record 7. E.
4. and 5. E. 4. for the title of the King, ought to be by the Record,
immediately from the party who makes the estate, and Mr. Stamford is to be
considered, that if the King has an ancient right, he may peradventure be in
actual possession without Record, but if he comes in as a purchaser; he shall
not have without a Record, and this is proved by the case of the Duke of
Somerset in 19. Eliz. Dyer, and Mackwilliams case in 3. Eliz. and be said, that
as to the relation, if a man seized of a Manor bargaineth it to me, and rent
incurreth before the inrolment I shall not have the rent, although the Deed be
enrolled within 6. monehts after, and so of a condition, and if a reversion be
granted, and before attornament of the Tenant the rent incurreth, the grantee
shall not have the rent notwithstanding any relation: as to the point of
confirmation, he vouched the case of Patrick Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland
cited in Dyer, also he vouched Dyer fo. 105. and by these books it seemed, that
in this case a confirmation is required to be made, and a bare assent is not
sufficient, and therefore if an incumbent make a lease for years, and the
Patron grants the next avoidance, and after confirms the lease, here the lease
is not good in respect the next avoidance interrupts it for his life, but after
the death etc. the term will be good, as it was here lately adjudged, and so he
thought, that in this case the confirmation is not good, and also that the
Commission not being returned, is not good, and after one of the Commissioners
die, before the return, it cannot be recurned, and by the inrolment here made
the lease cannot take his effect with any relation, and so be concluded, that
judgment ought to be given against the King. Tanfield chief Baron, the
Commission for the acceptance of the acknowledgement of the Bishop, touching
that it is to be known, whether this makes it the Deed of the Bishop, and that
the Commissioners should return etc. the confirmation in this case, was made in
the life of the Bishop Lessor, and of the Queen Lessee, although that some of
my brethren conceive the Record to be otherwise, also in this case Dimock
entered by virtue of his lease, before the inrolment of the lease made to the
Queen, as the Record purporteth: to the points, First, I conceive that nothing
rests in the Queen without inrolment, but if Lessee for years be outlawed,
the King shall have this lease by the outlawry, for the outlawry is intended to
be upon Record, but of a wardship for land, that is not in the Queen, by the
death of the Queens Tenant without an office, because there is no matter of
Record, if an Alien has a lease of land this is forfeited, yet he shall have
personal Chattels, and as to the Book of 18. E. 3. cited on the other side,
where the King brought a quare impedit etc. this may be well agreed, for the
Prior of Durham confessed by Record, that he had made a grant, and this is a
sufficient Record, and as to the book of 20. E. 4. where the Patron was
outlawed, and before the outlawry the Church became void; that the King shall
present, it may be well agreed, although that no office be found, for this
presentation is but a thing personal, and transitory, and therefore those Books
prove nothing in this case. Secondly, he said, that when this lease was
acknowledged before Commissioners, yet that was not sufficient to make a record
to entitle the King, and it is here expressly denied in the Bar, that this lease
was certified into the Chancery in the life of the Queen, and therefore he
thought, that here was no Record to entitle the Queen, and to this purpose he
cited a case in 19. Eliz.
Robins and Greshams case, if a Recognizance were acknowledged before a Master
of the Chancery and not enrolled, this is no Reco^d, and an Action of debt
lies not thereupon, and the 34. Eliz. in Brock and Bainhams case in this
Court, a Recognizance was taken before a Baron of this Court, yet this was no
Record without inrolment, and therefore the bare acknowledgement in our case is
no Record: also he denied the opinion of Davers in 37. H. 6. to be Law, but
only for personal Chattels, and the 12. Eliz. Brook and Latimers case was
adjudged against the opinion of Davers for land, or leases. Thirdly, he said,
that the successor of the Bishop comes in paramount the lease made to the
Queen, and the new Lessee entering before any inrolment, has made the successor
of the Bishop as in his remitter, and when an ancient right comes, this
prevents the relation, which otherwise might be by the inrolment, and he said,
that the first lease here made to the Queen is merely dead, until inrolment,
and he vouched the 11. E. 4. fo. 1. Vactons case, the discontinuor enters upon
the discontinuee, after the discontinuee dies his heir within age, the
discontinuor dies, this causes a remitter, and so by him, if the disseissee
enter upon the heir of the disseissor, being an infant and dies, this avoids
the descent by reason of the ancient right which the disseissee had, and by 7.
H. 7. and 11. H. 7. Eriches case, it appears that an Act of Parliament will not
revive a thing that is merely dead, by reason of any inrolment, and much more
here, an inrolment cannot revive this lease which is merely void by the death
of the Lessor, and the entrance of the Lessee of the Bishops successor, and
there is a great difference betwixt the inrolment in this case, and the
inrolment of a bargain and sale, in regard that the sale is dead before the
inrolment, and yet in the case of bargain and sale, it was adjudged in the
Common Pleas Pasch. 2. Jac. in Sir Thomas Lees case called Bellinghams case,
that if a man bargain land to A. and before inrolment of the Deed A. bargains
the land to B. which second bargain is enrolled, this inrolment makes not the
bargain good to B. for the relation of the first, is only to perfect and make
good the conveyance to A. from all encumbrances after his bargain, but not to
make the second Deed good which was void before: also in 36. Eliz. in Sir
Thomas Smiths case, if the Bargainee suffer a recovery before the Deed
enrolled, yet that does not make the recovers good, and he said, that in this
case, until an inrolment of the lease made to the Queen there is no Lessee, and
a lease cannot be without a Lessor and Lessee, and before an inrolment of the
lease, the Lessor is dead, so that there never was a Lessor and Lessee in life
together and therefore the inception of this lease was altogether imperfect
before the consummation came, and so it leemeth by him, that the death of the
Bishop Lessor intervening before the inrolment is the principal cause, that the
first lease is not good: as to the 4th. point of confirmation, it seems to me,
in regard that the Bishop was seized in right of his Bishopric, and the Dean
and Chapter have no interest in the land, so that an assent is only sufficient
in this case, it seems to me, that the confirmation (as you call it) is good
enough, for it is clear, that an assent may be as well before the lease as
after, for it passes no interest no more then an Attornment. Cook lib. 5.
Foords case proves this diversity plainly, and by the same reason, also it
seems to me, that this assent of parties who have no interest is good enough
without inrolment, but otherwise it should be, if a confirmation were required
in the case: and as to the pleading, I think the Bar is good; and as to the
exceptions which have been made, viz. if the lease supposed to be made to the
Queen be answered, and he said, it was good enough, for the purpose of the
Defendant is to bring the matter in Law before the Judges, and the matter in
Law is, if it were any lease or not, as the information supposes, and
therefore the Defendant ought not to agree with the information for the matter
in Law, and therefore he had done well to show the special matter as he had
done, and not to confess it as it is in the in formation, nor to traverse the
said demise, because it is matter in Law: 5. H. 7. and Vernons case Cook lib.
4. he needs not traverse absque hoc. that the lease was made for and in
satisfaction of Dower, and to show the special matter, viz. that it was a
conditional lease, and so leave it to the Judges for the matter in Law if it be
a jointure or not: also it seems to me, that it is sufficient for the Bar to
say, that the Commission was not returned by Hammond and Porter, for that is a
Traverse to the information, and it cannot be intended to be returned by any
other of the Commissioners, in regard that those two only did execute it for
the taking of the acknowledgement as the information mentions, but he said
nothing in this case, if this Commission may be returned by those Commissioners
who took not the acknowledgement: also by him and Snig ( Bromley absent)
sigillo suo ratificat. is good enough without saying sigillo suo sigillat.
contrary to Baron Altham: also the Defendants have showed the time in their
Bar, when the first lease was intolled, so that it is certain; but it seems to
me, that admit the matter in Law was for the King, yet upon this information we
cannot give judgment for him, for the information is for the mean profits
incurred before the inrolment, and this is clear that the King cannot have them
without doubt, (admit that the Bishop had been living) yet the inrolment cannot
relate as to the mean profits, although it should be admitted to be good to
make the lease good at the time of the inrolment, and so upon all the matter he
agreed, that judgment ought to be given against the King, and so it was.

Tanfield chief Baron said, that if a man take a lease of my land from the King
by Patent rendering rent, this is not an Indenture to compel him to pay the
rent, for the King had nothing to grant, whereupon a rent might be reserved to
him. Altham Baron said, that the King shall have the rent here, as by estoppel
between common persons; but it was adjourned.

It was said by Tanfield chief Baron, that a Collector of a fifteenth may levy
all the Tax within one Township, upon the goods of one inhabitant only if he
will, and that inhabitant shall have aid of the Court to make each other
inhabitant to be contributory; which was granted by the Court. Bromley being
absent.

Tanfield chief Baron said, that if a man had judgment against A. upon an
Obligation, who dies, and another Obligee of the said A. assigns his
Obligation to the King, the Executors of A. satisfy the said judgment, it is
good against the King, in respect the debt now due to the King, was not upon
Record before the death of the Testator, which was granted by the Court.

Levison against Kirk.
THis Term the case between Levison and Kirk, which was opened the last Term
was adjudged: and the case was, that Levison brought an Action upon the case in
the office of Pleas against Kirk, and declared, that whereas the Plantiff was a
Merchant, and 13. Martii 40. Eliz. intended to go beyond the Seas to M. to
Merchandise, and the same day and year at D. he acquainted the Defendant with
his determination, and then in the same place appointed and trusted the
Defendant being his servant, to receive for him all such Merchandise and goods,
which should be sent over, or carried, or conveyed by the Plantiff in the same
voyage, and to pay for the custom of them, and to dispose of them, and convert
them for the profit and commodity of the said Plantiff, and thereupon conveyed
diverse goods to the Defendant, and that the same day and year the Plantiff took
shipping, and sailed to M. and that within five days following 20. pieces of
Velvet were brought into the Port of S. consigned by the Plantiff to the
Defendant in the absence of the Plantiff, and that the Defendant on purpose to
deceive the Queen of her custom, and to make the Plantiff to allow custom
unto him, did take of the said goods so consigned, and land them on the land at
S. aforesaid the custom not paid, whereby the Plantiff lost his goods, as
forfeited for default of payment of custom to the damage of etc. and upon not
guilty pleaded, a venire facias was awarded to the the Sheriff, that he should
cause to come 12. from the Venue of D. and those etc. viz. from the place where
the trust was reposed, and from the place where the trust was broken, and
thereupon the Defendant was found guilty, and damages 50. l. and in Pasch.
Chibborn Sergeant moved in arrest of judgment that the Action did not lie for
every fault against the servant, although it be such a misfeazance, for which
the Plantiff receives prejudice, and therefore if you will have an Action in
this case, you ought to show a special trust reposed, and a breach of that
trust by the servent, or otherwise an Action upon the case lies not, and that
is not observed here, for although that you show, that the Defendant being your
servant, was appointed and trusted for the goods, to be consigned in the said
voyage, yet you did not show that these goods were not consigned in the said
voyage, neither do you show, that he was such a servant generally used to be
employed in trading for your goods, neither do you show, that you have allowed
or delivered moneys to him, to make him able to pay the custom, and to say,
that by the sale of the goods themselves, he may pay it himself, and you
appointed him to dispose them at his pleasure, yet hereby you do not enable him
thereunto, for he ought to pay the custom before he sell them, and them
peradventure he had not money to discharge the custom, wherefore there is no
cause of your Action, as this Declaration is; and therefore he prayed that
judgment may be stayed. George Crook prayed, that judgment may be given, for
although it b^ not expressly showed, that the Plantiff continued beyond the
Seas, in the said voyage, at the time of the coming of the goods to the said
Port, yet the intendment ought to be so of necessity, in regard it is showed,
that within five days after his departure, and in his absence these goods were
consigned etc. and his return cannot be intended in so small a time, and he
vouched 21. E. 4. fo. 13. also it is not material in the case to show, that the
Master has left where withal to pay the custom, for here the Action is
brought in respect of deceit, and fraud in the Defendant, and this is inferred
diverse ways: the first, that the Defendant ought to receive my goods.
Secondly, that he should pay the custom. Thirdly, that he should dispose of
them at his pleasure, for the profit and comoditie of his Master the Plantiff,
and it is showed, that he intended to deceive his Master and the Queen also,
and where a wrong is made to another in my name whereby I am damnified, there I
shall have an Action, and if in this case, the Defendant had left the goods in
the ship, then the Plantiff had suffered no loss, and therefore his taking them
out of the ship is the cause, which occasions the loss to the Plantiff, and
therefore it is reasonable* that he should render us damages, and he vouched
the writ of deceit in F. N. B. and diverse cases therein put, and 21. E. 4.
that if a man bring an Action in London, and the Defendant to delay my Action
brings a writ of privilege, be shall have an Action upon the case, and he
vouched the like case to be adjudged in the Kings Bench 40. Eliz. between Byron
and Sleith upon an Action of the case brought by the Defendant, because he sued
a scire facias against a Bail in a Court where he ought.
Bromley Puisne Baron said, that the Plantiff shall have judgment. First, it
shall be intended, that the Plantiff was beyond the Seas, at the time in
respect of the Minute of time, between his departure and the landing of the
goods. Secondly, he said, that it needs not be expressed, that the Master had
left moneys wherewith to discharge the custom, for it shall be intended in
this case, because the Defendant had taken upon him to meddle according to the
appointment of the Plantiff, wherefore etc. and so he departed to the
Parliament.
Altham second Baron agreed; that the Statute for the paying of custom
appoints, that if the goods of any man be laid upon the land the custom not
paid, that then the goods shall be forfeited, and therefore here he shall not
lose his goods, by reason of this Act made by the Defendant, so that if the
Defendant be a mere stranger to the Plantiff, without question an Action of
Trespass lies for this taking; then in the principal case, by reason of this
trust an action of the case lies, and if a stranger drives my Cattle upon your
land, whereby they are distrained by you, I shall recover against the stranger
for this distress by you, in an action against him, for by reason of this
wrongful Act done by him I suffer this loss, and he vouched 9. E. 4. fo. 4. a
case put by Jenney. Snig third Baron to the contrary, I agree that if a
stranger put in my Cattle to the intent to do hurt to me, a Trespass lies, but
here is an Action upon the case and that lies not, because it appears not
sufficiently, that the Defendant was servant to the Plantiff to Merchandise,
but generally his servant, and therefore an Action of Trespass rather lies
generally, for in an Action upon the case, he ought to hit the bird in the eye,
and here it is not showed, that the goods were for the same voyage, nor that
the Defendant is a Common servant in this employment: also the Declaration is
not good, because he does not show, that the Defendant had moneys, or means
from the Master to pay the custom, and he is not compellable to lay out money
of his own, besides he cannot dispose of the goods, until the custom be paid,
wherefore etc. Tanfield chief Baron, there are two matters to be considered in
the case. First, if here you charge the Defendant as your special servant, or
if as a stranger. Secondly, if as a stranger, then if an Action upon the case,
or a general Action of Trespass lies;
and as to the first, if in this case you have showed him to be such a servant
as a Bailiff, or Steward, and he has misbehaved himself in such a thing which
belongs to his charge, without any special trust, an Action upon the case
lies, but if he be taken to be your general servant, then he is to do and
execute all Acts and lawful commands, and against this general servant, if his
Master command him to do such a thing, and he does it not, an action upon the
case lies, but yet this is with this diversity, viz. if the Master command
him to do such a thing, which is in his convenient power, or otherwise not, and
therefore if I command my servant to pay 100. l. at York, and give him not
money to hire a horse, an Action lies not for the not doing of this command
but if I furnish him with ability to do it, and then he does it not, an action
lies well against him, and in the principal case it is showed, that the
Plantiff appointed the Defendant being his servant generally to receive etc.
and to pay all customs etc. then it is examinable, if the Plantiff
sufficiently enabled this Defendant to do this command, and the wo^ds of the
command seem to be all one, as if he had commanded the Defendant to receive the
Wares, paying the custom, and therefore the Defendant needs not to receive
them, if he had not money to pay for the custom, and so it is not within the
Plantiffs command to receive the Wares, and then if he does receive them not
paying for the customs, this is another thing then the command, an^ therefore
it is no misfeazance as my particular servant, but being my general servant, he
had done another thing then I commanded him, whereby I receive some damage, and
by consequence is in case of a stranger, for if my general servant, who is not
my horse keeper, take my horse out of my pasture and ride him, this is a thing
which he does not as a servant, but as a stranger: then as to the second
matter, the Defendant being as a stranger, if an action upon the case, or a
general action of Trespass lies, for this is, as if my general servant take my
horse, and rides him without my appointment, a general action of Trespass
lies, but if by reason of his riding my horse die, an action upon the case
lies, and so it is in the case here, the Defendant had laid the goods upon the
land, by reason whereof they were forfeited, it is collourable, that an Action
upon the case lies, but if a man take my goods, and lay them upon the land of
A. a Trespass, or an Action upon the case lies against him, who took them by
the better opinion; but it is good to be advised, and it was adjourned; and at
another day Altham Baron said, that an Action upon the case, or a Trespass
generally did lie well enough, and he vouched F. N. B. that if a Bailiff arrest
one without any warrant, I shall have Trespass generally, or an Action upon the
case at my election, and so in the like case 18. E. 4, fo. 23. Trespass, or
Action upon the case lies also: by F. N. B. if Executors be outed by the
Testators Lessor, there they may have an Action upon the case, if they will, or
Trespass generally, and in Slade and Morleys case, a case was put, which proves
it to be according. Snig Baron agreed, that Judgment ought to be given for the
Plantiff, and by Tanfield, if I take your goods, and detain them, until I have
caused you to pay me 10. l. a general Action of Trespass lies, and not an
Action upon the case, and it is cited 7. H. 4. or 7. E. 4. to be accordingly:
but yet he agreed, that judgment should be entered, and so it was appointed to
be done; but then Chibborn for the Defendant said, that here is a mistrial, for
if this trust be not material, because it is not effectually showed in the
Declaration as you have argued, then the Venue shall come only from the parish,
where the Wares were laid upon the land, and not from the parish also, where
the appointment or trust was made by the Plantiff, and therefore the trial also
being from both parishes, is a mistrial, and the Court agreed, that this is a
mistrial upon that reason, for now the appointment or Trust is but an
inducement, and therefore needs not to be showed within what parish it was
made, and therefore a new Venire facias was granted, and upon that a new trial,
and damages more then before, and judgment was given accordingly.

Arden against Darcie.
NOta, a good case of Attornament, which was decreed in the time of Baron
Manwood betwixt Arden and Darcie, and it was this; one Arden was seized in fee
of diverse lands in the County of etc. and made a lease for years, and after
made a feofment with words of Grant of those lands to A. and B. to the use of
the feoffor, and his wife for their lives, the remainder to Arden his son in
tail, and after the feoffor said to the Lessee, that he had conveyed his land,
which the Lessee held in lease to the uses aforesaid, and the Lessee said, I
like it well, and after he paid his rent to the feoffor generally, and it was
decreed in the Exchequer Chamber, that this is no Attornament, because the
Attornament ought to be to the feoffees, and it appears not, that the Lessee
had notice of the names of the feoffees, and therefore it cannot be said, to
amount to an Attornament, but notwithstanding that Decree, Arden the same to
whom the remainder was limited, had his Action depending in the Kings Bench to
try the point again, as he said to me: also this Term, a point concerning the
said Decree was in question, upon another Bill exhibited in the Exchequer
Chamber by Sir Edward Darcie against Arden, and the case was as follows. Sir
Edward Darcie exhibited his Bill here in the nature of a scire facias against
Arden, to show cause, wherefore the said Edward Darcie should not have
execution of a Decree made, in the time of Baron Manwood, and the Defendant
showed, that Darcie in his first suit supposed by his Bill, that he had a grant
of the land then, and now in question from Queen Elizabeth rendering rent, as it
appears by the letters Patents, and in facto there was no rent reserved upon
the Patent, and that the Defendant gave answer to the said Bill, and admitted
the Jurisdiction of the Court, and after a Decree was made against the
Defendant, and the Defendant now having showed this special matter demurred
upon this Bill, in respect that by his pretense the Court had not jurisdiction
to hold plea in the first suit, and here it was showed, that the first decree
was made upon a matter in Law, not properly examinable by English Bill, and
that in facto, the Law was therein mistaken, and therefore the Defendant prayed
that the decree may be re-examined. Tanfield chief Baron, it is usual in the
office of Pleas, that if an action be brought, as a debtor of our Lord the
King, this is good, although that de facto no suggestion be made thereof, if it
be not showed on the other side, and therefore a writ of Error for this falsity
shall not cause the judgment to be reversed, as it was resolved in a case in
which I was of Council, and so here as it seems. Altham Baron, here we are in
equity, wherein we are not tied to so strickt a course, as if it were in the
office of pleas. Brock of the Inner Temple for the Defendant, in a Court of
equity, it is in the discretion of the Court to deny Execution of a decree if
good cause be showed, and in 18. E. 4. fo. 1. judgment was given against a
married wife by the name of a feme sole, and reversed, although she did not
show in the first suit, that she was married, and in 8. E. 4. judgment was
given in the Kings Bench in a suit, and by writ of error was reversed, although
the Defendant had admitted the Jurisdiction of the Court, and the chief Baron,
and all the Court inclined, that Arden may exhibit a Bill to reverse this
Decree made against him, and may show what point in Law the Judges mistook in
the Decree, or otherwise we should not do as Law and Justice requires, for it
is not expedient to be examined by way of Bar to this Bill in the nature of a
scire facias: and after Arden according to the Decree of the Court, and their
direction did exhibit his Bill in the nature of a writ of error, Comprising how
the first decree was erroneously made, and prayed, that the said decree might
be reversed, and in his Bill he showed the point in Law, which was decreed, and
that upon diverse long conveyances appears to be thus, and so it was agreed by
Council on both parties; that Arden the father was seized of the Manor of
Cudworth in the County of etc. and was also seized of the Manor of Parkhal in
the same County, and of Blackclose etc. which was parcel of the Manor of
Cudworth, but lying near unto Parkhal, and always used and occupied with it,
and reputed parcel thereof, but in truth it was parcel of Cudworth, and that
Arden the father made a Conveyance of the Manor of Parkhal, and of all the
lands thereunto belonging, and reputed as parcel thereof, or occupied with it,
as part, or parcel thereof, and of all other his lands in England, (except the
Manor of Cudworth) to the use of Arden his son that now is Plantiffe here, and
if Blackclose will pass to the son by this conveyance, or if by intendment it
shall be excepted by the exception made, it was the question here, and was
decreed in the time of Baron Manwood, that it is excepted by the exception, but
all the Barons now thought it, to be a strong case, that Blackclose is not
excepted by the exception of the Manor of Cudworth, and so the first decree
was upon a mistake out of the Law; and Tanfield chief Baron said, that the
point is no other, but that I infeoffe you of Blackacre, parcel of the Manor
of D. exceyt my Manor of D. this does not except the King by express terms;
quaer. if in this case there was any land occupied with Parkhal, which was not
parcel of Cudworth, nor of Parkhal, for if so, then it seems that Blackclose
will be within the exception, in regard that the words and lands occupied
therewith, viz. Parkhal are well satisfied. Harris Sergeant said, that the case
is to be resembled to the point in Carter and Ringsteeds case, concrrning the
Manor of Odiam, where a man was seized of of a Manor within which the Manor
of D. did lie, and is parcel thereof, and he by his will devised the Manor of
D. excepting the Manor of Odiam, where the Manor passes by the devise, and
is not excepted. Snig and Altham Barons agreed, that this proves the case in
equity, but by the chief Baron Tanfield, because this is a rare case, that we
should reverse or undo a decree made by our predecessors in the very point
decreed by them, it is good to be advised, and therefore they directed Arden to
find presidents if he could, by search made for them in the said case, and
therefore the Attorney general who was of Council for Darcie, had demurred upon
the Bill which was exhibited by Arden, and that he being not present, day was
given until another term to hear Council on both parts, at which day the
Attorney said, that he conceived it a strange case, and without president, that
a Court should impeach and reverse the decrees given in the same Court, and
that if it should be suffered, the subjects would be vexed and troubled without
any end or quiet, and this stands with the gravity of every Court to maintain
their own judgments, and therefore several Statutes were made to reverse
judgments upon erroneous proceedings, and judges of other Courts constituted
to examine them, which proves, that before the Statutes aforesaid, and without
aid of them the Judges would not reverse their own Judgments, and so here.
Harris to the contrary, it is not without presidents, that in a Court of equity
one, and the same decree in the same Court has been reversed by decree of the
same Court, upon some consideration had of the erroneous misprisions of Law,
and it is no dishonor to a Court of justice so to do for matter in Law, but
otherwise it were for matter of fact, for then that betrayeth an Ignorance in
the Judges, which would be a dishonor to the Court, but for Law men are not
Angles, and for that point, there may be error; to prove that the Court of
equity may do so, he vouched the Book of 27. H. 8. fo. 15. Martin Dockwraies
case, which is our very case ruled in the Chancery, and so he said, that in
this Court 3. Jac. a decree made in the time of Baron Manwood was reversed upon
the like reason; and Tanfield chief Baron said to Sergeant Harris, that if it
appear by your president, that if the same matter in Law which was decreed was
reversed in the same point in Law, then this proves for you, but if it were
for matter of fact, otherwise it is, and therefore we will see your president.

Kent and Kelway.
KEnt and Kelway entered Hill. 6. Jac. Rot. 722. in the Exchequer, in the case
between Kent and Kelway, which was debated Pasc. 8. Jac. the Judges pronounced
in the Exchequer Chamber, that judgment ought to be affirmed, notwithstanding
their opinion before to the contrary as it appears, and therefore I demanded
of Mr. Hoopwel Clark of the Errors, what was the reason of their opinions, and
he told me that the case was debated by them this Term at Sergeants Inn, and
then they resolved to affirm the Judgment; and the reasons as he remembered
were as follows, and he also delivered unto me the case, as he had collected
it out of the Records, and delivered it to the Judges, which was, that the
Plantiff in the Kings Bench declared, that one Benjamin Shephard was indebted
to him in 300. l. and that he sued out of the Kings Bench, an Alias Capias
directed to the Sheriff of N. to the intent to compel the said Benjamin
Shephard upon his appearance to put in Bail, according to the custom of that
Court, for the Recovery of his debt, which writ was delivered to John Shaw;
Sheriff of the said County, to be executed, the Sheriff made his warrant, to
the Bailiffe of the liberty of the Wapentake of Newark, and the Plantiffe
himself delivered it to James Lawton Deputy of the Lord Burley, the Kings chief
Baili^e of that liberty to be executed, and the Deputy Bailiffe by virtue of
the said warrant arrested the said Benjamin Shephard, whereupon the Defendant
with others made an Assault, and rescued the said Benjamin Shephard out of the
custody of the said Deputy Bailiffe, whereby he lost all his debt, and damages
were assessed at 172. l. and cost 10. l. and in this case the Judges agreed,
that notwithstanding the Defendant had rescued the said Benjamin Shephard out
of the hands of etc. when the said Benjamin Shephard was arrested upon an Alias
Capias out of the Kings Bench, which writ is only in nature of a plea of
Trespass, yet the party who rescued him, shall answer in this action, damages
for the debt, because the Plantiffe by this means had lost his debt. And yet it
is not showed, that the Rescuer knew that the Plantiffe would declare for his
debt, but if in this case, the Sheriff or Bailiffe had suffered a Negligent
escape, they should be charged only with the damages in the same plea as the
writ supposes, and no for the debt, and so a diversity: also they agreed, that
the Declaration is good enough to say, that he was rescued out of the hands of
the Deputy Bailiffe, and the course in the Kings Bench was always so, upon the
return of a rescue, notwithstanding the Book of the 7. Eliz. Dyer fo. 241. also
it was resolved, that the Declaration was good, saying that he sued an Alias
Capias without mention of any latitat before sued: also it was agreed, that the
arrest was good made by the Deputy Bailiffe, by virtue of a warrant delivered
to the Sheriff: but quere, if they should not examine, if the Bailiffe had a
power given to make a Deputy by his Patent, for this appears not in the case.

Bently and others, against Leigh in Trespass Hill. 45. Eliz. Rot. 1231. Trin.
7. Jac. in the Exchequer.
TPe Judges affirmed a Judgment this Term, between Leigh Plantiffe in a writ
of Error, and one Bentley, and others Defendants, and the matter assigned for
Error was, because the Trespass was brought in the year 45. Eliz. for a
Trespass made in the 42. Eliz. and the judgment upon the verdict was against
the Defendant, and the Margent of the Roll it was entered: quod Defendens
capiatur, where it ought to be pardonatur (as he pretended) for the general
pardon, which was in 43. Eliz. had pardoned the fine to the King for the
Trespass, and this is a thing whereof the Judges ought to take notice, as it
was said by Damport, who was of Council with the Plantiffe in the Error, for
this word capiatur is of course entered in the Roll, for the Kings fine which is
due by him who is convicted of Trespass, as it appears by Cook lib. 3. in Sir
William Harberts case, and in this case the fine was pardoned, therefore
pardonatur ought to be entered, as it was in Vaughans case, Cook lib. 5. but the
Judges resolved, that of these general pardons they are not bound to take
notice without pleading, for in regard there are diverse exceptions in them, the
party ought to show, that he is none of the parties excepted, as the Book is
in -- E. 4. but if they will, they may take notice thereof without pleading, as
it seems by Vaughans case, and so said the Judges in the Common Pleas this
Term, and so here the judgment was affirmed.

Calvert against Kitchen and Parkinson Trin. 7. Jac. in the Exchequer.
IN Trespass by Calvert against Kitchen and Parkinson, upon a special verdict
these points were moved and argued by the Council at Bar, and first ^^e case in
substance was, that one Parkinson was a devisee of the next avoidance of the
Parsonage of D. the which Church became void by the death of the Incumbent, and
after one A. and the said Parkinson Simoniacally agreed, that the said Kitchen
should be presented by the said Parkinson to the said Church aforesaid, and
that after Kitchen not knowing of this Simoniacall agreement was presented,
instituted, and inducted to the Church aforesaid, and all this was after the
Statute of 31. Eliz. cap. 6. and after Queen Eliz. intending, that this
presentation belonging to her by reason of this presentation for Simonie, by
force of this Statute of the 31. Eliz. presented one D. and before that B. was
admitted, and instituted the Queen died, and now the King presented Calvert
with out any recital, or mention of the presentment made by the Queen, and
without any Revocation actually made of the said first presentation, and
thereupon Calvert is admitted, and instituted; and for the Tithes as Parson he
b^ought Trespass. Hitchcock intended three questions as he said, but moved also
other things. First, if a devisee of the next avoidance be a Patron within the
intent of this Statute, of the 31. Eliz. cap 6. Secondly, it within the said
Statute here be Simonie in the Patron, and not in the Parson, if this ought to
prejudice the Parson or not. Thirdly, if the King ought to present by this laps
after the Queen had made presentment without recalling of the former
presentation, or if the presentation of the Queen ought to be adjudged a Turn:
to the first matter he said, that a next avoidance is a thing devisable well
enough within this Statute, for the truth is, it is not a thing of any value in
the account of Law, and therefore it is no prejudice, although that the third
part do not descend to the Patron, for the Common Law intends it to be of no
value, and he said, that the form of conferring to a benefice, was ad ecclesiam
etc.
as appears by 7. E. 3. fo. 5. and he vouched Bracton to prove, that the Patron
had nothing but to provide, that the Church should be full etc. and to prove,
that this is a thing devisable, he said that it was so adjudged in the Common
Pleas, Mich. 33. and 34. Eliz. Rot. 2122. but admitting that here was not any
Patron by reason of any devise, then if he, who presented be a disturber, and
had acquired this Patronage hac vice by Usurpation, then that also is given to
the King within the intent of this Statute, by reason of this agreement for
Simonie, and therefore he said, that if he who had but a nomination corruptly
agree to make a presentation, or nomination, this nomination shall be forfeited
to the King, within this Statute, as it is said in Plowden, in Hare and
Bickleys case, he who has the nomination, has the effect of the Advowson: and
also he observed the words of the Statute, which say, that if any person do for
money etc. present any one etc. that every such persons presentation shall be
void, and it shall be lawful for the King to give the same benefice, for that
turn etc. so that if he had title or not, yet this turn is forfeited to the
King as by the Statute of 1. Jac. cap. 33. it is provided, if any goods which
ought to pay subsidy, be laid on the land, the subsidy not paid etc. the same
goods shall be forfeited: it has been agreed, that if a stranger who had
nothing to do with these goods, cause them to be laid upon the land, that they
shall be forfeited against the owner, as it was admitted in Levison and Kirks
case, in 7. Jac. and so here in respect that the true Patron suffers a Usurper
to present, and his presentee to be admitted and inducted, this turn shall be
forfeited to the King, by reason of the Simonie against the rightful Patron,
and he conceived, that although that the Presentee in this case, was not party
to this corrupt agreement, yet he shall be prejudiced by it, although not so
prejudiced thereby, but that he may be capable to be presented again to the
same benefice, but, hac vice the presentation of him is void; for as Littleton
says, the presentee ought to accept the Parsonage subject to such charges as
the Patron pleases, who in the time of Vacation has power to charge it, and
so by his Act had made it subject to the forfeiture, and therefore the person
who comes under him shall be prejudiced, and therefore he vouch^^ the case in
the 19. H. 8. fo. 12. if a stranger agree to disseise an infant to the intent
to infeoffe the Infant, although that the Infant were not knowing of the Coven,
yet he shall not be Remitted, because he came in under a wrong deer. To the
third matter he said, that the King may revoke his presentation, and by the
same reason he may present another, before his Presentee is instituted, and to
prove it, he said, that a Common person may recall his Presentation before the
institution etc. and he vouched the Book of the 31. E. 1. Tit. quare impedit
185. the Abbot of Leicesters case, although that Dyer citing of it, 12. Eliz.
fo. 292. conceives the Book contrary, but it seems to be in reason that the Law
is clear, that a Lay person may change, although that a Spiritual person
cannot, and the reason is, because a Lay person did not know his sufficiency
peradventure at the first, but a Spiritual person by intendment may inform
himself thereof well enough, and therefore he vouched 18. H. 7. and 1. H. 8.
Kelloways Reports, which proves that diversity plainly as he said; then he
thought by the same reason, if the King present one, and dye, or vary before
institution, that here, he himself, or his successor, may present anew, and
seemed to him no question, and to this purpose he vouched, 12. Eliz. Dyer fo.
292. that he may repeal, and it is not of necessity that this instrument which
purporteth the repeal, should be showed to the Guardian of the Spiritualties,
and by the 19. Eliz. fo. 360. in Coleshils case if it is said, that when the
King has presented, a Repeal by him ought not to be admitted after
institution, see for such matters in the Book, also he vouched Dyer 339.
Yattons case to prove that the King may repeal his presentation, by a new
presentation, without mention made of the former, except that the second
presentation be obtained by fraud, as there it is, and he vouched Dyer 294.
Goodmans case, and so he concluded. Damport to the contrary, there are two
points,

The first is the Patron, and a stranger corruptly agree to present Kitchen,
whereupon he is presented, if this shall be void against Kitchen. 2. admitting
that the Queen had title to present, and she presents, and dies before
admittance, if the King may present a stranger, without mentioning the other
presentation to be repealed. As to the first, he said that at the common Law,
so if one be simoniacally presented, yet this is not void until the Presentee
be deprived, and if before this Statute, such a corrupt presentment had been
made, the incumbent and ordinary being free, then no presentment should ensue,
and he vouched the saying of Linwood an Author of the Civil Law to be
accordingly, but if money be given by the friends of the Presentee, and after
the King had notice thereof and assent, then it is not punishable, but
pardonable at the discretion of the King, and now by him the Statute provides
no punishment for the person, when the Patron only consents to the Simonie, for
he observed that after the said Statute of 31. Eliz. had appointed a punishment
for the Patron then in the last part of this branch the words are, the persons
so corruptly taking, etc. shall be incapable of the Benefice aforesaid, and so
it seems, that the intent of the Statute is not to punish any party, but he
that is to the Simonie, and this is also explained to be so, by other Clauses
in the Statute, for another Clause inflicts punishment upon him who is party to
a corrupt resignation, and so in all the clause, those only who are partakers
of the Crime shall be punished, and to prove that such comstruction has been
made upon penal Statutes, that he only shall be punished, who had notice of
the crime, he vouched Littleton who says, that upon the Statute of Gloucester
notice was requisite, or otherwise no default, also he vouched to this purpose
the case of Pickering in 12. Eliz. Dyer fo. 292. a Lay Person presents a
Bastard to a Benefice, who was admitted accordingly, etc. and in a suite
thereupon, issue was admitted to be taken, if the Patron knew that he was a
Bastard, so if he had no notice thereof, then there is no default in him, and
he vouched 43. E. 3. to this purpose, and 22. E. 4. tit. consultation, and he
well agreed. Closse and Pomcoyes case now lately adjudged, which was, that Sir
George Carry being seized of a^ Advowson, granted the next avoidance to his
second son, and dyed, and after the Son, corruptly agreed with I. S. to
procure the said I. S. to be presented to this Benefice, and the second brother
knowing thereof, it was agreed, that for the perfecting of the agreement, the
second Brother should surrender his Grant and interest to the elder brother,
which elder brother not knowing of the said corrupt agreement, presented the
said I. S. who was instituted, etc. all shall be void, for he is presented here
by reason of this corrupt agreement between the Patron who then was, and the
parson, and the elder Brother was only used to convey a bad gift by a good
hand, and all had reference to the corrupt agreement, with the assent of the
Patron who then was, but here in our case was no agreement assented unto by the
Parson, and this diversity also seems to be good, that if A. has the
presentation, and B. the nomination to a Benefice, and the Presentor upon a
corrupt agreement, makes a presentation unknown to the Nominator, here the
Nominator shall not be pre^udiced within this statute. As to the second matter
it seems, that by the demise of the Queen this presentation is not
countermanded or repealed in Law, and therefore he said that he would agree,
that if the Qeen had made such an Act which was only a bare Authority without
interest, this will determine by her death, as it was ruled for a Letter of
Attorney to execute livery of Duchy Lands, for this is a bare Authority, and
is a means to do a thing to her prejudice, and he agreed that by implication or
without cause a common person could not vary from his presentation, as if a
Feme sole present, and intermarry, this is not controuled by her marriage, for
it is a thing which is not to her prejudice, and he vouched Cook lib. 4. Forse
and Hemlins case, and one Mark Ogles case, proves that the death of a Common
Patron is no revocation of his presentation, for if a man present, and dye, if
it be a disturbance, his Executors may have a Quare impedit, and much more in
the case of the King who dies, but he well agreed, that the King might have
repealed his presentation, and after have resumed it again, which proves that
it is not a mere Authority, but mixed with an interest, for an Authority
revoked cannot be revived, but without Actual repealing it is not to be
avoided, and therefore he vouched Sir Thomas Wrothes case in Plowden fo. 457.
That if the King grant to one license to purchase Land, in respect that by a
means this does acquire an interest to a party, this does not determine by the
demise of the King, although the Grant be not for the King and his Successors;
so here this presentation is a means to give an interest to the Party, and
therefore is not determined by the Demise of the King, and he vouched 1. Ma.
Dyer fol. 92. and so if it be a License dispensative, this is not determined by
her death, and he vouched 3. E. 3. fo. 29. cited in Sir Thomas Wrothes case,
see more after.

Mich. 7. Jacobi in the Exchequer.
Sir Daniel Nortons case.
IN Sir Daniel Nortons case it was agreed that where one Oglander was chargable
to the King for 27. l. for an Amercement, for which Process issued out of this
Court to Sir Daniel Norton Sheriff of Hampshire to levy it, and his under
Sherif being Chamberlain came to Oglander upon another occasion, and Oglander
said unto him, Chamberlain you do owe unto me 30. l. by bond, I pray you pay
me, whereunto. Chamberlain said, you are to pay me 27. l. for an Amercement
which I ought to Levy against you by Process which I have, and if you will give
me my Bond, I will give you 3. l. and discharge you of the said Amercement, to
which Oglander agreed, and delivered the Bond accordingly, and all this
Oglander disclosed by Affidavit, and further said, that Sir Daniel Norton had
taken his goods for the said Amercement again, this not being discharged in the
Office, and it was said by the Court, that this was a good levy of the said
Amercement by Chamberlain in the Law, and therefore Sir Daniel Norton ought to
be charged for it to the King, as a thing levied by him, and Oglander shall be
discharged of any another levying, and therefore, etc.

Sawier against East.
SAwier against East in an Ejectione firmae for certain Mills in East
Smithfield called Crush Mills, a special Verdict was found that Queen Eliz.
was seized of them in right of her Crown, and the 28. of her Reign leased them
to Potter for 40. years, who in the 30. Eliz. dyed, and Mary his Executrix
entered, and took to Husband one Burrell, which Burrell 33. Eliz. demised
parcel to Wilkinson for 20. years, and dyed, Mary took Hitchmore to Husband
who in 44. Eliz. 2. May surrendered to the Queen, and after the 2. of June 44.
Eliz. the Queen reciting the first Demise made to Potter, the interest of which
is now come to Hitchmore, and that he had surrendered to us; demised the
premises to Hitchmore as well in consideration of xxx. l. paid as for that,
that the said Hitchmore did assume upon himself to repair the said Mills at his
own cost being greatly in decay, and to leave them so repaired, and the Jury
also found that in the same Patent there was a Covenant that Hitchmore should
repair them, etc. for the doing thereof he had given some assurance, and that
the Mills were not repaired, and that the Lease made to Wilkinson is now in
Esse, being for 20. years, and that the King that now is, had granted the said
Mills to the Less of Sawier, etc. Walter for the Plaintiff, First, it seems
that this false recital in the lease made to Hitchmore makes the lease void,
and the point is, that the King by recital in this Lease; intends that all the
interest of the former lease was surrendered, whereas Wilkinson was possessed of
part thereof, and so it is in deceit of the Queen in matter of Profit; and
therefore makes the new Lease void, and to prove that a false recital in the
Patent may avoid it, he vouched 37. H. 6. fo. 23.3. H. 7. fo. 6. and 11. H. 4.
fo. -- in all which cases it is said, that if the King make a Grant upon a
suggestion made to him which is false, this will avoid the Patent, but if a
true suggestion be made to the King, and he himsel thereupon makes a collection
or surmise, this does not avoid the Patent, as the Lord Chandos case, Cook L.
6. and by 21. E. 4. fo. 48. By Hussy, but there if the surmise of the party be
false in any thing, this avoids the Patent, and therefore Hussy there says,
that if the King recite: that whereas the Manor of D. is escheated to him, and
he grants it to A. where in truth it was parcel of his Autient Inheritance,
this does avoid the Patent, but there by him if the King recite that whereas
his servant is decrepit, he of his mere motion grants the Manor of D. to him,
this falcity does not avoid the Patent, because the consideration is of his
mere motion, and by intendment the recital is not the information of the
party, and then in our case, the lease is not ex gratia, etc. and the recital
is the recital of the party, for it is of an Act done, viz. of a surrender
supposed to be made by the party, and that upon the matter is resolved to be a
cause to avoid the Patent, as it is in the Lord Chandos case and so also holden
by Hussy in 21. E. 4. fo. 48. and 9. of E. 4. in Baggots Assizes, if the
surmise of the party be false, and valuable to the King, then the falcity there
avoids the patent, but if it be not of a thing valuable, or beneficial to the
King, the falsity does not avoid the Patent, 29. E. 3. Grants 58. if the King
recites that whereas the Advowson of D. is holden of A. and he licenceth A. to
appropriate, if in facto, it be holden of the King himself, the license is not
good, because the King is deceived in matter of profit, and so 12. Eliz. Dyer
292. and 25. E. 3. there cited, where the King presents, and before admision,
he repeals, and then recites, that whereas his Presentee is Canonice
institutus, etc. and confirms it, here although that the Bishop after this
repeal had instituted the party, yet it appears, that the recital, which is
void, makes also the confirmation void, 8. H. 7. fo. 3.9. H. 6. fo. 28. and 21.
E. 4 if the King recite, that whereas the Manor of D. came unto him by the
Attainder of A. be grants to B. and in truth this did not come by the Attainder
of A. but is an inheritance of the Crown, this avoids the Grant, and 21. E. 4.
fo. 28. by Bryan, if the King recite that he is indebted to A. in 20. l. and
grants to him the Manor of D. if he be not indebted to him the Grant is void,
and so it appears by Sir Hugh Cholmleyes case, Cook lib. 2. fo. 54. that if the
Queen recite a thing, the falsitie whereof does prejudice her in matter of
profit, now the misrecitall avoids the Patent, as there it was admitted, that
if the Queen recite that whereas A. is seized of an Acre in tail upon a
condition, etc. and she grants the reversion to B. here if the state of A. were
without a condition, the grant of the reversion is void, for this false
recital, and according he vouched Alton Woods case, Cook L. 1. and in our case
it is prejudicial to the Queen, that all the interest in the former lease is
not surrendered, but a part thereof is in Wilkinson, for the Queen intended that
all this Land now leased should be immediately liable to her rent newly
reserved, where in deed it cannot be so here, until the ancient lease be
determined, whereby, etc. this recital is tacitly intended part of the
consideration: For the second Point, it seems that here is a falcity in the
consideration expressed, for the Queen leased to Hitchmore as well for 30 l. as
for that, that he assumed to build and sustain, so that the assumpsit to build
and sustain is part of the consideration, and therein the Queen is deceived,
and to prove that the word (pro) is as good as if it had been in consideration,
he vouched 43. Eliz. Luttrels case, that the word (pro) implies a
consideration, and here the finding of the Jury is, that no other security or
assurance was given to the Queen, here the Queen can have no remedy upon this
promise without matter of Record, and this is proved by 26. E. 3. fo. 20. and
without question the King intended by this Assumpsit that she might have remedy
for the not performance thereof, and although the Jury finds a Covenant in the
Patent for repairing, yet this is no sufficient performance of the
consideration, for the words (super se assumpsit) employ a thing precedently
done, and not to be done or contained in the same Letters Patents, as if the
King recite in consideration that A. had surrendered, he grants the same laud
supposed to be surrendered, although the very acceptance of the new grant is a
surrender, yet this is not the surrender intended, nor this is not the
consideration which moved the King, for he intenedeth a precedent surrender,
and the very words and intent ought to be performed in the point of
consideration, or otherwise the grant is merely void, although it be not of a
thing beneficial to the King, as appears by Cook lib. 6. in the Lord Chandos
case, and although the consideration be but of a personal thing, and not of a
real, as the difference is taken by our Books,) and although that the
consideration be of a thing executed; and not Executory, (as also some Books
take a diversity) yet as it seems to me the falcity herein avoids the Patent,
for this is of a thing which sounds to the Kings commodity, and he vouched
Barwicks case, Cook l. 5.94. and 3. H. 7. that if the King for money paid makes
a grant, etc. there it ought to be averred that the money was paid, and in 21.
E. 4. fo. 48. if the King in consideration that A. had released a debt wherein
truth there was no such debt, etc. this fa^city avoids the grants. Also if the
King in consideration that A had surrendered his Letters Patents of an Estate
Tail, Grants him, etc. although that by the surrender the King was to have
benefit notwithstanding because the estate yet continues, therefore this
falsity avoids the Patent, as appears in the Lord Chandos case, Cook Lib. 6.
Altonwoods case, Cooks lib. 1. fo. 43. and in our case the consideration is of
a thing beneficial to the King to be performed, therefore the falcity much
more avoids the Grant: Also the Covenant found here to be made does not aid
the matter at all, for it is not proper to be called a Covenant in Letters
Patents, because he did not seal unto it, and it cannot be called his deed,
but yet shall be bound thereunto for his estate, but not by way of action, as
the consideration intends. Also it seems, notwithstanding the construction
here was, that in consideration the Lessee would repair, etc. yet as our case
is, the Patent is void, because it is not repaired according, as appears by
Barwicks case, Cook lib. 5. fo. 94. that if the consideration in the case of
the King be not duly performed; and that prejudice may accrue to the King, by
reason of the not performance thereof, this avoids the Patent. Also if the case
be so, this would be an estate conditional between common persons, 38. H. 6.
and the 6. E: 6. Dyer, 72. and 21. E. 4. by Hussy pro quod Relaxabit, etc. and
so in Sir Thomas Wrothes case, Plowden, and 15. E. 4 for the King had no other
remedy to compel the thing to be done, except to seize the land for the not
performance, and therefore it appears by 21. E. 4. and Cook in Altonwoods case,
that the Grantee ought to plead this consideration to be performed on his part,
which also appears by Sir Thomas Wrothes case, if it be of a thing Executory,
and so for all these causes I pray that Judgment may be given for the
Plantiffe. Crook George at another day argued to the contrary, and he answered
three points. First, it has been agreed, that the lease is void upon a false
consideration employed, viz. the mis-recital. Secondly, admit that it is not
void for that, yet here part of the express consideration is not performed.
Thirdly, the lease made to Hitchmore was in Judgment of Law conditional, and
the condition not being performed makes an avoydance of the lease.
To the first point it seems, that this false recital does not avoid the
Patent, yet I agree the cases, and Books which have been cited out of 9. H. 6.
fo. 27. and 29. E. 3. Grants 58* for in these Books it appears, that the King
is deceived both in point of suggestion, and in point of interest, but our case
is not upon a false suggestion, which does prejudice the King in interest, and
in our case the King expresses another thing to be the Consideration of his
grant, and the suggestion is not the consideration, and therefore there is a
great diversity, and to warrant this to be a material diversity, he vouched
the Rule of the case in 21. E. 4. fo. 49. in Sir Thomas Wrothes case in
Plowden, for in 21. E. 4. it is agreed, that the mis-recital that it was the
Kings free Chapel, is not material for the King, is not deceived in point of
interest, and although that the book 3. H. 7. fo. 6. is that if the King relase
to a Prior a Corody, because that the Priory was of the Kings foundation,
whereas it was of another man's foundation, and therefore the release should be
void, because of the falsitie, although that it be a falsitie in the
consideration, and so more strong then in our case, yet in the said case, it
was adjudged to be a good release, as appears in Plowden 331. put in the case
of Mines, and so is 3. H. 7. fo. 7. and that this is not Law; see Altonwoods
case Cook lib. 1. accordingly, and as to the book 15. E. 3. there cited, he did
agree unto it, for if the King has the title to present, and he presents one
not according to this title, this presentation is void: see Greens case in the
Kings Bench 44. Eliz. accordingly, and now reported by the Lord Cook lib. 6.
fo. 29.8. H. 7. fo. 3. if the King grant the Manor of D. of the value of 10.
l. and this is of the value of 20. the King is deceived in the matter of value
by the Information of the party, and therefore the grant is void, which was
agreed in point of judgment in the Kings Bench 2. lac. -- between Mason and
Chambers, but there it was adjudged, that if the King will grant to A. the
Manor of D. which Manor is of the value of 10. l. yearly whereas it is worth
20. l. yet the Grant is good, because the words which Manor is worth etc. are
words but of the Kings recital, and in our case here is but one express
Consideration, and therefore the recital is not material, see 37. H. 8. Brook
Patents 100. that book makes a quaere, if a false consideration does not avoid
a Patent as well as false suggestion, but the book upon which I do principally
rely, is a point resolved in the principal case of Altonwood, Cook lib. 1. fo.
45. or 43. where the King recites that he had made a lease to A. and B. and
that whereas they had surrendered the Patent of the said lease, he in
consideration of the said surrender makes a new lease to A. and B. here
although, that in fact the demise supposed in the recital to be made to A. and
B. was void, and so the King was deceived in the matter of recital, yet in
respect that he made the surrender of the Patent to be the sole consideration
of his grant, the falsitie of his recital is not material, for the Judges ought
to take it to be a Motive to the King in his Grant, which he did not express to
be a Motive, especially if he express another Motive, and so in our case: also
it should be greatly mischievous to Hitchmore, if this falsitie of the recital
should prejudice him, for by intendment it is not in his power to inform the
King of this lease, which was made by Burwel to Wilkinson, because he is a
stranger unto it, and also the lease is not upon Record, and therefore
Hitchmore is not bound to take notice of it; see temps H. 8. Brook, Action upon
the case etc. and also the lease here made by Burwel to Wilkinson is to have
continuance but for 8. years after the time of the commencement of the new
lease made to Hitchmore, and so the King then shall have it liable to his rent
newly reserved, and so in these circumstances our case differs in matter of
prejudice, from Barwicks case Cook lib. 5. for there the Kings Lessee made
diverse under Lessees for all his Term, and after he himself by fraud accepted a
new lease of all rendering rent, which new lease was in consideration expressly
of a surrender of the first demise, and of all the estate etc. and this lease
was there void, and so the diversity appears, also in 18. Eliz. Dyer 352.
where the deceit to the Queen was in point of express consideration, and yet
the Lord Dyer said, that in that case the grant was not void,, and then much
more in our case; but admitting that the lease should not be good,
notwithstanding this false recital, yet it has been objected, that the
consideration is not performed according to the Kings intention, for the words
of the lease are, know ye now, as well for a fine of 30 l. as for that, that
Hitchmore had assumed to repair the Mills at his costs and charges etc. and
that here the said Hitchmore had not assumed by Record, so that the King may
have any remedy against him, for his not repairing, and that the contract is no
assurance: it seems to me that the words, for that, that he assumed, and the
express Covenant was sufficient to satisfy the intent of the Consideration,
for the words are, the words of the King, and of the Patentee, also in
judgment of Law, and therefore Pasch 7. Iac the Lord Evers and Stricklands
case was adjudged, the Lord Evers had made a lease by Patent, in which these
words were contained, viz. and the aforesaid Lessee shall repair the aforesaid
Tenement, and that after the reversion was granted to the Lord Evers, and it
was adjudged, that the Lord Evers should have a Covenant against the Lessee,
and this was in the Kings Bench, Pasch. 7. Iac. and so here for that he had
assumed upon himself, it is an accord sufficient to testify his promise,
whereupon the King may have remedy to compel a reparation to be made, and
although that the words are not personally spoken by the Lessee, yet he shall
be bound to perform them, as it is in 38. E. 3. fo. 8. if one takes benefit by
a lease which he never sealed unto, yet he shall be bound to a nomine penae
therein contained, and besides here is an express Covenant, and therefore, etc.
Thirdly, it has been objected, that the estate is conditional by these words,
he has assumed to repair, which condition is not performed, and so the lease
made to Hitchmore void, and 38. H. 6.34. and 35. has been vouched in proof,
which book I do agree, for there the King had no other remedy to have his
intent performed, and also the words there, are ad intentionem does not make
the estate conditional, and he vouched Brook condition 96. and 43. E. 3.34. and
Perkins 144. that if the Queen give land, and that the Donee should not
Amortize, that makes not the estate conditional for the Amortizing, and so if a
man make a feofment to A. that he should pay 10. l. and that R. may enter for
non-payment, yet this makes not a Condition, the reason is, because the first
words leaves it to the liberty of the feoffee, and the words after shall not
be construed to make it conditional, but I agreed the case put in Sir Thomas
Wrothes case in Plowden, Pro eo quod relaxabit, that this makes a condition if
it be not performed, because it is of a thing, futurely to be done, or
Executory, and the King had no other remedy; also in our case the circumstances
manifest, that the Kings intent was not to make a conditional estate upon this
lease, for he accepted an express Covenant for the requiring, and he vouched
the Lord Cromwels case, in Cook lib. 2. fo. 72. and he said, that if here the
lease had been made to Hitchmore, in respect he had agreed to increase his
rent, and further had a clause of distress for the rent, it shall not be
intended, that the King in such case purposed to make the lease conditional, if
the increase be not paid, because he had provided himself a distress, wherein
although that the King had no more remedy, then by the Law he should have had
without these words, yet the words manifest his intent to have no other remedy
but the distress, see 7. E. 6. fo. 79. and 3. E. 6. Dyer, Non licebit alienare
makes no condition in the case of the King without the words subpaena foris
facturae, and he vouched, 4. Ma. Dyer 138. the Countess of Surreyes case, and
also 18. Eliz. Dyer 348. which as he said, was one Greens case, where it was
adjudged. that if the King provide himself of another remedy, the words by
reason of any implications shall never be construed to be conditional, and so
was the opinion of Manwood and Harper in Wellock and Hamonds case cited in
Barrastons case, Cook lib. 3. and 31, E. 1. Voucher 141. A man made a
Feoffement with warranty against all people rendering rent, and further willed
that if the Feoffee could not enjoy the land, that he should pay no rent, here
the words subsequent take away the force of a recovery in value, which the
warranty otherwise would have given, and so here the King had appointed the
remedy which he intended to have, and therefore it shall not be construed to be
conditional, because the consideration intended is executed, viz. that he has
assumed, etc. Dyer 76. and 44. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, Sir William Lees case,
in consideration that he had assumed to make a release another promised to pay
him 10 l. an action may be brought for the 10 l. without averment of making the
release, because the consideration is a thing executed, viz. the Assumpsit,
etc. but if Executory, then the Grant is conditional, as 9. E. 4.19. and 15.
E. 4.9. If an Annuity be granted pro concilio impendendo, this makes the Grant
conditional, and void for not giving counsel, but otherwise it is if it be
pro consilio impenso, 4. But admitting that here it was conditional, yet the
Queen cannot avoid it without Office, and so the Plaintiff had no title to
enter for an avoidance which was before his grant, and so the lease is in esse
at the time of the Grant made to the Plaintiff, your Grant is without recital
thereof, and therefore is void, see Knights case Coo. lib. 5. If there be a
condition to re-enter for non-payment, an Office ought to be found, but if it
be upon condition to cease for nonpayment, then it is void to the King without
Office, as it was agreed in this Court in Sir Moyle Finches case, and he
vouched Cook lib. 1. Altonwoods case, to prove that the lease ought to be
recited in the Grant of the reversion, or future interest, and here although
there be a non abstante in your Patent, this does not aid you, because it is
not found in the special Verdict: Also for another cause the Plaintiff shall
not have judgment here, for it is not found that the Queen died seized,
neither that it came to the King that now is, and so it cannot come to the
Plaintiff, and although a fee-simple shall be intended to continue in the same
person, yet without showing it shall not be intended to come to the heir, 7. H.
7. 3. and so he prayed judgment for the Defendant. Tanfield chief Baron said,
that the case here is by Verdict, and therefore we ought to intend such
circumstances, if they be not expressed to the contrary: also the seisin of the
Queen is showed to be in Jure Coronae, and therefore the intendment that it may
be devised by disseisin, or abatement between common persons holds not here.

Carew against Braughton Mich. 7. Jacobi in the Exchequer.
THomas Carew Exequetor of William Carew brought debt against Morgan Broughton
Sherif of the County of Cardigan, and the case was that John Wyner was in
execution upon a Judgment for William Carew, and that after William Carew
dyed, and that John Wyner brought an Audita querela against Carew, Executor of
William Carew, and upon that Writ he had a venire facias against Thomas Carew,
and thereupon (as the Stat. apoints of 11. H. 6. cap. 10.) he put in bail by
recogni-zance in the Chancery to the said Thomas Carew, and one of the parties
for his bail was Thomas Wyner, and after upon the Audita Quaerela, Judgment
was given against the said Wyner, and a Scire facias awarded and issued against
Thomas Wyner as Bail, and after the said Thomas Winer was in execution upon
this Recognizance as Bail to the said Thomas Carew, and the said Morgan
Broughton being Sheriff, suffered him to escape, upon which escape Thomas Carew
brought debt against the Sherif in the debet and detinet, and had a verdict to
recover, and now in arrest of judgment it was moved by Jefferies that the
action ought to be brought in the detinet only, and he said that if an Action
be brought as Executor, this always ought to be in the detinet only, and he
vouched Hitchcock and Browns case remembered at the end of Hargraves case, lib.
5. where the case was, that one Anthony Brown Executor brought debt against one
Lister, and that Lister being in execution, the wife entermarried, the said
Lister escaped, the Husband and Wife brought debt for his escape in the debet
and detinet, and there it was resolved that it ought to be in the detinet only,
and so here, and see the custom to plead mentions, that the Recognizance
acknowledged was to the use of the Executor: and not to the use of Thomas Carew
by his name, but Wild of the Inner Temple prayed judgment, and said that the
Action is well brought in the debet and detinet, and he vouched 9. H. 6. and
20. H. 6. if an Executor recover, and after upon the Judgment he brings debt,
it ought to be in the detinet, but if an Executor sels goods of the Testator,
and takes an Obligation in his name as Executor, yet here the Action upon this
Obligation ought to be in the debet and detinet, because it is upon his own
contract, and 1. E. 3. Brook Executor pla. 287. although it appears there, and
so by 9. H. 6. fo. 11. That is good either way, and 41. E. 3. Brook pla. 545.
that if a debt be brought against the Executor upon a contract made by them, it
ought to be in the debet and detinet, or otherwise the Writ shall abate, and as
9. H. 6. is at his pleasure to name him Executor or not, and therefore etc.
Snig the second Baron, if the Executors bring an Action of goods carried away
in the life of the Testator etc. and has judgment to recover 20 l. and
damages for them, and upon this judgment he brings debt, this shall be in the
detinet, Altham 3. Baron, if an Executor sells the goods of the Testator, and
an Obligation is made to him for the money for which they were sold, without
doubt this action shall be in the debet and detinet, for the action concerns
him in his person, and so if he with his own money redeem goods which was
pawned by the Testator, etc. and the Stat. of the 11. H. 6. cap. 10. is that
upon an Audita Querela the party who sueth it shall put in Bond to the party,
etc. and the Testator is not party at the time of this Audita Querela, but
Thomas Crew who is the Executor, and it is not as a Process of execution
pursuant, etc. but is a new thing, and so for his opinion suddenly it is good
in the debet and detinet. Bromley the 4. Baron seemed clear, that if a Bond be
made to an Executor upon a simple Contract made with him for the goods of
Testator, there the action ought to be brought in the debet and detinet, but
this account is conceived upon a dependency of a duty to the Testator, and
therefore it ought to be detinet only. Tanfield chief Baron, the case is
doubtful, and therefore it is good to be advised, but for this time it seems
there is a diversity where the Recognizance is Legally forced, and where it is
voluntary, for in our case the Law compels this Recognizance upon the suite
which the Executor prosecureth as Executor, etc. and for the Testator, and
there it ought to have a resemblance of the Regionall debt, and although that
the Statute appoints that the sail shall be to the party, as Altham Baron
remembered, yet here as the pleading purports, the Bayl is to the aforesaid
Executor, which implies a legal dependency upon the first suit. Then it has
been granted, and the Law is so, that if an Executor recover a debt, which was
due to the Testator, and has judgment for it, now if you will have an action
upon this judgment, this ought to be in the detinet, because it is a legal
pursuance of a thing given to the Testator, and not voluntary as a bond for
further security or assurance, and so here the Bayl being pursuant and
compulsory, but by 5. E. 3. if it be voluntary, then it ought to be put in the
Kings Bench to an Executor which is to be resembled to our case, if an Executor
bring debt upon a Bayl, it ought to be as Executor, and not as I. S. clearly:
Altham the Bayl in the Kings Bench is upon the original suit, and so it is not
here, wherefore, etc. to which it was not answered, but for that matter it was
adjourned, see H. 6. in the Kings Bench, if a Feme, etc. take Husband, and one
of the Debtors of the Testator promise the husband if he will forbear his suite
to pay the debt, if the Husband will commence his action upon this promise, it
ought to be in the name of his Wife also, because the action pursues the
Original debt. Williams contr. it was agreed that if the Law were such, that
the Action ought to be in the detinet only, then the bringing of it in the
debet and detinet is such a Ieofaile as is not aided by the Statute of 18.
Eliz. Nichols case, and Chamberlains case. Cook lib. 5. Tanfield chief Baron
said in this case, that it is proper that the Action ought to be brought in the
detinet only, but as our case is, here is no issue joined, because here is not
a negative, and an affirmative, for the declaration is, that he owes and
detaineth, and the Bar whereupon the issue is joined is, that he owes not, so
where if his Action ought to be in the detinet, then there is not any N^gative,
and so no issue, which was not denied: at another day they agreed that the
action ought to have bin in the detinet only, and therefore judgment was given
that the Plaintiff take nothing by his bill.

Sir Henry Browns case touching the Countess of Pembrook.
SIR Henry Browns case, wherein Hawkins and Moore were parties, was this, the
Plaintiff declared of an ejectment of the Manor of Kiddington, D^le, and Sale,
and does not mention them to be adjacent to any Ville, and also of an 100.
Acres of Land lying in the same Ville of S. and that upon not guilty pleaded,
the Jury at the Assizes at Oxon were ready, and then the Defendant pleaded,
that the Plaintiff after the last continuance had entered into a Close called
Well Close parcel of the Tenements mentioned with conclusion, and this in the
Declaration he is ready to aver, and demanded judgment if it, etc. and this
was before Yelveton Judge of Nisi Prius there, and now the Plea here was
debated: And 1. in this case it was upon conference with all the Judges
allowed, that this plea may be pleaded at the Assizes well enough, and the
Judge there accepting of it, had done well, but as Tanfield chief Baron said,
the Judges may allow it or not, for if they perceive that it is Dilatory they
may refuse it, for it is in their discretion, and therefore, etc. But by
Dodderidge the Kings Sergeant, the Judge of Nisi prius is not Judge thereof, if
it be well pleaded or not, but is to give day to the Parties in Court where the
Suit depends to maintain this Plea, for he is only appointed Judge to take the
issue, and upon such Plea he ought to discharge the Jury of the matter in
issue, and record the Plea, and this is all his duty, and by him in this case
here is a Discontinuance, for the parties have no day given upon the Roll as it
ought to be, for the day in bank in judgment of Law is all one with the day of
Nisi prius, and this is of course given to the Parties to hear Judgment only
concerning the matter in issue, and here is other matter, and therefore the
Judge, etc. Nota, that in all Cases where a thing is pleaded triable before
other Judges, the Judge before whom it depents ought to give day to the Parties
to be before the Judges where the matter is tryable, 12. E. 3. Voucher 115. and
Title Day, 25. and 34. and Assise pla. 14. a Lord demands Cognizance of Pleas,
day ought to be given to the Franchises, or otherwise it is a discontinuance of
the Nisi prius, for there ought to be a special day for the parties here to
hear judgment in this Plea, 10. H. 7. fo. 26. so if at the Nisi prius a
protection be cast, the Judges shall give day to the Parties in Bank to hear
judgment, if this protection shalve allowed or not, for the Judge of Nisi prius
is no Judge thereof: Also the Judge in this case ought to have discharged ye Jury
and it appears not here yt he had done so, and therefore upon the whole matter
it is a discontinuance, but admitting that here was no discontinuance, it
seems that the plea was good; and I agree, that in all cases of Pleas
issuable, the plea ought to be expressly showed; or that which Tantamounts, and
here is showed that which Tantamounts, for when the Plantiffe in his Action had
showed the names of the Manors, and the Towns in which the acres lies, then
the Venue to try it for every parcel shall come de vicineto from all together,
and by consequence it is reasonable, that the Venue for the trial of one
particular to be parcel, or not parcel shall come from all, for if the plea in
this case were, that the Plantiff has entered into the premises, this had been
good, and then if it be good for the general, it seems it should be good for
every particular; also it is clear that two may be parcel of all the three
Manors, as in this case it is admitted to be parcel of all the premises by the
demurrer if so etc. Coventry, the plea here is not good, for the plea is to the
writ, and the conclusion ought to be pursuant to the premises of the plea, or
otherwise the plea is not good 36. H. 6. if a man plead to the writ, and
conclude to the Action it is evil 20. Eliz. Dyer 361. also the plea is not
good, because it is not showed, where the land lies, wherein the entry is
alleged, and therefore if the Plantiffe had denied it, then is there no
certain place, from whence the Venue should come, etc. Walter of the Inner
Temple, it seems that the plea is good. First, this plea although it is but
to the writ, yet it is peremptory as other pleas to writs are: see l. 5. E. 4.
fol. -- as to the conclusion of the plea, it is but matter of form, which the
Clark ought to amend, and therefore upon your general demurrer, you shall not
take advantage of it, and by the Court, this is but matter of form, and not
being alleged for one of the special causes agreed, that notwithstanding the
demurrer be special, yet the Court ought to apply the conclusion always as the
matter of pleading will bear it, and therefore if a man plead to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, and demand judgment of the writ, yet it is good by
Newton 7. H. 6. for if the Bar be good, the writ is not maintainable, and it
was said by Popham in a case in the Kings Bench 34. Eliz. that one, etc. had
two issues in one plea. First, if one thing be once repeated in a plea,
repetition thereof will supply all the residue for avoiding infiniteness in
repetitions. Secondly, one etc. will serve to supply the defect in matter of
form as here, and as to the Objection that the plea is not good, because no
certainty is showed where the entry was; it seems to me the plea therein is
good, because here is no need in our case to mention the certainty in the
Declaration, for here by our plea we offer two things issuable, viz. the
entry, or not entry.
Secondly, if it be parcel of the premises, or not, and when diverse things
issuable are specified, it is not necessary to show the place of any, for it is
time enough to show it in the rejoinder. 3. H. 7.11.3. H. 6.8.41. E. 3.8.10. H.
6.1.14. H. 6.31. And therefore it was agreed in the Kings Bench, that if one
pleads in Bar diverse matters issuable, the Replication ought not to take issue
upon any of them, but leave it to the rejoinder to the intent, that the place
may be showed therein, and so here. Secondly, here a place is sufficiently
showed by awarding of a venire facias, for it is certain enough to show it to
be parcel of the Manors, as it was resolved in Bailies case Trin. 7. Iac. in
the Court of Wards, then by the same reason it is good enough, to show it to be
parcel of all the three Manors, for the Venue shall come from all, as it shall
be to try the issue of all, and by the demurrer here it is admitted to be
parcel of all, and therefore, etc. Thirdly, he said, that the omission of the
place is but matter of form, and such a thing is within the Statute of 27.
Eliz. and ought to be specially set down, or otherwise the party who demurreth
shall take no advantage thereof, and to prove that it is but matter of form, he
vouched the case of Hall and Goodwin in the Kings Beuch Hill. 31. Eliz. and he
said, that a Replication makes not the plea good, which is evil in matter of
substance, and yet a Replication made to a Bar which wants a place, makes
the plea good, which proves it to be but form: also he vouched the case of 34.
H. 6.2. in debt the Defendant pleads the receipt of parcel hanging the writ,
and 34. Eliz. in the Kings Bench, between Noy and Midldeton, such a plea was in
Bar. Stephens, the plea is not good in matter, for the place where the entry
was made after the last continuance, ought to be showed, for always the most
certainty ought to be observed for the Venue to arise, as 6. H. 7. if Trespass
be brought upon the Statute of R. 2. for entering into the Manor of D. in D.
the Venue shall come from the Ville, and so here if the place be not parcel of
any Manors, yet if it lies in any Towns mentioned in the Declaration, the
Venue shall come from the Ville, and not from the Manor, 32. H. 6.15. three
several places are mentioned, and one pleaded a deed dated at the place
aforesaid, it is not good: also here it seems, if the party will plead, and
not demur, the want of place ought to be showed in the rejoinder, as it has
been conceived on the other side, but if he will not reply, but demur upon the
Bar, the plea in Bar is not good: Trin. 40. Eliz. in B. R. Rot. 1023. an Action
of Covenant was brought by a Bishop of a Lessee, and no place alleged where
the assignment was made, and a demurrer thereupon, and adjudged that the plea
was not good, and there it was also agreed, that it was not matter of form, and
so here: see after.

Tanfield chief Baron excepted to the form of an entry for the King which was,
that Postea the Justices of Assise Deliberaverunt Tenorem placiti, etc. for by
him the Presidents in the Kings Bench are, quod deliberaverunt recordum
praedictum, which as he thought was the best, but after upon the view of a
President showed, where an exception was taken in Baron Manwoods case, upon a
writ of error in the Exchequer Chamber after judgment given here, and the
entry then allowed to be good, and upon the view also of diverse Presidents
showed by Turner Master of the pleas, the chief Baron and all the Court agreed,
and resolved, that the entry of Tenorem placiti, or Tenorem recordi, is as
good or better, then recordum praedictum, etc. and therefore nothing was spoken
to that exception: see the President of pleading in Stradling and Morgans case
Plowden, where it is Tenorem placiti.

Sir Anthony Ashleys case.
IT was agreed by all the Court in Sir Anthony Ashleys case, that if the King
be entitled to the profits by an outlawry, and after B. assigns a debt to the
King, and the King had granted the profits which accrued by the outlawry to
Ashley, yet the lands of Ashley may be extended for this debt, for the King had
no interest in the land, but only the profits for the outlawry, and therefore
it may be extended for debt, per Curiam, quaere, if so for a common person.

Hill. 8. Jac. in the Exchequer.
Ewer against Moil, Hill. 8. Jac. in the Exchequer.
THe case was this, that a Commission issued out of the Chancery to Baron
Sotherton and others, and this was in 7. Iac. to inquire what lands and
Tenements the late Prior of Bister in Com. Oxon. had in Caversfield, in the
County of Bucks, and to inquire if a rent reserved upon a grant made to Banbury
of the lands of the Priory be arrere, or not, and by virtue thereof, the Jury
of the County of Bucks found that the Church of Bister in the County of Oxon.
was founded by the name of the Church of Saint Mary, and Saint Egbert, and that
Thomas Banbury Prior in the year, etc. made a lease to one Banbury of the
moitie of the Manor of Caversfield rendering rent, and that this rent was
arrear, and thereupon an Inquisition returned, and a scire facias issued to
Moil, who occupied the land, to show cause wherefore the King should not have
this land, whereupon he pleaded as Ter-tenant, and upon this plea the Kings
Attorney demurred, but it was misentred as see hereafter, but for diverse great
imperfections as well in the Kings Commission as otherwise, the Defendant ought
to have judgment as all the Barons agreed, as by the arguments of every Baron
upon mature deltheration appears, but for the reasons of the Barons to the
exceptions taken by the Council, see after for they are very good. Bromley
Puisue Baron, whereas the Inquisition purporteth, that the Jurors in the County
of Bucks, have found a foundation of a Priory in the County of Oxon. that is
not good by course of Law, for if a thing be local, the Jurors of another
County cannot find it, and here the Commission gives power only to inquire of
things in the County of Bucks, and he vouched Plowden in the Earl of Leicesters
case upon a Commission, directed to White Lord and Mayor etc. also the
Inquisition is, that Thomas Banbury Nuper Prior was seized, and made a
conveyance: as is affirmed, that is not good: also the word Nuper may be
intended a 100. years before, and so no certainty as appears in Wrothesly and
Adams case in Plowden: Altham 2d. Baron, there are three faults in the
Commission. First, is to inquire of a Manor and lands of the late Priory of
Bister in Caversfield, in the County of Bucks, and by these words, no power is
given to inquire of any thing concerning the Priory which is in the County of
Oxon. and the words in the County of Bucks do defer to all the sentence
precedent, and not to the word Caversfield only, 19 E. 4. fo. 16 7. H. 6. fo.
8. if A. B. and C. be insula de D. it shall be construed that the word insula
has reference to all the three Towas, but if it were in A. B. and C. insula,
and not in insula, then it is otherwise, a Commission to inquire of lands of
the Prior of Bister is evil without question where Bister is, and he said that
this may be proved by Pages case Cook lib. 5. also the Commission does not
propose any end wherefore the Jury should be, but generally to inquire of the
lands of the Priory at the time of the dissolution, so that it may be certified
to the King by the Inquisition: the first fault which is found is, that the
Priory was founded by the name of the Church of Saint Mary, and Saint Egbert
without saying the Prior and Covent of etc. and without finding of the place of
the foundation, viz. Bister, and this cannot be without assignmend of the place
of the foundation, viz. Bister: also the finding is, that one Thomas Banbury
then Prior as is affirmed, made a feofment etc. and this is not good, because
it ought to be absolutely found, or otherwise it is not material: also the
intent of the feofment is found to be made by the Prior, but no livery is found
thereupon, as it ought, although that livery shall be intended in the case of a
feofment pleaded by a common person, yet it ought to be found expressly, in the
case of a Corporation, and the finding here, and that by virtue whereof he was
seized, as the Law requires does not aid the case. Snig Baron, it seems to
me, that this Commission was only to inform, if the matter had been sufficient
to us to give judgment to the King, but here being to entitle, etc. it is not
good, the Commission is to inquire for the King of the lands of the Prior, and
this merely uncertain without saying certainly of what Prior, and therefore
they have no power to inquire of the lands of the Priory: also the Jury of the
County of Bucks, cannot inquire of the name of the foundation of a Corporation
in the County of Oxon. for the foundation is matter Local, but it seems to me
here, that the finding by virtue whereof he was seized prout, etc. shall be
intended that livery was made being by a verdict. Tanfield chief Baron, here is
not any demurrer being mis-entred, and therefore we have power to proceed to
any matter in Law, for the purpose in this case was, that whereas the Statute
of the 27. H. 8. of lesser Monasteries under the yearly value of 200. l. gives
them to the King, and this Manor of Caversfield within this Statute is to be
seized as is pretended in this case, whereupon this Commission issued to inform
the King of this Manor as parcel of these Revenues, for I deny that it is an
office of intitling, it is only an office of instruction, for the Statute of
27. H. 8. dissolves the smaller Monasteries, and vests them actually in the
King, and this is the difference from the Statute of the 31. H. 8. for this
Statute is only an Act to Abolish the lands of dissolved Monasteries, and
therefore this Statute is only to inform, for the Statute of 27. H. 8. had
entitled the King, and he said, that the land shall be in the King without
office, so that it being but an office of instruction, this may be good,
notwithstanding diverse incertainties therein contained; but the plain and
apparent fault herein is, because it is not to inquire what lands the Prior had
at the time of the dissolution, as it ought to be, for the words are to inquire
what lands the late Prior had, but it seems to me in this case, that the Jurors
of the County of Bucks, may inquire of the foundation in another County without
doubt, this being but to inform and not to entitle, and this is not alike
mischief to the party, for otherwise all Commissions to inform would be
quashed, and I have seen a Record in this Court, where a man of a good family
was found to be the Kings Villain regardant to a Manor in Norfolk, and this
was done by a Jury in Suffolk, and therefore in such cases (God defend) but
that a Jury may find a matter local in another County: also a gross defect is
in the Inquisition, viz. because it does not mention that the Manor of
Caversfield came to the King by the Statute of the 27. H. 8. but that the
Priory came to the King by that Statute, and does not say, that this Manor was
part of the possessions of the Priory at the time of dissolution, and for these
last matters it is apparent, that the Inquisition, and Commission are vicious,
although it be not proper for us, as the case is to adjudge it, for here is no
demurrer joined, for the demurrer is joined, as if it were upon an Information
of intrusion, and here is no intrusion laid to the charge of the Defendant, and
yet after the plea pleaded by Moil, the Attorney prayed that he may be
convicted of the intrusion, and Moil said, that he ought to show matter
sufficient, whereupon he upon the intrusion aforesaid ought to be convicted, so
that a thing is demanded of us to give out judgment in which is not in
question before us, and therefore no judgment at all may be given here,
wherefore it is not needful for us to dispute other matters in the case, and as
to the questions in Law, which were argued by George Crook, and others,
Tanfield chief Baron, nor Altham spoke not at all, because they might come
before them again to be adjudged upon a better office: but Bromley and Snig
Barons spoke to the matters in Law, and their opinions were as follow, and upon
the plea of Moil the case was this, that the Tenant pleaded protestando, that
the Priory of Bister was not founded by the name of the Priory of Saint Mary,
and Saint Egbert of Bister, as the inquisition supposes, for plea he says;
that one Thomas Banbury Prior of the Church of Saint Mary, and Saint Egbert of
Bister infeoffed him of the Manor of Caversfield by the name of the Moity of
his Manor of Caversfield, as also by the name of all his lands and Tenements
in Caversfield, and that the said feofment was made by the name of the Prior of
Saint Egbert of Bister, and that it was known as well by the name of Saint Egbert
as Saint Mary, and that the Manor of Caversfield was well known by the name of
the Moity of the Manor of Caversfield, and that the Prior had no other land in
Caversfield, and showed also, that there is another in Caversfield, which is
called Langstons Manor, the which heretofore was the Priors, and allotted as a
Moitie of a Manor, in the same Manor of Caversfields, and those and other
circumstances he used in his plea to the intent to show, that all the land of
the Prior shall pass to him, and he showed that this Manor sold to him was
known by the name of Langstons Manor. Bromley Baron, the Corporation is
mis-named in the Grant, because it is a thing material, viz. the omission of
the word Saint Mary, for the name of assent in a body politic is, as the name
of Baptism in a body natural, and the name of Baptism cannot be missnamed, as
it appears 3. H. 6. and 1. H. 7, if John by the name of Thomas make an
Obligation this shall not bind him if he does not admit it, and therefore it
shall not conclude the King, see the 11. Eliz. Dyer 279. where in some cases
the estate shall pass by livery and seisin, by what name soever it be made, but
a Corporation cannot pass an estate from them, but by Charter, and it may be
conceived, that the founder intended two things; the one was Religion, or more
properly superstition, the other was, that it may remain to posterity, as a
Monument of the piety of his Ancestors, and then if the name should be altered,
the remembrance would also decay, and therefore what name soever is first
imposed, ought always to be observed: and that the omission of Saint is
material, and he vouched Eaton College case, 3. and 4. Ma. Dyer and 35. H.
6.31. the case of the foundation of Saint Peter and Paul etc. but he agreed the
case in 11. Eliz. Dyer 278. that omission of the word undivided is not
prejudicial, because no material variance. Secondly, it seemed, that all the
Priors Manor of Caversfied passed by this grant, for by 20. H. 6. and 22. H.
6. it appears, that a feofment of 20. Acres by the name of a Manor is good,
and 6. and 7. E. 6. Dyer, if a man grant his Manor in S. containing 10. Acres,
yet if it contain 20. Acres it is good, and the word Omnia, greatly inforceth
the case as it seems, wherefore, etc. Snig Baron said, that the mis-naming is
a material variance which avoids the grant, also it seems, that Omnia alia
shall not be intended to refer to more then was granted by the other words,
except there were other lands besides the Manor, and therefore he thought that
only a Moity of the Priors Manor passed; super totam materiam.

Sir Henry Browns case before.
HObert Attorney general, it seems to me that the plea is not good for diverse
causes: see the beginning before, fol. -- he said, that first every issuable
plea ought to express a place, but if the issue be triable by the Record, or
witnesses, a place is not necessary, 11. H. 7. fo. 1. if there be no place,
there is no plea, and therefore if it be beyond the Sea it is no plea.
Secondly, in our case there is no place alleged from whence the venue should
come to try the entry in this case to be of all the premises, for it is to
try the entry, but in one particular parcel, but I agree as it has been said
of the other part, if the entry had been alleged to be in the premises, then
the venue shall come from all the premises, for here the plea of the entry
pleaded by the Defendant is double, and yet it is good, because of necessity
it cannot be otherwise intended in this case, but I cannot plead in this case,
that I have not entered into two Closes parcel of the premises, for that is
Negative preignans as is in 9. H. 6. fo. 44. in debt upon a bond where the
Defendant was bound to require a house, the Defendant said, that A. by the
command of the Plantiffe disturbed him, the Plantiffe shall not be admitted to
reply that A. did not disturb him by his command, but by protestation that A.
did not disturb him, for plea that the Plantiffe did not command him, etc. 6.
H. 6. fo. 9. in a writ of entry the Tenant pleads, that the demandant
confirmed after the last continuance, the demandant shall not say, that he did
not confirm after the last continuance, 5. E. 3. fo. 1. in a per quae servitia
of the grant to the husband and wife, the Defendant said, that the wife
released while she was sole, the other cannot reply that she did not release
when she was sole, but ought to deny the deed: and so in our case if you will
say by protestation, that the place where the entry is supposed is not parcel,
etc. for plea, that you have not entered after the last continuance, then the
issue ought to be joined, if we please or not, and this shall not have any
reference to the premises, but only to the two Closes, and then the venue shall
come from the two Closes; wherefore, etc. also by this plea so uncertain the
Plantiffe is prejudiced, for admit, that in this case Hawkins the Defendant had
reentred before the day of nisi prius, this had made our writ good again, as
appears by 26. H. 8. fo. 10. and 36. H 6. and 8. H. 7. and then if here the
Defendant will say that the Plaintiff had entered before the issue, now it shall
not be touching the premises; Also peradventure if he will assign the place,
this may fall out to be in another County, then where the Action was brought,
for so it may be, and yet parcel of the premises, and so he may give us cause
to demur. Also to say clearly that the Plaintiff had entered, etc. is not good,
for it ought to be that the Plaintiff also expelled or amoved the Defendant, as
appears in the book of Entries, Tit. Debt or Lease, fo. 11. or 12. and fo. 175.
B. also here the Plea is double to say in one close called Well Close, and this
is matter of substance, whereof we may take advantage notwithstanding this
general Demurrer. And also he says it is parcel of the tenements mentioned in
the Declaration, and this may be, and yet never parcel of the thing whereof
the Action is brought, for there are other Writs therein comprehended within
the pernosme: And as to the objection of Sergeant Dodderidge, that here is a
discontinuance because the Plea is not continued by the Judge of Nisi prius
into this Court here, if seems that this needs not, notwithstanding that it
be a collateral Plea in this Court, in Trin. Term at the Assizes, but it is
that the parties aforesaid do attend in Octab. Mich. and the continuing until
the Assizes is but with a Nisi prius, etc. and by express words the the
Parties have day to attend to hear judgment, and at the Assizes to try the
issue, and this is a sufficient continuance: and as to that the Judges of Nisi
prius ought upon this Plea to discharge the Jury, to that it seems that the
relinquishing of the issue joined, and the acceptance of this new Plea is a
discharge in Law. Also the Judges of Nisi prius have no power to give day in
the Court here to the Parties, for the Court here is to appoint the day in the
book of the other part, and 37. H. 6. fo. 2. is only that the Iudgs of Nisi
prius give to the parties their day, viz. the ordinary day, and not another
day, and the cases tit. Voucher, and tit. Journ. in Fitz. cited of the other
part are, where the Plea is to be put in another Court, as Durham, etc. where
the parties have no day before, and there a day ought to be given, but that is
apparently different from our case. Nichols Sergeant to the contrary, admit
that the Action had been brought of the Manor of D. only, and the entry had
been alleged in parcel as here it is, then it had been good, see the Book of
Entries tit. Debt or Lease, 11. or 12. accordingly, and by the same reasons it
seems, the Action being brought for the ejectment of three Manors, and the
entry was pleaded to be in one Close, parcel of the Tenements, and good, for
the venue shall come from all, as well from one Close, as from the other. Also
here the entry is alleged to be in parcel of the Tenements, and not of the
premises, and so the venue for the trial ought to be from the three Towns
where the odd Acres lie, and not from the Manor; also and by a reasonable
intendment it may be conceived that the place where etc. lies in all the three
Towns, 36. H. 6. fo. 17. the Defendant says, that the place where etc. is
parcel of the Manor of B. that he entitled himself unto, he needs not show
where the Manor lies, and yet it shall be intended in the same County, and
although that in such case it is said to be showed in certain, by the Book in
6. E. 6. Dyer fo. 76. yet this does not prove that it ought to be of necessity,
and here by the showing of the Plaintiff he had confessed the matter of fact,
which is an entry into parcel of the Premises; and by consequence he
falsified his Writ, for if he confess that he had entered into any parcel
thereof whereof he brought his Action, he had falsified his Writ clearly, and
he vouched 21. H. 6. fo. 8. and 6. Eliz. Dyer 226. in a Ejectione firm against
Nevell and others, it is said that by a Demurrer to such a Plea, the Plaintiff
had confessed the Entry, but otherwise it should be if he had imparled, see
Bowld and Mullinexes case in Dyer fo. 14. for the showing of a place, etc. and
l. 5. E. 4. fo. 138. an Executor pleads fully administered, and at the Nisi
prius he pleads that the Plaintiff recovered part of the Debt in D. after the
last continuance, and a good Plea, although it be not showed in what County D.
is: Also it seems that day ought to be given in this Plea, or otherwise it is
a discontinuance, for the day given upon the Roll is to hear judgment upon the
verdict, and this plea is Collateral, wherefore, etc. and he vouched 10. H. 7.
fo. 27 and 7. E. 3. fo. 338. by Herl, where a difference was taken when a day
in Bank shall be given, and when not, and he vouched 4. and 5. Eliz. Dyer 218.
where Fitz. Justice gave day in Bank. Tanfield chief Baron, true it is, that if
it be in an Assise which commenteth originally before the Judge of Assise he
may give day. Nichols also vouched 33. H. 6. and 11. E. 4. fo. 13. Hobert
Attorney general, the demurrer does not confess the plea when it is
insufficient, but if upon the demurrer the plea be adjudged sufficient, then
the fact is confessed, for the demurrer only confesses the matter of the plea
conditionally, viz. if it be good in the matter of the case, in 6. Eliz. Dyer
226. the Plantiffe conceived, that the plea there ought not to be pleaded in an
ejectment after the last continuance, and did not demur for the form, and a
demurrer does not confess the plea good, although that the matter is true, and
the Book in 21. H. 6. does not prove against me, for that was of an actual
confession, but in 37. H. 6. the issue joined was, if he who prays to be
received, may plead the entry of the demandant after the last continuance, and
the cause of the demurrer there, was only if he could plead that plea or not,
because it appears not, if he had any thing in reversion or no, and so it
seems, that we might have demurred specially, and this had been no
confession, and therefore the general demurrer shall not prejudice us, for the
matter of confession. Bromley Puisne Baron, it seems the plea is not good,
because a place is not assigned in certain in what Town the entry is, diverse
Towns being alleged, it seems that it is no discontinuance, for there needs
no special day to be given, but the day of return of the nisi prius, for they
cannot give any day being delegate only to a special purpose, and it seems to
me, that the demurrer does not confess the plea of the Defendant, but
conditionally, viz. if the plea fall out to be good, for otherwise the
Plantiffe shall be outed to take advantage of a bad plea, and so upon the whole
matter, it seems that judgment shall be given in the ejectione firm for the
Plantiffe. Altham second Baron, to the same purpose, there needs no special day
to be given by the Judge of nisi prius, although that it be upon a Collateral
matter, or plea, for by the record in this Court a day is given to the Jurors
conditionally, viz. if the Justices of nisi prius at the Assizes do not come,
etc. but to the parties it is given absolutely: fee 6. Assizes pla. 7. and L.
5. E. 4. fo. 2, 3, and 4. where there are several cases to this purpose: see 9.
E. 3.21. H. 6. fo. 10. if the Defendant make default, at nisi prius, a new
distress shall issue to the same Jurors to be here in Bank, and 3. H. 6. fo. 8.
and 9. if a man appear, and plead, he shall never take advantage of any
discontinuance: Also it seems that the plea is not good, and to say, that the
word Tenementorum refers only to the odd acres, and not to the Manor, it
seems, that it refers to all: but if it shall be taken to refer only to the
odd Acres, yet this is not good, and this is proved by the Book in L. 5. E. 4.
fo. 110. for a plea to the writ, ought to be always certain, and this case
also answers, that which has been said, that the demurrer confesses the
matter against the Plantiffe, for I say if you plead a release in Bar of a
debt, and show no place where the release was made, this demurrer is no
confession of the release, except that the cause of the demurrer fall out
against me, wherefore in respect that the plea is not good, and is peremptory
to the Defendant, as other pleas to the writs are, for this cause I conceive
Judgment shall be given for the Plantiffe. Snig Baron accordingly, that the
plea is not good, for the not showing of a place certain wherein the entry
was, as by the matter of discontinuance, it seems that the day of nisi prius
is all one with the day in Bank, and therefore there needs no day to be given,
and for that the death of any of the parties after the verdict, and before the
day in Bank shall not stay the judgment, the Books which were cited on the
other parts are different from our case, for there the suit was adjourned into
another Court, and the Courts in the Country are not as the Courts here, and
therefore it was necessary, that in such cases a day ought to be given: for the
manner of pleading we ought to give judgment against him who pleads the plea,
notwithstanding the matter admitted by the Plantiffe, wherefore judgment shall
be given for the Plantiffe. Tanfield chief Baron accordingly, the plea
whereupon the issue was joined, was for three Manors and lands in three Towns,
and entry is alleged to be in two Closes called etc. parcel of the premises,
in Bar of the Action, if the Defendant in liew of not guilty plead an
affirmative plea, and at nisi prius he pleads another plea, then the entry
ought to be, that the Defendant relicta verificatione etc. but in our case such
an entry needs not; the plea here ought to be more certain then others, for
two reasons. First, it is pleaded in abatement of the writ. Secondly, it is in
delay of the Plantiffe, and to which no rejoinder can be made, as to the plea
it seems it is not good, for by 10. H. 7. fo. 16. a quare impedit was brought
by an Administrator of a grantee of a next avoidance, and showed that the
Bishop of Sarum granted Administration to him, the Defendant says, that the
intestate had bona notabilia in diverse Diocesses, and so the Administration
void, and showed in what Diocesses the goods were, but showed no place where
they were, and therefore it was adjudged, that the plea was not good, because
he did not show a place etc. see 2. R. 3. and 5. H. 7. accordingly, and this
plea shall not be amended by a rejoinder, as is 21. H. 7. also to say parcel of
the premises, this cannot be intended, that parcel of three Manors, or of the
three Towns in certain, and therefore the plea cannot be good, because there is
no place from whence the venue should come, and it is inconvenient, that the
venue should come from all, if the place where, etc. lies but in one Town, for
as it appears in Arundels case;
Cook lib. 6. if a Manor be alleged to be within a Town, the venue shall come
from the Town, because it is a place more certain: as to the general demurrer,
that the plea aforesaid, is less sufficient in Law, etc. in 18. E. 4. it
appears, that in debt upon an Obligation, the Plantiffe does not show a place
where the Obligation etc. and the Defendant confessed the Action, yet
notwithstanding this fault, Judgment ought to be given against the Defendant,
but this differs from our case, because here is an express confession, and in
our case here is not: also here needs not to be showed any special cause of
demurrer, but advantage may be taken well enough upon the general demurrer, but
if the demurrer were, that the plea amounted to the general issue only, there
ought to be showed a special cause, or otherwise no advantage to be taken, and
he cited the agreement of seven Judges, to be at Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet.
this Term in a writ of Error in Dickensons case; the case intended was between
White and Priest, parties in an Action upon Trover and conversion, and the
Record thereof is in the Kings Bench, Trin. 7. Jac. Rot. 843. as to the matter
in Law, touching the discontinuance for want of a doy given by the Judge of
nisi prius, it seems there is no discontinuance in this case, for there needs
not to be any day given as our case is, yet in some case the Judge of nisi
prius ought to give day, but that shall not be a new day, but only the day
within contained, and that but in special cases, viz. if the issue be joined,
and at the showing of the evidence there is a demurrer, here the Judge gives
to the party the day within contained, as it appears in 10 H. 8. Rot. 835. and
Hill. 11. H. 8 accordingly in the Common Pleas, but Hill. 36. Eliz Rot. 448.
upon nonsuit at the Assizes no day given, so if the party confess the Action,
and so if there be a bill of exceptions, yet no day shall be given; Hill. 38.
Eliz. Rot. 331. in the Kings Bench, but peradventure, it will be said, that
these Authorities do not match with our case, because it is upon a material
plea, but I say it is all one, and therefore in case of a release pleaded after
the last continuance this is recorded, and yet no day given as appears Hill. 4.
H. 8. Rot. 906. in the Common Pleas, and this was upon a new and Collateral
matter, as our case is: Trin. 20. H. 8. Rot. 247. or 2447. upon an Arbitrament
pleaded, and he vouched diverse other precedents upon the same point: Trin. 3.
H. 8. 446. or 466. and 14 H. 8. Rot. and 11. H. 8. Rot. 446. and Mich. 31. H.
6. Rot. 141. and. Hill. 33. H. 6. Nota, that here it was admitted without any
doubt, that an Ejectione firmae lies of a Manor, although it was said at the
Bar, that Williams Justice was of opinion to the contrary the last assizes at
Norwich: and so by all, Judgment was entered for the Plaintiff immediately, and
a Writ of Error was brought, but never prosecuted, for the Countess of
Pembrook had day given to remove her goods out of the Mansion House, and so she
relinquished the possession of all the premises, as I heard.

Trespass against Gibson and others.
Upon evidence to a Jury, an Action of Trespass against Gibson and others, it
appears that the Defendant was Deputy to the Duke of Lenox, upon his Patent of
Vlnage, and that by virtue thereof, he pretended to make search of certain
Stuffs called new Drapery which the Plaintiff were carrying to London, and at
the Town of Ware two or three strangers affirming themselves to be servants of
the said Gibson, did unpack the said Drapery, and laid it in the dirt, whereby
the Plaintifs were hindered of the sale, etc. And in this case it was agreed, if
they as Servants to Gibson without his precedent appointment do seize the
Plaintifs goods, and the said Gibson approve them to be seized, although his
Servants without his consent abuse the goods, yet Gibson shall be Trespasser ab
initio. Also they agreed without any scruple, although that the first seizure
of these goods be admitted to be lawful as by the pretense or license in Law,
yet the abusing of them makes the original seizure to be wrongful, and
trespass lies, and therefore in this case, although it were not proved that
Gibson himself appointed, or was privy to the misusing aforesaid, yet he shall
be charged in damages, and so he was for several seisures in an Action to 32.
pounds, viz. 30. l. for one seizure, and 2. l. for another seizure, and so
several damages for several Trespasses in one Action, and although that by
the abusing of an Authority or license in facto a man shall not be a Trespassor
ab initio: but an Action upon the Case lies, yet for misusing of an Authority
in Law, Trespass lies ab initio, for if he who has power to seize Estrayes,
will labor the Estray, a Trespass lies for the seizing thereof, Bagshews case,
Hill. 4. Jacobi in the Kings Bench.

Bromleys Case, Hill. 8. Jacobi in the Exchequer.
HUtton Sergeant came to the Bar, and showed that one Bromley had before this
time made a Lease for years in County Palatine of Durham, of certain
Cole-mines in that County, rendering rent 100. l. per annum, which rent is
arreare for diverse years, and that Bromley became outlawed here in the Common
Pleas for debt at the Suit of Cullamour a Merchant, and that the King had
granted this debt due upon this Lease for years as forfeited for outlawry unto
him: And Hutton for the Bishop said, that it belongs to him, because he had all
the goods of men outlawed within his County, and if this debt belongs to the
King, or the Bishop, it was the doubt, the party being outlawed in the County
of Northumberland which is out of the County Palatine of Durham: Tanfield chief
Baron said that the debt shall follow the person, and he said that in 21. Eliz.
Vere and Jefferies case, it was a question, if debt upon a Bond shall be
forfeited to him, who had such a privilege where the Bond is, and he said that
in this case it was resolved that he shall have the Bond and debt (who had Bona
utlagatorum) where the Bond is, and so it was resolved as he said in a Case
referred out of the Realm of Ireland, but here is a bebt which accrueth by
reason of a real contract of goods in the County Palatine, and he who is
Debtor is the party outlawed, but not in the County Palatine of Durham: And
Hutton Sergeant said, that he dad the Roll of a Case in this Court in the time
of E. 3 that the Bishop of Durham was allowed a debt in a more strong case then
this is, for there a Creditor was outlawed in London, and his Bond was also in
London, and the Creditor was only an Inhabitant within the County Palatine, yet
the Bishop was allowed this debt: Curia put in your Claim, and we will allow
that which is reasonable, and it was adjourned.

Isabell Fortescues case.
Upon a motion it was showed by Coventry, that upon a penalty imposed upon
Isabell Fortescue for her Recusancy, and Inquisition issued, and it was found
by the Jury that the said Isabell was seized of no Lands, but those mentioned
in a Schedule to the Inquisition annexed, and then expresses diverse
particulars in the Schedule, without express finding that she was seized of
them, this is no good Inquisition, nor finding of any seisin, by the whole
Court: And so by the Court, where an Inquisition or Schedule says, that the
said Isabell was seized of the Manor of D. as by information, this is not good
clearly, for it may be she is seized without information, but where it was
showed that upon this insufficient Inquisition, diverse sums of money were
levied, and paid into the Kings Coffers, that this may be restored: The Court
answered, it does not appear, but that the King may by a new Inquisition have
this money justly, therefore it shall not be delivered out of the Kings
Coffers, but if you moan good matter in equity to be discharged in your English
Bill, you shall have restitution, etc.

Brockenburies case.
THe Kings Debtor suffered A. to manure his Land, and therefore the Sheriff
seized the goods of A. for this debt, whereupon A. (to the intent to have his
goods again) paid the Fees to the Sheriff, and made a Bond to the King to pay
the Sum due: And now upon a motion and Affidavit that the Debtor himself had
sufficient to satisfy the debt due, it was ordered by the Court, that the Fees
taken by the Sheriff shall be restored to A. and that the Bond remain in the
Office here, and if this debt can be levied of the lands, or goods of the
Debtor, the Bond shall be delivered to A. but if it fall out that it cannot be
levied of the Debtor, then the King shall resort to A. upon this Bond, and he
shall have the assistance of this Court for his relief against the said
Brokenbury the Debtor.

Robert Beckets case touching Recusancy.
RObert Backet seized of diverse Lands in Fee in the County of Cornwall, upon an
Indictment in 28. Eliz. was convicted of Recusancy for 10. months next before,
and died in 1. Jacobi, and no other conviction ever was, and yet de facto he
continued a Recusant until his death, and his Land, viz. two parts thereof
were seized in his life, and the King answered of 200. l. thereof, which
incurred in the months contained in the Indictment, and now a Writ is issued
which supposes the said Robert to be indebted to the King in 20. l. for every
month be lived after 28. Eliz. until 1. Jacobi for his Recusancy, which
amounted to 4000. l. which Writ also commands to enquire what Lands the said
Robert Becket had at the time of his death, and thereupon it was found that he
had diverse Lands, etc. and upon a Scire facias to the Terretenants to show
cause wherefore two parts of the Lands of the said Robert Becket should not now
be seized for the debt of the Recusant aforesaid, one Henry Becket as
Terretenant, or Tenant of the Premises pleaded that the King is satiefied of
all the 20. l. and for all the months that the said Robert was convicted to be
a Recusant, and he vouched the Constat thereof under the hand of the Deputy of
the Pipe Office, and for the residue he said that by 28. Eliz. cap. 6. it is
amongst other things enacted, that if any person which has not repaired, or
shall not repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer,
but has forborne, or shall forbeat the same, contrary to the Tenor of the
Statute of 23. Eliz. cap. 1. and has been heretofore convicted for such
offense, shall forfeit, etc. provided that it he has made submission, and been
conformable according to the true meaning of the said Statute, or shall fortune
to dye, that then no forfeiture of 20. l. for any month, or for seizure of the
Lands of the same offender, from and after such submission and conformity, or
death, and full satisfaction of all the arrerages of 20: l. monthly before
such seizure due or payable, shall ensue, or be continued against such
Offender, and traverseth without that, that there is any Record besides this
Writ, to charge the said Robert Becket deceased, of or for the sum of 4000.
l. toward our said Lord the King, etc. and so prays to be discharged
thereof. Upon which Plea the Kings Attorney General demurred, and Coventry
argued that the Plea is good, and he said that there are three Points to be
considered; First, that if a man be convicted of Recusancy in 28. Eliz. for 10.
months then passed, and de facto continues a Recusant until his death in 1.
Jac. without other conviction, if now the King can claim 20. l. a month for
more moueths then are contained in the Indictment whereupon he is convicted.
Secondly, admit that the King may have the forfeiture for every month, whereof
no conviction was as well as if a conviction had been, then if the King can
seize the Lands for the payment thereof after his death, no seizure being had
for it in his life, by the Stat. of the 28. Eliz. or if the power of seizure be
altogether gone by the death of the Recusant. Thirdly, admitting that the King
shall have more then is contained within the Indictment, if the Debt it self be
not gone by the death of the Recusant;
To the first Point, there is no President to be found that any man convicted
before 28. Eliz. was charged to the Payment of more then that which was within
the Indictment, and the words of the Statute of 28. Eliz. contained within this
Clause which provides for the payment due since the Conviction, do not enforce
any construction to the contrary, and in this Clause the words being, (do yet
remain unpaid) are not proper words but for a thing payable before this
Statute, for so many months whereof he was convicted of Recusancy, and the
words without any other conviction are to be understood for so much as was
unpaid of that contained in the Indictment, and the last Clause of this Branch
of the Statute has not the words without any conviction, and the other Clause
provides that by express words for the future time, every person who shall be
once convicted shall forfeit, etc without other conviction, and it was resolved
Hill. 4. Jacobi in the Kings Bench between Grinstone and Oliver, that the
Statute of 28. Eliz. alters, and adds three things to the Statute of 23. Eliz.
1. That all the money due for Recusancy shall be paid into the Exchequer. 2.
This limits a time for payment thereof yearly, viz. in the four Terms of the
year. 3. This gives a penalty, viz. power to seize all the goods, and two
parts for non-payment, but all that is only for that which was payable before
the conviction, and therefore the words in the Branch which contains our Case,
have apt words of construction, that he shall pay all due for the pain of
seizure, for 23. Eliz. gives no seizure, but imprisonment if payment be not
made within three months after judgment, and so in our case Conviction ought
to precede the duty: To the second Point it seems that the power of seizure
within this Statute is gone by the death of the Recusant, for before the
Statute of 1. Jacobi the power for seizure was but a penalty, that if the party
fail in payment of 20. l. a month then etc. and in all cases upon penal Laws,
if the party die before the penalty inflicted, this shall not be inflicted at
all, and that this is but a penalty, he vouched one Grayes case in 1. and 2.
Jacobi to be adjudged accordingly: Also the words in this Statute which give
the seizure of Land, appoints a levying to be of the 3. part for the
maintenance of the Offender, his Wife, Children, and Family, and after his
death he has no Wife, so that if it be demanded when the seisin must be, the
answer is, then when a third part may be left for his use, which cannot be but
in the life of the Recusant: Also it appoints that the seizure ought to be by
Process which ought to be in the life of the party by intendment: Also the
Proviso of the Statute of 28. Eli. says, that if any person shall dye, no
seizure shall ensue, or be continued, and out case is within those words, for
in regard there has been no seizure in his life, therefore after his death no
seizure ought to ensue, and the words which purport another semblance of
construction, viz. and satisfaction of all arrerages, are to be understood only
in case where there was a former seizure, that is in the life of the party, and
have reference to the words (to be continued) and that the intent is so, he
said that the words are, so that the Heir shall pay no more but so much as the
Land was seized for.
To the third, it seems that in this case the debt it self is gone by the
death of the party; At the Common Law, a penalty shall never be recovered
against the Heir, except that judgment be given against the Ancestor, and for
that see 40. E. 3. Executors 74. and 41. Ass. pl. 15. and 15. Eliz Dyer 322.
And also if a Recusant had been convicted upon the Sat. of 23. Eliz. and dyed
before judgment, clearly this forfeiture shall never be charged upon the
Heir, for the words are, that a Recusant shall forfeit 20. l. a month, and if
he do not pay it, then appoints the recovery by Bill, Plaint, or Information,
and this ought to be always in the life of the party, then the Stat. of 28.
Eliz. makes not a new debt or Forfeiture, but gives a penalty for the
non-payment of that which was a debt within 23. Eliz. and that the intent of
the Stat. of 28. Eli. was but such, this is proved by the Title of the Act.
viz. for the more speedy and due execution, etc. 2. It is proved by the first
words of the Act, for the avoiding of all delays, etc. so that it appears,
that this Act is but as a penalty merely: Also he said, that this Stat. of 28.
Eliz. dispenceth with the conviction as to the penalty, but does not take away
the Conviction: also he said that conviction without Judgment makes not a
Debt: Also he who is convicted by proclamation, and dies, is discharged: Also
he said that our Case has been compared to a Debt upon an Obligation, but this
is not like, for the Stat. stands not indefinite, but has reference to 23. for
otherwise a Recusant may be doubly charged, that is, upon both the Statutes,
for there is no means to recover the Debt but by this Statute of 23. Eliz. See
Sir Edward Walgraves case Dyer 231.

Wentworth and others against Stanley.
WEntworth and his Wife, and Rich and his Wife brought an Ejectione firmae
against Stanley, and showed in their Declaration how one Edward Stanley was
seized in Fee, and infeoffed the Earl of Darby and others to the use of himself
for life, the remainder to the use of the Plantiffs wife for 100. years, and
died, and the Plantiffs entered, and the Defendant ejected them etc. and this
Feofment was made in 40. Eliz. the Defendant says, that long before one
Richard Stanley was sesed in Fee, and gave it to the said Edward Stanley in
tail, and that he so seized made a Feefment to the uses as is alleged, and
died, and the Plantiffs entered, and the Defendant as issue of the Feoffor
re-entred, and so by his pretense his is remitted, whereupon it was demurred;
and upon the opening this case, the Barons were clear of opinion, that the
issue in tail is remitted, and came paramount the lease, and so the lease for
years is gone: also by the chief Baron, and Baron Snig, there needs no Traverse
to be alleged by the Plantiffe, because it was but of a fee gained in an
instant by the feofment of a Tenant in tail, and a fee-simple gained in an
instant needs not to be Traversed: 5. H. 7. and 2. E. 4. wherefore the Court
said, that judgment ought to be given against the Plantiffs, but yet at the
desire of the some, the Court gave day to the Council on both parts to argue
the case; at which day came Heneag Finch for the Plantiffs, and he argued to
the matter in Law, and therein he said, that by the feofment of Tenant in tail,
the use to himself for life, the remainder to his daughters for years, without
limiting the residue of the use, that in this case the residue of the use shall
be in the feoffes, and not in the feoffor, for by him there is a difference
between a feofment by him who had a fee with limitation of an use as above, and
a feofment made by him who derives an estate out of a fee, for when Tenant for
life, or Tenant in tail makes a feofment, and limits an use for part of the
estate as above, there the residue of the issue shall be to the feoffee, and he
vouched Castle and Dods case adjudged in the Common Pleas, 8. Iac. that if
Tenant for life grant over his estate without limiting of an use, it shall be
to the use of the grantee, more strong here in a tortious act, as our case is,
but if Tenant in tail will levy a fine with limitation of uses as above, there
the residue of the use shall be to the use of the Conusor. Secondly, admit that
the residue of the use in this case shall he to the feoffor, yet he shall not
be remitted to the use as it seems, the words of the Statute of 27. H. 8.
are, that cestuy que use shall have like estate in the land as he had in the
use, and therefore it is clear, that the first taker of the use shall not be
remitted, as it is resolved in Amy Townsends case in Plowden, and although the
words of the Statute mention not heirs or issues, yet by the intent of the
Statute they are in equal degree, but the Books which are against this opinion
are two, viz. 33. H. 8. Dyer fo. 51. but there it is not expressly said, that
the issue is remitted, but 34. H. 8, Br. remitter 49. is expressly against me,
but the same year in Dyer fo. 54. it is there made a quere, and in Bevils case
it is only said, that the first taker of the use cannot be remitted, but of my
opinion was Baldwin and Shelley, in 28. H. 8. Dyer. 23, 24. and in Sanages
case, and 29. H. 8. it is resolved, that if a man has land by Act of
Parliament, there shall be no remitter, and so here; wherefore etc. and he
said, if Tenant in tail be, the remainder in fee, and Tenant in tail makes a
feofment to the use of himself in tail, the remainder to him in remainder in
fee, in this case he in the remainder in fee shall not be remitted, for then
the first taker should be remitted: to the pleading, it seems that the bar is
not good; and first, the general demurrer here does not confess the matter of
fact, no more then in Gawins case in 29. H. 8. fo. 40. by Brown, a demurrer
upon account in an appeal is no confession of the fact, and in 44. Eliz. in
Crisp and Byrons case accordingly: see Sir Henry Browns case before, a good
case to this purpose: then as to the Bar, it seems it is not sufficient, for
want of a Traverse of a seisin in fee, alleged in the feoffor, who was Edward
Stanley, for it is a rule that two affirmatives cannot be allowed in a
Declaration, and the Bar without Traverse of that which is mentioned in the
Declaration is not good, except there be cause of some impossibility, or
inconvenience; but yet this is to be understood where the affirmatives are
express, and not by implication, as in Moiles case, if the Defendant in his Bar
confess a fee determinable, he needs not Traverse the fee alleged by the
Plantiffe; but in our case here is an allegation made by the words of a fee, to
be in the feoffor, and the Bar confesses only, as of a fee gained in an
instant; but I agree, that if the Bar had been, that the Feoffor was Tenant for
years, and made a Feofment; this had been good without Traverse, but when
Tenant in tail makes a Feofment, it shall not be intended, that he gained a
Fee, because it may be he has purchased the remainder, and thereby had
lawfully acquitted it, as an addition to his estate: and here the saying in the
Deelaration, that Edward Stanley was seized in Fee as a thing material, and of
necessity, and not superfluous, as the pleading in a Declaration for debt upon
an Obligation to say, that the Obligor was of full age, or as a Repetition of
the writ which needs not be Traversed, and that it appears in 15. Ed. 4. in
some case a Surplus^ge ought to be Traversed, and 7. Ed. 6. Title Formedon, the
Declaration as in our case ought to be special, and 21. H. 7. if a man will
maintain debt upon a lease, he ought to show how he was in titled to make the
lease: also although that in our case, the lease for years is the effect of the
suit, yet I say, that the seisin in Fee is the effect of the plea: 27. H. 8.50.
H. 7.14. in a replevin the Defendant avows as seized in Fee, the Plantiffe
says, that he was seized for life, and does Traverse etc. and 14. and 15.
Eliz. was our very case, Dyer 312. and there it is said, that the sure way is
to take a Traverse, as it is also said in 11. Eliz. Dyer, also where the Bar
says, that one R. was seized in Fee, and gave it to the Father of the Feoffor,
and the heirs of his body, he ought to say, that the land descended to the
Feoffor as son and heir of the body etc. also where the Plantiffe declares of
a lease for years made by force of a feofment, made the 30. day of August 6.
Iac. the Bar says generally, that the 30. day of August 6. Iac. the said
Feoffor made a Feofment of the same land to the same persons etc. but he does
not say, that it is one and the same with the Feofment mentioned in the
Declaration, so he answers not our title, and for that cause not good, and
therefore he prayed Judgment for the Plantiffe. Jones of Lincolns Inn to the
contrary, it seems as to the first matter moved, that in this case the
resioue of the use shall result back to the Feoffor 34. Eliz. Balfores case, if
Tenant in tail make a Feofment to the use of himself for life, without more, by
Popham the residue of the use shall be to the Feoffee, for otherwise the estate
for life would be drowned; but otherwise it is when a remainder of an use is
limited to another in Fee, for this saves the drowning or confounding of the
estate for life: as to the point of remitter, it seems that it is no other,
but that Tenant in tail makes a Feofment to the use of himself, and his heirs,
and dies, if the issue shall be remitted, or not, and as to that he said, that
the Statute of 27. H. 8. cap. 10. has by express words a saving of all ancient
rights, and therefore the ancient right of the estate tail is saved, and
therefore the issue shall be thereunto remitted, and so should the Tenant in
tail himself, if he had not been within the words of the Statute, as it is
resolved in Amy Townsends case in Plowden, and the authorities of my part are
33. H. 8.54. in Dyer expressly with me, and without any quere, as to the point
of remitter, but there it is said, that he ought to avoid the lease by entry,
as in our ease it is pleaded: and as to the pleading, it seems there needs no
Traverse. First, because it is matter in Law. Secondly, we have confessed a Fee
in an instant: as to the first reason, the Declaration is generally of a seisin
in Fee, and not expressly of a Fee simple, and therefore it is matter in Law, 5.
H. 7. and 11. H. 7.21. the Fee not Traversed: 46 Ed. 3.24. in Dower the
Defendant pleads a special tail, made by one who was seized in Fee, the other
says, that the Dower had but an estate tail at the time of the gift, without
Traversing that he was seized in Fee, 2. Ed. 4.11. that a seisin in Fee tail is
sufficient to maintain an allegation of a seisin in Fee: to the second reason
it is not alleged expressly, that he was seized in Fee, but quod cum talis
seisitus fuit etc. and 34. H. 6.48. he needed not in his Declaration to say,
that he was seized in Fee;
Pasch. 34. et 35. Eliz. Tailors case, if the Plantiffe in a quare impedit
alleges seisin in Fee, and the Defendant confess the seisin by Usurpation,
this is a sufficient confession of the seisin in Fee. Fitzherbert Title Travers
154. a good case to this purpose, and in Moils case cited before on the other
side, the Plantiffe does not mention in his Declaration a seisin in Fee
absolute, and the Defendant says, that A. was seized, and gave to the
Plantiffe, as long as A. had issue of his body, he needs not Traverse the
absolute Fee, Pasch. 33. Eliz. in the Common Pleas, where there was a stronger
case; to the replication the Defendant said, that the Countess of Devon. was
seized, and leased for life, the remainder to her self for life, the other
says, that the Countess was seized in tail, and Traverseth that she was not
seized in Fee, it is there said, that the Countesses estate in Fee need not to
be Traversed, and yet it was there agreed, that in regard it was but matter of
form, it was aided by the Statute of Jeoffales, for that was moved in arrest of
judgment. Tanfield chief Baron, in the principal case the issue of the Feoffor
is remitted without entry notwithstanding the lease, because it is not in
possession, but a lease in remainder, and therefore the title of the Lessees is
distrained before entry by the Defendant, and therefore the Defendant has not
answered the entry upon the Lessees, for you by your plea destroy the title to
this Term which you have allowed them, before they were ever in possession
thereof, and the Declaration is, that they were possessed of a Term for years,
and that you ejected them, and to this you give no answer upon the matter, for
clearly if Tenant in tail make a lease to commence at a day to come, and dies
before the day, this is merely void by his death, ad quod non fuit responsum:
see Plowden in Smith and Stapletons case, for there it is made a quere; and
notwithstanding that, Tanfield chief Baron, with the ass^nt of the whole Court
pronounced, that judgment should be entered against the Plantiffe immediately,
and so it was done.

Bents case.
IN a suit depending in this Court between Bent, and another for a Close, it
was ordered, and an Injunction accordingly awarded, that the Defendant should
suffer the Plaintiff to enjoy the said Close with the appurtenances until etc.
and contrary to this order, the Defendant had put his Cattle into the Close,
and thereupon an Attachment issued to answer this contempt, and he said, that
he put in his Castle for a title of Common, and it was ruled, that this was no
breach of the Injunction, because the Common was not in question in the Bill,
but only the title of the Close, wherefore he was discharged of the contempt,
and with the appurtenants does not include the Common to be taken in the said
Close.

Henry Clares case.
UPon a motion made by Sergeant Barker it appeared, that one Henry Clare was
indebted to the King, and was seized of a third part of certain lands in
Norfolk, and that Mr. Richardson of Lincolns Inn was seized of other two Acres
of the same laud as Tenant in Common, and the beasts of Mr. Richardson pastured
promiscuously upon all the land, and Henry Clare put more Cattle in, and upon
process to levy this debt for the King, the Sheriff took the Cattle of Mr.
Richardson, and sold them, and it was now ruled, that in regard, it was lawful
for a Tenant in Common to put in his Cattle upon all the land, and that if they
depasture all the grass the other has no remedy, and for that cause the
Sheriff could not take those Cattle for the debt of another Tenant in Common,
but otherwise it would be if the Cattle had been levant, and Couchant upon the
land of the Kings debtor, and in the principal case the Sheriff was ordered to
restore the money to Richardson for which they were sold, and that if they were
worth more, yet the Sheriff should not be charged therewith, except it could
be made appear some fraud in the sale, or that sufficient suerties were to pay
and discharge the duty, but if my Cattle are levant and Couchant upon the land
of the Kings debtor, the King may distrain them damage Feasant, but he cannot
distrain them for the debt, by Tanfield chief Baron, and Altham clearly, to
which Baron Bromley consented, but Snig said, beware of that.

Smith and Jennings case.
Upon evidence to a Jury, it was said by Tanfield, that if a man make Charter
of Feofment of lands in two Towns, and a Letter of Attorney to make livery, and
before livery made by the Attorney, the Feoffor himself makes livery of the
land in one Town, this is a Countermand of the Letter of Attorney, and so
livery cannot be made by the Attorney in the other Town; and quere if the Towns
were in several Counties. Bacon the Kings Solicitor said, that if a man make a
Charter of Feofment of two several Acres, whereof one is in lease for years,
and the other in demeasne, and the Feoffor makes a Letter of Attorney to make
livery, and before that be executed, the Feoffor himself makes livery, now
although that one Acre cannot pass by this livery, because it is in lease, yet
this is a Countermand, and revocation of the authority given by the Letter of
Attorney, for his intent is manifest so to be, to which Tanfield, and all the
Court agreed. Hobert Attorney general said, that in this case, although that
one of the Acres was in lease, yet in regard it appears not, that the Lessee
was in actual possession, therefore he conceived, that it should be construed,
that the Lessee was not in actual possession at the time of the livery made by
the Lessor in the name of all, and in respect there was no house upon the Acre
in Lease, it may be intended, that the Lessee should be in actual possession,
but for that cause he rather conceived, that it should be construed, that the
Lessee was not in possession, and so the livery might well operate to pass it.
Tanfield, and all the Court denied, that the livery was good to pass it,
although that the Lessor was in actual possession; but where Mr. Attorney
alleged further, that before the livery made an Infant had a Term for years in
this Acre in lease, and that the Feoffor at the time of the livery, was guardian
to the Infant, and thereby had a possession therein, and therefore the livery
made in the other Acre in the name of all, should be good to pass all, to which
the Court agreed, and thereupon directed the Jury to find the livery, and
seisin to be made of all: and in this case the Court inclined, that because
this Feofment was made, but ten days before, that the Feoffor committed
Treason, and in as much as it was made to the use of the son being an Infant,
and not upon consideration of marriage, that therefore the Feofment should be
fraudulent, and void as to the King, but the Attorney general said, that this
Feofment was made in performance of a precedent agreement, viz. it was agreed
that the Feoffor should make such a conveyance to an use etc. and that the wife
of the Feoffor also being an Inheritrix, should make such a conveyance of her
land which was done accordingly, and upon proof of this agreement, the Court
inclined that it was no fraud, and in this case it was ruled by the Court, if
parties have matter of evidence by the Records of this Court, they ought to
produce the Records themselves, for Copies of them are not allowable.

It was said by Altham, and agreed by the Court, that if an Information be
exhibited for intruding into a Close the 24th. day of March, and for the
asportation of 9. Cart Loads of Wheat betwixt the 24th. of March, and the first
of October, the which the Detendant converted etc. and upon not guilty pleaded
the Jury found, that the Defendant took three Cart Loads of the said Corn upon
the 24th. day of March, and after before the first of October they took also
three Cart Loads more, and damages were assessed for all, that here no
judgment shall be given upon this verdict, for the Information does not charge
the Defendant with the taking of any part upon the 24th. day of etc. and then
in regard that damages are more, judgment can be given for no part of it: see
Cook lib. 5. Plasters case: but this case being moved at another day; Tanfield
said, that he having inspected the Record, he found the verdict insufficient
for another cause, because the Jury found, that as to one Cart Load of Wheat to
the value of 20. l. the Defendant was guilty, and does not mention to what
damage, viz. to the damage of 100. s. or otherwise, and by him ad valentiam is
not sufficient, without showing also to what damage; and for that cause, by him
a venire facias de novo, ought to be awarded, and so it was done by the Court.

Edwards case.
EDwards case was, that an erroneous judgment was given in a Coppihold Court,
where the King was Lord, and this was in a Formedon in remainder, and it was
moved now by Sergeant Harris, if the party against whom it was given may sue
in the Exchequer Chamber by Bill, or petition to the King, in the nature of a
writ of false judgment, for the Reversal of that judgment. Tanfield seemed,
that it is proper so to do, for by 13. Rich. 2. if a false judgment be given
in a base Court, the party grieved, ought first to sue to the Lord of the
Manor by petition, to reverse this judgment, and here the King being Lord of
the Manor, it is very proper to sue here in the Exchequer Chamber by petition,
for in regard that it concerns the Kings Manor, the suit ought not to be in
the Chancery, as in case a Common person were Lord, and for that very cause it
was dismissed out of the Chancery, as Sergeant Harris said: and Tanfield said,
that he was of Council in Pettishals case in the time of the Lord Bromley,
where it was debated at large, if such a judgment ought to be reversed by
petition in the Chancery, in case where a Common person was Lord, and at last
it was decreed, that it should be, as in that case of Patshal, and for the same
reason here the King being Lord; and therefore day was given till the next Term
to show their errors; and Sergeant Harris said, that the errors are in effect
no others then were in the case 9. Eliz. Dyer fo. 262. and in Godmanchesters
case, and it was adjourned.

Scot and his wife against Hilliar.
SCot and his wife Plantiffs, against Hilliar for these words spoken of the
wife, viz. she would have cut her husbands throat, and did attempt to do it.
Hutton Sergeant, in arrest of judgment said, that these words are not
actionable, for the will or attempt is not punishable by our Law, and he
vouched Cockains case Cook lib. 4. cited in Eaten and Allens case, but by the
Court an Action lies, for the attempt is a cause for which the husband may be
divorced, if it were true, and it is a very great slander, and Baron Snig said,
that in the same Term a judgment was given in the Kings Bench, and was
affirmed in the Exchequer Chamber upon a writ of error for these words. He lay
in the high way to rob me, and therefore let judgment be entered for the
Plan^tiffe, but it was adjudged in the principal case, that for the words she
would have cut her husbands throat no Action would lie.

Gooches Case.
A Coppyholder surrenders into the hands of the Customary Tenants, to the use
of Anne his Wife, and after before any Court the said Coppyholder surrenders
the Land into the hands of other Customary Tenants, to the use of the said Anne
for her life, the remainder to Percie in Fee, upon condition that he in
remainder, and his Heirs should pay 20. s. per annum at Michaelmas for ever,
the first payment to commence immediacely after the death of the said Anne,
viz. at the next feast of St. Michael, and this to be paid in the Church Porch
or D. to the Church Wardens of D. in the presence of four discreet
Parishioners, or otherwise that a stranger should re-enter, and at the next
Court both these surrenders were present, and the Steward admitted the said A.
according to the second surrender, and she dyed, and now upon pretense, that
the rent of 20. s. was not paid by the Heirs of him in remainder, the Heir of
Gooch who made the surrender had entered, and thereupon an Action was brought,
and upon the evidence the Jury to the County of Bedford now at the Bar: These
matters were moved by Sergeant Nichols: That a surrender into the hands of
Customary Tenants cannot be Countermanded, and therefore the second surrender
void, and the admittance shall work to such uses as the first surrender was
made, as in Anne Westwicks Case, Cook Lib. 4. And to prove that a surrender
into the hands of Customary Tenants is not countermandable, he said, that it is
not countermandable by death, nor surrender, Cook lib. 4. in his Coppyhold
Cases. That a presentment in the Court may be after the death of the
surrenderer, and the admittance thereupon is good, and he compared it to the
Case of the delivery of a Deed, as an Escroll which may be delivered as his
Deed after the death of the Maker, as it is in Jennings and Braggs case Cook
lib. 3. which was not denied by the Court. Sergeant Dodderidge said, that when
a surrender is made upon condition that he shall pay a sum of money to a
stranger, these words make an estate conditional, and give power implyedly to
the Heirs of the party who did surrender, to re-enter for non-payment, and the
words which give power to a stranger to re-enter, are merely void:
nevertheless the precedent words shall stand, and make the estate
conditional, Tanfield, Littleton says that such a re-entry is void, for a
re-entry cannot be limited to a Stranger. Nichols Sergeant said, that if a
surrender be made, that he shall pay so much money, that this makes the estate
conditional, and gives a re-entry to the Heirs of him who did surrender. But
when it goes further, and does not leave the condition to be carried by the
Law, in such case all the words should be void, because it cannot be according
to the intent, as in the case of a reservation of rent, the Law will carry it
to the Reversion, but if it be particularly reserved, then it will go according
to the reservation, or otherwise will be void, and so here Tanfield: Admit that
here was a conditional estate by virtue of the Surrender last made, and this
condition is also to be performed to a stranger, which generally ought to be
taken strictly, yet, as it is here, he who will take advantage thereof, ought
to prove a voluntary neglect in the party, in the not performance of the
Condition, and inasmuch as there is no certain time appointed, when the payment
of this Annual rent should be made, but generally at Michaelmas, next after
the death of the said Anne, thereby in this case the Chuch-wardens ought to
notify the death of the said Anne, before the first day of payment, by
reasonable space, or otherwise the condition is not broken, and also it is
appointed here to be paid in the presence of four discreet Parishioners, by the
party who should perform the condition, yet by intendment he has no notice,
who are discreet, or who are not, especially he being an Infant, as in our case
he is, and therefore although the condition is to be performed to a stranger,
which generally ought to be performed strictly, according to 12. E. 3. Yet this
is to be intended only in such cases where the party had certain notice of all
circumstances requisite for payment thereof, and therefore he directed the
Jury, that for want of knowledge of such circumstances, they should give a
Verdict that the condition was not broken; And Dodderidge Sergeant moved that
this matter might be specially found. Tanfield said, the Jury knows our
opinion, and therefore leave it to them, and the Verdict was given that the
condition was not broken: See Term Pasch. that proofs by deposition taken here
in a former suite, shall be allowed in this, notwithstanding all the parties be
alive; and it was adjourned. Note, that in Staffords case in the Court of Wards
this Term, Flemming and Cook were of opinion with Tanfield here, viz. That
notice ought to be given to the Infant in the Case abovesaid.

I. S. was Parson of D. as appropriate, and A. is Vicar, and the King is Patron
of the said Vicaridge, and debate was between the Parson and the Vicar, this
Suite ought to be in the Exchequer for these Tithes, and by the Court it may be
commenced accordingly by English Bill in the Exchequer, or by Action to the
Office of Pleas, for it is apparent that the King is Supreme Ordinary, this was
Pasch. 9. Jacobi.

Sir Stephen Leazures case.
IN Sir Stephen Leazures case upon a charge upon Sir Thomas Gresham deceased,
Process issued to the Sheriffs of London to inquire what Lands the said Sir
Thomas had in London at the time of the debt accrewed, and to whose hands, etc.
And the Inquisition found, that the said Sir Thomas was seized of diverse
Messuages in London in four several Parishes, viz. in, etc. And now the Mayor
and Comminaltie of London came as Tenants of the premises, and demanded Oyer
of the Inquisition, and then demurred thereupon, and by the Court the
Inquisition is insufficient, for the words of diverse, etc. are so general,
that no exception thereupon may be made, nor the party can give no answer
thereunto, so of an Office found in the Court of Wards, as it has been diverse
times here used, see Carters case Pasch 8. Jac. in the Court of Wards.

Kitchen against Calvert.
SEe the Case before, fo. -- many Arguments therein at the Bar, by Bridgeman,
Ireland, Sergeant Hutton, and the Attorney General in Michaelmas, and Hilalry,
-- Jac. -- And now the Barons argued, and first, Bromley Puisne Baron argued,
for the first matter which is when a Church being void, the Patron contracts
with Parkinson for money to be given to present Kitchen, the money to be given
by Parkinson, and Kitchen not knowing of this Symonie, is presented,
instituted, and inducted thereunto, whether this be void or not. The 2d. Matter
is, admitting that this is void, and that the Queen presented Covell who died
before Institution or admission, if this presentation be good to Calvert,
without a Repeal of the Presentation made by the Queen, and it seems to be in
both points for the Plaintiff. To the first point be said, That the intent of
the Statute was to cradicate all manner of Symonies, and therefore the words
are not, if any man give money to be presented, but they are if any present for
money, and the Iutors here found 20. l. to be given, and nothing for what it
was given, or to whom it was given, for if money be the meede, a Presentation
is void, and therefore if I. S. be Patron of the Church of D. which is void,
and a stranger says to me, procure the Presentation for A. and you shall have
100. l. and he procured A. to be presented: here if the Patron had notice of
the money given to me, this Presentation is void, but otherwise not, and in our
case without notice of the Parson the Admissor, and all which ensued thereupon
is void, by reason of the Symonie in the Patron, and it is void as to the
Parson also, and if in this Case we are not within the words of the Statute,
yet we are within the intent clearly, as upon 1. Ed. 6. of Chanteries, an
estate made for years, or for life to Superstitious uses shall be within the
intent, although not within the words of that Statute, as it appears in Adams
and Lamberts case Cook lib. 4. So the Statute of 11. H. 7. should be construed
to meet with Cases of like mischief, as it appears in Sir George Browns case,
Cook Lib. 3. and Panormitane says that Simonia est Studiosa voluntas emendi,
vel vendendi aliquid Spirituale, vel Spirituali annexum cum opere subsequente.
To the second Point, it seems that the Presentation made by the King to Calvert
is good without aid of the Statute of 6. H. 8. cap. 15. for Covell who were the
Presentee of the Queeen had nor interest, no estate, and yet if he had, it
would be void by the death of the Queen, for the presentation is but a
commendation, and therefore if the Patron present his Villain, this makes no
infranchisement, and so if Lessee for years of a Patronage be presented, this
does not extinguish his Term. And whereas it has been said, that the Kings
Grant cannot be construed to two intents, true it is if it be to the Kings
prejudice, but otherwise it is, if it be for his benefit, as plainly appears in
Englefieldss case Cook lib. 7. See 17. Ed. 3. fo. 29. Also it is without
question, that the King may actually revoke his Presentation as it appears by
28. Ed. 3.47. And this implied Revocation is as good being for the Kings
benefit, as an actual or express Revocation: Dyer 18. Eliz. 348. And it was
adjudged in Pasch. 3. Jac. in the Common Pleas, Rot 1722. one Williams case,
that an Actual Revocation or Repeal is not necessary; And so it was adjudged,
Trin. 8. Jac. Rot. 1811. in the Bishop of Chichesters case, and therefore the
King may make a Presentation to a Church which belongs to him by reason of
Wardship under the Seal of the Court of Wards, because the presentation is
only a Commendation as it was there said, and so it was agreed also, Trin. 8.
Jac. at Sergeants June by Flemming, Cook, and Tanfield in the Lord Windsors
case, referred unto them out of the Court of Wards, and there it was said by
Cook, that the King may present by Parol, as it appears by 17. Eliz. Dyer, and
that a Second Administration may be well granted without Repeal of the first,
and also it seems, that the Statute of 6. H. 8. cap. 15. does not extend to a
Chaplain, for he is not a Servant within that Statute, nor a Presentation is
not a thing within that Statute, and moreover in this Case, Covel who was the
Queens Presentee is not in life, and therefore this Case clearly is out of the
Clause of the Statute of 6 H. 8. and so he concluded on the whole matter, that
Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff. Altham the second Baron
accordingly; The Presentation made to Kitchen is void, and the Admission, and
all subsequent thereupon is void also, for the words of the Statute are, that
if a Presentation be made for money, it shall be void, and that the King may
present that Turn, and therefore the want of privity in the Incumbent is
nothing to the purpose, as to the avoiding of the Benefice, but his want of
privitie avails to excuse him of being Simoniacus: yet because he is
Simoniace Promotus the presentation is void, and the King shall have it by the
express words of the Statute, and therefore as it seems if in this Statute
there had been an express saving of the interest of the Incumbent, by reason
of his innocence, yet such a saving of Interest had been void, and repugnant,
in respect that it was expressly given to the King before, as it is in Nichols
case in Plowden upon the Stat. of 1. H. 7. See 1. Mar. Dyer, and 7. Eliz. Dyer
231. such a saving doubted if it be void, and in Cook lib. 1. Altonwoods case,
a saving Repugnant to the express words of the Premises is void, and so in
our Case the Presentation is given to the King expressly, and therefore if
there were a saving in the words subsequent, this were void, much more in our
Case where there is no saving: And to prove that by the Symonie in the Patron,
that the Patron shall be prejudiced, he vouched 42. E. 3. fo. 2. It goods be
given to B. by A. this is by fraud in A. to the intent that he may defraud
another, although B. is not knowing of this friend, yet the gift is void as to
him 34. E. 1. Title Garranty accordingly, and Burrells case Cook lib. 6. upon
the Statute of 27 Eliz cap. 4. to the same purpose. To the second matter, it
seems that by the Queens death, her Presentation is determined clearly, and so
in case of a common person, for if an Admission, etc. should follow after the
death of the Presentor, this is without any Authority of the instrument of
Presentation, for although there were no Admission, there is no Presentation,
and he said that the Presentation passes no interest, but is as a
Commendation, and therefore he compared it to the Case of Say and Fuller in
Plowden Com. If a Lease be made for so many years as a stranger shall name,
there ought to be certainty of years appointed in the life of the parties, or
otherwise it will be void, and in 38. E. 3.3. If a Bishop present and die
before, etc. Now the King shall present anew, and also there it appears that
the King may present by Paroll well enough, and so it is said in 34. E. 3.8.
tit. Quare impedit 11. That a Presentment made by the Bishop becomes null, and
void by his death, and therefore it appears in Fitzh. Office of Court 29.
that license to alien granted to the King is void by the Kings death, and there
needs no actual Repeal or recital of the new presentation, and yet I agree
that the King may make an actual repeal if he will, as it appears by diverse
cases which have been cited before, but that is of necessity to be done, and as
it seems the words of the Statute 6. H. 8. prove that before this Statute a
second Grant made, the first void without actual repeal, in case where the
thing passed by the Grant, and by 38. E. 3. fo. 3.4. it appears that a second
Presentation made by the King, was good without a repeal of the first, and by
Gascoigne 7. H. 4.32. if the King make a Presentation to one, and then presents
another, without recital or repeal of the first, yet the Bishop ought to
receive the latter Presentee, for it is good without actual repeal, wherefore
judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff. Snig Baron said, that as the
Action is brought, judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff, but if the
Plaintiff had brought a Quare impedit, peradventure I should have been of
another opinion; And as to the point of Symonie by the Civil Law, it was
punishable by deprivation, and the guilt of the Patron should prejudice the
Parson, as to matter of Commodity in the Parsonage, and at the Common Law, if
the Parson will plead such Presentment, he should be prejudiced, as appears by
our Books, and hereby the incumbency the words of the Statute will not be
satisfied, for then the Queen should not Present, if an usurper present, and
the Presentee is in by six months, this gives Title of Presentation to the
King against the rightful Patron, also it seems, That if I. S. has an
Advowson, and A. purchase the next avoidance to the intent to present B. and
the Church becomes void, and A. presents B. this is Symonie by averment, as by
good pleading the Presentation of B. shall be adjudged void. To the second
Point, in respect that the Plaintiff had the possession by induction, it is no
question but he may retain a possessorie Action for the Titles, But if it were
in a Quare impedit, it would be material whether a Repeal should be in the
case or not, according to the Presidents in the Book of Entries, fo. 303, 304,
305. for if a License be Granted to purchase in Mortmaine, this may well be
executed after the death of the Queen, as it appears by Fitzherberts natura
brevium expressly, and so in Dyer, a license of Transportation does not cease by
the Kings death 7. H. 4. in the Countess of Kents case, it appears, when the
King makes a grant which is void, yet there shall be no new grant without an
actual repeal, but it seems we are out of the intent of the Statute of 6. H. 8.
because the words during his pleasure are not in the grant or Patent, and so
upon the whole matter judgment shall be given for the Plantiffe. Tanfield
accordingly, the case is, that the Defendant had prioritie of the possession of
the Corn for which the action is brought, and yet it seems judgment ought to
be given for the Plantiffe: and first, as this case is, here is Simonie by the
Civil Law, and the party had his benefice by Simonie, although he be not
conusant thereof. Secondly, admit that here was not Simonie by the intendment
of the Civil Law, yet the Statute has made an avoidance of the benifice in
this case, although it be not Simonie, for the Statute speaks not one word of
Simonie throughout the Act, and yet by express words it does avoid such
presentations as this is, and as to the Civil Law, such benefice is to be made
void by sentence declaratorie, but it is not void ipso facto, as it seems in
the case where a common person was consenting to the Simonie, but the text of
the Civil Law says expressly, that the Church ought not to be filled
Corruptive, or by corruption, and the Civil Law expresses such a person as is
in our case, by Simoniace promotus, and calls him who is particeps criminis
Simoniacus, and he who is Simoniacus, is by the Civil Law deprived not only of
the benefice ipso facto, but also is deprived to be a Minister, and adjudged
guilty in Culpa et poena. Petrus Benefieldus a late writer and of good
authority says, that if a friend give money to a patron, to make a promise to
him etc. and the incumbent pays it, such an incumbent is Simoniacus by the
Civil Law, and so if the incumbent pay the money not knowing it until after the
induction, yet he is Simoniacus, and by him if a friend gives money, and the
Parson is thereupon presented, though the Parson if he knew not of the money
given, yet he shall be deprived of the benefice, and this difference was
certified by Anderson, and Gawdey, to the Council table upon a reference made
to them by the King, touching the filling of benefices by corrupt means, and
the Statute of purpose forbears to use the word Simonie, for avoiding of nice
construction of that word in the Civil Law, and therefore the makers of the Act
sets down plainly the words of the Statute, that if any shall be promoted for
money etc. so that by these words it is not material from whom the money comes,
and then in such cases for the avoiding of all such grand offenses, a liberal
construction ought to be made, as has been used in such cases, and therefore
he remembered the large construction which was made upon the Statute of fines,
in the Lord Zouches case lib. Cook 3. and so upon the Statute of usurie, it
has been adjudged, that if money be lent to be re-paid with use above 10. l.
in the hundred at such a day, if three men or one man so long live, in these
cases all such bargains and contracts are void within the intent of the
Statute, as it has been adjudged in the Common Pleas, and so it is in Gooches
case Cook lib. 5. upon the Statute of fraudulent conveyances, and secret
Ioyntures; also upon the Statute of Simonie it was adjudged, although some of
the Common Pleas doubted of it, in regard a father is bound to provide for his
son; and Rogers and Bakers case in this Court was an ancient case, and adjudged
for the Plantiffe: and as to the other point, it is found by the verdict, that
the presentation made by the Queen to Covel is not revoked, nor admitted, which
words implie that Covel is still living in case of a special verdict, and
therefore to argue to that point, as if it were found that Covel was living,
yet he conceived, that the presentation without institution and Induction is
determined by the Queens death, and therefore in 2. Ed. 3. a license of
Alienation clearly is not good in the time of another King, for the license
says which are holden of us etc. and by the death of the King they are not
holden of him. Fitzherberts natura brevium contra 16 H. 8. the nature of a
presentment is explained, where an Infant would avoid his presentation, and in
the principal case the Bishop cannot make any admission upon this presentation
of Covel after the Queens death, for he cannot do that in any manner according
to the presentation, because that is determined by the Queens death, and
therefore it seems clearly there needs no repeal in such a case, although it
appears by some presidents, that repeals have been used in such cases, and as
to the case 17. Eliz. Dyer 339. that proves not that there ought to be any
repeal, for it appears there, that judgment was given upon a reason altogether
different from our case, and that was, because a presentation was obtained of
the Queen, a quare impedit depending by her, of which suit she had no notice,
and for that cause her second presentation was void, and that was the true
reason of that judgment, as it is also put in Greens case Cook lib. 6. and I
was present Mich. 17. Eliz. when this case was adjudged, and the sole reason
which they gave for the judgment was, because the presentation by intendment
could not take away the Action attached by the Queen, for then the Queens grant
should enure to a double intent, which the Law will never tolerate without
express words purporting so much, but in our case there is no such double
intendment, and therefore etc. but if there had been an admission, and
institution pursuing the presentation of Covel, although no induction, yet
peradventure in such case, there ought to have been an appeal, because in such
case it is not only the Queens Act, but of the ordinary also, interposing,
which is a Judicial Act, also without question, we are out of the Statute of 6.
H. 8. for here is no grant made by the Queen, and a presentation clearly is not
within that Statute, and for that other reason the presentation of Calvert is
good, without recital of the Queens presentation: also clearly if there ought
to be a repeal in the case, yet it is not examinable in this Action of Trespass
which is possessorie, and for the profits only, but it may be examinable in a
quare impedit, and as to Greens case Cook lib. 6. which has been used as an
authority in this case, that differs much from our case, for there the thing
which made the Queens presentation void, was contained within the very Charter
of the presentation, and therefore differed from our case, wherefore he
commanded judgment should be entered for the Plantiffe, and so it was.

Halseys case touching Recusancy.
THe case in the Exchequer Chamber touching the payment of the Kings Majesty's
debt due for the Recusancy of John Halsey, as Recusant convict deceased, with
the lands and goods bought in the name of John Grove, and Richard Cox Defendant
in this Court, that John Halsey was indicted and convicted for Recusancy the
18. day of July Anno 23. Eliz. and so remained convicted without submission
till his death, who died the last day of March 3. Iac. and after his
conviction, viz. after the 40. year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth
did purchase with his own money diverse leases for years, yet to come of lands
in the County of Worcester, and Warwick, in the name of Richard Cocks for
himself in trust, and likewise did with his own money purchase certain leases
for years, yet to come of lands in the County of Hereford, in the name of the
said John Grove, all which purchases were in trust for the Recusant, and to his
use; Margaret Field is his next heir, who is no Recusant, John Halsey has not
paid 20. l. a month since his conviction, nor any part thereof, these lands
and leases were seized into the Kings hands, for the satisfaction of the
forfeitures due for the Recusancy of the said Halsey 14. August 5. Iac. Thomas
Coventrie argued for the Defendant; the question is, whether these lands which
were never in the Recusant, but bought in the name of the Defendants in manner
aforesaid, be liable to the payment of his Majesty's debts by the said Recusant
as above said, or not: there are three points considerable in the case. First,
if lands purchased by the Recusant, in the name of others in trust are liable
to his debt. Secondly, if the land of a Recusant may be seized after his death.
Thirdly, if they shall be charged by the Statute of 1. Iac. as to the first, it
seems they are not, wherein I shall endeavor to prove three things. First,
that such land was not liable to debt by the Common Law. Secondly, that they
are not liable to debts by the general words of the Statute Law. Thirdly, that
they are not liable to debt by any word within the Statute of primo Iac. as to
the first he observed, that here is no fraud put in the case, but that these
lands and leases were never in the Recusant, so that before that they were
conveyed to the Defendants, they were not liable to this debt;

and I always observed, that which the common law calls fraud, ought to be
of such nature as shall be tortious, and prejudicial to a third person, and put
him in a worse estate and condition then he was before, and then he who is so
prejudiced in some cases should avoid such conveyances by the common Law: 22.
Assizes 72.43. Ed. 3.2. and 32. -- the Defendant in debt after judgment aliens
his goods, and he himself takes the profits, yet the Plantiffe shall have them
in execution; so that if a man bind himself, and his heirs in an Obligation,
and dies, and assets descend to his heir, who by Covin aliens those assets, yet
he shall be charged in debt; for in these cases the Plantiffe had a lawful
debt, and such lands and goods before the alienation were liable, and that
former interest was intended to be defeated by those alienations, and therefore
they are void: but of the other side, where no former interest of the party is
wronged, there no fraudulent conveyance was void at the Common Law; and
therefore if Tenant in Knights service had made a fraudulent Feofment to
defraud the Lord of his wardship, this was not aided by the Common Law until
the Statute of Marlebridge, for the title of the Lord was not prejudiced or
wronged by this Feofment, because it was subsequent to the Feofment, also after
the said Statute the Lord was without remedy for his release, for it is agreed
in 17. Ed. 3. fo. 54. and 31. Ed. 3. Collation 29. and therefore at the Common
Law, if cestuy que use, had bound himself and his heirs in an Obligation, and
died, if the use descended to his heir, none will say, this use was assets to
the heir, and so was Rigler and Hunters case 25. Eliz. as to the second point
it seems, that the general words of a Statute shall be expounded according to
the rule and reason of the Common Law, and by the Common Law such confidence is
not extendible, therefore etc. Westmin. 2. cap. 18. which gives the elegit,
has these words medietatem terrae, and within those words an use was never
extendible by that Statute 30. Ed. 3. because it was not an estate in him, and
so if a man be indebted for Merchandise or money borrowed, and makes a gift of
his lands and Chattels to defraud Creditors, and takes the profits himself, and
flies to the Sanctuary at Westminster, or Saint Martins, and there abides by
conclusion to avoid the payment of his debts, it is thereby enacted, that
Proclamation shall be made at the Gate of the Sanctuary, where such person
resideth by the Sheriff, and if such person does not thereupon appear in
person, or by Attorney, judgment shall be given against him, 2 Rich. 2. Stat.
2. cap. 3. 1. Rich. 3. cap. 1.
and execution awarded, as well of those lands and goods given by fraud, as of
any other out of the same Franchise, these words are more particular then the
Statute of Westminster the second, and yet it was doubted, if it did extend to
executions for debt, as it appears by 7. H. 7. and 11. H. 7.27. and therefore
in 19. H. 7. cap. 15. an Act of Parliament was made, that execution for debts,
Recognizances, and Statutes, should be sued of lands in use. As to the third it
seems that, that Statute does not make lands in use liable to debts, the words
of the Statute are, that the King shall seize two parts of the lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, leases of Farms of such offenders, so that they
are as general as the words of the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 18. and here
those lands and leases were not the Recusants, for he had but a confidence in
them: the first clause of the Statute does not extend thereunto for two causes.
First, in regard that it never was in the Recusant, and this clause extends,
only to such conveyances which are made by any man, which has not repaired or
shall not repair to some Church; for the disjunctive words do not extend
throughout that branch, but to the last part thereof, viz. that which comes
after the word (and) for otherwise this would extend to conveyances made at any
time without limitation, which should be against the meaning of the Act.
Secondly, this Branch provides what shall be done concerning the King touching
the levying, and paying of such sums of money, as any person by the Laws of
the Realm ought to pay, of else to forfeit etc. and by the Statutes before made
nothing was forfeited, but for such time as is mentioned in the Indictment,
which in our case is but 6. months, but out of this branch a strong argument
may be made, in respect that the Statute avoids all conveyances made by
Recusants, in trust by express words, but says nothing to conveyances made by
others to the use of Recusants, and therefore this Statute does not extend unto
it;
if Tenant by Knights service infeoffs his heir within age, and dies, the Lord
may enter upon the heir without suing an action, but if a Feofmenche made to a
stranger, there he cannot enter, but ought to bring his Action according to the
provision of that Statute, because it may be to the use of the Feoffee, but no
such provision is made for the heir, the Statute of 3. Jac. cap. 4. provides by
express words, that the King shall seize two parts of all the lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, Leases, and Faims, that at the time of such seizure shall
be, or afterward shall come to any of the hands of the said offenders, or any
other to their use, or in trust for him, or her, or at his, or her dispose, or
disposition, or whereby, wherewith, or in consideration whereof such offenders,
or their families, or any of them shall or may be relieved, maintained, or kept
etc. the different penning of these Statutes proves the diversity of the
meaning thereof, this Statute is a new Law which gives to the King this penalty
which he had not before, and in new manner, for it appoints, that the party
shall be convicted by Proclamation, and that being so convicted, he shall
always pay the said penalty, until his submission without any other
conviction 3. Jac. cap. 4. and also limits a manner how this new penalty shall
be levied, viz. by seizure of two parts of the land etc. then when a Statute
gives a new thing, which was not at the Common Law, and limits a course and
means whereby it shall be levied, that course ought to be pursued, and it
cannot be done in any other manner, the Statute of 8. H. 6. cap. 12. makes the
imbesting of a Record Felony, and that this shall be inquired by Jury, whereof
one half shall be Clarks of some of the same Courts, and that the Judges of
the one Bench, or of the other shall hear and determine it, and the case was,
that part of the offense was done in Middlesex, and part in London, so that the
offense could not have such proceeding as the Statute appointed, and therefore
it was holden, that it should not be punished at all. Mich. 41. et 42. Eliz.
Betwixt Aggard and Standish: the Statute of 8. Ed. 4. cap. 2. inflicts a
penalty upon him, that makes a retainer by parol, and moreover it is thereby
ordained, that before the King in his Bench, before the Justices of the Common
Pleas, Justices of the Peace, Dyer and Terminer, every man that will, may
complain against such person or persons, doing against the form of this
ordinance, shall be admitted to give information for the King, and it was
holden, that the informer could not sue for himself, and the Queen upon this
Statute, for an offense done in any Court not mentioned in that Statute: the
Statute of 35, Eliz. cap. 1. appoints, that for the better and spedier levying
and Recovering, for and by the Queens Majesty, of all and singular, the pains,
duties, forfeitures, and payments, which at any time hereafter shall grow due,
or be payable by virtue of this Act, and of the Act made in the 23 d. year of
her Majesty's Reign concerning Recusants, that all and every the said pains,
duties, etc. may be recovered to her use, by Action of debt, Bill, plaint, or
information, or otherwise in any of her Courts of her Benth, Common Pleas, or
Exchequer, in such sort in all respects, as by the ordinary course of the
Common Laws of this Realm, any other debt due by any such person, in any other
case should or may be recovered, wherein no essoin: etc. Note that this Statute
extends not to any penalty upon the Statute of 28. Eliz. cap. 6. also the
Common Law does not give any means to levy a debt upon a trust: and as to the
general point, it seems that no land can be seized after the death of the
Recusant, 23. Eliz. cap. 1. enacteth that every person of the age of 16. years,
which shall not repair to some Church, etc. but forbear the same contrary to
the Tenor of the Statute made in the first year of her reign for uniformity of
common prayer, and being thereof lawfully convicted, shall forfeit to the Queen
for every month which he or she shall so forbear 20. l. And that statute does
give no forfeiture at all for Lands: And also it gives no penalty without
conviction, so that the death of the party before conviction discharges all,
and so without question it was at that day. This last Point seems to be
remedied in part by the Statute of 28. Eliz. cap. 6. for thereby if the party
be once convicted, he shall always pay after without other conviction, and
this Statute gives also a Seizure, but before any seizure. Three things ought
to concur, 1. Recusancy. 2. Conviction. 3. Default of payment. And the last of
these was the true cause of the seizure, viz. That is, the contempt of not
payment.
Therefore it was adjudged in Sir William Greenes case: that this seizure shall
not go in satisfaction of such debt, but the King shall hold it as a penalty
for the contempt until the debt be paid, so that when a Statute imposes a
penalty for a contempt, as the contempt is personal, so is the penalty; And
therefore the death of the party before that it be excuted or turned in rem
judicatam, discharges all: and I shall prove it by the different plea in an
Action upon a penal Statute, and other common Actions, and therefore in debt,
not guilty is no plea, but in debt upon a penal Law it is a good Plea, for in
truth until it be adjudged, it is no debt, but a contempt, Michaelmas 41, 42.
Eliz. betwixt Car and Jones, and in debt upon the Statute of 2. Ed. 6. not
guilty was adjudged a good plea, Trin. 42. Eli between Morley and Edwards. 2.
It may be proved by ye different forms of judgment, for in common actions, ye
judgment is Quod quaerens recuperet, etc. But in informations the usual form
is, Quod defendens foris faciet, 41. Ass. which implies that it is not perfect
until the Judgment, and before it is only a contempt, and if so, then by the
death of the party it is discharged. Thirdly, I shall prove it by Authority,
that the death of the parties before Judgment discharges as well the contempt,
as the penalty of a penal Law, 40. Ed, 3. Executor 74. debt lies not against
the Executors of a Iaylor, who suffers Prisoners to escape, 15. Eliz. Dyer 322.
in the like Case the opinion of the Court was, that an Action did not lie
against the Executors of the Warden of the Fleet. but there ought to have been
a Judgment against him in his life time, for the Offense is but a Trespass by
negligence which dies with the Person, 18. Eliz. Dyer. An Action brought
against the Heir, and ruled that it does not lie, for it is a Maxim that no
Law or Statute charge the Heir for the wrong or trespass of his Father: Also
it is to be observed in the Principal Case, that the Statute limits the
seizure to be by Process out of the Exchequer, so no seizure can be without
Process, as it may be upon some other Statute; But a judicial course is hereby
prescribed whereupon the Party may plead with the King for his Land, and
therefore if that course be not pursued in the life of the party, it is too
late to pursue it after his death: Also the words are, that he shall seize all
the goods, and two parts of the Lands of such Offenders. But after his death
the goods are not his, but his Executors; and the Lands are not his, but his
Heirs, and a seizure by way of penalty relates no higher then to the time of
the seizure: also the words of the subsequent Proviso explame it further, for
it it be demanded when the King shall seize two parts, it is answered at the
same time when he leaves the third part, and when must be leave the third
part, it is auswered, in the life of the Recusant, That it may be for the
maintenance of his Wife, Children, and Family, and after his death he has
neither Wife, Children, nor Family, for in a Writ of Dower, the Demandant shall
say that she was Wife, and not that she is Wife: As to the last matter it seems
that the Statute of 1. Jac. cap. 4 has discharged this Land, admitting that it
was not discharged before, wherein the words are, and if any Recusant shall
hereafter die, his Heir being no Recusant: That in every such Case, every such
Heir shall be freed and discharged of all and singular the penalties, charges,
and encumbrances happening upon him, or her in respect, or by reason of his or
her Ancestors recusancy; and as to Walter de Chirtons Case, who being an
Accomptant to the Ring, purchased Lands of A. with the Kings money by Covin,
and took the profits, nevertheless upon Inquisition it was adjudged, that they
should be seized into the Kings hands for his debt: I agree that to be good
Law, because A. when he received the said money of Walter de Chirton, that
being the Kings money, A. immediately thereby became a Debtor, and an
Accemptent to the King, and then into whose hands soever these Lands do after
come, they are still chargable for that money, and therefore, etc.

Sawyer against East.
AN Ejectione firm was brought by Sawyer against East, for certain Mills in
East-Smithfield in the County of Middlesex, the Case upon a special Verdict,
was this. Queen Eliz. 28. of her reign demised two Mills, one Message, and one
Curtilage to Potter for 40. years, Potter makes Mary his Wife Executrix, and
dies, Mary marries one Burhill, who in 33. Eliz. did demise one Message, and
one Curtilage to Wilkenson for 20. years, and dies, and Mary intermarries one
Hitchmore who by deed enrolled in Chancery 20. Marcii 44. Eliz. reciting the
original Lease, and that he had the whole Right, State, and Interest and term
of years which Potter had, and that he surrendered the estate, and term of years
aforesaid to the Queen, reciting the matter mentioned in the surrender, and
that the Interest and Term which Potter had is come to Hitchmore, and that
Hitchmore had surrendered the whole right, as well for 30. l. as for that that
Hitchmore did assume at his proper charges to repair, and new build the said
Mills being in great decay, and to give security for the same, did demise the
Mills, Message, and Curtilage for 40 years to the said Hitchmore rendering
rent, with a Covenant to be void for not payment, etc. and after the King
demised the premises to Ferrers, and Philips two contractors, who enter and
demise to Sawyer, who was possessed, until ejected by East, who claimed under
the lease to Hitchmore, and the Jury found that in the Letters, Patents to
Hitchmore, were contained ordinary Covenants to repair the Mills, and to leave
them in good repair, and the Jury also found that Hitchmore had not given any
security for the building, and repairing of the Mills, and that the Mills were
not new built, nor repaired, and that Hitchmore had pulled down one of the
Mills, and that the Term of twenty years is yet in being, and if upon the whole
matter, etc. Bromley the Puisne Baron says, that it seemed to him that
judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff; First, the suggestion or surmise
in the Patent being false, in matter of value, and in such a thing, which is
proper for the information of the Lessee, causes the Lease to be void, as in
18. Eliz. Dyer 352. An Abbot makes a Lease for 60. years, the Lessee demiseth
to I. S. for 80. years, the reversion comes to the Queen, the 60. years expire,
the second Lessee surrenders to the Queen, his Term and Interest which was
nothing in substance, to the intention that the Queen should re-grant to him
for 20. years, this falsitie avoids the Lease, and yet it is no such Lease
which of necessity ought to be recited, and so is 8. H. 7. fo. 3. by Vavisor,
if the King at the suit of I. S. grants the Manor of D. of the value of 50.
marks, and this is of the value of 100. marks, and this upon the information of
the party, in this case the grant is void, and so is 8. H. 6.28. by Juine, if
the King be informed by petition, that such Land is but of the value of 8. l. a
year, which in truth is of greater value, the patent is void, 11. Ed. 4.1. The
Patentee suggests that a surrender was made, whereas in deed there was no
Surrender at all, there also the Patent is void, and so is, 3. H. 7. the Prior
of Norwich his case, but there it is expressed in the Patent, that the party
had informed the Queen of a thing which is false, and this is not expressed in
our case, yet it seems to me that there is no diversity between that case, and
the case in question, for it is plain that in our case, that the surrender and
consideration, are the information of the party which was the motive to induce
the Queen to her grant, for the suggestion is grounded upon the surrender, the
which surrender is fraudulent and deceptive, and therefore the Patent is void.
Altonwoods case Cook Lib. 1.40. The King grants the Manor of Riton and
Condor, where in truth they were two Manners, there neither of them pass,
Fitzh. Grants 58. and so here the suggestion is grounded upon the words of the
Surrender, which are false and deceptive, and therefore the Patent is void,
also it seems that when the Queen grants in consideration, that the Grancee did
assume to repair, and it is found that he had not repaired, this not performing
of the consideration avoids the Patent, and this is proved by Barwicks case
Cook lib. 5. if the King will make a Patent for a consideration which is for
the Kings benefit, (be it Executory, or executed, of Record or not) if it be
not true, or duly performed, the Patent is thereby void; And here the Covenant
or assumption not being performed according to the Queens intention, and the
consideration of the Grant will also make void the Patent. And it may be
construed as a Proviso in an Indenture, within some Cases, does amount to a
Covenant, and condition also, as it was in the case of Simpson and Titterell,
and also in the case of the Earl of Pembrook vouched in Cook lib. 2. in the
Lord Cromwels case, and therefore I conceive that the words super se Assumpsit
aedificare is parcel of the consideration, as well as if it had been pro eo
quod aedificabit; and so avoids the Patent by the not performance thereof:
Altham Second Baron, says, it seems to me that the Judgment ought to be given
for the Planthere are three things considerable in the Case: First, whether the
Lease made to Hitchmore were ever good or not, in respect of a false
suggestion; Secondly, whether in that the consideration, that he did assume
upon himself to repair, and the Queen indeed never had any precedent
information made of the want thereof, do avoid the Patent in the foundation;
Thirdly, admit it be good in the foundation, whether the Lease become void
afterward for not repasting; And first I will speak to such things which in my
opinion will not avoid the Patent; First it seems, that this want of not
assuring, does not vitiate the Patent, for the word Assumpsit supposes matter
of Fact executed, and whether it be true or false, it cannot be now examined,
no more then in the Cases put 21. Ed. 4. and 26 H. 8. In consideration of
service done, although there was no service done, yet that shall not avoid the
Patent; Sir Hugh Cholmlies case, Cook lib. 2. Recital of a matter in Pais, and
not of Record, which is not material, nor valuable, does not vitiate the
Patent, 37. H. 6.27. The King in his Privy Seal suggests a matter in Fact,
this does not destroy the Patent, also although that the consideration is
as well for that he assumed to repair, as, etc. and it is found that he has not
repaired, yet this fault shall not avoid the Patent, for as it seems here it is
not in nature of a conditional estate, or Grant, as if it had been in
consideration he shall repair, for as the words are here placed, it is
intended that the Queen will rely upon the Assumpsit, and not upon the
condition, and grant, and it seems that the Patent is void, only upon the
misrecitall, and the false suggestion, which is the first Point, for it appears
by the misrecitall, that the Queen was deceived in a thing material, and
valuable, and therefore the Patent void, and yet I agree, that every false
ricitall or suggestion does not avoid a Patent, as in 9. Ed. 4. Baggots Ass.
29. Ed. 3.7. if the King recite in his Patent, that he had made a precedent
Grant upon a Petition, yet this falsity does not avoid the Patent, and in 27.
Ed. 4. although that this falsity, be in point of consideration, yet if it be
not for matter of profit, and valuable to the King, it does not avoid the
Patent, but if it appear, that the Kings intention was grounded upon a matter
of value, and substance, and that he was therein deceived, the Patent is for
that cause void, as in 9. H. 6. fo. 2.8. H. 7. fo. 3.21. Ed. 4.9. H. 7. fo. 2.
and 11. H. 4. fo. 1. and this is all one as if it should appear in the Recital
or consideration, that the Kings intention was grounded upon a matter of value,
and the King therein deceived: therefore in Altonwoods case Cook lib. 1. If
the King recite that A. is indebted unto him, as Executor of B and he release
to him all demands generally, yet nothing shall be released, but that which he
owed as Executor, and so if the King recite, that whereas an Advowson is holden
of I. S. and he gives License to appropriate, if the Advowson be holden of the
King, this is void, 19. E. 3. Fitzh. Grants 58. It seems clearly that if it
appear by the Patent expressly, that the intent of the King was deceived, and
abused, the Patent shall be void, although it be not in matter of recital, or
in matter of consideration neither, as in 9. Ed. 4. fo. 6. and 8. by Neale 21.
Ass. pla. 15.40. Ass. pla. 36. The King gives License to his Tenant to aften in
Fee, and afterward it appears that this Tenant was but Tenant in Lail, and so
in the case of the Market or Fair of Torrington cited in Altonwoods case, and
in our Case the Queen is deceived, and misinformed in two Circumstances
material, and of value. First, for that she conceived that a greater quantity
of the thing demised to Potter is surrendered then in truth there was, and
therein she is deceived, for part of the thing is not come to her hands by the
surrender. Secondly the Queens intent was to make an entire Lease of all in
possession, and this cannot be, for part of the thing it enures but as a Lease
in reversion, or future interest, and therefore void, as it is in Altonwoods
case Cook Lib. 1. and the Queen has a double prejudice hereby. First, because
she cannot distrain for her rent reserved, in that part which is not
surrendered. Secondly, she cannot enter therein for the condition broken,
wherefore, etc. Tanfield accordingly, that judgment should be given for the
Plaintiff: The Patent recites, That all the Term-which Potter had surrendered,
etc. where in truth it was not so, and therefore it is clear that the Queen is
deceived therein, and the Grant void, for it was the very inducement which
procured the new Patent, and this recital is grounded upon the words of the
deed of surrender, so y^ the surren. is grounded upon ye information of
Hitchmore contained the surrender.
And if in that Clause Hitchmore had been well advised, the Lease to him ought
to have been, A. having of the Mills in possession, and A. having the Message
and Garden after the Term (which Wilkinson had) should be expired, and the
reservation of the Rent ought to have been expressed accordingly, for as it is
shuffled together, the condition cannot avoid the surrender, nor the rent
cannot issue out thereof: Therefore it was adjudged in 9. Eliz. in the
Common-Bench in the Bishop of Salisburies case. B. seized of two Acres, one
whereof was in Lease to A. for years, B. makes a Lease of both to a Stranger,
to have y^ one in possession, the other in reversion rendering 20. s. rent
entirely: now this rent shall issue out of that in possession, during the Term
in A. and after it shall issue out of the whole as one entire rent, and so it
is in our Case, for default of several reservations, for this is one
int^erent, and then the Queen cannot distrain upon all the Land, as she
intended, so in our Case, wherefore I adjudge the Patent void, not upon the
point of recital that is not for the not recital of a Subjects Lease, viz.
the Lease of one Wilkinson, but it is for the cause of misinforming the Queen
in the matter of value, and by consequence as has been said, Nemo tenetur
informare qui nescit, sed quisquis scire quod informat; And where Snig has
said, that this Patent is made Ex certa scientia and mero motu. And for this,
it cannot be intended that the Queen was gulled upon the information of the
party, I say that there are not any words in the Grant to prove that it was Ex
mero mortu, etc. And for that it seems Snig had no true Copy of the Case, yet
if these words were in the Patent, it is not void for a trivial and petry
mistaking, yet in matter substantial it will not help it, as if the King be
misinformed of his estate, in such a thing to be granted, or of estates which
are in Lease, for these are matertall things, 21. Ed. 4. by Huffey and Briant,
if the King recite that whereas I have given my Land of 100. l. value to him,
or whereas I have given to him the Manor of D. and he grants to me the Manor
of S. if this recital be false, the Patent is void, although it has these
words Ex certa scientia, et mero motu, and so is 18. Eliz. Dyer 352. where the
Patent was ex certa scientia, et mero motu, etc. but there Dyer held, that this
falsitie in the matter of Recital did avoid the Patent, notwithstanding the
words ex mero motu etc. but he held it otherwise, if it were in a consideration
which is faise, for at that time, the point of falsitie in matter of
consideration for 100 l. to be paid, although it be much contraverted in our
Books, and it seems in what place soever of the patent it appears, that the
King is misinformed and deceived in any matter material or concerning his own
estate in the thing to be granted, that that will dictate the Patent, and
therefore 17. Eliz. the Queen seized of the Manor of D. grants all her
purpartie of the Manor of D. if in this case, a Common person had granted by
such words, the Manor had passed, but in the Queens case it will be a void
grant, because a thing which she intended to pass, cannot pass in such plight
as she conceived it, viz. as a purpartie, and 36. Eliz. the Queen granted all
her portion of Tithes etc. although she had a Parsonage there, yet it does not
p^^s, for this manner of Appellation implies, that the Queen was misinformed,
and not well instructed of the thing to be granted, and therefore void; see
Cook lib. 4. in Bozuns case, Ex certa scientia et mero motu etc. does not help
it, also if the King recite, that whereas he had such land by the attainder of
I. S. where in truth he had it not by his attainder; now although that he
grants this land Ex certa scientia, et mero motu, yet this will not pass, but
if the King be not deceived in the point of intitling himself, but in the
deducing of his title, that will not prejudice the Patent, as if the King
recite, that whereas I. S. had land by descent from his father, and he grants
it to the King, and the King does re-grant the same to I. S. this grant is
good, notwithstanding that I. S. had it not by descent from his father, see the
Lord Lovels case in Plowden; that if the King be deceived only in the point of
mis-conveyance, the Law will not avoid the Patent, as if be grant to one and
his heirs born at D. the last words are void, and the grant is good; Pasch. 42.
Eliz. it was agreed, that if the King be Tenant for life or years, and makes a
lease for one and twenty years, this lease is void to all intents against the
King, because it appears not in the grant, what estate the King had, and by
that lease the King conceived, that he had power by his estate to make an
absolute lease, whereas legally his lease ought to determine by his death, so
by implication it is manifest, that the King was not well instructed of his
estate, 39. Eliz. the Queen leased for twenty one years, to begin whenever
the land should fall in possession by the expiration of any former lease, then
in being, if in that case there were no precedent lease then in being, this
lease will be void, for these words implie, that the Queen conceived her former
lease to be in being, and so impliedly she is deceived in her intent, in like
manner in the principal case the Queen was deceived in her intention, for the
recital is, that all the estate which Potter had, is come to the Queen by
surrender, and in truth all the estate is not come unto her, in respect of a
mean estate to Wilkinson; etc. as to the second point, it seems the
consideration being, that he did assume to new build, implies as much as if he
had said, he faithfully promised, and then it is all one as if it had been, for
that that he shall build, for it is a consideration executory, and is of value,
and then the not performance thereof vitiates the Patent, and the estate was,
as if it had been by a limitation to cease, and these words, that he did assume
upon himself, cannot be construed to any other intent, but unto an executory
consideration, because the King has no remedy by way of Action, for the breach
of this promise, and it cannot be conceived, that the Covenant is satisfied in
giving security, for it is observable, that the Covenant is but the ordinary
Covenant, viz. to repair, and keep repaired, and so a Trivial reparation will
satisfy that, but it appears that the Queens intent was not to make the lease
for such a petty consideration, because the Lessee had undertaken at his own
charges to new build the Mills, but the express Covenant does not bind him to
the new building of them, and in 6. Eliz. the like lease was made of the Manor
of Lidlescourt to Customer Smith, and the lease was for that, that he assumed,
that he at his costs would etc. and he avoided his lease upon a former lease
made to A. of the premises, and in truth the lease formerly made to A. was
merely void upon the making of this lease, though perad venture the condition
may be good, and the consideration performed, but the Queen was not well
instructed of her title; also in this case, the lease to Hitchmore is not
determined by a condition, as it has been objected, but it cease and is
determined by a limitation, and this may well enough revest in the Queen,
without entry or office, because it was but a Term, and such words purporting
an executory consideration in the Queens case implies as much, as if in case of
a Common person it had been said expressly to cease upon an act not performed,
for in the Kings case the Law speaks, and if so, then the lease for years is
void, and the Patentee may enter without office, and all considerations
executory in leases made by the King amount to a conditional limitation, and
then he who will have benefit by such a lease ought to aver the performance of
the consideration, as if a man declare upon a lease made unto him, etc. if I.
S. should so long live, he ought to aver his life in the Declaration, because
it determines, by limitation at his death, but otherwise it is upon a
condition, if a Parson make a lease for years, the Lessee must aver the life of
the Parson, because by his death the lease ends by a limitation implied, but
otherwise it should if it were upon condition, for the performance of that
needs not be averred; but that ought to be showed on the other part, and so it
seems, that as well for the point of falsitie in the recital, as also in the
not performing of the consideration, that the lease is void, and the Plantiffe
should have judgment which was entered accordingly. Snig, Baron, was of opmion
against all the other Barons, and he held that judgment ought to be given for
the Defendant, for he laid, that the Patent made to Hitchmore proves that it
was not made by reason of any suggestion of the party, for it is expressed to
be made ex mero motu, etc. and then the not surrendering of the other Term does
not vitiate, also if the lease be forfeited to the Queen for not repairing,
then the Queen should have a title before the lease made to the contractors,
under which the Plaintiff claims, and that not being found by office, the
contractors shall have no benefit thereof, and as to the cases 9. H. 6. and
Torringtons case cited Cook lib. 1. Altonwoods case, the words of the Patent
which express, that the Patent should be good, so that it be not ad nocumentum
etc. which is not in our case, does not prove the case in question; also if the
consideration be small, and recited as executed, it does vitiate the Patent
although it be false, and it is said in Sir Thomas Wrothes case in Plowden,
that it is not honorable for the King to construe his Patent to be void, by
color of deceit upon an inference, except it be upon a manifest deceit, and
in Barwicks case Cook lib. 5. the consideration was a surrender of all the
estate, and therefore it differed from the case in 18. Eliz. Dyer, because
there it was in consideration of an estate, which in truth was never in being,
and the cases whereupon he relied for the proof of this matter is the
principal case of Altonwoods, and the Lord- Chandos case: that if a violent
intendment might be admitted in the Kings grants upon an inference, it might be
here inferred, that the King should have the estate by this particular
surrender, but the Book is resolved, that no such inference shall be admitted
to avoid the Kings patent, or otherwise, but in that case of the Lord Chandos
it appeared, that the information of the party was true, and so it was not
here, because it was informed, that all the right which Potter had, is devolved
to Hitchmore, which is not so, and therefore a difference between those two
cases.

Nota, that the course of this Court is, that if A. be indebted, or be an
accomptant to the King, and A. has another debtor, which debtor has a third
person indebted unto him, in such case A. may by English Billin the Exchequer
pray, that the estate of the debtor of his debtor, Pasch. 9. Jac. in the
Exchequer.
may be extended for the debt of the said A. and it shall be granted.

Clerk against Rutland.
IN 6. Jac. in Ejectione firm, between Clerk and Rutland it appeared, that a
feme sole possessed of a Term of years, assigns this to A. in trust, and after
entermarries with him in reversion, and after the husband being in quiet
possession, he and his wife join in a Bargain and sale to B. upon valueable
consideration, and after the wife dies, and the assignee does set on foot the
lease, and if this shall be void against the Bargainee was the question upon
evidence, and it seems not, because the Bargainee claims nothing by
conveyance from the wife, and also this trust in the Term does not belong to
the husband after the death of the wife; for Tanfield said, that it was decreed
in the Chancery, and the opinion of the Judges was in one Denies case, if a
feme sole assign a lease in trust, and after takes husband, and dies, that
the administrator of the wife should have this trust, and that the
Administration shall be granted for this Term, although there be no other thing
for which the Administration ought to be granted: also it was touched in this
case, that if the father make a lease for forty years to a stranger, and
continue in possession, and after conveys the land to a younger son, who for a
valuable consideration conveyeth it over, it was doubted, if the purchasor
should avoid this lease or not, but it was said, that if in that case, the
father after the making of such a lease, had suffered the land to descend to
his eldest son, who had been privy to this trust, that then the Purchasor of
the eldest son should avoid this lease, as it was ruled in Burwels case Cook
lib. 6.

Upon a motion made by Prideaux, that Robert winter one of the Powder Traitors
made a lease for years 1. Jac. to one Gower, and that after 3. Jac. the Lessor
was attainted of Treason by Parliament, which attainder related to a time
before the conveyance of the Fee, and if in this case the Term be saved or lost
it was the question.

Pasch. 9 Jac. in the Exchequer.
Wickham against Wood Pasch. 9. Jac. in the Exchequer.
EDward Wickham declared in an Ejectione firm, that Skreen 17. April 6. Jac.
at Framlingham in Suffolk demised to him 30. Acres of pasture, to have for
three years etc. and upon the general issue pleaded the Jury found, that Thomas
Cooper, and three others were seized of the lands in question, and the fifth of
February 24. H. 8. infeoffed by Indenture M. B. and five others, to the uses
and intents mentioned in a Schedul annexed, and that was upon condition, that
if they aliened to any other uses or purposes, that the Feoffor should
re-enter, and the Jury also found the Schedule, which in effect was this, viz.
that the Feoffees and their heirs, should take the profits, and therewith find
an honest priest, by them or the greater number of them to be hired, and
competently paid to say Mass for the souls of the Feoffor and his friends, and
that by the space of 99. years then ensuing, and at the end of the said years,
the Feoffees their heirs and assigns, who then should be seized, should sell
the lands, and with the money find a Priest, to Chaunt for the souls
aforesaid, and with the said moneys or lands also, to make further provision
for a competent poor honest Priest for the timr being, (if then it could be) by
a Amortization, or otherwise as they should think best, for the sure and long
continuance of the said honest Priest, if so it could be continued by order of
Law, the Jury found all things executed accordingly, and the finding of a
Priest from the 24th. of H. 8. until the first of Ed. 6. by which Act the King
was entitled prout lex postulat, and that Queen Eliz. granted to Mildmay for
21. years, upon whom Fuller, the heir of the surviving Feoffee entered, and made
a Feofment to Wilbey and Skreen, by force whereof they were seized, and Mildmay
re-entred, and his Term expiring, he obtained a new lease 43. Eliz. and made a
lease to Wood, and Skreen survived Wilbey, and made a lease to Wickham, who
entered, and being outed by Wood brought this Action. Bromley puisne Baron, upon
all the matter I observe three things. First, if the Fee-simple in this case by
the letter or meaning of the Statute be given to the Crown, for the lease of
99. years is agreed to be given. Secondly, if there be such an employment of
this land as the Statute requires, admitting the lease was not given. Thirdly,
if the livery upon the Queens Lessee for years be good: and I hold that the Fee
is not given to the Queen.
Secondly, the land is not employed, etc. admitting that it was given. Thirdly,
that the Feofment here is not good; and as to the case at Bar the Feoffees may
enter: I doubt not of that because there is not any thing found, but that it
was employed to the uses intended for 99. years. Secondly, if it were not
employed according to the condition, after 1. Ed. 6. yet they cannot enter, for
themselves were parties to the Art which did prohibit it, as 34. H. 8. Dyer 52.
the Queen gives license, that Belmelt shall be transported notwithstanding any
Statute made, or to be made, if after it be prohibited, the license is
determined, because the Patentee himself was a party to such Statutes.
Secondly, it is said in Addams and Lamberts case, that a superstitious devise
or other estate upon condition is within the Statute, because the Patentee was
party thereunto. Thirdly, it is said in the said case, that a superstitious
devise or other estate upon condition is within the Statute, because it is
penal, and compulsorie for the maintenance of a thing prohibited by the Law,
and also there it is said, that there is a proviso toward the end of that Act,
that it shall not be Lawful by reason of any remainder or condition for any man
to claim any lands, etc. for the not doing, or finding of any such Priest: as
to the other point which was moved at Bar, I hold that the use does not arise
upon the words subsequent, and if they do not re-enter, that then the land
shall go to the use of the four Feoffees, to the intent aforesaid, is not a
mis-ordering nor an employment. Secondly, these words to the intent, do not
raise any use, but only a confidence and trust reposed in the Feoffees. Doctor
and Student 94. for the first point therefore he held, that there is no
superstitious gift of the Fee-simple, and if there were, it is not employed
etc. and therefore it is not given by the Statute of 1. Ed. 6. to the Queen:
and touching that we are to consider the Statute, Indenture, and the Schedule,
and there is not a word, that after 99. years the land shall find a Priest,
but the money, and the land is not given, but the money, as in the Dean of
Paul's case 22. Eliz. Dyer 368. if land be given to find a Priest with part of
the profits thereof, those profits are only given to the King by this Statute,
and not the land, but that belongs to the Dean and Chapter: also the Schedule
is, if then it may be lawful, and therefore if it were not then lawful, the
money is not given, and it is like to the case, where I make a lease for 21.
years, if I do allow of it before Michaelmas, and before Michaelmas do not
allow of it, this is a void lease, and so if I give land to the use of
Westminster School, if the Dean will enter into a Recognizance, etc. and if he
will not enter into a Recognizance, it is no gift, like to the case 15, H. 7. a
grant of Annuitie if such a thing be done, etc. secondly, as to the employment,
the lease is only found to be employed, and the employment of the lease is no
employment of the Fee, which was not given until the Term was expired, and if
the gift be not superstitious the employment ought not to be superstitious; and
yet as it is said in Adams case, there ought to be an employment to entitle the
Queen, as the case there is, if one gives the Manor of D. and S. to
superstitious uses, the Queen shall have the lands out of the hands of the
Feoffee, and if land be given to find a Priest in the Church of D. for 20
years, and after to find one in S. for 21. years, and before the expiration of
the first Term, the Statute is made, it seems the Queen shall have only the
first Term, because there is no employment of the second Term within the
Statute, 5. Ed. 4.20.15. Ed. 3. Execu. 63. I agree those cases, for land or
rent issue from a seisin 30. Ed. 3.12. in a quare impedit 5. Ed. 6. Benlowes, a
devise to 8. to the uses and intent, that the Feoffees with the profits shall
find a Priest, whilst the Law of this Realm will suffer it, and if the Law
will not suffer it, then to the use of three of the poorest of the Parishes
adjoining, by all the Judges this is not within the Statute; and as to the last
point it seems, that the Feofment is good, and the interest of the Queen is no
impediment, which if it be not then there is no question, as Dyer 20. Eliz.
363. Tenant in tail makes a feofment, the servants of the Lessee for years
being upon the land and livery is made, and after the Lessee for years agrees
saving his Term, this is a discontinuance 14. Ed. 4.2, 3. and 4. Ph. et M. Dyer
139. possession shall not be gained from the Queen, but by matter of Record 4.
Assizes 5.21. Assizes 2.8. H. 4.16.1. H. 7. no livery upon the Kings
possession, it may be devised by the heir, or conveyed by bargain and sale, or
by fine from him; and the Kings estate in reversion does not privilege the
estate in possession, as it is 23. Ed. 3.7. a disseisor conveys land to the
Queen who grants for life, and the disseisee shall have a writ of entry
against the Queens Lessee for life, by the opinion of Thorp, Cook lib. 4.55. a
disseisor makes a lease for life, the remainder to the King, a recovery of the
land against Tenant for life will defeat the Kings remainder, 7. Rich. 2. aid
of the King 61. Tenant in tail grants the land to the King with warranty, and
the King makes a lease for life, if the issue recover in a Formedon the Kings
estate is defeated; and I was of Council in the Court of wards, in a case which
was Pasch. 43. Eliz. betwixt Chackston and Starkey, for the Wardship of the
heir of Clifford, and it was this, the Ward at full age tendered his livery, and
had six months to sue it, and within the six months made a Feofment, and
after died before livery sued, in this case the livery and seisin was void, and
it is all one as if no tender had been made, for the Queens possession was
privileged; the second point was, that one being in Ward to the King, had a
reversion in Fee expectant upon an estate for life, and before livery sued made
a Feofment in Fee, this makes a discontinuance of the reversion,
notwithstanding the Kings interest, which he had in reversion for the Wardship,
which case is like to the case above mentioned of a lease for years, and also
it was there said, that if Tenant for life be, the remainder to the King for
years, the remainder to another in Fee, and the Tenant for life makes a
Feofment in Fee, this draws the Kings remainder out of him, and so he held,
that here is no gift. Secondly, that here is no employment, and so the Feofment
is made good. Altham second Baron contra, I will consider only two points.
First, if it be a gift for years or for ever, and I say, that it is a gift for
ever, for here is no intent in the Donor to determine the superstitious use,
because he does not limit any other use to which it should revert, but only
that the Priest should be maintained for ever, and as that which has been
said, that it was not employed, he answers that out of the Book of 22.
Assizes 52. where 12. d. is reserved for three years, and after 100. s. seisin
of 12. d. is seisin of the 100. s. because it is issuing out of the freehold,
as the case is in Littleton in the Chapter of Atturnement, Tenant for life, the
remainder in Fee, the Lord shall not avow upon the remainder, but shall have it
by way of Escheat, for all the estates together are holden of the Lord, but if
land be given to find a Priest in D. and one is maintained in S. this is a
mis-imployment; but in our case I conceive, that the Feoffees have power to
dispose the land, as to them seems best, and therefore it is uncertain, and
then given to the King as it was in Dales case, land was given to the intent,
that a Priest should be maintained as I. S. and I. D. thought fit, so that he
had not less then 8. marks yearly, the King shall have all, for the Feoffees
may give all to the Priest if they please, and in Turners case, land was
devised to a Priest, and diverse poor men, all is given to the King by the
superstitious employment, and as to the words, (if by the Law it may be) they
are idle, for id possumus quod de Jure possumus, and therefore 9. Ed. 6. an
office was given to one if he were able to exercise it, these words are idle,
for the Law says, that he shall not have it, if he be not able to execute it,
30. Ed. 3.8. a gift to two and to the longer liver of them, that the Survivor
shall have it, are idle words, 10. H. 7. a Condition that etc. and here it the
condition had been until an Act of Parliament prohibit it, they are Idle words,
for if land be given to I. S. and his heirs, upon condition, that if he die
without heirs etc. this is a void condition and Repugnant to Law. Lastly, I
hold the feofment good by way of Admittance, and that the livery takes effect,
notwithstanding the Queens interest 4. H. 6.19. the Kings Tenant for life is
disseised, he shall have an Assise, and yet there is no intrusion upon the King
17. H. 7.6. the Kings Lessee makes a feofment, the King enters, and so he held,
that the judgment should he given for the Defendant. Snig Baron argued much to
the same intent, that Bromley had done, and that the Schedule is so
circumspect, that nothing is given after the 99. years, and that a spirit of
Divination forwarned him of the alteration, and he agreed the Feofment to be
good with this difference, where the King is in possession actually, and where
the Reversion is in the King, and the book of 2 H. 4.9. that none shall enter
upon the Kings Farmor is to be understood of the Kings under Tenants, and not
of his Lessees. Tanfield chief Baron said, that neither by the intent of the
Statute, nor of the parties, the fee is given to the Queen, but it is apparent,
that during the 99. years, the parties intent is in suspense for fear of
alteration, and that they would see the difference of the times, and leave the
disposing thereof to his Feoffees, and if they had sold the land, and with the
money maintained a Priest, as many stocks of money have used to do, without
doubt it had been forfeited to the King, and not the land; and it would be in
vain to speak of an Amortization, if it be for a stipendary Priest only, for
this would not be necessary to have a foundation incorporated, and to make an
Amortization for such a Priest, and therefore it seems to him, that there is no
determination of his will after the 99. years, but that all is left to the
determination and disposition of the feoffees who then should be, and after the
intent of the Statute, which was penned by Hales Justice of the Common Pleas. I
observe four words, given, appointed, limited, and assigned, and I do not
conceive, that our case is within the compass of any of them, for as I said
before, it is in suspense until the end of 99. years, and the parties who
should have the interest are not known until the time come, nor the estate
settled until that time, but if it had been conveyed to superstitious uses
after, it had been given to the Queen, notwithstanding the conveyance had not
been sufficient, if he who did convey had power in respect of the ability of
his person, and the estate in him, and therefore Pasch. 22. Eliz. the case was
this, Sir William Say, before the Statute of 32. H. 8. of Wills was seized of
lands in fee not devisable, and before the said Statute he devised it to find
a Priest, and notwithstanding that the devise was not good, yet it was
adjudged, that the land was given to the Queen by 1. Ed. 6. but if it were a
feme covert, or an infant, who are disabled in Law, or a Tenant in tail, who is
disabled in respect of his estate, there it had not been given to the Queeen,
but in all cases there ought to be an assignment, or otherwise nothing is
given; and there is a difference where one grants land to the intent with the
profits thereof to find a Priest, there all the land is given to the Queen,
and where he grants a rent for the maintenance of a Priest, for there the King
shall have but the Rent; and he said, that the Case cited, 5. Ed. 6. Benlos, is
good Law, and as to that which has been said: That because the power of the
Feoffees is uncertain, it should be given to the Queen, true it is where the
power is uncertain to bestow the profits, but if their power be certain, it is
otherwise, and as to the employment there is none, because there is no gift,
but the employment of the particular estate is an employment of the Remainder,
and a small thing will make an employment. James case was of the Greyhound in
Fleetstreet which was given to find a Priest, and the White Horse for the
maintenance of another, and the Feoffees of the White-horse, maintained the
Priest of the Greyhound; and e converso, and this was ruled to be an
employment, for it was whereby, or wherewith a Priest was maintained, although
it was not whereof, and Mich. 21. Eliz. the Kings head in Breadstreet, now
Fishstreet was given to find a Priest, and a rentcharge granted in
performance of the Will, and this was adjudged an employment of the house, and
so where the assignment is good, a small thing will make an employment. And it
seems that the Liverie is good, and as to that, that no Livery can be made
without ousting of the Lessor, and by his consent, and therefore 9. Eliz. It is
ruled, that a Feoffement with a Letter of Attorney to the Lessee to make livery
is good, and no surrender, and Eides and Knotsfords case, 41. Eliz. Lessee for
years, remainder for life, remainder in fee, he in remainder in fee makes a
Feoffement to the Lessee for years, and makes Livery, and it was adjudged a
good Feoffement, because it was not a surrender, in respect of the mean estate
for life, and no ouster nor consent will serve, for then it would be a
disseisin, which cannot be upon the possession of the Lessee for years, for his
possession is also of him in the remainder for life, and I put these Cases,
that there ought to be a consent or ouster, but I agree that the Queens
possession cannot be defeated by entry or ouster, as it is 4. Mar. Dyer 139.8.
Ass. 21.18. H. 8.16. But the Kings Ward may make an estate, 1. H. 7. But if the
King be not in possession, but a remainder only in him, and the Lessor makes a
Feoffement, rendering 12. d. rent, this estate in the King does not privilege
any other in possession, and so judgment was given for the Plaintiff against
the opinion of Altham.

Mrs Chamberlains case.
IN 22. Eliz. York recovered by Indicement in the Kings Bench against Allen
upon an Assumpsit, York being thus interessed of the debt, after that is in
May, 26. Eliz. was outlawed upon a mean Process at the suit of I. S. and in the
same year and month was outlawed after judgment at the suit of the same I. S.
and after a general pardon came 27. Eliz. in which pardon, after the pardon of
all contempts for outlawrie, there are words also purporting a Grant, bounty,
and liberality, whereby the Queen granted all montes forfeited, or come unto
her hands, by reason of any such outlawry, with other words in the same pardon,
and Provisoes therein contained, necessary to be observed: And after in 28. El.
York was outlawed again after judgment at the suit of I. S. and then York
died, but he lived a full year after the pardon, 27. Eliz. and did not sue any
Scire facias against the party, at whose suit he was outlawed after Judgment;
and after the death of York another pardon came, 29. Eliz. to the same effect
with the pardon in 27. And after the Queen grants this debt to Anger for the
benefit of Mrs Chamberlain, who was the Wife of York, and Anger sued in the
Queens name to have an extent, out of this Court against Allen, who was the
party against whom Judgment was given, and all this was drawn into a Case, and
delivered to the Barons of the Exchequer to consider upon, viz. If execution
may be sued in the Queens name against Allen, and this case was argued at the
Bar at which I was present; And now it was argued at the Bench by Bromley
Puisne Baron, and concluded that Anger may well sue execution in the Queens
name, but he had almost made an end of his Argument before I came into the
Court, and three points seemed to be considered of in the Case. The 1. was
unanimously resolved, and agreed by all the Barons, that either of the pardons
will advantage Allen, who was debtor to the party outlawed, for although that
the words of the pardon, unport a pardon of all debts and sums of money accrued
to the Queen by reason of the outlawry, yet comparing all the parts of the
pardons together, it will plainly appear, that the intent of the pardon was
only for the advantage of him, who had committed the forfeiture by the
contempt, and extends only to him by way of restitution; And another
construction would be repugnant to all the Causes contained in the Act; By
Tanfield, as a Will ought to receive construction by due consideration of the
intention of the Testator collected out of all the parts thereof, so the
meaning of an Act of Parliament ought to be expounded by an examination of the
intention of the makers thereof, collected out of all the causes these therein,
so that there be no repugnancy, but a concordancy in all the parts thereof, and
therefore if a man by will devise Bacre to A. and his heirs, and by another
cause in the same Will he devises B acre to B. and his assigns, it shall not
be void in any part, insomuch that if both had been placed together, A. and B.
should be Ioyntenants, and therefore the Law will make such a construction, and
so if a man devise B. acre to A. and after he devises a Rent out of it to
another, both shall stand: Brett and Rigdens case, Plowden, Also this Debt was
due by Allen; 2. It was resolved by Tanfield and Bromley, that York should
take no advantage by the Pardon in 27. Eliz. to have his goods restored, which
were forfeited by the outlawry after judgment, for by them all the Statute for
the pardon of the outlawry after judgment was penued in such a form, as it is
but conditional, for it is in effect provided, that the pardon shall not
extend to the party outlawed after judgment until he shall pay or agree with
the party, at whose suit he was outlawed, and this payment ought to be in the
Court, or in such manner that the Court may be satisfied by the suing of a
Scire facias, and an acknowledgement of the party at whose suit, etc. for a
bare payment in the Country is not sufficient; But when the party outlawed has
once lawfully satisfied the party, at whose suit he was outlawed, then the
pardon will relate ab initio to avoid all intervenient matters, if the
satisfaction be made in convenient time, and therefore if the King had granted
the goods forfeited by outlawry after judgment mean between the pardon, and
the suing of the Scire facias, yet if the party outlawed sue this Scire facias
within convenient time, the pardon shall have such relation as it shall defeat
the grant of the goods, and therefore Tanfield compared the words in the pardon
of the outlawry after judgment to the words in the Statute of 27. H. 8. of
intolments, for there it is provided, that nothing shall pass by bargain and
Sale, except the Deed be enrolled within six months after, but if it be not
enrolled, otherwise it is.

Beckets case.
R. B. seized of Lands in fee, 36. Eliz. levies a fine, etc. and declares the
use to be to himself for life, and after to T. B. with power of revocation, and
to limit new uses, and if he revoke and not declare, then the use shall be to
the use of himself for life, and after to Henry Becket with power in that
indenture, also to revoke and limit new uses, and that then the fine shall be
to such new uses and no other, and after 42. Eliz. by a third Indenture he
revoked the second Indenture, and declared the use of the fine to be to the use
of himself for life, and after to Hen. Becket in tail, the remainder to I. B.
etc. R. B. dies, and T. B. his brother, and heir is found a Recusant, and the
lands seized, and thereupon comes H. B. and shows the matter as above, and upon
that the Kings Attorney demurreth: Bromley and Altham Barons, that the
Declaration of the uses made by the third Indenture was good, and he having
power by the first to declare new uses, may declare them with power of
Revocation, for it is not merely a power, but conjoined with an interest, and
therefore may be executed with a power of Revocation, and then when he by the
third Indenture revokes the former uses, now it is as if new uses had been
declared, and then he may declare uses at any time after the Fine, as it
appears by 4. Mar. Dyer 136. and Coke lib. 9. Downhams case, and in this case
they did rely upon Diggs case Cook lib. 1. where it is said, that upon such a
Power, he can revoke but once, for that part, unless he had a new power of
Revocation of Uses newly to be limited, whereby it is employed, that if he had a
new power to appoint new uses, he may revoke them also. Snig Baron to the
contrary, and said, that he had not power to declare 3. several uses, by the
first contract, which ought to Authorize all the Declarations upon that Fine,
and then the Revocation by the third Indenture is good, and the limitation
void, and then it shall be to the use of R. B. and his heirs, and so by the
death of R. B. it does descend to T. B. the Recusant, and also he said, that
such an Indenture, to declare uses upon uses, was never made, and it would be
mischievous to declare infinite uses upon uses. Tanfield held, that the uses in
the second Indenture stand unrevoked, and the new uses in the third Indenture
are void, and then H. B. ought to have the Land again out of the Kings hands.
The power in the second Indenture is, that he may revoke and limit new uses,
and that the Fine shall be to those new uses, and no others: and then if there
be a Revocation, and no punctual limitation, he had not pursued his Authority,
for he ought to revoke and limit, and he cannot do the one without the other:
Also he said, that after such Revocation and limitation, the fine shall be to
such new uses and no other, then if there be no new uses well limited in the
third Indenture, the former uses shall stand void.

Nota, it seems that if a man make a Feoffement and declare uses, and reserve
a power to revoke them, without saying more, he cannot revoke them, and limit
new, for the use of the Fine being once declared by the Indenture, no other use
can be averred or declared which is not warranted thereby, for he cannot
declare the fine to be to new uses, when it was once declared before, Cook lib.
2.76. That no other use can be averred, then that in the conveyauce, Cook lib.
9, 10, 11. Although that the first uses are determined, as if a man declare the
use of a Fine, to be to one and his Heirs upon condition, that he shall pay
40. l. etc. or until he do such an Act, if the first use be determined, the
Fine cannot be otherwise declared to be to new uses; And therefore it seems
that all the uses which shall rise out of the Fine, ought to spring from the
first Indenture, which testifies the certain intention of the parties in the
leaving thereof, and then in the Case above, the second Indenture and the
limitation of new uses thereby, are well warranted by the first Indenture, and
in respect that this is not a naked power only, I conceive that they may be
upon condition, or upon a power of Revocation to determine them; But the power
to limit the third uses by a third indenture after revocation of the second
uses in the second indenture, has not any Warrant from the first Indenture,
and without such Warrant, there can be no Declaration of such new uses, which
were not declared or authorized by the first Indenture, which Note, for it
seems to be good Law.

FINIS.
AN EXACT TABLE of the Principal Matters contained in this BOOK.
A.
AN Action of false impriprisonment for taking his wife in execution she
appearing as a Feme sole, 48, 52 An Action upon the Case for conspiring to
outlaw a man in a wrong County, 49 Amerciament for a By-law, 55 An Action upon
the Case where against a Servant for breach of trust, much good matter, 65, 66,
67, 68 Amerciament where well levied by the Sheriff, 74 Action by an Executor
against a Sheriff in the debet and de^^net, where good, 80, 81 Authority in
fact, and authority in Law abused, a difference, 90 Action for these words
against I. S. spoken of the Plaintifs wife, she would have out her husbands
throat, and did attempt to do it, 98
C.
Custom for Pirates goods if payable, 15 Copy hold surrendered to the use of a
younger Son, he can have no Action before admittance, 20 Churchwardens if
elected by Vestry-men, where good, and capable to purchase Lands, 21
Conspiracy, see Action. Collector of a fifteenth leviable upon one Township, 65
Commissioners of inquiry, and their power, 83, 84
D.
DEbt against the Sheriff for an escape, a good Case, 20 Distress for a By-law
upon the Kings Tenant, he must bring his Action in the Exchequer, 55 Devise to
the wife until the issue accomplish 18. years ends not by death of the issue
before, 56, 57 Decree where execution thereof may be stayed, 68, 69
E.
ERror a Writ directed to an inferior Court ought to be executed without fee
paid or tendered, 16 Elegit the party who sued it dies, no scire facias for
the Heir, 16 Equity where releviable in the Exchequer, 54 Estreats where they
may be discharged for insufficiency in the Indictment, or not mentioning the
offense, 55 Estoppell in the Kings case, 65 Exception in a Grant, 69 Escape, a
difference where caused by a rescous, and where by the Sherif, or Bailif, 70,
71 Executor see Action, 80, 81 Erroneous judgment given in the Kings Manor,
reversed in the Exchequer by Petition, 98
F.
A Feoffement to the use of the Husband and Wife for their lives, and after to
the heirs of the body of the wife begotten by the Husband, what estate, 17
First fruits ought to be paid before induction, 20 Forfeiture by Tenant for
life by what Acts, 38 Forfeiture by a contempt for not returning upon a command
by Privy Seal, and what, and how long the forfeiture continues, an excellent
Case, 42, 43 False imprisonment, see Action. Fine, if void for uncertainty, 55
Where it shall be directed by the Covenant, ibid
G.
GRant of the King what shall be a good surrender thereof, 1 And what shall be
a good consideration therein, 4 Where such a Grant is aided by 43. Eliz. cap.
1. ibid Grant by the King of a reversion, nec non manerium de Skipton, 39
I.
INformation upon 3. and 4. E. 6. for buying of Butter against two, and one
found guilty, 19 An information against one for refusing to pay Impost for
Currants, a famous Case, 23 An information for engrossing 1000. quarters of
Corn, one Defendant found of 700. only, 59 Informer where he shall have a
moity upon 23. Eliz. but not upon 28. Eliz. against a Recusant, 60 Judgment
must be paid before a debt to the King, 65 Judges if bound to take notice of a
general pardon, 71 Injunction to enjoy possession no hindrance to him that
claims Common therein, 96 Information of intrusiion into a Close, and for
asportation of 9. Cart loads of wheat, between the 24. of March, and 1. of
October, the Jury found him guilty of 3. loads the 24. of March, and damages
taxed for all, no judgment can be given for any part, 97, 98 Indentures
several, with several powers therein to declare uses how to be expounded,
118, 119
K.
THE King where he may extend for outlawry after alienation, 20 The King where
he may take without inrolment, and what Acts amounts to an inrolment, 31, and
35, and 60 The King, where he shall have his rent of the Assignee in trust in
the Interim before a reassignment made, 39 The King where he may extend a Term
conveyed in trust, 50, 51 The King shall not charge the successors of a Bishop
for a subsidy, but the Executor or the heir, 51 The King, where he shall be
ordered in equity to perform a trust by an English Bill, 54 King, see
Judgment, 65 King, what interest he has by an outlawry, 83 King, where he
shall have his debt of his Debtor, or Trustee, 91 King, cannot distrain the
Cattle of one Tenant in Common for the debt of the other, 96, 97 King may
charge the debtor of his debtors Debtor, 112, 113
L.
LIvery and seifin of Lands in 2. Towns by Letter of Attorney countermanded by
livery in one by the Lessor himself, 97 Livery if it can be made upon the
Queens Lessee, 114
M.
A Memorandum in the Exchequer, and the operation thereof, 5 Misnomer of a
Corporation where it voids a Grant, 15, and 33 Mistriall, and a venire facias
de novo awarded, 68 Misnomer of a Corporation, 35
N.
NOtice of an use, or promise makes a man liable to execute the same, 60
Notice, see Judges, 71 Notice of payment upon a condition ought to be givea to
an infant, 100, 101
O.
OYer of a Deed must be demanded the same Term in the Common Pleas, but
otherwise in the Kings Bench, note the diversity, 39 Outlawry in Northumberland
for a debt in Durham if the King or the Bishop be entitled, 90
P.
PAtent of Denization, what words therein make it conditional, 58, 59 Patent
where void for false recital, or want of consideration, 75* 76, and 108, 109
Pleas before a Justice of Nisi prius, what allowable, and what not, 81, 82, 86
Plea discontinued for want of a day given, 89 A Parliament pardon (the debt
being agreed withal) relates ab initio, 118
R.
A Remainder where contingent, 22 Rent, where it must be demanded, and where
not, 56, 57 Record, what makes a double matter of Record to make the party sue
by Petition, 58, 59 Recusancie, see S. Remitter in what cases, 93, 94, etc.
Recusant if chargable for lands bought in trust, and if seisible after his
death, and if liable by 1. Jacobi, 104, 105
S.
THe Statute of 43. Eliz. cap. 1. well expounded, 5, etc. The Statute of 33. H.
8. cap. 39. well explained, 51 Simony in what Cases, and excellent matter
thereof, 71, 72, 100 Statutes of 23.28. Eliz. and 1. Iacobi expounded
concerning Recusants, 91, 92 Surrender where countermandable, 99 Statute of 1.
Ed. 6. of Chantries and the meaning thereof amply debated by the Barons, 113,
114
T.
TIthes where due for Headland, 16 Tithes where discharged by unity of
possession, 17 Traverse where good, 18 Trust where a Recusant convict is
capable thereof, 39 Tithes a prescription therein for the Kings Coppyholder, it
must be tried in the Exchequer, 39 Trust where forfeitable, 54, 55 The tenth
according to the Statute leviable only upon part of the lands out of which etc
56 Tenorem platiti, or Tenorem recordi, as good as Recordum praedictum, 83 A
trust in a Term by the Wife, belongs not to the Husband after her decease, 113
V.
USes where fraudulent against a Purchasor, 22 Venire facias de Vicineto of a
forest, 33 Uses, see Indentures, 118, 119
A Catalogue of LAW BOOKS, and such as appertain to the LAW.
AShes Tables 2. Volumes Folio. Ashes Tables to Cooks Reports. -- Epeciea or
table of equity. -- Fasiculus Florum. Arguments on the Writ of Habeas Corpus.
Assise of Bread. Atturnies Guide. Attorney of the Common Pleas.
BRooks Abridgement. -- Readings on Magna Charta. -- Cases. -- Reading on the
Stat. of Limitations. Boultons Justice. Bulstrodes Reports. Bracton. Brownlows
Reports 2. parts. -- Pleadings in 2. parts. -- Judicial Writs. Lord Bacons
Elements of the Law. -- Cases of Treason. -- Ordinances. -- Reading of the
Statute of Uses. Britton. Book of Oaths. Bollewes Reports of R. the 2d. Blunts
Glossographia expounding Terms of the Law. Boones Examen Legum Angliae.
Cooks Reports 11 parts French. -- 12th Report English. -- Entries. -- on
Littleton the first part of his Institutes, 1. -- on Magna Charta 2. -- Pleas
of the Crown, 3d. -- Jurisdiction of Courts 4th. -- Complete Coppyholder. -- of
Bail and Mainprise. Cragge de Feudis. Customs of Normandy. Mr Cooks
Vindication of the Law. -- Pooremans Case. City Law. Cromptons Justice. --
Jurisdiction of Courts. Cowells Interpreter. -- Institutes. Callis Readings on
Sewers. -- Ignoramus. Crook and Hultons Arguments on Shipmoney. Complete Clerk
and Scriveners Guide. Calthrops Relation of Manors and Coppyhold. -- Cases
about the customs of London. Conference about the liberty of the Subject.
Clerks Vade Mecum Presidents. Clerks Guide in 2. parts. Collins Summary of the
Statutes. Complete Justice. Caries Reports in Chancery. Claytons Reports. --
Topic of the Law. Complete Attorney 2. parts. Charter of Rumney Marsh.
Chancery Orders. Court Leet.
DAvis Reports. -- of Impositions. -- abridgement of Lord Cooks Reports.
Daltons Justice. -- Office of a Sherif. -- Abridged. Dyers Reports. --
Abridgement in French. -- Abridgement in English. Doderidges English Lawer. --
Principality of Wales. -- Complete Parson. Deggs proposals. Declarations and
Orders, 4o Dr and Student in Lattin. -- idem in English. -- Abridged.
Davenports Abridgement of Cook on Littleton. Deerehams Mannuall. Dallison and
Benlowes Reports, with Ash.
EDward the 3d. in 2. parts. -- Quadragessimus -- Assizes of Edward 3d. --
Abridged. Edward the 4th. Elmesmores Post Nati. -- of the Chancery. Edgars
Charges. Executors Office.
FItzherberts Abridgement. -- Table to the same. Fitzherberts Natura brevium in
French. -- idem English. -- Justice. -- English. Finches Law, French. --
English. Fidels Presidents. Fletacum Seldeni notis. Fulbecks Parallels. --
Preparative to the study of the Law Fruits of Pleadings. Fortescu de Laudibus
legum Angliae, Fillacers Office. Fees of Courts.
GOdbolts Reports. Gouldsboroughs Reports. Gregory's Moot Book. Grounds of the
Law. Greenwoods Curia Comitatum Redivina. Glanvill of the Law. Grotius of the
Law of War and peace.
HEnry the 4th and 5th Henry the 6th 2. parts. -- the 7th. -- abridged. Hobarts
Reports. Huttons Reports. Hackwells Liberty of the Subject. -- Passing of
Bills. Hughs Commentaries on Original Writs. -- Parsons Law. -- Reports. --
Abridgement. Hearns Law of Conveyances. Horns Mirror of Justices in French. --
idem in English.
Judge Ienkins Tracts of the Law. Irelands abridgment of Cooks Reports
Judgments of the Upper Bench. Instructions for the Court of Wards.
KEylweyes Reports with Dallison and Benlows. Kitchen Court Leet in French. --
idem in English.
LAmbarts Saxon Laws. -- Justice. -- Perambulation of Kent with Cinqueports. --
Archeion. -- Duties of Constables. Long Quinto. Liber Intrationum. Linwoods
Constitutions. Lanes Reports in the Court of Exchequer. Lawyers Logic.
Littletons Tenures French. -- in English. Laymans Lawyer. Leigh Law Terms. Lees
Wards and Liveries. Layers duty of Constables.
MAnwoods Forest Laws. Marches Reports. -- Actions of slanders 2. parts. --
Amicus Reipublicae. Magna Charta.
NOyes Reports. -- Maxims of the Law. -- Cmpleat Lawyer. Nusances. Novae
Narrationes.
ORdinances of the Lord Protector. Ordinances in Parliament. Owens Reports.
Orders for the Poor. Orders in Chancery.
PVltons Statutes. -- Abridgement. -- De pace Regis. Plowdens Reports. --
Abridgement* -- Quaeres. Pophams Reports. Powels Atturuyes Accademy. -- Court
Leet. -- Repertory of Records. -- Atturneys Almanac* -- Search of Records.
Penal Statutes. Perfect Conveyancer. Perkins Law in French. idem English.
Practice of the Chancery. Presidents or Instruments.
RAstals Statutes at large 2. voll. -- Abridgement. -- Entries. Register of
Writs.. Rules of the Upper Bench. -- Commons Pleas. -- Chancery. Ridlys view of
the Civil Law. Reformatio Legum Ecclesiast.
SCobels Collection of Acts and Ordinances. Statutes of 16th and 17th. Caroli.
Statutes of Ireland 2. Volumes. Stathams Abridgement. Scotch Laws 2. Volumes.
Sheppards Epitome of the Common and Statute Law. -- Touchstone of Common
assureances. -- Marrow of the Law or the Faithful Counselor, 2. parts. --
Parsons Guide, or the Law of Tithes. -- Presidents of Presidents. -- Justice of
Peace: -- Justices Clerks Cabinet Presidents -- Office of Constables. -- Court
Keepers Guide. -- County Courts. -- Proposals for regulating the Law. Spelmans
Glossarie. -- Constitutions. Smalls Declarations. Swinburne of Wills. Special
Law Cases. Seldom of Tithes. -- Arguments about Liberty of the Subject. --
Privileges of the Barons in Parliament. Sea-Lawes in 8^ Shearmans Estates
Tail. Shipmoney- Star Chamber Case. Stamfords Pleas of the Crown. Skeine
verborum significat. Stones Readings on the Statute of Bankrupts. Styles
Practical Register.
TEnures of Ireland. Table to Edward the 3d. second part -- Quadragesimus. --
to Henry the 6th. -- to Henry the 7th. -- to Dyer.
THree Readings viz. of Sir James Dyer, Sergeant Brograve, and Sir Tho. Risden.
Judge Thorps Charge. Tothils Transactions in Chancery. Treatise of Barons.
Trotmans abridgement of Cooks Reports Theloalls Digest of Writs, Terms of the
Law.
VErnons Regulation of the Exchequer.
WInches Reports. Wests Presidents, 2. parts. Woman's Lawyer. Wisemans Law of
Laws. Wingates abridgement of the Statutes. -- Body of the Law. -- Summary of
the Common Law. -- Statuta pacis. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs. White of the
praise of the Law.
YOungs Vade Mecum.
ZOuch Elementa juris-prudentiae. -- Iuris Fecialis. -- Specimen Questionum. --
Questions and Cases Resolved.
Books Printed for, and sold by GABRIEL BEDEL, and THOMAS COLLINS. 1656. (Viz.)
Books in Folio.
THe Complete Ambassador, containing the Letters and Negotiations of Sir
Francis Walsingham, the L. Burleigh, and other eminent persons; being a
perfect Series of the most remarkable passages of State, both at home and
abroad, in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth of blessed memory; collected by Sir Dudly
Diggs. The History of the Civil Wars of France, written in Italian by Henrico
Catterino D' Avila, the whole fifteen books; Translated into English by Sir
Charles Cotterel, and William Aylesbury. Idem the Continuation alone, being
ten books. A complete Chronicle of England; begun by John Stowe, and continued
by Edmund Howes Gent with an appendix of the Universities of Eng. A French
English Dictionary, with another in English and French, compiled by Randal
Cotgrave, Gent. whereunto are added the Animadversions, and Supplement of James
Howel Esquire The Life and Reign of King Henry the VIII written by the Right
Honorable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Annals Veteris Testamenti, a prima
Mundi Origin deducti, una cum rerum Asiaticarum, and Aegyptiacarum chronico; a
Temporis Historici Principio, usque ad Maccabaicorum initia producto, Jacobo
Usserio Armachano, digestore. Idem, Secunda Pars, usque ad Imperii Vespasiani
Initia, atque Extremum Templi, and Rei publicae Judaicae excidium. deductum
Authore Jacobo Vsserio. Of Government and Obedience, as they stand directed and
determined by Scripture and Reason; in four books, by John Hall of Richmond,
Gent. Daultons Country Justice, corrected and enlarged, by the Authors own
hand before his death; unto which is Annexed, and Appendix or Abridgment of all
the late Acts, and Ordinances that relate to the Office of a Justice of Peace,
to the year 1655 by a Barrester learned in the Laws. I. Ragguagli Di Parnasso,
or Advertisements from Parnassus, in two Centuries: with the Politic
Touchstone; written Originally in Italian, by that famous Roman Traiano
Bocalini, and now put into English by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of
Monmo^th. The History of Philosophy, in eight parts, containing those on whom
the Attribute of Wise was conferred; with the pictures of several Philosophers,
by Thomas Stanley Esquire Historical Relations of the United Provinces of Flanders,
containing the Natural conditions of the people, with the Forms of Government.
With the Complete History of the Wars of Flanders, written in italian, by the
Learned and Famous Cardinal Bentivoglio, Englished by the Right Honorable
Henry Earl of Monmouth, the whole work Illustrated with many figures of the
chief Personages mentioned in this History. Politic Discourses; written in
Italian by Paolo Paruta a Noble Venetian Cavalier, and Procurator of S. Mark.
Whereunto is added, a short Soliloquy, in which the Author briefly examins the
whole course of his Life: Rendered into English by the right Honorable, Henry
Earl of Monmouth. Eadmeri Monachi Cantuariensis, Historiae Novorum Sive Sui
seculi, res Gestas sub Guilielm. I and II, and Henric. I. Emisit Joannes
Seldenus. Seldeni Mare clausum, seu de dominio maris. Notes and Illustrations
on Palaealbion. The History of the Reign of King Henry the VII written by the
Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam Viscount S. Alban; unto which is annexed
a very useful Table. Orlando Furioso, in English Heroical verse; Illustrated
with Figures, with an Addition of Epigrams; by Sir John Harrington. The Marrow
of the French Tongue, by John Woodroeph Gent. Pyrotechnia, or the Art of Fire
works, with an addition of Logarithmes; by John Babington, Student in the
Mathematics. Devotions upon certain Festivals, Piously, and Learnedly expressed
in Meditations, by that Accomplished Gent. William Austen, of Lincolnes Inn. Esquire
Books in Copartnership with W.L. and D.P.
A Collection of Acts in the year 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651. very useful,
especially for Justices of the Peace, and other officers, with several other
Ordinances of like concernment, by Henry Scobel Esquire Clark of the Parliament,
and Clark of his Highness Council. A Collection of all those Ordinances,
Proclamations, Declarations, etc. which have been printed and published since
the Government was established in his Highness the Lord Protector, (viz) from
December. 16. 1653. unto September. 3. 1654. with their several dates, and
Dependencies, comprised in a lesser volume then before, for the better use and
benefit of the Reader, printed by his Highness Printer. (...)

