Moral Essays; Wherein some of Mr. LOCKS AND Monsir. Malbranch's Opinions are
briefly examined.

Together with an ANSWER To some CHAPTERS in the Oracles of REASON CONCERNING
DEISM.

By Ja. Loud, Rector of Settrington in Yorkshire.

YORK, Printed by I. White for Fra Hildyard, and are to be sold by Brab Aylmer
at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill, and Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Church, London. 1699.

To the Right Honorable, John Earl of Bridge-water, Viscount Brackley, Baron
of Ellesmere, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Bucks, and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
TItles do not so much make some Men great, as show them to be so; Gold has an
intrinsic value in it, even before the Stamp; thus the Honors of your Family,
and the Favors and Smiles of your Prince, which yet are very great
Happinesses, are not the essential Ingredients of your more solid and
intrinsic Nobility. Virtue and Piety are the great Ornaments and Stability of
the Throne it self; nor is it a less Happiness to a Kingdom, when Nobles
inherit their Fathers Virtues together with their Fortunes: Thus should I have
looked upon that long Train of Virtues, which your Lordship takes more pleasure
in practicing, than in having them recounted, almost as hereditary to you, if
thereby I might not seem to lessen your personal Title to 'em; and I hope you
will give others leave to express what they are so intimately sensible of, the
great Benefit and Advantage they receive by such benign Influences.

My Lord,

I shall not here attempt any thing by way even of your Lordships just
Character, because the greatness thereof, and your own native averseness from
all such Panegyricks, do wholly discourage me herein, so that this will be the
p^culiar C^aracter of this Epistle Dedicatory, that it comes as f^r short of
the real worth of its Patron, as others usually exceed ^t.

Only your Lordship must pardon me and others, if in this declining state of
Religion and Piety in the World, we call in the Aids and Assistances of such
Examples as are able, not only to recommend the practice of Virtue to others,
but also to render it, even Honorable in the midst of a perverse Age.

But I am afraid that I am injurious to the Public, whilst I thus employ your
precious Minutes; if perhaps you vouchsafe to give this short Address the
reading. I shall now only take this Opportunity, gratefully to acknowledge
those many Favors, which by the long Experience of many Years, I have received
from you; it is to Your Lordship and Noble Family, that I owe these happy
Retiremenrs, wherein I shall not be wanting to this part of my Duty, to pray
for your long Health and Happiness, and that God would long continue your
Lordship to us, a great Example of all Virtues, and a great instrument of
public and private Good. This is, and shall be the constant Prayer of,

My Lord, your Lordships most obliged, and most obedient Servant, Ia. Loud.

THE PREFACE.
PRefaces are now grown so customary, that Readers generally think themselves
neglected without 'em, otherwise I should not have concerned my self herein,
the subject matter of these Papers not affording any great occasion for such an
Address. I hope thou will not impute it to any pragmatical conceitedness, if I
thus fill up some vacant Minutes, not wholly taken up in the employment of a
Country Cure, with such Meditations as these.

Besides, the Civility of Mr. Locks Answer on the one Hand, and the concerns of
Truth on the other, did in a great measure, call for some suitable Reply; I did
not indeed, for some time, think the Controversy betwixt him and me,
considerable enough to trouble either him or my self with these disputes, (and
some perh^ps may think so still) but so it happened that a friend of mine
lately asked me, whether I was really satisfied and convin^'d with what Mr.
Lock had writ in his Preface in answer to my former Treatise, I told him I was
not; whereupon he replied, that then Mr. Lock had taught me in his late
Controversy with the learned Bishop of Worcester, that good manners required
me to acknowledge the honor he did me, in taking notice of what I formely
writ, and that I was bound in Civility to represent the Reasons why I cannot
bring my Sentiments wholly to agree with his; for it seems a piece of
^ullenness and disrespect to remain dissatisfied, and not acquaint those from
whom they may most reasonably expect information why they are so.

And further, when I considered that several others, viz. J. S. and Mr.
Becconsall had variously disputed those little Controversies betwixt Mr. Lock
and me, I humbly conceived I might be allowed more fully to explain my Sense
and Meaning therein, and then leave the whole with the judicious and impartial
Reader, where it must rest at last.

Another design of these Papers is to show the weakness of the Pretenses, and
the inconclusiveness of the Deists Arguments; I mean such as they themselves
have of late made use of in their own Defense, and I have the rather chosen to
answer some of those short Letters in the Oracles of Reason, both because I
hope this may be done without any great tediousness to the Reader, and also
because this is not liable to any of those Objections, that the dry method of
the Scholastic Ob. and Sol. (as it is sometimes called) is liable unto.

The Deists here plead their own cause, and if it prove not so strong as was
expected, they have no Body to blame but themselves for it, and if they think
it has suffered by any personal failures, they may at their own pleasure employ
better Advocates.

I do not here pretend to advance any new Notions, but only with as much
strength and clearness as I can to defend the old, and therefore I know what I
here write, is not like to meet with any general good reception in such a
curious Age as this, only I hope there may be some in the World who will not
think the worse of Truth because it is gray headed, Truth being always of the
elder House; for though Antiquity has not been so successful in ^inding out
Hypotheses of Natural Philosophy, yet I think it has been more happy in settling
Morality npon its true Foundations: I am not for venerable Nonsense being
preferred before new Sense, nor yet am I for venerable Sense being slighted in
respect of new Nonsense, it is the greatest instance of folly imaginable, to
run out of one extreme into anot^er, and though the former Ages have been too
much led by Authority, and addicted to ancient Errors, yet it will not hence
follow, that all new Notions are true.

I am apt to believe, that some Opinions now prevailing in the World owe their
reception therein to the positiveness of their Patrons, and to the silence of
those of the contrary persuasion, rather than to any strength of Rea^ on that
would be found in 'em, were they duly ex^min'd, there are some whose Notions
are so i^^ric^^e and their expressions so much out of the common Road, that
many times they do facere intelligendo, ut alij saltem nihil intelligant: what
I here design, therefore in these Papers is clearne^s and perspicuity; for
however deep the pit might be wherein the Ancients pla^'d Truth, yet I never
heard that it was muddy, so that what is said of the method of Salvation by the
Gospel, Romans 10. 8. may be applied generally to all things of a moral Nature,
the word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thine Heart.

The learned and judicious Author of the Occasional Papers, Paper 1. Pa. 4.
tells us, that it would be of great Service both to Religion and good Manners,
to have ill Books as they are published, considered calmly by Men of Temper. I
would only propound it further to Consideration, whether it might not be
convenient also somewhat to enlarge the design, and not only take notice of ill
Books as he calls them, such as either directly, or by natural and easy
consequence tend to undermine our Faith, or corrupt our Manners; not only I say
to take notice of such, but also of the more material mistakes, even of good
ones, the best and wi^est Men may ^ometimes be mistaken in their principl^s or
d^du^tions from them, and it is no d^sparagement ^or any one to acknowledge it.

There is one thing further wherein I must beg thy pardon; the^e D^^cour^es
want one great ornament of all Compo^ures (Essays themselves not being
excepted.) that is, my transitions are not so soft and well connected as they
ought to be; this I am very sensible of, what the Reason hereof may be, I know
not, whether it be my want of Skill, which I rather think, nobis non licet esse
tam disertis, or want of leisure, my other employments not suffering me to
apply my Self to these thoughts, but at certain intervals, or my natural (but I
confess, very culpable) indifferency both as to Style and Method; however it
is, if this be any satisfaction to thee, I do willingly acknowledge my fault
herein.

Nor must thou expect full and just Discourses upon Each of those Points I here
mention, neither my Ability nor Inclination concurring herein fully to exhaust
a Subject.

I have no other end or design in these Papers, but only the search and defense
of Truth, and if in any thing I be mistaken, (and who can se^vre himself from
mistakes) I shall think my self obliged to any one, who shall with candor and
calmness show me my Error.

Mr. Lock's Epistle to the Reader examined, so far as concerns the Law of
fashion and innate notions in his second Edition of his Essay of humane
understanding.
WHAT benefit or advantage, as to the concerns of truth and useful knowledge,
the World may receive by that little difference in Dispute betwixt Mr. Lock and
me, I know not, yet herein I hope, we have given an instance of the possibility
of manageing a controversy without hard words, or unhansome Reflections; and
if even this was more generally observed, it would very much advance the
interest of truth, however of Love and Friendship in the World among persons of
different Opinions. I do not in the least question the truth and sincerity of
what he there professes, that he is always ready to renounce his own and
receive the opinion of others, according as truth appears on either side; yet I
hope he will pardon me, if I take the freedom to say, that the Instance he
there gives of altering of his opinion in reference to the last determination
of the will of Man, does not seem to come up so fully to his purpose, seeing he
does not there so much quit any Opinion of his own to embrace that of another,
as to renounce the common opinion of most, tho then believed by him to
entertain an Opinion, I think, purely his own.

Mr. Lock there complains, that his meaning is often mistaken, and that he has
not always the good Luck to be rightly understood: This is a common complaint
in such circumstances, and I think, I may also lay a just claim to a share
therein, but if I have mistaken his meaning in any thing, whatever the cause
might otherwise be, I do insist upon this in my own vindication, that it was
not out of any wilful design: And I furth^r assure that Learned Man, that I
never did think my self, nor went about to insinuate to others, that it was my
Opinion of him, that he absolutely held no real difference or distinction
betwixt Vice and Virtue: I did only ask this question there, Whether if Men
should place their commendation or blame on that s^ide which deserved it not,
whether that would alter the nature of things? This I conceived, might either
set the thing in a clearer light in it self, or give him occasion so to do. I
there also farther appealed to himself Pa. 17. of his 1 st. Edition, where I
suppose he did not only declare the sense of the Heathen Philosophers, but his
own too upon this Subject, when he grounds the reason of Men's keeping their
word, not upon the approbation of the place, Men live in, But upon the honesty
and dignity of the thing it felf.

I did also read and consider those other places, where he does positively
assert the unchangeable Rules of right and wrong, only I must confess, I did
much wonder how so Learned a Man should go so near, as I thought to contradict
himself in other places, where his expressions seemed, at least, to me then, to
infer the the Rules of Vice and Virtue to be of a more changeable Nature,
perticularly in that place I quoted Pa. 159. Virtue is every where that which
is thought praiseworthy, and nothing else but that which has the allowance of
public esteem, is virtue.

But instead of is Virtue, in the 1 st. Edition, it is now is called Virtue, in
the Second, therefore, I suppose, he says That the 2d. Edition will give me
satisfaction in the point, and that this matter is now so expressed, as to
show, there was no cause of scruple. It may be so expressed now perhaps that
there is no cause of scruple (tho that I much question) but it will not sollow
hence, that ^here was none, but rather the contrary, because he has altered his
Expression in such a material point.

But he tells us, That he was there, not laying down moral Rules, but showing
the Original and nature of moral Ideas. For my part I dare scarce trust my own
eyes against his word; I shall here quote part of the Paragraph, which he here
refers to, P. 157. 6. Of these moral Rules or Laws, to which Men generally
refer, and which they judge of the rectitude or pravity of their actions, there
seem to me to be three sorts. Here he seems to me to call 'em moral Rules,
but whether he means the same thing by moral Rules here, that he means in
his Epistle, that he himself is best able to resolve. Vid, Mr. Becconsall, P.
199. 200. etc. But I must confess, that if I was mistaken in any thing, it was
in what he tells us immediately after; that in that place I there quoted, (and
if so, then by consequence in all those other places, which in the same Chapter
may seem liable to the same exception) That he only reported as matter of fact,
what others call Virtue and Vice, etc.

I shall therefore here briefly lay down the reasons, why I did not so
apprehend him, and then leave it to Mr. Lock's own candor to pass judgment.

I shall not need, to Premise, that it is only the 1 st. Edition of his Book,
that I am concerned in, without taking notice of any alterations, or
explications he has made in his 2 d. my discourse being writ, before his 2 d.
Edition was Printed, and therefore; 1 st. Besides what I have already
mentioned^ there are some other passages in that Chapter, wherein he seems to
speak his own opinion rather then mere matter, of ^act what others call vice or
virtue 158. P.. 7. By the relation our actions bear to the Divine Law, We
judge, whether they be sins or dutys, by the 2d. The Civil Law, whether they be
criminal or innocent. By the 3d. By the Philosohhicall Law, whether they be
Virtues or Vices. So P. 160.. 14. There having resolved the complex Idea, we
signify by the word Murder, into its simple Ideas, he proceeds, this
Collection of simple Ideas being found by me to agree or disagree, with the
esteem of the Country, I have been bred in, and to be held by most Men there,
worthy praise or blame; I call the action vertuons or vicious. Now I had
thought that We and I, especially being joined with such Words as these, We
judge and I call together with this expression found by me, had included a Man's
self ( Chap. of Identity 20.) Vrbem, quam dicunt Romam Melibaee, putavi,
Stultus Ego, hunc nostroe similem.
Truly I imagined that, in things of this nature, Men had generally spoken
after the same manner all England over.

About the Year 1284. There were some Grammatical heresies, that is, some
false Latin and false Grammar condemned, by Arch Episcopal Authority, such as
these, Ego currit, nullum nomen est tertiae personae. far be it from me to
impute any such Sollaecismes to this Learned Author; however I think, that I
had very good reason to apply these expressions to the 1 st. Person, rather
than to any third. 2 ly. It Is observeable that he pleads for this 3 d. Law, and
that with all the force of reason, perhaps, that the thing is capable of, now
when Men relate things, as mere matter of fact, what others either do or say,
they usually leave 'em to stand or fall by their own evidence; I question
whether ever any did so much toward the giving Men's actings according to
custom or opinion, the formality and grandeur of a Law before, and as for the
sanction, with all the Elaborate circumstances he has annexed to it, I think it
is perfectly his own. P. 159. 160.. 12. But I must beg leave here to say that
the most Hetrodox writer (absit verbo invidia) might perhaps thus take upon him
only the same character of a Relator, after he had used and urged all the
Arguments that either reason or Authority could afford him for his particular
opinion.

I do not here say he so far pleaded for this Law of custom or opinion, as to
make it the standing Rule of Vice or Virtue truly so called, or of right and
wrong, as he some times calls 'em, but only that he espoused the cause and
pleaded for that Law further than the thing would well bear. And these are the
reasons that did more especially induce me to think, that he did not there take
upon him the bare Off^ce of a Relator.

To which I might also add, if it was necessary, what he says. P. 159.. 12. If
any one shall imagine that I have forgott my own notion of a Law, when I make
the Law whereby Men judge of Virtue and Vice, to be nothing else, but consent
of private Men, etc. This is not spoken like one, who barely relates matter of
fact: Others indeed may, and that justly too, act in obedience to that rule of
decency and common repute, yet I think he was one of the first that made it a
Law, especially such, where by Men judge of Virtue and Vice.

I shall only add one or two considerations more upon this Subject, before I
leave it.

1 st. It seems a peculiar way of speaking, not yet grown common in the World,
when he assigns the Names of vice and virtue to such actions, as are agreeable
or dissagreeable to common reputation, and for that reason, because they are
so, whereas it always was, and still is the more usual way, not only of judging
what things are in their own nature, but also of denominating actions virtuous
or vicious rather from their agreeableness or disagreeableness to the dictates
of reason, and the law of Nature, rather than from the custom of the Place. I
grant indeed, that what ever is truly virtuous, is generally counted laudable,
but it is not therefore virtuous, because laudable, but therefore laudable
because virtuous.

Now I think that neither Names, nor the grounds and reasons of 'em ought more
to be altered, than the Ancient Landmarks in Public Fields, ought to be
removed; for nothing but disorder, confusion and needless disputes will arise
from both.

I cannot pretend to be acquainted with all the particular Modes of speaking
throughout the World, yet I much question, whether this be the most common and
general acceptance of that word Virtue, that it is taken most commonly for
those actions, which according to to the different opinions of several Countries
are accounted laudable. page 23. 18. or however, not under that formality,
because they were so counted. I do not here dispute concerning the true and
proper acceptance of the word Virtue, as Mr. Lock has rightly stated it in the
very next period, but only as to matter of fact, even what apprehensions other
Nations generally had of it.

I grant indeed that we shall sometimes find different practices in different
places about the same thing, and all abounding in their own sense and pleading
for the fitness and decency of their own particular way: Thus some thought it
the most Decent and Honorable way of burying their Dead by eating of 'em,
others by Burning, others by Enterring, and no doubt all thought their own
Method the best: But these are matters of indifferency, and so do not strictly
come up to our present case, but however it may be further asked whether or no
these several sorts of People did count themselves only Virtuous herein, and
all the rest Vicious.

Quakers are very rude and uncivil in Thouing People, as we call it, especially
those that are not of their own Club, but I wish they had no greater Vices to
answer for than this. I have heard of a King that was both blind and Lame,
whereupon it was grown in fashion, and a laudable custom in that Court, not to
appear but with one Eye covered, and with some counterfeiting at least a
lameness. These were indeed very complaisant Courtiers, but why they should be
called Virtuous for their dissimulation I know not, nor whether they were
accounted so, even in that Place, where the thing was grown so fashionable,

Thieves live in good Repute and Credit among themselves, and no doubt applaud
their own Exploits in their own Clubs, but yet I much question whether they
think violence and rapine to be Virtues or no, or do indeed call 'em so. They
may perhaps employ their wits and fancy's to excuse their way of living, but
not to justify it, nor to raise it to a degree of Virtue; or if we should
suppose one among the rest more modest in his apprehensions and not retain such
Heroic thoughts of Theft and Murder^ as the others did, yet I fancy his Life
would not be so uneasy to him as Mr. Locks Sanction would seem to make it. pa.
159. I scarce think that any Christian Nation (and the Christian World is a
Scene large enough for this dispute) does call that a virtue, which either is
in it self, or by any other Christian Nation is called a vice. Whoredom, though
in some Countries permitted and but too much in fashion, yet it is not even
there called a virtue, though perhaps it may be counted a lesser vice. And why
should we here in England begin to unhinge and unsettle (...) whose sense and
meaning always was and still ought to be more fixed and constant.

2. this Law of Opinion and Reputation, as it is made to Constitute a distinct
Law, is not well grounded, for a Law is always supposed to bring men under an
obligation, now the things in fashion among men, if they be contrary to the Law
of Nature, let men's opinions of 'em be what they will, yet they are no Law to
any one, and if they be agreeable to the Law of Nature, then they do so far
coincidere with the Divine Law, and do not constitute a new Species of Law.

But I must remember what Mr. Lock reminds me of, that he only relates what
others say, not what he defends. But if so, then I can mention several other
rules, which men sometimes make Laws to themselves, viz. their respective
tempers and humors, and the prejudices of Education: which are as much Laws to
these men in their respective Clubs, as opinion and reputation are to others in
theirs.

But he goes on, whatsoever Authority, he says, I place in my old English
Dictionary, it no where tells me, that the same action is not in credit, called
and reputed a virtue in one place, which being in disrepute passes for and
under the name of vice in another. But with submission I must tell him, that
what ever Authority he places in his new way of speaking, yet, though our English
Dictionarys (his as well as mine) no where say, that the same actions are not
variously reputed, so or so in various places (for that is not their business)
yet they no where say, that they are. For both our Dictionarys and Moral
Philosophers (I appeal to both) tell us, that vice and virtue are much what the
same with good and evil, sin and duty, and by consequence, that they did not,
at least in those times so much as receive their denomination from Custom, but
if he had instanced in one particular action in the whole Christian World,
which in one Place was counted a virtue and in another a vice, it would have
added much light to the whole, and better explained his meaning.

The taking notice that Men bestow the names of virtue and vice, according to
the rule of reputation, is all I have done, or can be laid to my charge to have
done, toward the making of vice virtue, and virtue vice.

Here I would only ask whether this, of Men's bestowing the names of virtue and
vice, according to the rule of reputation, be in it self a just well grounded
and reasonable action, if it be, why does he not assert and defend it, if it be
not, why does he found a Law viz. of opinion and reputation, upon the
unwarrantable and ill grounded actions of Men.

But he seems to commend me, (upon what account I know not) for taking the
alarm, as he calls it, even at expressions, which standing alone by themselves
might sound ill and be suspected I know not what he means by expressions
standing alone by themselves. I hope he will grant, that several expressions,
standing alone by themselves, that is at certain distances, yet all upon the
same account justly exceptionable, may be taken notice of; and I suppose he now
understands, that it was not only one single expression, dropped as it were by
chance from his Pen, that I found fault with but with his whole way of arguing
upon that particular.

It Is to this zeal, allowable in his Function,

Some think this to be a reflection upon my Function, as if its proper business
was to be employed in impertinencies, but I am willing, according to my
Function, to put the most favorable interpretation upon things that they are
capable of bearing, that I forgive his Citing my words, as he there does, etc.
It Is my happiness, that I find, that some Men, as they are great, so they are
also merciful. I also thank him for the respect he seems to show to the
Function, but Zeal without knowledge (as he must suppose mine to be, for
otherwise I should never have found fault, where there was no ground for it) is
no more pardonable in my Function, than in others, p^rhaps less. But no one
they say refuses Gods and the Kings Pardon. I will go a little further, and not
only accept, but humbly beg his Pardon too if I be in the wrong, but I hope I
may contestari litem. He blames me for not taking notice of those words
immediately preceding those of his, The exhortations of inspired Teachers, etc.
But it was not much material to my Purpose, nor any way Prejudi^ial to his
Cause, whether I did or no, as I hope will appear in the Sequel. He also blames
me for quoting that Place of St. Paul, Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, if there
be any Praise, etc. In a sense he used it not. Truly I am not yet convinced,
that I quoted it in any other sense, than the Apostle spoke it, and if he used
it in any other, I cannot tell how to help it, he must look to that, but he
says, he brought this passage of St. Paul, to show that for reasons he there
gives, Men in that way of denominating their actions, do not for the most part
much vary from the Law of Nature, which is that standing and unalterable rule,
by which they ought, etc.

I am of his opinion too in this particular, viz. that in so doing, they do not
for the (...) etc.

And yet not for this reason because St. Paul says watsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think of these things.
For indeed St. Paul here supposes some things either in themselves of good
report, or in their own natures indifferent, and by the Innocent and la^dable
custom of that place made so, and then they are the subject matter of a
Command, think of these things: but then by bare mentioning things of good
report, he does not concern himself in that question, how far Men in
denominating their actions according to common repute, may or may not vary from
the Law of Nature:

Though by the way it seems but a very humble commendation of this Law of opinion
or reputation, which is attended with all these diminutions, That it is such as
(only) for the most part does not much vary from the Law of Nature. That is, it
may sometimes, nay frequently too, and in some degree vary from it.

But St. Paul, being an inspired Teacher, certainly would not appeal to common
repute under those Formalitys and disadvantagious circumstances, seeing he was
there laying down Rules for the guidance of all succeeding Ages of the Church
So that the things of good report, which the Apostle appeals to, (...), but
always agree with the Law of Nature, or at least were not contrary to it.

The Exhortations of Inspired Teachers have not feared to appeal to common
repute, etc. By this must be understood such an appeal, as refers to Practice,
think of these things; now I durst appeal to Mr, Lock himself whether the
Apostle would exhort Men to the practice of things of good report, without any
restriction or limitation; since he himself does acknowledge that Men, in
denominating their actions according to this Law, do (only) For the most part
not much vary from the Law of nature. Whereby, even in the Corruption of
manners, the true Boundarys of the Law of nature, which ought to be the Rule of
Virtue and Vice, were prtty well preserved.

These are the Words, upon account of which he blamed me, because I did omit
'em; but does he indeed think, that the Apostle in this case would have
appealed to such a state of things without exception, wherein the true
Boundarys of the Law of Nature were, (only) pretty well preserved. It Is granted
on all hands, that the Law of Nature ought indeed to be the Rule of virtue and
vice; but it seems it is not always actually so: If this be not the meaning of
that expression pretty well preserved, I know not what is. And what advantage
is this to his cause? I hope Mr. Lock is not one of those, who would here tell
us, that the rule, which the Apostle here lays down, is not absolutely certain
and infallible, but only such, as for the most part, and more generally is
true: For this would ill comport with the Caracter of an Inspired Teacher:

Nor do I see, what tolerable Sense can be made of these words, If there be any
virtue, If there be any praise, Or why they are introduced, according to Mr.
Lock's way of interpreting the Place.

I have insisted the longer upon this Subject, and represented my thoughts the
more variously, that if possible I might the more certainly hit the Authors
meaning, for I must confess, that such is either the obscurity of his
Expres^ion, or of his way of Arguing here, or such the dullness of my capacity,
that I cannot be assured, that I fully apprehend his meaning in this particular.

But then as to Natural notions, he says, we are better agreed than I thought
of; if so, I am glad of it, for I can assure him, I take no pleasure in having
any difference with any one: But I am afraid, there will, upon examination, be
found some small difference betwixt us, in this particular also.

In stating the Question, he says, I leave nothing in it contrary to what he
had said. I shall here first Transcribe my stating of it, so far as is
necessary in this particular, that so the Reader may be the better able to
judge betwixt us. P. 52. These Natural notions, are not so Imprinted upon our
Souls, as that they naturally and necessarily exert themselves (even in
Children and Idiots) without any assistance from the outward Senses, or without
the help of some previous cultivation, for thus reason it self, which yet, we
say, is natural to a Man is not so born with him, but that it requires some
Supervenient assistances, before it arrive at the true exercise of it self, and
it is as much as I here contend for, if these notions be in the same sense
connaturall to the Soul, as Reason it self is.

And farther, the use of our understanding being First supposed that is, our
faculties laboring of no natural defect, nor deprived of those other
advantages, that God and Nature have made necessary there unto, then our Souls
have a natural power of finding, or framing such principles or propositions,
the truth or knowledge whereof no ways depends upon the evidence of sense or
observation. And now does Mr. Lock indeed say, that these notions are in the
same sense Connatural to the Soul, as reason it self is? Does he indeed grant
to our Souls a native power of finding or frameing such principles or
propositions, the truth or knowledge whereof no ways depends upon the Evidence
of sense or Observation? and yet, methinks he must grant this too, if he hold
to his intuitiue certainty; and if so then we are better agreed, than I thought
of: But then what becomes of that pompous principle, that sensation and
reflections upon sensible Impressions, are the Originals of all our knowledge;
but he proceeds, All that he says for innate, imprinted or inpress'd notions
(for of innate idea's he says nothing at all) amounts only etc. Here he seems
to blame me for not speaking of innate ideas. But 1 st. What reason had I to
enter upon any such discourse, seeing that neither he believes any such, nor do
I Universally assert ^em, nor did my subject naturally lead me hereunto. For I
cannot be convinced of the force of his argument P. 27. That if there be innate
notions, that then there must be innate idea's. I do indeed assert innate
notions, in the sense before explained, but yet I do not say, that all the
respective ideas, viz. simple ideas relating to those notions are innate: I
shall only instance in one or two, Cogito, ergo sum, bare nothing cannot
produce any real Being. P. 312. Of his Essay, of these Mr. Lock says, he has an
intuitiue knowledge or certainty, and yet I do not believe, that there are any
innate ideas of Cogitation, Existence, Production, nothing, etc. The respective
ideas, that these notions are composed of.

2. I had no mind to engage in a discourse of that nature, because I looked
upon the Doctrine of idea^s, as it is now generally managed, to be a very
intricate, and perhaps not altogether such an useful speculation.

The old way of re^olving knowledge, was into these three operations of the
mind, 1 st. Simple apprehension. 2 d. Composition and Division. 3 d. Discourse
from both the former. Now if this ideal Scheme, with all its various Divisions,
and Sub-divisions, be either the same, or do in a great mea^ure concidere with
the former, why should the World be amused, either with making new Words, or
using Old ones in a new Signification. I know Mr. Lock tells us, P. 73. 4. That
it is unavoidable in Discourses differing from the ordinary received notions,
either to make new Words, or use Old ones^ in somewhat a new signification. But
then such Men ought to consider, whether the^e Notions, which appear different
from the Ordinary reccieved ones, do not in a great measure owe their
extrordinarinesse, if I may so speak, rather to the Authors expressing them in
new words, or words of a new signification, rather than to any newn^ss in the
notion it self.

Nor do I see how this way of resolveing knowledge into th^se ideas conveyed
into our minds, by Sensation and Reflection there upon, does any way more
effectually tend to the real advancement of useful knowledge, than the other,
for it rather supposes us already to have attained to that knowledge, which we
thus resolve into these idea's, than to enable us to make any further advances
in it.

Thus I have a general notion of a Book for example; at the first sight, now
if I should resolve this notion into its ideall principles, into all its simple
ideas, etc. I believe I should at last have no better notion or idea of it than
I had before.

I shall only instance in another of his own P, 160.. 14. For example, Let us
consider, the complex idea we signify by the word, Murder, and when we have
taken it asunder, and examined all the particulars, we shall find them to
amount to a Collection of simple ideas, derived from sensation or reflection.
First, from Reflection on the operation of our own minds, we ^ave the ideas of
willing, considering, purposing be^ore-hand malice, or wishing ill to another,
and also of life or perception and self motion. 2ly. From Sensation, we have
the Collection of the simple sensible ideas of a Man, and of some action by
which we put an end to that perception and motion in the Man; all whieh simple
ideas are comprehended in the word Murder. I suppose, he designed here more
particularly to explain to us the nature of Murder, according to his ideall
way, by sensation and reflection. Now if we should thus explain the Word or go
about to instruct an honest Country-Iury-ma^ in the nature of the thing, Viz.
Of Murder, he would certainly stare at us, and perhaps think that we were not
much overgrown, either with Law or Reason; but never understand the nature of
Murder one jot the better for it. I never yet observed that Lushington's
Logic, which is either a new way of thinking or a new way of expressing old
thoughts ever made that improvement of knowledge in the World, which the Author
at first perhaps promised himself it would do.

P. 44.. 24. The impressions then that are made upon our selves by outward
Objects, that are extrinsecall to the mind, and its own operations about these
impressions reflected on by its self, as proper Objects to be contemplated by
it, are, I conceive the original of all knowledge. Here it is observeable, that
the reflection is made upon the operations of the mind, as employed and
exercised about these outward impressions, now one might have thought, that the
streams would not have risen above the Fountains head, and that the
reflections upon these outward impressions would not have produced idea's of a
quite different nature from the rest. So that that which Mr. Norris. P. 61. Of
his remarks upon the Athenian Society, puts upon these ideas, seems to be the
most natural and obvious sense and meaning of 'em, Viz. That these ideas of
reflection are but a secondary sort of ideas, that result from the various
compositions, and modifications of these primary ones of sensation. Otherwise
this notion of his, which he seems to advance with some kind of pompous train
of thought, as if something out of the common road of former methods, will, at
last dwindle into this, which has been the common and general opinion of all
the considering part of Mankind herein, that all knowledge proceeds either from
the senses, or from the understanding, in its most extensive capacity, however
qualified and disposed for that purpose. But by reflection among other things
he includes the power of negation: Thus from conception of some thing by
negation hereof he forms an idea of nothing: But now methinks we are got far
above the sphere of sensation, for nothing cannot be the object of sense, nor
make any impression upon the outward organs, and yet the Soul can frame
propositions of as great truth and evidence from this nothing; as it can from
something Ex. gr. bare nothing cannot produce a real being, but to proceed.

He says that I make innate notions conditional things depending upon the
concurrence of several other circumstances, in order to the Souls exerting
them; and so leave nothing in the stating of the Question, contrary to what he
had said before. But I shall quit the place, upon which he grounds this, and
then leave it to the Reader to judge, whether he has done me right or no, P.
78. Of my former discourse. I was there complaining of some Men who will put
such a sense upon these Words, innate or natural, as if a thing could not be
thus natural or innate to the Soul, unless it did so immediately and
necessarily stare Children and Fools in the face, that they must necessarily
assent thereto, even before, by the common course of nature, they are capable
of assenting to any thing; whereas those who defend this Question, make these
natural or innate notions more conditional things, depending on the
concurrence of several other circumstances, etc. Now I appeal to the Reader,
whether these notions may not be more conditional things, or not such absolute
ones, as necessarily to stare Children or Fools in the Face, and yet not such
as Mr. Lo^k makes '^m and yet not such as owe their origionall to sen^^^ion or
re^lection upon sensible impre^sions. But h^ s^ys that all I say for innate
notions amoun^s only to this, that there are certain propos^tions, which tho
the Soul, from the beginning, or when ^ Man is born, does not know, yet by
assistance from the outward sen^es, and the help o^ some previous cultivation,
it may afterward come certainly to know the truth of.

1 st. I do not say that Infants have that actual knowledge of these
propositions, any more than they have the actual exercise o^ reason; Yet by
a^sistance from the outward sen^es^ etc. Here I cannot but take notice, how
industriously he endeavous to fix his own sense upon my Words, tho 'indeed they
will not bear it; but certainly here must be some mistake, either in him or me,
as to this particular, for in the stating of the Question, I s^id; that the
truth and knowledge of these propositions did no way depend upon the evidence
of sen^e or observation, therefore methinks, I should not presently say, that
by the assistance of the outward senses w^ afterward come to the certain
knowledge of them, in the same sense wherein he seems to intimate it: But what
if I never s^^d any such thing at all, or what I said will not amount to any
such sense, as he put there upon it? He might have done well to have quoted the
place, then might we better have examined the sense and meaning of it: But I
think those expressions (nor any thing like 'em) do no where occur in my Book,
what com^s the nearest is P. 52. I shall transcribe the Words, and let the
Reader judge: These natural notions are not so imprinted upon the Soul, as
that they naturally, and necessarily exert themselves (even in Children and
idiots) without any assistance from the outward senses, or without the help of
some previous cultivation: For thus reason it felf, which yet we say, is
natural to a Man is not so born with him; but that it requires, etc. I do not
understand, that there is any such thing asserted in this place, as that which
he seems to make my meaning in the former: But I shall have occasion to
examine this place again, upon the like account.

But he seems not to like that expression of the Souls exerting of notions,
as being a very unintelligible and unfit one in this case, misleading Men's
thoughts by an insinuation as if those notions were in the mind, before the
Soul exerts 'em.

But I have already told him, that I do not say, that these notions are in the
mind from the beginning, any other ways than reason it self is; and if I did,
(as Mr. Norris very pertinently asks the question) How does the Author know,
but that these natural impressions, may be so ordered, that they shall not
become legible before such a period of time, I know not how he would confute it.

2 d. I was there d^fending innate notions, and he opposing 'em, it was his
part therefore to prove my assertion ^alse, but when he barely ^inds fault with
this expr^ssion of the Souls ex^rting of notions, as if it mi^ted Men's
thoughts, etc. This is only to suppose it false, but not to prove it so.

He further seems to charge me with some contrariety or inconsistency of
expression. P. 52. There he charges me with saying, that the^e natural no^ions
ex^rt themselves as P. 78. That the Soul exerts 'em.

As to the 1 st. P. 52. That these notions exert thems^lv^s: Truly in that
place, I say no such thing, but ^^^her the contrary, my Words are these; ^hese
natural notions are not so imprinted upon the Soul, as that they naturally and
necessarily exert themselves (even in Children and idiots)

Here we may observe, that the period is n^gative, and the negative particle
exerts its influence, if I may so speak, upon the whole sentence: But however,,
I say, They do not exert themselves without any assistance from, etc. Which
supposes that with such assistances, they do exert themselves, but this perhaps
is the only instance, wherein Mr. Lock does not seem to deal so ingeniously
with me, Viz. To charge me with an inconsistency or impropriety of speech only
by implication; but suppose one, who asserts innate notions should say
sometimes, that they exert themselves, sometimes, that tbe Soul exerts 'em, I
think it would not be any such great inconsistency, unless Men would be too
severely critical, yet this I say, that these natural notions may require or
suppose some assistance from the outward senses or some previous cultivation,
and yet the truth and Knowledge of 'em, not depend upon the evidences of sense
or observation any more than intuitive knowledge does. But he would have me to
explain to my self or others what I mean by the Souls exerting these notions,
and what that previous cultivation, or those other circumstances in order to
their being exerted, are.

1. By the Souls exerting them as it is an act or operation of the Soul, I mean
the same that I do by all other its acts or operations, only the Soul here acts
upon different motives and principles, and upon different occasions, ex. gr.
When the Soul exerts this notion or proposition, Snow is white, the truth of
this she has from sense or experience, but in this, nihili nullae sunt
affectiones, there she acts in a more abstracted way of speculation, without
any notices or assistances, immediately drawn from the s^ns^s: And this I
conceive, is the w^y of his in^uitive certainty. If he says, that this is what
he means by his sensation and reflection, I am very glad of it, and shall no
ways oppose him.

And then as to what I mean by that previous cultivation, or those other
circumstances, etc. He may observe, that I always introduce these expr^ssio^s
with relation or respect to Children going before. And so it was P. 52. and 78.
So that by that previous cultivation or other circumstances I mean all the
previous discipline the Child underwent at School, or elsewhere, all the
benefits and advantages of Education, which are commonly requisite in order to
reasons coming to a competent exercise of it self.

So that, if I should say, that the Soul being so, and so qualified exerts
those notions, so, as to suppose some footsteps of these truths imprinted or
interwoven in the very essential constitution of the Soul, as such that is, as
rational, I think it an assertion not unreasonable in it self, however not
possible to be disproved, or confuted by any one.

Though this is not my way of asserting innate Notions, viz. intellectual
Notions, exclusively of the other, which I shall here subjoyn.

Therefore, 2 dly. If I say that these Notions are of such a frame or bear such
a natural or necessary a^reement to the facultys of our Soul^s, in the free use
and exercise of 'em that they cannot ^ut assent to 'em, when fairly proposed.

I think this is much what the same with the former, especially if we consider,
that I do not h^re suppose the intermediation of any Notices or Ideas drawn
from sense, in the act of producing them, any more than in any act of reason,
or Speculation whatsoever.

Now if either of th^s^ two ways (if perhaps they be diff^rent) prov^ reneable,
then I shall be able to m^in^^in my ground, for in stating the question, I did
not confine my self to either of 'em par^icularly, for I said that supposing
the Soul so and so quallify'd, it then has a native power of finding or framing
such Principles or propositions, the truth or knowledge whereof no ways depends
upon the evidence of sense, or observation.

I have hitherto been upon the explaining Part, in observance of his demand, I
hope he will now give me leave to desire him to explain some things in his
assertions, which s^^m not so easy and obvious to apprehend.

Pa. 318. The k^owledge of our own being we have by Intuition; the Existence of
a God, reason clearly makes known to us, the knowledge of the existence of
other things, we can have only by sensation, here he assigns 3 several ways of
acquiring Knowledge, and in the same Pa. he says, the notice we have by our
senses of the existence of things without us, tho^ it be not altogether so
certain as our intuitive knowledge, or the deductions of our reason etc. Pa.
312, Man knows by an intuitiv^ knowledge that bare nothing cannot pro^^ce any
real being. Now intuitive knowledge was never supposed to be acquired by
sensation, or by any reflection upon material mpressions, and indeed here he
hims^^f acknowledges the same.

Now that which I would desire him to explain to himself or others is, 1. How
this intuitive Knowledge thus asserted is reconcilable with what he say^ Pa.
44 and 24, where sensation and reflexio^ are made the Originals of all
Knowledge. 2. I would desire him to explain how any impressions from out^ard
objects, or any operations of the mind about these impressions reflected on by
it felf, can produce in Man any ^nowledge or sense of Moral good or evil or of
the difference betwixt them; I know he tells us that supposing a God, and such
a creature as Man is, from the relation that one bears to the other, honor
will necessarily b^ due to God, from Man. I grant this, but I do not see, how
he can come to this knowledge from any sensible impressions from without, or by
reflections of the mind ^ereupon.


When he has a little more fully explained these things, I suppose there will be
very little difference betwixt him and me in this particular, an^ that he will,
in some measure be forced to acknowledge with me. Pa. 53. that the Soul, the
free use of our understandings first supposed, has a native power of finding,
or framing such Propositions the truth, or knowledge whereof no way depends
upon the evidence of sense, or observation.

But I must remember that what that Learned Man writ, was only by way of Es^ay,
and I would desire the Reader to look upon what I write too here, in the same
manner: Only I think, that an Essay, like a Town or Fortress once attempted or
besieged ought eit^er to be well defended or fairly given up, and thus much in
Answer to Mr. Lock.

I shall here further take notice of a Cavil of the Atheists, who make it an
Objection against the being of a God, that they do not discover him without any
application, in spite of their corrupt wills and debaucht understandings; if
such a God (say they) as we are told of, had Created and Formed us, surely he
would have left upon our minds a native and indelible inscription of himself,
whereby we must need have felt him, even without seeking, and believed in him,
whether we would or no.

I shall first consider this as a mere Cavil of the Atheists, though as it is
managed by some, it seems rather to be made use of as an Argument against the
natural impression of God upon our minds, than any proof against his being.

And here we may obs^rve.

1. That if the confession of Atheists will add any thing to the Cause in hand,
they themselves do grant, that it was a thing reasonable and becoming, that God
should leave some Natural Character of himself upon the Souls of Men, but the
unreasonableness of the Cavil consists not in the impression it self, but in
the supposed indelibleness and Irresistibility of it, but I hope we shall be
able to account for that by and by. 2. Atheists themselves are sometimes
for^'d, more especially at their Death, to acknowledge a God whether they will
or no, and this is a fair probable Argument at least of this natural
inscription; it is true, God may more ime^i^tely work such effects upon Men's
mind, but his ordinary and regular way of acting is by means, viz. by
restoring, Conscience to its Natural freedom, which before was debauched and
blinded by bad Principl^s and worse Practices; th^se Natural no^ions of good
and evil, and the sense of our Obligation h^reunto, being now more at liberty,
and their consciences more fr^ely excusing or accusing them, though I do not h^re
exclude the influences of Gods Holy Spirit.
But it is here Replied, that God has endued Mankind with powers and abilitys of
Natural light and reason, by which he cannot miss of the dis^overy of a God,
and this is su^^^^ient, and therefore such an Original impression would not be
necessary. But what if there be other Arguments to prove the being of a God,
must we then reject this as useless? Suppose an Atheistical Person should
object against such a particular Epistle or Chapter in Holy Writ, that it is
not Canonical Scripture, must we therefore giv^ up the Point, because perhaps
there is Scripture sufficient to Salvation without it?

But they say, that such an impression would have rendered the belief of a God
i^resistible and necessary, and thereby bereaved it of all that is good and
acceptable in it. But how do they prove, that this impression would make the
belief of a God irresistible and necessary? may there not be such an impression
upon our minds, as may rather gently incline, than forcibly constrain to
belief? May it not be such, as that the power and ef^icacy of it may be, in a
great measure rebated by wilful wickedness and vicious Practices? May there not
be such a thing as Divine Grace, though at the same ^ime we do not believe it to
be irrisistible? But they tell us that such a radical truth that God is, and
springing up with the very E^se^^e of our Souls, is not pretended to by
Religion. But does Religion pretend any thing to the contrary? But supposing
(which yet will not be easily granted) that the Scripture does not either
suppose or assert this natural inscription o^ signature of God upon our minds;
yet does Religion forbid us to make use of any Argument that may be piou^ly or
rationally credible, for the proof of a God?

Scripture does not go about to prove the being of God by Philosophical
arguments, this was not the desig^ of Moses, or the Prophets, or the Apostles,
any other ways, than as the History of the one, and the Prophesies and Miracles
of the others do sufficiently demonstrate it; and therefore it is no argument
against such a Natural impression or idea of God^ because the Scripture does
not particularly insist upon it, for that purpose. The Scripture does argue as
strongly, as any the most accute Philosopher can do, but then it is rather to
prove the atributes, than the being of God; this is rather supposed, than gone
about to be proved in Scripture.

But then I would only ask these opposers of this Natural character of God
upon our minds, whether they do grant any Natural notions of good or evil;
if they do, I know not why they should deny this of God, upon which the other
do depend^ If they do not, they then must make morality a more Mechanical and
Factitious thing than God and Nature ever designed to make it.

So that I humbly conceive, that these Men, whilst they thus go about to
answer the Cavil, do indeed rather cut, than lose the knot, by granting the
truth of this consequence, that if God has made any original impression of
himself upon the minds of Men; then it must be necessary and irresistible as to
the produceing such and such effects upon all Men, and at all times: For by
this means they lay a necess^ity upon themselves of denying any such thing, as
this natural Character or idea of God, whereas they might sufficiently have
answered this Cavil of the Atheists, by granting the being of such a natural
impression, and by denying the consequence, that then it must be irresistible,
in the sense they assert it; and I believe it would require more wit, then the
Atheist either is, or ever will be master of, to prove it.

Addenda to the former Chapter^ Concerning the Law of Custom, and Innate
notions.
MR. Lock in his Preface says, he was in the Chapter there mentioned, not
laying down moral Rules, but enumerating the Rules Men made use of in moral
rela:+tions, whether those Rules were true or false but certainly it is not so
well consistent with that great Character that Mr. Lock bears in the World, to
spend time in laying down Rules in things relating to morality, without any
respect to their being either true or false, considering the bad use the vulgar
and inconsiderate People may, and frequently do make of such doubtf^ll
discourses; Men may thus write for ever, and yet the World never the better,
but possibly much worse for their Writeing: But the Rules he there takes notice
of are these three: 1 st. The Divine Law. 2 d. Humane Law. 3 ly. The Law of
Opinion, or Reputation. Now the Divine Law is always true, Humane Law always
Obligatory, but the Law of Fashion or Opinion, which is neither always true.
nor always Obligatory, seems to be very unjus^ly joynd with the two former.

But I must do Mr. Lock that right, as to take notice of what he says in the
last. of that Chapter. There he tells us, that though the Rule be erroneous, and
I mistaken in it, yet the agremeent or disagreement of that, which I compare
with it, is evidently known by me; wherein consists my knowledge of relation:
But what an insignificant piece of knowledge is this, thus to know Relation,
for when I see a Peddler measuring me off so much Stuff by a false Yard, I see
indeed the relation, that one bears to the other, and that agreement betwixt
'em but what satisfaction is that to me, for the Cheat that is put upon me by
the false measurer. But though measuring by a wrong Rule I shall thereby be
brought to judge amiss of i^'s moral rectitude, because I have tried it by
that, which is not the true rule, etc. Here Mr. Lock confesses that moral
rectitude consists in the truth of the rule, not in the agreement of any action
to a rule, whether that rule be true or false. Now let us compare such or such
an action to the Law or Rule of Fashion or reputation; I find it agreeable
thereunto: What then follows? Why, then it follows, that it is agreeable
thereunto; nothing further can follow hence, because as yet I know not whether
that Law of Custom or reputation be true or no.

So that Mr. Lock here seems to make use of his own authority in a great
measure to repeal that Law of Custom or fashion, which in the former part of
that Chap. he seems to enact.

But now in his Preface he says, he never endeavored to make it a Law; if so,
then what means the 12 th.. Wherein he seems to assume to himself the honor
of making it such, and further adds a Sanction thereunto, I think perfectly of
his own Elaboration: Though indeed the Sanction does not seem to stand good, even
upon his own principles. For. 5. He tells us, that moral good and evil is the
conformity or disagreement of our voluntary actions to some Law, whereby good
and evil is drawn on us from the will and power of the Lawmakers, and by the
Decree of the Law maker. Now I suppose no particular Society or Club of Men
ever met together to constitute such respective sanctions to actions agreeable
^r disagreeable to Fashion or Reputation; for he tells us.. 10. That this
approbation or dislike, does by a secret and tacit consent, (which certainly is
some thing different from the will, power and Decree of the Lawmakers)
establish it self in the several Societies, and Clubs of Men in the World:
And. 6. It would be in vain for one intelligent being to set a rule to the
action of another, if he had it not in his power to reward or punish the
compliance with, or deviation from this Rule, by some good and evil, that is
not the natural product, and consequence of the action it self, for that being
a natural convenience or inconvenience, would operate of it self without a
Law. Now if an action be truly morally good, praise and approbation is the
natural product and consequence of such an action; and if it be really bad,
then blame and censure; but now these do not come up to the rewards and
punishments above mentioned, such as are extrinsick to the nature of the
action, and not the natural and necessary results of it.

But Mr. Becconsall has in a great measure prevented me on this Subject, for
which I thank him.

But I.S. P. 271. p. 199.200. Of his reflections upon Mr. Lock, there speaking
of this little Controversy betwixt Mr. Lock and me, says, that Mr. Lock has so
perfectly cleared that point in his Preface' that none can now remain
unsatisfi'd, for who can hinder Men from sancying and nameing things, as they
list. none indeed can hinder Men from doing thus, but this they ought not to
do, unless they think and Write without any respect either to truth or
goodness, and when Men fancy and name things, as they list, if this be done
without any ground of reason, and contrary to the general practice of Mankind,
I humbly conceive, there is no reason, that this should satisfy any one: But
then pa. 274. He says, I think it had been better and more unexceptionable, to
have called such good and bad dispositions (Reputed virtues and vices) than to
join those qualities in an univocall appellation, etc. Here he seems to cast
the Cause on my side again: But we are all partys here, and so must appeal to
the impartial and juditious Reader, the only supreme Judge in things of this
nature,

Here it is very well worth the Observation, what the Learned Bp. of Worcester
says, pa. 25. Of his Answer to Mr. Locks 2 d. Letter. I am utterly against any
private Miuts of Words, and I think those Persons assume too much Authority to
themselves, who will not suffer common words to pass in their general
acceptance, but will set such Bounds and Limits to 'em, as suit best with
their own speculations.

And here I cannot but take notice of a certain kind of novell affected way of
speaking of late prevaiing in the World, even among great Philosophers, whether
it be to gratify their own curiosity of speaking, or that they pretend to
advance some new notion by this new way of expressing themselves, I know not;
but this is certain, that vicious and ill minded Men do make use hereof,
especially when it is applied to matters of Morality, to worse purposes, than our
modern Philosophers probably ever intended it.

Mr. Malbranch, pa. 15. Paragraph, 7. Of his late Treatise of Morality, It is
certain that universal reason is always the same, order is immutable, and yet
morality changes a^cording to places and times. Bad Men from such instances, as
these, take occasion to undermine the very Fundamentals of all Religion, and
wholly to resolve morality into mere custom and Education. Mr. Lock indeed did
say in his 1 st. Edition of his Essay, that nothing else but that which has the
allowance of public esteem, is virtue. But he altered it in his 2d. and
probably Mr. Malbranch if he have the same candor and ingenuity, will do the
same too. Men's apprehensions concerning some points of Morality may vary and
alter, but the things themselves never do. It is a virtue, he says, among the
Germans to drink hard. But this is i^ an assersion both false and scandalous,
for who ever said that the personal faillures of private Persons can make that
a virtue any where which is not so in it self, neither do I think, that this of
Drinking hard, I suppose, he means to excess, is generally counted a virtue,
even in Germany: Thus some Men stick not to violate all the Rules of order,
truth and justice, only to advance a notion false in it self, and dangerous in
its consequences, Viz. That Morality changes according to times and places.

Vice and Error are of a Progressive nature, thus Men first live as if there
were no God, then they wish there was none, then they set their understandings
to defend, what their Vicious and Corrupt affections first prompted them to
desire: Thus from Atheism in practice they proceed to Atheism in speculation.
So also some Men speak, as if there were no fixed and standing rules of
morality,; others, being prompted thereunto by their vicious humors, take the
hint, and hence boldly assert that there are no such things; thus taking away
the very foundation of all natural Religion.

I shall here beg leave to reflect upon one or two passages more in his
Treatise Pa. 414. De inquirenda veritate. He tells us, that God has instituted
a Natural Union betwixt the will of Man and the representation of Idea's. But
now in the 5 th. Chapt. of his Trea^ise of Morality, being conscious perhaps
that the Will of Man will ^ot so well do the business he now shu^^^^s betwixt
Man's will and his a^^^ntion, as if th^s^ two were the same ^^ing. In the heads
of that 5 th. chap. we fin^ this, our desires are the occasional causes o^ our
Knowledge. But in the 2 d. Paragr: he t^lls us tha^ God by a general Law has
ann^xed the presence of Idea's to the attention of our mind, and some few lin^s
^f ^r h^ving an inward sense of his own attention and no knowledge of the
operati^n o^ God he looks upon the endeavor o^ his d^sires^ as the true cause
of those Ideas, that accompany that endeavor, What he means by the endeavor
of his desires, we shall know, when his Illustrations come out: I suppose he
does not make Men's desires and their endeavors the same thing, only because
Men desires commonly put 'em upon endeavors. But Parag: 4 th. he tells us^
that attention of the mind then is a kind of natural Prayer, he might as well
have said that Prayer is a kind of Natural attention^ and so made quidlibet ex
quolibet, merely to avoid a frank acknowledgment of his former error.

In the beginning of his 2 d. Chapt. he says, the love of order is not only the
chief of moral Virtues, but the only virtue, and through that whole Chapt. and in
other places he speaks very great things of this love of order, as if there was
no other virtue besides it, and yet Chapter 3d. Paragr: 1 st. though I have not
expre^s'd the Principal or Mother Virtue by the Authentic name of Charity, I
would not have any one im^gine that I pretend to deliv^r to M^n any other
Virtue, than that which Christ ^^mself has established in these words, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, etc. on these two depend the Law and the Prophets.
Mat. 22. 37, 40. 1 Cor. 13. 1. But then why did he not retain the same name,
that our Savior and his Apostles made use of, does he think that the love of
order expresses i^ better? Or is not this something of the humor before taken
notice of, viz. an affected way of speaking. By the love of order then he only
means a true inward principle of all virtuous actions, and if so, then it is so
far from being the only Virtue, that it is not one, that is, complete, entire,
perfect virtue of it self, there are other things requir^d to the completing
of virtue besides a right principle though perhaps this is the first and
principal ingredient; bonum ex causa integra, malum ex quolibet defectu, so
that a disposition or facility of performing such dutys is not properly virtue,
without the love of order: Pa. 15. neither is the mere love of order properly a
virtue, without the performing such duty's when we have ability and oppor^^^ity
of perfo^ming 'em.

Then as to Innate No^ions I would add,

That I take these (especially Int^ll^ctual Notions) to be called so, rath^r i^
opposition to their b^ing the result of mere sense and observation or of any
m^r^ r^fl^xions on sensible impr^ssions, rather than that they are imprinted
from the beginning upon the Soul in any such gross Characters, as some perhaps
may imagine them; though I do not here recall any thing, that I had said before
upon that Subject.

We seem to have as clear a Notion of the thing, when we say, nihili nullae
sunt affectiones, as we have, when we are told P^. 139 of Mr. Lo^ks Letter to
the Bishop of Worcester? that the Idea of nothing has a necessary connection
with no power, no operation, no causality, no effect, that is, with nothing.
This proposition indeed, nothing has a necessary connection with nothing, is
certainly true; but then it seems to border too near upon those Propositions,
which add no light to the understanding which bring no increase to our
knowledge, that is, trifleing Propositions. P a. 307. of E^say. Mr. Norris
blames Mr. Lock, because he has not given us a just and real difinition of an
Idea, and may ^ot Mr. Lock blame Mr. Norris his difi^i^ion Pa. 30 of his
reflections upon Mr. Lock's Essay, when he tells us that an Idea is a partial
representation of the Divine omniformity or the omni^orm Essence o^ God,
partially represented, eit^er as in it self unintelligible, or as not so
agreeable to the honor and dignity of the Divine ^ssence.

I could have wished, that Mr. Lock had further explained, what relation those
opperations of the mind, which he calls Ideas of reflection, have to the
precedent impressions made upon the sense Pa. 44. 24. That seems to suppose
sensible impressions always to preceed the reflections of the mind. But on the
other hand, Intuitive knowledge, viz. of the existence of our Souls does
neither suppose, nor is it self any operation of the mind about any sensible
impressions going before.

Mr. Lock charged me with some kind of a inconsistency of expression in one
place saying, that the Soul exerted those notions, in one another, that they
exerted themselves: But it is a great sign, that matter and Argument run low,
when Men thus meanly carp at words: I hope I have sufficiently vindicated my
self, as to that particular; but if I should follow the example of so great a
Master, and be thus severely critical, it perhaps would be difficult for
himself to avoid the like censures. pa. 323. of his Essay,. 14. 1 st. Edit.
Knowledge is the consequence of the ideas, that are in our minds, what ever
they are, and produce general certain p^opositions. I dare not be over
confident that I rightly understand the period, but if this be the sense of it,
which seems to be so, that the ideas produce these general certain
propositions, I humbly conceive it the more proper way of speaking, to say,
that the Soul by the aids and assistance of these ideas produce, those
propositions, than that the ideas themselves should do it. I do not speak this
as if there was here any just occasion of exception, but only to show, how
easily men may be ill natured, if they pleased.

I am sorry I have not the concurrence of Mr. Becconsall's opinion in this
point too of innate notions, I shall therefore briefly examine some passages of
his, relating to this subject, first I do not well understand, why he should
grant the Law of nature to be innate, or implanted in the minds of Men, as he
tells us, Pa, 2 d. That ^he Gentiles had a Law of action implanted in ^he very
frame and Constitution of their Natures. and Pa. 6. The Law of Nature is
implanted in the minds of Men, as rational beings: And yet at the same time to
reject the Doctrine of innate inscriptions, as he calls 'em. Pa. 75. Whereas I
humbly conceive, that the Law of Nature is either the same with these natural
inscriptions, or innate notions, or the one so Founded, in the other, that they
must both stand, or fall together, if by being implanted in the minds of Men,
he mean only a power or faculty in the Soul of collecting those truths by
rational disquisitions, then I think, he has not done right neither to himself,
nor his Reader by so expressing it.

But he says, Pa. 75. that the frame, and order of things both within, and
without us, with the exercise of our own facultys upon 'em will present us with
a Scheme of moral duty, and a true measure of action, and that too as clearly,
as if it was imprinted upon the mind, with the first lineaments of its being. I
do not deny the great use, and advantage of our natural faculties, in order to
that end, that is, to those whose circumstances are such, that they have
abilitys, and opportunities to employ 'em so, that is, Christians may possibly
do it, but a great part of the Gentile world cannot.

But how does he prove, that this Scheme of duty will thus be as clearly
presented to us, as if it was imprinted with the First lineaments of our
beings: This seems to be barely asserted without proof: Whereas the contrary
seems more probable, that the double evidence of natural inscription and
Rational deduction would add to the cleareness of the thing.

And therefore he says, There seems to be no visible necessity for having
recourse to innate ideas, or inscriptions. Those who assert innate inscriptions
justly suppose themselves on the defensive part, and they who write against 'em
can challenge no other, than that of opponents. Now barely to plead the no
necessity of a thing is no necessary argument against him, who positively
asserts the matter of fact, that it is so, for many things may be, and are so,
of which perhaps there is no necessity, that they should be so: And this seems
sufficient to abate the force of the Argument; If nothing further could be
added; for what if God has given us greater assistances, than perhaps were
absolutely necessary; in a thing of so great concernment; we have no reason to
take it ill.

But then why may we not assert, if not a necessity, yet a great convenience of
these natural notions, viz. In respect of that part of the Gentile world, who
have neither ability nor inclination to make such profound disquisitions into
the nature of Man, and the reason of things, as are necessary to attain to the
natural knowledge of duty: And if Mr. Becconsall had more fully considered the
Barbarous state of the greatest part of the Heathen World, it is probable he
would have found 'em subjects not capable of such rational enquiry's, as his
way of Arguing supposes 'em. But he goes on,

If innate ideas be serviceable to Mankind, they must be so in order to supply
the defects ^f reason, and consequently they seem to be exempt from the
disquisitions of reason. These natural notions of truth, and goodness are some
of the greatest strokes, wherein consists the Image of God, imprinted upon the
minds of Men, in order to make them what they are, rational and Religious; now
if this Learned Author, or any else call this a supplying the defects of
Reason, I shall not much oppose it; only I should rather call 'em the
fundamental principles of all Reasoning: And consequently they seem to be
exempt from the disquisitions of Reason. I do not understand the necessity of
this consequence at all, for how can these things be fit and proper aids to
supply the defects of reason, if they themselves cannot, or dare not undergo
the most exact trialls and disquis^tions of reason.

He gives his reason in the following words. For if innate ideas are to be
examined and judged on by the working of reason, What then? We might have
imagined, that the inference from hence would have been, either 1 st. That then
there are no such things as these Native Inscriptions, or 2 ly. That they are
not serviceable in order to supply the defects of reason, or 3 ly. That they
were exempt from the disquisitions of reason, but its none of these, but only
this, Then reason it self will answer all the ends and designs of a reasonable
being: But if it does, this seems only to extend to the Christian World;
reason does but very indifferently perform this among the Heathens. But he
says, It does it as effectually, as if a digest of Laws were originally
recorded on the mind. But how does he prove, that the Heathens may not thank
those Native impressions, that they are not sunk lower into Barbarism than
indeed they are: or supposing, that they did enjoy a greater and freer use of
reason, than I am afraid they do, yet how does he prove, that they owe the
light of truth and obligation to duty merely to their rational enquirys in
contradistinction to, or separation from these innate notions, or not rather to
the benign influence that these later (however in conjunction with the former)
have upon them. But pa. 76. He says, That the Doctrine of innate ideas must be
laid aside, since we cannot conceive, that a wise Creator should establish any
ordinance without some special ends, and use annexed to it, I mean such, as are
not served any other way. But to this I answer, 1 st. That what he there
supposes, is not yet sufficiently demonstrated, viz. That Men generally may as
well come to the knowledge of their Duty, by such rational enquirys, as they
may by these native inscriptions. 2 ly. How does he prove, that it is
inconsistent with the wisdom of Divine providence to appoint the joint
concurrence of two things, as in this case, natural inscription and rational
deduction, as means in order to the same end, they mutually supporting,
defending, and confirming each other.

Pa. 77. In a word then, though the sacred language seems to favor the notion of
native inscriptions, yet it may be justly r^solved into metaphor and figure,
etc, But it is some advantage to the notion, that the sacred Language favors
it, especially since the assertors thereof are defenders of that Text, and
found their opinion upon it: And therefore it is not sufficient for him to say,
that the Sacred Language may be resolved into a Metaphor, but he must prove,
that it must necessarily be so interpreted; and here the assertors of these
Inscriptions may more justly say, that the Text may be understood in the plain,
obvious, and literal sense of the words, therefore there is no need, no
occasion of a Metaphor.

I do not here speak any thing to derogate from the excellency, and usefulness
of those powers, and facultys that God has endued us with in order to discover
a rule of action, yet I can scarce be persuaded, that the mere exercise of
reason in those circumstances of time, and place before mentioned, will do it
as clearly and as effectually, as if a digest of Laws were originally recorded
on the mind, though I do not say that any such digest is thus recorded, only some
of the primary, original and fundamental Laws of Nature, or some greater
strokes thereof are originally communicated to the Soul, yet in a way suitable
to the nature of the things thus communicated, and to the nature of the Soul,
the Subject of 'em.

But here if I may speak my own private conjecture, I think, these rational
enquirys by the use of our facultys may better serve the designs of truth,
than they can those of goodness, and be more available for the founding of
intellectual, and notional, rather then Moral, and practical Principles upon.

Pa. 75. He says, that if it be allowed, that probabilitys may determine our
judgments in this matter, the doctrine of innate Ideas is rather to be
rejected, than retained.

But if probabilitys will avail any thing, I doubt not but the Doctrine of
innate Ideas has its probabilitys too, as 1. Since this Doctrine of native
Ideas or inscriptions (he means the same by both) is not matter of mere
indifferency, but has a very useful influence both upon natural and Revealed
Religion, is it not therefore the more probable to be true? And further, ^s it
probable that the Apostle, To. 2. 15. would positively and plainly say that
this Law of Nature was written upon the hearts of the Gentiles, if it really
and truly was not ^o? 2. Is it probable, that God would leave the Gentile World
to the guidance of that reason, which in their circumstances, could not be any
tolerable direction to 'em, either in the ways of truth or holiness, without
some other (at least more probable, means) to keep em, if possible, from
sinking too much below themselves? 3 d. This is the most that can be said
against the Doctrine of Innate Ideas, or natural inscription, that there is no
need, they say, of having recourse hereunto, reason it self sufficiently
serving for those purposes without it: Now this is such an argument, as may
perhaps be urged with equal force against all the Moral (that is, no small)
part of the Gospel; for may not, nay, do not some Men say, that there was no
need of any such Revelation, reason it self, they say, had done that without it.

But perhaps it may seem too much a receding from the Divine Authority of
Scripture, to plead that over again by probabilitys, which it is granted on all
hands, is favored by plain expressions of Scripture.

But Mr. Becconsal in his Chapt. of Parental love, and affection: Pa 122.
speaking of the lower Order of Creature^, says, they, as well as we, must
conclude, that Parental Love is the effect of some peculiar propension, wove in
with the Frame, and Constitution of our beings. and Pa. 126. For a Man to love
and cherish his Offspring is certainly the result of an inward Propension. Now
I do not know, that the assertors of Innate Principles do understand any thing
more by them, then what is here granted: It Is true indeed, it follows, but the
exercise of it from the consideration of the close affinity it bears to his own
flesh and blood, is a work of reason. But is it the less Innate, because it is
also rational? Or may not a Man actually love his Child out of that inward
propension so to do, tho^ at the same time he does not consider that affinity
it bears to his own flesh, and blood?

But the ground, and reason of the difference betwixt Mr. Becconsal and me in
this particular seems to be this, Pa. 74. that he thinks the Doctrine of Innate
Ideas, or practical Principles serves not any real purposes of Religion, and I
think it does.

Mr. Lock, in his Reply to what I had said concerning Innate Notions, imploys
the most of his discourse upon that, which is least considerable, he s^irmishes
about the outworks, but never enters into the merits of the cause, nor comes to
dispute that which was most material in the Controversy.

I wonder why he should lay so much stress upon Children, and Fool^, and
debaucht Persons, to make their a^sent or dissent so availeable one way, or
other: I am no friend to Dogmatizing, yet I humbly conceive, that no one has
any just reason to think the wors^ of any Opinion merely because such Persons
do not assent unto it.

Neither do they who plead for this general consent, make it so universal, as
to include every particular.

Pa. 24.. 20. I desire these Men to say, whether by Education, and Custom these
Notions can or cannot be blurred and blotted out. Since he is so Positive in
his demand, why may not we be a^ positive in our answer, and say, that they
can: And what then? Why, then truly he drops that part of the disjunction and
only says; If they may suffer ^ariation by adventitio^^ Notions (which is a
very gentle way of blotting out) but what then follows? Why then we must find
^^em cle^rest, and most perspicuous, nearest the Fountain^ in Children, etc. We
must, he says, but he never yet proved the neces^ity of that consequence: And
then as for Illiterate Persons, if he mean, plain, honest illi^^^at^^ Heathens,
such as are less Learned, ^^t less corrupted by ^^lse Principles and wicked
Practices I doubt not, but these Notions will appear clearer in such: But
however we still remain in the full and undisturbed possession of that side of
the disjunction, that these notions may by bad Custom, and Education be blotted
out, which ground thus gained will be of great disadva^tage to his cause.

As for what he says, Pa. 18. of the wicked Practices, and Atheistical Opinions
of some Heathen Nations, some think that his Authors were not so exact in their
observations, as they might have been, but suppose they were, it makes nothing
to the advantage of his cause, unless he had proved before, that these Notions
cannot be blotted out of the minds of Men.

Neither will it follow hence, that they are of no use to Mankind, if they may
be thus defaced. For, 1 st. It may be in some measure oweing to these, that all
the Nations of the Heathen World are not sunk lower into wickedness than indeed
they are. 2 dly. It Is probable these Innate Notions will be instrumental in the
Conviction and Conversion of these People, when God in the wisdom of his
Providence, shall think ^it to do it; and I doubt not but the Apostles in their
Preaching did appeal to these, and make use of 'em, for this p^rpose. Romans 2.
14, 15.

Pa. 21.. 14. Here speaking of these Moral Rules, he is very urgent with us, ^o
tell, which they are; if he means, that we should give the exact determinate
number of 'em, I think this is a very unreasonable demand, however I shall at
present instan^e in those, which Mr. Nigh mention^ (...)f His natural
Religion. 1 st. A tenderness for and care of our Children. 2 d. A commiseration
of the oppressions and wants of such, as are distressed, and not by their own
fault, but through mishap, or the iniquity of others. 3 d. A propensity to favor
worthy Persons and actions: And here, I would only give him this caution, that
in his reply, he do not draw his Answer and Arguments from Children, and Fools;
for such Evidence will be excepted against; nor from such as by Vicious
customs have blotted these notions out of their minds; for no one thinks the
worse of the Belief of a God, because the whole Club of professed Athests denis
it.

Here give me leave to add one thing further, though out of its proper place, as
for those that assert these innate notions I know no^ how they can well
otherwise express it, than by saying, that the Soul upon occasion exerts 'em,
and as for that other w^y, of exerting themselves, if it wanted any defense, I
have very good authority for it, Mr. Loc^. P. 13. of his Essay.. 27.

It Is ^ great presumption that these ge^erall ma^imes are not innate, since
they are l^ast known to tho^^, in whom, if they were ^nnate, they must ne^ds
(...) themselves, with most force and vigor.

That there is a real, and unalterable distinction betwixt good, and evil, is
a very great, and important truth, and such as ought to be fixed upon the best
and surest foundations, but I cannon think, Mr. Becconsalls Argument pa. 194.
so ^og^nt, as the nature of the thing requires,

Moral good, he says, always in^ludes a n^turall good, and natural good is
evid^ntly established in the frame of created natur^^ and consequently, if the
frame of nature be unalterable, m^ral good must be s^ too.

Here, if by moral good always including a natural good, he me^nes, that moral
good is always attended with some r^al advantage naturally accruing from the
practice of it, this I grant, is generally true, but then may we not say here,
as he says of pleasure, pa. 188. In respect of Natural good, that it seems to
be a consequenc^, ^ather then a measure, and constituent principle of moral
good, so thi^ na^^r^l good, which, he says, i^ always included in moral good,
seems to be the consequence, rather then the measure, and constituent
principle of moral good: But then if he makes moral good only a part of, as
indeed he seems to make it the same with, natural good, (only distinguished by
the accession of a free choice, pa. 186.) and so included in the frame of
created nature, this will only prove, that moral good is what God at first
Creation made it, and so not in the highest Sense, eternal and immut^ble, as
depending merely upon Gods free and Arbitrary will, and positive determination,
and thus this Learned Author will fall in with P. Poiretts opinion in this
particular. vide. former discourse of humane nature. pa. 95.

Whereas I am willing to carry the reasons of good and evil higher, founding
them in that relation they bear to the essential wisdom, purity, and holiness
of the Divine nature, which relation is, in some measure, made known to us by
those native notices and natural impressions upon the minds of Men.

And whereas he tells us. pa. 192. That the proper measures of moral good mu^t
be taken from the original frame, ends and intrests of our beings, I am afraid
that all these in respect to each individual, and abstracted from all Law to
direct us, would be found so variable, and uncertain, that moral good would,
upon this hypothesis, prove a much more unfixt and unsettled thing, then God,
and Nature ever made it. vide. pa. 72. Of humane Nature.

So that I humbly conceive, it would not be a sufficient asserting the
eternal, and immutable nature of moral good, to say, that it is as immutable,
as the frame of created nature, for we know, that this has, in some particular
instances, been changed, and may be so again, but the reasons of good and
evil never were, never can be changed.

I shall conclude this with a judicious observation of Mr. Becconsalls, in
another case. pa. 107. The notions I have contended for, are founded in things,
that fall in with the established sentime^ts of Mankind. And as the arguments
suggested are, at least, as cogent and satisfactory, as those on the other
side, it is not prudent to leave the common Road, and put things of moment, and
importance upon an issue, that, it may be, wants Evidence, or at least
contradicts so^e received truths or notions.

But as for, the apology he makes pa. 186. I think no apology can be suf^icient
for making use of new modes of expressions in matters of a moral concernment.

Short Remarks upon two Chapters in the Oracles of Reason.
IT is the worst u^e, that any can make of the belief of a Good, or natural
Religion, from thence to infer the no necessity of future Revelation, whereas
on the contrary; both from the nature of God and the Dispensations of Divine
providence in the World, we may rather infer, if not the necessity, yet at
least the great convenience of a further Revelation

For supposing the Corruption, and depravation of Mankind, which yet the very
Heathens did acknowledge, and were intimately conscious of, it seems more
agreeable to the beingnity of the Divine nature to pity, and relieve the misery
of that state, by some new methods of Revealed mercy.

The dispensations of Divine providence do also seem to require it, thus the
general practice of Sacrificeing, and the general belief of the necessity of
a Mediator, even in the first ages of the World; do either suppose or at least
infer the great convenience of such a thing, the better to in form the World
with the true nature, end and de^ign of both those.

A Learned Physician thought it necessary, as a preparatory vindication of his
faculty, First, to state that question, an ter^inus vitae s^t mobilis, the
profession of Physic being a very vain, and idle thing, if all things come to
pass by blind chance or fatal necessity. In like manner it would be in vain
for Divines to talk of the grace of God made known to us by the Gospel, if
there never was any such thing, as Divine supernatural Revelation in the World.

It were to be wished that Discourses of this nature, to prove the very
principles of Christianity, were neither seasonable nor necessary, but such is
the iniquity of the age we live in, that deisme appears barefaced in a
Christian State, that it bears it self high upon the pretended strength of its
own cause, and acknowledges no Oracles, but those of its own, Viz. Of Reason.

If one might venture to guess at the causes of their mistakes (to omit that
unfixedness of mind, and that affectation of popularity, hereby to gain to
themselves the reputation of Men of more than ordinary parts) they perhaps
might be first occasioned by such steps and methods, as these.

1. Reason being both a name and thing, which always was, and ever will be
justly valued, and esteemed in the World, and there being a time, when reason,
or Philosophy was the great, if not the only guide to Man in things relating
either to this World, or the other, that being the only rule, that we know of,
that God gave the Heathens to direct 'em to a future happiness; this perhaps
might be one occasion of the present Deisme of the age. 2. It has been the
misfortune, that revelation has laid under, in the opinion of some Men, though
without any just ground, that it bears a direct opposition, and contrariety to
reason, now these Men improveing and propagateing this opinion, as much as was
possible in the World, they built themselves a Reputation by advancing Reason,
which was once a sufficient guide to Men, even above, and in contradistinction
to Revelation. 3 dly. It Is not improbable, but that these Men may be offended
at the severity of the Christian Religion, not that I here go about to accuse
'em of immoralitys, no! Their Liberal Education, their Candid temper, and their
true and just sense of things, which otherwise they entertain, forbid me to
harbor any such thoughts of 'em, yet I would appeal here even to their own
private sentiments whether there be not something of truth in what I here
intimate, and that they could be willing to purchase Heaven at some easier
rate, or more agreeable to their particular humors or inclinations, than that
prescribed by the Gospel. 4. Perhaps the Severe Apprehensions, which some
Christians entertain concerning the desperate estate of all Heathens may make
some run into the other extreme, Viz. That Natural Religion is sufficient for
all, in order to Eternal Happiness, which is so unreasonably, as they think,
denied to some for such. But to pass by these Conjectures.
Now in order to the clearer stating of the question betwixt us, we must
consider. 1. That since we have been now above 16. hundred Years in possession
of our Christian Religion in particular, and much longer of a revealed Religion
in general, therefore the deist can claim no other part in this dispute, than
that of an opponent, and here he must prove the History of the Gospel, as to
matters of fact, to be false, and those ancient Apologys, for, and those more
Modern defenses of Christianity insufficient.

If it be replied, that Natural Religion preceded Revelation, and so was the
more Ancient. I answer. 1. Some are of Opinion that God immediately after the
Creation of Adam, did give him either an inward or outward revelation or both,
of things covenient or necessary for him to be known then, though perhaps they
were such, as in progress of time, and long study and observation might have
been found out afterward.

Here I must confess, we have no certain Rule to guide us, but must only go by
conjectures, such as are more rationally and piously credible. But if after all
any one will positively say, that such was the perfection of Natural reason
before the Fall, that all those things relating more particularly to that
present State of affairs, might have been found out by it self, I shall not
much oppose it; however this is certain, that God immediately after the fall of
Adam, did reveal the Gospel to him in Paradise, by the Promise of the Messiah,
and this the Deist must acknowledge, unless he can prove the History of Moses
to be false.

2. In those first Ages of the World God did convey his will and pleasure to
Men by Angels upon extraordinary occasions, so that they could not be even
then, said to be absolutely without Divine Revelation.

3. They had Tradition, which was better grounded and of more Authority then,
than it can pretend to now, because of the long life of the Patriarchs, so that
it did not go through so many hands, and consequently not so liable to be
corrupted; though I do nothere suppose this Tradition to extend to Moral Dutys.

4. Notwithstanding all these helps, and assistances, they felt the sad want of
a standing Rule to direct 'em, for those first Ages of the World soon
degenerated into Idolatry, and this and worse would be the Fate of the present
Age if God in judgment should remove the Gospel from us.

But to return, the Deist must 2 dly prove, that it is a thing contrary to the
Divine Nature to make any further Declaration of his will, than what he has
made known by the light of Nature, he cannot say, that this is contrary to the
free, and positive determination of the Divine Will, for how can he know this,
seeing he does not suppose any outward Declaration of Gods will ever made to
Man. If he say that God never made any but only this, viz. That he would make
no more, but what he had discovered to Man by the Light of Nature: I hope he
will prove what he says, and show where ever God made any such Declaration: If
he say that there was no need of any further: This is a very weak way of
argueing against matter of fact: If I should say, that there is nothing writ in
a certain Book called the Oracles of Reason, in defense of Deisme, because
there was no need of it, there was enough writ of that before, I believe he
would not grant the Argument to be of any force.

Some are of Opinion, that that Book called the Oracles of Reason is not worth
the taking notice of by way of Answer, it being, they say, such as would soon
dye of it self; I must confess I have no great opinion of the performance
therein, viz. Of the Letters of those Gentlemen one to another, (I do not speak
of the Translations) not that I here reflect upon the abilitys of the Persons,
but of the weakness of the cause, that was not capable of a better defense.

-- Si Pergama dextra
Defend si possint, Etiam hac. --
But because some are apt to look upon this as an argument of the strength of a
cause, when no one vouchsafes an answer to it, though perhaps the true reason is,
because they think it does not deserve any, I shall therefore briefly consider
that part of it, which is writ in favor of Deisme, if not for its own sake,
yet for the sake of those, who are too apt to overvalue every thing, that may
seem to gratify their own private inclinations, and if some think as meanly of
this, as others do of that, I am very well satisfied, if they should dye both
together.

The Summary account of the Deists Religion examined, pa. 88.
I Shall not need to advertise the Reader, that the Deist here meant and so
often mentioned in this and the like discourses, is not one barely, that never
heard of Divine revelation, but being born and living several years, in the
outward pr^fession of Christianity, having now at last taken some distaste at
it, has in effect renounced it, or at least the necessity of believing the
fundamentals of it.

Chap. 1 st. He here tells us, that whatever is adoreable amiable or imitable
by Mankind, is in one supreme, infinite and perfect being, that is, they
believe one infinite, supreme, perfect being, and do adore, love and imitate
his imitable perfections. The worst of Spirits believe the one, and the best of
Heathens practice the other, and if the World has lived it self back again into
Gen^ilism, it may thank the Deists for it.

Chap, 2 d. That God is not to be worshipped by an Image we willingly grant. 2
d. Nor by Sacrifice, I know the Deists now are for no Sacrifices at all, but
here I would propound it to consideration, whether they do not owe this truer
notion and righter apprehension of things to that clearer light, which they
have received from Divine Revelation; though they are not so ingenuous as to
acknowledge it, for why should they now, abstractedly considered from all
communication with Christians oppose the constant opinion and practice of their
great Patriarchs and Apostles; the Heathen Philosophers, in this particular. I
know indeed, the Stoics tell us, that it is below their wise M^n to repent,
and by consequence that there is no need of Sacrifices: But these were a sort
of Fanatics in their Religion, and dreamed of I know not what kind of
perfection, which their State was not capable of, their discourses many times
contradicting their practices: I grant also, that the Heathen Poets, and
Philosophers, about the time of our Saviors appearance in the World, began to
speak very meanly, and undervaluingly of ^acrifices, but then they may thank
the Christian Religion for this.

S^cri^iceing was a thing early prevailing in the World, and it will be very
difficult for the Deists, according to their principles to give any tolerable
account hereof. Indeed Christians are divided in their opinions herein, some
asserting a Divine positive command, and Revelation of God to Adam, though not
mentioned in Scripture; neither is this, say they, any Argument that there was
no such thing, because Scripturae silentium non est semper argumentativum.

Others suppose Sacrifices founded in nature, though this, say some, is not
altogether so reasonable, because they cannot conceive, how natural reason
abstracted from a Divine command, could suggest, that God could be acceptably
worshipped by the destruction of his Creatures.

Others distinguish betwixt Typical and Eucharisticall Sacrifices, these
latter, they say, may be founded in Nature, though the same cannot be so easily
granted of the other: What the real truth herein is, perhaps is not so easy
to determine. However, the Deists seem here to have a particular notion of
their own, Viz. That Sacrifices were only Typical of repentance, and sorrow
for sin, but this without any ground either from reason, or authority.

Having premised this in general, I shall come now more particularly to
examine, what he says upon this subject.

God is not to be worshipped by Sacrifices, he says, because Sponsio non valet,
ut alter pro altero puniatur.

Here he seems to reflect upon the Sacrifice of our blessed Savior. But why
should any such maxim be of more authority than those of St. Paul? Neither does
this, when rightly understood, any ways contradict that commutation of
punishment asserted by Christianity.

For we commonly say, that volenti non fit injuria and that truly too, with the
concurrence of these two conditions. 1 st. That the Person so undertaking may
lawfully do it, that is, if he be not under any moral, or political obligation
to the contrary. 2. If the Person be not imposed upon, by want of a full, and
true understanding of the thing so undertaken. Now both these conditions did
concur in our blessed Savior. 1 st. He had power to lay down his Life, and he
had power to take it up again. 2, It would be profane to think that the Son of
God did not well understand what he did, when he undertook the work of Man's
Redemptiom. However, no such sponsion can be made with a brute Creature. Here
he seems to reflect upon the Jewish Sacrifices: But 1 st. He should have
proved, either that the whole History of Scripture, relating to Moses and the
promulgation of the Law, as to matter of Fact, was false, or 2 ly. That it was
contrary to ^eason, and unworthy of God to institute such Sacrifices, as the
Jewish were, that is^ supposeing the promise of the Messiah given t^ Adam and
the Patriarchs, that in the ful^ess of time the great Savior of the World
should appear for the Red^mption of Mankind, considering also the proneness of
the Jewish Nation to Idolatry, and their hankening after the Gods of Egypt; he
should prove, that it was any way unworthy of the Oracles of God, and Religion
to institute such Sacrifices, as should be both Typical of the Sacrifice of our
Savior, and also Symbolical of that purity, and instrumental in order to the
procuring of that piety, and holiness, which (under Christ) was the great and
most effectual means to happyness: And therefore we do not say, that any mere
external rite can reinstate the creature after sin in God's favor again, and
whereas he says, that it is the first error in all particular Religions, that
external things, or bare opinions of the mind can after Sin propitiate God;
whatever it was in other Religions, It is none in Christianity, because it
asserts no such thing, but just the contrary. He concludes this Paragraph thus.
Enim facilius est, superstitiose quam just vivere. Here it is observeable, how
strangely, these Men are for every thing purely Natural, a Natural Grammar, as
well as a Natural Religion, and absolutely against any instituted Rules in
either; but our positive Grammarians, those Men of Institution, tell us, that
Enim does not so well begin a Sentence.

3. Not by a Mediator, for that he says, is unnecessary: Strenu^ asseris, sed
quo modo probas? These Gentl^men seem to allow of no Authority, but their own:
They will not believe God himself speaking in Scripture, and yet they expect
that others should believe them upon their bare words, for they seldom go about
to prove any thing; he does indeed tell us, that Gods mercy is sufficient for
his justice. But will he infer from hence that God neither can, nor will ever
inflict any punishment. I do not here Dispute whether God might not have
pardoned Sin some other way, than that which he did make use of, but
considering him as a just Judge, and governor of the World, exerciseing an
Universal, wise, and just providence therein, it was necessary, that Sin should
not go unpunished.

2. God must he says, appoint this Mediator, and so he was reconciled to the
World before. It was indeed in Gods power to accept, or not to accept a
Mediation, or Mediator, when offered, and he did first declare his pacability
upon such, and such terms, and so was so far reconciled to Mankind, even before
any Mediator was offered, or accepted.

3. He says, a Mediator derogates from the infinite mercy of God. But I
suppose, he will not say, that God is always bound to act according to the
utmost extent of his mercy; it was in Gods power, whether he would accept of
any terms of reconciliation, or no; and it is no lessening of his mercy to
require such just, and reasonable, and advantageous conditions at least on our
side, nay such, as seem as much means, naturally tending to the obtaining
humane happiness, as conditions to be performed in order thereunto: If he would
consider God, as a wise, and just governor of the World, these little
objections would soon vanish.

But then positively, he says, God is to b^ worshipped by an inviolable
adherence i^ our lives to all the things (...) This (...) grant, but I further
add, to all things that ar^ (...), as well as (...) so.

CHAPTER. III. Of Punishments after this Life.
HE tells us, that a Man, endued with the virtues before mentioned, need not
fear to trust his Soul with God; the virtues he mentioned are these, viz.
Repen^ance, obedience for the future, ending in the ^ssimilation of a Man's Life
to God. These are indeed very large, and comprehensive virtues, but I would
only ask, whether the Man he speaks of be a Christian by profession, or no;
if he be, then there is some thing further required, than these mere practical
virtues, viz. A belief in Christ according to the tenor of the Gospel, etc. If
he be a mere Heathen by Birth, and Education, though I do not deny all
possibility of future happiness to such an one, yet I think, he cannot perform
such obedience to the commands of God, nor so far assimilate himself to him,
but that after all there will remain some just fears, and jealousyes of his
future happiness: For though no Creature was made with a malevolent intent, yet
by their own fault, they may make themselves such, as even after all they can
do, by the light of Nature, for their reformation, yet upon a strict
examination will find that they have but too just grounds to doubt of their
future happiness.

I deny not, but that even good Chris^ians sometimes may entertain some such
doubts as these, but then it must be considered, whether this be not rather the
fault of the Man, then of his Religion; whether Christianity rightly
understood; believed, and practiced does not assord us greater, and better
assurance of Salvation, than the mere light of nature can do. And though
verisimile est similem deo a deo non negligi; Yet a mere natural Man, who never
heard any thing of Divine Revelation, cannot when he comes to die, build any
certain grounds of trust in God, upon bare verisimilitud^s.

CHAPTER. IV.
HERE he asserts the probability of a Deists Salvation before the credulous,
and ill living Papists. It is not my business to make comparisons: Only I say,
that neither Papists, nor any other sort of Christans, though far more Orthodox
than they in their principles, if they live ill, can ever be safe; but he says,
the Deist is not an Idolater. What then? Neither is an Atheist one, yet this is
no great commendation, either of the Man, or of his Opinion; but he says, that
the morality in Religion is above the mystery in it. I only say, that both are
necessary in the Christian Religion, and they ought not to be separated, or
opposd one to the other; and therefore, when he repeats the same over again in
the bottom of pa. 91. that the credulous C^ristian, that believes Orthodoxly
but lives ill, is not safe; this is something lik^ the ^^akers way of arguing,
when they tell us, that an outward conformity to the orders, and constitutions
either of Church, or State signifies nothing without inward honesty, and
integrity of heart; this we grant, but may we not be as honest, sober, and
sincere in the Communion of the Church of England, as they are out of it, and
may not we live as holy Lives in the profession of the Chistian Religion, as
they do in the Natural? I am sure Christianity has all the advantages toward a
holy Life, that Natural Religion can pretend to, and many more.

But If the D^ist errs, he errs not like a Fool, but Secundum verbum after
enquiry. But may not a Man err, like a Fool, and yet after enquiry? Will a
superficial enquiry excuse the folly? But he goes on; If he be sincere in his
principles when dying, he may appeal to God. But how such a Deist, as we are
now speaking of, that is, one who professed the Christian Religion, but now has
renounced it, can be sincere either in Relinquishing the Chrstian, or
embraceing the Natural Religion, is not so easy to be understood. Te bone
deus, quaesiui per omnia. If an honest Heathen at his Death should thus appeal
to God, I should have a great deal of Charity for him, but when Christians
renounce their Religion, and then turn Seekers of that which they need not, and
ought not to loose, reason it self will judge the case to be much diff^rent.

At the end he annexeth some notes, I suppose in favor to and honor of
Natural Religion, but it is a great disparagement to the cause, these Gentlemen
engage in, that a Boy of 12 Years old, but moderately instructed in the
Christian Religion, shall be able to produce out of Scripture matters of more
sublime theology, and more profound morality, than these adult Naturalists,
have here done out of any of their Heathen Authors.

1. He tells us, that the Grand Arcanum of Religion among the Phythagoreans
was, that the object of Divine worship was one, and Invisible. To this I shall
oppose 1 Timothy 1. 17. Now to the King Eternal, immor^all, invisible, and only
wise God be glory, and praise now, and for ever more, Amen. Now I durst appeal
to the Deist himself, whether there be not a greater air of Divinity in this,
that in the other.

2. The Heathens, he says, notwithstanding their topic^ll Deitys acknowledged
one supreme God, only they said this God being of so high a nature, and there
being other intermediate Beings betwixt God, and Mankind, they were to address
themselves to them, as to Mediators, etc. But now Christianity teaches the
Doctrine of the one, only true God, without these vicious mixtures of our
Addresses to any other intermediate beings, So that, he says, the Opinion of
the necessity of a Mediator was the foundation of the Heathen Idolatry.

If the Opinion of the necessity of a Mediator be well grounded, then it adds
strength to the reasonableness of our Saviors Mediation, neither will it be
any prejudice to it, that it was the occasion of the Heathen Idolatry, if
perhaps is was so, for the same may be urged against the opinion or belief of a
God, that it was the occasion of all the Superstition and Idolatry in the
World, for if there had been no belief of a God, there could not well not have
been any Idolatry.

But if this Opinion of the Heathens was not well grounded, it is no prejudice
to our Saviors Mediation, because it does not depend upon it: Though it is
probable, that God did occasion, or suffer that Opinion so early to prevail in
the World, foreseeing that it might afterward be made u^e of, to facilitate
the belief of the Christian Religion in this particular; but I would not have
any conclude from hence, that I found the mediation of Christ only upon
prudential considerations, that I utterly disown, nor do I think that any such
odious inference can, in strictness of reason, be drawn from the former
assertion.

I shall only further take notice of one odd piece of reasoning P. 93. That
there is a generosum honestum hid in all our Souls, is plain from the Epicurean
Deists themselves, for they labor to have their vices imputed rather to a
superiority of their reason above that of others, than to a servitude of their
reason to their passions, which shows that Vice is naturally esteemed a base
and low thing. How the conclusion follows from the premises, I do not well see;
that which seems more obvious to observe from hence, is, that the Epicurean
Deists had a mind rather to be counted Knaves then Fools, or that they went
about to mitigate their Vices by ascribing them to a very preternatural cause,
viz. The Superiority of their reasons above that of other Men.

There are some few Notes more upon this Subject, but I am afraid the Reader
will think I have already insisted too long upon things too inconsiderable. And
is not this now a Scheme of Religion worthy of an Immortal Deist? Who would not
from hence be apt to think, that these Men could write as good a Moral as the
Gospel? what less glorious Title than that of Oracle, becomes such profound
reasoning, as this? But what I have here offered, I hope, may be at least a
Responsum ad hominem; If I may so speak, that is, such as though not the best,
and most perfect in it self, yet a sufficient Answer to him, against whom I
write. And I hope it will be no arrogance, or self conceit in me to say, that
probably my defense of our common Christianity had been more strong, and
Nervous, if the opposition had been more considerable.

Of Natural Religion as opposed to Divine Revelation, pa. 195.
THE chief heads of this Natural Religion, he says, consists of Seven
praticulars, Whereof the 6 th. is this, That we are to expect rewards, and
punishments, hereafter, according to our actions in this Life, which includes
the Souls immortality. I suppose he takes it in the best, and most proper sense
of Immortality, that is, by nature, there are indeed some of these Gentlemen,
who hold the materiality of the Soul, and that it dies with the Body, but is
again Created, or reproduc'd at last, by the power of God, and thus in some
respect may be said to be Immortal; I know not whether this Opinion has not
received some encouragement by a piece of speculation in Mr. Lock's Essays,
pa. 270. which might give occasion to others, to carry the notion further, and
to worse purpose than he ever designed it; for this Argument has been made use
of to prove the materiality even of God himself. Orac: Of Reason, pa. 188. Nor
do I here go about to charge Mr. Lock with the bad use that others may make of
his opinions, which were also the opinions of some long before Mr. Lock was
born: Though withal I think, there is more notice taken of what he says now,
than of what twenty old Philosophers said before: And further this opinion of
his, viz. Of matter's thinking, seems to have a bad influence upon some other
parts of his better reasonings; for if matter may think, it will take away the
certainty of an immaterial substance in Man; as that great, and excellent
Prelate, the Bp. of Worcester has sufficiently proved.

2. And it will be very difficult to know what clear, and distinct Ideas are,
and when we have 'em, if we have not such of this, that matter cannot think.

But Mr. Lock tells us, Pa. 270, That it is impossible for us, by the
contemplation of our Ideas, without Revelation, to discover, whether
omnipotence has given to matter fitly disposed, a power of perceiving, and
thinking, or else joined, and fixed to matter, so disposed a thinking immaterial
substance; it being equally easy, in respect of our notions, to conceive, that
God can, if he pleases, superad to our Idea of matter a faculty of thinking, as
that be should add to it another substance with a faculty of thinking.

To this I Answer.

1. It is no derogating from Divine omnipotence, to say, that God cannot do
any thing in a subject contrary to the nature of the thing it self; thus if
matter be in its own nature incapable of thinking it is no lessening of Divine
power, to say that God cannot make it, it still remaining matter, to think; now
that matter cannot think, is evident not only from the Idea we have of it, but
from all that evidence of reason that results from thence, that is and from all
those absurdities, and inconveniences that would follow from such a supposal.
2. It is not very Philosophical to have such frequent recourse to the Divine
omnipotence, and to argue from the utmost extent of possibility, for this would
take away in a great measure, all our present grounds, of certainty, and by
degrees lead us to the very borders of Scepticisme, would any one believe
Epicurius's opinion concerning the original of the World the sooner, because
we cannot prove, that it implies any Logical contradiction, that the
fortuitous concourse of atoms might possibly at last hit upon such a regular
frame of a World, as we now behold? Though I believe the case here before us,
viz. That of matters thinking, is much fuller of absurdity, and contradiction.
3. Whereas he says, in his first Edition, it is Equally easy to conceive, that
God can, if he pleases, superad, etc. I fin^ it thus quoted by the Bp. of
worcester, I suppose out of his latter Editions, in respect of our notions^ it
is not much more remote from our comprehension, to conceive that God can, if he
pleases. etc. Equally easy to conceive, and not much more remote from our
comprehension to conceive, are expressions, that do not altogether signify the
same thing, so that this learned Author seems somewhat to waver in his Opinion
as to this particular.
But then what difficulty is there, in supposing a thinking substance joined to
an unthinking one, and the thinking one to perform those operations, which the
other could not? Is it equally easy, or not much more remote from our
comprehensions to conceive, how we may add to a Fool or Idiot the power or
faculty of Wisdom, as to conceive how we may join to him a wise Guardian to
direct him in all his actions. Seeing therefore this opinion, of the
possibility of matters thinking is a Novel one, the proof hereof must lie upon
those, that assert it, and here it is not sufficient to say, that they know not,
how far the power of matter does, or may extend, but they must possitively
prove, that it extends so far.

But Mr. Lock tells us, Pa. 270. That Philosophers ought not Magisterially to
determine in doubtful Cases, and that there is a certain Modesty, which very
well becomes Philosophy: This is very true, and yet this Modesty may err in the
excess; the Scepticks, are in some sense, the most modest Sect of Philosophers,
and yet not the bettet for that.

And whereas he says, that all the great ends of Morallity, and Religion, are
well enough secured without Philosophical proofs of the Souls immateriallity,
etc.

So, what if another should say, that all the ends of Nature are sufficiently
secured though God always, when we went to sleep, annihilated the Soul, but then
when either the Body was sufficiently refreshed, or violently pressed upon by
some sudden accident, that then God always created it again.

As for those Arguments which may seem to be drawn from our night Dreams,
these, I doubt not, may be solved in a way suitable to the Hypothesis, that is,
that though the Main body of the Soul, as it were, be annihilated, yet the
Atmossphere or some ^ot Steams thereof may remain still in the Body, which,
like so many Sentinels, are left here behind to give some small intimations of
what passed, during her absence, or state of nonentity: I know no
demonstration can be brought against this, and yet I fancy whoever should go
about to Philosophize at this rate, would sooner be laughed at, than believed.

Some things may be asserted, which can neither be fully, and clearly confuted,
or shown to be false, nor proved to be really true: And in such things as
these, the advantage always lies on the side of the de-defendant, thus in that
question whether the Soul does always think, or no, either side may be
defended, but neither sufficiently confuted.

But to proceed,

The 7 th. is this, that when we err from the rules of our Duty, we ought to
repent, and trust in Gods mercy for pardon. This indeed we ought to do, and it
is very reasonable we should do so. But then it may be questioned what kind of
sorrow it is, that is availeable for the remission of sins, for though some kind
of Natural sorrow be the necessary result of Conscience from the sense of
having done some foolish, or wicked action, yet it may be questioned whether
this be that ingenuous sorrow, which is both in its own nature, and by Gods
appointment so expiatory of sin. And further, how can we have any just ground
to trust in God for pardon of sin, even according to the dictates of natural
reason, unless to our Repentance we add also, not only a resolution of
amendment, but actual Reformation also of our Lives, if time and opportunity
do permit.

I shall now examine that Oracular Syllogism, which seems to be spoken, as it
were, ex Tripode, and which, I suppose, he looks upon as no less, than
demonstration.

That Rule, which is necessary to our future happyness, ought to be made known
to all Men.

But no Rule of revealed Religion was, or ever could be made known to all Men.

Therefore no revealed Religion is necessary to our future happiness. No
instituted Rules, though it be in Logic it self, can meet with any approbation
among some Men, I shall therefore examine this Syllogism, even according to
the Rules of natural Logic it self. And First, how does he prove that it is
necessary that there should be one single, determinate Rule for the future
happiness of all Men? The Gentiles had the Law of Nature, the Jews the Law of
Mo^es, the Christians the Gospel, or the Law of Christ for their Rule; I would
further ask him, what he means by Our happiness in the major proposition. If
we apply it to Christians, it makes the proposition absolutely false; for what
necessity is there that the Gospel should be made known to all Men, in order to
its being a Rule for future happiness to Christians? The Rule of happiness
ought to be made known to all, to whom it is a Rule, but no further; but let us
see how he proves the Major, viz.

Our future happiness depends upon our obeying, or our endeavoring to fulfill
the known will of God, but that Rule, which is not generally known, cannot be
generally obeyed; therefore that Rule which is not generally known cannot be
the Rule of our happiness. Here we may see how the Original sin of the first
proposition transfuses it self to all its Posterity, and renders the whole
Argument a mere blunder, that Rule that is not generally known, cannot be
generally obeyed, but may not the Gospel, though it be not known to all, be a
Rule to those whom it is known and to whom it is intended, as such, that is, to
Christians?

Those who were born in a Christian state, and who have lived for some time in
the profession of the Christian Religion, cannot but have the Rule of the
Gospel made known to 'em.

But he tells us again, pa. 197. That the natural Religion will suffice for our
happiness, because it is the only general means proposed. But I cannot yet be
satisfied with this way of Arguing: And that for these two reasons.

1. Because this would prove, not only that God has not made any other
declaration of his will, than that contained in nature, but also that he could
not have done any such thing, unless he had made it of as large an extent, as
the light of Nature, that is, to all the World. Now let us suppose, that God
had actually made such a Revelation of his Will, and in the same manner, as he
has done in the Gospel, (and I challenge all the Deists in the World to prove
the impossibility of such a thing) yet the argument would lie as strong against
the thing then, as it does now: So that this argument proves too much and by
consequence nothing at all to the purpose. 2. I have often heard it asserted by
this Gentleman, but never yet any solid reason given, why the want of an
universal revelation of the Gospel to all the World, should make it of less
force, or obligation, where it is. Is it the less day with us, because it is at
the same time Night in otber Places? Pa. 198. The several lustrations, and
expiations formerly practiced in the World were but symbolicall, and referred to
our sorrow, and repentance: That is the true and only expiation for Sin, and is
so agreed, upon by all Men, in all Ages, and of all Religions.
The original of Sacrifices is variously disputed by Men of several Opinions,
but according to the Deists Principles, they can only be founded in nature,
because they do not suppose any positive Revelation of Gods will made
afterward to mankind. But now if all Sacrifices were only Symbolical of
Repentance, I do not know why Nature should go so far about, as to enjoin
Sacrifices at all, why should not Nature have enjoined Repentance only, without
any such Sacrifices, as have no Intrinsic prevalency for the pardon of sin?

But how comes he, so much like an Oracle, to determine that Repentance has
been so agreed upon by all Men, in all Ages, and of all Religions. Whereas the
contrary is rather true, that no company of Men of all Ages and of all
Religions ever agreed, that Repentance was the only expiation of sin, in
opposition to, or separation from other conditions and qualifications.

Pa. 199. If one Religion was once known to be true, Mankind would all agree in
it, otherwise those marks of truth in it were not visible, which are necessary
to draw an universal consent. But a revealed Religion may have sufficient marks
of truth in it, so as to be able to satisfy any rational enquiry, and yet not
be able to draw an universal consent, lust, passions, prejudices, and false
Opinions may sometimes hinder ttuth from gaining that universal Empire. which
othewise it might justly challenge.

Pa. 202, I have already endeavored to prove, that it is not necessary that
God should reveal more, and therefore till that point be determined, I humbly
doubt, and suspend my belief. And I have already told him that the controversy
does not depend upon that point, but upon this, whether God has actualy
revealed any more, than what he first made known by the light of Nature. It is
not for him to prescribe limits to God, or to tell him what is necessary, what
not.

Another Objection he says may be this, that there is no foundation in natural
Religion, for a virtuous Life, or at least not so great, as in a revealed
Religion, where Rewards and Punishments are proposed, If he had urged it thus,
where Rewards and Punishments are more clearly proposed, than in the natural
Religion, then he had done right to the Objection; and in his answer I do not
see how in the least he attempts to prove rewards, and punishments as clearly
proposed in the Natural, as in the Revealed Religion, which yet he ought to
have done in order to the giving a full answer to the Objection.

Pa. 203. Another Objection is, a differen^e betwixt our condition, and that of
the Heathens, for if they lived up to the height of Virtue and known Reason,
they might (say some Charitable Christians) be happy in a Future State, we
cannot, because a Revealed Religion has been discovered to us more than to
them, though we believe it not. This seems to be the substance of the Objection.
The Inference as he calls it, is this, therefore we ought in our own defense to
embrace it.

But let us see what Answer he returns to the Objection, he says, it supposes a
reveald Religion, which is yet to prove. But here he may consider, that we
having been in possession of our reveald Religion so many hundred years, we
have very good reason to suppose it to be true, till such times as he can prove
the contrary: And perhaps he is one of the first of those hardy Men in England,
who having been brought up to that age in the Christian profession, has now at
last, in effect renounced it.

And if the Heathens, he says, living up to the light of Natural Religion
might be happy, I see no reasno, but why we may be so too. We, that is, Persons
bred up in the Christian Religion, but now having a mind to pick a quarrel with
it, design to return to a certain more refined sort of Paganism.

But to this I Answer, no Christian, as such, can be eternaly happy, except his
righteousness exceed the righteousness of mere natural Religion, for why may
not God require higher degrees of holiness there, where he has given both
cl^arer knowledge of Men's duty and better assistances, for the performing of
it? And can we ^hink it reasonable, that God should deal the better with any
Man for turning Apostate? or indeed that he should be admitted into the same
rank of Candidates for happiness, with a mere natural Pagan, who never knew any
other Religion? I think he cannot reasonably expect it, because one, who has
been thoroughly preswaded of the truth of Christianity, cannot possibly be so
fully afterward convinced of the contrary, but that, in all probability, he
will live in a state of self condemnation all his life after, unless he fall
into such a continued course of debauchery, as to Sin away all s^nse even of
natural Religion it self: And the Sin of Apostasy from the Christian Religion
will be such a dead weight upon his Conscience, as will necessarily sink him
below the condition of an honest Heathen, for I believe, even such an one may
dye with better hopes of future happiness, than a Renegado Christian.

Here I shall further show the unreasonableness, and imprudence of Deisme.
1. DEISME gives no tolerable accoun^ of one of the most considerable
Phaenomena's in the World, Viz. Of that speedy, and general reception of the
Christian Religion in the World, the whole thing, according to the Deist's
principles, being a mere nullity: Here I might insist upon that which is urged
herein. 1 st. The contrariety that the Doctrine of Christianity bore to the
Vicious principles, and practis^s of the World.

2. The great opposition it met withal from all sides, and yet its prevailing
against, and conquering all difficulties, without any outward, visible
assistance. 3 ly. The first Promulgers of it were wise, and honest Men, they
were too Learned to be imposed upon themselves, and too honest to deceive
others. 4 th. Neither could there be any thing of interest in the case, seeing
they engaged in a cause wherein they could not have any prospect of advantage
to themselves; these things I only mention, being more fully prosecuted by
others.

2. Deisme requires more evidence ^or things, than they are capable of, or more
than the nature of things will admit: Now we have as great assurance of the
truth of Christianity, as we can have of any thing of that nature; and as much,
as we possibly could have, supposing the thing to be absolutely true. If we
require more than this, we then run into Scepticisme, the greatest folly in the
World, next to Atheism.

3. Deisme is unreasonable, because it pretends to be certain of that, which no
Man can be certain of, viz. That Christia^ity is false, something that has been
either falsely imposed upon the World, or what ^he World has foolishly imposed
upon it self; this the Deist must be certain of, otherwise it is the most
imprudent thing imaginable, because of that foolish choice he makes, and the
infinite hazard he runs thereby: So that let the g^ni^s of Christianity be as
mild, and charitable as we can suppose it, yet I know not that it has any
where declared Pardon for Apostates, and it is no ways contrary to the Laws
either of God, or Man, to proceed against those who have renounced their
allegiance, rath^r like Rebels, and Traitors, than fair Enemies. I have
hitherto examined this Answer to the first part of the Objection mentioned. pa.
203. I shall now proceed to the Inference, as he calls it. pa. 204. That though a
supernatural Religion be dubious, yet it is the safest way to embrace it. We do
not grant Supernatural Religion to be in the least dubious, therefore the
consequence is good, and well grounded, that it is more reasonable in it self,
and more safe for us to embrace it.

This, methinks, is no hard matter to prove; one might rather wonder, how in a
Christian state we should be put upon the proof of such a thing, as this. For
first to embrace, or comply with such a Religion, as Christianity, is no
violation of any command, or duty of natural Religion it self, for the utmost
efforts that Deisme hitherto has, or perhaps can make, are only some little
difficulties it urges against the Old or New Testament, not any positive
arguments to prove the fals^ty of either, nay, I am apt to believe, that even
natural Religion, seriously, and impartially considered and followed, would by
easy steps lead a Man to the imbraceing of the Christian

2. Christianity, and natural Religion have the same general end, and design,
to promote the honor of God, and the good of Men by Temperance, Righteousness
and Holiness, and then, as to the additions contained in the revealed Religion,
they are not any vicious mixtures, or adulterations of the natural, but rather
improvements of it to higher degrees of excellency and perfection: Christianity
does not propound any less noble end, nor makes use of any less effectual
means than natural Religion does, but rather advances, and improves both: So
that if it be possible to be safe in the natural, it is much more so in the
revealed Religion, Christianity has all the advantages of natural Religion and
many more.

Then as to the difficulties that are pretended to accompany the practice of
the Christian Religion, Viz. A more profound mortification of our lusts, and
passions, and a more exalted degree of holiness, and piety, this certainly is
rather an argument of its excellence than any diminution of it, especially
considering the great assistances that the reveald Religion affords us to
perform that Obedience, which it requires of us, and the greatness of the
reward that attends the practice of it.

So that if revealed Religion be false, it can no ways prejudice the designs of
the Natural, but if it be true, as certainly it is, then the mere belief of a
Natural Religion will be of fatal consequence to those, who have enjoyed the
glad tidings of the Gospel.

But then Pa. 204. he says, I cannot embrace what comes not within the compass
of my knowledge. But in Order to our embraceing of a thing it is not necessary,
that it should so come within the compas^ of our knowledge, as that we should
fully comprehend all the Modes, and circumstances of it, thus we may embrace
the Misterys of our faith, though they do not thus come within the compass of our
knowledge, and if we must b^lieve nothing but what we thus comprehend, as to
the Modes and manner of the thing, then we must in obedience to this principle,
reject the principal Articles even of Natural Religion also.

But he proceeds, And if I cannot believe, it is a sign the Evidence is not
strong enough to make me. But our not believing is not always a sign that the
Evidence is too weak, but that our passions, and prejudices are too strong:
Evidences in matters of Religion do not work, as Mathematical ones do, not
force assent, but suppose some previous dispositions of the Subject, upon which
their efficacy many times depends: It Is sufficient, if the evidence be such, as
may convince a rational and prudent Person, if Men will be perverse and and
Skeptical, I know no remedy but they must remain so still, pertinaciae remedium
non posuit Deus: not in the common and ordinary Methods of his Providence.

He proceeds next to answer two Arguments of Sir Charles Woosley's, but I must
Beg leave to tell him, that it it not his business to answer Arguments, unless
they be such upon which the Issue and success of our cause depends. And here, 1
We assert the truth of the History of the Gospel, as to matter of fact. 2. This
supposed, we say it certainly proves the Divinity of the Doctrine, and a
Supernatural Revelation contained therein. Here he must prove the falseness of
the one, and the in-consequence of the other; and what ever he does less, than
this, it is altogether nothing to his purpose, no ways tends to make good his
cause: Though I do not say that he has Answered Sir Charles his Arguments, I
think he has not, but suppose he had, Sir Charles never designed the whole
cause should depend upon these two, he might urge 'em as further confirmations
of the thing he was then about, but he did not lay the whole stress of the
cause upon 'em.

I shall make some short remarks upon his Answer to the 2 d. Argument. Pa. 206.
The Argument is this. Propitiation for our Offenses must be supernaturally
discovered, or else we can come upon no certain terms of acceptance with God.
In answer to this he tells us, that all the World, who have agreed upon the
fault, agreed upon the compensation, viz. Sorrow and true Repentance, and
reason dict^tes this without revelation. I wonder why he should say that all
the World is agreed upon this point, when all the Christian World differs from
him in it, that is, though they grant, that Sorrow for sin, and Repenance are
necessary conditions in order to our being reconciled to God, yet they do not
exclude but necessarily include the satisfaction of Christ. And whereas he
says, that Reason dictates this without Revelation, I answer, that though Reason
may dictate a natural propensity, and inclination in God to pardon, and
forgiveness, yet we cannot come to God upon such certain terms of acceptance,
as we may do upon the assurance we have by Divine Revelation, and that for
these two reasons. 1. Guilt is naturally full of fears, and jealousies; but
Natural Religion is not so fully suited to answer, and take away all these, as
Christianity is; as might easily be made appear. 2. Natural reason cannot so
fully assure us of the truth, and sincerity of our Repentance, as it does or
may convince us of the heinousness of our many sins, and repeated provocations
against God, and I think Natural Religion does not dictate Sorrow, and
Repentance for sin any further a means of reconciliation with God, than as it
is sincere.

But he tells us now, that more in all Ages ha^^ agreed that Lustrations and
Sacrifices without repentance were nothing, etc. Before he had said, that all
in all Ages were agreed, etc. Now only more were so.

But it will be hard here rightly to compute the number of Voices and it is
probable it may go against him here too, since there is scarce any whole Nation
in the Heathen World, without Sacrifices and Lustrations (by Lustrations I mean
whatever is outward, and Ceremonial) or if there be, it is probable they are
without Repentance too.

But he says, that bare Repentance is a suffici^nt compensation for an
Infinite Offense against an Infinite Being, is what our Adversarys deny, and
therefore point us to an Infinite Sacrifice for sin, viz. Jesus Christ; But we
do not point to any other Sacrifice, or propitiation for sin, than what God
himself has pointed them to, and that with such clearness, and evidence as to
matter of fact, as is beyond the possibility of their ever proving the
contrary: and here will return the force of that Argument, Which like a dead
weight, hung about the neck of Deisme, will at last ^ink it, viz. The necessity
they lie under of proving the History of the Gospel, and the Doctrine therein
contained, to be false.

I would willingly assert the necessity of Christ's satisfaction, as far as
possible, only not to introduce a fatality into the Divine nature, or to
destroy the liberty of God's acting herein: Therefore I do not well understand
what Mr. Norris means, when he tells us pa. 4. Of his Reason, and Faith that
the necessity of Christ's satisfaction ought to be grounded on the Essential
order, and justice of God. Was Christ's coming into the World made necessary by
any other essential order, or justice of God, different from his own free good
will, and love to Mankind: That Sin should not go unpunished was highly
agreeable both to the wisdom, and justice of God, but yet we should be careful
not to entertain any opinions herein, which may seem to lessen the riches, and
freeness of Divine goodness in sending his Son into the World for Man's
Redemption.

And when we have asserted the truth of Christ's satisfaction in offering
himself a sacrifice for Sin, does it any way derogate from the glory of God, or
rather is it not highly agreeable to his manifold wisdom: Ephe. 3. 10. Thereby
also to accomplish some other subordinate ends of Divine providence, such as
were yet truly worthy of God to propound, and not unworthy of Christ to
undertake.

But he tells us pa. 207. That till all, who profess Christianity agree,
whether Christ be a propitiation, or no, I need not go about a further
confutation of this Argument.

But this seems rather a slight way of shuffling off, than Answering the
Argument, but is it indeed a sufficient Answer to any Doctrinal point, to say
that all who profess the same Religion are not agreed in that particular? I may
then tell this Gentleman, who asserts Repentance only a sufficient propitiation
for Sin against God, that till all who profess Deisme, agree in this
particular, I need not go about any further refutation of it: For the Author of
the summary account of the Deists Religion. pa. 89. Tells us, that some thing
further besides repentance, viz. Obedience for the future, ending in an
assimilation to God, is required in order to the reinstating a Man after Sin,
in God's favor.

The Socinians indeed will not allow Christ, in a strict, and proper sense, to
be a Sacrifice, or propitiation for Sin; But will it therefore follow, that it
is not a truth, because these Men deny it: If what Limborch says, pa. 108. Of
his Amica Collatio cum Iudaeo. Speaking of the two Natures in Christ, be true,
Ad huc non credunt Sociniani, and satis sunt Christiani. If Socinians be
Christians enough, than there is very little required of a Man, in reference to
his Credenda, To make him a Christian.

What remains is either much what the same, with what has been already
con^idered before; or something which seems his own peculiar way of arguing
against himself, that so he might return the more easy Answers,. But I am
afraid I have already tired my Reader in prosecuting these little things.

I cannot in justice or Charity suppose these Gentlemen such Deisis, as border
more immediately upon Epicurism, because the assert the Providence of God, and
a Future State of Rewards and Punishments. Only I would heartily, and humbly
propound to their consideration, whether they being happily brought up in the
belief, and practice of the Christian Religion, and their now falling back from
it, whether I say this may not be a step naturally leading to that worst sort
of Deism, little better than Atheism: For what better or stronger reasons will
they have for retaining the Natural Religion, than they had or might have had
for Christianity?

It is to be feared that the Purity of the Precepts, and the severity of the
Christian Doctrine, was the great offense they took at the Christian Religion,
and may they not after such a breach, as it were, made upon their Consciences,
be tempted to renounce even Natural Religion it self for the same reasons. Nemo
repent fit pessimus: Men ^ommonly by degrees arrive at the height of
^ickedness. Mr. Blount in his Letter Pa. 87. ^f the Oracles of Reason. Though
Deisme be ^ good manureing of a Man's Conscience, yet ^ertainly, if sowed with
Christianity, it will ^roduce the most profitable crop: But it is re^orted that
before his Death he fell from that more modest, and ingenious temper of mind
which he here seemed to express.

Vriel Acosta in his Life time was very wavering in his Religion, and at last
turned Deist, and shot himself. The same Fate attended that unfortunat^
Gentleman both in his Life and Death. I shall make no personal reflections,
only lay down this great truth, worthy to be considered by the Immortal Deist,
as he is called. Pa. 95, That Christianity lays the best and surest foundation
of living and dying well.

I shall here, because of the affinity of the subject to this in hand, briefly
examine some particulars, in the Translators preface to Hierocles, upon the
Golden Verses of the Pythagoreans. Sheet a 4. The proposition he there advanecs
is, this. That it is possible by a due advertency to the light of nature
sufficiently to discern betwixt good, and evil. This is very true, unless
perhaps there lies some ambiguity in the word sufficiently, that the light of
Nature does, or may inform us in the greater strokes, and instances of our
duty, is certainly true, but whether it descends to all the particulars
thereof, may be justly questioned; but then in the proof of this proposition, I
think he goes further, the the nature of the thing reqnired, the Heathens might
be able by the light of Nature to distinguish betwixt good and, evil, though
their Writings did not fully come up to the height of Christianity.

I do not asserts he says, that the Law of Nature was Engraven upon the hearts
of Men in as fair Characters, as upon the two Tables of Stone, for then there
would have been little, or no use of Revelation. Here seems to be some little
obscurity, both in the proposition, he lays down, and in the inference he
makes from it, I shall briefly examine both,

1 st. It seems as reasonable to believe, that the Law of Nature was Engraven
At first in as fair Characters upon the minds of Men, as it was afterwa^ds upon
the two Tables of Stone (I do not mean in any gross sense) that is, Natural
Duties might be as well known to Adam in Paradise by the light of Nature, as
they were afterward to the Jews by the Promulgation of the Law, if the Law of
Nature, in process of time, was so defaced, that it could not be so easily
Read, this was owing to the vicious principles, and practices, to the false
opinions, and wicked Lives of Men afterward. 2 ly. As to the inference, For
then there would have been little, or no use of Revelation. This may refer
either to the Revelation of the Law, or of the Gospel, to that of Moses, or
that of Christ. If it refer to that of Moses, yet the Revelation of the Law by
him might be of great use, by seting out, as it were a Second Edition of it
upon Tables of Stone, when it was so miserably defaced before upon the minds of
Men.

If it refer to the Gospel, that also might be of very great use,
notwithstanding all the clearest Revelations that were made either by the Law
of Nature, or by the Law of Moses, because the Revelation of the Gospel
contains in it something, that was never designed to be made known, at least,
so fully, by either: And he will not, I suppose, say, that the method of
salvation, now revealed in the Gospel is contained in the Law of Nature, though
it had been writ in as fair Char^cters, as that of the two Tables of Stone; nor
can he say, that the Law of Nature fully, and clearly Imprinted upon the minds
of Men, would render any further Revelation (particularly that of the Gospel)
useless.

But yet he says, that in the Writings of the Heathens is contained the whole
Moral Law, and that uot only in the integral parts, but in its utmost
intention, nor is there one Precept of Christianity so exalted, and Heroical,
but may be paralelled in an Heathen: No Man can deny this, he says, who has
read the Morals of Plutarch, Seneca, Epictetus, Cicero, to these he also adds
Juvenal and Persius.

I am not in the least willing to lessen the great excellencys that some of the
Heathens have attained to, but yet I k^ow no reason, why they should be
equaled with the Christians. As for those Moralists and Poets he mentions,
it is observable that all of 'em, except Cicero lived after the time of our
Savior, and the promulgation of the Gospel, and it is certain that the
Christian Religion had very much improved the Morals of the Heathen world at
that time, and that they owe a great deal of that light, which appears in their
writings, to the Sun of Rightousness, though they were not so ingenious, as to
acknowledge it. So that there can be no necessary Argument drawn from these, to
prove that the Heathens, purely as such, can vie with Christians in this
particular. What was said of Seneca, may in some measure be said of the rest,
si Christianus Paganice, Si Paganus, Christian Scripsit.

Then as for those Heathens, that lived ^befoe our Saviors time, I think I
shall do 'em nothing but right, and justice, in these following particulars.

1. They had no right notion of original sin, that general depravation, and
corruption of humane nature either as to the true cause or cure of it, without
which I think, there cannot be laid any such firm foundation of Virtue, and
Piety, as Christianity thereby now affords us. 2. The Heathens were not always
consistent with themselves in their discourses of this nature; their Candle did
not only burn dim: But like one in the Socket, it had sometim^s its lucid
intervals, and then sometimes seemed to be quite extinguished, they had light
enough to show 'em their own darkness, but not sufficient to assure 'em of the
right way; the light of their understandings was many time like that of an
ignis fatuus, desultory and uncertain.

Or if sometimes a more then ordinary Heroic Precept dropped, as it were, from a
Pagan penn, yet this will not be sufficient to equal Natural Religion with
Christianity, which is a constant, uniform, uninterrupted Series, and
Constellation, as it were, of Divine Precepts: One Excellent Precept is not
enough to form an institution, especially if we consider, that the influence
thereof commonly reached no further than the particular Sect, by which it was
delivered, and many times not so far neither, and then the greater quantity of
common rubbish, and perhaps vicious mixtures did quite sully the beauty of the
celebrated Maxim, and render the influence of it very ineffectual.

3. What ever their notions might be, yet they wanted that which is the very
life of all Religion, and the peculiar happyness of Christianty, viz. That
inward strength, and assistance, which might enable 'em to put their knowledge
into practice.
He adds, what exa^ted thoughts of virtue had Aristotle, when he made the very
formality of happiness to consist in the exercise of it, (...) etc. Happiness
is the act of a rational Soul according to the most perfect virtue in a life
most perfect. I take this, says he, to be the most Noble and Sublime conception
of Virtue, that ever was, or can be framed by the mind of Man. It Is true the
Wise Man tells us, Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace, that is, says he, they are attended with pleasure, and peace: But that
the exercise of virtue should not only be attended with, but be all one with
happiness it self, is such a superlative encomium o^ it, that neither the love,
nor contemplation of a Seraphim can suggest a greater. Greater things than
these cannot be spoken of Thee, O thou City of God! He might as well have gone
on, and preferred this definition of Aristotle above any thing that was ever
said, either by our Savior, or his Apostles, upon this Subject. Christ in his
Sermon on the Mount, if he had a mind to have come up to the Aristotelian
Altitudes, should have given no other reason of the blessedness of such, and
such Persons but only because they were such, that is Virtuous. Blessed are the
merciful because they are merciful, etc. But our Savior was pleased rather to
make use of this more humble way, and more accommodated to the State of
Mankind, viz. To place the reason of the happiness in the reward.

But suppose I should take the same liberty with Aristotle, that he does with
Solomon, that is, insert some words into the de^inition, to make the sense of
it more dilute, as Her ways are ways of pleasantness and all her paths are
peace. That is, says he, attended with pleasure and peace; then Aristotle would
have no advantage over Solomon, but I think there is no need of this: Aristotle
has done it to my Hand. For first, we may observe, that in the definition it is
not said, that the formality of happiness consists in the exercise of virtue,
but only that happiness is the Act of the rational Soul according to the most
perfect virtue, etc.

2. It is not every virtue, in the exercise, whereof happiness does consist,
but it is the most perfect (...) etc. Si plures sint ver^utes, tunc ex vertute
perfectissima.

3. It must be (...) in vita perfecta And here he tells us, that as one Swallow
makes not spring; (...) etc. One day, or a short time is not sufficient to make
a Man happy: That happiness is founded in virtue, or that a Man cannot be happy
without it, is certainly true, but that virtue alone is suff^icient to make one
so, Aristotle himself does not assert. It is generlly supposed, that in (...)
There must be the concurrence of all outward good things to the consummation of
this happiness, 1 Cor. 15. 10. If in this World only we have hope in Christ,
then are we of all Men the most miserable, and yet the Apostles were as happy
as virtue could make 'em.

He proceeds next to compare, and equal Heathens with Christians, as to their
practices: I do not say, that an actual formal intention, of referring all to
God, is absolutely necessary, either in Heathens, or Christians, but yet this
we may assert, that the nearer we approach thereto, and the more we refer all
our actions to the glory of God, the better they are, and come nearer to
perfection: I am of his opinion in this, that if a Man do what is agreeable to
right reason, because it is agreeable, he does well, though perhaps he does not
think of God at that present; provided he has no contrary intention in it. This
I believe is true, though not for the reason there assigned: viz. Because he
says, to constitute the nature of Sin which is contrary, it is not required that
there be an intention of transgressing the dictates of natural reason, much
less of offending God. But to this it may be reply^d. 1 st. That Virtue and
Vice are not, in a strict, and proper sense, contrarys, they are only privative
opposita. 2 ly. Perhaps it is not possible for any one directly, and formally
to design the transgression of the Law of Nature, or the Law of God, and yet
notwithstanding be guilty of Sin: If the action be in its own nature bad, or if
it want any necessary circumstance to make it morally good, it will have the
nature, and denomination of an evil action let the intention be what it will.
Bonum ex causa integra, malum ex quolibet defectu.

But he is not satisfied, unless he bring the Heathens, upon all accounts, to
an equal level with Christians, ( sheet B. 3) though I confess I see no reason
why an Heathen may not have this intention, as well as a Christian. How far an
Heathen may sometimes possibly have such an intention, is not my business to
dispute; only this I say, that there is this reason, why an Heathen should not
have such an intention, as well as a Christian, because he has no such plain,
and possitive Precept in this case. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat, or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God: and I think I may further observe
from this Chapter, that there are not any such plain, and positive commands to
be met withal in any Heathen Author, to teach us to use our liberty in things
indifferent so, as not to give any just occasion of scandal, or offense to
others, as we have laid down in that Chapter; for though perhaps there may be
something met withal in those which may be Wire drawn as it were, to these
purposes, yet probably this was never, either the intent of the Author, or ever
so generally understood at that time. Thus much briefly as to that particular.

I also humbly conceive, that Mr. Norris, does too much undervalue
Christianity, even as it contains a Doctrine of Morality, when he tells us.
pa. 6. 7. Of his Reason and Faith, that there is nothing in Christianity
considerable enough, when the great mysteries of the Trinity, and Incarnation
are taken away, to make it appear an Institution worthy of God, or to challenge
the assent of any thinking, or con^iderate Man. I grant indeed that the
misterys of Christianity do render it more awful, and venerable, and that more
especially upon these two accounts. 1 st. Because they are really true, and not
such Fantastical whimsies, as may be met with all in the Pagan Theogonia's. 2
d. They have a natural tendency, either as motives, or arguments, or
encouragements, to promote our duties both to God and Man.

But yet is there nothing in that admirable contrivance of the whole? nothing
in that exact correspondence, and agreement of the parts of Scripture, though
writ at several times and upon different occasions? nothing in that (...) ^f
Divinity, that seems, as it were, to (...) through all, both Gospels and
Epistles (...)ing in that most exact systeme of Morality, that ever appeared in
the World? nothing in all this worthy of a Man of clear Ideas, and distinct
perceptions to believe or embrace? Nothing in all this worthy of a rational
assent? We have not thus learned Christ.

Since therefore Christianity consists of these two principal parts, Mystery
and Morality, and both excellent, and necessary, I think, they ought not to be
opposed to, or unseasonably compared with one another, the Theory, and practice
of Religion mutually supporting, and defending each other. Thus that great and
Learned Man, the Reverend Bishop of Worcester. pa. 57. Of his Preface, To his
Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, the principles of Natural Religion,
are those that comm^nd Christianity to me, for without them the mysteries of
Faith would be far more unaccountable, than now they are, etc.

And however dismal the fears and jealousies of some Men may be of an
universal deluge of Deisme overspreading the World though the lives of Men may be
generally wicked enough, yet I fancy the age is not ignorant, and weak enough
yet ^or that purpose; for if Men be but either strict in their Lives, or in
their reasonings, there will be no great fear of Deisme universally prevailing
among 'em; but since i^ cannot be expected that they generally should be so,
therefore all ought in their respective stations to oppose the growing evil;
yea, even the S^ate it self ought to have a watchful eye upon the growth of
it, for when Men once arrive at an opinion of indifferency of Religion, they
will soon from thence proceed to an in^ifferency in Government: Yet we ought
not in the mean time desperare, nec de republica nec de Religione.

Some remarks upon a passage in Dr. Nicholls his Conference with a Deist, pa.
32. 2. part.
I Would not here be thought to take pleasure in finding fault. But this
learned Author himself has taught me in Dr. Burnetts, and Mr. Whiston's Case,
that 'its possible for one to differ from another in some particulars without
any lessening of their learning, without any Reflection upon their Persons, or
without any disparagement of their performances. I perhaps might speak as great
things in commendation of his Book as he does of theirs, but it does not stand
in need of the approbation of one of so mean a Character, yet I hope I may
without offense make use of that modest liberty, which he takes in the like
case.

Some are only for natural Religion, not granting any to be revealed; others
are all for revealed Religion, not granting any, in a strict and proper sense,
to be Natural; and I wish that some ill minded Men be not apt from hence
(occasion being thus given by dashing these assertions one against another) to
conclude, that there is no such thing, as any religion at all. But I think the
heat of opposing Deisme proceeds too far, when Men in defense of the revealed
Religion, deny the natural, for the granting of the one, is so far from being
any prejudice to the other, that those two seem rather mutually to support, and
defend each other.

This learned Author in the place above cited tells us, that the common Rules
of Morality, which we generally call Natural Religion, were at first revealed
by God, and it is very odd he says to think how such propositions as these,
Parents are to be ho^oured, friends a^sisted, etc. How these propositions,
which are the complication of so many distinct, and ^imple Ideas, which we are
sure are generally attained by reason, and experience should yet be asserted to
come into the minds by such an unaccountable way, as that of Inscription; But
here I would ask this learned Author, whether it be possible for God to
inscribe such propositions as th^s^ upon the minds of Men (I do not mean in any
gross or literal sense) if it be (and I think I may challenge any one to prove
the impossibility of it) yet still we might urge the same difficulty against
'em, Viz. That these propositions are only the complications of so many
distinct and simple Ideas which we get by experience, so that this is only such
an objection as may be consistent with an acknowledged truth, and therefore
indeed is none at all. I do not here suppose the simple Ideas of Parents, and
Honor, of Friends, etc. to be inscribed by God, and yet the truth of those
propositions may be truly said to be so, but I shall refer the Reader to what I
have further said upon this particular, in Answer to Mr. Lock.

As for Dr. Nicholls his Argument drawn from the poor honest Indian, I think is
so far good as to prove, that he di^ not come to the knowledge of those notions
of honesty, and fidelity by any such profound ratiocination, to which some Men
would ascribe the Original of all those moral duties. But whether he came to
'em by Tradition, or Instruction from his Father may be justly questioned,
because they who have lived long and conversed much with those Indians, do find
that it comes as little into the Parents minds to instruct their Children in
the principles of morality, as it does come into the Children's to make any
diligent enquiry into the nature of it themselves. So that though that learned
Author does say that that opinion of Innate notions has be^n of late generally
Exploded by learned Men; yet I think it still stands upon an equal level of
probability with either of the other viz. Either Ratiocination, or Tradition,
considered singly by themselves.

I do not here go about absolutely to oppose this way of Tradition, Valeat
quantum ^alere potest, but yet I would not lay the whole stress of the cause
upon it, so as to deprive our selves of any advantage that may accrue to us by
either of the other, in the defense of our common cause of Religion, either by
rational deduction, or Natural inscription; Orall Tradition^ having not found
that good success in the World, as to Divinity, as much to encourage others ^o
urge, or to prosecute the same in morality.

But he says, that though relations of matters of fact, ancient customs, and
difficult articles of Faith, may suffer much by ^eing conveyed this way, etc.
But was not Gods instructing Adam in these things, matter of fact? Or may not
matters of Fact done by God be misrepresented as well, as those done by Men? As
for difficult Articles of Faith, if he mean such as are of a more complex
nature, and include a long series of propositions, or if he supposes this
Tradition to extend to the modes, and circumstances of things, then this way
might be very liable to mistake, and corruption by passing through so many
hands; but suppose God had taught Adam to believe a Trinity in the Godhead,
the Resurection of the Body, with out the respective modes of either, I do not
see but that these might as safely, and securely have been delivered down to
posterity, as those other precepts he mentions^ but these plain Rules of
morality, he says, such as worship God, Honor thy Parents, etc. Are so natural
to the understanding, so easy ^o be embraced by it and appear upon proposal to
be so extremely useful ^o Mankind, etc. Here he seems to relinquish his own
principle, Tradition, and to found the belief and ready reception of these
rules of Morallity in their being so natural to the understanding, etc. That
they must be assented to, and can never be mistaken, or forgot. But pa. 33. he
tells us, that there are some very barbarous People, who, we are very certain,
want most of these Moral Notions, so that here must have been some mistake, or
forgetfulness on some hand, or other. But he says, Pa. 37. If Morality was
inscribed on Men's hearts, Parents might with as muh wisdom pretend to teach
their Children to eat, and drink, to love their Children, etc. So that it
seems, there is such a Natural Duty, or instinct for Parents to love their
Children that they cannot but do it. But why is not the Duty reciprocal? Why
may not Children be, in the same way, bound to honor their Parents, as Parents
to love their Children? and yet he says, Pa. 72. That among the ancient
Heathens it was a common thing to throw their Children when born into the next
ditch, they met with. No great Argument of such a Natural Love and Affection
toward 'em, as they could not but show and exercise: Pa. 33, he tells us, it is
odd to think, that these Propositions should come into the minds of Men by such
an unaccountable way, as that of Inscription, and yet he says Pa. 92. That Gods
permission of Vice is no sign of his liking it, he having otherwise declared
his will, by giving to all Men a Law of Virtue. This cannot be understood of
the traditionary Law, because that has not, by some defect or other, extended
to all Men.

Pa. 38. It Is further remarkable, that Parents Deuteronomy. 6.6. are commanded by God
to teach their Children these Moral Dutys: But what then? Did ever any body
assert, that this Natural Inscription does super^ede the necessity of other
Instructions, or the use of those other means which God, and Nature have made
requisite in order to the more perfect knowledge of our Dutys? But after the
recital of the Ten Commandments, viz. The Moral Law, Moses adds, and these
words, which I command Thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall
teach them diligently to thy Children, etc. But these words were not introduced
immediately after the recital of the Ten Commandments^ The ten Commandments
were recited about the middle of the 5 th. Chap. and v. 31. God there speaking
to Moses, says, Stand thou here by me, and I will speak unto thee all the
Commandments, and Statutes and Judgments, which thou shall teach them, that
they may do-them in the Land, which I give them to posssess it; Now these
words, Commandments, Statutes, and Judgments, are generally understood to
signify all the Precepts of the Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial Law, and
certainly the Jews were obliged to observe some other Laws, besides the Ten^
Commandments, in the Land which the^ Lord gave 'em to possess it: The like
words are repeated. Chapter 6. 1. Whereupon ^. 6. it follows, These words which I
command the this day shall be in^ thy heart.

He proceeds, It Is further remarkable, that what Moses here says, shall be in
the Jews hearts, the Apostle says Romans 2. 15. was written in the Gentiles
hearts, so that unless there can be a substantial difference evinced between
being in the heart, and written there, all the Doctrine of inscribed
Propositions falls to the ground. I perceive that those who are any ways
concerned for the Doctrine of Inscribed Propositions; must either now speak, or
else for ever hereafter hold their peace. But to this I answer,

1. That if that expression of Moses, of Being in their hearts, relate only to
the Ten Commandments. viz the Moral Law. Why then may not Moses be as well
explained by St. Paul, as St. Paul by Moses; and so Natural inscription be
understood by both? 2. I know not whether I can show a substantial difference
betwixt ^^ose expressions, or no, yet I hope, I shall s^ow such an one, as may
be sufficient to satisfy any impartial and considerate Reader.

1 Moses and St. Paul do not speak Secundum idem, or ad idem. Moses speaks of
the Precepts of all the three Laws, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, St. Paul
only of the Moral.

2. They do not speak, Eodem modo. Moses's expression of being in their hearts,
according to the best Interpreters, signifies no more, than being in their
Memory's, and affections, St. Paul's being written in their hearts. signifies
something more as supposing the Gentiles naturally conscious of the observation
and breach of the Moral Law; So that I humbly conceive, there can be no
Argument drawn from the comparing those two places of Moses and St. Paul in
prejudice to the Doctrine of Natural Inscriptions, rightly understood.

Pa. 129. No body says, that God reveals these Natural truths to us, but only
gives us facultyes of discerning them.

And may not the same be said of some Moral truths which we commonly call
Natural Religion, that God does not reveal these truths to us, but only gives
us facultys, by virtue whereof we may either find, or frame such propositions
as are agreeable to the morral, as well as to the Natural frame, and
constitution of the Soul? I cannot too often remind the Reader that I never
asserted these Natural, ot Innate notions to be imprinted upon the mind in any
gross, or litterall sense, upon which mistaken Ground, and persuasion only, I
am apt to believe that they are opposed by some, Pa. 83. Of my former
discourse, there speaking of the Archetypall forms, and patterns of all truth
in the Divine intellect; These I say, are communicated to the soul in a way and
proportion suitable to such a being, that is, they are either made Natural
propertyes of its being, as such, or the necessary, and immediate result of its
faculties, in the right use, and exercise of em',

For it is not easy to conceive how either any senfible impressions from
without, or any re^lections of the Soul upon its own operations ( about those
impressions) can be connatural causes of moral truths.

I grant indeed, that virtue has a natural tendency to promote both public,
and private interest, but yet I think the Soul finds, as it were, an intrinsic
sut^bleness of these truths to it self, and of it self to them, antecedently
to any such external considerations.

Some Remarks upon Mr. Chauvin de Religione Naturali.
ONE design of his Book, he tells us, was Orthodoxarum Ecclesiarum fratres ad
concordi^m vocare. An excellent design this, and worthy to be prosecuted with
all the prudence, and pious Zeall, that the thing is capable of, but it is to
be wished, that he had brought a more humble, and modest temper of mind to such
a work, as this; it did not become him, to reflect unhansomly upon the
constitution, and government of that Church, which both as to Doctrine, and
Discipline comes the nearest to that of the Primitive, of any in the Christian
World: It is not for private Persons, much less for Strangers, and Forraigners
to prescribe new forms, and methods to a Church that has been so long, and so
well constituted, as this has been; when this Gentleman has more fully
considered, and better understood things of this nature, he w^ll be better
satisfied with some of our ^^cle^iastical constitutions, than at present he
^eems to be.

I shall not presume to take notice of any thing in his Epistle Dedicatory,
because it is to a learned and Reverend Bishop of our own Church; though withal,
I believe, there are some things in it writ without his knowledge, or
approbation. But least my charge here against him might seem too general, and
so groundless; I shall instance in one particular, pa 419. Where he unhansomly
and rudely reflects upon our Convocations.

But these are things above my sphere, but under the careful, and watchful
Eye of our Superiors.

My de^ign here is of a lower nature, Pa. 131, Nobis jam ostendendumest, qua
via, illa lex, quae naturalis dicitur, in corda nostra irrepserit, utrum nempe
naturaliter sit menti nostrae inscripta, quod vulgoasseritur, nos vero
Evidenter asserimus, illud esse falsissimum. A little more Evidence in the
proof, though less in the assertion, might do very well: But here it will be very
difficult to reconcile this Author, either to Scripture, or to himself. St.
Paul tells us, Romans 2. 15. That the Gentiles show the work of the Law (that is,
the Natural Law) written in their hearts. Now it must be granted, that this
Natural inscription, even a primo ortu, is the most plain, and obvious
interpretation of the place, and where that may be re^tained, we ought not to
look for another: And though it is true, that the Natural Law is agreeable to the
dictates of reason it self, when come to perfect maturity, yet if this had been
all the Apostle designed to express; I am apt to believe, he would not have
thus worded it, by being written in their hearts; for by thus doing, he did
almost inevitably, and invincibly confirm Men in that false opinion (if it be
one) which was then more generally received in the World. Nor can any argument
be drawn from the word (...) in the following part of the Verse, in prejudice
of this opinion of Natural inscription. Dr. Hammond, here tells us that these
(...) are practical (...), common notions of good and evil, which are among
the generality of Men, even Heathens, without any light from the Mosaicall Law,
etc.

I shall now see how difficult it is to reconcile him to himself in other
places, pa. 5. There speaking of the belief of a Deity he tells us, Consentanea
utique est illis connaturalibus rationis principijs, quae nobis insunt, and
paulatim augescunt Pa. 38. quid nobis esse debet antiquius, quam religio, quae
si verum fatearis, insculpta fuerat, in hominum mentibus. Pa. 45. speaking of
the belief of the Unity of a God, haec opinio demonstrat naturae rudera, quae
in imis illorum medullis, infixa sunt, nec ulla de causa possunt amoveri. I
might easily tire my self and Reader too in citing places to this purpose, in
favor of these natural principles, which seem ^ven at first implanted in the
minds of Men, though it cannot be expected they should show themselves, before
the actual use of reason.

I shall now briefly examine the reasons he gives of his opinion; if, says he,
the Law of Nature, be writ by the finger of God upon the hearts of Men a primo
ortu then it must be either to direct us to good, or to deter us from evil, but
it cannot serve for either of these: Not the first, nam ubi omnia sunt turbata
etc. Where all things are disturbed, and out of order by reason of the
tenderness, and weakness of Age, altogether unfit for prudence, there the Voice
of the Law cannot be heard. But will he argue barely from the Laws not being
heard, that therefore there is none? We commonly say, that in war the Laws are
silent, or howsoever cannot be heard and yet they are Laws even there too: If
he supposes us in the state of Infancy, before the use of reason, what should
he talk of the rules of good, and evil to such, ^s know neither? If he supposes
us in the State of juvenility, though our passions be strong, and turbulent, yet
methinks, there should be more need at such a time, more especially, of a Law
to direct us.

Nor, 2 dly, Says he, can it deter us from evil, because there is no actual sin
in Children before the use of Reason, but would it be in vain to have this Law
imprinted upon the minds of Children, because they cannot yet make use of it?
May not the the Soul of a Child properly be called a rational Soul, though as yet
it cannot form a Syllogism? may there not be natural inclinations, and
dispositions to truth, and holiness. Some semina vitae moralis, though these do
not show themselves until such prefixed times, as Providence and the nature of
things have appointed for 'em? And till this be proved either abs^lutely
impossible, or highly irrational, the opposers of these natural Principles do
prove nothing to their purpose, nor gain any strength or credit to their cause.

2. Another ground of his Opinion is drawn from a parity of reason betwixt
faith, and this Law of Nature, there being he says, the same reason for both,
quoniam ut ambae, fides and lex jure suo utantur, necessario debent una cum
intellectu voluntatis actus eximios exerere. But I do not see how there can be
any necessary Argument drawn from the one to the other, the one being purely
Natural, the other supernatural, and Similitudes may indeed sometimes
illustrate, but never necessarily prove any thing.

He tell us indeed Pa. 333. Maximi viri his novissimis temporibus evidenter
probarunt, etc. That great Men of late days have evidently proud, that neither
faith nor ne semen fidei, is in us from our Infancy: I do indeed believe, that
it was in these latter days, that such novel Doctrine, as this was Preached;
who he means by his viri maximi I know not, but I am apt to believe, that their
authority is not indisputable; and it will be very difficult for him, or for
any else, who resumes the dispute, to prove, that there is not at least, a
semen fidei, that is, an inward principle of Divine grace, so far as to
regenerate the Infant, conveyed in Baptism: And therefore I wonder why he
should call that an obsolete opinion, because perhaps some Modern French
Divines have been against it. ut si vulgo omnes, ac presertim Seneca, de
vertutum seminibus loquuti sunt, distinctam s^orum dictorum notitiam non
habuerunt.

It is an easy way of confuting those, who differ from us, to tell 'em, as it
is an usual custom now a days, that they have no distinct Idea, or clear
perception of what they say. But a greater degree of Modesty might very well
become a greater Man than himself.

It is very strange, that God, who at first created Man after his own Image,
that he should not make, as it were, one actual stroke either of truth, or
holiness upon his Soul, wherein if in any thing, he might much more especially
resemble his Creator. So likewise in his new Creation, or spiritual
regeneration, which is generally I think, supposed to be begun in Baptism, that
he should do nothing by way of actual conveyance of grace, and strength, as an
inward principle.

Here I beg the Readers Pardon, If I so far digress, as briefly to examine,
what the Reverend Author of the Catechetical Lectures has laid down in his 70
th. Pa. Vol. 1 st. Relating hereunto. All, who are the Children of God, either
in the sense of the Scripture, or of the Catechism, are not thus actually
Regenerated. Here the question is not to what degree they are regenerated in
Baptism, but whether they be really Regenerate, or no. No one can here imagine,
that Children should be so Regenerate in Baptism, as that they should be able
to perform all the Offices, and Duties of Christianity, as adult Persons do.

As to the Sense of Scripture he says, it is, plain, that every one that bears
the relation of a Child of God, is not dutiful to his Father which is in
Heaven: No one ever doubted this: But will it thence follow, that even such an
one was not once a true Child of God, and regenerated in Baptism; may not Men
put themselves out of that state of Salvation, wherein once they were, by their
gross and wilful Sins? But then further, every degree of Undutifulnes is not
inconsistent with a Regenerate state; indeed upon ^very commission of sin, we
ought to return again to God by repentance, and reformation for the time to
come, yet every particular Sin, does not put a true Child of God into a state
of damnation:

And as to the meaning of a child of God in the Catechism. it is plain, that
it is not only such, as are renewed in the spirit of their minds, and imitate
God, that are here to be understood, for every one that is Catechized is
required to answer, that in his Baptism he was made a Child of God, whereas
many Catechumens are not yet renewed and really converted. To this I Answer.

1 st. That these two expressions, of being renewed in their minds, and
imitating of God are not here well joined together, because Children may be so
renewed in their Spirits as to be really regenerated, and yet not to be in a
condition of actually imitating of God. 2. Catechumens are indeed required to
Answer so; neither does our Church herein require 'em to tell a lie for so they
were made the Children of God, and that by true and real regeneration (I still
insist upon that Word, because our Church asserts it) though our Reverend, and
learned Author does suppose, that many Catechumens were never yet actually
renewed in the Spirit of their minds, or regenerated, and many never will be^
Which makes Baptism a more insignificant thing, than either Scripture, or the
Church of England ever designed to make it. But why may not the Catechumen
truly say, that in Baptism he was made a Child of God, more than by a mere
Covenant Relation, viz. By the laver of Regeneration Tit. 3. 5. and why may we
not charitably, and truly too suppose the Catechumen by the blessing of God
upon a Christian education, still to have the seed of Baptismal grace remaining
in him, which we firmly believe God at first bestowed upon him? for our Church
tells us, that Infants dying before the commission of sin, are certainly saved,
and yet this we know, that nothing impure, or unholy can enter into that state:
But he proceeds.

So that a Child of God by Spiritual regeneration, and God-like imitation
express rather a duty what every one ought to be, than, etc. By God-like
imitation, I suppose, he means a pious imitation of God, though I do not know,
whether that expression will bear it, or no:

But then let us apply what he here says to the Office of Baptism, and see what
sense it will make, when we Pray that the Child then comeing to Christ's holy
Baptism may receive remission of his Sins by Spiritual regeneration; this is
not to be understood of any thing then actually to be received at Baptism, but
at a certain critical moment of Conversion some Years after, if perhaps such a
thing ever happen at all; and whereas in the last prayer of that Office it is
said, We yield The hearty thanks most merciful Father, that it has pleased
thee to Regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit; This must be understood
so, as that he is only at present put into a capacity o^ being Regenerated
hereafter^ But he that thus explains the Catechism must at the same time
destroy the Office of Baptism, which is of equal Authority with the other, but
the Doctrine of the Church of England is not inconsistent with it self, if Men
do not come with prejudice, and prepossession to the explication of it: And
though he tells us, Pa. 60. That this matter was rightly stated by one thus, that
is in a way suitable to his own opinion, yet I believe^ upon examination,
neither his Authority, nor his reasons would be found of any great force.

I shall only further take notice of one question and Answer in the Catechism.
Do thou not think, that thou art bound to bel^^ve and do as they have
promised for thee? Ans: Yes verily; and by Gods help so I will^ and I heartily
thank our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state of Salvation
thro^ Jesus Christ our Savior. Now a state of Salvation is certainly something
more^ than a mere faederal Relation. And I pray unto God, to give me his grace,
that I may continue in the same to my Life's end. ^^t this learned Author says
that all Ca^^ch^mens are not Converted o^ R^generated, and some by their own
fault^ never will be, but certainly it would be the greatest curse imaginable
to teach a Child to pray, that he may remain in a state of unregeneration.

The Reverend Dr. does not take the least notice of this part of that Answer in
his explication of it, so that I do not certainly know what his particular
sentiments are herein.

It is to on purpose to tell us, that it is not easily conceiveable how
Children can be regenerate in Baptism, since the Scripture does warrant it, and
the Church affirm^ it; perhaps it would be dfficult for them to explain the
manner how adult Persons are Regenerate. John, 3. 8. The wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but thou know not whence it
come than^ whether it goes, So is every one that is born of the Spirit.

But to return from this digression.

He urges further, cuj tandem bono indulgebitur nobis illa naturalis lex, etc.
Is it that there might be some previous dispositions in the Soul by degrees to
dispose it to better obedience to its precepts? Let us suppose this for once,
and see what Answer he returns unto it. He tells us, that these previous
dispositions to virtue are things altogether as unintelligible as Aristotle's
substantial forms, which lie hid, no body knows how, in the bosom of the
matter, till at last they show themselves in their proper shapes: But here he
seems again, Eadem Chord ^ oberrare, before heargu'd from supernatural things
to Natural, now he argues from Physical to things of a moral and more
immaterial nature. Aristotle's substantial forms are unintelligible, ergo the
Law of Nature is so too, for they are as like one annother, as ever they can
look, for like as substantial forms lie hid in matter, till they find, or take
occasion of coming out, ^o these Natural principles do just the same, in
reference to the Soul. This indeed is evident affirmation, but I see little of
proof in it. There are indeed real difficulties, and absurditys urged against
substantial forms; but I know none against these Natural notions in the sense
before asserted: All that seems to be materially objected against this natural
inscription, is, that there is, they say, no need of it in order, either to the
knowledge of truth, or obligation to duty, these, they say, may be accounted
for other ways: But supposing this for once to be true, but not granting it to
be so, this is no argument against what is here asserted, viz, Natural
Inscription; for what if God should afford us more ways in order to the coming
to the knowledge of truth, and goodness, then we fancy to be absolutely
necessary, have we any reason to blame providence for it? But he tells us Pa.
336. etc. That the Soul does make certain Aphorisms, or general Rules, for the
direction of humane Life, Post maturam tandem experientiam: After mature
experience. Such as these, Honestum vitio ac libidini esse praeferendum, etc.
Which afterward he calls genealis norma de honesto apud homines stabilita.

But I would only ask him, in what place and in what Age it was, that Men thus
generally met to determine, and fix the Rules of right and wrong, by a general
consent: For a further answer hereto, I shall refer my Reader to my former
discourse of humane nature, Pa. 54.

There is one thing more, wherein this Gentleman seems to affect some kind of
peculiarity, though I think it is rather in expression, than in notion: That the
Christian Religion, especially as to the Dutys of it, are no ways contrary to
Natural reason, but highly agreeable thereunto is certainly true, and tends
much to the honor, and reputation of Christianity.

But then why we should so far strain the common sense, and acceptance of the
word Natural, as to apply it to all the misteri^s and miracles of our Religion,
I do not understand. We have sufficient reason from the nature of God, and from
Divine Revelation to believe all the instituted parts of Christianity, but I
know no reason why we should as^ert the Naturalness of em', if I may so speak.
But he designs here to advance a seeming paradox, pa. 263. Quoniam res videtur
ardua, and firm inaudita, pa. 248. grandia suscipimus cum omnes, qu^tquot
vidimus sunt huic opinioni oppositi, ut qui maxim. He makes use indeed of a
peculiar way of speaking, but when he has explained what he means by it, and in
what sense he understands it, the notion is common, and ordinary. per naturam
intelligo rectam rationem, usum, and morem hominum communem, and tandem
traditionem receptam. Pa, 264. a very large acceptance of Nature.

If God has adapted some of his institutions, either to the custom of former
Ages, or to the apprehension^ of Mankind, we have so much more reason to
acknowledge his condescension to our infirmities^ but we have none from hence to
call em' Natural. Pa. 271. nec communi usui aut rerum naturae adversantur seu
miracula, seu propheti^^ Jesus Christi. One might almost think here, that he
asserted Spinosa's opinion, that miracles were not above nor contrary to
Nature, but his meaning is more innocent, he only means that Miracles were
pretended to by other Religions, and that they were made use of by Christ, in
naturae restaurationem for the benefit of Mankind and the support of humane
Nature. Pa. 286. There he tells us, that even Evangelical Faith it self does no
way interfere with his former Doctrine. But his Reason seems very strange, and
not much for the honor of Christianity, sed si nos ipsos consulamus,
comperiemus corda nostra sponte pa^ere anilibus fabulis ut qui credulitati
natura nostra obnoxij simus, etc.

It were to be wished that Men would ^xpress common thoughts in a common and
ordinary way: But some Men think to gain to themselves the Reputation of great
Notionalists, by dressing up common and ordinary Notions in a new form of
words, thus seeming to speak something great, and above the o^dinary pitch of
other Men, when many times there is v^ry little, or nothing in their pompous^
ways or speaking.

If the learned Author of the Catechetical Lectures has in any other part of
his Book (which yet I have not met with) explained the point before mentioned
in a way agreeable to the Office of Baptism, I then recall what I have said
upon that particular, only, I could have wished that he had not given that
o^^asion to others of misapprehending him.

Some Remarks upon Monsieur Malebranch his Opinions of the non-efficiency of
Second Causes, and of seeing all thing^s in God.
THE true liberty of Phylosophizing, and the free and ingenuous use of ^ Man's
own Reason, is certainly a very great perfection of a Rational creature, a just
freedom of thinking together with that of ^hoice, being two great prerogatives
of humane nature; but the best things may be abused, and perverted to bad
purposes, thus Men sometimes, under the plausible pretense of free thinking,
give their fancyes leave to Rove about for new Opinions, and then presently^
are so enamored of their own inventions, that it is very difficult, if at all
possible, eve^ to convince 'em of the contrary, and that which more confirms
them in their own way, is, that they fancy themselves the only Men, that enjoy
the true genius of contemplation, and those who differ from em and cannot
assent to their way of reasoning^ they look upon to be Men, whose
understandings are crampt by the prejudice of an unha^py Education.

Here I shall propound these two things to Consideration^ 1. No Opinion in
Philosphy is either to be rejected o^ embraced merely upon account of its
Antiquity or novelty, but only, as it comes attended, or no^ attended with the
Evidence of reason and probability at least of truth, thus a more true genius
of Philosophysing may appea^^ in the defense of an old truth, than in the
asserting of a new error. 2. In things purely Physical, relating to things
merely of a material Nature, w^ may indulge a greater liberty of thinking but
in things that terminate more immediately upon God, as this Opinion of Monsi^ur
Malbranch does, in seeing all things in God, in such I conceive, we ought to be
more wary, and guide both our Thoughts, and Words with greater caution.


There are some positive Moralists, if I may so call 'em, such who tell us,
that there is nothing good, or evil in its own nature, but that things are so
(...) non (...), only because of the positive decree, and determination of God,
that they should be so: Monsieur Malbranch seems in some respect, to be the
same in Natural Philosophy, that those others are in Moral, that is, he grants
no Natural efficiency to 2 d. Causes, and that they are only signs, and
occasions upon which God will, and without which he will not produce such
effects. Thus what Mr. Norris^ Pa. 59. Of his Remarks upon the A^henian
Society, says concerning sensible impressions in resp^ct of Ideas, may be said
of all other causes, tha^ God has established a certain Order, or connection
betwixt such impressions made upon our senses, and such Ideas, not that these
impressions do cause, or produ^e these Ideas, but that they are conditions,
upon the presence of which God will raise them, or to speak more properly,
exhibit them to our m^nds.

Now according to this Hypothesis if God had ordered things so at first, or
shall hereafter do so, then the running of a feather though never so lightly over
a Man's hand, might have caused the most exquisite pain imaginable; then
Tent^rden Steeple might have been as much the cause of Goodwins Sands, as any
second cause is of the effect, which yet seems to follow from it. But then if
we consider what he says, pa. 116. of his Illustrations, he there seems not
much to differ from the common Hypothesis, ad deum seu ad causam Vniversalem,
^bi effectuum, specialium ratio postulatur, recurrendum non esse fateor, but
withal he says, naturae inestigatio falla^e^ and omnino vana, ubi in ea, aliae
verae causae quaeruntur, quam voluntates omnipotentis: Again in the same place,
si fieri possit, effectuum, de quibus agitur, causa naturalis and specialis est
explicanda, but again he says, actio istarum causarum consistit duntaxat in vi
movente, qua agitantur; illa vero vis movens nihil ali^d est, quam ipsa dei
voluntas.

But it is no great sign of truth, or of a good Cause when its Patron seems, as
it were, thus oppressed by its weight and thus operosely labors in the
explication of it.

But its observable, that he himself grants that it^ would be more agreeable,
if it could be done, to assign special natural causes of particular effects.
But now would it not be more Phylosophical; to say, that there are such
particular causes in Nature, though at present we are not able to assign 'em,
then thus to run to the more immediate power of God for the salving of every
ordinary Phenomenon of Nature. I grant that it is very difficult to assign the
just limits betwixt Natural, and Supernatural power, to determine justly where
the one ends, and the other begins, or indeed fully to explain all the modes of
Natural Phaenomena's, but yet, methinks, it is not altogether so Philosophycal,
to ascribe these, (commonly reputed) ordinary Phaenomena's of gravitation, for
example, or the growing of a pile of Grass to the constant efficiency, or
Supernatural influence of almighty God. I do not say, that we are able to give
a full solution of these things, as to all the minutest circumstances of 'em,
nor would I ascribe too much to Natural causes, but yet I think, presently to
have recourse to Divine power, for the solution of all things; this would damp
all our further enquirys into Nature, which is an employment very worthy of a
rational Creature, (provided it does not extend too far, I mean, to the
excluding of providence out of the World) besides to ascribe all things
immediately to God, exclusively of second causes, might perhaps seem to detract
from the tr^e Notion and nature of providence it self in that just, and wise
order of things, in that exact harmony betwixt the Natural^ and moral World,
which God has constituted in the Universe: And it would be difficult to give
any tolerable account, worthy of the wisdom of God; of those things, commonly
called second causes, if they be but bare signs, or conditions of those
things, which they seem to have some causal influence upon.

But he tells us, Pa. 124. Of his Illustrations, (which I should have mentioned
before) ^^m voluntas mea determina^ voluntatem dei, certe brachium meum
movebitur non voluntate mea, quae inessicax est perse, sed voluntate dei, quae
effectu suo nunquam frustratur.

But why should he call the will of Man Inefficax, when at the same time he
tells us that it determins the will of God? Might not Man's will, if God had so
pleased, as well determine the motion of his own Arm, as determine the will of
God? And I do not yet see, how he has proved Gods pleasure to be otherwise.
Neither will those words per se do him any service, for no body asserts second
causes to have any power of themselves, but what they received from the first.
I do not dispute the pow^^ful e^^iciency of the Divine will, wherever God is
pleased to employ it, only if our Adversaries will grant any subordinate
causality to sccond causes, but still in dependence upon, and under the
direction of the first cause, I shall not dispute about the Quantum.

But the Monsieur betakes himself to his modish way of fenci^g with Ideas.
Voluntatem meam producere Ideas meas, nego, quia ne quidem capio quo modo illas
possit producere; But may not I deny Man's will to determine Gods will, for the
same reason quia ne quidem capio, etc. How my will can determine Gods will? And
some few lines after, he says, nemo habet claram Ideam hujus virtutis mentis in
corpus and corporis in mentem, qui id positive asserunt, non satis assequntur,
quid dicunt. But may we not both by reason, and experienece, know something to
be true, of which we have no clear and distinct Idea, as to the manner of 'em?

But though I am apt to believe that there are some things in Nature yet unknown
to us, which afterward shall be, and others which never will be known in this
State, which yet in the other we shall then see Natural causes of, yet I would
not have any to infer from hence, that I in the least go about to lessen the
credit of Divine miracles, as if there were not sufficient grounds to satisfy
any rational Man of the truth, and reality of those miracles wroght by Moses,
Our Savior and his Apostles, viz. To prove, that they were, both above the
power of Nature, or any diabolical Arts, to perform, which will appear form
hence, because no doubt the Devil had his Instruments, both under the Old, and
New Testament, who evry well understood the powers of Nature, and their own,
and would certainly make use of the same to their utmost possibility in
opposing the Religion, that was then to be established, and yet we find they
were never able to contend with these Divine workers of Miracles, with any
success.

And if we further consider, the intrinsic nature of the things themselves, if
we consider the end and design of these Miracles which were always done in
confirmation of a Doctrine truly Divine, and in pity, and compassion to the
Souls, and Bodies of Men, never for popular applause, or vain ostentation, if
we consider lastly the manner of their being done, by a bare Word, where the
thing was no sooner said than done, though at great distance too, from all these
things we must necessarily conclude these Miracles to be truly Divine; and now
for a Man, after all this, to urge that we know not how far the powers of
Nature may extend, and whether these may not come within this compass, is
rather to play the Sceptick, then the Philosopher. Vide. Preface to Amyraldus
of Divine Dreams Sheet, C

Though I do not see any inconveniency at all in asserting the deluge to have
happened by the concurrence of second causes, but still under the influence,
and direction of Divine providence. I know its here objected, that if it came
to pass by Natural causes then there must have been a Deluge whether the former
World had been so wicked, or no. Then Noah's Preaching had been all Collusion,
and if the World had Repented, yet it could not have escaped the punishment. To
this I Answer. 1 st. That the force of these Objections, if perhaps there be
any in them, con^ists in this, Viz. The supposal that these Second causes are
not under the influence and direction of Divine providence. 2. If we could well
suppose that actually to come to pass which God certainly foresaw would never
come to pass, that is, the Antediluvian World had repented, how do they come to
know that it would have perished notwithstanding? Could not God as well Save
the rest of the World by some extraordinary manner, as he saved Noah, and his
Family in an ordinary one? But a right notion of Divine prescience will
perfectly solve all these seeming difficulties, and here I premise.

1. That Gods Foreknowledge is of as large an extent, as all the possible
actions of the most free agents, he foresees that M^n might have done this, or
that, and yet he certainly sees, that he will freely choose this. 2. God's
foreknowledge of things to come does not lay any necessity upon the things
foreseen, antecedently to the event, neither will it hence follow, that God's
foreknowledge might have been here frustrated, if things might have fallen out
otherwise, because God did also foresee this possibility too, and yet he saw,
that notwithstanding they would certainly fall out thus.
Now let us apply this to the present case. God foresaw that the Antide-luvian
World would be so preverslly wicked, not withstanding all the means he should
use in order to their Reformation: He then ordered such a constitution and
frame of things, such an harmony betwixt the Natural and Moral World, that
Nature it self should be instrumental for the punishment of Men's wickedness,
and that without any violation of the Divine mercy and justice, and in a way
agreeable to its own Laws: This seems to tend much to the honor of Divine
providence, and no ways contrary to any of Gods attributes. Therefore it is no
good way of Arguing, that if the Deluge did come to pass by the concurrence of
Second Causes, then it would have happened, whether the World had been so
wicked, or no, because the constitution of such a frame of Nature did suppose
the certainty of its being wicked, and yet without laying any necessity at all
of its being so.

I shall now proceed to his other Opinion, of seeing all things in God. pa.
208. Lat Edit. But here also there seems to be some kind of uncertainty, or
obscurity in stating of the Question, so that his Notions seem not here to lie
very clear in his Head, pa. 211. Deus non potest facere mentem ad cognoscenda
opera sua, ni^i men's illa videat aliquo modo deum, videndo ipfius opera; adeo
ut dicere possimus, quod si Deum aliquo modo non videremus, nihil prorsus
videremus. But this cannot be so understood, that by seeing the Works of God,
we thereby only come to the knowledge of his Atributes, of power, wisdom, and
goodness; some thing more then this, is intimated through the whole series of his
Hypothesis: But then though we thus, some way or other see God, yet we do not see
his Essence, pa. 209. Inferendum non est, mentes videre Essentiam dei, exeo
quod omnia in deo videant, eo quo diximus modo, quia id quod vident est val^e
inperfectum, deus vero perfectissimus.

Now it is not easily conceiveable, how we can see God, and yet neither see him
by his Essence, nor his Atributes.

And in the same place he says, praeter quam quod dicere possimus nos non ta^
videre Ideas rerum, quam res ipass, quae Ideis repraesentantur: And yet Mr.
Norris, pa. 203. Of his Reason and Religion, tells us, that those Ideas which
are in God are the very Ideas which we see, and the immediate objects of our
knowledge, and perception.

However if we see all things in God by his exhibiting to us the Ideas that are
in himself, how comes he so variously to represent them to several Men? I do
not now speak of the Objects, of sense, but of moral, and intellectual objects,
so that there are very few Men of the ^ame opinion in things of this Nature:
The union, that Monsieur Malbr talks of, betwixt the will of Man, and Gods
representation of Ideas will not do it, for however short Men may come, as to
the attainment, yet certainly all Men desire to see the exact truth of things:
If it be here said, that the preception of truth depends upon the various
tempers, dispositions and qualifications of the minds, it meets withal, this I
do not deny; but then this is that which seems more agreeable to the other
hypothesis, this assertion being not so well consistent with that exhibitive
way of seeing all things in God, upon our desiring to see 'em.

Monsieur Malbr. reckons up Five several ways of Solveing the mode of humane
understanding, the Four first he confutes, and rejects, as unreasonable, and
impossible ^o solve the Phaenomena's of Sensation and understanding, the Fifth,
viz. That of seeing all things in God, he asserts and defends. I shall not here
dispute, whether he has fully answered the Four first or no, but supposing he
had, yet it will not necessarily follow, that the Fifth is sufficiently
established by the overthrow of the First. as Mr. Norris tells us. pa. 194. Of
Reason and Religion.

For 1 st. What necessity is there, that the mode of Humane understanding
should be thus fully explained at all? Why may not this, as well as the union
of the Soul and Body, remain a Phenomenon not yet explained, and perhaps not
explicable? 2. Perhaps Monsieur Malbr. has not made a sufficient enumeration,
why may there not be yet another way, besides those he there mentions, though
those, he here Disputes with, ar^ not bound to assign it? If we be in pursuit
of a Man, who is gone to such a place, and we know there are Five ways^ that
lead thither, though he be not gone any of the Four first, yet it will not
follow that he is gone the Fifth, because perhaps there may be some other
unknown way, that he may either find, or make to the same place.

In the beginning of the 6 th. Chap. pa. 108. He premises these two things. 1
st. That God has in himself the Ideas of all things: This I shall not deny, but
yet if I had a mind to set up for new Notions, I might take the hint from Mr.
Norris, pa. 184. Of Reason and Religion. And argue thus, the truth and
perfection of Reason is in God though not in that formality, as it is in Man;
this gradual proceeding from one thing to another which is that we properly
call reasoning, being rather a defect incident to created capacities; so God in
like manner perfectly knows, and comprehends all things, but to see, and know
'em by Ideas, this is an imperfect way of seeing, and knowing things, proper
only to Man, and created Intelligences: But now God sees and knows all things
by an infinite, more perfect way, than by Ideas, in a way more suitable to the
purity, and simplicity of the Divine Nature, so that when we say that God sees,
and knows things by Ideas, this is only an humane mode of Knowledge, by way of
accommodation applied to God: But I shall leave these novell notions, to those
who take more pleasure in them.

But suppose, we grant Ideas in God, it will not thence follow that we come to
the knowledge of all things by viewing their Ideas in him.

His 2d. Postulatum is this.
THAT God is intimately by his presence united to our minds; that God is
present with our Souls, as he is with all things else, is certainly true, but
then I hope, he will not hence infer, or here assert such an union betwixt God
and uor Souls, as neither Reason nor Religion will allow. God may be said to be
the place of Spirits, as Space is the place of Bodies, and yet without any such
close, and strict union, as he supposes. Fanatics in the late times used to
say, that they were Goded with God, and Christed with Christ, but far be it
from me to think that Monsieur Malbr. Entertains any such opinion: But the mere
presentialness of God to our minds, has no necessary influence upon our seeing
all things in him, independently upon his Will, and this Monsieur Malebr
himself asserts, when he tells us, that the Mind can see all things in God,
dummodo deus v^lit ipsi retegere id quod in se habet quod representet illa
opera. pa. 209. According to those Men, who assert God only to be Vertually
present every where, that is, by his power, and providence, yet according to
this Hypothesis, though it be a very false, and dangerous one, God might if he
pleased thus represent all things to Men's minds, that is, by his power, and
providence.

I shall now briefly examine the Reasons, upon which he founds his Opinion.
1. HE Argues from the general aeconomy of the Universe, wherein it appears
that God never does that by difficult ways, which may be done by simple, and
easy ones: But what if we should say, that the other way, and method of humane
understanding is as plain, easy, and obvious, either in it self to be done, or
for us to apprehend, as that of seeing all things immediately in God, however I
think the former tends as much to the Illustration of the power, wisdom, and
providence of God, as the latter does. But this maxim, that God always acts by
the most simple, and easy methods, must be managed with a great deal of
prudence and piety, otherwise it may prove of very bad consequence: We must not
fancy to our selves what are the most simple, and easy ways of doing things,
and then by virtue of that maxim. oblige God to act according to our foolish
imaginations thus if we should argue, that it is the more easy, and simple way
for the Earth to bring forth Fruit, and Herbs, as it did at first, without
Cultivation; or that it had been a more easy, and simple way for God to have
pardoned Sin, without sending his Son into the World to dye for it, would any
one think that there is any force in this way of Arguing?

That God can make known to us all things more immediately by himself, every one
grants; but then the question is, whether those reasons which Monsieur Malbr,
has exhibited to us be sufficient to convince any rational, and considerate
Man, that this is the method, that God takes in this particular.

I shall only take notice further of one period of his upon this Subject
wherein he shows a great deal of wavering, and uncertainty in his Notion. pa.
209.

Cum igitur deus possit per se omnia mentibus patefacere, volen^^ simpliciter
ut videant id quod est inter ip^os, seu in medio ipsorum, hoc est, id quod in
ipso est quod relationem habet ad illas res, quodque illas representat,
versimile non est, etc. 1. He is not here willing to call these things Ideas,
but express 'em but by another large Periphrasis. 2. He knows not where to
place 'em, whether in God, or in our selves. But to proceed,

The Second Reason he gives is, because this Hypothesis places the minds of Men
in the greatest depend^nce upon God imaginabl^, because thus we can see nothing
but what Go^ wills that we should see, and nothing but what God exhibits to us
to be seen.

We ought not indeed to entertain any Opinion that may lessen our just
dependan^^ upon God, but is it any ways inconsisten^ with our Christian
d^pendance, to be f^llow workers tog^th^r with God in the ways of his own
Appointm^nt? May w^ not make use of second causes by the assistance of his
Power, and in Obedi^nce to his Will, and after all depend upon God for a
Blessing, and all this without any violation of ou^ dependence upon him? But ^e
says^ our Minds cannot su^si^ien^l^ depend upon God in all their Operations, i^
they are suppos^d to have all things which we distinctly perceive ^o be
necessary to Action, or i^ they h^ve the I^ea^ of all things present to them.
^ut must we have all things n^c^ssary for Action, if we have the Ideas of all
things pr^sent to us? Is there nothing further r^quir'd for Action but only
these? Do^s not the Soul depend upon God, as to its pres^rvation in all (...)
Actions? And is there not required in the (...) the f^ee determination of it
self, though (...) other requisites besides do concur? With^^t this, I know not
how the liberty of the (...) can be secured.

3. He further argues from the manner of ^^d Mind perceiving all things, for we
all (...) by certain experience, that when we are ^inded to think upon any
particular thing, (...) first cast our Eyes about upon all Beings, (...) then
at last fix upon the Object which we ^^tended to think upon; but perhaps all
(...) do not ^ind by experience that this is (...) way and method they take in
their re^^ective Meditations, I rather think, that when Men intend to fix their
thoughts upon such a particular Object, that the previous roving o^ their Minds
is confined with in a much narrower compass, and is not of such an universal
extent.

But he says, it is past all question, that we cannot desire to see any Object,
but we must see or know it already, though in a more confused and general way;
and the ground of this I suppose is, Ignoti nulla cupido, or something to that
purpose, but here I would propound it to Consideration, whether Mr. Malbranch,
though he be a severe Enemy to the Scholastic way, yet whether he does not
s^ffer himself to be too much imposed upon by that Maxim of theirs, before it
h^^ undergone a just and due Examination.

But he says all Beings cannot be any other ways present to the mind, but
because God is present to it, who in the simplicity of his being comprehends
all things. Neither will Gods presentialness with our Minds prove that all
Objects are so present to us, as to be known by us either distinctly or
confusedly, unless God be willing to display 'em to us.

Here it may be further inquired, whether we may not be said to have a gene^al
or confused knowl^dge, even of the mysteries of our Religion, and of things
above the reach and comprehension of human Reason, and if so, why may we not
desire to have a further and clearer sight of 'em; now if we should desire to
see these things, and God be not willing to represent 'em to us, t^en what
becomes of that Union betwixt Man's Will, and God's representation of Ideas.
Pa. 21. Ipse est, qui unione naturali, quam etiam instituit inter voluntatem
hominis, and representationem idearum, ipsis notificat omnia, etc. But I must
confess, that I did not think, that when Monsieur Malbranch first instituted a
philosophical disquisition upon this Subject, that he designed it to extend to
things of a divine Nature, had he not likewise endeavored to reconcile his
Opinon to Scripture.

His last Argument, he says may pass for a demonstration with those who are
used to abstracted Ratiocinations; it is this, Impossible est, D^um in suis
a^^ionibus alium habere sinem principal^^ a s^ip^o diversum; necess^ ^gi^ur
est, ut cognitio and lux, quam menti impertitur, aliquid nobis patefaciat, quod
in ipso fit. It is impossible that God in any of his Actions should have any
principal end different from himself. It is necessary therefore that that
Knowledge and Light which he bestows upon our mind should open, and ^xhibit to
us something, that is in himself. Quiequid enim ex deo ve^it propter alium
fieri non potesi, quam propter deum; for whatsoever comes from God, cannot be
for any other besides God. These are his words so f^r as concerns the present
Subject, but now they are so far from having the force of a Demonstration, that
they seem not to have the face of a tolerable good Argum^nt, viz. to prove, as
he there designed, that we see all things in God; for if God in all his Actions
has not any principal end differ^nt from himself, all that can necessarily
follow from hence is, that in this particular Action, of his bestowing Light
and Knowledge upon our Minds, he had no other principal end diff^rent from
himself; this I ^a^ily grant, may not God make his own Glory the end of his
giving us this natural Light, though we do not in his Sense thereby see all
things in God? Or does not that Light and Knowledge which God imparts to the
Mind, discover to us those divine Attributes which are in God, and therefore
not different from God himself? But perhaps it is my unacquaintedness with the
abstracted ways of reasoning, that renders me incapable of understanding the
force of the Demonstration.

Mr. Norris speaking upon this Subject, viz. of seeing and knowing all things
in God, Pa. 206. Of Reason and Religion, says this very Notion Aquinas had once
plainly hit upon, however he came afterward to loose it. But I do not know
that he ever lost that Notion he there hit upon, that Opinion which he here
asserts, being the general opinion of the Schools in this p^rticular; for says
he in express terms, Pa. 1. Q. 84. 5. It is necessary to say, that the human
Soul knows all things in their eternal Reasons, by the participiation of which
we know all things, for that intellectual Light which is in us, is nothing else
but a participated similitude of that increated Light, in which the eternal
Reasons are contained. Now I do not see that this is any acknowledgment at all,
of our seeing all things in God in that way that Monsieur Malbranch and Mr.
Norris explains it, that the Soul knows all things, that is, universals (wherein
Aristot. did a^sert all Science, truly so called, to consist) these things we
know in their eternal Reasons; but he adds, by the participiation of which we
know all things, so that we do not see them under that formality as they ar^ in
God, but as by participiation these eternal Reasons are derived to us; for that
int^ll^ctual Light that is in us, is nothing but a participated similitude of
that in^reased Light in which the eternal Reasons are ^ontain'd, that is,
originally in God, but derivatively, or by way o^ participation in us, so that
I am perfectly of Aquinas's Opinion according to this Interpretation, which
whether it be more true in it self, or more ^ikely to be Aquin^s's m^aning, is
l^ft to the Reader to judge.

But if this Opinion of Monsi^ur Malbranch be a truth, it has the least
app^arance of Truth of any in the whole World,; all our outward S^ns^s give
T^stimony against it, and our inward faculties do not in the least seem to
favor it; we compare Ideas^ and dis^ourse, and draw cons^quences from ^ormer
Pr^m^s^s, just ac^ording to the m^tho^s of the other Hypothesis; but if it be
said, that after the use of all these means, that notwithstanding we see and
know all things in God, one might be almost persuaded to think, that either God
would have made these means (under the superintendence of his own Providence)
effectual to those ends they seem at least designed for, or else to use his own
way of arguing, would have made use of that more easy and simple way which he
might have done, by exhibiting or producing the knowledge of these things more
immediately by himself, without the concurrence of these outward means, which
are indeed nothing but useless and ineffectual Conditions.

Lastly, As for the Scriptures he urges in favor of his Opinion, I think they
do not prove what they were intended for, that all our knowledge is from God,
that he is the Father of Lights, and tea^hes Man Wisdom, that Christ is the
true Light that enlightens every one^ etc. No Body here denis this, but the
dispute is not so much about the thing it self, as the manner of it, that is,
whether all the Knowledge we arrive at here in this World, be only by seeing
all things in God acc^r^ing to his Hypothesis, Monsieur M^lbranch thought
perha^s it would be some ^dvantage to his c^us^, if he could procure it some
count^nance from Scripture, but when his quotations are so little to the
purpose, they serve only to create prejudices against it; t^us others are apt
to believe there is but little strength in the cause, when Men are for^'d to
use such inconclusive Arguments in the defense of it.

Nor^ do I think that those brought by Mr. Norris amount to any necessary
Proof, St. John, he says, calls Christ the true Light, that is, the only Light,
but may not other subordinate Lights be also true Lights? Is not the light of a
Candle a true Light, though it be inferior to that of the Sun? But however it
will not hence follow, but that this only true Light may have several ways and
methods of giving light to the World, besides that of seeing all things in God,
etc. He cites also, Io. 17. 17. Sanctify them by thy Truth, thy word is Truth,
which is not he says, meant of the written word, but of the substantial and
eternal word, as appears from the Context; but I do not see how any Argument
can be drawn from that place, unless it be from the word (...), which yet does
not always signify the substantial and eternal word of God, but sometimes the
preaching of the Gospel, as appears from the 20th. Verse, for all those who
shall believe in me through th^^r word (...), by the pr^ac^i^g of the Gospel,
La^^ly, The Apostle says expr^sly, 1 Cor. 1. 30. of this divine Word, that he
is made unto us Wisdom, which is exactly according to our Hypothesis, that we
see all things in the ideal World, or divine (...). Pa. 222. of Reason and
Religion; but in answer to this, 1. By Wisdom is not here meant natural, but
divine and evangelical Wisdom. 2. The Apostle there speaks of Christ Jesus, of
Christ more especially, as he is made known to us by the Gospel, for he is
there said to be made to us Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, as
well as Wisdom, but I suppose he will not say, that we see our Sanctification
or Redemption, that is, the ways and methods of these, in the (...), or ^deal
World, or any other ways than as they are revealed to us in Scripture. 3. May
not Christ be made to us Wisdom, unless we see all things in the Ideal World? I
shall here only further observe what Theophylact says upon this place, (...),
etc. non dixit, sapien^es nos fecit, sed factus est nobis sapientia; doni
largitatem sc. ostendens, perinde ac si dicat, seipsum nobis tradidit.

I have now finished those short Remarks upon those two Subjects, viz. the law
of Fashion and innate Notions, not only in answer to Mr. Lock, but to some
other Learned Persons also, who seem to favor his Opinion in the second
particular; and now if any expression herein seems too harsh, or not becoming
the Character of such great and learned Men (though I hope there is not) yet if
there be any such, I do hereby wholly recall it. I hope we are all pursuing the
same general design, viz. the search of Truth, and if so, then the detection of
any error will but be the promoting of the same common end we all aim at, for
my part, I shall think it so, as to my self.

I would not have Mr. Lock think, that pa. 88. I do there in the least
insinuate, that he held the materiality of God, or that I went about to draw
him into a Controversy, wher^in he is nothing concerned. I do freely grant,
that he asserts the spirituality of the divine Essence in the most strict and
proper Sense of it. I was once in hopes that he was convinced of the Certainty
of the Souls Immateriality too, by what he said pa. 5th. of his Answer to some
remarks, added to his reply, to the Learned Bishop of Worcester, but what his
Opinion herein is at present, I know not.

I shall here only propound these two things to Mr. Locks serious
Consideration, 1. Whether asserting the immateriality of the Soul be not a good
Fence or stop against the inlet of that dangerous Opinion of the materiality of
the divi^e Essence. 2. Whether it be worthy of a Christian Philosopher to make
a b^re po^^^bili^y the ground of his asserting things of this Nature, for I
think, he is v^ry unfortun^^e in his choice, who happens upon s^c^ ^n Opinion
in Philosophy, that it is not po^^^ble for Omnipotence to make good.

I shall not here enter into that dispute, whether Tully held the Soul to be
material or immaterial, yet this I think must be granted by all, who
attentively read, and impartially consider his 1st. Tusculan Question, that
whatever nature he held the Soul to be of, he makes God to be the same: But it
is not so much to the purpose, to consider what Opinions the Heathen
Philosophers entertained in things of this Nature, as what is worthy of a
Christian Philosopher to think of 'em.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5, Line the last, for hunc read huic, p. 12, Line 7, for appe^l, r.
appealed. p. 15, l. 2. for watsoev^r, r. whatsoever, p. 20, l. 19, for
concidere, r. coincidere, p. 24. l. 13, for quit, r. quote, p. 27, r. misled,
p. 38, l 15, for the, r. that, p. 39, l 18, for m^asurer, r. measure, p. 41,
plac^ the Figure 199, 200, l. 22, in the l. ^bove 21, p. 4, last line r.
prevailing, p 45 l 22, re^d M^n's, p. 48 l. 19, r. pr^cede, p. 54, l. 1, r.
sepa^ation, p. 62, l. 25, for moral, r. natural, p. 65. l. 4, r. God, l. 17, r
benignity, p. 69, l. 13, r. convenient, p. 72, l. 2 r. defendi possint, p. 77,
l 13, r. hankering, p. 85, l 18, dele the second not, p. 88. l 13, ^or made use
of, r. c^^ryed on, p. 8, l. 27, dele the first And, p. ^0, l 7, r ^p^curu^'^,
p. ^5, l. 14, after those, add, to, p. 98, l. 1^ r. other, p. ^14, l. 6, r.
assert, p 116, l. 22, r. ingenuou^, p 134, l. the last, r. extern^l, p. 139, l.
5, r. as, p. 140, l. the last, r. virtutum, p. 141, l. 14, dele much, p. 154,
l. 12, r. inve^tigatio, p. 158, l 10, r. very, p. 160, l 24, r. ante diluvian.


