A LETTER From on Board Their Majesty's Fleet NEAR USHANT, July the Twentieth,
1689.
Giving an Account of the good Condition of it, and of the taking of some
French Ships with LETTERS from IRELAND.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

SIR,
HAving this Opportunity, I thought it convenient to let you understand how the
Affairs are with us here: We have been accrusing some days off this Harbor,
and have used all means to induce the French to come out and fight us, but all
will not do; although yesterday our Admiral commanded fifteen Men of War, with
four Fireships, to go into the very Road of Breast, and put up the Flag of
Defiance, yet notwithstanding they would not offer to stir. Our Fleet is in a
very good condition, and well manned, wanting nothing but the Enemy to come
out; for we are able to fight any Navy in the World. Our Fleet consists of
above Eighty Sail, Twelve of which carrys Flags (viz.) five English, and seven
Dutch, and three more are daily expected. Some days since we took a small
Vessel going from France to Ireland; they pretended at first to be Protestants
making their Escape, but upon strict Enquiry they were found to be otherwise;
and upon search we found a Packet of Letters under the Coat of the Mast, which
discovered the whole Intrigue. They are English, Scotch, and Irish, who had
been for some time in the French King's Service, and were going to the late
King in order to be preferred.

Yesterday we took a small French Man of War coming from Waterford; it should
have carried Thirty six Guns, but they had but Eighteen, they having left the
rest in Ireland: They had a Packet of Letters from the late King James going
to the French King: The Captain of the said Ship reports, that the late King
declares, That all the Nobility of England have left King William, and that
Scotland has unanimously declared for him: He gives out at Dublin, that as
soon as the French Fleet is arrived in Ireland, he will go with Ten thousand
men into Scotland, and so to England. But I do not doubt, but by the Blessing
of God, that we shall be able to prevent ever their coming thither. Again, he
says. That the pretended Parliament have passed an Act, for giving the late
King James 20000 l. per Month, for Thirteen Months: As also another Act, that
all Religious shall pay their own Clergy: He comfirms the Defeat near
Enniskelling, and the taking of the 20000 l. and that Londonderry holds out,
and makes a brave Resistance, and have lately taken ninety Head of Cattle from
the Enemy: He adds, That the Bishop and Dean of Waterford were barbarously
murdered, and several of the Servants wounded; and that the Differences and
Jealousies between the French and Irish grow greater and greater; and he does
verily believe, That upon the landing of an English Army in that Kingdom,
several of the Native Irish will revolt, being already weary of the French
Yoke. This is all at present from

Your Servant to command. J. L.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THE Art of curing Diseases by Expectation; with Remarks on a supposed Great
Case of Apoplectick Fits: Also most useful Observations on Coughs,
Consumptions, Stone, Dropsies, Fevers, and Small Pox; with a Confutation of
Dispensatories, and other Various Discourses in Physic. By Gideon Harvey, M.
D. 12o.

THE Conclave of Physicians, in Two Parts, Complete; detecting their Intrigues,
Frauds, and Plots against their Patients, and their destroying of the Faculty
of Physic: Also a Peculiar Discourse of the Jesuits Bark, the History thereof,
with its true Use and Abuse. Moreover a Narrative of some Eminent Cases and New
Principles in Physic, of greater Use than any yet known; By Gideon Harvey, M.
D. their Majesty's Physician of the Tower, and Fellow of the College of
Physicians of the Hague: In 12o. Both Printed for, and sold by James Partridge
at the Post House at Charing Cross.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge at the Post House at Charing Cross.
MDCLXXXIX.


