THE Loyal Martyr VINDICATED.
AFTER Mr. Ashton's Paper had been shown by the Sheriff to those that sit at
the Helm, and that it was known there were more Copies of it given abroad, so
that it was impossible to sham or disguise it, it raised in them (as I am
informed) very sollicitous Apprehensions what Effects it was likely to work in
the Minds of all the true Sons of the Church of England, to see a genuine
Member of that Communion, with his last Breath, admonish his prevaricating
Brethren of the enormous Crimes of Perjury and Rebellion, in which they they
had of late so deeply plunged themselves; denounce Prophetically to them the
Judgments attending their Apostasy, if not timely repented of; profess so
stoutly his Allegiance to his much injured and unjustly Dispossessed Prince;
seal our Church's Doctrine of Non-resistance with his dearest Blood, and dye so
resignedly, cheerfully, nay joyfully, in Testimony of that Christian Principle;
could not but be apprehended to our Statis's to be the most powerful Motives
imaginable, to reclaim those who had been misled by false Information, or
seduced by Interest into a Repentance of their Errors; and to establish the
rest in the Loyal Principles to which they had hitherto adhered. Besides, the
honest unaffected Reason, which appears in the Account he gives of his Tenets,
and Conscientious Proceedings, and the Christian Moderation and sincere Piety,
which he observed throughout his whole Paper, Praying heartily for his very
Enemies, though unjustly thirsting after his Blood, (the proper Temper of a
dying Martyr,) could not but recommend the Contents of it to the esteem of
every indifferent Reader, and even be able to shock all such as were not
resolutely biased.

Nor can I blame them for being so highly concerned, that such a Legacy was
left to the Loyal Party. Those politic Men were well aware of the successful
Methods by which Christianity was Propagated at first, and that The Blood of
the Martyrs was the Seed of the Church; and therefore they judged it very
Expedient, that some speedy and effectual Means should be taken to stop the
prejudicial Effects, which it would otherwise produce. It was then thought the
best way to seem to slight and undervalue the Paper, by Printing it themselves,
and at the same time to endeavor to baffle and confute it by an Answer going
along with it, penned with as much plausibleness as the Cause could bear: But
Truth is not easily trampled down. His Christian Constancy has made too great
an Impression in the Hearts of his Admirers, to permit his Meritorious
Sufferings to lie under the Scandal of a Treasonable Guilt; and has given
Courage to some of the meanest of them to vindicate his Cause, and Credit,
against the wicked Slanders and weak Reasons of this mercenary Writer; though
he foresees that if they be discovered, they can expect no other Reward but the
same fatal End. The Holland Lion has begun to taste English Blood, and finds it
so sweet that it draws on an Appetite of shedding still more.

To fall then to our Reply --

His First Sham (for the whole Piece is a continued fardle of such Stuff) is,
That the Paper is none of Mr. Ashton's. This, if made good, would (they hoped)
take off the Authority and Influence of it, as no^ being the proper Act of the
Martyr, but of some other of that Party ^ it required therefore his best skill
to make this Credible. Let us then examine his Arguments: His First Proof is,
Because (...) with too much Art and Care to be the Work of one, who professes
he thought it better to employ his last minutes in Devotion, (p. 8.) What a
ridiculous Cavil is this! His last minutes were at the place of Execution which
the Martyr professes he thought it better to employ in Devotion and holy
Communion with his God, than in making Speeches; which if they were Loyal, and
delivered his Thoughts fully, were likely to be interrupted, and so not
attended with the designed Success; and therefore he chose rather to deliver
what he had to say in Writing. Now comes this Gentleman, and pretends (if his
Words have any Tenor or Sense in them) that he must have composed this Paper
of his a^ his last minutes, that is, at the Gallows; which, he says, he could
not do with so much Art and Care, those minutes being taken up otherwise, viz.
In Devotion; and therefore (forsooth) the Paper is none of his: As if he had
not time enough between his Sentence and the Execution of it to compose a
Paper, both larger, and more full of Art and Care (had he minded such
Advantages) than this was: Or, as if good Men, whose Piety enclines them to
spend their last minutes in holy Thoughts, could not in the time anteceding use
both their best Art and Care to pen a true Account of their Principles, and the
Cause for which they Suffered; but indeed there is little Art or Care in the
Master, or Sense of the Paper, but a plain and candid Discovery of his Thoughts
and Affections both toward God, and the World; and as for the manner of
Writing it ( if it were indeed such as this Man exhibits it) there was neither
any the least Art or Care shown in it, but perfect Negligence, or rather great
Ignorance and Folly throughout the whole, as will be seen shortly.

His Second Reason to prove the Paper was not the Martyr's, is, Because Mr.
Ashton, says he, was illiterate and unskilled in the Law, and yet uses such
Bug-words, as Impending, Prevaricating, Premises, and Consequence; and gives
such a peremptory Judgment about the Laws of the Realm, in a Case acknowledged
by all ingenious Men of his own Party to have a great deal of difficulty in it;
this Man will say any thing, though never so openly false: Not one M^n of his
Party ever thought there was the least difficulty in this, That it was Treason
by our Laws to resist a legal Prince, or acknowledge any other for King while
he lives. No not this Writer himself, as appears by his not thinking it his
best play to allege the Laws of the Realm, bu^ flying off and recurring to the
Law of Nations: And as for the Law as it relates to his own Case, he was far
from Peremptory, as is manifest from his saying -- I am told I am the First Man
that ever was condemned for High Treason upon bare Presumption or Suspicion: Do
not these Words [ I am told] sound as modestly as is possible, and bar all show
of his passing such a peremptory Judgment about the Laws of the Realm, as he
puts upon him p. 8? What will not this Caviller say? But it is pleasant to
observe what Prancks he uses all along. It Is plain Mr. Ashton meant no more but
that he was illiterate (that is, unlearned) and unskilful in the Law, as
appears by his desiring the Judges to observe for him what might be for his
Advantage. And sure a Man who has not made the Law his Study, (for the Word
reaches no farther,) may have Learning enough to use those Four ordinary Words,
none of them being artificial Law Terms; but such honest English as every
Gentleman, that converses with Persons above the lowest Rank, is capable of
understanding and using. But this candid Gentleman seeing his Cause could not
be maintained but by Tricks, (for this whole turn of Government was nothing but
a Trick of Policy,) disjoyns by his Discourse [ illiterate] from [ unskilled in
the Law] and refers the Four cramp Words to the former, and his passing a
peremptory Judgment about our Laws to the latter; and when he has done, he
tells us very sadly, one may justly wonder at it; and indeed it is very
wonderful: For to play so many juggling Tricks in so little room, wresting
almost every Word 'till he has made it crooked; and then gracing every Flam he
gives us with such a demure Hypocrisy, is altogether Monstrous.

He tells us, p. 9. That the Loyal Martyr designed two Things. To assert his
Principles, and to testify his Innocence; and he sets himself to prove that he
did neither. As for the former, he grants that by the Faith of the Church of
England Mr. Ashton meant the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; and then confutes
him most learnedly, by telling us, That he suffered not for Passive Obedience
but for want of it, and that had he regulated his Life by this Principle he had
preserved it. Did ever any Man's Reason turn tail so aukwardly? The constant
Doctrine of the Church of England was Passive Obedience to a lawful King; and
he is the lawful King according to the Constitution of our Government, who has
Title to it by immediate Succession. Now comes this acute Gentleman, and
pretends, without Shame or Wit, that the Doctrine of the Church of England is
not Passive Obedience to the legal King, whom all the World did ever
acknowledge for such, in their clear, unb^ass'd, and (...) in us Thoughts, but
to another, who has dispossessed this legal King of his Kingdom, and whose Title
is quite annulled by our English Laws, nor owned by any but some of those who
got their Advantages in doing so, or who dare not do otherwise. And then after
he had preva^icated thus eg egiously, he te^ls us very gravely, That certainly
there must be some g^ea^ mistakes about the Doctrines and Principles of our
Church: Whereas if there be any it is manifestly on his side; but to say the
plain Truth, there is no mistake at all, even on his side, but an open
Prevarication, and a wilful shuffling and shifting the whole Subject of the
Church of England's Tenet, making our Passi^e Obedience regard not only a wrong
but an opposite Object, which is to make the Principles of our Church face
ab^ut with the Times, and point (as a Weathercock does to the Wind) to a
Dispossessour of the true Prince; so he gets but Power enough to make himself a
strong Party, and keep under, or Murder, by his new Laws, and new Judges,
those who dare be Loyal.

He pretends that The Doctrines and Principles of our Church are to be found in
the Articles and Constitutions of it. If he means that only some of them are
found there, it reaches not home to his purpose. But if he means that All the
Doctrines of Faith which our Church holds are found there, he shows himself to
be very weak. Sure he cannot forget that God's written Word, and it only, is
our entire and adequate Rule of Faith; and that the best Interpreter of it for
us to follow, is the most unanimous Exposition of it, avowed by the Doctrine of
our Churchmen, and the agreeable and constant Practice of our Church. If then
he would prove that our Church does not hold Passive Obedience, and
Indispensable Allegiance to our lawful King upon our Rule of Faith, that is,
does not hold it part of her Faith; he should have produced such, and so many
genuine, grave, and eminent Members of one Church, as are beyond Exception, who
have unanimously declared themselves to understand the Scripture in an opposite
Sense, and upon that ground held the contrary. I except always from that Number
Dr. Sherlock, who is so flexible a Complier with every side, that, I fear, he
is of no side, and ready to be of any, as God-M^mmon shall inspire him by
proposing a good fat Deanery, or some such irresistible Temptation. As for the
Practice of our Church giving us light to know her Faith, it cannot be possibly
manifested better than by her Carriage toward King Charles II. in the
Protector's days, who had Abdicated twi^e, (if the leaving England to avoid
danger to his Person might be called Abdicating,) and there was another actual
supreme Governor who had got all the Power into his Hands, and so was
Providentially Settled in Dr. Sherlock's Sense; yet none of the genuine Sons of
our Church flincht from their Allegiance to their King in those happy days,
when honest Principles, as yet unantiquated, made our Church shine gloriously
even in the midst of Persecution, but all adhered to their legal King, though
all of them suffered in their Estates, and many lost their Lives rather than
forego their Duty.

But as our Author told us formerly, that Mr. Ashton died for want of that
Passive Obedience which the Church of England holds, so he tells us here, that
he might have believed himself obliged by his Religion to look upon his
rightful lawful Prince, (whatever his Principles were, or his Practices might
be,) as God's Vicegerent, and accountable to God only from whom he received his
Power: All this (says he) he might have done, and have been alive still,
because, as he contends, King William was his rightful lawful Prince. So that
it se^ms let King William be of what Principles he will, even though he were as
zealous a Papist as King James; or let his Practices be what they will, even to
the Subverting all our Liberties, Properties, nay the most Fundamental Laws of
the Land, still we are to believe our selves obliged by our Religion to look
upon him as on God's Vicegerent accountable to God only, and consequently to
obey him as such. Which ridiculous Partiality overthrows a good part of his
Book, and makes all the Deserters, and first Adherers to the Prince of Orange,
and the whole Parliament that set him up for their King, and the Consent of the
Nation, he talks of, to be Irreligious and Wicked. For since King James was
confessedly at that time their rightful lawful King, nor can he be pretended to
have worse Principles and Practices than those mentioned, which comes within
the compass of his, [ whatever his Principles are, or his Practices might be,]
and this Man confesses that notwithstanding all this they were obliged by their
Religion to submit to him as God's Vicegerent; it follows unavoidably, that we
are to believe they violated the Principles of Religion, in the highest Degree,
who deserted him, opposed him, turned him out, and set up a Stranger in his
stead. Yet this Action of theirs, confessed by himself to be Irreligious, is the
true Foundation of our new Government.

Hitherto he has begged the whole Question, and supposed the present Governors
to be rightful and lawful King and Queen; and now after he has done this, he
sets himself to prove it: Certainly this Man's Logic is very extraordinary. If
it might be supposed, it needed not to be proved; and if it could be well
proved, it needed not have been supposed. Yet this Gentleman, to make this sure
Work, will needs do both, though the Method he takes to do this be very
preposterous, his special Gift of Reasoning, by a neat Figure called Hysteron
Proteron, sets the Cart before the Horse; and first supposes it, and then goes
about to prove it: The Question, says he, (p. 9.) is not whether rightful
lawful Kings are to be obeyed, but w^o in our Circumstances is our rightful
lawful Sovereign? And so he addresses himself to settle King William's Title,
and put it beyond all disp^te, which being so rare a Sight, and so great a
Novelty and Curiosity, it may deservedly challenge our best Attention;
especially it being withal our real-Interest: For I cannot think that any Man
of the least degree of Wit, would undergo outward Disquiets, Dangers, and
Inconveniences, in not submitting heartily to this present Government, if his
Conscience would let him be quiet within: Let us see then what we in Reason and
Conscience think of this new Title to what was most evidently, by G^d's and
Man's Law too, another Man's Right.

That Party that stickled to make the Prince of Orange King, do hold that the
People have the Power to make and unmake the supreme Magistrate; and so they
fix his Title upon the Creation of the People, and make account the same People
by virtue of the same Power can limit his Authority, and annihilate it again,
as one of them professed openly in the House of Commons: Nay, this was the only
Reason and Interest they had, or could have to make him King; for the
Commonalty, of whom they pretend to be the best Patrons, were not at all
burdened with Taxes under King James; and withal themselves enjoyed Liberty
of Conscience; and, lastly, had more than should have fallen to their share in
Places and Offices; And what could they wish more, except the pulling down
Monarchy ten Pegs lower, and dwindling it into a Duke of Venice? Which could
not be while the legal King governed; but might, they hoped, be easily brought
about when themselves had the making, and consequently the modelling of their
new Magistrate: For it is but reasonable that they who give and bestow a Thing,
should give as much and as little of it as they please. But this Plot was
carried too openly, which obliged the House of Lords, fearing their Ruin by a
Commonwealth, rather to vote any new King at a venture, than become Slaves to
the People: Nor would a precarious Authority satisfy a Genius, that naturally
aimed at being Absolute. So when they had given all the Money that they thought
could well be raised, without an extreme Wrong to the common Good of the
People, they were packs away; and home they went gnashing their Teeth, that
they should be so Silly as to bring themselves into a Noose they could not
untie; and which in time might come to hang their Liberty, Property, and (if
they should dare to mutter too rudely) their Persons too. Thus that First Title
fell, which served well enough while the Young Government was yet in its
Swaddling-clouts, but when it became bigger it out-grow it, as Children do
their Clothes.

After this our Church of England Men, who all this while stood Trembling left
this new King, being in his Inclination a perfect Presbyterian, and the
Creature of their Adversaries, should come to ever-power them, and trample on
them, finding that Things did not co^^on well between the ungrateful Sovereign,
and these his disgusted Subjects, but that they grew weary of one another,
judged it was now their time to strike in: Wherefore they offered him their
most humble Ser^ice; which being accepted, they laughed in their Sleeves at the
poor baffled Presbyterians, telling them after an upbraiding and scornful
Manner, You would needs give us a King whether we would or no, and now we will
keep him up whether you will or no. So all this was done, not out of Love to
him, (for he has the ill luck to have few Personal Lovers,) but for fear of the
opposite Party, and to secure themselves against their emulous Competitours, or
revenge themselves upon them. If then Title (as it ought) be that which gives
and upholds Authority; his best Title after he had now got rid of the hanck the
Presbyterians had upon him, next to that of the Confederacy owning him for his
Money and Assistance, (which now begins to knock off) was in reality, The Feud
between our Church and Dissenters: Which Two made up a Second and a Third Title
to prop up by turns this feeble Authority. Money then they voted him, and (to
engratiate themselves by out-bidding the others) full thrice as much as the
Dissenters had done; so that the Nation was half beggered by his Transporting
it beyond Sea, to hire Foreign Soldiers, and bribe the Confederates; and yet
though they thus pleasured him by lavishing away the Money and Riches of the
Nation, all the Title he could obtain of them unanimously, was to be only King
de Facto, and not de Iure. Which encouraged Dr. Sherlock, who stood watching,
his Advantage, to face about and build: this New and Fourth Title upon the
Events of Providence, or (to use an Expression less blasphemous and more proper
for a Rueling Authority) on the Wheel of Fortune. But the poor Man was so
baffled for this new Notion of his, particularly by the Author of the Trimming
Court Divine, and more largely and unanswerably by those two learned and acute
Treatises, Entitled, [ The Duty of Allegiance settled upon its true Grounds,
according to Scripture, Reason, and the Opinion of the Church, and by Dr.
Sherlock's Case of Allegiance considered with some Remarks upon his
Vindication;] that it is his best play to sit down with silence, and be content
to lull his Conscience with his Deanery, without awaking or disquieting it by
thinking how to answer them, lest it start up in his Face, and disturb his
peaceful and comfortable Enjoyments of his new Acquisitions; for I dare
challenge him, particularly in the behalf of the two latter of those three
Treatises; that he is so shamefully, confuted that he has not one starting-hole
left for his Credit to escape by. And yet I must tell him, That unless he
answers them fully, he Cheats the Government, and is bound in Conscience to
make Restitution of his Deanery; For why should he be so bountifully paid for
weaving a Piece, which, when it comes to be well looked into, is so full of
Bracks, Stains, and Holes, that it is useless and good for nothing?

Thus the Fourth Title of a King de Facto, by the Wheel of Fortune, was laid
flat, and the Unsteady Authority of our new Governors was bandied most
miserably from Post to Pillar, and could find no Foundation to fix upon, nor
any Basis that would fit it. None had hitherto been so Hardy to offer to
maintain by Reason, that they were rightful and lawful King and Queen: Yet I
am credibly informed that a certain Gloomy-look't Divine, relying, I suppose,
on some mystic Exposition of the Revelation, had preached a Sermon which would
insinuate that King William had a Right to England by Conquest; which was
formerly ready to be published, but upon the taking of Mons some s^op was put
to it at that time. If this be as true as it is told me, with much assurance,
we Englishmen have reason to bless God for that Success of the French King, as
the most beneficial Event of Providence that has befallen us this long time;
for had that Project been heartily encouraged, our Contrymen had been all
Slaves, and every Farthing in the Nation at the Conquerour's Devotion, it being
indeed, in that Case, his own; so that when Parliaments would give no more, he
might, by setting up his Title, when he pleased, take all; and this was the
Fifth Title which has been set on foot.

At length comes this Gentleman, and seeing all the other Titles to be but
impertinent Shifts, and not at all likely to take, he will needs strain a Note
above Ela, and settle it on a higher Foundation; viz. on the Law of Nations,
which allows Independent Governments to right themselves by Force, or by making
War on him that injures them: But, because he saw no War was made, no Army
fought, nor a Stroke struck ^ so that none who was not mad with Revelation
could dream of a Conquest giving him Right over England; he very politickly
twists with it -- and with the Success of this Just War, (p. 11.) the Consent
of the People too. This, I must confess, is a more extraordinary and more
refined Notion than any of the other, it is made of Contradictions, and is of a
Composition altogether Monstrous. We use to instance in Chimeras by a
Hirco-cervus (a Goat-Stag) or some such whimsical Conceit, that imports two or
more different Natures clapped together. But this new fangled Notion of Right, he
has invented, consists not of merely different, but opposite Natures; War and
Force signify Involuntariness in those they are exercised upon, and Consent
signifies Voluntariness. Again, the Effect of War and Force is to subdue
Resisters, and Consent of the whole Nation signifies no Resisters at all. So
that to come in by Force of War, and at the same time by Consent, is to be
beaten voluntarily, to be forced willingly, to resist yieldingly, to submit
withal our Hearts, yet against our Will, or whatever Nonsense of this kind
this incoherent and self-divided Notion of Right affords us. But, to say the
Truth, there was neither a fair War, subduing the resisting Nation against
their Consent, nor a clear, free, and deliberate Consent of the whole Nation;
but (as will shortly appear) a mere Trick, managed by an Ambitious Invader, and
his Confederates, seconded by a Party of Malcontents and Rebellious
Deserters, and carried on by a complicated Series of unproved Pretenses, and
Forgeries, to bubble and fool the Common People, and bring us into the Slavery
and Beggary we now groan under.

We will put this young new-hatcht Kingly-Title its best Clothes on, and then
see how finely the Royal Robes become it, and how prettily the Baby will look.

There is besides the Laws of the Land (says he, p. 11.) a Law of Nations, by
which Sovereign Independent-Governments, when injured, may Right themselves by
a Just War. Here were great and violent presumptions of an injury to the Right
of Succession, and too great Evidence of a formed Design to subvert the
Established Religion and Civil Liberties of the Nation, and this War had
Success; therefore the Sovereignty was duly transferred, and so there can be
no dispute left to whom our Allegiance is due. This is the full substance of
the Discourse he had put together, as he told us ( p. 10.) to clear this whole
Matter. Let us now take it gently to pieces, and lay each part of it down
easily, lest it fall asunder of it self, and shatter into Incoherent Atoms
before we come to handle it closely.

It Is denied then, that there were in our Case two Nations, or several
Independent Governments. It Is denied there were great and violent presumptions
of the Injury mentioned. It Is denied there was too great Evidence of the formed
Design he pretends. It Is denied the Prince of Orange acquired his Authority by
making War, or that he righted himself by Force, or came by the Consent of the
People; and therefore since he has no Right either by fair Means, or foul
Means, it is denied he has any Right at all; what he has, how he came by it, or
how he still keeps it, shall be declared hereafter.

First then, That there is a Law of Nations distinct from that of particular
Kingdoms every Man knew before; so that he needed not have been so large in a
Point so universally acknowledged; but it is becoming his small Politics to
amp^^fie mightily, and carry all before him Victoriously in Things which no Man
living denies: But to be short and slight, or rather perfectly silent in those
p^rticul^rs, on which the Decision and the Truth of the whole business depends;
we grant him then that Independent Governments may, when injured, have a Right
to demand, and if it be denied them, take Satisfaction by force of Arms, for
it is no more than every Man knows, and yields to; but it is denied that this
comes home to his Purpose, or does his Cause the least service. For --

Secondly, It Is denied that there were here Two Independent Governments, and so
his Discourse falls to the g^ound. The S^ates of Holland indeed make a
Government, but those good Men, who never told lie in their Lives, disclaimed
the Action by their Ambassador; and, like wise Men, lest it should not succeed,
would not be seen in it, but made use of F^ot of W^elp to do their own Jobbs,
'till the Six hundred thousand Pound came to be paid them, and then indeed
they so far owned it heartily, and took our Money very readily: Besides they
were Allies to King James, which makes it contrary to the Law of Nations, to
which he recurrs. And, lastly, if they made this War, and had Success in it, (I
am sure the Prince of Orange was not such an Independent Governor as to make
it without them,) it would follow, by this Discourse that They, and not He, are
our Lords and Masters; a Title which the Hollanders do not qu^t, but still
assert on due occasions, That their State-holder manages England for their
behoof, as appears by their carriage in the Mogull's Country, where they
seized some of our Merchants Effects, by pretending that England was now under
Holland, and that they had sent one of their own Officers to govern it on their
stead. As for the Prince of Orange, taken in his own single Capacity, he was
far from being a Separate Nation, or Independent Government, which this
Gentlemen's Discourse proceeds upon, or indeed Supreme Governor of any Nation
at all, not of the Principality of Orange; for this was by Dr. Sherlock's Event
of Providence, and by Conquest taken from him long ago: Nor was the Prince of
Orange a Sovereign Independent Prince in Holland, for he was there under the
Government of the States: Nor was it ever heard there was a Prince of Breda: So
that this Gentleman's Discourse faulters in that which should have been the
very subject of it. He should have said that any great Man who had received
W^ong, might in true Reason right himself by the best means that he or his
Friends could make against any Man, who was not his Sovereign or fellow
Subject, and this by the Law of Reason, or Nature, not by the Law of Nations;
For what had the Law of Nations to do in the business, when there was no Nation
Injured, or that demanded Satisfaction? For surely he will not say that King
James had done Wrong to the Principality of Orange, or that the Person of King
William alone, or of his Queen either, is a Nation: Yet one of the two he must
say, ^o make his Discourse hang together.

Thirdly, It Is denied there were great and violent (...) of an injury to the
Right of Succession: This, if made good, might do his Cause some service; let
us see then what strong Proofs he brings to evince it. Two sorts of Arguments
he alleges to prove it. The first is the Prince of Orange's Declaration;
certainly this Man is infatuated. Our English Proverb [ Ask my Master if I be a
Thief] contains as good a Plea as this; yet the poor Man triumphs mightily, and
thinks his Work is done when he has barely repeated it. But what says the
Declaration? Why, it says, That all the good Subjects of these Kingdoms do
vehemently suspect, that the pretended Prince of Wales was not born of the
^ueen, and that many doubted of the Queen's Bigness, and of the Birth of the
Child; and yet there was not any one Thing done to satisfy their Doubts: So
says the Declaration indeed; and if a Man may be believed in his own Cause,
(against our own knowledge,) when he might hope to get Three Kingdoms by saying
so, all is as true as Gospel, and as clear as Demonstration; otherwise our
Reason will, I hope, give us leave to suspect at least Misinformation in the
Case, if not Self-partiality. And I do not like either the Sincerity, or the
Care of him that penned it, in saying, first that [ All good Subjects
vehemently suspected, etc.] and then dwindling afterward into [ Many doubted,
etc.] A sober Man would not have quoted the Declaration, unless to defend it;
but this Gentleman builds on it as on his Principle.

But how will he justify the Declaration when it says, that not any one thing
was done to satisfy Doubters, or himself for hinting so impudently, (p. 14.)
That the principal Persons concerned had not the least Satisfaction given them?
Was not the Testimony of near Fifty sworn Witnesses of Credit, enough to
satisfy reasonable Men in a matter of Fact? No, says he, (p. 13.) No private
Depositions of such as are dependents, or otherwise liable to suspicion, can in
reason be taken for satisfactory Evidence. Does this Man consider how many
Protestants, how many Persons of unblemished Honor he taints with suspicion of
Perjury, and Treason against the Nation, by hinting they are so sworn in
attesting the Bigness of the Queen, and the Birth of the Prince of Wales?
Unhappy Mr. Ashron, who had such Judges, and such Jurymen, as though fit to
condemn him without any one Witness, or any one Proof, but merely upon
Suspicion or Presumption; yet such multitudes of legal Witnesses are held
insufficient to satisfy those of the ^ame Party of the Truth of a matter of
Fact far more evident. Certainly this pretended Scrupulosity of theirs, which
is so loose at some time; and so straitlac'd at another, is more lodged in
their W^d than in their Reason: But on how he bussles, and runs about the World
to pretend a flaw in this most sample Atte^tation! The Old Roman Laws are ha^ed
in by Head and Shoulders, ( p. 13.) though he knows well they are generally no
where observed, especially those he mentions; they being indeed such
extravagant N^ceties, that it would look like perfect Madness, now a days; to
offer to bring them into play. Then comes in our Old Common Law, (p. 14.)
Allowing a Writ of Inspection, and the Old Law Books giving directions to
prevent and discover Subernation: Now if there were any Thing done contrary to
our Laws, that makes for his purpose, Why does he not produce it, and urge it?
Especially why did not the Contention, when they were so vehemently pressed to
it by the Loyal Party go about to Discover this pretended Subordination? Why
did not they, or any other since this Government came in, make us of his Writs
of Inspection, and his Chapter in the Old Law Books? Did none of them know Old
Laws, W^its and Chapters, but this learned Setler of the Royal Succession? This
I can assure him, that durst the Convention have attempted it they should have
sound, even at that, time, very many other Witnesses of Credit, able both to
satisfy the nicest Scrupulosity, con^ute the Calumny, and confou^d the Authors
and Abet^ers of it. But they were aff^aid such an important Truth should be
made too evident to the whole World, because it would at once have spoiled the
Prince of Orange's Declaration, and have shamed their own Rebellions Resolution
of deposing King James, and setting up another in h^s Head: A Pretense which
was so necessary to be started and upheld, must not be Discovered by, the
Framers and Abetters of it to be a manifest Impestuce, as they knew well it
would have been, had they gone about to examine it. I omit to give a fuller
Answer to his Citations out of the Old Roman Laws, and our Old Common Laws
because they have been considered very particularly, in a Discourse pu^posely
made upon those (...) subjects, Entitled, De Ventre I^spiciendo, or Remarks on
Mr Ashron's Answerer; which shows clearly from those Laws themselves, in the
places he cites, and from those Oracles of the Law, B^acton and my Lord Coke,
that neither the one, nor the other are at all to his purpose.

His other P^oofs of this injury justifying the War, are a company of [ Its] as
(page 13) I^ there was no reasonable Care taken to prevous and remove these
Suspicions; and (page 14.) If no such Care was taken, etc. If the principal
Persons concerned had not the least Satisfaction given them. If the whole Thing
was managed with Secrecy, and suspicious Circumstances, etc. But he no where
affirms, that all the particular [ Ifs] or any one of them was positively true;
and consequently he attempts not to make good, nor ^ffers the least Proof, that
the War upon this Score was Just; nor that the Law of Nations, he so much talks
of, gives the Invader any Right or Title to the Crown; nor, lustly, that there
were great, and (as he only phrases it) violent Presumptions of this Injury to
the Right of Succession: Whence follows, that he has not even said one single
Word in ju^^^fication of this New Government, or of the Swearing Party; and so
he is infinitely short of clearing the whole Matter, as he, in big Words,
pretended at the beginning of this Discourse. Certainly our Governors were
either very unwise in clinsing no better a W^iter to defend their Cause, or
else (which is the very Truth) their Cause it self can bear no better a Defense.

Since then this stout Champion of our new Government is so mightily in love
with [ I^s.] it were not amiss to ans^er him with more Ifs than he brings,
which more^ver (a thing he ^o where does, for fear of a Confute,) we dare vouch
to be true. We affirm then, That if this Invasion was intended above three
quarters of a Year before it was executed, or more, the French King sending
King James word of it half a Year before: If it was long before concerted
between the Prince of Orange and the Confederates, to dethrone King James,
without any Respect to the Prince of Wales, (as yet but a young Embrio, if so
much,) or to the maintaining our Religion or Liberties, or to any of those
other specious Pretenses taken up afterward, but on the Confederates parts at
least) merely for fear he might be brought to (...) with France, or stand
Neuter, and to make the silly English lose their Lives, and beggar themselves
to maintain the Quarrel of Foreigners: If the main thing that encouraged the
Confederates to that U^dertaking was the Kn^wn Hatred of the English Men in
general ^o King James's Religion, that King's Zeal to make those of his
Persuasi^n ^s free is the rest of their Fell^w Subjects, (which they hoped
would highly disgust very many ^) and the^r Assurance that they had a Factions,
Lying, and Discontented Party here, who would make way for his Ejectment, by
giving about and countenancing such Stories and Libels as would incline great
part of the Nation to a Revolt: If, among the rest, this Flam of a
supposititious Prince of Wales, nor dreamed on by any till then, was comed ^^
the Politic Mint at the Hague, sent over into England to be made current here
by their Party, and then the Dissatisfaction which themselves had raised h^re
was taken up for a Pretense, and inserted in the Prince of Orange's
Declaration, to give the idle Story a greater Authority, and to gloss over such
an unnatural and so unjust an Invasion: If ample Satisfaction was given by the
Oaths of Multitudes of Credible and Honorable Witnesses, when the
Dissatisfaction came to some height; it being highly unwise for a King to humor
every idle Report, or honor it with such a solemn Examination: If the Queen's
Delive^y was far from being carried secretly and suspitiously, (as one of his
Ifs shame^^^y ^ints,) but in op^n Daylight, before a Multitude of People of
All sorts indifferently, no Person of Honor being denied Entrance, who had the
Curiosity to be present: If the Prince and Princess of Orange, who were Two of
the Persons chiefly concerned, being absent far off in Holland, and not denied
coming over, if they would, might have sent some whom they could trust to be
present, or at least had pressed their Sister who was here, and whose Joint
Concern it was to be exactly curious in a Business so highly importing ^h^m
all; and yet none of them, though so hugely obliged by then Interest to do
this, did ever make any kind of Means or Applica^ion, in order to their so just
Satisfaction, which it had been a Madness not to have done, had they indeed had
any real Doubt. Nay more, If (to carry on the politic Sham) the Princess of
Denmark, who was the Third Person so nearly concerned, after having avoided
with all the Industry imaginable to be present at the Queen's rising and going
to Bed, (left she should be forced to see what she was loath to know, and
resolved not to w^tn^ss, viz. the Queen's Pregnancy,) would needs, contrary to
the Will of her Father, who expressed some Trouble that she should then ^e
absent, because she being satisfied in the Thing her self, might be the better
able to satisfy her Relations, run out of the way to the Bath, and to be
purposely absent just at the time the Queen reckoned to be delivered, though
she had most pressing reasons of Interest to be here at that time, nor could,
without most manifest Injustice, be denied all the Liberty allowable ^o one of
the same Sex, both to satisfy her self and others; though at the same time it
was given out, that she was sent away by her F^ther, lest she should discover
the pretended Cheat: I^ none of the Three nearly conc^r^ed, nor any other, made
the least Scruple, nor pretended the least Dissatisfaction in the World, when
the Queen was ^elivered of other Chi^^ren formerly, though not half the number
was present, until a Male Child was born, which to th^i^ R^gret, put them by
the Hopes and Expecta^ion of succeeding in their turns ^he Next: If instead of
offering any Proof at all, or any one Witness of the contrary, to invalidate or
counte^bala^ce in the least degree this consonant Testimony of so many Persons
of untai^ted Honor and Sincerity; this Farce, to gull and mad the silly
credulous People, was carried on and abe^^ed with nothing but Multitudes of
Lies, printed and baw'd about to serve a present Turn; as that the Woman whose
Child it was, was come out of Holland, and would appear to justify it; that it
was brought to St James's, sometimes in a Coach, some^imes in a Warming-p^n,
that the Midwife had confessed the Cheat, etc. All which are e^i^ced to be
Falsehoods by this, that they were never proved, or attempted to be proved,
th^ugh it was so highly necessary: If the factious Members in the Conventi^n,
that voted up this new King, were p^est by the loyal Party to call this matter
into Examination, yet could never be brought to do it, though it were in it
self of the highest Concern imaginable to our Nation, and withal most
absolutely necessary to justify this otherwise barbarous Invasi^n of the
Prince of Orange, and their own Treasonable Abdication of King James: Lastly,
If this heavy Charge against the King and Queen, of trumping up a Sham Prince
of Wales, was indu^^riously spread throughout the Three Kingdoms, not out of
any real Zeal of pres^rving the ^^ue Succession, but only as a fit occasion to
throw off That, and the Mona^chy too, as hereditary by Lineal Descent, by
changing it into an Elective, as frankly acknowledged by one of the greatest
Abdicating P^ers of the Realm, who owned to a Person of known Integrity, that
he believed the Prince of Wales to be as truly born of the Queen's body, as his
own Son of his Wife's; and that therefore they were resolved to pluck up both
Root and Branch; which in other words is to change the Government: If, I say,
all these Particulars be true, as we dare affirm them to be, and are ready to
p^ove by unquestio^able Testimonies; and as most of them are most notorious,
then we may safely conclude, that the Birth of the Prince of Wales was no just
Occasion of a War, nor consequently can be derive hence a Right to the
Government by the Law of Nations justifying his Invasion, as this Gentleman
pretends.

I pity his Weakness in compa^ing ( p. 15. this open Carriage of things in the
Birth of that Prince, before Multitudes of People of all sorts indifferently to
a Jugg^e between Three, (the pretended Father and Mother and a M^dwife,) to
subo^n a false Chi^d: He thinks it too of great Weight, That the Ju^y upon
hearing the whole Evidence, gave Judgment that that Child was supposititious:
What Straws will Men catch at when their Cause is sinking? But why does he not
tell us, what Evidence the Jury he speaks of proceeded upon? Because it would
shame his alleging it. It Is this, as I have been informed: The Hereford (...)
Woman was held Incapable of Children, which made the next Heir to the Estate
suspect no Child was born: A crafty Lawyer, who undertook to discover it, first
made Enqui^y what poor Women the midwife 'had delivered about that time, and
found that ^ne of them had her Child missing; having discovered this, he
f^ights the Woman, by telling her there was a great Rumor that the had
murdered her Child, and that she should be hanged if she did not produce it
alive or dead. Hereupon she made known the whole Intrigue of the Midwife, and
the p^etended Parents, and the Juggle came to be consist Is this in any Regard
like our Case? None were sworn there but the two Persons immediately con^erned,
who hoped to enjoy the Estate, and a Country Midwife, who was to have a share
in it for her Project, at least we may be sure a good lusty Bribe. So that here
wa^ in really but One Witness, the pretended Parents being barred from
witnessing in their own C^use: Coun^ now the Number of our Witnesses, and weigh
their Worth, and how that they were not Persons (...) out, but came
accidentally as they hapt to hear of the Queen's Co^^ition, and it will appear
impossible they should be capable of a Confederacy or Subornation. Again: The
Queen was never held to be barren; She had had formerly diverse Daughters, and a
Son; and it was likely, and no more but what by the course of Nature is
generally expected, that She should at another time have a second Male-Child:
'Nor did any Mother of the Child appear to own it, as the Lying Parts a go^d
w^^e pretended she would; all those kind of Romances served like Butt^esses or
Scaffolds to raise this new King to his Height, and build up our New
Government; and therefore when things were better settled, and could stand
without them, they were taken down again, and laid aside as useless. In a word,
let him bring an Evidence in any degree like that which his Herefordshire J^ry
had, and we shall acknowledge the Wrong done to the Nation, and to the R^yal
Family, and grant the War (had there been any) just: Till then let not such
Personages lie under such intolerable Slanders, let not Christianity and Duty
be so wickedly violated, nor the People of England deluded and scandalized with
such Talk without Proof, and such heavy C^arges laid without the least
colorable Shadow of Evidence, to ju^^ifie that they are so much as in any
degree Probable, much less (as he mouths it) great and violent Presumptions,
and least of all (what they ought to have been) absolutely certain Truths.

Thus much of his great and violent Presumptions, etc. Next follows (for though
he be a very slender Prover, yet he is still a very big Pretender) his Too
great Evidence of a formed Design to subvert the Established Religion, and Civil
Liberties of the Nation. I supp^se he calls it Too great Evidence, because it is
so great that it dazles the Night, as the Sun does at Noonday; so that no Man
can see it, or b^hold it, else why is it too great? Now when a Man has too much
of a thing, it is very unkind, and even ill-natured and hard-hearted, not to
spare a Little of it to his Friends to whom he owes it, and who both want it,
and expect it from him. But we mistake his Genius, he is a Pra^ing not a
Proving Writer: Nor does he evidence the Calumny otherwise, than by referring
us again to his Alcoran, the Prince of Orange's Declaration: Whatever he finds
there, he makes account is a First Principle, and so bring of too great
Evidence, it can need no Proof.

An impartial Narrative of matters of Fact known to most in England, will give
us a true Light to judge of this Point. King James his Religion and the hatred
which the generality of the Nation had against it, made all those who were of a
different Persuasion look with a jealous Eye upon his Actions, and apt to make
the worst Constructions of every thing he did, in favor of Papists: Nor is it
to be thought that he wanted many Enemies of the Old Excluding Faction, who
stood watching all Opportunities to b^eed him Vexation, and disaffect his
Subjects by malicious Insinuations. Those of our Church who were heartily
Loyal, did grieve exceedingly to see him give his Enemies too fair occasions to
work him Mischief: They judged that the setting up the High Commission Court
over Ecclesiastics, were there nothing in it but the Novelty of it, should not
have been attempted in such Circumstances if at all. The making one of the
Jesuits (Men more odious to our Nation than Turkish M^sties) a
Privy-Counsellor, could, they feared, have no other likely Effect, but to
exasperate all England to the highest degree. They conceived that the
Dispensing with the Test, and putting Roman Catholics promiscuously into
Offices Civil and Military, might have been let alone 'till the Test it self
were Abrogated; which would certainly have been more easily obtained, had not
this forward Anticipation put our Church of England out of humor, and made
them more warily stand upon their Guard, and resolve unanimously to part with
nothing that could any way he likely to advantage them: But that which most
Startled our Church, was the Design of giving Liberty of Conscience to all
Dissenters; they had sadly experienced in the long Parliament's Time, and in
Oliver's Days, how those Men had trampled the Church of England under Foot, and
they feared that this settling them by Law, on an even level with themselves,
might in time give those restless Men opportunity to play the same Franks over
again. In a Word, they apprehended they were to fence with their Enemies on
both hands, and therefore they combined -- Veleus Testindine facta -- to link
themselves unanimously against the universally D^^pensing Power, and in
Maintenance of the Test.

On the other side, King James was very earnest to have a general Liberty of
Conscience settled by Law. It had ever been his Tenet, that Persecution purely
for Conscience sake was Unchristian: Besides, he judged it would enrich the
Nation, as it had done Holland, by inviteing Strangers hither, and encouraging
Trade; the convenience of our Ports, above those of our Neighbors, being an
efficacious Motive to draw the Traffic from them to us. He judged too that
this universal Toleration, if wisely settled and managed, might be a means to
compose the Bedlam Animosities here about Religion, which had so often
distracted the Nation, and, within our Memory, turned the Government
topsie-turvy* Nor was it one of his least Motives (though not the only one, as
some apprehended) to gain those of his own Religion a Toleration among the rest
of the Dissenters; a thing (to speak impartially) to which both his Honor and
his Conscience could not but exceedingly incline him. These Conveniences
meeting in one, took such full hold of his Judgment, that he was exceedingly
fond of a Project, which did seem to him so hugely Advantageous to the Nation.
Hereupon he tried all Sweet means imaginable to bring it about* but found all
his Caresses ineffectual to induce our Church Party to permit it to be enacted
in Parliament, which was his main design: Wherefore he saw there was no other
Expedient, but to turn out such Officers as opposed his Intentions, and ( for
the present) to put in Dissenters to whom he knew it would be grateful, and by
that means to compass such a Parliament, as was likely to establish this
Liberty of Conscience by Law. He hoped it would not much displease our Church,
since he declared he would continue to them the Prerogative above others to be
still the State-Religion established by Law, to enjoy all the Bishoprics and
Benefices, and by that means to have vast Privileges a^^ Advantages over any
others whatsoever: But they were jealous that this was not sufficient to secure
them for the future. And hence, as it happens, when both Parties are stiff in
their contrary Pre^ensions mutual Diskindnesses past toward one another, which
ill meaning Men laid hold on, and made use of to disaffect the Nation; and so
facilitated the way to welcome the Invader.

Now all this while, What had King James done to make his Son in Law, and his
own Nephew, nay his own Daughter, turn their Father out of his Kingdoms? There
was nothing taken from our Church but the Power of Persecution, our Principles
he meddled not with, nor intruded Men of Heterodox Tenets into our Bishoprics
and Livings; whereas now we have Soctnians and Latitudinarians softed into our
Chief Cathedrals, and ou^ Parish Churches; so that we may expect shortly,
without God's special and undeserved Mercy, our Church will be made an
Amsterdam of all Religions: Their Swearing Allegiance at a venture attones for
all their Heretical Tenets let them be as D^m^able as they will, or can be. Had
our Governor (for to call him Head of such a d^fferent natured Church, were to
call it a Monster) taken away our ^xternal Grandeur, or our Revenues, it had
been less pernice us ^o our Church, than what it now suffers. For not outward
Splendour or R^b^s, but True Principles of Fai^b are that which make a Church*
The C^^i^tian Church under the Ten Heathen Persecutions, was still a most
perfect and pure Church, h^ keeping her Principles untainted* and admitting
none into her Communion that were polluted with False Tenets, though it wanted
then all these outward Ornaments and Accessaries: So that both the very Essence
and Being of our Church goes on n^w corrupting every Day; and her Revenues too,
in great part, are given away to Aliens: Whereas King James never injured us,
in the least, either in the one of those respects, or the other, (nor have we
any more than a suspicion that he ever meant it) though he showed some
Resentments against the personal Opposition, or rather uncompliance of some of
our great ones, which was a trifle in Comparison: Whereas the Prince of
Orange's declaring he came over to maintain the Protestant Religion, was a mere
Pretense, being so far from maintaining, or upholding our Principles of Faith,
or assisting our Church; that, as appears by the Event, he has taken Care to
corrupt the One, and is making haste to destroy the Other; the War therefore
(if any) cannot be said to be just upon that Account.

As for what King James is pretended to have done in prejudice of our Civil
Liberties, which required the Prince of Orange's over-charitable vindicating
them: He was told by his Judges that it was his due Prerogative; and suppose he
had something extended that, why should this oblige a Son and Daughter to
invade a Father? Had he beggared the Nation by Heavy Taxes, it had been worse
for them when their turn came to enjoy it. But to magnify the Ro^al
Prerogative had been a high Benefit to them, especially in a Nation which was
in great part of Common-weal^hish Principles, and ought to have been esteemed
meritorions. Again: The greatest Encroachment upon our Civil Liberties that was
objected, was the Dispensing universally with the Laws against the Dissenters,
whence it was inferred, he might by the same Reason dispense with any other
Law, or suspend the Execution of it, and then adieu to our Civil Liberties. But
it ought to be remembered, that when he did this, he declared his Judgment at
the same time, what it estimable Common Goods it would being to the Nation,
(which cannot be pretended the Dispensing with any other Law whatsoever,) and
he judged himself to be by his Office, as indeed he was, Ove^seer of the Common
Good. It may be remembered, that it enriched not himself, but rather
impoverished him; for he l^st the Fines and Forfeitures raised upon
Conventicles: So that it is manife^^ he aimed only at the Common Good of the
People, and not at his own private Interest; and therefore if he had erred, it
ought to have been very pardonable, and not have been made such a heinous
Fault, as deserved an Invasion, and the Loss of his Crown.

Again: If King James over-reached, it was in order to get Universal Liberty of
Conscience settled by Law, which suiting so exactly with the Dutch Methods
could not, to a Dutch Prince, be a just Ground for such an Unnatural Quarrel;
especially since it was intended to take the Grievous Yoke of Queen Elizabeth's
Laws from off the Necks of those of the Presbyterian Persuasion; which being
the Religion that Prince had espoused, and been bred up in, it ought rather to
have obliged him, than have exasperated him so highly as to draw his Sword at
his Father. This Pretense then of maintaining our Civil Liberties, and of
Justifying the War upon that score, is so open a Sham past upon us poor English
Gulls, that it gives it self the Lie, even from the Principles of our New
Governors themselves.

Fourthly, It is denied there was any War at all, either intended, or
proclaimed, or acted. Princes that conceive themselves aggrieved, use to be so
generous, as first to complain and demand Satisfaction; and if this be denied,
then to d^^ounce War, and pr^se^ute it. Thi^ is the Law of Nations, and the
common Custom of the World: But here was no Complaint, no Demand of
Sati^f^ction, no^ any War proclaimed, but denied to the very time of their
Larding; nor was any battle inten^^d, That Warlike and Noble Prince (witness
his false-hearted Declaration) came over to wheedle, not ^^ fight. Some
Th^^sa^^^ of Soldiers he did indeed bring over with him, and they might
cr^^mp, and perhaps muster; but for coming forwards within the Lists, till the
King's Army had voluntarily dispersed it self, or offer to join B^ttel with
them, you must pardon them. Alas! They were so far from the least Thought of
taking upon them that Boldness, that it is we^l known how upon the Delay of our
Renegadoes coming over to them, they had called a Council, not of War, or of
Fight, but of Flight; for it was there in a Panick Fear resolved to be gone
most valiantly the next day, had not one of them unexpectedly arrived, who
brought the reviving Tidings of more chief Officers to follow; whose shameful
Deserting, as it gave them the Courage to stay, so it amused the King, that he
durst not venture to trust the rest, not knowing the Number of his firm
Friends, since those who had the greatest Obligations in the world to be so,
had so dishonourably run to his Enemy, and turned Traitors. War implies some
kind of Bravery in its Notion, but in this case there was nothing but a
sneaking Treachery, and a more Trick to f^ight ^some with the apprehension of
an unive^sal Defection of the King's Army, and to debauch the rest with Shams
and Lies. This was the War, this the Success of War, which (p. 11) this idle
Talker so much braggs of, and on which he builds the Prince of Orange's Right
to the Government. A strange War without doubt, where never a Stroke was
struck! and as strange a Success of War, which depended not on the Battled
Courage of the Dutch, but on the Treachery of the English. Till now all Mankind
verily judged, that Success in War imposed Victory or Conquests* and Can it be
called a Victory, ^here none fought? Besides, a Victor signifies a Conqueror;
and then England should be his by Conquest, notwithstanding the Consent of the
People afterward, unless the People compounded it with the Conquerours before
hand, as the Kentish-Men did with William I. otherwise all is his.

L^^^ly, It Is denied there was an unanimous Consent of the People. He
distinguishes (p. 23) between a Right to the Government, and the Manner of
assuming it. The Right, she says, was founded on the (...) Causes of the War,
and the Success in it: But the Assuming it was not by any way of Forc^ or
Violence, but by a free Co^^ent of the People. It see us then the Government
originally was (...) his, even while he was in Holland, if he could but catch
it; and so, if he were but so wise as to know his own Right, and his own lot
(...), of which none can doubt, ^he came over with a Design and full Intention
to get it. Yet himself in his De^la^ati^n disclaimed any such Intention; and
continued to do so all along, till the very time of ch^sing him, even after
King James was gone, and his Army dispersed; and consequ^ntly after the Success
of the War (such as it was) was acquired: So that this acute Gentleman gives us
a New and Sixth Title to the Crown, which was never known to that Prince
himself, nor ever owned by him, nor hinted in any of his Proclamations; nor
(which is strange) acknowledged or intimated by the Convention; when they voted
him King, and were at an utter Loss on what Ground to settle his Title, while
the true King was yet living; nor, lastly, thought on, d^eam'd on, or heard on
by any Man in the World, till himself writ; and one would think, that had not
his bad Cause suspended his Use of Common Sense, he could not but see that the
very Word [ Acceptance of the Government,] which he here uses, (page 23.) is
clearly relative to their Giving him the same Government, and (unless we will
wrong the Use and signification of Words) giving it as a Kindness too, since no
man can be said to accept that as a Gift which was his own before. But give it
they did, and accordingly he left his hand, and thanked them for the Favor.
And I wonder to what end, if this Dis^ourse of his be true, was all that mad
Clutter about the Abdication Vote, to make room for a new King, and give him a
Title: For if K. William had Right even then to the Government, upon the score
of a successful War, King James had no Right at all, but was absolutely outed,
whether he had abdicated or not abdicated. But it seems they were all Fools to
this Gentleman, whose quick sight could descry a Title which was hid from the
dim Eyes of the whole Consenting Nation.

But was there indeed a free Consent of the People? Let us see. A Consent is
said then to be free, when there is neither Force over^awing Men, nor Fraud
either circumventing them with false Motives, or frightening them with false
Fears. Now the Common People were bubbled at that time with a Thousand Lies
about the Prince of Wales, Smithfield-Fares, a League made with France to
enslave us all; nay, that we were all sold to the French King, and in Danger to
have all our Throats cut by him: They conserted then upon such Suppositions,
not absolutely; and so these Suppositions being found to be false, their true
Reason consented not, but they were surprised, terrified, and ama^ed into a
false grounded Passion, which made them in a hurry do they knew not what;
whereas the most sedate Deliberation, and most true Rep^esentation of things is
requisite to such a Free Consent, as submits all the Subjects Lives and
Fortun^s to the maintaining this New Governor in the Throne, as they must do,
whoever own their Allegiance due to him.

At least he will say the Convention represented the Nation, and ^e consented,
and that is enough. I deny all Three. It was neither a Legal Representative, and
so let it Vote what it will it binds no Man, nor consequently is it enough for
his Purpose: Nor did the People who chose the Commons intend to empower them to
alter the most fundamental Law of the Land, and make a New King as they
pleased. Besides, if they would needs do it, they ought to have first repealed
the Laws for the Royal Succession, and all those other Laws too which make it
Treason to obey or acknowledge any other but the immediate Successor for their
King; otherwise those Laws, yet standing, whatever was done against them was
beyond all Excuse illegal and treasonable in the highest Degree. Nor, lastly,
did the Convention unanunorisly and freely consent. The Common-wealth^sh Party
could not (...) to bring in a New King, while the Old one was Alive, and had
not resigned. Being thus at a loss, when they had computed the Number of their
Faction, who they knew would vote any thing, they put the King's Abdication to
vote: It was carried, though it was such a Piece of bold Impudence as was, at
another time, (and will be for all future Ages) enough to make all the
Convention held Madmen. The King was commanded out of his Palace to a Prison,
and all Treaty with him refused, and so, being made justly apprehensive by his
Father's Fate, he had retired for his Safety; but well foreseeing the ambitious
Drift of the Prince of Orange, He, both by his Letter from Rochester, and
diverse others afterward, particularly in that to the Lords, both claimed the
Government, challenged their Allegiance, desired them to prepare things for his
safe Return, and signified he would be within Convenient distance, to receive
and answer their Proposals: He told them the Right was His, and bid them
remember, that none but Himself was or could be their Sovereign.

Besides: It was fresh in every Man's Memory, how his Royal Brother King
Charles had retired also for his Safety, continued many Years out of England;
yet no Man living ever thought, nor were his very Enemies so senseless and
shameless as to object, that he had Abdicated his Crown: Yet notwithstanding
all this, and in despite of common Sense, Claiming was called Abdicating, and
the Challenging their Allegiance was voted Renouncing it: They might better
have voted; that the Huntington Colt, driven down to the Bridge at Cambridge,
was a Sturgeon; that an Apple is an Oyster; or that Chalk is Cheese; for th^se
are only different Things, not directly Opposites, as a^e the other. No Wonder
then it cost the Factious Party such Sweat and Toil to get such a damnable
Contradiction enacted: Such a Soliciting, Cajolling, Frighting! Such Hurry and
Clamor, [ Make him King, make him King,] enough to put sober Mankind out of
its Senses! Besides; a Dutch Army over-awing them, and the Fear of being
accused afterward to the New King as disaffected to him, which considering his
Humor, impatient of Opposition in a pretense he was violently bent upon, might
either prove their Ruin, or at least make them live very uneasy under him.

Take one short but very significant Instance, how things were carried in those
Mad Days, as it was related by a Noble Pee^ (who was himself very forward for
the Abdication) to his Friends upon occasion. There being no Judges yet
appointed, there was a Debate in the Convention, what Gentlemen of the long
Robe should be made choi^e of to assist in the House: Some named Sir Francis
Pemberton, Sir Robert Sawyer, and Mr. Finch; but the Lords Mordant, Delamere,
and some others, took Fire suddenly, and brake out into big and boisterous
Language, telling the House flatly and plainly, [ We will have none of those
who have been Instruments in the late Reign:] Upon which a sudden Damp seized
all the Lords, as if they had been attackt in Flank and Rear with Canons and
Mortars, or the Thunder from Mount Sinai: For we looked on them, said that Lord,
as on so many Princes of Orange, or such as might not be contradicted for fear
of his Displeasure; and in the same Manner most Votes were forced, till we had
the Grace to be pliable to what the Military Lords and their Accomplices
proposed. Is not this a strange kind of free Consent, when the Heads of the
Faction did All at their Pleasure, and the rest, who made up the Generality,
durst do Nothing at all, but what was agreeable to the Arbitrary Will of the
Prince of Orange, and his insolent Adherents?

And yet though their own Party was so great, and had all those Advantages to
back them, they were able to carry it but by a very few Votes, as appears by
the Catalogues of each. And which gives a greater Blemish in the House of
Lords, than it had Advantage in the House of Commons, Six Dukes, and Thirty
Lords protested solemnly against it, and their Protestations stand yet upon
Record: And the Generality of the others admitted it, because they judged it
would be a Ruin to themselves, and withal worse for King James, if the
Government should settle into a Commonwealth, than if they should keep up
Monarchy, by setting up a King de Facto at present, which is all they intended
at first, as diverse of them have declared privately to those Friends they durst
trust; though now they are carried down by the Current of the Times into many
Treasonable Actions, contrary to their first Intentions. So dangerous is it to
recede from Principles, in Compliance with any present Circumstances whatever.

Seeing then all this whole Turn of our State depends upon the Abdication Vote,
as on its Bottom and sole Foundation, and no King was chosen, but in
Supposition of King James's Relinquishing, and voluntary divesting himself of
his Crown, it follows, that the True Ground of King William's Right to the
Government, is a piece of m^re Nonsense, which we English Men call a Bull: And
therefore since none of the many minded Writ^rs, who have gone about to settle
his Authority, have light on this Seventh and truest Title of his, I thought it
fit to let them know it, that all his Friends may adore this mysterious
Monster, this Bull; and in their Devotions cry aloud, These are the Gods that
brought our Israel out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage; i.e.
from under the Government of King James. And for not thinking this Bull to be
rational, and falling down and adoring it, our Loyal Martyr suffered.

But to put an upshot to this whole Business: Let any Man who has but Eyes, and
common Sense, peruse these following Letters of King James's to the Lords of
the Council, and the House of Lords and Commons, and he must, whether he will
or no, plainly see how prodigiously senseless this pretense is of that King's
Abdication, on which, (and which only) the Convocation grounded their
Dethroning him, and Setting up the Prince of Orange in his stead.

His Majesty's Letter to the Lords; and others of his Privy Council.
JAMES R.
My Lords,
WHen We saw that it was no longer Safe for Us to remain within Our Kingdom of
England, and that thereupon We had taken Our Resolutions to withdraw for some
time. We left to be Communicated to You and to all Our Subjects, the Reasons of
Our withdrawing: And were likewise resolved, at the same time, to leave such
O^ders behind Us to You of Our Privy Council, as might best suit with the
present State of Affairs: But that being altogether Unsafe for Us at that time;
We now think fit to let you know, that though it has been our constant Care
since Our first Accession to the Crown, to govern Our People with that Justice
and Moderation, as to give, if possible, no occasion of Complaint; yet more
particularly upon the late Invasion, seeing how the Design was laid, and
fearing that Our People, who could not be destroyed but by themselves, might by
little imaginary Grievances be cheated into a certain Ruin. To prevent so
great Mischief, and to take away, not only all just Causes, but even pretenses
of Discontent, We freely and of Our own accord redressed all those Things that
were set forth as the Causes of that Invasion: And that We might be informed by
the Counsel and Advice of Our Subjects themselves, which way We might give them
a further and a full Satisfaction, We resolved to meet them in a Free
Parliament; and in order to it, We first laid the Foundation of such a Free
Parliament, in restoring the City of London, and the rest of the Corporations
to their ancient Charters and Privileges; and afterward actually appointed
the Writs to be issued out, for the Parliament's Meeting on the Fifteenth of
January: But the Prince of Orange ^eeing all the Ends of his Declaration
Answered, the People beginning to be undeceived, and returning apace to their
ancient Duty and Allegiance, and well foreseeing that if the Parliament should
meet at the time appointed, such a Settlement, in all probability, would he
made both in Church and State, as would totally defeat his Ambitious and Unjust
Designs, resolved by all means possible to prevent the Meeting of the
Parliament. And to do this the most effectual way, he thought fit to lay a
restraint on Our Royal Person, for as it were absurd to call that a Free
Parliament, where there is any force on either of the Houses, so much less can
that Parliament be said to act freely wh^re the Sovereign, by whose Authority
they meet and sit, and from whose Royal Assent all their Acts receive their
Life and Sanction, is under actual Confinement. The hurrying of Us under a
Guard from Our City of London, whose returning Loyalty We could no longer
Trust, and the other Indignities We suffered in the Person of the Earl of
Feversham, when sent to him by Us; and in that Barbarous Confinement of Our own
Person We shall not here repeat, because they are, We doubt not, by this time
very well known, and may, We hope, if enough considered and refl^cted upon,
together with his other Violations and Breaches of the Laws and Liberties of
England, which by this Invasion he pretended to restore, be sufficient to open
the Eyes of all Our Subjects, and let them plainly see what every one of them
may expect, and what Treatment they shall find from him, if at any time it may
serve his Purpose, from whose Hands a Sovereing Prince, an Uncle, and a Father,
could meet with no better Entertainment. However, the Sense of these
Indignities, and the Just Apprehension of further Attempts against Our Person,
by them who already endeavored to murder Our Reputation by infamous Calumnies,
(as if We had been capable of supposing a Prince of Wales,) which was
incomparably more Injurious than the Destroying of Our Person it Self; together
with a serious Reflection on a Saying of Our Royal Father, of blessed Memory,
when he was in the like Circumstances, That there is little distance between
the Prisons and the Graves of Princes, (which afterward proved too true in his
Case,) could not but persuade Us to make use of that which the Law of Nature
gives to the meanest of Our Subjects, of freeing Our Selves by all means
possible from that unjust Co^fi^^ment and Restraint. And this We did not more
for the Security of Our own Person, than that thereby We might be in a better
Capacity of transacting and providing for every Thing, that may contribute to
the Peace and Settlement of Our Kingdoms: For, as on the one hand, No Change of
Fortune shall make Us forget Our Selves, so far as to cond sc^nd to any Thing
unbecoming that High and Royal Station, in which God Almighty by Right of
Succession has placed Us: So on the other hand, neither the Provocation or
Ingratitude of Our own Subjects, nor any other Consideration whatsoever, shall
ever prevail with Us to make the least step contrary to the t^^e l^^erest of
the English N^^io^; Which we ever did, and ever must lo^k upon as Our own. Our
Wall and P^^^sure, therefore is, That You of Our Privy Council, take the most
effectual Care to make these Our gracious Intentions known to the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, in and about our Cities of London and Westminster, to
the Lord Mayor and Commons of Our City of London and to all Our Subjects in
general. And to assure them, That We desire nothing more than to return and
hold a Free Parliament, wherein We may have the best Opportunity of undeceiving
O^r People, and showing the Sincerity of those Prote^^ations, We have often
made of the preserving the Liberties and Properties of Our Subjects, and the
Protestant Religion, more especially the Church of England as by Law
established, with such Indulgence for those that d^ssent from her, as We have
always thought Our Selves in Justice and Care of the general Welfare of Our
People bound to procure for them. And in the mean time You of Our
Privy Council, (who can Judge better by being upon the Place,) are to send Us
Your Advice, what is fit to be done by Us toward Our Returning, and
Accomplishing those good Ends. And We do require You in Our Name, and by Our
Authority, to endeavor so to suppress all Tumults and Disorders, that the
Nation in general, and every one of Our Subjects in particular, may not receive
the least Prejudice from the present Distractions that is possible. So not
doubting of Your Dutiful Obedience to these Our Royal Commands, We bid You
heartily Farewell.

Given at St. Germains en Lay the 14th. of January, 1688. And of Our Reign the
Fourth Year. By Hiis Majesty's Command, MELFORT.
Directed thus -- To the Lords, and others of our Privy Council of Our Kingdom
of England.

His Majesty's Letter to the House of Lords and Commons, Writ from St. Germains
the Third of February, 1688.
JAMES R.
My Lords,
WE think Our Selves obliged in Conscience to do all We can to open Our Peoples
Eyes, that they may see the true Interest of the Nation in this Important
Conjuncture; and therefore We think fit to let you know, that finding We could
no longer stay with Safety, nor act with Freedom in what concerned Our People,
We left the Reasons of Our Withdrawing under Our own Hand, in the following
Terms.

THe World cannot wonder at My Withdrawing My Self now this Second time; I
might have expected somewhat better Usage after what I writ to the Prince of
Orange, by my Lord Feversham, and the Instructions I gave him; but instead of
an Answer, such as I might have hoped for, what was I to expect after the Usage
I received, by his making the said Earl a Prisoner against the Practice and Law
of Nations; The sending his own Guards at Eleven at Night to take Possession of
the Posts at White Hall, without Advertising Me in the least manner of it; The
sending to Me at One a Clock after Midnight, when I was in Bed, a kind of an
Order by Three Lords to be gone out of My own Palace before Twelve the next
Morning. After all this, How could I hope to be Safe, so long as I was in the
Power of one, who had not only done this to Me, and Invaded My Kingdoms,
without any just occasion given him for it, but that did by his First
Declaration lay the greatest Aspersion on Me, that Malice could invent, in that
Clause of it which concerns My Son? I appeal to all that know Me, nay, even to
himself, that in their Consciences, neither he nor they, can believe Me, in the
least, capable of so Unnatural a Villainy, nor of so little common Sense to be
imposed upon, in a Thing of such a nature as that: What had I then to expect
from one, who by all Arts has taken such pains to make Me appear as black as
Hell to My own People, as well as to all the World besides? What Effect that
had at Home all Mankind have seen, by so general a Defection in My Army, as
well as in the Nation, amongst all sorts of People.

I was born Free, and desire to continue so; and though I have ventured My Life
very frankly, on several occasions, for the Good and Honor of My Country, and
am as free to do it again, (and which I hope I shall yet do, as Old as I am, to
redeem it from the Slavery it is like to fall under,) yet I think it not
convenient to expose My Self to be Secured, as not to be at Liberty to effect
it; and for that Reason do withdraw, but so as to be within Call, whenever
the Nations Eyes shall be opened, so as to see how they have been Abused and
Imposed upon by the specious Pretense of Religion and Property. I hope it will
please God to touch their Hearts, out of his infinite Mercy, and to make them
sensible of the ill Condition they are in, and bring them to such a Temper,
That a legal Parliament may be called; and that amongst other Things, which may
be necessary to be done, they will agree to Liberty of Conscience for all
Protestant Dissenters; and that those of My own Persuasion may be so far
considered, and have such a share of it, as they may live Peaceably and
Quietly, as Englishmen and Christians ought to do, and not to be obliged to
transplant themselves, which would be very grievous, especially to such as love
their own Country: And I appeal to all Men, who are Considering Men, and have
had Experience, Whether any thing can make this Nation so Great and
Flourishing, as Liberty of Conscience? Some of Our Neighbors dread it.

I could add much more to confirm all I have said, but now is not the proper
time.

Rochester, December. 22d. 1688.

But finding this Letter not to be taken to be Ours by some, and that the
Prince of Orange, and his Adherents did Maliciously Suppress the same, We Writ
to several of Our Privy Council, and directed Copies thereof to diverse of You
the Peers of the Realm, believing that none durst take upon them to intercept,
or open any of Your Letters: But of all these We have no Account.

But We wonder not, that all Arts are used to hinder You from knowing Our
Sentiments, since the Prince of Orange rather chose against all Law to imprison
the Earl of Feversham, and by Force to drive Us away from Our own Palace, than
receive Our Invitation of coming to Us, or hearing what We had to propose to
him, well knowing that what We had to offer, would content all Honest and
Reasonable Men, and was what he durst not trust You with the Knowledge of.

Those False and Wicked Reflections on Us, relating to the FrenchLeague, and to
Our Son the Prince of Wales, We require You to examine into, and thereby
satisfy Your Selves, and all other Our Subjects, where the Imposture lies; We
hope God will not permit You to deprive Your Selves of a lawful Prince, whose
Education shall be such, as may give a Prospect of Happiness to all Our
Kingdoms hereafter.

We are Resolved nothing shall be omitted on Our part (whenever We can with
Safety return) that can contribute toward the red^ess of all former Errors, or
present Disorders, or add to the Securing the Protestant Religion, or the
Property of every individual Subject, intending to refer the whole to a
Parliament, Legally Called, Freely Elected, and held without Constraint,
wherein We shall not only have a particular Regard to the Support and Security
of the Church of England, as by Law Established; but also give such an
Indulgence to Dissenters, as Our People shall have no Reason to be jealous of,
not expecting for the future any other Favor to those of Our own Persuasion,
than the exercise of their Religion in their own private Families.

And because many of Our well-meaning Subjects, whose unnecessary Fears for the
Protestant Religion, and the unhappy Mistakes of the Prince of Orange's
Ambitious Designs (which they did not sufficiently see into time enough) have
been Fatally led, beyond what they first intended, ( viz. the Preservation of
their Religion, etc.) to the Breach of all Laws, and even to the total
Dissolution of the An^ient Government it self; and knowing themselves thereby
to be Obnoxious, may despair of Our Mercy: We do therefore declare, on the Word
of a King, That Our Free Pardon shall not only be extended to them, but to all
Our Subjects, to the worst, even those that Betrayed Us, (some few Excepted,)
Resolving in that Parliament, by an Act of Oblivion, to cover all Faults, heal
all Divisions, and restore Peace and Happiness to all Our Subjects, which can
never be effectually done by any other Methods or Power.

Having thus firmly Resolved on Our part, whatsoever Crimes are omitted, whose
Posterity shall come to suffer for these Crimes, We shall look upon Our Selves
as Justified in the sight both of God and Man and therefore leave it with You,
expecting You will seriously and speedily consider hereof; and so we bid You
heartily Farewell.

Given at St. Germains en Lay the Third of February, 1688. And of Our Reign
the Fourth Year.

The Letter to the Commons was Verbatim the same.

To the Officers and Soldiers of the Army.
JAMES R.

THe Regard We have for you as Gentlemen, and Soldiers, obliges Us to
endeavor to restore you to that Reputation for Courage, Loyalty, etc. which
has till now been inseparable from English men, which by your late fatal
Defection from Us your lawful Prince ( whose particular Care you ever were) is
now become Contemptible, even to those you joined with against Us, nor can any
thing restore you to your former Character, but a sudden and hearty return to
that Duty, which you have so unduly quitted, which We doubt not of, being
verily persuaded, that even those that first left Our Service, had no just
Prejudice against Our Person, but were Betrayed and Decoyed by Persons employed
by, or in Confederacy with the Prince of Orange, who by most wicked and
malicious Lies, had represented Us as black as Hell to Our Subjects, who, We
hope, do now see into their evil Designs, which they c^uld never have thus far
accomplished, but by deluding you into a belief of the Imposture of Our Son the
Prince of Wales, the French-League, the Death of Our Brother the late King,
etc. of all which they well know Us Innocent, and da^e not therefore bring on
the Stage to be Examined and Searched into, according to their former Promises.

And can you then without Indignation, Serve th^se who have thus Villanously
Betrayed, Deluded, and made a Property of you? And now having obtained their
Ends by your Assistance, Neglect, D^^spise, and Evilly Entreat you: For to the
eternal Shame of all English men ^one but Foreigners are now trusted in the
most Honorable P^sts in and about White Hall and London, whilst you are sent
ab^oad as Mercenaries, and made subservient to them; cast back your Thoughts on
the Villainies of their Actions, who sat in Our Councils and Betrayed Us,
adding Treachery to the blackest of Ingratitude; enquire into the Morals of
those General Officers that Deserted Us, and Misled You, and indeed into the
Principles of most of these, in their present New Government, and you will soon
be convinced, That 'twas not Religion (though that was made the specious
Pretense) that influenced their Actings, but Interest and Ambition; We charge
not these Crimes but on some particular Persons, well knowing that the greatest
part both of Officers and Soldiers in Our Army, were not faulty in their
Allegiance: And therefore We shall only look forward, and resolve to reward all
according to their Demerits, and prefer those first who continue untainted, and
shall be quickest in returning to their Duty; which We doubt not, but that ever
long, by God's Blessing, We shall by appearing in Our own Kingdoms, give them
an opportunity to do, and consequently to retrieve their own Honors, as
becomes true hearted Englishmen, and Lovers of their King and Country.

Given at St. Germains en Lay the 14th. of February, 1688 And in the Fifth
Year of Our Reign.

But to return to our Discours^ -- Such a free Consent, as suffices in this
Case of transferring a Kingdom and the All^giances of all their fellow
Subjects, ought to have been General of the whole Nation, unanimous, hearty,
and most deliberate, not done in a sudden heat, not checked nor overaw'd, not
protested against; especially it ought to have been grounded, at least, upon
good tolerable Sense; all which were here wanting. This in case their free
Cons^nt could do the Work: But let their Consent be the best qualified in the
World, it can never be sufficient for this purpose; for no Consent of those who
have no R^ght to a Thing, though it were never so free, is able to give away
another Man's Title, who is known to have had a true and undoubted Right to it.
Well, May a Conspiracy of my Servants, Tenants, and of my Children joined with
them, have the Power to d^ive or fright me out of my House? But not all these
together, though never so many, can give away that Right, which the Laws of the
Land, and in our Case God's Law too, have made my Property.

Thus much for his new Coined Notion of Right by the Law of Nations, owned by
none but this singular Writer, who seeing all other Titles of this upstart
Government baffled, was forced, for a shift, to recurr to this Whimsie. But
since he was pleased to decline the Law of the Land, and run to a Superior Law,
(viz.) that of Nations, we shall take leave to mind him (for He and his Party
seem to have quite forgot it, or rather indeed to out-brave, and laugh at it)
of the Supreme Law of all, the Law of God, which commands us to Honor our,
Father and Mother, and not to covet, much less to rob or cheat another; and
least of all so near, and so Revered a Relation, of what is rightfully his. Let
us consider then what Good and Conscientious Christians would have done in the
Case of the Prince, and Princess of Orange. For, First, If their Party, with
their Consent or Connivance, invented those Stories, which he makes the just
Occasion of the War, on purpose to turn out their Father, it was in many
regards the most hideous, and the most villainous Injustice that can be
imagined. Secondly, If those Falsehoods were suggested to them by others, they
knew the Genius of the English Subjects was apt to raise and believe the most
Senseless Falsehoods of him out of hatred to his Religion; and so they ought to
have considered, that there was no kind of Evidence of this Story, nor so much
as one Witness, that the Prince of Wales was a Counterfeit, nor (as appears by
their not producing it in their Justification when it was so necessary) any one
tolerable Reason, able to persuade a prudent Man, the Thing was true: Whereas,
on the other side there were, as was said, near Fifty Sworn Witnesses of clear
Honor and Reputation testifying the contrary, any Two or Three of whom were
sufficient to carry the greatest Estate, or take away the Life of any Man in
England. They knew too, that if the pretended Injury done to them were not
really true, they must incurr the dreadful Indignation of a just God, for
breaking diverse of his Commandments, in that one Action, by Dishonouring,
Injuring, and Slandering their Innocent and near Related Neighbor; And who
would hazard their Soul upon such odds? Thirdly, If they did indeed doubt of it
before the Birth, they ought (as was said) to have sent some trusty Persons, or
have signified their desire, that some here, whom they could confide in, should
be present. If they only doubted of it after the Prince was Born, they might
have demanded that the same Persons might have Counter-interrogated, and
Examined the Witnesses; now they were bound in Conscience to use all such
honest and wary Means before they proceeded thus to the highest Extremities.
Fourthly, If greatest Proof against no Proof could not satisfy them, Why did
they not, to clear their Honor that they had not acted Unjustly, Undutifully,
or Unchristianly since the time they came hither, bring the Matter into a new
Examination? Since nothing could more contribute to settle them in the Throne,
had it been proved an Imposture, nor have more ob^iged all England to them, nor
have more taken off the Scandal of the World, and have satisfied every Man of
the Justice of their Proceedings. Lastly, If it had been done for the good of
Europe, and to bring the French King lower, (though this could not justify
this Invasion,) yet Why was not at least the wisest Course taken for this? Had
the Prince of Orange pursued only the Ends expressed in his Declaration, and
obliged King James, as he might easily have done, to redress Abuses here, and
make a lasting League with the Confederates abroad; it had, in all likelihood,
by this time reduced the French King to a low Condition: For then King James
had been able to unite all the Force of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
bend them unanimously against the Common Enemy: Whereas now our Men (and Money
too) are employed in Fighting against one another in Scotland and Ireland; nor
only so, but England it self, whose free Consent he so much brags of, is so
Distracted, that we know not how soon we may fall into the same Misfortunes;
some out of Conscience, not daring to hazard their Souls in Swearing Allegiance
to one, whose Title the most zealous Adherers to him cannot agree on, nor
themselves are satisfied with; and far more of them being disgusted to see our
Country beggared to maintain the Quarrel of Foreigners, and enrich our
greatest Enemies the Dutch; so that this Pretense of pulling down the Height
of France, though I doubt not, but it was the Intention of the Confederates,
was far from being the main Design of the Prince of Orange. He could then have
no other Motive of Invading England, Driving out his Father, and Usurping his
Throne, but mere Ambition, seconded by Dutch Policy, making use of our
Rebelliousness, silly Credulity, and our addictedness to Lying, that they might
cheat us of our Money, make us defend their Quarrel, and impoverish us to that
degree, that we should not dare to resent it, when they get our Trade, and
c^zen us of our Plantations, (as they have done often,) and then (to crown the
Dutch Jest) laugh at us for a Company of dullheaded block headedly Fools when
they have done.

But I must not forget the Instances he brings to prove this Invasion to be
agreeable to the Church of England's Doctrine, and vouched by the Law of
Nations; and those are these Three.

First he Instances in Queen Elizabeth giving Assistance to the Dutch against
the King of Spain, (p. 16.) Now this has been so well answered already, in the
Defense of the Bishop of Chichester's Dying Declaration, that I do not see any
Reason to concern my self with it; and, methinks, this Answerer should have
first answered what had been alleged there, before he ventured on this
Instance; but some Men have a peculiar Confidence to bring in Things over and
over, though they have been answered sufficiently, and yet never take notice of
the Answers. However, it is sufficient here to observe, that this is nothing at
all to his purpose; he tells us but four lines before, That what he is to make
out, is that the then P. of O by his Relation to the Crown, had a just Right to
concern himself in the Vindication of our Religion and Liberties, and that this
is not repugnant to the Doctrines of the Church of England, p. 15. And, I pray,
good Sir, Had Queen Elizabeth any Relation to the Government of the Low
Countries? And if not, how does this Instance prove that which he is to make
out, that the Prince of Orange, by virtue of his Relation to the Crown, had a
just Right to concern himself; and his Instance proves that any Prince, whether
they have any such Relation or not, have a just Right to concern themselves.
And what, I pray, is all this to a Title by Conquest? Let it be admitted, but
not granted, and which I suppose will not be easily proved, that no Foreign
Prince has a just Right to make War upon another Prince, for Invading the
Liberty, and Religion of his own Subjects; has he therefore a just Right to
make a Conquest of these People, whose Liberties he pretends to defend, and to
set himself King over them? Or had Queen Elizabeth, upon pretense of securing
the Dutch Liberties, a just Right to make her self Queen over them? In my
Opinion it is a pre^ty odd way of rescuing People's Liberties, to make a
Conquest of them; and if this be the Case, Princes and their Flatterers may
talk of Piety and a Care of the People, but all the World will see that the
Design is not Religion nor Liberty to the People, but a Crown to themselves;
and it cannot choose but be very Pious and Religious to gain a Crown.

His next Instance is in King James's time, When the Prince Elector was chosen
King of Bohemia. And how does this prove his Point? Why, he sent to King James
for Advice, and he had no mind he should engage in it. And therefore the Prince
of Orange has a just Right to concern himself, and to make himself King
according to the Principles of the Church of England. I perceive it is not for
every body to make Consequences, for who but our Author could ever have found
out how such wonderful Things followed from King James's denying his Son to
engage in it. Well, But the Arch bishop wrote a Letter to the Secretary, and
said, that he was satisfied in his Conscience that the B^bemians had a just
Cause, and that the King's Daughter professed she would not leave her self one
Jewel, rather than not maintain so Religious and Righteous ^ Cause. And that
may be too; but without Reflection on that Princess, that is no Evidence of the
Righteousness of a Cause; for some Kings Daughters will not leave themselves a
Jewel, rather than not to take away, and keep a Kingdom from their Own Father,
and which is neither a Religious, nor a Righteous Cause.

His Third Instance is in the time of King Charles the First, When the King of
Denmark had taken Arms to settle the Peace, and Liberty of the Germans, and was
Defeated; and King Charles thought himself concerned to assist him; and
Archbishop Laud drew up a Declaration setting forth the Danger, and requiring
the People's Prayers and Assistance to prevent the growth of Spain, etc. Now it
does not appear whether the King of Denmark's pretense of taking Arms was just,
or unjust, (for our Author has a peculiar faculty of talking of Things at
random, and never stating them, and bringing them down to the matter in
Dispute.) But let that be as it will, it makes no difference in the present
Dispute; for let the Cause of his taking Arms be originally what it will, I
hope King Charles might assist him to prevent his being overrun, thereby
securing the Peace and Safety of his own Kingdom. And this was plainly the
Case: The King of Denmark had made War upon the Empire, and was defeated; and
it ^ had ^een ^e^t without Assi^^ence, the Emperor might have wholly subdued
him, which would not ^^ely have ruined Denmark, but have endangered all the
Northern Princes, and especially England, as the Declaration it self speaks,
there will be an open way for Spain left, to do what they pleased. And what is
this to our Author's purpose? Is there no difference between Assisting one
Prince actually at War with another, to prevent his utter Overthrow and
Destruction, and in such a case for wise and politic Ends to stop the
exorbitant and dangerous Growth of a potent Neighbor; and for the same Prince
to take away another Prince's Crown, because he is uneasy and ungrateful to
his Subjects? Yet after such fallacious Inferences, our Author with his wonted
Modesty adds, Let those who now with as much Ignorance as Confidence upbraid
Men with Renouncing the Doctrines and Principles of the Church of England, read
and consider these Passages, and if any thing will make them more wise and
humble, this will.

He contends all along to prove from those Instances, which are of several
Independent Governors, and so relate to the Law of Nations, that this
Proceeding of the Prince of Orange is not repugnant to the Doctrines and
Principles of the Church of England, p. 15. and more particularly afterward
from the Homilies, p. 21, 22. which say, we are bound to obey a Heathen Tyrant,
and to pray for him; from the Jews who were commended to pray for the King of
Babylon, and for obeying Augustus; lastly, from our Savior's acknowledging the
Roman President's Power and Authority, as given him from God. Nay, he argues a
fortiori, p. 21. from the Homilies, thus: If they (and consequently the Church
of England) declare we are bound by God's Word to obey a Heathen Tyrant, much
more ought we, by the Doctrines and Principles of our Church, to pay Allegiance
to good and religious Princes, etc. This is the full force of his Argument why
we ought to pay Allegiance to the present Governors. But first, We cannot
think them good and religious, whilst we see they have wilfully broken, and
obstinately continue to break God's holy Commandments, the Observing of which
is the best Test of Goodness and Religion. Next he le^ves the main Point, which
Dr. Sherlock mentions out of his Convocations that are better Declarers of the
Church of England's Doctrine than the Homilies,) That the Authority of all
those Conquerours was to be thoroughly settled; so that there was no mor^l.
Possibility the former Governor (in case he had been alive) could ev^r by
himself, or his Friends, be restored; and therefore we seldom or never hear
that any of such ejected or subdued Sovereigns did ever struggle for their
Kingdoms, or went about to recover them. H^w this suits with our present C^se,
where the former supreme Governor is living, did ever, and does still claim
it, pursues the Recovery of it, has a most potent Monarch abroad for his
Friend, who espouses his Quarrel has engaged his Honor he will either restore
him to his Crown, or lose his own, is easy to be discerned. But moreover,
which is n^^ess material in this Business, King James has great Parties in each
of the three Nations, who do not acknowledge the present Governors* and look
upon them as unjust Usurpers of their Father's Right. Besides, (which alters
the Case extremely,) here was no Conquest, or subduing England by Force; nay,
no War at all exercised upon it: His bad Cause forces this mercenary Writer to
shuffle to and fro, and pretend now one Thing, now another; but all of them,
when they come to be scanned and applied, equally to no purpose. Conquest he
dares not call it in down right Terms, for fear of disgusting all England, by
making us all Slaves; yet those Instances of Rightfall Power which he brings,
and would have us think to be parallel to this New Government, and proper to
a^et it, were all true Successes in War, and by consequence perfect Conquests.
It Is easy to discern by these Hints what he would be at, and not hard to
conjecture what Title, though they have agreed of none hitherto, they intend at
length to pitch upon finally, unless the Patriots of the Subjects Liberty do in
time restrain such audacious Attempts.

Thus far in Answer to his settling King William's Title, which being shown to
be incoherent and ill grounded, in every Regard, it follows, that Mr. Ashton
suffered for a Righteous Cause, and for his due Allegiance to his true
Sovereign, which entitles him to the Honor of a glorious Martyr, and this in
case he had endeavored to make way for his Master's Restoration. It remains
to vindicate his Paper from those other petty Exceptions this G^ntleman makes
against it.

He denies p. 24. that King James's Usage, after the Prince of Orange's
Arrival, was very hard, severe, and unjust. Let the World judge. A Council was
held at Windsor, upon Notice of the King's being in hold at Feversham, where it
was debated, whether or no he should be sent to the Tower* And it is well known
who they were that voted in the Affirmative. But the Prince having laid his
Design, feared that if the King staid here, some Accommodation would be made;
so he sent Monsieur Zuylisten to tell him, he would have him to stay at
Rochester, which being a Port Town, and toward the Sea, might afford him
opportunity to escape out of England. The Message mist him; so he returned to
White Hall. The next Night the Prince of Orange sent three Lords to him at
Midnight, to tell him he would have him remove by Ten the next Morning to Ham,
a place very unlikely to be approved of, there being (as the King objected)
neither Furniture nor Provisions for him; and therefore as he expected he
moved, for his Return to Rochester, which after his sitting an hour in his
Barge, waiting his Pleasure, was granted: And thither he was packed away in
great State with Dutch Myrmidons; now (to the eternal Shame of English
Su^jects) their King's Gaolers, under whom he suffered Hardship enough; but he
was not allowed out of his own Exchequer one Farthing to bear his Charges. The
King had before this sent him a Message by the Earl of Feversham, offering to
settle all things in Parliament to His and the Kingdom's Satisfaction: Now had
the Prince of Orange meant sincerely in what he pretended, and come only for
the Good of the Nation, what could he have wished more? But what would have
obliged and sweetened another, did highly exasperate him; for he relished this
Condescendence of his so^ll, being indeed unsuitable to the ambitious Aim he
proposed to himself, that, first, contrary to the Law of Nations, he made his
Ambassador Prisoner, and th^n sent his Worshipful Command at Midnight to his
Father, to be gone out of his own Palace to a Prison; for they told him a Guard
was appointed for him at Ham-house, whither the Prince of Orange ordered him to
go the next Morning; enough to let the King see what he was to expect. He tells
the Prince of Orange could have prevented his going away; true: But then he
feared the Nation would only reduce King James, not depose him, much less choose
another, their own King being present; it was therefore thought more Politic
to fright him away, and then pretend Abdication, and the Necessity of a new
Government, which he knew well (as he and his Faction would handle it) could
light on none but himself: So that it was out of kindness to himself, not to
King James, or the Nation, that he let him escape. Yet he Magnifies this
Indulgence of the Prince of Orange exceedingly; but I would ask him, in what
this Civility differs from that of Robbers, who first strip the poor Travelers
of all they have, and then turn them a Grazing without a Penny in their Purse,
or as this pretty Gentleman phrases it, ( p. 24.) Allow them great Freedom to
go where they please. I would ask him too what one Thing was done by the
Prince, which looked either Generous, Civil, or in the least degree Respectful
toward a King and a Father, and not rather most Barbarous and Rude? Or what
one Action of his gives us Reason to think, he intended to accommodate Things
with the true King, and not rather to set up for himself?

The Martyr, out of Love to his Native Country, resented, that All the new
Methods of settling the Nation, have hitherto made it more miserable, poor, and
exposed to Foreign Enemies. What says he to this* Can Impudence it self deny
this to be true? Is not the Interest of England torn piecemeal, and every
Nation has a Limb of us? Is not the Charge of securing Scotland, reducing of
Ireland, the hiring Souldier^ from Denmark, and other Places, the Bribing of
Holland, the Suiss-Cantons, Savoy, and other poor Confederates, the keeping and
paying two great Armies in Flanders and Ireland, and the setting out a vast
Fleet at Sea, gone all out of our Pockets? Has not the driving out King James,
and the Protecting our new Governor (and his only) put us upon such an
expensive War, that we are upon our last Legs; it being absolutely impossible
to squeeze Five Millions more out of our drained Purses to keep the War on foot
another Year, which is the least Sum that can now be expected: For if Five
Millions this Year have done nothing at all, it is to be feared that Seven
Millions will scarce enable us to do much the next. A certain Person employed
in the Treasury, who has the opportunity to know exactly the Incomes and Issues
of the Exchequer, assured a worthy Friend of mine, that this Michaelmas there
will have been paid out of it, since this Revolution, Fifteen Millions; and
that there is still an Arrear behind, to the Army, to the Navy, and for Stores,
of Five Millions more: And this besides many Thousands (perhaps a Hundred of
Thousands) owing for the Wages of transport Ships; and that for want of ready
Money the Creditors are paid with Tallies, so that those who have them can
raise no Money, without abating Four or Five Shillings in the Pound, until the
next Parliament gives Money to pay off all these Back-reckonings. The
insuperable Difficulty of doing which, and withal of raising Seven Millions
more to carry on the War the next Campaign, (not to mention the repaying the
Money we have borrowed,) will make the great Work of Conquering France go but
slowly on: Every wise Man, even of our State-Party, clearly seeing, and with
regret complaining, that in all appearance the War is as far from an End, as it
was at the Beginning.

Now where is all this Money to be had, or whence to be raised? Are not our
Ships taken in great Multitudes, our Traffic decayed abroad, our Trade at
home, the Tenants unable to pay their Landlords; so that sometimes instead of
bringing in their Rents, they are forced to send to them for Money to pay their
Taxes, or else they must throw up their Farms? Are not they already forced, in
many Places for want of Money, to exchange one Commodity for another in the
Markets? Is not half our Cash gone out of the Nation, so that in Holland alone
our Guineas and M^ll'd Money have been as frequent as their own Coin? Is not
Clipped Money, which is not worth Transporting, now, in a manner, the only
current Coin left in the Nation? And to prevent the possibility our good Money
should ever return again, it is melted down in Holland into the drossie Alloy
of their Sebellings and Stuyvers. But the Transporting our Coined Money is not
all: They have invented more Expedients than One or Two open ones to impoverish
England; the Decus and Th^amen, inscribed on the Edges of our new Coin, was
Judged an eff^ctual Preservative from Clipping and Fyling. But now the Clippers
(who by the Law are to suffer as Felows) are become the best Friends to the
Trafficking part of the Nation; and if they be not connived at, and the Melters
down of our M^ll'd and Uncircumcised Money into Bullion, transported in vast
quantities every Year into Holland, (as appears by the Entries in the
Custom-house,) be not severely punished, we must in a short time be contented
with only Copper and Tin Farebings, or else be forced to debase our Money to
the Dutch Standard. If Captain Guy and several other Masters of Yatches, and
other Vessels both Dutch and English, were strictly (...), they could tell them
what prodigious Number of Chests of Money in Specie, or in Bullion have been
transported these Three last Years into Holland and Flanders. We have indeed
some Returns from thence, for they bring us prohibited Goods; so that both in
Exporting and Importing our English Laws are still Dispensed with, without any
permission from the Parliament, and no Man (though our Ruin depends upon it)
dares complain. There is yet another odd Commodity imported, which would much
increase the Revenue, if it did but pay Custom; and that is Shoals of
Caterpillars, that come over to devour the Fruits of our Labors, the Dutch, I
mean, and other Foreigners with their Wives and Children, of which scarce a
Ship or Hoy comes hither that brings not from Ten to Sixty, etc. These and the
French Hugenots are transported hither to make up several new Colonies, and
compose a Secret Militia, to be ready at a dead lift to enslave our Country,
if, our Eyes being at length opened to see our impending Ruin, we grow
Headstrong, and refuse to wear the Yoke which is preparing for us.

Again, Have we felt nothing from the Insolences of the Dutch, Danes, and
other Foreigners wherever they come. Lastly, What are all those Losses put
together, in Comparison to the loss of so many English-men's Lives, who have
perished either by War, o^^ through want of Necessaries, or else by strange
Diseases in Ireland and at Sea. A Thousand or Two are swept away at a clap in
this late prodigious Storm: The loss of the Coronation, and the other Ships
that perished, and the damage done to all the rest that suffered in their
Rigging, and otherwise in that Hurricane, is not worth the mention by those who
are so inured to continual losses of sundry kinds as we are; though I Am told by
a knowing Person, that the Repairing of that one M^sfortune will require some
Hundreds of Thousands of Pounds to be added to the former large Audit of the
Nation's Accounts. And will this Man persuade us that all this, and many other
such, are no Miseries? He runs from the M^tter to talk of the French King; but
the true point, to which he ought to have spoken, is, Whether we were burdened
with any such Taxes, or felt these Miseries of War and Poverty under King
James? Had we any concern with France, either by abetting or opposing it in his
Days? Had the Prince of Orange, or our selves used the King Dutifully, as we
ought, we might have secured our selves whilst that Prince was here against
either Popery or Slavery (which we pretended to dread) being forced upon us, we
might have enjoyed Peace, Plenty, Trade, and Riches, and have reapt
incomparable Benefits, and vast Advantages by the Distractions of all others
round about us. This we might have done; and if we saw Cause to fear that
France meant to disturb us, when we meddled not with it, (which that King is too
Politic to do,) we might, by joining with other Disinterested Princes, have
kept the Balance of Europe even at our pleasure, and have stipulated with
Holland and the rest of the Confederates to bear the Charges of the War, whilst
we stepped into their Assistance; whereas now we are forced to hire them at a
dear Rates to assist us, to keep a Man in the Throne who has no Right to it:
All this we might then have done, had we been wise; but a Rebellious Spirit,
which had possessed and infatuated us, hurried us inconsiderately into a War,
for no other Reason but to maintain obstinately that Sin, which we ought to
have repented of. And that War unless God's undeserved Mercy do prevail over
his Justice, will by a just Judgment of the same God prove our utter Ruin.

He seems ^ma^'d, p. 25. (for he seems Twenty times to wonder when he wants
something to say,) that Mr. Ashton should say, That the Religion we pretend to
be so fond of Preserving, is now much more than ever likely to be destroyed.
Nor do I wonder at his Amazement; for he makes account Religion consists only
in having Benefices conferred on Ecclesiastics, and secured to them let the
Incumbents be of what Principles they will: This I told him of formerly, and
here he makes my Words good; for ( p. 25, 26, 27, etc.) he reckons up Three
Things as putting our Religion out of Danger; ( viz.) The same Laws, the same
Protection, the same Encouragement: But Principles which are the Main, and
Essential to a Church, are the least part of his Thought. Let but a Church have
True Principles preserved Sincere by her Bishops and Pastors, and she will be a
Church and a Glorious One too in the Eyes of God, and all good Men, in despite
of all the Opposition that wicked Men, or Hell it self, can do, though she had
neither Laws, Protection, nor the least Encouragement to befriend her; nay,
though the Laws, and the State were bent against her. As for our new Principles
then; let him but open his Eyes, and he may see Rebellion made now a chief
point of Religion. He may see Oaths of Allegiance made to Persons, whose Title
to the Government (as appears by what has been amply proved above) not one Man
in England certainly knows, and not one knowing and disinteressed Man is
satisfied in, forced upon Men's Consciences to make the Kingdom, as far as lies
in their Power, a Nation of Knaves, and all those who make a good Conscience of
their ways a Company of Beggars. He may see the Commandments laughed a^; and
those who dare boldly stand up for them branded and persecuted for Traitors,
and put to death as the worst of Malefactors. Besides the forementioned
Miseries, there is still One that is no less Galling to Persons of Honor and
Probity, who for themselves, and the Reputation of the Nation, would preserve
the Characters of Just and Upright, Loyal and Pious, Conscientious and keepers
of their Faith to God and Man; these now lie under the heavy Sentence of
Violaters of all the Cardinal Virtues, with which Character when Foreign
Nations once brand a People, it sticks upon them to all succeeding Ages. In
former days we were reputed Valiant, Hospitable, inviolable Observers of our
Compacts, Faith, and Honesty.

But we cannot forget what an Odium the Murder of King Charles I. brought upon
the whole Island of Britain; yet there was then some just Apology to be made
for that Barbarity: That Tremendous Fact was not committed 'till after Six Yeas
Civil War, 'wherein the Victorious Rebels had conquered, disarmed, and utterly
impoverished the Loyal Party, yet there still remained a numerous Part of the
Three Kingdom, who made many generous Attempts to restore King Charles II. and
the whole Nation wearied with their endless Miseries, and the Succession of
Usurpers, at last happily effected it.

Now what shall we say for our selves, who have Abdicated our King without
shedding One Ounce of Blood, or adventuring a bloody Nose in his Defense? All
Nations from the Orcades to the extremest Indies, must judge us to be a People
who have no regard to the most Sacred Oaths, the most ungrateful of all
Mankind, a Nation fitted for Slavery degenerating from our Loyal Ancestors, the
Offspring or By-blows of Prostigate Rebels.

Yea, we are still so much worse than those of the last Age, in that now so
numerous a Party of the very Clergy, who should, and do know the Oligation of
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which every single Man of them took to
their lawful King, have by unpardonable Perjury renounced their King, and sworn
Allegiance to One whom they know in their Consciences, and have often declared
upon Occasion has no legal Right; no, not so much as Cromewell the Wicked:
These are the Men who have brought an indelible Scandal and Hatred upon our
Religion. Miratur Orbis se tam cito factum esse Arrianum, was the pathetical
Exclamation of a holy Author of Old: What would he have said, if he had lived
in our Age, to see a National Clergy Apostatise from the Established Doctrine
of their own Church, in the point of Allegiance and Non-resistance? By the
Conduct of these Men, one would be almost tempted to look upon all Religion as
a mere Cheat, and to believe that they themselves owned no God. Whether they do
or not, I shall not give my self the trouble to enquire; but I am sure some of
them do as good as own no Hell, by Teaching Men, that notwithstanding those
terrible Threatenings God in his holy Word has denounced against the
Incorrigible and Impenitent, of everlasting Fire, everlasting Punishment, etc,
he has not obliged himself to the literal Performance of them, since he that
threatens keeps the Right of punishing in his own hand, and is not obliged to
execute what he has threatened, any farther than the Reasons and Ends of
Government do require, etc. Dr. Tillot son's Sermon before the Queen, March 7.
1690. page 13. And that these Threatenings, etc. do not restrain God from doing
what he pleases, though they cut off from the Sinner all reasonable Hopes of
the Relaxation or Mitigation of them. p. 16.

Of what comfortable Importance this Doctrine may be to some, and how necessary
under our present Circumstances, let any one judge: It Is impossible Men should
have perpetrated such abominable Villainies as have been lately transacted, to
the Amazement of all that have the least Sense of Piety or Honor left, unless
their Minds had been first debauched with these or the like Principles. He that
will audaciously violate the sacred Commands of God, acknowledged such by the
Church of England, his own Subscriptions, Oaths, and Preaching, must
necessarily fancy some secret Reserves of Mercy in the Breast of the Almighty
for the Authors and Abetters of such horrid Crimes, upon some Occasions, which
will not suffer his Justice to pass upon them in another World, or some
extraordinary Relaxations or Mitigations of future Torments. The first seems to
be despaired of, because there is small Hopes of Repentance left, the
Scriptures for that very Reason, perhaps, amongst many others, comparing
Rebellion to the Sin of Witchcraft; the latter therefore is pitched upon as
most congruous to carnal-minded Men, who to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
Season, and not willing to go to Heaven through Tribulations and Afflictions,
do rather choose to undergo a future Pu^ishment, especially if it consists only
as to its Perpetuity in a bare Exclusion from Eternal Happiness. Sermon. p. 15.

Now, I say, such a Series of Villainy as has been hitherto, and shall be
farther exposed, being altogether inconsistent with the Principles of
Christianity, which this accursed Generation of Monsters had not long since
most zealously professed, they found it as necessary to Abdicate their Savior
and his Precepts, as well as their King and his Rights, as far as they durst.
The first thing they did was to ridicule and blasphemously expose the Doctrine
of the Cross, and if they could have drawn over the Majority of the Convocation
to their Party, the next thing they designed was to have expunged out of the
Liturgy the Athanasian Creed, which was in effect to have denied the Divinity
of our Savior, le^t they, should have been charged with Rebellion against God,
as well as their King, if all Power be derived from the second Person of the
Trinity as Mediator, and all lawful Kings, whether Christians, Heathens, or
Mahometans, be his Vicegerents, and he has the Disp^sal of their Crowns, and
the Command of their Power, and does actually employ, and makes use of it in
the Prosecution of the righteous Ends of ^is Government, as Doctor Scot has
learnedly proved in his Christian Life. Part. 3.

As it appeared necessary to reform the Doctrines of Christianity, to make them
square the better with their late Practice; so likewise to procure an
Alteration amongst our Ecclesiastical Governors too, it being as much for the
Interest of this upstart Government the Metropolitan should be an Usurper, as
the supreme Governor in the Civil State; Like Bishop like King, being as true
a Maxim now, a No Bishop no King heretofore. If the Metropolitical See had been
real^y void, this present nominal Archbishop was unqualified for it, being
esteemed an Heretic, and by the 84th Canon of the Apostles, as being an actual
Rebel, who ought to be deposed, or degraded from his Priesthood and though in
the present juncture he cannot be convicted and sentenced; yet his Crimes being
so notorious, all that understand them ought not in Conscience to own him as a
Christian Bishop, or hold Communion with him, according to the 33d Canon of the
Laodicean Council, that we ought not to pray, or communicate with Schismatics,
or Heretics.

Of what grand Concern these particulars are let every good Christian seriously
consider, and lay to heart. Now it is that Poison is poured out into our
Church; therefore it is high time for us to avoid the Contagion, according to
that excellent Advice of St. Cyprian, Keep at a Distance from the Infection of
such Men by fleeing from them; and shun their Conversation as you would the
Cancer or Plague, according to the Premonition of our Lord, Mat. 15.14. They be
blind Leaders of the blind, and if the blind lead the blind, etc. -- Let them
perish by themselves who are willing to perish, let them alone remain without
the Church, who have forsaken the Church. Epist. 40. ad Plebem, etc. How can
these Men pretend to be Guides to others, who keep to no certain Path
themselves? What certainty can there be in their Doctrines, when they vary them
with their Interest, and ever calculate them to serve a turn? Therefore none
ought to communicate with them, who value the Salvation of their Souls, and are
not willing to partake of their Guilt and Punishment.

The Doctrines and Duties of our holy Religion have the Spirit of Truth and
Holiness for their Author, and like him are always the same, without any shadow
of Change: But from what Spirit must these bold Attempts upon Common
Christianity proceed? Holloixius in his Defense of Origin, lib. 3. cap. 6.
cites several Passages out of his Writings, wherein he assigns a different evil
Spirit to every Vice or Sin, which he calls inimicas, and adversarias Virtutes,
and delivers this Notion among the rest: There seems to me, says he, to be an
infinite number of contrary Powers, or Spirits; because in almost every Man
there are certain Spirits, which incite and provoke him to the Commission of
diverse Sins: E.g. There is a Spirit of Fornication, and a Spirit of Anger, a
Spirit of Avarice, and a Spirit of Pride; and if it happens that any Man be
acted by all these, or more Sins, he is to be looked upon as possessed by so
many or more Enemies, or evil Spirits. Surely then, according to this Opinion
of Origin. Legion must have taken Possession in some of the Grandees of this
new schisinatical Church of England. How obvious is it for any but those who
are infatuated, and spiritually blind, to discern the Spirit of Rebellion,
Ambition, and Emulation; the Spirit of Heresy, Schism, and Persecution; the
Spirit of Blasphemy, Lying, Slandering, and Apostasy, reigning and triumphing
among them.

This word Apostasy I am very sensible will found very harsh in their Ears; but
let any sober and unprejudiced Person seriously consult the several
Acceptations of the Word among sacred and profane Authors, and he will soon be
convinced, that it will be no easy Task for these Gentlemen to purge
themselves from the imputation of it. Grotius, in his Appendix to his
Commentaries de Antichristo, tell us, that by Apostasy is understood all kinds
of Hostility or Con^umacy against a Superior, who has the Right of Commanding,
and proves it from several Texts of Scripture. Sometimes it signifies a
Defection, or a Revolt; see Suidas and Stephanus. In its common acceptance
amongst Christian Writers, a Departure from the Faith, by going over to
Heresy, etc. Maimonides, as he is cited by Hottinger, in his Thesaur. Phil
log. l. 1. c. 1. s. 3. amongst the several Distinctions of Apostates among the
Jews, reckons those who taught or solicited others to sin. I shall not make a
particular Application of these significations of the word Apostasy to the
forementioned Persons, I only refer the Reader to their Sermons and other
Discourses, their very Prayers and Practices, it being so easy to be observed
by the meanest Capacity; but shall only add this following Remark, as an
Illustration of what has been just now charged upon them. If the
Abrenunciation, and the solemn Stipulation to keep God's holy Will and
Commandments, etc. before Baptism were the real Tests of the Faith and
Sincerity of the Candidate, by which he was obliged to deny himself, and to
take up his Cross; i.e. to forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Lands
and Possessions, and to lay down even his very Life, when ever they should come
in competition with his Duty; and we cannot ordinarily be called to the
Performance of this our Vow and Covenant, but under unrighteous and persecuting
Princes, then it follows clearly, that by our entering into Christianity we have
tied up our hands (by our own solemn Act) from making any forcible Resistance
against our supreme Governors, upon any pretense whatsoever, and that the
Doctrine of the Cross, or Passive Obedience, is a fundamental Doctrine, or
Principle of the Christian Religion; and, lastly, that whosoever teach or
practice otherwise, are Renegadoes and Apostates from Christianity it self.
This was very near the Assertion of Dr. Burnet himself, in his Sermon on Romans
13. v. 5. p. 36. But, blessed be God, our Church hates and condemns this
Doctrine, ( viz. of deposing and resisting of Kings,) from what hand soever it
come, and has established the Rights and Authority of Princes on sure and
unalterable Foundations, enjoining an entire Obedience to all the lawful
Commands of Authority, and an absolute Submission to that supreme Power which
God has put in our Sovereigns Hands. This Doctrine we justly glory in, and if
any that had their Education in our Church, have turned Renegadoes from this,
they proved no less Enemies to the Church her self, than to the Civil
Authority; so that their Apostasy leaves no blame on our Church.

If this be the Case (as we have all the Reason in the World to think so) it is
plain and evident to any ordinary Understanding, That these Men are not true
Church of England Divines, as they would have all the World believe; neither is
the Church in Possession any more to be esteemed the True, Legal, Ancient
Church of England, than the Donatists of Old were to be accounted the only
Catholic Church. Their Priesthood is now become Schismatical, having erected
Altar against Altar; their Liturgy Blasphemous and Diabolical, wherein they
address themselves to God as the Author and Fountain of all unjust Power, the
Patron of Injustice, and the grand Protector, and Encourager of the Notorious
Violators of his most sacred Laws. What is this, but with the most impudent and
horrid Blasphemy that ever was heard of, to beseech the Almighty to divest
himself of his most glorious Attributes, and to enter into a League with Hell
it self, for the support and maintenance of all their detestable Impieties.

What have they now to say? Confusion and Shame must cover them, who are the
Scandal and Reproach of the Pure and Undefiled Religion they should profess.
Thousands of these could not say (though in reality the well known pretense of
most) that they swore for Bread; God forgive them they durst not trust
Providence, wanted the Courage to give a good Example, or to teach their Flocks
the danger of Perjury: They sinned against God, and his Anointed, and their own
Souls, and knew they did so.

In the preceding Age we can scarce name a Dignified Clergyman, or any Person
Eminent for Piety and Learning, in either of the Universities, in City or
Country, who were not outed their Benefices for refusing to take the Covenant
or Engagement; but now the great Body of the Clergy have been observed to
renounce their Allegiance, and worship the Idol of the Hogans: Indeed out of
this Number we must except the Most Reverend the Metropolitan, and Seven of his
Right Reverend Brethren, and the other Clergy and Loyal Fellows in the
Universities, who have not defiled themselves with the Abominations of their
Apostate Brethren, whose Virtue and Piety is the only Thing left to attone^ for
these loud and crying Sins of our Clergy; and, who incessantly like Abraham
intercede with Almighty God to avert his Judgments from this sinful Nation, and
which the Perjury and Apostasy, and the general Defection gives but too sad an
occasion to fear hangs over our Heads.

In short, whatever hopes we may conceive of ever seeing the true Church of
England flourish in its true Luster and Purity, we must owe it (next to the
infinite Mercy of God) to those never enough applauded Heroes of our Church,
the true Archbishop of Canterbury, and those ejected Bishops, etc. who have
stood in the Gap of Schism, and bor^^ up Loyally against the all over-bearing
Torrent of the prevaricating Party, who have preferred the Peace and Comfort of
a good Conscience, before all wordly Honor and Interest, and feared the
offending their good God more than their own certain Ruin from ill natured
Men. How will these glorious Lights of our Church, and true Servants of the
living God shine after their Trial is over past, when the Adorer's of Mammon
(those interloping Arch bishops, Bishops, and those other mean spiritted
Worldlings, who preferred their Profit before their Honesty) shrink, look dim
and pale with Guilt; and at length their Candlesticks being removed from them,
come to be utterly extinguished and go out like an ill scenting Snuff.

Some Instances he brings ( p. 26.) to show we are not singular in Perjury and
Rebellion. He tells us that the Law of the Land and of Nations, require us to
swear Allegiance to him who is in Possession: Which lame Pretense is answered
fully over and over, in the forenamed Books against Dr. Sherlock; only this
Gentleman's Assertion is more raw than his, for he proceeds upon quiet
Possession (as do also our Lawyers, whom he speaks of, and would have quoted if
he durst.) But this Man makes account that bare Possession, however qualified,
gives Title to our Allegiance, nay obliges us to swear it too, which we cannot
do unless we can safely swear, that this Discourse of his is Convictive; which,
I^le be sworn, is most pernicious Nonsense, and would, if followed, pervert all
the settled Order of Mankind, and all Right in the World. To assert that mere
Possession of a Thing gives a Man Right to it, is enough to encourage all Men
to be Rebels, Usurpers, Robbers, Thieves, and Cheats. It cries aloud to them
all, Catch that catch may, my Masters; all that you get is your own, by the Law
of the Land, and of Nations, of once you get but Possession. It makes the
saying of the Th^eves [ This is mine, I stole it] very strong Reason and good
Sense. He Will say these Cases are not parallel to his: But why are they not, if
a true Prince has as good Right to his Crown, as a Subject has to his Money or
his Goods? For if he has, then a Possession transfers the Right of a Crown; so
it must transfer the Right of a Purse, a Cloak, etc. And with so much the more
Reason as the Right of the Crown (on which the common Good of the Nation
depends.) ought to be more fixed and unalienable, than the Right of private Men
to their Goods, which are of an inferior Concern. Now if the Law of the Land
require us to swear Allegiance as due to any present Possessor, the same Law
declares that Allegiance, and consequently the Crown is his Right; otherwise
the Law would oblige me to swear false. And if the Law of the Land declares the
Prince of Orange has Right; To what end did this Gentleman all this while run
about to the Law of Nations to patch him up a Title? It must be a pitiful Cause
that makes a Man, who otherwise has wit enough, still interfere thus with
himself.

But he says, That if an Oath of Allegiance should not follow Possession, there
would be infinite Snares to the Consciences of all such who are required to
obey, but are not bound to enquire into the Right of War. Note, by the way, one
of those shuffling Tricks, of which his Book is full. He begins with Oaths, but
proceeds as if only Obedience were required: As if a Man could not live quietly
under a Government, without Swearing and calling God to witness that the
Governor has Right to the Kingdom, (and consequently to our Allegiance,)
whether we know he has or no. But let us apply our selves to his Discourse. All
the play of these Men, is to persuade the World that this business of
Allegiance due to King James only, is a Kind of dubious Case; and then if they
can but get their Judgment to bover, they hope that Interest or Fear may turn
the Balance, and make them swear to King William: Whereas we maintain that
it is a most plain Case, which none but biased Men can doubt of. Is it not
evident to all, that King James was Three Years ago the undoubted Supreme
Governor, and that all the World held that none but he had Right to the Crown,
and consequently that Allegiance would then be lawfully sworn to none but him?
Is it not evident that he is living, and has not given up his Right; and so, by
the common course of the World, it is evidently his still? Is it not evident
even to themselves that the new Right of the Prince of Orange is obscure, that
Men are in several Minds about the Ground and Reason of it; some alleging one
Thing, others another, which shows that England it self is not satisfied with
the Truth of his Title, but is led on by Fear or Interest? Is it not evident
that very many conscientious and good Men, amongst whom are the Primate, and
some Bishops, and many reverend and worthy Pastors of our Church do refuse to
take the New Oath; whose Authority far outweighs all the others, in regard they
have no Motive but pure Conscience, since they are ruined for refusing; whereas
the Complying Party find Interest, and the Favor of great Men, by their
mercenary Submission? Is it not manifestly evident to every sincere Christian's
Conscience, even of the most ordinary Capacity, that Oaths are most Sacred
Things; and that those Oaths which were due, or have been sworn upon certain
Grounds to an undoubted and indisputable Authority, ought not to be unsworn
again, by swearing Allegiance upon uncertain Grounds to a dubious (at least)
and disputable Authority? So that here is no moot Case in the Business, as he
would pretend, but plain Sense, which every sincere and conscientious Christian
is capable of comprehending: There is no danger then of infinite Snares, (as he
madly calls them,) not of any at all, but those of weak Fears, or base
Interest, which have already ensnared many Consciences, and are spread every
where, as the Devil's Nets to entangle and ensnare the unwary, unstable, and
worldly minded Men.

He asks, p. 26. If it be Perjury and Rebellion in the now French King's
Conquests, for the Inhabitants to take Oaths of Fidelity to the French King?
Now this is a very pleasant Gentleman; and for all his objecting, p. 19. The
admiring the French Conduct to this sort of Mai^ [Mr. Ashton's Friends.] He
has said more for the French King than any Iacobite in England will say, and
the rankest French Man in the World can say no more; and that is, that he has
a Right to all the Places he has overrun with his Arms, in Flanders, Savoy,
yea, and the Principality of Orange too. But then, Where is that independent
Sovereignty which our Author talks of, as necessary and essential to make a
Title by Conquest? For he is possessed of the Principality of Orange; and
therefore according to our Author, the King of France is Prince of Orange, and
no body else. And not to meddle with what Right Conquest conveys, (as being
foreign to the present Question;) here is this vast difference in the two
Cases: The King of France actually Conquered these Places and People; the
Prince of Orange did not Conquer England, and none but a Madman will say he
did: And therefore if the Author would have made the Case parallel, he should
thus have put his Question, Whether it would not have been Perjury for the
Inhabitants of those Places, to have put the Government into the French King's
Hands, to transfer their Allegiance, and to take an Oath of Fidelity to him,
when it was in their Power to resist; nay, when he could not do it otherwise
but by themselves, and by their own Contrivance, and Assistance: In that Case,
which is plainly ours, I stick not to affirm that it is Perjury and Rebellion
with a witness; and no Man who has not his Ear bored, and is became a Slave to
Interest, can have the Face to deny it: And yet for all that he goes on. If it
be not Perjury and Rebellion in those Conquered Provinces, How comes it to be
so here? By which we say again, he is ready to maintain, (for he does here
manifestly suggest it already,) That England is the Prince of Orange's by
Conquest, and all our Lives and Estates are at his Disposal. And there wants
nothing but one of his infinite Snares, a good rich Deanery, or Bishopric, to
make him perfectly hold and openly maintain that Opinion. Parliaments had best
look to such Libels in time, left the pretended Conqueror come to abdicate them
too as Useless, or Obstacles to the pretense of Conquest, and make all our
Contrymen become Slaves to his Ambition.

But what meant he by his instancing, p. 26, 27. in the Portugueze's swearing
Allegiance to the Duke of Braganza, though the King of Spain had enjoyed the
Crown for Three Generations? The Case was this. There were Three Pretenders to
that Crown, and most of the Universities in Europe were employed to determine
which of them had Right; when Philip the Second, while the Thing was yet under
debate, seeing them incline most to the Duke of Braganza, sends the Duke d'
Alva with an Army, and very unfairly Surprises and Oppresses the Headless
Nation, and decided the Controversy by the Sword: This was no Conquest, but a
manifest Usurpation, for no Battle was fought, nor Resistance made; Was this
parallel to the Case of us in England? Was our Nation Headless at the time of
the Prince of Orange's Invasion? Was it under dispute whether King James, or he
had Right to the Crown? Or had King James usurped it, as King Philip had done?
Was he not in quiet Possession of England, which King Philip never was? The
Portugueze still grumbling and resenting, that they were enslaved to a
Foreigner, when a King of their own Nation had a Title to it. Again, their
swearing Allegiance to King Philip, was too, in many regards, more justifiable
than ours; they were kept under by a Foreign Force, whereas we do it
voluntarily: Besides, the Spanish King had been one of the Pretenders, and the
Question was not decided. Had the Prince of Orange, or his Princess, any kind
of pretense to England while their Father lived? Lastly, They rose against a
Foreign King to introduce one of their own Nation, whereas we rose against our
own to introduce a Foreigner. How shallow then is it to huddle together many
Instances, and not bring one of them home to his purpose? How ridiculous to
argue all along from Matters of Fact to Matter of Right? Which is just as wise
as to pretend, that whatever has been done, must be well done; and is the same,
as if he would set himself to prove, that we were not the first, nor the only
Rebels, Traitors, or Perjured Persons, that have been in the World; but that
there have been others, both of our own and other Nations before us, which we
never denied.

He has not done with his Plot, to prove the Paper none of Mr. Ashton's; but
(take which you will) tells you p. 28. That either it is not his, or else that
he contradicted himself. In what I beseech him? Why. Mr. Ashton, at his Trial
said He could not but own he had a fair Trial for his Life, and yet in his
Paper he complains of the severe Charge of the Judges, and hard Measure: And
where lies the Contradiction? Every Man knows that the Trial is over before
the Charge is given, or the Verdict brought in by the Jury: So that nothing
hinders but the Trial may be fair, and seemingly kind, though the Charge which
came after did aggravate, and made the worse Misconstruction (as indeed it did)
of every thing, and so was very hard and severe. But does Mr. Ashton mention no
hard Measures besides? Does he not object his close Imprisonment, the hasty and
violent Proceedings against him, and the Industry used in the Return of fi^ting
Persons to pass upon him, the denying of him a Copy of the Panel, with an etc.
at the end of them? Were not these hard Measures, and some of them villanously
unjust, and indeed plainly showed, that since they saw him so heartily honest,
that he would not be warpt, the Resolution was taken beforehand by the Party to
have his Life, per Fas aut Nefas? Does he deny these were hard Measures, or
that Mr. Ashton said true, when he told us he had received such hard Measures?
He confesses both, by his Silence in such main Businesses. Is it not a rare
piece of Justice, to cull out a select Company of Court Pick-thanks, who they
were sure would hang him; and yet deny a Copy of the Panel, that he might
except against some chief Boute-feus, (and particularly that malicious Jury Man
he so complains of,) who would never leave pressing and soliciting the rest,
till they brought them (let the Cause be never so ugly) into the same Guilt of
Murder with themselves? Yet a Man who loses his Life by such Tricks, is
(according to this Caviller) confident, uncharitable, or whatever other
Character his time-serving Spite thinks fit to put upon him, if he do but
barely speak of what they did to take away his Life.

Now after all this Outcry and heavy Charges, to lay Load upon the Martyr's
Credit, what was it he said: Though I have, I think, just reason to complain of
the severe Charge given by the Judges, and the hard measure, etc. Yet as I hope
for Pardon at the Hands of my God, I do most heartily pray for and forgive
them, etc. Could any thing be said more sweetly, or more modestly? He only
spoke it in Transcursu, and as a Transition to the declaring his Charitable
Forgiving of his Enemies: He only said [ he thought] he had received ill
Usage, and why might not he think so, when his Lawyers told him the Law did not
reach him, there being only Presumption, which was incompetent in that Case?
Yet this uncharitable Ca^iller charges him with Confidence, and want of Common
Charity, and employs all his little Tricks of Rhetoric to have it thought he
dyed an ill Man, and (which is the worse Sin of the two) to murder as far as
he could, his Soul, and his Credit as a good Christian, after the Judges and
Jury had murdered his Body.

But how does he clear the Jury? He cites my Lord Coke, p. 29. that the Intent
is to be discovered by Circumstances, etc. But does he or any Man say, that
those Circumstances must not be evidently connected with the Intention; that
is, such as could not have light or could not have been put, had there not been
such an Intention? Otherwise the Evidence rises not above Presumption, which
that Lawyer declares to be insufficient; and therefore he requires Good and
Manifest Proof; and the Proof of a Man's Intention cannot be said to be
manifest, unless the Over-act was manifestly connected with it. Was it so here?
Ashton cleared the occasion of his going over to France to have been upon a
quite different Account. But the Papers, says he, were found about him. What
then? Might not another who was in the Company, and who only was conscious of
their Contents, give them to him to keep? Nay, would not that Person who was
concerned judge it best in Reason, rather to give them to a Person which was
not at all concerned in them, than to another of his own Gang? Certainly he
would. Nothing more frequent in Oliver's Days, than for loyal Gentlemen going
in Coach, to give such Papers which were Treasonable in those days to the
Coachman, or some Gentlewomen in Company; and must such Persons who carried
them be concluded guilty of Treason? This Circumstance then of having the
Papers found upon him, which were evidently another Man's Concern, as being
writ in his hand, was so far from being manifestly connected with his being
concerned in them, or knowing their Contents; that, of the two it rather
signifies the contrary. Besides, this Circumstance is not rightly represented.
Had they been found upon him when first searched, it might have born a slight
Suspicion, that he was the Bearer of them; but when he was first forced out of
the hiding Place, he was searched, and nothing found about him; but going down
afterward to the Hold of the Ship, and finding those Papers left, (which he
might suspect my Lord Preston would not have had found,) he put them in his
Bosom, with design to throw them overboard, which being observed, they were
found there. Well; but he had a mind to have these Papers thrown overboard:
What then? Would not any Friend do the same, if his Friend and
Fellow-Traveller, who by leaving his Letters behind him where he lay, had by so
doing signified, that he would not have them seen, though at the same time he
knew nothing of the Contents. Did not Captain Billop at the Trial declare upon
Oath, that Mr. Elliot was much more concerned than he was, and yet no
Presumptive Evidence was grounded thereupon against him, of knowing their
Contents? Again, Are there no Secrets, and important Ones too, but Treason?
What Man who is versed in the World would have made such a rash Conclusion of
his knowing the Contents of the Letters from a Carriage, as was lately showed
has sometimes, and may often be used in other Occasions, where he that destroys
or conceals any Papers of another's, is yet utterly ignorant of what is in them,
or what is his Friend's Design? My self in the Protector's Days lodged near the
Pall Mall, when a Civil Gentleman came to take a Room in the same Hou'e; it
seems he came over to England about King Charles his Business, though he kept
it to himself, and never in the least had acquainted me with it; upon a fright
he came running from the Yard into the House, and feating a Search, retired
into a safe hiding Place, giving me some Papers (which it seems he would not
have found with him) to secure them if I could, or else to burn them. I did not
much fear, knowing the Constable; so I locked them in a small Trunk of Mine,
and put them under the Beds-head. They searched but found nothing. Here is a
Case parallel exactly, or rather far more obnoxious than was that of Mr.
Ashton's, and more significant, that I was privy to the Design of them. Now I
would ask this inconsiderate Jury, whether, had those Papers (which I
understood afterward to be Commissions) been found in my Trunk, they would
have brought me in guilty? Doubtless such a Jury as this would have done it;
and yet I can safely be deposed, That I was then utterly ignorant, both of the
Business of that Gentleman, and of the Contents of the Papers. I desire those
Gentlemen of the Jury to lay their Hands on their Hearts, and tell us
seriously, whether they durst have ventured their own Lives, (could it have
been brought to the Trial,) that Mr. Ashton intended to go into France with
such a Design? I doubt their Hearts would quail at such a dubious Wager: And
could they think fit to take away another Man's Life, and hazard to damn their
own Souls too, on an Evidence that they durst not stake their own Lives upon.
Let them reflect how often even very great Likelihoods deceive us every day;
nay, sometimes so great, that we should have judged it almost impossible it
should have missed; and yet no wise or good Man would venture his Life or his
Salvation upon those highest Likelihoods, or think fit to swear the Truth of
them; and dare Iuror^ then hazard to forswear themselves, and to commit Murder
in to the Bargain, by bringing in an illegal Verdict, which takes away a Man's
Life upon Likelihoods or Presumptions? The Law he confesses requires manifest
Proof; What says this Patron of Injustice to the Law? Yet this Proof (says he,
page 29.) must still be such as the thing will bear. Let us examine the sense
of these Words. Either he means by the Word [ Thing,] a Fact of such a Nature
as Mr. Ashton's is pretended to be, and that such a Fact, abstractedly
speaking, cannot bear a more manifest Proof than this had: Or he means that
this individual pretended Fact, as standing under the Circumstances it really
had, can bear no better Proof than it did, or be made more manifest. He cannot
without extreme Folly mean the former of these: For it is evident and confessed
here, p. 30. by himself, That had the Papers been produced writ in his own
hand, it would have been a plain Proof of his knowing what was in those Papers,
(which by the way, is a plain Confession, that (that Proof wanting) there was
no plain or manifest Proof at all,) He must mean then, that this Fact, no
better circumstanc'd, can bear no better Proof: Which is in less candid Terms
to say; We were resolved to hang him, and could have been glad of a plain or
manifest Proof, but the Evidence we could get from all the Circumstances, not
bearing or affording as such a Proof, we were forced to condemn him upon this
unmanifest Proof, or else (which would have vexed us) we must have acqui^ted
him. This is what he would say, had he the Gift of Ingenuity. Well then, since
there was (as he confesses) no plain or manifest Proof, what Proof will he
afford us instead of it? Why, he tells us, there was sufficient Proof of his
Privity to the Contents of those Papers. Sufficient! What does he mean by that
indeterminate and insignificant Expression? No Proof is sufficient by the Law
but what is manifest: But he as good as confesses here, that the Proof was not
manifest. He can only mean then by that lukewarm word [ sufficient,] that the
Proof was sufficient to take away his Life, if such Judges and such a Jury had
the managing of it, who were resolved to sacrifice their Consciences and
Honesty to the Fear or Favor of Men, and blindly submit them; without Scruple,
to the Pleasure of the State.

Next he tells us, there can be no direct and plain Proofs of a secret
Intention. How many Tricks are coucht in these few words? What does the word [
direct] here? Did any Man ever pretend he could see a Soul directly, or receive
Impressions from it in a straight Line, as Light and visible Objects come to
the bodily Eye? Again: What does the word [ secret] here? Had it not been
enough to say, None can have a plain Proof of an Intention? But to confound the
weak Reader, and color over the Paradox, he must add [ secret] to it. Indeed
while an Intention is secret, it is undoubtedly secret; but why can there be no
plain Proof of an Intention, making it become not secret? Certainly the denying
this would destroy all humane Negotiation, in all its mainest Concerns, and
make all our chief Actions floating and uncertain: It makes all the Execution
of the Law comfortless to the Judges and Jury, and wickedly injurious to the
Persons accused; for by this Man's Discourse the former can never tell whether
or not they condemn an Innocent, and the latter sees his Life and Honor exposed
to Hap-hazard. It Is the Intention, and that only, which the Law regards, nor
is any Action reputed by it to be Felony, Murder, Treason, etc. unless it be
done Animo Felonico, etc. with a Felonious Intention, etc. and this Intention,
according to him, can never be made plain; so no Man ^ving knows, or can know,
who dies deservedly, who innocently. Let him reflect, that all that the
Witnesses can do is to atrest the Overt Act, or the Words spoken imprinted on
their Senses; but it is the Duty of the Judges and Jury, when once they are
satisfied of the Witnesses Integrity, to see that those Actions are necessarily
connected with such an Intention as with its Cause, and proceeded from it; and
if they be not satisfied, but that possibly it might spring from another Cause,
they must be judged not to value how precious a Man's Life is, nor to regard
much whether they legally condemn an innocent or no, if they bring him in
guilty; and so they incurr the Guilt themselves of careless Murderers: Nor do
the Judges deserve a better Character, if they fail in the Duty of instructing
them, that the Law requires manifest Proof, and that they ought not to proceed
upon even high Likelihoods or Presumptions, which we do experience do often
deceive us: But especially if they aggravate and enhance those Likelihoods to
make the Jury proceed upon them as Certainties: All which was but too visible
in the Charge to this easily byast Jury. Did this Gentleman, who denies that
Intentions can admit of plain Proof, never hear of those Sayings, That out of
the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, or that the Tree is known by its
Fruit; i.e. a Man's Interior by his Outward Actions? Can we not know very
manifestly, that if a Man way-lay his Enemy, and out of an Ambush assaults and
runs him through, he had an Intention to do him a Mischief? Does not himself
confess, that had the Papers been in Mr. Ashton's own hand, it had been a plain
or manifest Proof of his knowing their Contents; which Knowledge is of its own
Nature altogether as secret as is an Intention: Lastly, Does he not tell us out
of my Lord Coke, that no Proof is sufficient but a manifest one; and yet he
sets himself to prove, that there can be no plain or manifest Proof of an
Intention, which makes the Law require Impossibilities? What Stuff is this to
be vented by a Man chosen out to support the State, vindicate the Judges, and
confute the solid Paper bequeathed us by our dying Martyr!

After this he pretends, that, in his Judgment, one of the Papers was writ in
the very same Hand in which this Speech was written; that is, it was writ by
Mr. Ashton. But he must pardon us if we dare not believe his Judgment, which
(as has been abundantly shown) has scarcely judged right in one single Line of
his whole Book: But how frivolous is this Pretense of his! Had the Judges, or
the Managers of the Trial found the least Ground for such a Suspicion, it had
been the easiest thing in the World to have compared that Paper with Hundreds
of Accomp^s, Acquittances, and Letters, which were all seized in his House by
Order from the State: Nor could they have wanted Witnesses to have sworn, that
they believed such a Paper was writ by him, as well as they did in the Trial of
my Lord Preston, which is a very great Presumption that they found no such
Paper under his Hand, or so near resembling it as might induce any to swear it.
They found indeed another Paper of his, which more vexed them and hastened his
Death, than had they found any such other as this Gentleman pretends:
Concerning which take the Martyr's own Words out of part of that Paper left by
him in a Friend's hands; which are as follows.

[Being suddenly to give up my Accounts to the Searcher of all Hearts, I think
it a Duty incumbent upon me to impart some Things farther, which neither the
Interest nor Iniquity of these Times will, I conclude, willingly bear the
publication of, and therefore not fit to be inserted in the Sheriffs Paper.

Some time after the Prince of Orange's Arrival here, when it was expected,
that, pursuant to his own Declaration, and the King's Letter to the Convention,
an exact Search and Enquiry would have been made into the Birth of the Prince
of Wales, there was a Scheme drawn up of that whole Matter, and of the Proofs
that were then (and are still) ready to be produced, to prove his Royal
Highness's Legitimacy; but no public Examination being ever had, and the
Violence of the Times, as well as Interest of the present Government, not
permitting any private Person to move in it, those Papers have ever since lain
by: But it being now thought advisable by some, to have them printed and
published, and (as at first they were designed) addressed, at their next
Meeting, to the Lords and Commons, entreating them to enquire into that weighty
Affair, and to call forth, examine, and protect (for who else dares to appear)
the many Witnesses to the several Particulars therein offered to be legally
proved, etc.

I was ordered to carry those Papers to the King, my Master, for his view, that
his Leave and Approbation might go along with the Desires of his good Subjects
here; and they being taken with me, with some other Papers of Accounts, etc. in
a small Trunck, amongst my Linen, and other private Things of my own, and not
in the Packet, (my Lord Pre^ton being altogether a stranger to the whole
proceeding,) by this means fell into the hands of our present Governors, who,
though they wisely waved the producing them as Evidence at my Trial, yet have I
just Reason to believe my greatest Crimes were contained in them; and I do
therefore conclude and hope, that I only am designed to be sacrificed, who only
knew of them: Nor am I surprised at it, since nothing, I think, can be more
prejudical to some Persons present Interest, than the exposing of those Papers
to the Public, which will set that pretended Mystery of Darkness in so clear a
Light, that all Mankind must be convinced of his Highness's being Born of the
Queen, and of their Wickedness, who have maliciously and designedly asserted
that innocent Prince to be an Impostor. The Love and Compassion that I have for
my native Country, as well as Charity, obliges me humbly to implore Almighty
God to be merciful to it, and not to charge this great Sin to the public
Account, and that we may not farther provoke his Justice by our wilfully
continuing in Error and Mistake, I beseech him to put it into the Hearts of
the Lords, etc. at their next Meeting, to examine into that whole Matter, and
(if before that time this be published) to enquire after, call for, and, if
possible, retrieve those Papers that were taken with me; whereby the Obstinate
will most certainly be convinced, the Ignorant informed, the Doubtful
confirmed, the Eyes of all opened, and a sacred most important Truth made
apparent to the whole World.]

And may we not now with good Reason challenge those of the other Party to give
an Answer to those Papers, which were the true occasion of his Suffering; and
in behalf of Justice, Truth, and the good of the Nation, to demand that the
said Papers, which are now stiffled, may be produced, and (if possible)
confuted: For since never greater fedulity was used by any other to set that
Business in a manifest Light; the Answering them must consequently be the
surest Means to keep the Nation from being imposed upon in so weighty a Matter.
And if this be not done, Will not all sincere Persons conclude hence that the
Proofs of the Prince of Wales's Legitimacy, contained in those Papers of Mr.
Ashton, are even in the Opinion of our Stat^sts themselves, absolutely
unanswerable, and all England be convinced that the Pretense of his being
Supposititious, was set up for no other End but to bring, by that detestable
Forgery, the King and Queen into Odium and Disgrace, and to make way for the
Prince of Orange to seize on his Crown; and reflect, that from this one
villa^ous Cheat, all the Calamities that have befallen our deluded Nation, have
had their true Source and Origin. I know the Observator upon Mr. Ashton's
Papers denies there were any such; but could it be done with our Security, we
do undertake to prove Circumstantially, that they were in his Trunck when taken
by the Government's Order; and farther that we will clear that whole Matter,
far more fully than has been done hitherto, by many other Witnesses of
unquestionable Credit, and by most convincing Proofs; and to satisfy all I
terrogatories that can be offered by the most inquisitive Scrupler. But to
return to our Juries; What matters it what was brought to light about those
Papers afterward? The Question is, what Evidence the Jury then had, when they
brought in their lawless Verdict: If they had at that time no such Evidence as
the Law requires; i.e. if they had then no manifest Proof, he died Innocent in
the Eye of the Law; and nothing can acquit his Condemners from being, according
to the same Law, and God's Law too, unconscientious Murderers. And it is of this
kind of Innocence only the Martyr speaks, when he declares himself Innocent;
about which P^ssage this Gentleman, who can neither understand another Man, nor
many times himself very well, is very Gay and Pleasant: Though, it is true, the
Martyr by owning his Duty to his lawful Sovereign, does withal, by consequence
profess, that, though he had been legally Convicted of an intention to restore
him, and of acting too, in order to that good End, he had notwithstanding been
Innocent also before God.

The Result of all the whole foregoing Discourse is this, That our blessed
Martyr is clearly vindicated from any Treasonable Guilt, and proved to have
died doubly Innocent; in the sight of Heaven, in dying for his Allegiance,
which provoked this unreasonable Malice against him; and in the Eye of the Law,
by being adjudg'd to die without manifest Proof, or legal Evidence. May his
Noble Christian Fortitude, and his Pious Example, so influence his
Prevaricating Brethren, that they may repent them of their Perjury and
Rebellion, imitate his Constant Loyalty, and be partakers of that Eternal Crown
of Glory which he now enjoys, for undauntedly owning, and even to Death
persevering in his Duty of Allegiance to his only Lawful, and only Rightful
Sovereign.

An Humble Petition to the Present Government.
SInce Nature does generally incline every Man to avoid his own Ruin, and to
do that which is apparently best for his own worldly Interest and Convenience;
it cannot in common Reason and Prudence be imagined, but that the generality of
those, who do adhere to King JAMES his Title, would be glad to live at Ease,
and out of Danger, by submitting freely to the present Government, did not some
Consideration that is of a Superior Nature, and concerns their well-being in
another World, overawe them and deter them from owning it. Wherefore as we who
write this, do in our Names, so we justly presume we may in the Names of those
others, protest in the presence of Almighty God, who sees their Hearts, that
our refusing to take the Oath, and pay a voluntary Allegiance to the present
Governors, does not spring from any inclination to Faction, nor from
Obstinacy, nor yet from any Disaffection to their Persons; but purely from
this, That we cannot be satisfied, either by our own Reason, or any Thing that
has been hitherto writ upon that Subject, that they have any Title to the
Crown, either by the Law of God or Man; but, on the contrary, that both Divine
and Humane Laws are against their wresting it, by a Trick, out of the Hands of
their Father, who was the undoubted rightful Owner of it; and that their still
Possessing and Detaining it from him, is no less against the same Laws, and
consequently a doubly-unjust Usurpation: And therefore our Conscience tells us,
That we shall incurr the just Indignation of Almighty God; and withal, become
Obnoxious, by our English Laws, to the Punishments due to Traitors, should we
yield to such illegal Compliances. Wherefore we humbly Petition, That for
satisfaction to our Consciences, our Governors would please to give Order,
that some grave and learned Man may compile a Treatise, showing their true
Title to the Crown, and manifesting how King James's legal Title, by
Succession, comes to be annulled: And let him evince these Two main Points from
any solid Principles, of what nature soever, acknowledged for such by the
indifferent part of the World; and so that it may appear by their giving
Authority to that Treatise, by such their Order, that that is the true Ground
of their Claim, and the Title they will stand by. Those who have writ in
Justification of their Government, are in so many Minds about the Ground of
their pretended Right, that instead of clearing it they have, by their
Disagreement, satisfied all understanding Men, that it is very obscure, even to
their own Party; whereas yet it ought to be of it self, or else be made most
Evident, ever it can in any Reason be held able to overthrow a Tenure so
incontestibly Evident and Legal, as was that of King James, it being built on a
long continued H^reditary Succession, abetted by the most Fundamental Laws of
the Land, and approved by the universal acknowledgement of the whole World. We
humbly request then to be informed which of those many Grounds, advanced by
their Writers, themselves will think fit to make choice of, and esteem thus
Evident, which we have not hitherto any Light to guess at. Their Carriage by
carressing and advancing Dr. Sherlock, seems to hint that they most approve of
his new Notion; but that Flash of his has been so perfectly and so manifoldly
baffled, and laid flat beyond all possibility of setting it up again, or
supporting it, that (next to the Abdication Title) no Tenet in the World was
ever so notoriously convicted of Folly and Inconsistency. We are told that Mr.
Johnson is about publishing something upon that Subject, with a disclaim of any
other Title but that he is setting up: But as we are well assured that the
Principles that Gentleman will proceed upon, (however he may pretend to wrest
our Laws to his Fancy,) are purely Commonwealthish, and no less confident that
our Governors will never think it Honorable for them to own such a precarious
Authority; so we cannot think it safe in Conscience for us to acquiesce in such
a Title, which they themselves will not think fit to acknowledge and abide by.

This Request is for another Regard the more Reasonable, because the granting
it is clearly the best for the Interest even of our Governors themselves: For
nothing can be more Prevalent to unite all England in a hearty Subjection to
their Government, than the making out Evidently, and Inconfutably (in Case they
judge it fecible) upon what Ground we may justly hold the former Prince's
rightful Title is Extinguished, and their own rightfully Introduced and
Established. Nor can an^ Thing more acquit them from the heavy Imputation of
Cruelty and Murder, (which Odium they will otherwise lie under,) than will
showing their Right to be thus Evident: I say Evident; for plain Reason very
sensibly informs every honest Christian, that a Title which was never doubted
or controverted, nor had the least flaw in it, by any one pretender in the
whole World, ought not to be held abolished by a Title which is controverted
and dubious; and also that O^t^s of Allegiance ought not to be sworn to those
whose Right to our Allegiance is doubtful and uncertain. Wherefore let them but
take away this doubtfulness, by making their Title Clear and Evident; and then
the same Reason which makes us yet retain our Allegiance to King James, will
oblige us in Conscience to become Faithful and Obedient Subjects to the Prince
and Princess of Orange; and will show, moreover, that we enjoy under them a
State of Liberty and Reason, and are not purely under the slavish Condition of
Force and Fear.

The granting then this Humble Petition of ours being every way so Reasonable
and Advantageous to their own Honor and Interest; so satisfactory to those who
have Scruples, which hinder their Complying; so agreeable to the Prince of
Orange's Declaration, which promises not to persecute for Conscience sake; so
conducive to the Peace and Union of the Kingdom in general; and, lastly, so
necessary to clear the Honor of all their own Party, now lying under the
Scandal of Complying they know not why, and of Sacrificing their Consciences to
servile Fear or base Interest: If this be refused by the State, and yet Oaths
be still pressed upon the Iacobites, and they be still Persecuted, Imprisoned,
and put to Death, for performing their conscientious Duties to him whom they
cannot but judge as yet to be their rightful Prince, then they do call Heaven
and Earth to witness that they suffer for Conscience sake; and that the
pretended Governors are resolved to ruin them, for no other Reason but that
they will not, to second and uphold their unaccountable Authority, break God's
holy Commands, and our own Laws; which all good Christians and true Englishmen
are bound to observe.

On the other side, their not yielding to this Humble Request cannot but
redound highly to their Dishonor; for all thinking Man will easily make this
Inference from their refusal, that either they do not judge they have any Title
at all, which will bear the Test, or which they will stand to; or else, that
they are most cruel and most unchristian Persecuters: While, on the one hand,
they refuse, when humbly Supplicated, to take Order to give satisfaction to
Men's Consciences, in a Case which the many Controversies about it, and the
former long settled and legal Title shows to be (at least) Dubious; and on the
other side, they go on to punish and put Men to Death, who are desirous to be
satisfied, merely for acting according to their Consciences; which those Men
themselves are not able to satisfy, that they ought to submit voluntarily to
the Present Government; and those who should be most able are most concerned,
nay absolutely, in many regards, bound to do it, refuse them that Christian
Charity.

In a word, Let the Present Governors either satisfy our Consciences, or
leave off to persecute us for being Conscientious; or, else (which is only
left) let them speak out, and tell the World in plain Terms, what this refusal
of theirs will sufficiently intimate, that they will do neither; but that they
are resolved we shall be punished as Traitors, if we will not be Knaves; and
that they will only allow us this sad Choice, to be either Hanged or Damned.

FINIS.

