DU MOULIN'S REFLECTIONS Reverberated, Being a full ANSWER TO A Pernicious
Pamphlet ENTITLED Moral Reflections on the Number of the Elect. TOGETHER With
several Arguments against TRANSUBSTANTIATION Of the outward Elements in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, transubstantiated into Falsehood and Absurdity.

To which is added A Postcript in Answer to some Passages in Mr. Edmund
Hickeringil's Scurrilous Piece STYLED The second part of NAKED TRUTH.

By Edward Lane Vicar of Sparsholt, Hants.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar. 1681.

A PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
THis following Tract was prepared to be a Refutation of Dr. Lewis du Moulin's
Reflections upon the Number of the Elect, long before his Death. But you may
see no haste has been made to impart it to the World, having been (too long I
confess) retarded in expectation of some other more able Pen, which could have
convinced him of his Error.

Yet since it has pleased God to put an end to his Days, and that no man has
hitherto (so far as I can learn) appeared for the Vindication of the Truth of
the Gospel against him in this particular, I have accounted it my Duty to
undertake it, in regard I have already been an Aggressor upon him, in the
Antidote which I gave the World about a year past, to keep poor desponding
sinners from receiving harm by his uncharitable Opinion of the small number of
those that shall be saved.

He has, It seems, Repented him, before he died, of all those personal
Reflections which he made in his Books on the Divines of the Church of England,
as that they leaned toward Popery, and in downright terms that they had made
several Advances toward Rome; But as for this Book of his Reflections upon the
Number of the Elect, I find no Retractation of it made by him at all, or by any
else for him; And do therefore fear that he left the World with this Opinion
which he had so deeply imbibed upon his Soul without any public Repentance of
it.

Whereupon he having been such a leading man among those that pretend to know
more of the mind of God in holy Scripture than others, it is much to be
doubted, he will have many Disciples to follow him, who will Jurare in verba
Magistri, take all to be Gospel which he has written of this Subject: For
seeing there are many of them (as it is said) who still persist in their
Invectives, and have since his death published under his name an Additional
Account of the Church of Englands Advance toward Popery (though it appears
clearly by many Infallible Proofs to be as false a Slander, as the Father of
Lies himself could Invent) what can be otherwise imagined, but that such
blustering Zealots will much more second him in this Antifundamental Opinion?
Such people being prone to publish that Doctrine, which seems to Canonize them
for the few that shall be saved, and to damn to Hell all those, whoever they
be, that shall but look awry upon them, out of a dislike of their Fraternity,
and their Opinions.

Upon which Account I would that this which is here written against the said
Doctor may be construed as directed unto them, to prevent their precipitant
Zeal in following his Example by mealing with the number of Gods Elect. For
him, I hope God has forgiven him his Error therein: And seeing that he lived
to wish that his Soul might be with theirs whom he had in his lifetime
(according to his own confession) wronged in his uncharitable Censures, I
believe he has found before this time a real Demonstration of his Error in
numb'ring those that came not within the compass of his Arithmetic.

I do therefore leave him in his Bed of Rest, but shall withal warn all men by
this which is here written against him, to take heed that they run not after
him into such want of Charirity which he lamented on his Deathbed as being
Inconsistent with the power of Godliness and true Christianity. Yea I would
advise those that profess themselves to be his Disciples, seriously to consider
with their own Souls betimes whether their defaming the Church of England, as
this Doctor had done, or their rash determining of the number of Gods Elect,
like unto him be such as he would have approved on his Death bed, or (as it
has been already said) such as they will dare to Answer for at the great day
before Gods Tribunal.

But if any will yet be so Anti-Evangelical as to appear in the defense of his
desperate Doctrine of a general Damnation, and their defense be managed by them
with Learning, Piety and Moderation in the Judgment of those that are wise and
godly, with whom I hold a Conversation, I shall though I be superannuated (as
being in the seventy seventh year of my Age) certainly maintain the truth of
the Gospel in that point against them. Humbly beseeching God to give us all a
right Understanding more and more in the Mystery of the Gospel; And if in the
publication of this my labor of Zeal I have offended either in the manner or
matter of it, the good Lord, I hope, will pardon me, seeing I had prepared my
heart only to aim at his Glory, though I have not done it exactly according to
the Rule that is set me.

Having thus far given my Apology for publishing this Tract; It is meet that
somewhat be also here premised concerning that Doctor, to the end my Readers
may discern how unfit he was to enter upon such a Controversy. He was desirous
it seems (having been public Professor of History in the University of Oxford)
to appear to the World as an Atlas in that kind of Learning, by quoting several
of the Ancient Fathers, and other Writers; that he might thereby add some
strength to his Opinion: But the truth is, he did rather in so doing lay open
his weakness to the pre-judging of his own Cause: As may be made evident by two
of his Quotations, wherein he failed, and it is therefore to be suspected, he
has done the like in many more. The two Quotations which I have singled are
these that follow.

In the thirteenth Page of his Book, where he undertook to prove that the
greatest part of the World was in the state of Damnation, and must inevitably
sink in it, it is thus written.

The Popes drew all Europe into Perdition; And this is what all the World would
suffer, Per Docilitatem Asininam.
unless some or other were permitted to Resist the Pope and to demand of him,
By what Authority he led so many Millions of Persons into Hell: For it is that
which we learn from the Canon, Si Papa, etc.

Which Et-Caetera signifies that this Doctor was of that Opinion in which
others before him have been deceived: For it to is most shamefully false which
is alleged from the said Canon, viz. that the purport of it is this, Albeit
the Pope should drive the whole world into Hell, no man ought to say unto him,
why do you so?

But before I proceed any further herein, let no man here so far mistake me, as
if I were pleading for Popery. It is only to lay open the plain truth in this
case without Partiality. The Church of Rome is doubtless faulty enough, yea
most abominable in her Doctrines and Doings, yet will it not become us to make
it worse than in truth it is; She has Guilt enough upon her that will
certainly in Gods due time bring her down wonderfully, so that the World shall
say, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen. But that the aforesaid Opinion of
her is a great untruth, and consequently that the Doctors Collections from
thence were vain, shall be here made manifest from that which is past all
Contradiction.

1. The Author of the said Canon was not a Pope, as it has been Imagined; But
it was St. Boniface a faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ (as in the Title of the
said Canon is expressed) which Boniface was never Pope but a Virtuous Learned
Englishman who lived about nine hundred years past, and was the first
Archbishop of Mentz in Germany, of which People and Country he is called the
Apostle (by ancient Writers) for that he publicly converted the Nation,
Erected that Primate See, and suffered glorious Martyrdom by the Heathen for
the Faith.

2. The Canon, Si Papa, etc. was taken by Gratian out of the Writings of that
St. Boniface. The Introduction into which Canon is, according to the words of
that Holy Man, in this manner. Damnatur Apostolicus qui suae and Fraternae
Salutis est negligens, Plagismultis in aeternum vapulaturus.
The Pope is damned who is negligent in the Affairs of his own Salvation, and
of his Brethren; after which begins the Canon, Si Papa suae and Fraternae
Salutis negligens, etc. Showing that albeit the Pope have no Superior Judge in
this World, which may by Authority check him, unless he fall into Heresy: Yet
shall his Damnation be greater, than of other sinners, for that by Reason of
his high Dignity he draws more after him into Perdition than any other.

Whereby we may perceive that this Canon was written not to flatter the Pope,
but to warn him rather of his Peril, etc. But how then came the World to
mistake this Canon, as if it said, though the Pope should carry many people
with him into Hell, yet no mortal Creature may presume to say unto him, why do
you so?

To give a short Answer to this demand; I might relate the story at large, and
make mention of the names of those Persons engaged in a Contract about this
Canon, which occasioned those hard words clean differing from the Intent and
Scope of it, and which did put some upon a more strict Inquiry into it; The
Result whereof is briefly this, some of the words of the said Canon were
mis-placed, some omitted, and some misquoted. The omission of that which is in
the Canon is this, Cum ipso plagis multis in aeternum vapulaturus, that such a
Pope is to suffer eternal Punishments, and to be scourged with many Stripes
together with the Devil himself, if by his evil and negligent Life he be the
cause of others Perdition, which Threat being omitted, these words, as
immediately following in the Canon, are misplaced and joined with the
Antecedent words which should have been put after, viz. Hujus culpas redarguere
Praesumit nemo, etc. That which is mis-quoted is Praesumet for Praesumit, no
man shall or may presume, for, no man does presume to Control. Lastly, That
which follows containing a Reason of all that went before, is left out, viz.
Quia cunctos ipse judicaturus a nemine est judicandus, nisi deprehendatur a
fide devius, etc. For that whereas he is the Judge of all other men, he cannot
himself be judged by any except he be found to err from the true Faith.

Here is the case in as few words as it could possibly be put, which clearly
show the sinister Sense that has been put upon that Canon, yet this it was
certainly which led the Doctor into this Error; For, says he, it is that which
we learn from the Canon, Si Papa, etc.

The second mistake is in that he quoteth St. Austin Lib. 1. de vera and falsa
Poenitentia, Cap. 5. Affirming that he has there an excellent Thought (as his
usual word is) whereas if he means by Lib. 1. the first Book (as probably
that must be the meaning) this must go into the mistakes, for there is but one
Book of that Subject de vera and falsa Poenitentia: Neither is that one any of
St. Austin's Work; But it is thrust in by others as an Appendix only to St.
Austin; yea more, the Author of that Book (whoever he was) produces a Sentence
out of St. Austin expressly naming him, Cap. 17. to which saying of St. Austin
the said Author refuses to give his Consent which is a clear Argument, it is
not St. Austin's.

But instead of this mis-quotation I could wish that the Doctor had thoroughly
perused that Book de vera and falsa Poenitentia, for he would have found in
that Book a full Confutation of his Opinion concerning a general Damnation, and
that which I have written in my Antidote to be as fully confirmed.

Moreover besides these Mistakes, the said Doctor, after all the dreadful
Clamor made of Millions of Millions that shall perish in their sins, adds
that which may well be accounted in Effect a plain Contradiction to his
Opinion, by showing what is the concurrent Judgment of some English Divines in
this Case, whom he names, calling them The true Barnabasses, and to whom he
subscribes his Consents viz. That the Justice of Gods Tribunal at the last day
is full as much laid open in the Pardon of the greatest sinners that Repent, as
it is in the Vengeance and Punishment, of the Impenitent, and those that know
not God, That when Jesus Christ shall come in the last times, he will do the
same to those that truly have Repented, though even at the last Period of their
Lives, That the Mercies shown to Zacheus and the Thief upon the Cross were
particular and personal, but the Comfort which is to be received from thence,
is common and public. Adding likewise further in the same Page, Page 39.
that the same English Divines do also agree with all the Casuists, etc. In one
considerable mark of a Child of God, and which (as he says) is comprehensive
all Divinity and the practice of Piety, and which may also be shut up in one
Period, to wit, that notwithstanding the Atheism whether Speculative or
Practical, secret or open that Reigns at this day in the World, and all the
Difficulties which are met with in the Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures,
which Human Reason cannot unravel and understand, a man ought to be strongly
and powerfully persuaded of the Truth, Goodness and Excellency of the Christian
Religion, and of this holy Scripture which contains it; And that it will be his
Eternal Happiness, if it be now his principal Care, Study and Endeavor to
obey, etc. Whereto may be joined what one of his said English Divines affirms
(Page 24.) viz. That Gods Mercies are offered to us in such a manner, that
nothing is required of us but that we would Accept them without any thoughts of
our own so much unworthiness to hinder and keep us from it: that as his
Promises are of Grace and Mercy, so likewise are they Rich and Great. That in
truth, they are made to those that believe, but also that Faith is a Gift of
God, and he gives it as liberally, as he grants the pardon of sins.

And who is there that will not now be ready to say, if all this be so, to what
purpose is all this heat and fury in so bold, uncharitable condemning the major
part of mankind to Hellfire? Do not these words of his English Divines, (some
of whom (as Owen, Baxter,) were as Oracles unto him) speak aloud to the World
that the Doctor might well have saved himself the labor of writing his
Reflections upon the Number of Gods Elect? For they do plainly prove his
Thousands, Hundred Thousands, Millions, Millions of Millions that shall be
damned to be Insignificant Ciphers, as to Gods secret Purpose and Decree, and
likewise as to his Will revealed in Holy Scripture.

One thing, I consess, there is which he writes of these Divines, (but has
been here omitted) which I for my part cannot but except against, that is, that
they have mingled with all these Lenitives such a Corrosion as may in some sin
sick Patients prove for ever destructive to their precious Souls, viz. that the
greatness of Repentance ought to be commensurate to the Greatness and Enormity
of the sins that have been committed.

What warrant those men, or any else, can have for this Assertion, is beyond my
reach. I confess somewhat may be said for it from Reason, if we consider what
passes between us poor Creatures when we are offended each with other, it is
but sit that the Quality of the Repair or Acknowledgment should be apportioned
according to the Quality of the Offense, but does God require the same of us
for our Violation of his Law as if satisfaction should be given to his Justice
by our Repentance.

True it is, very good it would be in us all, if we did walk humbly with our
God all the days of our Lives, according to the Hainousness of our Iniquities,
as Manasseh did, when he had sinned greatly against God, he humbled himself
greatly before the God of his Fathers, and when Peter had sinned so wickedly in
denying his Master, he went forth and wept bitterly. But is this the constant
method, as this Doctor has said, which God has prescribed in the Conversion
of greatest sinners? What would then become of those that repent only in
Articulo mortis, when they are at the point of death? Yea what alas will become
of us all, if this were required of us? It is not hanging down our heads like
Bul-Rushes, nor beating our Breasts, nor shedding our Tears, though in
abundance that will come near to a satisfaction for our Transgressions; not but
that where true Repentance is in the Heart, that (...) as the right word is,
and natural strength is waiting upon it, these external Humiliations will be,
yea and in some measure ought to be: But to make such account of them, or to
trust unto them, as if we had obliged God by them so as to have mercy upon us,
and that he could not in Justice deny us now the pardon of our sins (which is
the old Pelagian Error, and new Popery downright) this will really prove an
Aggravation of our sins, and make them exceeding sinful.

To this purpose hear what Mr. Bilney a faithful Martyr of Christ in the Reign
of Hen. 8th. once said of such kind of Doctrine as this is, if (says he) I had
heard such Preaching of Repentance in times past, I should utterly have fallen
into Desperation. And in his writing to Dr. Tonstall Bishop of London, he has
these words, viz.

To speak of one of your famous Men; After he had sharply inveighed against
Vice (wherein he did well, for it cannot be too much abhorred) he thus
concluded, behold, said he, thou have lien rotten in thine own Lusts, it may be
by the space of threescore years, even as a Beast in his own Dung, and will thou presume in one year to go forward toward Heaven, and that in thine Age, as
much as thou wentest backward from Heaven toward Hell in threescore years? Is
not this think you (says that good Martyr) a goodly Argument? is this the
Preaching of Repentance in the Name of Jesus? Or rather is it not to tread down
Christ with Antichrist 's Doctrine? For what other thing did he speak in
effect than that Christ died in vain for poor sinners? He will not (it seems by
this Preaching) be our Jesus or Savior, but we must make satisfaction for our
selves by our Repentance, else we shall perish eternally. Then does St. John
lie (quoth he) in saying, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of
the World; And in another place, His Blood cleanses us from all our sins, and
again, He is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, etc. Thus he,
like one that well understood the Mystery of the Gospel, and good it were, if
we did so all of us, that pretend to be Preachers of truth in this Generation.

These things considered, let not so high an esteem be set upon that Doctor, as
to Account him infallible, for it is certain, he was deceived, and he himself
did find it so before he died, as appears by his own confession on his
Deathbed. I am loath to say what has been written to me of him by a
Neighbour-Minister (who for his Learning and Piety is wortly of a due Regard)
as that he (the said Dr. Moulin) had some private ends and hints, and that he
had been prompted to this ill Office upon those Accounts. But this I will
affirm constantly, if after all this friendly warning that has been given to
those that tenaciously stick to his Opinions now since his Decease, and will
publicly Advance after him (a word that he commonly used) in his Errors, so
making them worse at the last than they were at the beginning, I say no more,
but Oculus ad finem, the coming of the Lord draws near, when every man's work
shall be made manifest, whether it be Wood, Hay, Stubble, or that which is
precious, and will endure the searching fire of Gods Spirit, which will one day
try every man's work of what sort it is.

And seeing that sundry Errors as well of the Church of Rome as of other false
Brethren have crept in among us, I have here produced several Arguments against
that unreasonable Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and though I kno' many learned
Authors have written already, in the Vindication of the Doctrine of our Church
against that of Rome, Insomuch that it may be thought what is here done, is but
actum agere, to repeat only the Arguments that have been formerly used; Yet
this I will be bold to assirm, that that old saying, nihil erit dictum quod non
dictum fuit prius, cannot here be objected against me. True, it is impossible
but we must sometimes take up the same Weapons to encounter our Enemies which
others have before used, yet may they be sharp'ned and furbish'd afresh, that
an insipid Crambe, shall not in the using them be here laid to my charge, nor
dull the edge of them. Yea and a new Weapon shall be here taken out of the
Armory of holy Scripture, that never was (so far as I can find) managed before
by any, which may prove as convincing (absit arrogantia) as any other.

The design of which little Tract is, according to the Title that is set before
it, to lay open the Falsehood and Absurdity of that grand Error, of
Transubstantiation, and because the Church of Rome has been a long time so
infatuated as to wrest the words of our Savior which he spoke of the Bread at
his last Supper, (viz. This is my Body) to make them speak that which be never
intended, but very little or not at all meddling with his other words concerning
the Cup, as well knowing the very reciting of them, would be a sufficient
Conviction of their Error; I shall therefore here deal with them at their own
weapon, and to that purpose will, at the very entrance, call upon my Reader, to
remember the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he spoke at his last Supper,
viz. This is my Body.

DU MOULIN'S Reflections REVERBERATED.
THE Design of this Treatise is to put a stop to the Carieer of one Mounsieur
Moulin, (I say not that Reverend Dr. Peter Moulin, Who is, As he well deserves
an Eminent Dignitary among us, but his unworthy Brother Lewis) who like Jehu
marches furiously here in our Nation out of his Road, venting his Paradoxes
not only against the Order and Discipline established in the Church of England,
But against the very Doctrine of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
should be dearer to us than our Lives.

It is Reported by some that he is a Scholar, and possibly they may have taken
his Dimensions in that kind from his Office that he held by the Title of
Usurpation in the University of Oxford, during the late Schism; But doubtless
his Pamphlet Entitled Moral Reflections upon the number of the Elect, was not
Penued at Athens. Sure I am, It did not spring from the sweet Fountain of
Israel, for whatsoever his Learning may otherwise be, he has not yet learned
Christ sufficiently to know the Truth, as it is in Jesus.

A Character has been given me of him in scriptis from London by a very good
hand which is as it here follows. This Lewis Du-Moulin is by Profession a
Civilian, by persuasion an Independent, a man of a Morose and insolent
Conversation, he was a History-Professor at Oxford in the times of the late
Troubles and Distractions. But being thrown out of his Desk at the happy Return
of our Peace, he is led away by a misguided Zeal, turns Malecontent, Peevish
and Froward; quarrelling with all good Order and Discipline, thinking himself
not enough out of Babylon unless he be out of himself; A man that ought to be
severely corrected for his Insolence and Folly, it being to be wished, the
Magistrate would take such Men under their Discipline, which will work a more
effectual Cure upon them, than the most Satirical Pen, though dipped in Gall, as
wise Generals punish mutinous Persons more than Thieves and Robbers. The Reason
(says my Friend) that makes me more severe with him is, because he has, since
I writ to you last set forth another Discourse under this Title, viz. The
Conformity of Discipline and Government among those who are commonly called
Independants to that of the Ancient Primitive Christians. You may guess of the
Book by the Title: It is not worth your Animadversion, nor my time to give you
any Rehearsal of it.

This is the Man with whom we have here to deal about his Moral Reflections
upon the number of the Elect (so he calls them) and as the man is, so is his
Work, wherein he advances (as his braving Transition is) on and on, without
any Order or Method, insomuch that whosoever he be that shall undertake him
shall have but as 'twere a Rope of Sand to hold by in following his Track: Only
it must be the Pages of his Book that are to be my Conduct, and the Exercise of
my Readers Patience, if he will give himself the trouble to peruse them.

Which Book of his, though I had it in my custody before I writ my Preface to
the Antidote being then at the Press (for I would not answer a matter until I
hear it or know it, That (as a wiser man than either he or I are ever like to
be, has said) would be Folly and Shame unto me) yet have I for born hitherto
to answer it particularly, because I hoped some other would have Reverberated
this Reflector according to his Desert before this time: And well might it have
been expected, seeing his hand has been so busy against every Man, not above
one in a million escaping the Virulency of his Pen, I supposed every Man's
should be against him. But since it is so that no man has hitherto appeared in
this Contract, but my self, albeit several Persons both Wise and Godly have
approved of that which I have already done in it, I shall now proceed further
to make his Folly manifest to all men, hoping that I may thereby do somewhat in
the service of my Master Jesus Christ for the Glory of his great Name. The good
Lord give his Blessing unto it, that the good People of God may be confirmed in
the Truth of the Gospel, and that this Unevangelical Doctor may have some sight
of his Folly also, who now sits Brooding upon his Error. And against whom I
confess I have a zealous Indignation, fearing Lenity in this case may be
imputed as a sin unto me.

First then to begin with the Title of his Book, he calls it Moral
Reflections upon the number of the Elect.

[Moral Reflections] Would any man that had Learning, Fear of God in him,
Christian Love or good Manners toward the Church of God have Reflected so
boldly upon the secret Counsels of the Almighty, as this peremptory Mounsieur
has done, by using this Term of Reflection in this case? I know the word has
of late obtained a Pass, and gone for current instead of Observations,
Considerations, etc. But it is so toto Coelo Excentrick, as we say, from God
that it cannot be used in the Sense it is here put to, without Blasphemy; Not
therefore to be passed by without a Reflection, or a Repercussion rather. To
Reflect, what is it but to Bend or Bow, or strike again? Flectere si nequeam,
etc.
And though our Rhetoric may sometimes lead us to this word in things of a
mere human Alloy, yet I think I may safely say no sober modest Author,
Christian, Jewish or Heathen did ever stretch it to such a height, as this
proud Dictator does, in giving a final Judgment upon things Divine that are
secret to us. And that which leads me to this considence is, because Cicero
that Prince of human Learning (if we may give any heed to a large and perfect
Index annexed to the four Tomes of his Works) did never so use it.

Let this Mounsieur then talk what he will of the Worth and Excellency of his
Subject, his Divinity (certainly) is very slender, that he dares thus rashly
more than ever any Man did presume to make Reflections upon Gods Infinite
Wisdom, in determining Gods eternal Election according to his Fancy, which is
above the reach of Men and Angels.

Nor will his Word Moral wherewith he would Polish his unhandsome Reflections
make them acceptable, rather it makes them seem more ugly. Will any man think
that his blunt, muddy Morals can either Penetrate or Illustrate that
inaccessible Light which no man has seen, or can see? or can he imagine that
his Morality will excuse his Blasphemy? It is somewhat I confess, that he did
not name the Elect here Gods Elect (as St. Paul does often in his Epistles)
though he cannot deny but that that must be his meaning. Yet (possibly) being
conscious to himself that he had been already too bold with God, he durst not
for shame advance so far, as to call them Gods Elect.

Nevertheless taking his words as they are rendered by him (impudently enough)
has he known the mind of the Lord? or has he been his Counselor? To know the
number of Gods Elect with a Reference to the number of those that are left to
Perish in their Sins? I could name a man, of whom this Puisny may learn, one
that had heard the Words of God (which may be called (...)) and knew the
knowledge of the most High, which passes Knowledge, and who saw the Vision of
the Almighty, yet made it a Question, Numb. 23.10.
Who can count the Dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?
Which he meant it is like, of the Elect of God, as his following words seem to
imply. But out of all doubt God promised Abraham Gen 22. That his Seed should
be as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand which is upon the Seashore
innumerable, showing him how to make his Account from things above, and from
things beneath, which might probably signify both Jews and Gentiles, for he
was to be the Father of many Nations (which must also be understood in a
spiritual Sense) what reckoning then can any man make of those that are without
number? But to be meddling thus with Gods numbering, it is such a Boldness that
is without Parallel.

Holy David would have taught him more Modesty when speaking of Gods Salvations
( P. 71.15.) he says, Non cognovi numeros ejus, confessing he knew not his
numbers, q. d. He had no skill in that kind of Arithmetic, such Knowledge was
too wonderful for him, it is high, he could not reach it. St. Austine Renders
it non cognovi Negotiationes ejus, meaning that he (the Prophet) knew not the
several ways of Gods dealing out his Salvations to the Children of men, the
Negotiations of his Grace and Mercy with the Souls of poor Sinners to bring
them to Heaven, he thought were not only secret but numberless. St. Jerome
thus, Non cognovi Literatunam ejus, he knew not a Letter in Gods Book of
Accounts wherein the number of the Elected is Enrolled, meaning, The Book of
Life was far above his Reading; yet this poor Illiterate Man, it seems knew
all, so that he could tell, as if he had taken out a Copy of the Account how
many were to be set at the last Day on the Judges right hand, and how many on
his left. Otherwise he would not have said his Reflections are proved plainly
by Scripture: Which proof if he can produce (for in all that he has yet
written there is no such Evidence) I shall hereafter be willing (as old as I
am) to go to his School and learn to cast up my Accounts better than I have
done, though I believe a man may learn better of the Soothsayer before
mentioned.

Three places of Scripture I know there are, but no more upon which he will
fasten, to prove his numbering right, all which are sufficiently proved in my
Antidote against him, to be heterogeneous from the Propositum in hand. What a
Doctor then have we here that has set forth a Book pretending that his
Reflections therein are proved plainly by Scripture-Evidence, when they have no
warrant from thence at all? And seeing that the spirit of God has not given
his Imprimatur unto it, the audacious Author well deserves to be smitten with
that Exprobration written Ezekiel. 13.7. Have thou not seen a vain Vision? And
have thou not spoken a lying Divination? Whereas thou say, the Lord says
it, albeit God has not spoken.

But what is it that he says is proved so plainly from Scripture-Evidence?
Why, that not above one in a hundred thousand, nay probably not above one in a
million from Adam down to our Times shall be saved. See how punctual this
French Calculator is in his Accounts: Surely a man would think our times were
much beholden to him, that we are not brought into the same Condemnation with
those before us: But let us not be too hasty to catch at his Charity, nor to
fear his Fury. At his first onset (to speak of his Fury) he is like a true
Frenchman very fierce, but he does but hide his Tallons, for he will, we shall
see, open them again, and gripe us to death everlasting as much as others.

And what is the Reason think ye, that he does so curtal his Sentence of death
here in his Title, which he after enlarges even to the day of Judgment?
Possibly this Mounsieur may be of their mind, who held that there were no more
of Mankind to be saved, than might suffice to sill up the vacant places in
Heaven, from which the Angels who kept not their first Estate, but left their
own Habitation, fell down to Hell: or it may be he is somewhat near of kin to
the ancient Gnostics, who were of opinion that none were saved, but all went
to Hell, till the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, wherein it was from Heaven
Revealed, This is my Beloved Son, Hear him.

A man might here indulge himself with too much Mirth, but it is better in this
case to be serious. That which did put him upon this simpring and mincing his
number in the Title Page, which in his Book he utters with open mouth, was it
may be his fear of displeasing his own party, lest they might suppose he had a
hard opinion also of them for the major part of them, or possible he donbted he
should exasperate the whole World about him, if he had in his title extended
his uncharitable Censure to the full length, and that thereupon his Book might
prima facie have been cast aside with a quis legit haec? Nemo, hercule nemo, or
have vanished like a Cacodaemon or Spectrum quite out of sight, or into Grocers
Shops for wast paper, as it has been said of another like unto it in Thuris,
piperisve cucullos.

In short, never was there man that wrote at the rate, as this man has
written. How great a Scandal (alas) has he brought upon the Christian
Profession? For should this be received without a public Contradiction, as a
Doctrine of Truth among us, viz. That not above one in a Million shall be
saved, our Religion would be the most uncomfortable Religion of any in the
World, and who among those that are Aliens from it, will ever be persuaded to
be Converts unto it?

Nay then may Satan well insult, and with triumphant Boastings cry out with a
shout, O Christ, where is thy Victory; what, is the Blood of God, spent for the
Salvation of the world, become of so little value that so small inconsiderable
number can be saved by it? Thou, O Christ art called (...), and (...), and I
know not what, but a poor Prince, and a weak Captain have thou proved thy self
to be, when I like a Stout and Valiant Champion indeed have brought the
greatest number of those, for whose sake thou did enter the field against me,
under my Command, not above one in a million but shall for ever be subject unto
me, and consequently never to be delivered from everlasting Destruction.
Horrendum dictu! Never, O dear Christians, never let our Souls enter into the
secrets of this man, nor be Baptized with the Baptism that he is Baptized with.

Somewhat we may discern by him of the miserable Fruits, which the late Schism
and Rebellion brought forth amongst us, that such as he should be preferred
then to a place of Dignity in one of our Universities, where he might be the
more able cum privilegio, to do mischief by his whimsical Opinions. However I
am glad it is not any of our Nation that has run into this worst kind of
Antichristianism, but one that has been an Intruder amongst us.

While men slept in those days the Enemy, we see, has been busy to sow his
Tares, yet may these Tares be now plucked up without any hurt to the good Corn,
yea very much would it be to the advantage of it, if they were quite removed.
And therefore since this Intruder has disobliged our Nation, yea goes on
still to disoblige it more and more, it were to be wished that he had his Pass
given him to return again to his own Country with shame, for there is no
reason he should stay longer to eat of our Bread or abide in our Nation, as he
has by his own Confession upwards of fifty years, and yet be so unworthy of
this Privilege by his dissenting from us both in the Doctrine and Discipline of
our Church, creating thereby Troubles to us while we are here in this World,
and sending us all for the most part packing to Holl, when we depart out of it.

At least I could wish that his Works may have the same Law put in force upon
them, as the Works and Wares of Aliens are to have by the Statute of the 14th.
and 15. of Hen. 8th. viz. that special Marks be set upon them, to prevent the
Fraud and other worse Inconveniences that may arise unto us by them.

I have done with his Title, upon which I confess I have insisted too long, but
that what has been here written of it, may be joined with that which hereafter
follows in the Refutation of this uncharitable man's absurd Opinion.

Before I come to his Book there are also some parts of his Epistle to be
Reflected upon and to be Reverberated too for that Religious Persons sake to
whom he Dedicates his Book, and for the sake of all others who may have the
hard hap, as I have had, to Read it.

First I find no fault with Dedicating his Book to an Honorable Lady, one that
excels in Piety, knowledge of and Love to Sacred Things (as his words are)
whom if he had called his Elect Lady, it had been pertinent to his purpose, for
(surely) he could not but account her as one chosen out of his millions etc.
Let such Persons, whom the King delights to honor, have all that Honor
given them which is their due, and when by their exemplary Piety they bring a
more than ordinary Luster upon Religion, God himself has promised to honor
them likewise: Well then may we that are Ministers of the Gospel by all good
ways and means endeavor without flattery to do the same. This man (I do not
call him Minister of the Gospel for that it seems he is not) but whatsoever he
be, he has so done by his Dedication, and I commend him for it. It is pity he
did not set her name unto it as well as her Title. She is a stranger unto me,
one of whom I never before heard, though I have made some inquiry of Persons
about me.

But though I commend him in his design of Dedicating, I cannot approve of all
that he has written in it. He humbly begs to have leave to lay his Treatise at
her Honors Feet for Protection, this methinks sounds not well, and signifies
a fear in him (as well there might) that he failed in his undertaking. Why else
does he thus fall a begging? when if his Treatise be (as it should be)
according to Truth, he needs no such protection of it, for no doubt God would
protect him in it, and the whole Church of God would stand by him against me
and all others that should except against it. But if otherwise it agree not
with the Standard of Truth, that is, the holy word of God, who will not say
neither he nor it deserves any Protection at all, what then is the matter,
trow? that he so earnestly begs Protection? Does the man fear he shall be
knocked on the head that he thus seeks for Protection? or will his Treatise be
safer at her Honors Feet, than it would be upon a Stationers Stall? The feet
indeed is the sit place for it, that is, to be trodden upon, or spurned
into the fire rather than to be protected, being able to do much hurt to those
that shall read it or hear it.

Had he Dedicated his Book to his good Brother, or to some other that may be
better able than himself to discern the dishonor which he does to our Lord
Jesus Christ and his Gospel by it, he might not have possibly been in danger
thereupon to have fallen into the number of those Millions whom he so much
condemns; which I fear, without a serious Reflection upon himself and his
Works, such as may through Grace lead him to Repentance for it, he will find to
be his Portion in the end to his smart and sorrow.

Non obstante (as I have said already) I dislike not his Zeal in awakening the
World out of that sluggish Lethargy to which all, as he says, are more or less
inclined; Let the Thunder and Lightning of Sinai be ratled in the Ears, and
darted into the Eyes of secure impenitent sinners, let the Terrors of the Law
be as Magormissabib, formido circumquaque, dreadful to them round about, let
the Judgment to come be displayed before them with all the terrifying
Appearances of it. This indeed being according to the form of found words which
the Spirit of God in Scripture has set us in our Preaching, may do some good,
as it has done to many desperate sinners in opening their Eyes, and turning
them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God. But it is a
false Allarm that this man sounds to that purpose when he tells the World
that not above one in a hundred thousand, nay probably not above one in a
Million shall be saved. This is not to be as a Schoolmaster to drive us to
Christ, but rather as a Devil to scare us from him. This is the Echo rather of
the Bottomless Pit, the Reverberation that arises from the deep Caverns of
Hell, enough to make men run headlong into Desparation, or into Athiesm, or at
least into Epicurism and greater Dissoluteness in their Lives; Neither indeed
can any other be expected, when the mercies of God, which have always been
proclaimed to be infinite, are so straightened, (...) 1 Pet. 1.19.
and the precious honorable Blood of the Lamb sufficient to save all the
World, is made of so little reckoning.

A good Doctrine would this be where that Antichristian Tenet is received as an
Evangelical Truth, viz. that men shall be justified by their own Righteousness,
and saved by their own Works, for then well may it be said, not one in a
Million, nay not one in all the World from Adam down to the last man that shall
spring from that sinful Root shall ever be saved, well may the Church of Rome
now sing their Jo Paean, and well may the Quakers that frantic Sect join in
it, For this man has done all their work for them.

But to go on with his Dedication. He is (it seems by his words) at the end of
his Stage, even as I am, I confess, at the end of mine, and it will concern us
both therefore to be very wary how we get off from it. No necessity (though)
was there for him before his Exit to gaze about for a Plaudite by proclaiming
publicly that it is the common Entertainment he allows himself to meditate
upon his Leaving the Stage. Let him on Gods name employ his Wisdom (if he have
any) in considering his latter end, and his Appearance before the great God,
and God Almighty grant that I also may do the like. Nevertheless when I look
upon his Boldness in reflecting upon Gods Arcana Imperii, I am afraid he is not
so wise as he should be in that matter of his Departure, but that either the
thought of his latter end was then the latter end of his thought, or if his
thoughts did run to the end of his Stage, his precipitant Fancy did so
outrun them, that he could hardly reach with Comfort to the end of his Race.
And as for others, better surely were it for us, who are ready to be unclothed
(as the Apostle's word is) to reflect upon our selves by a serious Examination
of our Hearts, Lives and Opinions, then to be Astonished with the Stupidity and
profound Security of others, which I confess is much to be lamented too
wheresoever it is. But for him to boast thus of himself, and at the same time
to condemn the gross of Mankind (as he impudently calls it) for their
Negligence in that matter, wherein he would have us believe he himself
excels, what is this but Pharisaism in a high degree.

All their thoughts and bustle (he says) amount only to this to pursue the
Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, and to advance
their carnal Interests in the World, as if there were nothing more to hope for
or to fear, etc. which he applies not only to Heathens, but to those that are
born in a Christian World, that are Educated and Bred up in the Truths of the
Gospel, in whom he says this Insensibleness is inexcuseable.

See I beseech (good Readers) what a Censor morum this doughty Doctor is and
how Arrogant, in that he will dare to usurp a divine Power thus by entering into
the Hearts of men, and to know all their Thoughts; What knows he but that a
great multitude of those whom he accounts insensible may have as great a sense
of sin at some time or other in their Souls and sorrow for it, as he himself
has? Yea and though they make not so great a bustle in the World about it as
he does, yet may their sorrow be more after a godly sort. For him, when I hear
what carefulness there is in him to amend his Errors, what Apology he can make
for himself about them, what Indignation he has against his own Heart for
conceiving them, when I hear of these and the other effects of godly sorrow to
be in him, I will rejoice and praise God for the Grace that is given him, but
till then I must say he has exceedingly sinned against God, and let him be
sure his sin will find him out.

In the mean while when he says all their thoughts and bustle amount only to
this, to pursue the Lusts of the Flesh, etc. and to advance their carnal
Interests in this World, as if there were nothing more to hope for, or to fear:
On the other side the Gulf which all must shoot, I would know of him what he
means thereby, would he have men to neglect their Callings whereto God has
called them, and wherein, by the Apostles Rule, they are to abide with God,
otherwise not to eat? Men that are wise would say, the more Noise and Bustle
men make in the World by their Diligence and Industry in their Callings, the
more are they to be commended, provided that they keep themselves within due
Bounds, especially that they neglect not the Vnum necessarium, the one thing
needful: For whereas God commands us to serve him, he allows us also to serve
our selves, nay more, by serving our selves in a holy conscientious Use of Gods
Blessings, and by following our Callings in Obedience to his Commands, God
accounts himself to be served too. Col. 3.24.
Servants (says St. Pauly in serving their Masters diligently, serve the Lord
Christ, they wrought for me, says the Lord ( Ezekiel. 29.20.) when it was their
own Interests and Advantages they aimed at in their Bustle which they made. If
then this be the bustle which he means, God will certainly in mercy pay wages
for it, notwithstanding the bustling of this foolish man.

Or would he have men cast off their near and dear Relations so as to take no
care for them contrary to the will of God often revealed in Scripture? This
were a bustle indeed that would overthrow all natural Affection, and make men
worse than brute Creatures. One of these I guess he does mean by his writing at
this uncharitable rate, more like a Judge than one that shall be judged among
other men.

Let him examine all the Examples of Holy Men, whose Praise is upon Record in
the Book of God, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, etc. Were they not all diligent
in their particular Callings? Were they not all tenderly affected toward their
natural Relations, Wives and Children? Yet no man will say that their care of
their own eternal Salvation was less'ned thereby; And if the gross of mankind
(as he like a proud Pharisee calls the major part of the World of men) do the
same now as those Patriarchs and other holy Men did, with what face can he say
that all their Thoughts and Bustle amount only to this, to pursue the Lusts of
the Flesh, etc. and to advance their carnal Interests in this World, etc?
Rather does not an Anabaptistical Spirit haunt and pursue this man, which has
put him upon these Whymsies to account all that is done by men in the World but
a vain Bustle, unless it be (forsooth) licensod by his magisterial Fiat? No
Prince (if at least he will acknowledge any) shall go to War against an
encroaching and enraged Enemy, but he will call it a Bustle, no Merchant shall
Traffic with any Foreign Nation, but it shall be a Bustle, no Tradesman tend
his Shop without a Bustle, no Artificer practice his Scill, but it is a Bustle,
no shepherd look after the state of his Flocks without a Bustle, no Rustic
Till his Ground, sow his Corn, gather in his Harvest, carry it to Market, but
it must be a Bustle, no Husband take care for the things of this World how he
may please his Wife, nor no Wise take care for the things of this World how she
may please her Husband, but all this must be a bustling to pursue the Lusts of
the Flesh, etc. and to advance carnal Interests in this World. How this Bustler
can be able to stand with confidence before men in this World, when he has
been thus pragmatical in stretching beyond his Last, I know not, and how he
will able to stand in the Judgment at the last Day, let him look to it betimes
before it be too late.

It was said before we should go on with his Dedication, but I doubt I go too
far, making the Porch too big for the Building that is to follow one Reflection
therefore and no more shall be here made upon some other words in his Epistle
Dedicatory.

You say indeed that there are some Divines very sincere and upright, etc. that
are apt to believe that the Mercies of God are of a vast Extent, far beyond our
possibility of finding out. And why apt to believe? as if they did not yet
really believe this; Surely if they be good Divines instructed unto the Kingdom
of Heaven, they do fully believe that the Mercies of God (I will not say as you
say, are of a vast Extent, that is a word too much below the Height of this
Divine Subject, but they do believe they) are infinite, and that the Dimensions
thereof are incomprehensible, far beyond (as you say) our possibility of
finding out: This questionless they believe, and do not you (Sir) believe so
too? If you do not (which your words imply) you are so far from being a Sincere
and Upright Christian, that intruth you are no Christian at all, but a
downright Enemy to God and his Son Jesus Christ: If you do believe it, why do
you cast off those sincere Divines so slightly by saying There are some others
whose Reasons appear more strong and sinewy to you, and who allege Scripture
for their Opinion, that conclude the Mercy of God is to be restrained, to a
fewer number.

[The Mercy of God] was there ever man that dallyed thus with the glorious
Attribute of God? He spoke before of the Mercies of God, as of many wherein he
did well, for they are indeed without number: But now being about to make Gods
Mercies of a less Extent, the Plurality thereof would not agree so well with
his Fancy, therefore he speaks of them now in a diminutive Sense: Whereas had
he written like a Scholar, he would have made the Correspondency in the latter
Branch exactly according to the former and have called them, as they are, the
Mercies of God, nor did he before make mention of any number to whom the
Mercies of God should have been extended, only now the small number which ran
in his mind has made him to vary his words, and to bring them down to Nonsense.

Having stayed thus long in the Portal, it is now time to enter into the
Building, where instead of Mercy being built up, as the good Psalmist foretold
it should, and that for ever, we shall find it miserably broken down, which
will be but a cold Entertainment for my Reader who has his hope in Gods mercy,
only he shall see it here repaired in some measure, and the Ruins of it,
removed out of his sight, that his hope in it may be strengthened yet more and
more.

The Reflector begins here again with his Title of Moral Reflections upon the
number of the Elect, as if he were not ashamed of it, but would stand to it
like a Valiant Man, whereas it will appear his Boldness is but dawbed over with
Impudency, nor will his shuffling excuse his Impudence by telling the world
what others say of this unmerciful Tenet; For that which they say, and they say
as he writes, pretending as if he himself had nothing to say to it, he affirms
it to be his own Judgment in the following parts of his Discourse, surpassing
all that ever I heard of, or I think any man else in uncharitable judging,
declaring his mind plainly that not above one in a Million shall be saved.

First, he begins with the opinions of others that differ from him, giving his
sense of them, naming one Caelius Secundus Curio, an Author, I confess, that I
am not acquainted with, whose Opinion, though he dislikes it, is most Orthodox,
and is the same which I shall here maintain against this Reflector, and against
the World, viz. That the number of those that shall be saved is, in all
probability, much greater than the number of those that shall be Damned.

But as for that of Zuinglius, whom he names also, if that be true which he
writes of him, viz. that the number of the Saved and the Damned is equal, just
as many of the one, as of the other, Zuinglius.
which he and his followers would prove by certain Parabolical Allusions and
Semblances that are not Argumentative, I shall let it pass, as unworthy of any
Regard.

Those Arguments of the first sort, viz. Caelius, etc. that are most pertinent
to the matter in hand, though this Reflector takes no notice of them or but
very little, I shall briefly recollect and render an Account of them; First,

The Law in its greatest Rigor says that God punishes but to the third and
fourth Generation, but he shows Mercy to a thousand Generations, Thus they.

And will not you Mr. Reflector say so too? If you will not, you must fall
under the Curse threatened by the Holy Ghost (Rev. 22.) viz. God will take your
Part out of the Book of Life, i.e. Cast you out of his Church, so that you
shall be incapable of any of the Blessings belonging to it: If you will say
thus, the Thousands to whom God will show Mercy would have sounded better under
your Pen, than that which you have writ of the number of those that shall be
Damned.

And here I cannot but insert what a learned and good Divine has writ to me
when he saw my Antidote against your Book. we (says he) seldom or never (in
sacred Pages) meet with the terrifying number of the Damned particularly summed
up, but of the Happy we find Rev. 7. such precise numbers mentioned. And some
thousands of years before that, it is written God had Mercy in store for
thousands of them that loved him and kept his Commandments.

This, in truth, is the Spirit that has prevailed among us here in this our
Church, it being well known that the Genius (if I may so call it) of our Nation
has always more inclined to Mercy than to Rigor, and has been apt to
interpret the Law of God as well as the Law of our Land rather for the Comfort
and Benefit of Mankind, where such a Construction may upon good terms be
allowed, then for their Ruin and Destruction. I know not (Mounsieur) what has
been predominant with you in other parts of the World. But it is you and such
as you are that have joined with the Roman Faction against us to create
Disturbances among us, and to lead captive silly People into many absurd Errors
which have brought a Cloud over all our Excellency, and have eclipsed that
glory of Truth and Peace, which but for you would, long ere this time, have
dwelt in our Land.

You go on to tell us what they say (viz. Caelius, etc.) That the Mercies of
God are of a large Extent, that God is slow to Anger. ready to Pardon and show
Mercy, that he forgives sins of the deepest Dye, and that Calvin remarking upon
the words which God speaks ( Ex. 34.) of his forgiving Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin that God thereby wonderfully advances the greatness of his own Mercies,
and that he would have us to know, he Pardons not only little Sins, but also
the most Enormous, and that God would not command us to say Forgive us our
sins, if he had not an intention to forgive them; for he did not make that
Command to send us away from him (as you impiously say) like Fools as we came.
Yet is your Sarcasme an Argument against you.

All which that they say of this matter, and much more that you add is true,
and which all good People who believe there is a God, will say. How dare you
then to contradict it by saying, not above one in a Million shall ever by these
Infinite Mercies come to Heaven? Would any man but you having all these
Comfortable Promises of Mercy and Overtures of Grace under your Eye, conclude
expressly for the Execution of Gods Wrath to the uttermost upon his poor
Creatures that have sinned against him?

But that you after say, the Arguments for your Opinion are incomparably more
strong and nervous (how strong they are we shall see hereafter.)

In the mean time I must tell you, these Premises (though you slight them as
being not Syncategorical with your Position) yet are they certainly against
you, and make for the Truth.

You say further that they mightily Press, (As all good Christians will) the
Infinite Price and Value of the Merit, Death and Satisfaction and Redemption of
Jesus Christ, which is not only efficacious to Pardon (you should rather have
said to obtain Pardon for) an Infinity (that is your word) of sins both for
their number, and their Enormity, but also for an Infinity of men. That it is
extremely to lessen the ends, for which Jesus Christ came into the World, to
admit, that he came only to Redeem one man of a Million. That it is not to be
believed that Jesus Christ at the right hand of his Father does intercede but
for one of a hundred thousand of all mankind. What you say to all this, we
shall see hereafter.

They do likewise (say you) mightily urge this Consideration that since none
are in a State of Damnation, but who are under a perpetual weeping, wailing,
and gnashing of Teeth, and an eternal Horror of Conscience for their past
Offenses, it cannot rationally be affirmed of so many millions of Heathen
Children that dyed before they came to the use and exercise of Reason: And if
God be merciful to these (as who can determine the contrary) it would be
ridiculous (such is your word, as if you had a mind to laugh at God) that God
has reserved their Parents alive, who have the use of Reason, to damn them to
all eternity; what you will say to all this also would be considered, for none
of all these things move you.

Moreover who will believe (say they) that God so loved the World, or that he
sent his Son into the World, not to condemn it, but that it might be saved by
him, That Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World, and
that he being the Bread of Life, gave himself to the World to give Life to it,
etc. who will believe that by the World, we must understand but one or two
Persons among I know not how many thousands or millions in the World? And where
is that love toward the World, to let it walk, that is to say perish in its
own ways?

All this and much more is alleged by that Orthodox Evangelical Party against
your destructive Opinion, as for that other which makes the number equal
between the Elect and Reprobate, as I have said, I meddle not with it. And you
Mr. Reflector had done better if you had made no mention of it at all: For to
what purpose do you recite it, and their Arguments for it, when you may know it
is not at this time of any Account, scarce a word spoken of it among any,
unless it be with Contempt? But you were willing to muster up your Enemies, and
drive them before you altogether promiscuously like a brave man at Arms, or
rather like that Pugnacissimum Animal, as it is said of the Gander, Armata
elidere Manu, to crush them altogether, as it were with one gripe.

Two and twenty of their Forces you have reckoned up Paragraphically with words
at length and with figures too, enough to make your Valor famous in conquering
them. And what is it that you do against such a Troop? It is methinks somewhat
like to that which the man did against the learned Cardinal with two words only
quite confuting him, viz. Mentiris Bellarmine. So say you here, but for all
this, I like better those that are on my side, than those that are against me.

So that in effect it is your own poor narrow Soul that must sway the Balance
against all the Reason that can be produced, and against all the Whimsies too
of Zuinglius and his Followers.

If this be not childish and absurd, what is? Children, we know, are wont to
say, but for all that, I will do what I list; or as Scolds say, for all this, I
will have it as I please. The word, it is true, has been used in some Cases to
good purpose, but never by Scholars in their Disputations, especially when
Arguments have been multiplied against them.

You come at length to show what your Party can do in your Opinion, but do it
not. They do you say most easily enervate and weaken all the Arguments of those
who hold the opinion of Caelius Curio Secundus, i. e. That the major part of
mankind shall be saved; And how do they so?

They say first, if we ought not to be too ingenious to throw men into a
Despair of their Salvation, so we ought not to lull them asleep in the depth of
security by a false Persuasion that they shall be saved.

First I must here tell you it is not your word, they say, will excuse your
Nonsense, and what is it that they say which you do not say? But would any man
undertake such a weighty Matter as this is and manage it no better? That which
you offer in the first place should be (as your vaunting words are) most strong
and nervous; But how is it so, when it fails both in Sense and Reason? We ought
not, you say, to be too ingenious to throw men into Despair, and you ought to
be so ingenuous now to acknowledge your Folly, when it is made known unto you.
For tell me sadly, do you account it a Trick of Wit to cast men into Despair of
their Salvation? I shall not charge this upon you (though your word signifies
so much) no nor will you (I believe) nor will any of your Party pretend unto
it, what a stout Champion then are you to begin thus with Nonsense? You will
say possibly, it is but a Typographical Eslip, the word here should be
Ingenuous, but the Printer here failed, yet neither will this help you, for
what ingenuity or goodness of Nature can there be to do the Devils Work? you
should have said If we ought not to be too severe in that kind, this will be
easily granted you; for doubtless it is the most uncomfortable Office in the
World to offend in such a Severity, and most impious. But by shunning such a
Severity we ought not you say to lull men asleep by a false persuasion that
they shall be saved. And what Reason is here; Is there any necessity that he
that shunneth the one must unavoidably do the other? Thus far I will consent
unto you in this Case, whosoever he be that shall do his endeavor to lull men
asleep in the depth of Security by a false persuasion that they shall be saved,
he is in danger himself of Eternal Damnation.

But you make your Argument here to be like unto that which has been called by
Logicians Argumentum Crocodilinum, a Dilemma.
for as the Crocodile if you follow him will lead you into his Den, i. e. into
the River Nilus, if you fly from him, he will pursue you, till he have fastened
upon you, so do you, if we consent unto your Doctrine, you will lead us into a
damnable Snare, where we shall be in danger to make men run into Despair, if we
shun you, you will judge us as the Authors of men's Condemnation in lulling them
asleep, etc. what then shall we that are Ministers of the Gospel do who are
chiefly concerned in this matter? The best is, not to regard your vain words,
but seeing the word of Reconciliation is committed to us, let us then, as the
Ambassadors of Christ, beseech poor Sinners still to be reconciled to God; if
this will lull them asleep, etc. we cannot help it, a necessity is laid upon
us, and woe will be to us, if we Preach not the Gospel; We are not then to
neglect our own Duty, because of the Misconstruction that others may make of
our Ministry, the Consequents that may follow thereupon are to be deferred to
the Judgment and Award of Almighty God who will order the whole matter for his
own Glory, as seems good unto him.

Thus did St. Paul in another the like Case, though he had in 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.3.
written of the sudden coming of the Lord, yet when he perceived that some were
like to take occasion thereby to make the World believe that the day of Christ
was then at hand, that so they might, as it is probable, carry on a pernicious
Design against the whole Doctrine of the Gospel, he thereupon tells them
plainly in his second Epistle that that day should not come, (2 Thessalonians. 2.2, 3.)
before such and such things that he there mentions were first come to pass: He
feared not, it seems, least he should give occasion of a carnal Security to
presumptuous Sinners (as it is here objected) by his writing of the Protraction
of the great Day, but leaves that to their Peril, who shall pervert his words
and turn them to such a sinister Sense, declaring the mind of God clearly
without casting such scruples as you do. And this may be a sufficient warrant,
once for all, unto us to speak freely of Gods Grace and Goodness to the World,
not regarding what wicked Persons deluded by the Devil may suggest unto
themselves thereby.

Thus Mr. Reflector you see your first Allegation is here torn in pieces. The
rest that follow are so far from being weighty, strong and sinewy, that they
are as light as a feather. So in truth a man may well account of them, for
having already driven you from your strongest hold, I mean, the holy Scripture,
which you may find in my Antidote set forth against you, I shall make little
reckoning of any thing else that you can say, your outworks I mean may be
easily thrown down.

But because I find I shall be tedious to my self and others if I should Trace
you, as I have begun, I shall choose in the Sequel to join Issue with you in a
more succinct Manner, and take down your Sophistry and mounting Confidence at
the first bound of them; not that I intend to gather up all the Fragments of
your Discourse to give my Reader a taste of them, for that would be nauseous,
but to save my self the labor, and to ease him of his trouble in tumbling over
your stuff, which you have heaped together, I shall in that manner as aforesaid
make my Addresses unto you V. G.

Reflector.

Adam and Eve's Salvation is much what the same with that of Solomon's, and both
equally probable, though they are not certainly known and revealed,

Answer.

Not certainly known and revealed? no more is the Salvation of Seth, Enos,
Cainan, etc. nor many of those that follow who are upon Record for holy Persons
though their Obedience to Gods Law was not so exact, as the Law did require.
But seeing the Salvation of our first Parents is here brought into Question by
you, I shall show you somewhat concerning them, which it seems you know not.

To say nothing of what is written of Adam ( Luke 3.38.) where he is said to be
(...) of God, for as Cain is said to be (1 John 3.12.) (...) of the wicked one
the Devil as belonging to him, so is Adam (...) of God, as belonging not only
to his Creation (for so do all Creatures, even the Devils) but to his Election
of Grace.

It is written of Adam ( Genesis 3.20.) that after his Fall and Gods Displeasure
made known unto him for it, immediately Adam called his Wives name Eve, Because
she was to be the Mother of all living. The sense whereof I take to be this
(with submission to better Judgments,) Adam by Faith here lays hold upon the
Promise of Gods Grace. And he does it in the only way and manner that he could
have at that time to give an Evidence of his Faith, that is, in calling his
Wife by a new name, a name which he had not before given her, when the Lord God
brought her first unto him; For he now when the Sentence of Death was past upon
him, calls her name Eve, which signifies Life (whereas before he had only
called her Woman, as being one, whom he was to own above all other Creatures
for the lovely and beloved Consort of his Life) implying doubtless that though
he had been in danger through his sin, to die in the loss of Gods Favor for
ever, yet was he now fully persuaded by the gracious Indulgence of God unto him
in the Seed of the Woman that not he himself alone and his Wife should live,
but his Posterity also should be a living Posterity, and that his Wife should
be Mother of him among them, by whom the Sentence of Death was to be Reversed,
and Life and Immortality to be again brought to light, for, says Moses, She
was to be the Mother of all living.

That this sense may be received, let it be considered, if this were not the
Intent of Moses in this place, viz. to give notice hereby of Adams
Restipulation to the new Covenant, here would be a strange Incongruity between
these words and those immediately before: There had God severely threatened to
punish Adam all the days of his life with sorrow upon sorrow for his
Disobedience, and that he should in the end be reduced to his Dust from whence
he was taken. Now (surely) to a man that was exalted to so great an Honor as
Adam was in his Creation, the sound of these words must needs be very terrible,
and it might well be expected that at the first hearing them, somewhat should
have appeared of Adams Astonishment, and bewailing his Misery, but we find no
such matter here at all to be mentioned.

What then? Is all this Thunder and Lightning from Heaven upon him slighted,
and made of no Account? So it should seem, if these words of Adam concerning
his Wife have no coherence with the former, but do only show a kind of
Uxoriousness in him toward his Wife. But away with such vain conceits, there
is certainly that here added which may well be construed as a due Sequel of the
former proceedings of God with Adam.

For when God had done pronouncing his righteous Judgment, what should this
poor Malefactor do? Not (certainly) as Cain after him did, cry out desperately,
my Punishment is greater than I can bear, but without delay close in with God's
Mercy in the promised Seed.

Here therefore in order thereto is a Description of his Considence in Gods
goodness purposely so interserted by Moses, to show (as has been said) the
lively Faith of Adam in laying hold upon Gods preceding Promise. For though it
is to be presumed, he did humble himself greatly before God for his sin, yet is
not that so much regarded by the Spirit of God, as this his confident cleaving
to the Covenant of Gods grace, that so the Church may take notice hereby that
this Covenant was at first mutually agreed upon between God and Adam, and
consequently that all Mankind to the end of the World who are interessed in it
must be obliged to the conditions of it: For the Act and Deed of the first
Covenanter (who was the representative General of all that came after him in
this Case, as well as in the other of the former Covenant) was ipso facto
obligatory in their several Generations, according to the form and Manner,
Force and Virtue of all other Covenants that are usual now adays in the World
of the like sort and nature.

If this then be the true sense of this Scripture (as I believe it is, and will
be so accounted by the Church of God throughtout the World,) viz. that our
first Parents did in this manner mutually consent with God in the Covenant of
grace, what an uncharitable man are you to doubt of their Salvation? especially
when (as it appears in the verse following) upon their submission and
consenting to this new Covenant, God does immediately also take care of these
his new Covenant Servants that they may be clothed (as 'twere) with his Livery,
that their Bodies may be preserved from Shame and Violence, and that they might
know thereby that the Garment of his Righteousness, whom those Beasts (with
whose skins they were clad) did typifie, would do their Souls more good, than
the Fig Leaves of their own Righteousness could, with all their patching be
able to do.

Reflector.

The Salvation of Solomon is much-what like to that of Adam and Eve's, and both
equally probable though not certainly known and revealed.

Answer.

Nothing will please you I see but what agrees with your Fancy. You Question
here the Salvation of Solomon, because it is not Revealed; As if all Persons
mentioned in Scripture must have such a Revelation of their Eternal Happy
Estate there set down, else you may be at your liberty to judge of them as you
please. It is true much is written of Solomon's Defection; But so there is of
Noah's Drunkenness as it is called, of Lot's Incest, of Judah's Incontinency,
of Reubens Desiling his Fathers Bed, of Simeon's and Levi's Cruelty, of King
Asa his Rage against the Seer who came to him with a Message from the Lord,
etc. But little or nothing is written of their Repentance before they died, yet
will no man be so rash as to doubt of their Salvation: Why should you then or
your Accomplices be so peremptory as to cast a scruple about the Salvation of
Solomon? Cannot you be contented with that which is written of him, Favoris
Gratia, but you must have a damnable sling at him, as if he were hovering
between Heaven and Hell? But how else could you maintain your absurd Paradox of
your hundred Thousands and Millions of Men that shall perish in their sins, in
comparison of one that shall be saved?

We read Joh. 13.1. whom the Lord loves, he loves to the end; and do we not
read also again and again that the Lord loved Solomon. 2 Samuel 12.24. Neh.
13.26. yea that this Love was confirmed unto him by the best Assurance that
could be given him, viz. propter Jehovam, the Lord loved him for the Lords
sake, that is, for Christ the Messiah's sake, in whom all Gods Elect from the
beginning of the World to the end, are beloved with an everlasting love. Did
God choose him out to be one of his Actuaries of his public Records to his
Church, viz. the Book of the Proverbs, the Book of Ecclesiastes, or the
Preacher, the Book of the Canticles, that pure Caelestial Epithalamum, or
Marriage Song, and of two of the Psalms (as the Title of them signifies,) viz.
Ps. 72. and Ps. 127. And can it be probably thought that he should be dignified
in this high Degree, if he had been no better than a wretched Castaway in Gods
eternal Purpose? What, were there not Heirs enough of everlasting Salvation to
be inspired by the Holy Ghost for the office of a public Notary of Heaven, but
one must be taken from among the Bondslaves of Hell to make up the number? Was
he a Preacher sent of God, and was not one of his Books called Ecclesiastes his
Recantation Sermon which he writ in his old age when he took a more serious
view of his bypast Life, wherein among other his Follies he shows his
Abhorrency of his being misled by Women.

I find (says he) more bitter than Death the Woman whose Heart is Snares and
Nets, Eccles. 7.26.
and her Hands as Bands; Implying that though Death be bitter, yet he had
rather die than be entangled again in the Snares of a whorish Woman. Which
option may well be justified, if we consider the Aggravations of this sin, as
they are rendered by a good Interpreter, Bishop R.
one of a Thousand, and a right Reverend Preacher among us in our Church, whose
words are these, viz. They (that is wicked Harlots) are more bitter than Death)
more pernicious, and bring more heavy Miseries with them. We read of the
Bitterness of Death 1 Samuel 15.32. And of a worse Bitterness, the end of a
strange Woman is bitter, etc. and her steps take hold of Hell, Pro. 5.4.5.

Death may be sweetued and sanctified, made a welcome and desirable thing to a
Believer, 1 Cor. 15. But the Bitterness of Hell is incurable; Death may be
honorable, to die in a good Cause (as our King Charles the Martyr comforted
himself in his Death) to die in a good old Age, to go to the Grave in Peace,
lamented, desired, with the sweet savor of a holy Life, and many good Works to
follow one. But to consume and putrify alive under a Tabes of Impure Lusts, to
shipwreck a man's Honor, ruin his Estate, shorten his years, consume his
Flesh, rot his Bones, put a Hell into his Conscience, to bury his Name, his
Substance, his Soul, his Carcass, in the Bosom of a Harlot, This is a
Bitterness beyond that of Death.

This now is that which Solomon here means and complains of. And whether this
be a sound of Repentance, or no, judge you; And if your judgment be of any
value, how dare you doubt of his Salvation? Being so true a Penitent, as you
see, neither can you but acknowledge him to be so.

Reflector.

Nothing can be concluded of the Salvation or damnation of those that were the
Types of things to come.

Answer.

Can nothing then be concluded of the Salvation of Samson, who was an Eminent
Type of Jesus Christ? So does our Learned Whitaker demonstrate him to be, viz.
1. In sanctitate nativa. 2. In servatoris Munere. 3. In juvicto Robore. 4. In
morte calamitosa cum Hostibus:
If all this will not satisfy you, the Apostles numbering him among the Saints
( Heb. 11.) should convince you, that you may conclude of his Salvation. I
could instance in sundry others, as Gideon, Jephthah, etc. But this may suffice
to show you your Error herein.

Reflector.

For it happened sometimes that one Person, as Esau who was the Figure and Type
of the Reprobate, was also that of the most excellent thing in the World, viz.
The Righteousness of Jesus Christ, under which a Jacob, a Sinner obtained the
Blessing of God.

Answer.

Your Reason here is defective both in Sense and Truth, worthy therefore of no
regard. But that you may not flatter your self in your Folly. What a confused
shuffling words is here, like the Quakers jumbling several things together
without sense? As for Esau, it seems, you have so much Charity for him, as not
to conclude him to be a Reprobate, though the Spirit of God in Scripture has
noted him to be a profane Person, and one whom God hated. But how it came to
pass that he has escaped your censure of a Reprobate, when you make him a Type
of the Reprobate, I know not it being a Rule in Logic (if ever you learnt it)
de proportionalibus est idem judicium. Et quod de uno, secundum proportionem,
affirmatur, id etiam de altero; If Esau then be a Type of the Reprobate, that
is, has the Impression of a Reprobate upon him, (...)
as the word Type signifies, He must needs be a Reprobate.

But let me demand of you, is it for you or I to cast a Figure thus, or create
a Type of Gods eternal Decree, concerning Mankind? We should certainly usurp
upon Gods Power, if what is written in Scripture, we may wrest it to our
meaning without an express warrant from the Spirit of God. And Polanus (an
Author whom I suppose you approve of) says Typi fuerant Figurae a Deo
destinatae ad Res Divinas praefigurandas. In Syntag.
Let us not then be too bold, to thrust our selves into Gods Pavillion by
giving our Judgment of things which God has kept in his own Power. For my part
I cannot say that Esau was a Type of the Reprobate, much less that he himself
was a Reprobate.

This I can say, with good probability he was in that Generation admitted into
the Church of God by the Sacrament of Circumsion, as well as his Brother Jacob,
who though he took him by the Heel at the Birth, signifying his future
supplantation of him, yet could he not supplant him in his new Birth, but both
were alike Interessed in Gods Grace and Favor.

It Is true Esau was Profane in the Act of despising his Birthright, but so was
Judah in the Act of Incontinency, etc. And he was one whom God hated i. e. did
not love, as he loved Jacob, yet I will not stretch my censure of him so far,
as to account him a Son of Perdition, as Judas the Traitor is. Luther on Genesis
17. is very positive for the Salvation of Ismael (though it be written of him
that he being Born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was Born after the
Spirit) and for ought I see, we may be as confident of the Salvation of Esau.

Certain it is, his Father Isaac, a holy Man loved him entirely from his very
Infancy, nor do we find that he ever displeased his good Father by any
undutiful Carriage toward him (except only in his linking himself with the
Daughters of Heth) nor by forsaking the True God, and falling off to Idols; And
seeing Isaac had so great Affection to him, Strangers that knew him not should
not condemn him for a Reprobate.

But Esau according to your words, must be not only a Type of the Reprobate,
but also of the most excellent Thing in the World, to wit: The Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, under which, a Jacob, a Sinner obtained the Blessing of God, What
Sense or Truth there is in these words, let the wise Reader judge. The bare
reciting them is, to me, a clear Refutation of them. Only a man would think
that you who can set out Idea's of the true Sons of God so roundly with
Characteristical Signs and Figures drawn at large out of holy Writ, which is
easy to be done by any man studious in searching the Scripture, but not so
easy to find all those Excellencies in any the very best of men (for a quis
requisivit may suffice to bring down their vaunting Pride in that matter, and
to shorten your Rolls wherein you glory with much Insultation) a man, I say,
would think that you should with a seraphical strain of Holiness magnify the
Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, and not dwindle or shrink up that most
excellent thing, as you call it, in so poor jejune unedifying exemplar, as Esau
was one whom the holy Spirit of God, we may well believe, never intended to
such an Honor. But what a stout way is this of enervating all the Arguments of
your Adversaries who hold the opinion that is truly Evangelical? If bold words
without Sense, Truth and Reason will do it you have done it to purpose. But let
us search a little further into your Folly, that it may be made manifest unto
all men.

Reflector.

Those Promises in Ex. 34. and Numb. 14. are conditional, and only appertain to
them that obey the Commandments of God, and that repent as David did.

Answer.

It is much that you do not call them fine Promises as you, in Derision, do in
the 26 Page of your Book. So light account do you make of that which concerns
the comfort of poor Sinners, but any thing that may lead them to a Despair of
their Salvation, you aggravate to the uttermost.

Who ever doubted of this that Gods Promises of mercy are conditional, and only
appertain to them that obey his Commands? But if you mean here by such an
Obedience as the Covenant of works did require, you make the Gospel of no
Effect: And who then can be saved? Are you your self so exact in keeping Gods
Commandments that you may lay a just claim to the Crown of Life by a rightful
desert, and need not the Passion of thy Redeemer? I have that charitable
opinion of you, that you are not guilty of such a Pharisaical Arrogance; Be you
then so charitable, as not to lay on men's shoulders such Burdens which you your
self will not, nay cannot touch with one of your fingers.

Had you confuted St. Paul concerning this very Scripture, which you have
alleged; you would have given a better Interpretation of it, than your words
seem to carry with them; I mean more agreeable to the Tenor of the New
Covenant: read but what is written by him Romans 4.3, 4, 5, 6.7, 8. and then, if
you please, tell me your mind, what you think of obeying Gods Commandments.

But it is well that you have added, Gods Promises belong to those that Repent;
which is indeed Evangelical, but whereas you say they ought to Repent as David
did, instancing in many of his words taken out of the 32 Psalm, not at all to
your purpose; It is true what David did in Sincerity, let every man look to it
that he follow his example therein, but can you or any man else come near unto
him in Holiness, Zeal, Humility, etc? The examples that are given us in
Scripture of the Piety of Gods Eminent Servants are (indeed) set for our
Imitation, and let our Souls drive our sluggish Hearts hard after them to the
uttermost of our power, yet let us do what we can, we shall not overtake them
(neither is it, I think I may say, required of us that we should) for Copies
must ever be more excellent than the Apographa that are to follow them,
otherwise they cease to be Copies: Nor does God command that there shall be in
all that are ordained to eternal Life the same degree of Faith, spiritual
Wisdom and Mortification, but as the Apostle faith of Alms 2 Cor. 8.12. so may
it well be said of all that we do in the work of our Salvation, if there be
first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not; As a Father deals with his Child whom he loves,
so will God deal with all those that shall be Heirs of Salvation, what Quality
soever they be of^; He accepts of the Will for the Deed, you and above the
Deed. Only let every poor sinner, whose heart God has touched with Remouse,
see that his mind be fully bent not barely to will but to do, so far as he is
able, that which is acceptable unto God, Praying also with all the earnestness
of his Soul for Gods Assisting Grace herein; For says the Apostle Phil. 2.13.
it is God which works in us both to will, and to do, according to his good
pleasure.

Reflector.

Remission of sins belongs to those whose Hea^ts are without Guile and Maliee.

Answer.

Do you not know that the Heart of man is deceitful above all things? It is not
safe therefore trusting to your own Heart, of which it seems you have some
Confidence, because you speak so much of the Hearts of Gods people (of whom you
reckon your self, no doubt to be one) that they are free from all Guile. If I
thought yours were so, I would (as I have heard a good man make the offer to
another) change Hearts with you, and give you all the money in my Purse to boot.

But let it be as you say, for I confess it to be a truth, that Remission of
sins belongs to such and such, yet let me ask, cannot the Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanse the Heart from all Guile and Malice, seeing the Evangelist tells us,
it cleanses us from all sin? 1 John 1.7.
And what know you, but that this purifying Act may, in instanti, powerfully
operate upon the Hearts of millions of men in the World, whom you, without any
warrant, have doomed to everlasting Destruction? Hereafter then I advise you
meddle not with the Hearts of men, so as to pass your censure upon them, lest
you be judged at last to be an Intruder upon God who alone is (...) ( Acts
1.24.) for as it has been a true word Cathedram in Caelo habet qui corda
docet, so it is as true, Cathedram in cord habet qui ad Caelum ducit.

Reflector.

Those words of St. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. God has not appointed us to Wrath, but
to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, are to be explained by those of
the 13 verse of the second Chap. of the second Epistle, viz. God has from the
beginning chosen us to Salvation through Sanctification of the Spirit, and
Belief of the Truth. Your Comment hereupon is this, God has chosen us to be
sanctified, and has sunctified us, to the end that he might save us.

Answer.

Seeing you will have such an Explanation of the former words by the latter
(though some would have put a difference between them,) not only in respect of
the distance which the Apostle has set in his writing of them (the scope of
the Writer not being always the same in one place, as it is in the other,) but
because of the Persons whom the Apostle distinguishes, viz. us and you) yet I
shall choose rather to let you know that by the words (which you insist so much
upon,) viz. through Sanctification of the Spirit) is meant the Sanctification
wrought in them by the Spirit of God, which may be also in millions of millions
of Persons not discernable by the World.

This certainly is that Sanctification which all true Believers are to glory
in, not boasting of any Holiness or Worthiness of their own (as Quakers
commonly do) but rejoicing in the work of Gods abundant Grace upon them. For
you must know that which the Apostle here means is not so much an active
Sanctification manifested in the Life, as that which is passive, wherein they
are but patients under God, though they do indeed actually receive it into
their Hearts by Faith; God begins with his work of Sanctification, and the
Believer seconds it with his work of believing, both which are here joined
together by the Apostle, (...), In, by, or through the Sanctification of the
Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. Whereas if it were an active Sanctification
that were here meant, such as is commonly visible in the Life of a Believer,
then may that Doctrine be received again among us which has justly been
exploded by us, viz. that we are chosen to Salvation for or because of our
foreseen Holiness, which is that that you ignorantly contend for.

But you should remember it is Christ who is all in all in the work of man's
Salvation, and that it is nothing but Faith which is expected from us, That no
Flesh should glory in the presence of God (1 Cor. 1.29.) and mark what the
Apostle there adds, v. 30. For of him are we (that is born, of him) in Christ
Jesus, who is made unto us of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption (meaning all that is required of us in this matter.) He is our
Wisdom to instruct us, our Righteousness to Justify us, our Sanctification to
sanctify us, our Redemption to save us.

What are you then, poor man, without Christ, what is your Wisdom but Folly,
what your Righteousness but a filthy Rag, what your Sanctification, but sin at
the best, your Holiness no better than the Popes Holiness, what your
Redemption, but everlasting. Bondage under Satan? From all which good Lord
deliver you Talk no more therefore so proudly of your Sanctification, But let
him that glories glory in the Lord.

By this time I hope you begin to see your Error in making so false a gloss
upon that comfortable word of the Apostle, viz. God has not appointed us to
wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ: Which word will stand firm and
strong against your ignorant and absurd Cavils, yea and against the gates of
Hell, neither is it weakened at all by that other word of the Apostle (which
you have ravished from the pure simplicity of the Gospel) but confirmed rather.

Whereupon I conclude your Argument is so far from that Nervofity you boast of
in overthrowing the True and Sound Doctrine of the Common Salvation that it is
as weak as water. Only it shows how apt you are to catch at any thing in
Scripture, though you wrest it to your own Perdition, which may but seemingly
strengthen your destructive Opinion.

Reflector.

All the world fallen in Adam, deserving the Curse and Eternal Damnation, it is
a signal Mercy to spare some from that General Condemnation.

Answer.

We have heard in the late times, of Legal Preaching, but what can be more
legal, I mean more disagreeing with the Covenant of Promise, than your words
here are and in many other places of your Book?

It is we confess an Eminent Mercy to save some of those that had by their
Disobedience made themselves liable to the Curse. But to save a numberless
multitude, or a million for one that shall sink under the Curse, is a Mercy
more to be magnified, yea and might with more truth have been asserted by you,
than to talk of a general Condemnation.

Reflector.

How Excellent soever the Efficacy of Redemption may be, it is only for those
whom God has a mind to save.

Answer.

Miserable Man! do you know what you say? A Report has gone of you that you
are mad, because you have been thrust out of your Preferment at Oxford. If it
be so, it is the best excuse that you can have for making these frantic
Reflections. Would any Christian who is right in his Wits speak thus
unreverendly of the great work of our Redemption, as you have here spoken? Do
you not know the Excellency of it in its Efficacy? You might surely have known
it partly by the Price of it, not by corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but
with the Precious Blood of Christ, partly by the Fruits and Benefits that arise
to us by it, as the Holy Scripture sets them out, viz. we are redeemed from the
Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. from our vain Conversation 1 Pet. 1.18. from all
Iniquity Tit. 2.14, etc. Partly by the end or final Cause, that we may be
Consecrated to God and the Lamb Rev. 14.4. that our sins may be forgiven Ephesians.
1.9. that we may receive the Adoption of Children Gal 4. that we may be
reconciled to God. etc.

If you know these things, why do you speak so doubtfully in this weighty
Matter with a may be? As much as to say, the Efficacy of Redemption may be
excellent, or it may not be so, and whatsoever it is, it is only for those whom
God has a mind to save, q. d. Let Christ suffer what he will, let him give a
full satisfaction by his Death to Divine Justice for the sin of the world, yet
God has no mind to save any, but a very few, in some parts of the world.

This is your Sense; But had you said, it is only for those whom you your self
have a mind shall be saved, this indeed had been Answerable to that height you
have Skrewed your poor Fancy up unto, viz. To judge the world as you please.

But you are pleased here to refer it to Gods mind, methinks however you might
have found out some sitter Word for this purpose that had been more for the
Honor and Majesty of the most high God, than to talk so boldly of the mind of
God in this Case. But possible it is thus with you, because you pretend to know
the Mind of God, and to be his Privy Counselor, being that (as I have said
already) which has made you to cast up your Accounts so exactly and judicially
of your Thousands, hundred Thousands and Millions that shall be damned.

Had you said here (as it has been wont to be said by all Christians that are
wise and honest) the work of Redemption is only for those that are in Covenant
with God, and that believe the Gospel, this had been according to the mind of
God, but these terms you were willing to wave, because you know that Faith is
the gift of God, and he gives it to whomsoever he pleases, which would have
made your Reflection retort upon you, whereupon it is that you talk of the Mind
of God at large.

But has this indeed been the Mind of God to lay such Restraints upon the
sufferings of his Beloved Son that the Efficacy of them shall reach but to a
sew? And consequently has this been the Mind of God by an Eternal Decree to
damn all his poor Creatures who are the Masterpiece of his Creation for ever
excepting one in a Million? Genesis 1.
O that ever any that bears the face of a Man should dare to speak so
wickedly of God: What is this but to make the Father of Mercies, and the God of
all Consolations more cruel than all the Tyrants that ever were in the World,
yea than all the Devils that are in Hell? For they are but Gods Executioners,
it is God himself that has passed this doom, neither can the Merits of his
only begotten Son our dear Redeemer be of force to reverse it.

Away therefore with this cursed Opinion, most abominable in the hearing of all
Mankind. The very Heathen will certainly abhor it, yea and hate that Religion
which maintains it. Nay they will be ready to Defy and Blaspheme that God who
shall harbor so cruel a Mind, and say (as one of them said in the like Case)
Qualis, malum, Deus isbe est, what a kind of God with a Mischief is this, whose
mind is set to damn and destroy so infinite a number of People whom he had made
(as they say) after his own Image and Likeness.

Upon these and the like Considerations that shall follow I hope (Mounsiour)
you will retract these your Reflections and be sorry that you have given so
great offense by them, both to God and his Church.

Reflector.

When Jesus Christ Prayed for those that Crucified him, he did particularly
mark out those in Act, 2.36, 37. who would Repent at the Preaching of St. Peter.

Answer.

Christ's Prayer upon the Cross for those that Crucified him was this, viz.
Father forgive them, and the Reason why he so Prayed was not as you seem to
imagine, For they will Repent; That is far short of his meaning, neither is it
suitable to that Philanthropy that was in him toward them, nor to the
Elevation of his Mind unto his Father, which was fixed, no doubt, upon his
Fathers purpose to save the World by him, of which they were ignorant, for,
says he, they know not what they do: From whence it may be gathered that they
who ignorantly transgress as the greatest part of the World do, may be more
capable of mercy than they who sin presumptuously (as the Apostle St. Paul
says of himself 1 Timothy 1.13. I obtained Mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in
Vbelief.)

We read indeed ( Joh. 17.20, 21.) that Christ Prayed also for them, who should
believe on him, through the word of his Apostles, that they all might be one in
him, that so the world may believe that the Father had sent him, which
otherwise might have been brought into Question, after his departure, by the
Divisions and Dissentions that might arise among his Disciples.

But that when he Prayed for those that Crucified him, he did particularly (as
you say) mark them out Act 2.36, 37. who would Repent at the Preaching of St.
Peter, this is your particular Fancy, groundless and unwarrantable.

And will you still thus shuffle with the holy Scripture to make it serve your
turn? for it is very obvious to all that read you, why you force these
Scriptures together that are so incoherent. You would like a wary Fencer ward
off a Thrust, which you foresaw might have touched you to the Quick. But fear
it not poor man, for it will be easily granted you that none but those who are
born again shall ever be saved; But you likewise must grant that both Faith and
Repentance are the gift of God, and that Gods Mercy in the free bestowing his
gifts is not to be limited to time or Means for the Conversion of those that
are chosen to Life Eternal (as you may find it clearly proved in my Antidote,)
but that this Mercy may be secretly and suddenly dispensed to millions of
millions in the World by the gracious Work of the good Spirit of God in and
upon the Hearts of men before they die, and that sometimes in the very instant
of their departure out of this Life. This being so, your Accounts will fail you
of your hundred Thousands and Millions that shall perish in Hell for ever, in
comparison of one that shall be saved.

Reslector.

And though there should be but one saved for a hundred Thousand that, should
perish and be lost, yet Grace would sub-abound in this one Person saved, where
sin had abounded, as in the Example of the Thief, Luke 23.40, 41.

Answer.

The words of the Apostle that you harp upon are these, Where sin abounded,
Romans 5.20.21.
Grace did much more abound, That as Sin bath Reigned unto Death, even so Grace
might Reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

A most comfortable place of Scripture this is, written on purpose to magnify
the glorious Grace of God now under the Gospel, toward poor Sinners that
Repent. And will you thus limit it to one particular Person, whom you have
fancied to be culled out of your Thousands and Millions, when it is clear, the
good Spirit of God speaks it expressy of Adam and his Offspring as they
generally Issue from him in their several Generations? Are you then and your
Accomplices sit to meddle with the Holy Scripture when you understand it no
better? Better (surely) were it for you, if it were as a sealed Book unto you,
rather than be permitted to wrest it so perniciously to your own destruction.

There is a Truth, I confess, in what you here say; But seeing you cannot but
know that these words of the Apostle (from whence you gather this your abundant
Favor for one probably of your own gang) are of so large an extent as has been
said, and that to take them in his sense, were utterly to overthrow your
damnable Doctrine, (which rather than you would do, you would pervert them to
your own private shallow Interpretation) since it is so, may it not well be
said without any offense either before God or Man, you are fitter to be a Hewer
of wood, etc. as the Gibeonites were, than to divide the Word of Truth to Gods
People? Had the Apostle here written, where Sin abounded, Wrath did much more
abound, this it seems, would have gone down easily with you, as according to
your Palate. But blessed be the good Spirit of God whose word it is, and
blessed be the Hand that first wrote it, it is a word of Mercy, a word of
strong Consolation to the whole Church of God. The Magnitude and Redundancy of
Divine Grace being infallibly by the abundance of sin made the more
conspicuous, as the more desperate a bodily Disease is, the more is the Virtue
and Excellency of the Medicine that Cures it, made the more famous and to be
extolled.

Let therefore that word stand firm and steadfast against you which you in your
eleventh Paragraph of objections have made light account of, viz. that the
Grace of God is exalted far above his Judgments and Severities, that there
where sin has abounded Grace has much more abounded, for the solution hereof is
not so easy, as of many more, though you have pretended so of it, to your
Reader.

Reflector.

As to the Salvation of the Children of Heathen Parents, or others, that is a
sealed Book which God does not permit us to open.

Answer.

It is well that you have that Charity for Children, yea for the Children of
Heathen Parents, as well as of others, so as not to reckon them among your
Thousands and Millions, whom you have marked to Destruction, for your only
Design, (you say Page 27.) in this whole Discourse is, to speak of men deceased
above an Age ago (still you shuffle) and after they had the exercise and use of
Reason: It is well I say. But you here add, the Salvation of such Children is a
sealed Book, which God does not permit us to open.

I will not much argue with you about this, though I might, nor inquire by what
Authority you call the Salvation of Children, more than of others, who have had
the exercise and use of Reason, a sealed Book, which God does not permit you to
open. Possibly you may dream of the Limbus Infantum, where Children are kept
from the Pains of Hell, not having the Pain of Sense but only the Pain of Loss;
Which Limbus no man could ever open, no, not the Pope himself, for though it is
said he has the Key of Purgatory, yet the Key of this place appointed for
Children is not, it seems, committed to his Custody.

But is the Salvation of Children, as you say, a sealed Book, and is not the
Book of Gods Universal Judgment, and the Lambs Book of Life sealed Books
likewise? Yet you dare, it seems, without Gods Permission, yea contrary to Gods
express command in Scripture, to open these Books, and give your Judgment
(forsooth) of them, as you please. And what is this, but to anticipate the
Judgment of the great Day? The Apostle Reasoned with Faelix of Judgment to
come, Act. 24.25. and advises yea warns us (1 Cor. 4.5.) To judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come who is to be the Judge of Quick and Dead;
Much less should we judge so rashly as to determine of the Number of Gods
Elect, and that with so peremptory a Sentence, as to exclude the major part of
Mankind from all hope of Salvation, which is the deadly Venom, that runs
through your whole Discourse.

It had been good indeed, if this your Book had been so sealed, that it might
have been bound up in everlasting silence, never to come forth, rather than to
do that mischief, which it is like to do among poor and weak Christians who
have always been apt to despond, and not only them, but among such as are
Profane, to strengthen some in their Atheism which grows over-Rampant in
this Generation, and others in their Epicurism and Debaucheries, who will be
ready to say, Seeing there is little or no hope of Mercy for us when we die,
let us take our Pleasure while we may, Eat, Drink and be Merry.

Reflector.

It is sufficient for us Mortals to know that none is or can be saved but by
Jesus Christ: But we must not go about to determine, whether none are saved,
but who have known Jesus Christ.

Answer.

For us Mortals? a word that you use once and again here in your Discourse,
because you would (like your good friends the Quakers) take up a form of speech
differing from that which is common: Otherwise you might have said, it is
sufficient for us, poor Creatures; which would have passed for current better
than your word Mortals; For the time will come when this Mortal shall put on
Immortality, wherein the same Truth shall be known by us then, which we now
know. And do not they that are now Immortal know this that Jesus Christ is the
only Savior of the World, as well and better than we.

But I must tell you, it is not sufficient for us Mortals (as you call us) to
know this, for God has been graciously pleased to Illighten us poor Mortals,
and those that are Immortal too to know, that none can be saved by Jesus
Christ, but those that are in Covenant with God. Why then do you by affirming
so gross an Untruth, lessen that knowledge which the Spirit of God in Scripture
has given us, saying? It is sufficient, etc. Why indeed, but because you was
loath to extend the work of Salvation so far as to reach to those Thousands and
Millions, which you will have to be damned, for they also may (for ought you
know) be in Covenant with God, as well as your self. Men may guess at your
meaning, Don Doctor, though you speak it not out, as you ought to speak it.

You say further, we must not go about to determine whether none be saved, but
who have known Jesus Christ. Was there ever such a Don known before that will
take upon him so imperiously to judge the World, and yet be guilty of so
shameful Ignorance in the Fundamentals of our Christian Faith? Does not our
Lord himself tell us, it is eternal Life to know him? And must we not then
determine that none can be saved but those that know him? know him, I say,
either by an acquired knowledge in the use of holy Means, or by an inspired
knowledge without them, as many Millions in the World I doubt not have attained
through Grace, and may also for the time to come more and more, one of these
must be absolutely necessary to Salvation, seeing our Savior has spoken the
word, it is eternal Life to know him. Go then and learn better to know Jesus
Christ, if thou thy self wilt look for Salvation by him.

Reflector.

All other passages seem to carry with them some kind of probability and
likelihood, but they are not convincing, and their Solution is very easy; in a
word they are nothing so forcive as those which are alleged for the contrary
Opinion, viz. that for one that shall be saved many hundred Thousands shall be
damned.

Answer.

Passages you call them. A pretty word for a mystical Man at Maudlin Hill Fair,
where he comes with his Hocas Pocas and Heipass to turn substantial Arguments
into Shadows, or by a nimble sleight of hand to close them up in a narrow
Pinfold of Passages to delude the People. But seeing you will have them called
Passages, it is fit you should be paid for your Passages with a Demonstration
of your cunning or of your folly; Your cunning in hiding that which would have
laid you open to the Eyes of all your Spectators, or your folly in your vain
glorious Boastings and Triumph that you make by insulting over the poor Truth
your Captive, telling the World, those Passages for it are not convincing, and
their Solution is very easy, and nothing so forcive, as those which are
alleged for your great Diana, the contrary opinion.

Nevertheless, you say they seem to carry with them some kind of probability
and likelihood, which is more than any that are wise will say of your Opinion,
as for Zuinglius and his followers (whom you reckon among the rest) I shall
leave them to be swinged by you, as I hear you have threatened me, and do so,
pay them soundly, for they well deserve it.

But what will you say to that where it is objected that that man to whom God
has given the Grace to pardon all those that have offended him has a tacit
Promise that God will forgive him all his sins. That it is extremely to lessen
the ends for which Jesus Christ came into the World, to admit that he only came
into the World to Redeem one man of a Hundred, of a Thousand, or of ten
Thousand, or indeed of a hundred Thousand, etc. that it is not to be believed
that Jesus Christ at the Right hand of his Father does intercede for one of a
hundred Thousand of all Mankind, etc. Are not these Passages, as you call them,
convincing?

Or is there no force in these that follow, viz. that God is slow to Anger,
ready to Pardon, and show Mercy, yea plenteous in Mercy, as the Scripture often
speaks of him, that the work of God and his natural Inclination is to do good
to his Creatures, and to pardon them their sins, that he never punishes but
with Regret and Unwillingness, and that to Destroy and to Chastise rigorously,
it is his work, but it is his strange Work, and his Act, but his strange Act.
That if Jesus Christ would have us to pardon seven times, yea seventy times
seven our offending Brother, there is no likelihood, but that God should be
much more merciful, since he commands us Mortals to be so, and if God promises
to give a new Heart to all those whose sins he pardons, who will believe that
God should pardon an infinite number of Persons, but that he should only give a
new Heart to a few, etc.

What is there nothing now forcive in all this? Surely it may well be said of
you, Bishop Hall.
as it has been heretofore applied, with too much derision to an Eminent, Holy
and Learned Prelate of our Church, viz. that you are an irrefragable Doctor.

But above all, I am amazed to see those two Important Considerations to be
thus slighted by such a man as you are, who pretend to rejoice in hope of the
Glory of God by Jesus Christ; Both which you intersert among other Objections
against you, in this manner.

First, that it is extremely to lessen the ends for which Jesus Christ came
into the World, to admit that he came to Redeem only one Man of a Hundred, of a
Thousand, or of ten Thousand, or indeed of an hundred Thousand, etc.

2. That it is not to be believed that our great Redeemer and Advocate at the
Right Hand of his Father, does Intercede but for one of a hundred Thousand of
all Mankind.

These are such things as would make any Man's Ears to tingle that should hear
them. But for you, you make nothing of them, and their Solution with you is, as
the rest are, very easy. Certainly were it not that you were too much doting
upon your general Damnation (a word peculiar to your own fancy, for I believe
it was never used by any in the World before you, neither was it an unhappy
Eslip of your Pen or Spirit which came from you unawares, for you repeat it
again and again in your pernicious Pamphlet, as if you would that the world
should take special notice of it) were it not, I say, that you had been too
precipitant in running on upon that foot of Account, you would with earnest
Prayer have besought God to guide you with his good Spirit that you might not
err in this weighty Point (which Prayer, it is much to be doubted, you have
neglected, because you have erred in the matter most grossly.) Yea and now when
you may, if you will, perceive, that your Foundation on the Holy Scripture is
mislaid, and that all the Batteries which you make from thence will Recoil upon
your self with shame and sorrow, you should do your utmost Endeavor to Retract
your uncharitable Aspersions, and to find out some other sense of those places
of sacred Writ, which hitherto have been, by you and others, but ill understood
and worse Interpreted, as your own words are in another Case.

Saint Austin I am sure gave this Advise, Lib. 2. Cap. 3. De Cons. Evang. where
treating of some difficulties in the Evang. Genealogies, has these words, Hoc
facile posset occurrere Homini Religioso, qui quodlibet aliud quaerendum potius
judicaret quam Evangelistam crederet esse mentitum, i. e. to a man truly
Religious this Consideration would easily offer it self, that it would become
him to judge that some other sense then yet appears, should be inquired out,
rather than to doubt that a Quill of the Holy Dove should drop the least spot
of Error in the written Oracles of Heaven. And rather, say I, than to wrest
them to a sinister Sense, disagreeing from the whole Current of the Gospel, as
you have done with those Texts mentioned often by you for the Confirmation of
your Opinion, viz. Mat. 7.14. Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which
leads to Life, and few there be that find it. And Luke 12.32. Fear not little
Flock, it is your Fathers good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom, and Mat.
20.16. Many are called, but few are chosen. So Mat. 22.14. To show you your
Error in these, it is needless here, having said enough of it already in my
Antidote set forth against you, which has been sufficient, in the Judgment of
Rational Men, to expel the Poison of your corrupt Doctrine.

Reflector.

They that hold the Opinion of the small number that shall be saved, allege
the Rigor of the Examination at the day of Judgment, and the words of St. Paul
in the 2 Cor. c. 5. v. 10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to
that he has done whether it be good or bad, etc.

Answer.

[Those who hold it] And are not you one of them that hold it? Nay do you not
in Rigor surpass all men that ever held it by uncharitable Judging and
Condemning? your confident boldness therein will appear more in the Sequel of
this Discourse.

But to our present Business. First I do not like your uncouth word here,
Rigor, as you use it. A more Reverend Term might in this Case have easily been
thought upon by you, and more proper for your purpose, but that your rigid
Spirit would have an unseasonable Vent according to its Humor whether with
Sense, or without, you cared not.

There shall (it is true) be a strickt and severe Examination at that day of all
the whole Race of Mankind, all their Thoughts, Words and Works shall be made
manifest and placed in order before them. Gods Law-Book which may be called his
Doomsday-Book, whether it be the Law of Works for such as are in a Reprobate
Condition, or the Law of Faith, for such as are the Elect of God, shall then
likewise be opened; By both which the sin of the World shall be set out in its
Colors, I mean as the Apostle, It shall be made exceeding sinful ( for by the
Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20.)

All this and whatever else you Mr. Reflector can be able to add warrantably
from the written word of God concerning that most exact scrutiny and search
that shall then be into the Hearts and Lives of all Mankind I do readily
consent unto, for it will be the day of the Lords Vengeance upon all his
Enemies who lived and died in their Malice against him, and knowing the terror
of the Lord, we should all be persuaded in this our day to know the things that
belong unto our Peace, before they be hidden from our Eyes.

But after all he granted which you can well Imagine what will be the result of
this Righteous Examination? Will a general Damnation follow upon it? Yes must
you say (for so you have said) though most impiously, else your arguing comes
to nothing. As for your alienating the matter in the twenty fourth Page of your
Book, it is not a retracting of your bold Censure: You say indeed, the Apostle
did by the Consideration of the Terror of the Lord persuade men to fly to Jesus
Christ, but what is this to your opinion of the general Damnation? That you hold
still in worse terms (as may be seen in the following parts of your Discourse)
than any of your Fraternity (for ought I know) ever did before you, and such as
cannot enter into the Heart of Man to conceive, which is not void of all
Humanity.

I will therefore here tell you what, I believe, will be the sequel of this
great Judgment and Scrutiny; I do not say it shall be for your Condemnation or
mine, because I hope and pray that both you and I shall before we die, repent
us of our sins, you of your misjudging the World, and I of my misjudging you
(if I have offended therein) and of my many other failings, wherein I am too
sure I have very much offended; But this I say that when the horrible Ugliness
of sin shall then be discovered, an Amazement shall generally seize upon men
for their folly in committing it, insomuch that those who have been tried by
the Law of Works, and are found guilty of the Violation of that Law (as all
unbelievers and impenitent Persons shall be) will say to the Mountains and
Rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon the Throne,
and from the Wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his Wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand: But others that have been tried by the Law of Faith,
and have thereupon found their Judge to be their Advocate, as I believe a great
multitude (not one alone amongst many Millions) but a great multitude, Rev. 7.9.
which no man can number, of all Nations, and Kindred and People, and Tongues,
i. e. The major part of Mankind, shall find him to be, they shall then lay
aside their Amazements at their former Folly; and with loud Acclamations Chant
out their Hallelujahs, ascribing Blessing and Honor, and Glory, and Power unto
him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.

These undoubtedly are some of the immediate Consequents that will follow upon
the Righteous Judgment of that great Day: Some I say, for I do not take upon me
to determine of all, but only what concerns our present purpose, viz. the
beginning of everlasting Sorrows to all the Reprobate, and the beginning of
everlasting Happiness to all the Elect People of God.

I know there will follow the Justification of the Judge himself, for it is
called Romans 2.5. The day of the Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God,
which may be taken not only in an active Sense but in a passive, which will
signify that which is written, he will be justified in all his sayings, and be
clear, (says the Prophet) overcome (says the Apostle) when he is judged,
meaning all mouths shall be then stopped which have been apt to cavil against
him, and be forced even against themselves to confess, the Judgment of God is
according to Truth. But to return to our purpose.

You Will say, how shall they that have lived all their days in unbelief and the
hardness of their Hearts, (as the greatest part of Mankind made up of those
that are without, alienated from the Life of God, and those that are within,
living under the Light of Gods Word, yet have been Ignorant and Profane) how
shall they be able to stand with any Confidence in the Judgment at the last Day?

Hereto I have already also given an Answer in my Antidote, to which I remit
you. But because you object so much that terrible threatening (as you call it)
of the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.10. I will tell you the right meaning of those words,
after I have first showed you your weakness in the Construction that you make
of them. You will now, you say page 24. speak a word for the Comfort of
Repenting Sinners that examining their Lives, and squaring it (you should say
them) according to that terrible Threatening in 2 Cor. 5.10. which frightens
them in such a manner as to take from them all hopes of finding Pardon and
Grace at the last day; It is, say you (but the diligent Reader will easily see
your Incoherence here) it is, if those words of St. Paul were to be understood
according to the Letter, that there should not be one saved, no not Moses,
Caleb, Joshua, David, Daniel, St. Peter and St. Paul.

Strange! But it is no novelty with you to mis-interpret Scripture. Know
therefore those words are to be (and God forbid but they should be) understood
according to the Letter, for there is as much Comfort arising from them to
Penitent Sinners, as you can gather Terror to the Impenitent (as is evidently
to be seen) the Inference therefore that you bring from thence is utterly
false, viz. that if so, there should not one be saved, not Moses, Caleb,
Joshuah, etc.

You say further St. Paul would contradict himself when he makes man's
Righteousness to consist in the Remission of Sins. But I believe you do wrong
to St. Paul in putting this upon him, and consequently to the holy Ghost, can
you tell where the Apostle says Man's Righteousness consists in the Remission
of sins? Have you thus learned Christ? Alas man, there is as much difference
between these two, as there is between Habitus and Privatio; It was the Death
of Christ that brought on Remission of sins, and it was the Resurrection of
Christ that was the efficient of our Righteousness. This doubtless is the
Apostles Doctrine uti patet Romans 4. 25. He was delivered for our Offenses to
take them away, and was raised again for our Justification, to make us
Righteous.

But you say, St. Paul in the following verse makes it plain enough to be
understood, that he only used that way of speech to give Terror, and to
persuade men to fly to Jesus Christ, etc. Here I must tell you Mr. Reflector by
the way you have so delighted to act the part of a Boanerges (though your
thundering Sounds in the Ears of wise Men, but as the discharge of a Pot-Gun)
that it is a hard matter for you to be a right Barnabas, as appears here by
your words which you intended for Comfort.

For will not the poor desponding Sinner be ready hereupon to reply unto you,
is this your Comfort, to tell me the Apostle used that way of speech only to
give Terror? Alas this needed not, I find it to be true by sad experience upon
my Soul and Conscience, but I find not here that he does persuade me (as you
say) to fly to Jesus Christ. That which he says in the next words is only to
show how necessary it is for Ministers, if they have any true fear of God in
them, to be diligent in the performance of their Duty by persuading men to
prepare themselves for that dreadful Judgment. But this reflecteth not upon me
for my Comfort.

In fine, it is true what you say, Jesus Christ is our Righteousness, even of
the very worst of Sinners, say I how deeply soever they have been drencht in
sin, provided that they Repent and Believe, their sins shall not be imputed to
them, being already imputed to Christ. But it is not true that by his
Righteousness our sins are pardoned, rather you should say our Persons are
justified thereby, as for sins they are pardoned by the satisfaction which
Christ made to the justice of God through the Blood of the Cross, for by his
stripes are we healed says the Prophet, Es. 53.5. and thus says the Apostle,
he was made sin for us (having born our sins in his own Body on the Tree) that
is now made a Sacrifice for sin, and when sin is thus done away, then is Jesus
Christ become our Righteousness, for so it follows that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him.

Thus you see Mr. Reflector how unhappy you have been in expounding the
Scripture: Doubtless you are an Interpreter one of a Thousand, but it is the
wrong way, for there are but few, I hope, that will be so bold with Gods holy
Word as you are, in rendering the Sense of it according to vain Fancy, as you
have done.

But what then, you will say, is the right meaning of those words? I answer, the
Context will plainly declare it: Some there were it seems to me, that would be
cavilling against the Apostle, as if he Commended himself too often unto them
to whom he wrote, needing their approbation of him and his Ministry. This
Exception he was willing here to remove, We, says he, persuade men (not upon
such a low account as you imagine, to curry Favor with you, but) First because
we know, we must appear, as well as others, before the Righteous Judge at the
last Day, and that will prove a woeful day unto us if we preach not the Gospel
to you. 2. We appeal to God and your Consciences to judge of our Fidelity in
the discharge of our Duty (to the same purpose in the following words of the
11th. verse) and this in short I humbly conceive to be the Reason why the
Apostle makes mention here of the Terror of the Lord with a direct Reflection
we see upon himself, I am not ignorant there are other Reasons rendered, but
this I may be confident is one.

As for your words whereby you make such a pudder, viz. of the startling and
thundering thereby upon others, which you call Terrors (though the Apostle does
not so) that is to be taken obliquely not as the chief thing that he intended,
(...).
albeit there be Terror enough in them to drive us all to Repentance.

I shall now (for it is high time) shut up this Reflection with an Allusion to
that which the Prophet writes of the Church of old concerning her deliverance
from the Assyrian, Is. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver,
the Lord is our King, he will save us; Every word is Emphatical, and may well
be applied to our present purpose.

The Lord is our Judge; To him it is (may all poor Sinners say, to whom God may
be pleased to grant Repentance unto Life throughout the World) to him it is
that we stand or fall. A small thing it is (Mr. Reflector) that we should be
judged by you, or of man's Judgment, the Lord who is our true Friend and Elder
Brother is our Judge, and he will certainly take care of us that we shall not
perish. It is true, a Judge must not be partial, he must give Sentence
according to Law, otherwise he is not a Righteous Judge, well, let it be so. But

The Lord is our Lawgiver, our Statute-maker, he has the Law in his own
Breast, he can mitigate it as he pleases, yea he can retract it, and bring in
another Law in its stead more favorable to us; the Law of Moses with the Curse
annexed to it shall not be the Rule of this Judgment to us, but the Christian
Law, which is the Law of Faith. But what can a Lawgiver do if he have not
Power? there have been, we know, Lawgivers in this World, such as Numa
Pompilius, Solon, Lycurgus, Osiris, Zamolxis, and others, that have found their
Laws to be of no force, for want of Power to establish them, the Law of the
Sword utterly broke asunder the Sword of their Law. But

The Lord is our King, he it is that bears the Sword, and he bears it not
in vain, is able to maintain his Law against all adverse Power and to overcome
when he is judged, yea and able to defend all those that will at any time, upon
the least intimation of his will, be subject unto him. For so it follows,

He will save us; us a rebellious a stiff-necked and idolatrous People, he will
save us, he is sui juris, his will is his Law, his Power is Absolute and
Arbitrary, the Power that he manageth in this kind is for the good of his
Redeemed, not for their Destruction: It is not said, as you say, he will damn
us all, that were in our Sense Tyrannical, but, he will save us. Salvation is
his peculiar Prerogative, the richest Jewel in his Diadem, this was the Song of
the Prophets of old, David sang it when he fled from Absalom, Jon. 2.
Salvation belongs to the Lord, Psalm. 3.8. the Prophet Jonas lang it in the
Belly of Hell, Salvation is the Lords: It was the Song of the Apostles, the
Grace of God brings Salvation, Christ is the Captain of our Salvation, the
Author of Eternal Salvation, and it is the Song of Heaven, Salvation to the
Lord, Rev. 7.

It is indeed (as an excellent Writer says of it) the Argument of both the
Testaments, the Staff and Supportation of Heaven and Earth, they would both
sink, and all their joints be severed, if the Salvation of the Lord were not,
the Birds in the Air sing no other Note, the Beasts in the Field give no other
Voice, than Salus Johova, Salvation is the Lords: He will save us, us sinners
of the Gentiles, in what dark Corners of the Earth soever we lie hid, us
sinners in the visible Church of what sort soever we be though the most
heinous, the most Obdurate, the most desperate Sinners in the World, whom the
Devil has carried Captive after him at his Will, yet if we will believe,
though it be at the very last Exhalation of the Spirit, he will save us.

And even your Oracle Mr, Baxter has, by your own Confession here, page 24.
in effect said so much (of whom it will become you to learn more Moderation in
your judgment concerning this matter) even he, you say, has said, that Gods
Mercies are offered to us in such a manner, that nothing is required of us but
that we should accept them (meaning surely, that we should believe) without any
thoughts of our own so much unworthiness to hinder us, and keep us from it;
that as his Promises are of Grace and Mercy, so likewise are they rich and
great; that in truth they are made to those that believe, but also that Faith
is a Gift of God, that he gives it as liberally, as he grants the Pardon of
Sinners.

The Refultancy of the whole matter is this, he that is our God is the God of
Salvation, he will save us from our sins, he will save us from the Wrath to
come, he will save us from the World, he will save us from our selves, he will
save us from the Devil, for he is the God of Salvations (so is the word of the
Prophet rendered) whereas if your word of a general. Damnation should stand, you
would make him (a word not to be spoken without great Horror and Blasphemy) the
God of Damnation: If all the Devils in Hell should Conspire together to put a
dishonor upon the God of Heaven, could they imagine a greater?

Hitherto (Mr. Reflector) I have showed you the weakness of your Collections
from Scripture, those I mean which you have heaped together in the 5. and 6.
Pages of your Book with the Corollary to the last of them in the 24. Page.

I should now say somewhat to the Types which you have fancied to relate to the
number of the Elect and Reprobate, as the drowning all the World, except eight
Persons at the universal Deluge, and the Land of Canaan, and the small number
that entered into it, in comparison of those that did not, the Division of the
Kingdom of Israel into two Parties, the Survey that you make of the whole
World, etc.

But because I judge it more methodical to join your other Reflections from
Scripture which you have in the 22. Page with those beforementioned, I shall
rather reflect upon them, and upon the Preface set before them, wherein I shall
take the same course with you, as I have taken before. And thus you begin Page
21.

Reflector.

I would refer my self to the Judgment of any sober considering Person, what a
vast and almost an infinite proportion in number one should find, if from Adams
days down to ours, there should be a Comparison made of the sum Total of the
Elect with that of those who are not Elected: I believe that this proportion
would be of one Person saved to a Million that is not, that is to say, that
there is a Million of Reprobates to one that shall be chosen, so as to be
saved. Which is a dreadful thing to think on, that the Lord Jesus Christ came
only into the World to save one Man among an hundred Thousand, or rather a
Million: It Is an Abyss that neither can nor ought to be sounded, etc.

Answer.

First you say, you would refer your self. It is well that you will at length
speak plain English, and not fob us off with them and they, as you did before
to make us believe you were not concerned in the point. But you would refer
your self, as much as to say, you would appeal to the judgment of any sober
considering Person, as if you thought that any such would give judgment in your
behalf, but what sober man is there in the World who does not rather abhor your
Opinion (I am sure I have discourst several about it, who do much condemn you)
and look upon you, as the most daring man that ever set Pen to Paper? The holy
Scripture tells us that God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the
World by that man whom he has ordained, etc.

But is Mounsieur Lewis du Moulin become that man? stay, I beseech you, till
you be raised up from the Dead, for before that time we can have no assurance
from Heaven that you shall be the Man. In the mean while talk no more so
proudly of the sum Total of the Elect, so as to compare it with those whom you
in your hasty pre-judging Spirit will not (forsooth) allow to be elected, which
will certainly be accounted an Affront put upon the righteous Judge, yea and a
charge upon him with want both of Faithfulness and wisdom if he should not give
sentence according to that total Sum which you have taken pains to cast up.

You consider not (poor Worm) from whom it is that you refer your self or make
your appeal. You must therefore know, is is from Almighty God who has
determined this Case, before the World was, and has kept it as a secret in his
Power, far out of your reach, and it is from our Lord Jesus Christ, as if you
Questioned the value of that Satisfaction which he has given for the sin of
the World, if so, how can you look to be interessed in it?

You say next that you believe this proportion (upon such inquiry) would be of
one Person saved to a Million that is not, that is to say, there is a Million
of Reprobates to one that shall be chosen, so as to be saved.

Upon what Foundation, I pray, do you build your Faith? It is not upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, etc. But merely upon the Quicksands of
your Imagination, and upon your shallow Observations that you make of the World
in the several Ages of it. What you imagine in this case is not material, and
as for your surveying the World to spend your Censure upon men, as you do, who
was it that did put you into that Office? though you look upon the face of the
whole World during some thousands of years (as your words are,) yea and shound
visit all the Families, (as you say) and all private Persons, but cannot find
the truth of Religion, nor the Power of Godliness in them, may you therefore
take upon you so precisely to determine of their final Estate? That is, without
doubt, to be reserved to the judgment of the great day. For what think you, can
this grent Mystery of Man's Salvation be perfectly known by Observation, and
their eternal Election pointed out to the view of the World, so that we may say
(as a great many Phantasticks do say) Lo here is a Saint, and lo there is a
Saint? Has not our Lord himself told us Luke 17.20. The Kingdom of God comes
not with Observation, that is, neither at his Appearance in the last day, nor
at his Appearance in the Hearts of Men by his good Spirit in this day of Grace
and Salvation, so as to be outwardly discerned,

Or can this Mystery be comprehended by the discourse of Reason, when the
Scripture (as I have proved) is silent in it, viz. with a reference to
particular numbers, wherein nevertheless you take upon you to be very positive?
affirming that there is a Million of Reprobates to one chosen to Salvation. A
dreadful thing it is, you say, to think upon, and I say again, it is a horrid
Blasphemy to speak it, which you are not afraid to write, viz. that the Lord
Jesus Christ came only into the World, to save one Man among a hundred
Thousand, or rather a Million. And though you say, it is an Abyss that neither
can nor ought to be sounded yet will you dare to be diving into it, though you
venture your Salvation upon it. The Lord give you Grace to Repent of this your
Boldness betimes, before it be too late.

Reflector.

If one durst to proceed upon this Subject father than I have done, and well
weigh the words of St. Paul Act. 14.16. That God in times past suffered all
Nations to walk in their own ways: that is to say, he left them to perish in
them, one might find that the proportion of the number of the Reprobate to that
of the Elect, before the Advent of Jesus Christ, and before the Preaching of
St. Peter had convented three thousand men, Is not the number, neither of a
thousand nor of a Million, but of Millions of Millions, to one Person that is
saved.

Answer.

Whereas you say if one durst to proceed upon this Subject farther than you
have done, It seems thereby you doubt no man durst do so, and well you might;
For I believe, no man, who has had any knowledge in the Mystery of Salvation,
would (if not out of fear of Gods Displeasure, yet for Humanities sake) proceed
so far in it, as you have done. The words of St. Paul which you quote out of
Acts 14.16. will not infer such a damnable Conclusion, as you have brought from
them, if they be well weighed, as you should have done them; For first, albeit
the Nations of old were sufferd to walk in their own ways, i. e. without that
clear Light to guide them, which now shines in the time of the Gospel, yet
does it not follow that God so left them that they all might perish therein,
that is a stretch of your own, and a false gloss that you put upon Gods
Providence in his Government of the World.

2. What were those ways which they walked in? There is no necessity to
Interpret them the ways of sin, unless it be of their Idolatry: For there is no
Question, but in many of those Nations, if not in all of them, there were
allways some leading men, who were just, temperate, meek, innocent in their
Lives, who did infuse Principles of Virtue into the minds of the common sort,
without which they could not well live comfortably together; And I could name
you some Divines of our Church in former times, Eminent for Holiness and
Learning who have to this purpose written of those Nations. Thus says one,
Precepts of moral Conversation have been among Heathens as soundly delivered,
and some as strictly observed, as if Moses had taught and lived amongst them:
Reprehensions likewise of all sorts of Vices, and Commendations of their
contrary Virtues they have both wisely conceived, faithfully proved, and
earnestly persuaded, and although they were ignorant of the Joys of Heaven, and
the Torments of Hell, yet in their Gentile Learning they saw Reason sufficient
that the Embracers of these contrary Qualities should be contrary-wise
Recompensed.

Certainly (says another) the Civil Virtuous Courses, and Commendable Actions
of many Famous Renowned Pagans, such as Fabritius, Aristides, and the like were
not mala in se, nor Sins, Depravations, or evil Acts in themselves, but good,
as the Pearl is bred in the Sea, in a Shellfish, materially Water, but of
Heavenly or Aereal Dew, and in Value and Account, for the Clearness, Smoothness
or whatsoever condition it has, rather resembles and refers unto Heaven,
than to the Sea: So some Men Naturalists in the Sea of this World, have bred,
nourished, fomented in them, by sweet Influx of Gods general Grace and
Providence, those commendable Qualities and correspondent Actions, which in
themselves simply are accepted of by God, do not displease him, are rewarded by
him.

Notwithstanding all this thus far I consent unto you, if these excellent
Moralities of the Heathens be not at some time or other clothed either with an
implicit or explicit Faith in Christ (as who knows but that they may?) That
being the Formality and Life of every work truly and Essentially Good, they are
not so accepted of, as to be rewarded with Salvation and Eternal Life. For
however they be specious among us here on Earth, it is the Image and
Superscription of Christ upon them that makes them Current in Heaven. But
seeing the Work of Faith whereby Christ comes to dwell in the Hearts of men may
be secretly and suddenly wrought in them without the use of ordinary means, as
appears by Examples out of Scripture, it may, and seeing it may be said of
the People of those Nations of old that were suffered to walk in their own
ways, that they were not far from the Kingdom of God, such of them, I mean, of
whom History reports that they did excel in good Works, why should you
pronounce upon them so hard a Sentence as to say, God left them to perish in
their Sins? Why indeed? but only because you are still for perishing, perishing
upon the least occasion that you can meet with, and to make sure of your
general Damnation that it may fall upon your Millions of Millions, for so you
now mouth it out, in comparison of one that shall be saved.

The Opinion of Justin Martyr (whom you asperse from your Scotch Author) of the
Heathens partaking of (...) (the Evangelists word of Christ) would have been
more tolerable: The virtuous Qualities, says he, and commendable Endowments of
Heathens living after (...) were Christian Ornaments and Cognisances of that
House: For true Virtue is Christianity, That Continence, Temporance, Justice
and Honesty, and the rest, they had by a Participation of that (...), which
originally is from Christ, and which eminently and properly, though not by them
understood, is Christ. Thus he; This without doubt sounds better than your
uncharitable judging. So likewise does the Opinion of Clemens Alexandrinus (for
whom you have some Favor) show by his words (which I could relate if need were)
what he thought of the Salvation of the Heathen, before Christ's Incarnation.

You might have added to these Epiphanius and St. Chrysostom who were as much
of the same opinion as the former. These all do clearly speak of the ways that
Heathens walked in before Christ came; And their words in this Case, which I
could reckon up unto you, (but that for Brevities sake I omit them) are rather
to be taken for Sound and Orthodox than yours which tend so directly to
Destruction.

Reflector.

One might find that in the Posterity of Abraham, which God had chosen out of
the general Damnation to be his Elect People, and his peculiar Treasure, there
were scarce of five hundred or a Thousand Israelites one that was Elected,
faithful, and in whom there was no Guile.

Answer.

Having driven the Heathen into Hell you now go on to spend your Censure upon
the Israel of God, whom you say God had chosen out of the general Damnation to
be his Elect People, etc. with whom you deal as cruelly as you dealt with the
former, affirming that scarce one of five Hundred or a Thousand of them was
Elected, etc.

And is not this also a bold Aspersion? Does the Holy Ghost in Scripture set so
high a Value upon that People, as to account them Gods peculiar Treasure (as
you your self call them) his first Born, his Portion, his Inheritance, a holy
Nation, with many other Titles of singular Favor and Honor that are given them,
not only when he first took them to be his People, but after they had Rebelled
against him, solemnly protesting unto them that though he would make a full end
of all Nations whither they were scattered, yet he would not make a full end of
them? And does not this people to this very day continue in the World to prove
Gods Promise in this kind to be true? And will you thus judge and condemn them
all to Hell except one in a Thousand?

It Is true (you may say, as the whole World will say) they were a stubborn and
stiff-necked People; and you may say that God has for a time quite forsaken
them; But to speak of them at the rate as you do, with a Reference to Gods
Eternal Election, what is this but Intrude your self most presumptuously into
the Secret of Gods Pavillion? Nor do you, it seems, thereby think it any
Robbery to be equal with God, in that you take upon you to search and know the
Hearts of Men, when you say there was scarce one among a Thousand of the
Posterity of Abraham that was Faithful, and in whom there was no Guile. If
these things be not to deprive God of his Honor, I know not what is. And if
they be not a hinderance to that happy Restoration of the Jews which is
expected by us, let the World judge. But you go on Mr. Reflector, to add
greater Abominations, for thus you write.

Reflector.

I dare not make any further Advance in this matter, for fear lest I may be
deceived in the Calculation, not in having made the number of the Reprobate too
great, but because I have not made it great enough.

Answer.

You have already advanced notably against the Mercies of God, and the Merits
of our Redeemer Jesus Christ But now you say, you dare not make any farther
advance in this matter. It is a good hearing that you are come to the end of
your march. Alas man, what is it that frights you, that you are put to this
Nonplus? Has the Captain of your general Damnation met you, that you are in
some danger to be hurried away by the Millions of Millions that you have listed
under his Power? Or do you begin to Repent you of your daring in that you have
done? I would it were so for the Truths sake, and for the Churches sake, and
for your own Souls sake: No, but it is for fear, you say, that you have been
deceived in the Calculation, as doubtless you have been, and it were good for
you to learn a better Art of Arithmetic in this Point, than hitherto you have
learned.

But you are so far from that, that you fear you have not made the number of
the Reprobate great enough. What, will not Millions of Millions satisfy your
cruel Mind? This is indeed somewhat to your purpose of a general Damnation; and
what does it signify, but that you are ambitious to be the prime Feweller to
the Prince of Darkness, to fill up his Tophet by throwing all the whole Race of
Mankind into Hellfire. Insomuch that he may now save himself the labor of
walking about, seeking whom he may devour, for thou O merciless man, have done
his work for him. But what is it that has put you upon this divellish Design?
Some great matter will be expected from you.

As for all the observations which you or any man else have made of the State
and Condition of the World from the Days of Adam down to these Days, all your
scrutiny into the over-spreading Idolatry, and sinful Course of men's Lives in
the several Ages of it, all of them I say, are in this case not worth a Rush;
Yea all your Typical Prefigurations, which you here in your Pamphlet have
fancied of the judgment to come, are of no Value; For if the time when this
Judgment shall be, is unknown to all the Angels of Heaven, much less can the
number of Gods Elect, taking it but comparatively as you do, be known to you
(poor man) or any other whatsoever, neither can there be, without a daring
desperate Presumption, any scrutiny made into it, so as to derogate from the
Merits of our Merciful and Faithful high Priest Jesus Christ.

What then is it that you will pretend unto, which has put you upon this
pragmatical busying your self in that which is so much above your reach? You
say you have your Warrant from Scripture-Evidence; For thus you write (meaning
that this your determination must pass for current.)

Reflector.

Especially after all the Reflections I might make thereupon, as are these.

First God says by his Prophet Jeremiah, chap 3. v. 14. That he will take but
one of a City, and two of a Family or Tribe, to bring them to Zion.

2. Of a hundred Sheep, he will leave ninety and nine of them to their
wanderings.

3. Jesus Christ took a long Journey to the City of Samaria, which was called
Sychar, to Signalize the Conversion of one poor Samaritan Woman Joh. 4.4. usque
ad 27.

4. Presupposing that the Children of Israel were as great in number as the
Sand on the Seashore, yet but a Remnant of them shall be saved, (...), Romans
9.27. Is. 10.22, 23.

5. The Lord had but very few names in Sardis, Rev. 3.4.

6. Of the ten Lepers that were healed, there was but one that returned to give
glory to God, Luke 17.

7. In truth there is incomparably a far greater number of commen Stones and
Pebbles than there is of Diamonds, Saphirs and Pearls, and yet Jesus Christ
does only make use of these in the Building and Structure of his House.

8. Few persons find the way that leads to the Kingdom of Heaven, and Life
Everlasting, strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads thereunto, and
few there that be find it.

Answer.

These (Mounsieur) are your Triarii, else you would not have ushered them in
with such a terrifying Preface, nor made them your last Reserve, ordering them
in Rank and File so Paragraphically, (not like your former which were huddled
up altogether in a heap) that so the more notice might be taken of them.

And now let all men that have any understanding in the holy Scripture give
their opinion of this Reflector; Would any one but a Fool or a Madman lay so
great a weight upon so sandy a Foundation, as this Octonary of Reflections
seems even at first fight to be, and which, upon a serious perusal of them,
cannot but be construed a miserable wresting of the Holy Oracles of God? Let us
consider them here severally each one by it self, and in such words, as you
render them.

First God says by his Prophet Jeremiah Chap. 3. v. 14. That he will take but
one of a City, and two of a Family, or Tribe, to bring them to Zion.

Here I must mind you by the way, that as you render the Sense of the Prophets
words to another parpose than the Spirit of God intended them, so you word it
otherwise than God spoke it. God does not say, he will take but one of a City,
and two of a Family, etc. (your word (But) whereby you would hook in your
sinister Opinion, will prove a Butt for Gods Anger against you) but thus says
God, I will take you, one of a City, and two of a Family, that is (not as you
would have it, of a Tribe, but) of a Country or Nation, (for so the word Family
is in Scripture sometimes used and must be so here) the true sense whereof is
this; Gods calls upon his People Israel when they had forsaken him to return
unto him, and to encourage them, speaks words of Comfort and Kindness, uti
pater ver. 12. Return thou backsliding Israel, and I will not cause mine Anger
to fall upon you, for I am merciful, etc. Turn O backsliding Children, for I
am married unto you, and I will take you one of a City, etc. o^ as it is Is.
27.12. one by one, q. d. Seeing I am joined to you all in such a Contract, I
will pick out and gather you all out of the several places and Countries into
which you have been dispersed, that though there should be but some one only of
you in a City, or some two only in a whole Country, yet they should not be
neglected, but should be culled out; or as the Lord speaks by the Prophet Amos,
Am. 9.9. I will sift the house of Israel among all Nations, like as Corn is
sifted in a Sieve, yet shall not the least Grain fall upon the Earth, or, be
lost, and I will bring you to Sion, or join you to my Church, whereof Sion is a
Type, that so all Israel may be saved, Romans 11.26.

This being the genuine Sense of the place, how can it, with any serenity of
Conscience be wrested to that, to which you apply it? If it be said, it is so
interpreted by way of Allusion, I grant, by a Collusion it is; neither do
Similitudes all men know, prove any thing at all Argumentative, only Rhetorice,
they may be of some use some times, but not in this place.

Secondly, Of a hundred Sheep God will leave ninety and nine of them to their
wanderings, Mat. 18.12.

Rather he will leave them in a sure and safe Fold, or in a good Pasture. God
commits his People, that is his Flock to his Pastors which he has set in his
Church, that they may be fed, so the charge was given to Peter, feed my Sheep,
feed my Lambs. He does not then leave them to their wandering, if so, he would
have no great cause to rejoice when he returns home with his stray sheep upon
his Shoulders, sweating under his Burden, where he sees that during his
Absence, all his flock are gone astray.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ took a long Journey to the City of Samaria, which was
called Sychar to Signalize the Conversion of one poor Samaritan Woman, Joh.
4.4. to 27.

A long Journey you call it: It was a Journey that he had been acquainted with
before, for this is not the first time that he came into those parts, and he
came you say to Signalize (a word of your Country (possibly) or of your own
coining) the Conversion of one poor Samaritan Woman. Whereas it appears not
by all the Discourse that passed between him and the Woman, nor by the Report
that she made of him to the men of Sychar that she was such a Convert, as you
imagine; And if it were so, she was not the only Convert in that City, for it
is said v. 4.1. that many believed, because of his own words, and the
confession that they made of him was much more signal, than any thing we read
of the Woman, how then did he come thither to convert that one Woman?

But let all be granted that you say of this matter, what is it to your
purpose? eve just nothing, it will signify rather against you, that he went
thither to open the Treasures of Mercy and Grace to the poor despised
Samaritans. Is this your Reflection then of any value?

4. Presupposing that the Children of Israel were as great in number as the
Sand on the Seashore, yet but a Remnant of them shall be saved, (...), Romans
9.27.

[Presupposing] and why so? Was not the same Promise made to Abraham Genesis
22.17. Totidem verbis? and repeated again by the Apostle Heb. 11.12? Why then
should any man speak doubtfully in this Point? I confess, it is a proverbial
form of Speech used commonly to signify an innumerable Multitude, Judge. 7.12.
Is. 48.19. but is it not clear hereby, that when any thing is mentioned in
Scripture that may tend to the enlarging of Gods Mercy toward the World, it is
by you but lightly regarded, (as it has been noted before) whereas any thing
that may but seemingly advance your general Damnation that must be stretched to
the uttermost? So here an innumerable multitude that may signify the Elect of
God (in some sense) is ushered in with a doubtful presupposing, as if the thing
were uncertain.

Well, but this being so, what will follow thereupon? Nothing at all to serve
the present Turn; for can any man infer from hence directly that not above one
in a Million shall be saved eternally?

Admit that the Remnant of the Israelites who were delivered from the Sword of
the Assyrian (which is the proper meaning of the Prophet in that place) were a
Type of Gods Elect among that People to be saved by Christ (as some imagine)
what is this to all the Elect of God all the World over? Yea and when the whole
Nation of the Jews is restored again to their former Glory (as there is no
doubt but they shall be) it may as well be concluded to be a Type of universal
Redemption, (which the Arminians will be ready to catch at, so that then there
shall be no (...) (as your word is) or rather no (...), no Reliquiae, but all
the whole Race of Mankind shall be saved, which is an opinion not to be
warranted by the word of God.

5. Christ had but very few names in Sardis, Rev. 3.4. Ergo.

A most Incongruous Ergo must this be accounted by all men, but it is of the
same kind as the rest are; and therefore there need no more be said unto it,
but only to fix a non sequitur upon it, unless we may say, you wrest the
Scripture from the right understanding to a Reprobate Sense.

6 Of the ten Lepers that were healed, there was but one that returned to give
Glory to God.

From hence if any thing may be gathered in reference to Eternal Salvation, it
may be said (which nevertheless must not be said) that there shall be a
Decimation of all Mankind at the last day, one amongst then to be saved, or
rather it may be you would have it there shall be then a Centuriation of
Millions of men, that shall then be culled out for Salvation which will amount
to your reckoning, but that you reckon, as we say, without-Book. i.e. without
the Records which are laid up in Archivis, far out of your reach.

7. There is incomparably a far greater number of common Stones and Pebbles
than there is of Diamonds, Saphirs, and Pearls: And yet Jesus Christ makes use
only of such as these in the Building and Structure of his house.

Grant all that you here say, viz. that Jesus Christ makes use only of Precious
Stones for the Building of his House, yet what stone is there laid, which is
not of his own squaring, framing, polishing, yea of his Creation? And surely,
since he will have his house of a large Extent, we may believe he will create
materials answerable thereto, for Number as well as for Quality: Yea and rather
than fail he will take them immediately out of the Quarry of corrupt Nature
into his own hands, to fit and smooth them for his purpose: of Pebbles and
common stones he can make them Agates, Saphirs, Carbuncles, and what not?

8. Few Persons find the way that leads to the Kingdom of Heaven and Life
Everlasting, strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way that leads thereto, and
few there be that find it.

This, we may believe, you make the main Pillar of your Building. But this
Pillar is already removed, and set in its right place; The removal whereof has
made your whole Building to shake, for when your Scripture-Evidence (so you
call it in your Title Page) has proved to be invalid, as to your purpose, your
and cetera that there follows is but as a Spectrum to fright inconsiderate
people, or as a single simple Cipher, signifying nothing.

Behold here (good Readers) what strong and nervous Arguments the Reflector
has used to maintain the Doctrine of his general Damnation, and how easily, as
he would make us believe they do enervate and weaken all that may be said
against it. Who will not now rather think that the man has been given up to a
spiritual Blindness, not being able to discern that Truth and Reason, which are
so clear against him? contraria juxta se posita magis Illucescunt.

The Triarii being thus routed, and the Commander having advanced yet farther
with a Party of the same Spirit, forcing the holy Scripture to wait upon him in
his Salleys against the Gospel of our Savior; We are now to see whether the
other Weapons of his, surreptitiously taken out of that Sacred and Celestial
Armarium, be well managed by him, and what Edge they carry in them to do him
Service, or rather disservice to Christ and his Church. These are they that are
produced in the 10th. and 11th. Pages of his Book, where he thus fluttereth.

Reflector.

Of ten Thousand to whom that Holy God-Man Jesus Preached, hardly will you be
able to prove, or substantially find any thing to ground your Belief that a
hundred of them were Converted, whereof the greatest part thought that Jesus
Christ was come into the World, not to establish a spiritual Kingdom in it,
made up of Saints and faithful Souls, but to erect an earthly Empire, and to
set up Tabernacles in it.

Answer.

First, for the reckoning that is here made of the ten Thousand to whom Christ
preached, concerning whom I will not contend, only it may be demanded why such
a scant number should be set of them? Was not Christ (as he is called Romans
15.8.) The Minister of the Circumcision, that is, of the whole Jewish Nation?
And did he not Preach to others that were no Jews? For he was (...), the
Messenger of the great Counsel (as the Septuagint Render that written of him,
Es. 9.6.) and does it not hereby appear that the Reflector writes at Random, as
his fancy only leads him, without any warrant? for there is not the least
tittle in Scripture of the ten Thousand that Christ came to Preach unto.

Neither will I much contend about the term that the Reflector here puts upon
our Lord calling him God-Man. Our Lord Jesus Christ is indeed God and Man, but
is this term, God-Man, according to the form of sound. Words? It Is true, Christ
is often called (...) by Human Writers, but never so in holy Scripture; And
though the Greek bears it well enough, yet the Idiom of our Language will not,
whereupon we are forced in that case to use a Periphrasis, and to say God and
Man. Why then should this Reflector make use of such an uncouth Word when he
speaks of our most Holy and Righteous Lord which neither the Scripture nor our
Language will allow him? only because as he differs from men that are Rational
in his opinion, so he does, I say again, take up a form of Speech, like the
Quakers, differing from all other men.

But though this holy Man of God, or rather this (...) God and Man did Preach
and Speak so as never man spoke, yet we are told here that hardly shall we be
able to prove or substantially find any thing to ground our Belief that a
hundred of them were converted, etc. What then was there any failing in the
Doctrine which he Preached, or in the Spirit wherewith he spoke? Far be from us
any such Blasphemy. The work which the Father had sent him to do he perfectly
fulfilled it: But it was not all to be finished during the time of his
Ministration, some things were to be done by him while he was in the state of
his Humiliation, and some things after he came into the state of his Exaltation.

The perfect Conversion of sinners from Ignorance to the true Knowledge of the
Gospel, and from Unbelief to a full Considence or Assurance of Faith was not
(as it is the work of Gods free Grace) to be consummated by Christ until he was
Ascended into Heaven, and set at the right Hand of his Father, for then and not
before, was the Holy Ghost to be sent for that very end and purpose amongst
many other.

Which powerful Act of the Spirit was first Wrought upon the Apostles that they
might be instructed more fully to the Kingdom of God. For even they, during the
time that they were with Christ, and were Witnesses of what he did and taught,
were very defective both in Faith and Life. In faith, about the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, and about a temporal Kingdom, which was their Error as
it was of the rest of the Jews. In Life, when they were too full of Revenge in
drawing the Sword, as Peter, or for calling down fire from Heaven upon the
Samaritans, as James and John, Luk 9.54. It was the Spirit after the
Resurrection and Glorification of Christ that was to bring all things to their
Remembrance whatsoever he had said unto them. It was the Spirit which should
then lead them into all Truth. It was the Spirit which, after Christ was
Glorified, made them clearly to understand the Prophecies which went before of
him. Thus it is said, Joh. 12.16. These things understood not his Disciples at
the first, but when Christ was Glorified, etc.

It was the Spirit which should adapt and fit them for the great Work of
Converting the World, which otherwise they could never have been able to bring
to pass. And as it began thus with the Apostles, so did this Grace extend unto
others in the same manner (secundum modum Recipientium) thus testified the
Evangelist Joh. 7.39. This spoke he of the Spirit which they that believe on
him should Recieve, for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not
yet Glorified.

These things considered we may see some cause why there were not many
Converted by the Preaching of Jesus Christ. Yet cannot a Conclusion be gathered
from thence that there were but few then of Gods Elect among that People,
unless we will exclude the Apostles, or at least other the Disciples of Christ
from eternal Salvation, who had also their failings both in Faith and Obedience
because the Holy Ghost was not then given.

Reflector.

Jesus Christ says that his Flock is small, that there are but few Persons
that enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that when he shall come again upon the
Earth, be shall not find Faith in it, that all the world shall run after the
Beast; That the number of the Elect is very little in comparison of those that
are called, and consequently that the number of the called is infinitely less
than that of those who are not called, and that know not what the Christian
Religion is.

Answer.

We had best beware what we say of our Lord Jesus Christ at any time so as to
tell the World, Jesus Christ says, when he has not spoken it, for fear lest
that Rebuke fall upon us which fell upon the Prophets of old, behold I am
against you that smooth your Tongues, and say, he says.

Let these Scriptures be searched which are heaped together, and it will
evidently appear they say no such thing as you say of them. First, when Christ
calls his Flock little slock, he speaks not of the Elect of God all the World
over, as you imagine, that would be contrary to the Holy Scripture, which in
several places speaks of them as of a great multitude: But it is certain he
speaks it only of his Apostles who were his peculiar care above all others: as
is plainly to be seen in my Antidote.

2. Christ never said that there are but sew Persons that enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. But speaking of the narrow Way that leads to Life, he
says, sew there be that find it, meaning probably sew there be of the Jewish
Nation at that time that were so wise as they should be to find it. Metapha
canibus investigantibus.
For so the word (...) signifies, sagaciter depichendo as it is written at
large in the aforesaid Antidote.

3. Christ says not, as you say, when he shall come again upon the Earth, he
shall not find faith in it. The words that you harp upon in this particular
(though jarringly) are those in Luke 18.8. When the Son of man comes shall he
find Faith on the Earth? And now consider how great a difference there is
between your words, and the words of our Savior. First, he says not when he
shall come again upon the Earth. For the Earth, where is it at that time? St.
Peter tells us, the Earth and the Works that are therein shall then be burnt up
2 Pet. 3.10. But his coming shall be in a Cloud with Power and great Glory,
Luke 21.27. so say the Evangelists, and the Psalmist says, he makes the Clouds
his Chariot, Psalm. 104.3. such a Chariot it was that carried him into Heaven,
and such a Chariot it must be, on which he will Ride, when he comes again, (so
the Angels tell the Apostles Act. 1.11.) But that will not be to the Earth, the
Wheels of his Chariot will not strike so low, St. Paul who knew better than any
man the way to the third H^aven and the way back again, he I say shows the
utmost extent of his Stage which will be at that time, viz. the air, for thus
he writes 1 Th^ss. 4.17. Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up
together with the Angels in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the Air, etc. To
speak therefore of Christ's coming again upon the Earth what is it, but a Dream?
2. He says not, as you say, he shall not find faith upon the Earth, but only
by way of Interrogation thus, Shall he find Faith, etc? between which sayings
there is some difference. But 3. There is a great Error that follows which
has deceived many, and you among the rest, who have rendered the word of our
Savior here, as if he meant that all the whole Christian Profession should be
utterly then Banished out of the World by a general Apostasy and Defection from
the Faith; This I say is a great Error that has gone about the World, and you
it seems are willing somewhat to revive it: But this is not the meaning of our
Savior, for then would the Church be quite dissolved, and how then should his
Promise be fulfilled, viz. that he would be with his People to the end of the
World? Can Christ be with his Church to the end of the World, and yet find no
Faith in it at all? You Will say, he means but little says, or but sew that have
faith: and I say he means no such matter, but that it is to be doubted whether
he shall find any Faith, meaning any Jewith Christians in the Land of Judaea
when he comes to Judge the persecuting Jews that were in that Land: For so the
word (...) is to be understood, Rev. 1.7.
viz. for this Land of Judaea, not for all the Earth as it has been taken (as
(...) Tribes of Israel) which word of our Savior came to pass at that time
when Jerusalem was destroyed as it is observed by Eu^cbius. The People of the
Church in Jerusalem, that is, the Christians there, according to an Oracle
delivered by Revelation to some honest Men among them, commanding them to go
over Jordan to a City called Pella, did all remove thither, and left Jerusalem
without any Christians in it at their Destruction: Which clearly fulfilled the
Prophecy of our Savior, when the Son of man comes shall he find faith in
this Land? that is, the Land of Judaea.

In the next place you lead us to one of St. John's Visions and Revelations:
But neither does Jesus Christ, nor his Angel, nor his Servant John say as you
say that all the World shall run after the Beast. The words in the place that
is here fixed upon are in the original (...), which are not to be taken for all
the World in your Sense, but for the whole Land or Region where the Roman
Idolatry was set up. Neither do the following words, viz. (...) signify a
running or wandering after the Beast, but a wondering behind or after it, which
implies their great Veneration of that Idol-Worship: Which is further expressed
by their saying, who is like unto the Beast? who can sight with him, that is,
who is able to oppose this Idol-Worship, or resist the Power by which it is
upheld? Rev. 13.4. And what Idol-Worship was this, but that which was professed
in the Capitol at Rome by the Inhabitants of that City while it was Heathenish?
See Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase upon this matter and his Annotations.

This (very probably) is the right sense of the Spirit of God in those words
(...). That Exposition of them therefore which you give, and not only you, but
some other Expositors that have of late taken upon them to make their
Revelations of the Revelation, Mr. Brightman, etc.
rendering the said words as you do, viz. that the whole World shall run after
the Beast, meaning the Pope and his Idolatrous Worship, cannot be good; much
what like unto that which has been gathered falsely from this Book of the
Revelation, viz. that the People are they, that must pull down Antichrist,
whilst Kings espouse his cause, than which nothing can be more effectual and
direct (says Dr. Hammond) toward the raising and fomenting of Commotions in
the World; which is certainly contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel.

But let me now here demand of all those that have been of your mind, what is
all this to your purpose? surely nothing. Yet, if it were so, as you seem to
say, that there shall be a general Defection, or falling away to Romish
Idolatry, so that all Nations and People in the World shall run after the
Beast, will it necessarily follow that God from everlasting decreed that not
above one in a Million of Millions shall ever be saved? Cannot a true faith be
wrought in the Hearts of Idolatrous People before they depart out of this
World? is any thing too hard for God? It is no novelty, for the Spirit of God
to work such a Conversion secretly, suddenly, in a way unknown to the World,
and to deliver People at the very last moment of their Lives out of the Snare
of Satan, as Brands plucked out of the Burning. And do not you tell us even the
very same thing in the 29. Page of your Book that Jesus Christ will save those
that have truly Repented, though even at the last Period of their Lives?

Such gracious Acts of Gods infinite Goodness have been done upon those that
seemed to be as Castaways in the Eye of the World, and doubtless may be done
again. Gods Arm is not shortened, nor his Bowels less yearning toward his poor
Creatures that are ready to perish in their Sins, through the malice of Hell,
which has originally brought them into that wretched Condition. But of these
things enough has been written in the aforesaid Antidote, no need therefore
here to write of them again.

As for that which is here added about the number of the Elect in comparison of
those that are called, enough also has been said thereof in the Antidote
aforesaid.

These are the Scripture-Evidences which the Reflector has produced to
maintain the dreadful Doctrine of a general Damnation. All which the wise and
pious Reader will now see to be far short of proving that which is so stoutly
affirmed in the Title Page of his Book of Reflections, viz. That not one of a
hundred Thousand, (nay probably not one in a Million) from Adam down to our
times shall be saved. Or as the said opinion is stretched in the 21th Page of
the said Book, viz. the proportion of the number of the Reprobate to that of
the Elect, before the Advent of Jesus Christ and before the Preaching of St.
Peter had Converted three thousand men, is not the number, neither of a
Thousand, nor of a Million, but of Millions of Millions to one Person that is
saved.

There yet remains one Reflection more which will require some animadversion
upon it, that is, the Idea or Character (as the Reflector calls it) of the
Children of God, made by himself in setting a multitude of Marks and Signs upon
them, without which, he says, they cannot be saved, all which he makes the
essential and constituent Parts belonging to every true Christian. And from
thence he imagined, that his opinion of the general Damnation is concluded to
be a certain truth, because they are not all to be found in one man amongst a
Million.

But festina lent (as we say) for haste makes waste, are these all, being
about thirty of them, to be found together in one man? I believe, without any
breach of Charity, they were not all to be found in himself that so compiled
them? else he would never have been so uncharitable, nor so unrighteous, as he
was, in his passionate raging Heats against the Church of England, nor, in
accusing several of the most Eminent Champions of the Gospel in it against the
Superstitions of Rome, laying to their charge things which they knew not, as
that they leaned to Popery, and had made their advances toward Rome, wherein,
by his own Confession upon his Deathbed, he thought they were not guilty,
wishing that his Soul might be with their Souls whom he had so much and
unjustly defamed, but let that go.

This I may say boldly, to glean the holy Scripture, raking together several
Duties of Piety, Charity, Righteousness, etc. required in it, and to annex unto
them such a terrible Threatening as this, viz. without them there can be no
Salvation, this cannot agree with the Spirit of the Gospel: Had it been said,
without Faith and Repentance no man can be saved, I for my part would readily
have subscribed thereto. But as that Legislator had stated the Case, designedly
to give some corroboration to his unevangelical Opinion, he seemed to me to be
as one sent from Moses with two new Decades of Laws, more dreadful than the
Decalogue proclaimed on Mount Sinai.

For, as for the Violation of that Decalogue we hear a comfortable sound, Jesus
Christ the Righteous is the Propitiatory (1 John 2.2.) meaning doubtless that
such a Violation shall, upon true Repentance pentance, be so hidden by Christ,
that it shall never appear in Judgment for Condemnation to any that believe
(for in those words the Holy Evangelist alludeth to the Mercy-Seat which
covered the Ark of the Covenant from the sight of God, (where the Tables of
that Law lay) But for the Violation of these Laws which come out of Sion (as
being written in the New Testament) there is no Propitiation: for where there
is a failing in these, we are told there can be no Salvation.

But let us consider the matter a little better. It were an excellent thing
indeed, and as it were a Heaven upon Earth to have such a Characterism upon us
while we live in this present evil World, and let us on Gods name press toward
it as the Apostles word is, Phil. 3. that if by any means we may attain (not
only to the (...), to which all Mankind shall attain but) to the (...), that is
the word, the glorious Resurrection of the Dead; Let us be spiritually minded
(for for so the Reflector Characteriseth the Elect of God) which is, so to know
the things of the Spirit, as to believe them; so to believe them as to affect
them and esteem them, so to esteem them, as to seek them, so to seek them, as
to seek them in the first place, let us abstain from carnal and worldly Lusts,
let our Thoughts and Meditations be more set upon God than the World, let us
live Soberly and Righteously and Holily in this present evil World, etc.
Nevertheless if in these or the like any of us shall come short of the Glory of
God, or of the Glory from God, meaning Gods Acceptance and Approbation (as it
must be confessed with the Apostle in many things we offend all, and too many
offend in all) we are comforted from the Evangelist, we have an Advocate with
the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous, etc. 1. Joh. 2.1.

Having yielded thus much in this Point, let me now Expostulate a little with
the Disciples of this Reflector concerning these things; Is it agreeable with
the Sense and Scope of the Gospel of our Savior to multiply signal
Demonstrations of Gods elect Children, by imposing Duties upon them, as if they
were all exactly to be performed without any the least digression from the
Rule, and without making any mention at all either of Gods Grace assisting and
enabling thereto, or of Gods Mercy by Christ in pardoning the transgression of
them. adding only the Condemnation (as the Reflector has done) that shall fall
upon those, in whom those marks are not to be found? What Thunder and Lightning
from Sinai could be more dreadful? could any thing be said or written more
consonant to the Covenant of Works? Upon this account, I confess, the Doctrine
of general Damnation may prove to be, according to the usual saying, as true as
Gospel: but what then will become of the Covenant of Grace; and consequently of
the comfortable Doctrine of Salvation? will it not by this means be utterly
annulled, and made of no Effect.

2. What did the Reflector mean, when he said that in our days we can meet but
few that labor to take the Kingdom of Heaven by Violence? What, but that he
would catch at any thing that would but seem to hold up his Opinion of the
small number of persons that shall be saved.

For I demand, is the Kingdom of Heaven in these days to suffer violence, and
do the violent take it by force according to Christ's meaning when he spoke
those words, Mat. 11.12. Certainly if that be a good Exposition which I have
read an Interpreter one of a Thousand has given of them, viz. that the
multitude and meaner Crowd of the Jews who had heard John's Preaching came and
submitted themselves to the Rules of the Gospel, together with the Publicans
and Sinners, who were all looked upon by the Jews, as those that were accursed,
and had no right to the Messiah, and so were accounted as violent Persons,
Invaders and Intruders upon those Privileges which they imagined did
peculiarly belong unto them. If this, I say, be the true and genuine Sense of
those words, as in all likelihood it is, how can they be so stretched, as they
are wont to be to such an use and purpose as is commonly made of them?

I deny not but we may therehence obliquely infer that a holy Zeal in the
Service of our God is good and commendable that we are to strive to enter in at
the strait Gate, to sight the good fight of Faith, etc. But to argue from
thence that few in these days do take the Kingdom of Heaven by Violence,
therefore few shall be saved, is not to be endured, being both (...) and (...)
absurd and Irrational.

3. That the Reflector did take his marks amiss, for the greatest number of
them, and that they are defective in sundry particulars, as Coincidence,
Tautology, vain Repetitions, Contradictions, Misinterpretations of holy
Scripture, etc. may be easily proved if we should insist particularly upon
them. Some of them shall be here produced to that purpose, to give an essay of
the rest, v.g. It is said the Elect of God are to be regene rated, and that
they are passed from the state of Nature into a state of Grace: And what
difference is there between these two? are they not both one and the same? And
how often is this repeated by the Reflector? It is the common Crambe in his
Book, ad nauseam usque. Though Regeneration be much talked of, yet is it but
little understood. True, the Power of it is to be evidenced in the course of
our Lives: But the first working of it is (without doubt) in our Baptism,
wherein, as our Church Liturgy teaches us, we are made Members of Christ, the
Children of God, and Intheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven: And what does this
signify, but that we have then passed from the state of Nature into the state
of Grace? Hence it is that the Minister, after we have been Baptized,
pronounces openly before the whole Congregation, that we are then regenerated
and grafted into the Body of Christ's Church. And the Church likewise there
declares it to be certain by Gods word that Children which are Baptized, dying
before they commit any actual sin, are undoubtedly saved. All which do agree
with the Apostles Rules, Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27. etc.

If then we are Regenerated in our Baptism, and are thereupon changed from the
state of Nature into the state of Grace, and it be granted that these are the
marks of the Children of God and of the Members of Christ, can any man pass a
definitive Sentence upon us that we belong not to the number of Gods Elect?

I know and acknowledge there is some difference between an External Profession
of Religion which we take upon us in our Baptism by Water, and between a
Practical Conformity to the Rules of the Gospel and the Example of Christ,
which Conformity is the Effect of our inner Baptism by sire, and which will be
visible in the course of our Lives: But even this is not limited to any certain
time; for the work of Regeneration is never at an end while we live in this
World, it is indeed somewhat like to the ineffable Generation of the Son of God
which never cease, being as the School men speak of it, Actus commensurastes
Aeternitati, of the same size with Eternity, a permanent and everlasting
Generation, so our New Birth or Regeneration is not a transient Act, but a
permanent and continued Act, an Act which is still in being all the days of our
Lives. To this purpose I have heard a most Learned Divine, Dr. Collins by name
who was in my time Provost of Kings College in Cambridge and Regius Professor
of Divinity in that University deliver his Judgment at a Public Commencement
there, in these words, Quotidie Renati sumus, we are every day Regenerated.
Which being so, what judgment can any man make by the work of Regeneration in
us, of our eternal Election, so as positively to determine such an one is
Regenerated therefore he shall be saved, and such a one is not Regenerated,
therefore he shall be damned? The holy Apostle would that we judge nothing
before the time.

It will be said, may we not then judge of men, as we find them? If they live
Righteously, Soberly and Holily, so far as can be discerned by men, may we not
say so of them? yes without doubt, if we go no further in our judging: But to
judge of Gods eternal Election thereby, what is it, but to anticipate Gods
Judgment (as it has been said before) It is to intrude our selves into the
secret of Gods Pavillion, it is to invade Gods prerogative, it is an Arrogance
God will never endure. Yet is this a part of that course which according to the
Reflectors arguing we are to take in determining of the number of Gods Elect.

Another of his marks is to live in the Joys of the Holy Ghost, possessing a
peaceable serenity of mind, and an undisturbed Quiet of Soul, without which it
is concluded no man can be saved. And this is again repeated in the same words.
Religion consists in a continual Serenity of Joy, Peace of Soul, Tranquillity
of Mind. But what then will become of a broken Heart, of a wounded Spirit?
what? The Prophet David who knew better the Mind of the Almighty and Merciful
God, will tell such for their comfort, they are Gods Sacrifices, which he will
not despise, what account soever they be made of among uncharitable Men.

It were too much to follow the Track of all the Reflections which has been
made of this matter. I think I have pursued the chief of them with a tolerable
Reverberation, only before I conclude, I cannot but protest against the strange
and vehement Asseverations that are used in the carrying on of this pernicious
Doctrine. It is said to be as great a Truth as any can be in the World, viz.
that there is no Salvation but among Christians, and that the greatest number
of the Elect is amongst the Reformed, etc. But can a man with any serenity of
Soul and Conscience speak thus confidently of Gods secret Counsels and Decrees?
And what a bold and daring Affront is this which is put upon divine Truth, to
affirm that this Opinion of the small number of Gods Elect, so limited as is
here set down is as great a Truth as any can be in the World?

Surely that which was once unjustly laid upon a Pious and Reverend Prelate of
our Church by some Ministers in and about London may most justly be here
applied, viz. Is this as great a Truth as any can be in the World? what is it
not a more certain Truth that there is a God? Is it not a more certain Truth
that Jesus Christ is God and man? Is it not a more certain Truth that Christ is
the only Savior of the World? As great a Truth as any can be in the World?
Must this then be an Article of our Creed, the Cornerstone of our Religion,
must this be of necessity to Salvation? No greater Truth than this, which is no
Truth at all? O that men should not only forget themselves, but God also, and
in their Zeal for their own vain Fancies, utter words bordering upon Blasphemy.

I cannot likewise but protest against that which is written Page 23. where
complaining of the neglect of Piety in this Age, which is too true, and a thing
much to be lamented, it is said that many masters of Families, otherwise Sober,
Civil, True, Honest, Upright Dealers, and good Friends have wholly neglected
Family Duties, etc. God forbid that I or any man should speak or write a word
against the Religious Exercises of good Christians in private! that is and
shall I hope be ever far from me, let them still be continued in their due
order, provided that the public service of God, as it is now in use among us
here in this Church and Nation, be not thereby slighted and brought into
Contempt, as it has been in many places, especially in populous Cities and
Towns: Nay it were much better that the Family Duties were wholly omitted, than
the public Worship of God in our Churches and Congregations should be despised.

The Church certainly has taken great care for her Children in this matter,
appointing a method to be commonly used in the Service of God twice a day
throughout the year morning and evening, commanding the Holy Scripture to be
read so daily, that the Old Testament shall be read once every year, and the
New Testament thrice. And were it so that the Church-Liturgy were exactly
observed in every Church throughout the Nation, Ministers and People heartily
joining together, as the Common Prayer Book does appoint, what a Nation should
we be of holy Zealots for Gods Glory? Glory would then certainly dwell in our
Land, and never till then? Jesus Christ would be in his Throne amongst us, and
God would delight in us as his peculiar People. Then should we not need to fear
the Encroachments of Popery upon us any more, if we had once this Unanimity and
uniformity settled among us in the daily service of our God, O that God would be
pleased yet to open the Eyes of the People of this Nation, both high and low,
to see and understand this one needful thing, that will above all things else
bring Peace unto us, and establish it.

Let Family Duties I say again be performed in their due time, place and order,
but let them yield the precedence to the public, which of late years they have
not done, the greater is our sin: Yea though the private Piety and Zeal, I mean
that which is according to knowledge, has been the Fruit and Offspring of the
public Service of our God, yet through the Malice of the Devil it has come to
pass that the old word is verified in our Land, Filia devoravit Matrem, the
Mother which under God give a Being to the Daughter is devoured most viperously
by her own Issue, and the Daughter is perked up in her stead. And though a
spurious Brood of Errors does commonly spring from her, yet will she pretend
that all saving Truth is confined to her private Conventicles. Let this then be
done and there will be no need to complain any more of the omission of
Family Duties. Nor let any be scandalized at that which is here written in the
behalf of our Book of Common Prayer, but for Lewis du Moulin's sake let men
have better Thoughts of it who while he was in his Health and Jollity did
possibly join with others in a prejudice against it, but when he saw Death the
Sergeant of Heaven ready to lead him before Gods Tribunal, he then was of
another mind, to which purpose somewhat shall be here related of that which is
published of him by a good hand when he lay dying.

Doctor Du Moulin having sent to the Reverend Dr. Patrick Dean of Peterborough
to desire a Visit from him, being of his Parish, the Dean immediately upon the
Evening of the same day went unto him, and was Entertained with many
Expressions of great Affection to him, and high Esteem of him, when after some
comfortable words spoken to the sick man, he endeavored with meekness to
convince him of his great Offense against the Church of England, which he had
wronged Intolerably to the great Gratification of its Enemies, at such a time
when all sober Men should be its Friends, and without any real Cause for such
imputations as he had charged upon it, Whereupon Dr. Du Moulin replied
somewhat, needless here to be repeated, but yielded thus far, as to say, well
Doctor, pray to God to pardon me all my Sins, especially my want of Charity.

Accordingly the Dean kneeled down by his Bed side and began with the Lords
Prayer, so proceeding to the other Prayers, which are appointed by the Order in
the Common Prayer Book for the Visitation of the sick, in all which the sick
man joined with lifting up his hands often, and other Expressions of Devotion;
Especially at that passage (in the Prayer, when there appears small hope of
Recovery) give him unfeigned Repentance for all the Errors of his Life past,
etc. He gave more than ordinary signs of his fervent Desire, and when the Dean
had done he gave him most hearty thanks, and renewed his Expressions of
extraordinary Affection to him and esteem or him.

A little after, the Dean coming to see him again, he was so affected with his
Kindness in giving him a new Visit, that he said, Are you come again Sir? O how
charitable are you! This is indeed to return me good for evil.

And after some discourse with him, desired him to Pray with him again, for
your Prayers, said he, were very comfortable to me the last time. And
accordingly he did, in the same form of words he had used before: With which he
was so much affected, that when the Dean had solemnly commended him to Gods
Blessing, in that excellent Form; Unto Gods gracious Mercy and Protection we
commit thee, the Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc. he laid hold upon his hand
(which he held up over him) and kissed it with an unusual Passion.

Such an Example as this one would think should incline People who are apt to
speak evil of that excellent Form of Prayer prescribed by the Church in that
Book, and of the whole Method of Divine Service in it, to be much humbled
before God for their depraving it, and to make better use of it, than hitherto
they have done, by making it their daily Rule for the ordering of their public
and Family Duties and Devotions with Reverence and godly fear.

The last thing that I shall here take notice of is that which is added toward
the close of these Reflections, viz. a plain contradiction of them, and which
overthrows all that is before written of the general Damnation, in these
words, They that find there is nothing but Wickedness in them, and Death by
sin, and that they have only the name of Christians, and have denied the Power
of Godliness, and that they deserve for ever to be cast out of the presence of
the Almighty, may have hope; for even in that miserable and much to be pitied
Estate God Counsels the sinner to make use of the Remedy that he offers him,
and to touch the Scepter of Grace which is extended to him, which will
infallibly work the Salvation of the Soul; for God's ways are not like to man's,
nor are his Thoughts like to those of sinful flesh, his Ways and Thoughts are
inconceivable, the height and depth of them immeasurable toward sinners that
Repent: where by the ways of God you are to understand those of his Mercies,
and not those of his Knowledge and Wisdom.

This I must say sounds well, and I wish that all the rest that is written in
that Book of Reflections had agreed thereto, but there is as much difference
between this and them as there is between the Colors of White and Black. I
have been willing to add this in the close, that if ever it should happen these
Papers may come into the Hands of any Disconsolate Soul, it may see that here
both from the Reflector and my self which may bring some comfort unto it.

Remember the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he spoke at his last
Supper, viz. This is my Body.
IT is much to be Lamented that there have been so long a time perverse
Disputings and uncharitable Dissentions about these words among those who are
or should be partakers of the same Precious Faith, when if they were understood
aright, it might well be presumed, that instead of Animosities and fiery
Persecutions which have too much abounded, a sweet Peace and Brotherly
Accordance had ere this time happily overspread the Christian World, to the
Adorning of the Doctrine of God our Savior, even among those that are without.

It is not too late yet for us to use our utmost endeavor toward the making
up of this Peace, I say not, by affording any Connivence to Error, but, by
rendering an Interpretation (rational in the Judgment of all men) of these
words, which may possibly be a great furtherance unto it: And if my poor
Judgment may be of any Value, I think (after fifty years Employment that I have
had in the work of the Ministry) that such a sense may be given of them,
which, though it be not to be found in the common Road of Expositors, yet may
lead all sorts of People of what persuasion soever they be (if they be not
possessed with a Spirit of Contradiction) to the nearest way of a right
Understanding, the meaning of our Savior in them, and consequently to a more
peaceable and christian-like Living together in the World, and loving one
another than has been among us in former times.

True it is, Satan has prevailed mightily in this his Masterpiece of
Mischief, to sow Discord and Variance about that very thing, which our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, has ordained to be a means to unite his
People together in Love. Surely we cannot but be sensible of it; O that we
would all unanimously agree to counter-work this our grand Enemy, by a holy
endeavor after Unity, in consenting to the truth of these words of our Blessed
Savior, according to his own sense of them: which sense, I say, this present
Discourse shall aim at, and in some measure demonstrate plainly, without any
wresting, or sinister Construction, yet with Submission to the Churches
determination of it.

Those who are and will be of the Roman Schism, are indeed very free also in
making their Complaints of these unhappy Differences: I wish that it could not
be a true Imputation put upon them, viz. A main Cause of all this Quarrelling
in this Point has chiefly had its original from them.

Ferus (Moguntinus Concionator as he is called) one of the greatest Moderation
among them, cries out in this manner, O dolor super dolorem, quod Ecclesiam
conjungere deberet, per hoc ipsa vel maxim discerpitur and scinditur, quod ad
Pacem and Vnioneni servire deberet, eo vel maxim utimur ad excitanda Bella,
Discordias, Sectas, i. e. O Grief of all Griess! that which should knit the
Church together in Love and Concord, even by that very thing is it chiefly
divided and rent in pieces, that which ought to work Peace and Union, we
chiefly make use of to raise and foment Wars, Discords and Schisms. Thus he,
And why then will they (and he among the rest) be still so tenacious as they
have a long time been, in maintaining their corrupt and prodigious Doctrine of
Transubstantiation?

A Doctrine but of yesterday, not known in the Church, till above a Thousand
years after the Gospels first Appearance in the World; Bishop Hall.
So young it was (says a Pious and Learned Prelate of our Church) that it had
not before learned to speak, he and sundry other Authors of very good Account
affirming that this word Transubstantiation, whereby the Roman Church
understands the turning of the Sacramental Bread into the Body of Christ, was
never mentioned, or heard, or thought of among the ancient Fathers, or in the
Primitive Church: Only about six hundred years now past, Pope Nicholas the
second (some say it was Innocentius the third, so N. D. a Popish Writer against
our Martyrologist) in the Lateran Council did set forth, Propagate and confirm
to the utmost of his Power that opinion of changing the substance of the Bread
in the Sacrament (as for the Cup their heat does not reach so much against
that, which is the Reason that this Discourse is mostly of the Bread) and would
have made it an Article of Faith, and did what he could to have it placed in
the Creed, whereupon there ensued Corput Christi Day, Masses of Corpus Christi,
and the like Novelties never before known or brought into Use, Practice or
Observation in any part of the World: Yea hereunto do they themselves (the
Papists) give their Consent (which they could not possibly avoid) that this
word Transubstantiation was not used before the time of the said Council; Yet
to keep themselves from a total Defeat herein, they do withal affirm that the
Doctrine of it was held in Effect and Substance from the beginning by the
Ancient Fathers, and maintained by them in other terms, such as Mutation,
Transmutation, Transelementation, Conversion of the Bread, and the like.
Nevertheless this Evasion will not serve their turn, for though they yield us
thus much, in this Point, confessing this word to be a Novelty, as they apply
it to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, yet, is it not (let all mankind judge) an
absurd Vanity for any man to Imagine that the said Doctrine should be so
generally owned, and so fiercely maintained, yet not a fit word to be found out
by any in that long Tract of time, to show to the World the full meaning of
that Doctrine? For, as for those words which they say were then used, what do
they signify, but the same sense, which we (who are and must be their
Adversaries in this and many other Points of our Christian Profession) do and
always have acknowledged, viz. That there is a change in these outward
Elements, being turned from a common to a sacred Use, after they are
Consecrated and set apart according to the first Institution? Which certainly
was the meaning of the Ancients in this Case, and no otherwise (as shall appear
hereafter from very good Authority) though, it is true, their Zeal did oftimes
lead them to many strains of Rhetoric in a just magnifying this great and holy
Mystery. But will any man that is wise conclude thereupon that to be their
Judgment, which is now, and has been since their times vainly precended, and
thrust upon them by the Church of Rome, merely upon the account of their florid
Elocutions, Hyper bolies, and high Expressions used by them, to quicken
Communicants to their Duty, when they come to the Lords Table? For our parts,
we cannot so conclude, for then we should condemn our selves, who often do the
same thing, to the same good end and purpose, as they did yet abhor this
unscriptural Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

A Doctrine it is that overthrows the very nature of the Sacrament: For
unless there be an outward sign really continued in it, such as Christ
instituted to Represent and assure the Grace he principally intended to the
Faith of those that come worthily unto it, it is and must be utterly
annihilated; Neither can it be said that the Accidents of Bread and Wine do
remain as a Sign, when the Substance is vanished; For there can be no
Resemblance nor Analogy between those Accidents which have nothing in them of
Nourishment, and the Body and Blood of Christ whereby the Souls of True
Believers are in and by that Sacrament really nourished and strengthened. Nor
can it be denied that in every Sacrament, it is meet and requisite that there
be an Analogy or convenient Agreement between the outward Sign, and that
spiritual good thing which is signified by it. This being so, may it not be
proved to the Teeth of our Adversaries that they are in an Error in this Point;
and that they vainly pretend to make that to be an Article of Faith, which a
man may Consute by his fingers ends?

A Doctrine which, like the Eutichian Heresy of old, disanuls the Verity of
Christ's Human Nature; For it has fancied such a Body unto Christ, which in one
and the same moment of time may be in many thousands of places, viz.
wherefoever the Massing-Priests shall please to Consecrate their Host, which
clearly contradicts not only Nature and Reason, but the plain word
of-Scripture, which says, Heb. 4.15.
Christ was in all Points temp'red like as we are, yet without sin; neither
will it help them, to say (as they do weakly enough) Christ's Body is now
Glorisied: For first, Christ spoke this word (This is my Body) at his last
Supper when he was here upon Earth. 2. It is the Crucified Body of Christ which
is Represented in the Sacrament, not the Glorified. 3. Christ's Body is not, by
being Glorified, so divested of its natural Properties, as to cease from being
a Body: and if by being in Glory, it be made ubiquitary (a Property only
belonging to the Divine Nature) then shall our Bodies be so too in Heaven,
(which I think no man will say) For these Vile Bodies shall be made like unto
Christ's Glorious Body, Phil. 3.21.

It would be too great weariness to my Reader if I should lead him into a
consideration of the many gross Absurdities, which arise from this upstart
Doctrine, that which has been here in short alleged against it, is enough to
show the Vanity of it. And so long as the Abettors thoroof continue in it, all
who will be faithful to the Gospel of Christ, and his Church must protest
against them.

But we have (say they) the word of Christ himself for our Warrant, for has
not he said, This is my Body? and may not we, without offense, say as he has
said. viz, That it is his Body? Yea and one of them, none of the meanest (as I
find it reported of him by a late Writer) thus vannteth out his Considence,
that if God should ask him at the Day of Judgment, why he held so, he will
boldly say Tu docuisti, thou have taught me. But is it true, that the Spirit of
God has taught him to say so? and will he like a dull Scholar (...) poring
still upon the Letter of his Lesson, never laboring to understand the right
sense and meaning of it? of which gross neglect what account he and his
Fellow-Ignaro'es can be ablo to make at the time of public Examination, would
be considered by them.

And is it not (say they again) possible with God to make good his own word by
changing the Substance of the Bread into the Substance of Christ's Body, though
we see it not? Wherein they seem to be like the Stoic Philosophers that were
of old, who proposing things strange and uncouth in foretelling future Events,
pleaded for themselves, saying nihil est quod Deus essicere non possit, there
is nothing which God cannot bring to pass. But as Cicero answered them well, in
his second Book de divinatione, Vtinam Sapientes Stoicos effecisset, I wish he
had made the Stoics wise Men; So may we wish that these of the Roman Church
had more Wisdom in their knowledge of God and his Word, than it appears yet
they have.

For us, we will not, we dare not, and God forbid we ever should deny this
Attribute of Omnipotency to the great God Creator of Heaven and Earth, he has
himself spoken it, not once, but twice, i. e. not once, but many times, once in
the Law and a second time in the Gospel, without Retractation, That Power
belongs unto him. But to argue a posse ad esse will be acknowledged by all to
be very Illogical, and in this case it is inconsistent with found Divinity: For
we are taught by the Holy Scripture that Gods Will and Power are ever joined
together, only his will makes way for the exerting his Power, his actual Power,
I say, which is of the same Latitude and Extent with his Will. Our God is in
Heaven (says the Psalmist, P. 115.3.) and does whatsoever he will, not
whatsoever he can do: So Job, What his Soul desires, even that he does, Job.
23.13. He can at an Instant overturn the whole course of Nature, and Reduce all
things to a Chaos, by his absolute power, or annihilate them, but he does not,
because he will not.

There is no doubt but what Christ said is true, and what he said he is able to
bring to pass, for being God equal with the Father, we confess with Holy Job,
he can do all things. But the Question is not of the truth of these words, nor
of his Power in fulfilling them, but of the Sense, viz. Whether Christ intended
thereby that a new Sacrament, should be ordained and continued in his Church,
till his fecond Advent, or, because his words being spoken in this manner,
(viz. Take eat, this is my Body which is broken for you) whether his Apostles
should at that time take that Bread which was then broken with his own Hands in
their sight, and which they did then Eat in his Presence, whether, I say, they
should take that Bread for his Human Body, made of a Woman, Gal 4. which was
the next day to be Buffeted, Scourged, Crowned with Thorns, nailed to a Cross,
and pierced to the Heart with a Spear: And this his Body which was present with
them sitting at the Table, and speaking these very words should (contrary to
his own meaning and Resolution often before declared by himself in express
terms, and contrary to the clear Apprehension of his Apostles) be free from all
this Cruelty and extreme hard Usage.

A very easy Passion certainly it must needs be which Christ endured, if this
be granted, as it must if their Doctrine of Transubstantiation be from that
instant time allowed, being the thing which they contend for: Neither indeed
can we say, as it is commonly and truly said, that there was never Sorrow like
unto his Sorrow, if he had such a Proxy to suffer for him. But without
controversy Divine Justice would not now be satisfied with Figures, Shadows,
Representations, and Resemblances, but seeing the Body is come, which they did
all typisie, the Body it self must be Sacrificed, or all mankind must perish
for ever.

This latter part therefore of this Hypothesis must be cashiered, and the
former retained, viz. that Christ intended only by these words (This is my
Body) to ordain a Sacrament in his Church, which should be a standing Memorial
and Declaration of his Death (as the Apostles word, 1 Cor. 11.26. signifies)
till his coming again. And herein there cannot, or should not at least be any
difference between them and us. Well then, if our Saviors intent was by these
words to institute a Sacrament, will not all men say that he used a sacramental
kind of Speech to that purpose, in his forming of such an Ordinance?

Hither to have we dealt only with our Romish Adversaries those
Psendo-Catholicks about this matter. We should now show the Sense which
Orthodox-Catholicks have rendered of it.

But first because there have been some who have joined with us against those
our common Adversaries, that have in their haste given such an interpretation
of these words, as is inconsistent with Truth and Reason, lest their Sense
should be objected against us, as if we were wounded with our own Weapons, it
will be necessary to show in one or two particulars, what is not the Sense of
the Catholic Church of England, nor of most of the Reformed Churches that
harmoniously agree with it.

First then, the misconstruction which is made of the excellent Form of sound
Words in our Liturgy, is not the sense of the Church, whose Children we are.
There it is said, the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful in the Lords Supper; which is a most true saying and
worthy of all Acceptance. But to infer from thence that there is a areal
Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in that Bread and Wine, is such an
Error, that they who make this Inference, do in Effect pass over to the Tents
of the Romanists, or Consubstantiate themselves with the Lutherans in their
Heterodox Opinion, which is also very absurd.

The truth is, those words are not to be understood with a Reference to the
Bread and Wine immediately after Consecration (as our Venerable Mr. R. Hooker
has excellently declared his Judgment in this point which shall be showed at
large hereafter) but to the time, in which they that are worthy do really
entertain Christ, and feed on him in their Hearts, after they have Received. So
the words spoken to them by the Minister, when he gives them the Sacramental
Consecrated Bread do plainly signify, which words are these, Take and Eat
this, in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on him in thy Heart by
Faith with Thanksgiving. And this feeding must necessarily imply a real
Presence of Christ unto them, not to any other. This mistake therefore of the
premised form of sound words in our Liturgy does not show the true sense which
we are inquiring into.

Much less does that form of unfound words devised in the time of the late
unhappy Schism and Rebellion among us give any satisfaction herein. The words
which were imperiously imposed in those times upon every Minister to use, when
he gave the Bread of his God, after he had broken it, were these, Take ye, Eat
ye, this is the Body of Christ, which is broken for you. But now I appeal to
the Conscience of any man that is able to discern in this Case, could these
words be thus spoken without assuming presumptuously a power which Christ had
not given? yea could they be spoken without great offense to the Communicant?
For might not he well demand, how can this man give us the Body of Christ to
eat which has been in Types and shall be really broken for us? And what can he
think when he hears these words of the Bread, which he sees with his Eyes,
and feels with his Fingers Ends, but that either the Minister is Blind, or
that he intends to deceive him, or that he believes as the Church of Rome
believes, viz. that the Substance of the Bread is vanished, the Accidents of it
only remaining, and that the Body of Christ is really substantially present in
it.

I know well what they will allege for their Justification, i. e. seeing our
Blessed Savior used this sacramental Form of Speech in his first Institution,
they likewise may use it in a Conformity to him, when they Administer the said
Sacrament: Which is somewhat like unto him whom I mentioned before, who will
say unto God at the day of Judgment. Tu docuisti, thou have taught me.

But they may hear that now which possibly they never heard of before, or at
least did not well consider, viz. Because our Savior, like a King that has
command over his Broad-Seal, to Confirm or alter it, as he pleases, spoke this
word, (This is my Body) when he first Instituted this Sacrament, it will be too
bold an Arrogance for any man since, whatsoever he be who pretends to be a
Subject unto him, to say the Bread is the Body of Christ, when he Administreth
it. Sure I am, the great Apostle St. Paul does not word it in so bold a manner
as to say, The Cup which we Bless is the Blood of Christ, or, The Bread which
we break is the Body of Christ, no, but with a pious Modesty worthy of
Imitation, only thus, The Cup of Blessing which we Bless is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? And the Bread which we break, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? And this it is like, was the Form which all
the Apostles used in their Ministrations of this Nature, for he speaks it here
in the plural number; We, we,

Neither indeed, is there the same Reason for us, nor the same occasion before
us, to speak these words, as there was for Christ to speak them. He spoke them
discriminatim, in a way of forbidding the former Sacrament of the Passover to
be used any more, and appointing this of his last Supper in its stead (as shall
appear more at large in the following parts of this Discourse) upon which
account it is, that he then spoke this word so expressly, (This is my Body) to
the end that his Apostles, and after them his whole Church might understand his
meaning, in abolishing the old Sacrament, and ordaining the New.. Which being
so, doubtless we are not to follow his example in speaking the words that he
spoke, which brought on this change.

And accordingly I knew a man at that time (Domino test non mentior) who for
Conscience sake did not use that indirect Form when he Administered that
Sacrament, but varied from it using the aforesaid words of the Holy Apostle,
when he gave tho Bread, This Bread is the Communion of the Body of Christ,
adding thereto the words prescribed in our Liturgy, viz. Take and cat this in
Remembrance that Christ died for thee, etc. and when he gave the Cup, This Cup
is the Communion of the Blood of Christ, Drink this in Remembrance, etc.

For knowing assuredly that the real Presence of Christ is not in the outward
Element, but only in the Hearts of the worthy Communicants, he durst, not say
so plainly and so punctually, as he was then commanded that the Bread is the
Body of Christ which is broken for his People.

A large mention has been here made of the form that was then commanded to be
used in Administering the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; Not as if it were
worthy of any Regard, (rather it deserves to be expunged out of the World with
an Anathema fixed upon it) but that our Enemies may not upbraid us with it, and
that the World may take notice how apt those that separate themselves from the
established Orders of our Church, will, though they be associated in an
Assembly as they were in those days at West minster, and applauded by their
followers for their Piety and Learning, will be to fall into the worst of
Romish Errors, though they will seem most to protest against them.

Having removed the Rubs that lay in our way, we may now go on in a plain Path,
which will lead us to hear the Voice of our Lord walking in his Garden which is
in his Church, where he commonly meets his People, and makes his mind known
unto them. There it is, where we have learnt the true Sense of his words in
this Mystery. Let us then hear what the Spirit has said of it to the Church,
which is our Mother, and to her Children, amongst the rest to one, who is the
meanest of Gods poor Servants, who rejoices that he has attained to some
Understanding in this Mystery; And if his particular Judgment which shall be
added toward the close of this Discourse, be accounted by those who are to
judge in such cases, sit to be built upon the Foundation, his song shall ever
be Deo Gloria, mihi venia.

The sense of the Church in general is declared in the twenty eighth Article of
her Confession, which is of the Lords Supper, in this manner, The Supper of the
Lord is not only a sign of the Love that Christians ought to have among
themselves one to another, but rather it is a Sacrament of our Redemption by
Christ's Death, insomuch that to such as worthily and with says receive the
same, the Bread which we break is partaking of the Body of Christ, and likewise
the Cup of Blessing is a partaking of the Blood of Christ; The Body of Christ
is given, and taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and
spiritual Manner, And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is Received and Eaten
in the Supper, is Faith.

This is the Voice of the Turtle which is heard in our Land, the Echo whereof
is heard in Heaven, which makes sweet Music in that Celestial Symphony.

The word which our Apostle uses (1 Cor. 10.16.) in this case is (...), an
Emphatical Word which makes Heaven and Earth intercommon together; First on
Gods part, it is Communicatio, for God by his Ministers (in all ages)
Communicates or Distributes this spiritual Food among his People. 2. On their
side, it is Participatio, when they by Faith take and receive this Food into
their Hearts, for then, and not before it turns into Nourishment in them, and
is digested by them. From these two springs another (...), viz. A Communion or
Fellowship not only among our selves, but with the Father and with his Son
Jesus Christ, (1 John 1.3.7.) a most sweet and apposite word, a word which the
said Apostle seems to delight in, as appears by his repeating it in the same
instant (...), says he, and again, (...); Surely it pleased him very well, as
well it might: and to me it sounds, as if he would have us to account this
Vinum generosum to be (...) the common Wine that passed between God and his
Guests at his Holy Table.

Much pains likewise have been taken by Orthodox Catholics to smooth the way
to a right understanding of this great Mystery: R. V.
But I shall not here multiply Quotations of that which is written hereof by
them. Their Sense shall be shortly summed up in that Form of words which is to
be seen in a late Writer, and is in effect used by them all.

When Christ said, This is my Body, what Body did he mean? even his own natural
Body, which is given for us ( Luke 22.19.) which is broken for us (1 Cor.
24.10.) but how can this be? It Is impossible that Bread, while it is Bread
should be Christ's Body, or Wine while it is Wine should be his Blood. It Is
very true that it is impossible, Disparatum de disparato non proprium
praedicatur. We must therefore seek for a possible meaning, and of necessity
conclude with Calvin, Sacramentalem esse Loquutionem, that it is a Sacramental
Form of Speech, the sign bears the name of the thing signified, as both in
Vulgar and Scripture Language is common in Scripture, signs either figuratively
Representing, or sacramentally Sealing do bear the name of the things
Represented or Sealed. v. g. Genesis 40.12. The three Branches are three Days.
Genesis 41.26. The seven Ears of Corn are seven years, the seven Kine are seven
years, so Ezekiel. 37.11. These dry Bones are the whole House of Israel. Dan.
2.38. Thou O King are this Head of Gold. Dan 4.17. The four Beasts are four
Kings. Gal. 4.25. this Agar is Mount Sinai. Rev. 7.9. The seven Heads are seven
Mountains. So in Sacramentals, Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17.^3.
and a token of the Covenant, ver. 11. And a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith,
Romans 4.11. The Lamb is called the Passover, Ex. 2.21. The Rock was Christ, 1
Cor. 10.4.
and in this of our Lords Supper, This is the Cup of the new Testament. These
and the like Instances are commonly used in this case, and the Form of Speech
is so plain that a Child may understand it. Thus he.

But if Similitudes may be of any force (I say not in Argumentation, but
Illustration) in my Judgment there can be nothing more Pregnant to this purpose
than a Resemblance that may be made between our Savior himself, and this his
own Holy Ordinance.

Two Natures, we believe, are personally united in Christ, the Divine and
Human; Now as the distinct Properties of these Natures are by virtue of this
Hypostatical Union sometimes applied and made common to both, yet remain
themselves entire without any Confusion each with other, or Conversion into one
another; in like manner there being in this Ordinance of our Savior a
Sacramental Union between the ontward visible Sign, and the inward and
spiritual Grace, well may the one be denominated by the other* yet remain
themselves entirely in their own Nature and Substance (as they were before the
said Union) without any confused mixture one with the other, or any real
Conversion into each other.

So the Soul and Body of Man while they are united, are oft-times put
distinctly for the whole Person of a Man, yet are both bounded within their
original Beings.

But the truth is, this real corporal Conversion of the Bread into the Body of
Christ, notwithstanding the Confidence which the Roman Party uses by it to
bring on their Oral Manducation of Christ's Body in the Mass, has no such
Warrant, as they dream of, from these words of our Savior, which they so much
harp upon.

For it is well known among the Learned (as my aforesaid Author observes out
of Cameron and Moulin) that the Hebrew Tongue or Syriack, in which Christ
spoke, does not use in this form of Speech any Copula of Subject or Predicate,
either (is) or (signifies.) But sometimes, and not always Pronoun, as in those
places before cited in the old Testamenr, no (is) nor (was) nor any other Verb
is there; But thus, The seven ears of Corn, they seven years, the four Beasts
four Kings, which when they come to be Translated into Greek or Latin, then the
Idiom of the Language requires it, and says (...) is, e. g. The Rock is Christ.

So that they are much mistaken who to bolster up their devised
Transubstantiation place the Emphasis here in this word (Is) which Word
probably our Savior did not speak, when he instituted this Sacrament, though
it be, as it must be, so rendered by the Evangelists, according (as it has been
said) to the Idiome of the Language in which they wrote.

Thus in short we see the Sense which has been wont to be given of these words
of our Savior by Pious and Learned Men, and which passes for current among us
of all sorts; To which Sense I also for my part do readily subscribe, though (I
do humbly conceive) there is something lacking in it, and so not fully coming
up to our Saviors meaning, I come therefore now, according to my Promise, to
deliver my particular Judgment of it. My particular, I say, because I never
heard of it before, nor in all my Reading met with it in any Author elder or
later that has written of this Subject. And it is as follows.

Our Lord Jesus Christ intending, as it appears, to put an end to the old
Sacrament of the Paschal Lamb, for which his Disciples had been so sollicitous,
and to Institute this of his last Supper in its stead, he therefore, having
first lifted up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, that he might in the Name of his
Father, Consecrate the chosen Element of Bread and Wine, speaks to his
Disciples in this manner and form, saying, This is my Body, and this is my
Blood, q.d. you have taken that for my Body hitherto, according to the
Rudiments of the Law of Moses (for indeed Christ the Lamb of God was
praesigured thereby) but now This shall be it hereafter till my Coming again:
So placing the Emphasis in the word (This) as by way of distinction from the
former Sacrament, calling it likewise his Body in opposition to the former
shadows, not making any other change at all, but only one Sacrament instead of
another; which (it is true) is generally acknowledged, but the premised
Emphatical Distinction has not been heeded, as it ought to have been, from
whence have sprung the differences, and hot contentions about the manner of
Christ's Presence.

The Apostles themselves so understood it, for they never after were
inquisitive, as they had been, about the Passover, but were, no doubt, obedient
to the Command of their Lord and Master, for he had laid this charge upon them,
in these words, Do this in Remembrance of me, as much as to say, leave the
other undone, or, use it no more, and let none other use it in my Name
hereafter.

The Apostle St. Paul, who labored more abundantly than all the rest of the
Apostles, kept himself precisely to this command in his Apostolical Office. So
he tells the Church at Corinth (1 Cor. 11.23.) that (says he) which I have
received of the Lord (meaning not from Moses, but of Christ) have I delivered
unto you. Yea the very words of our Savior himself, which he spoke of the Cup,
do seem to point out this Sense unto us, for as he says of that, This is my
Blood of the New Testament, so his meaning (very probably) may be of the Bread,
This is my Body of the New Testament, that is, which in the time of the New
Testament you and all other to the Worlds end shall take for my Body, not that
which has been taken for it, under the old. For by these words he takes away
the first Sacrament of the Passover (how else comes it to be out of date?) And
establishes this of his last Supper: the first being an ordinance of the Law
to continue during the old Covenant, the second he will have to be an ordinance
of the Gospel, as being more apt to agree with his new Covenant.

This, this I say, is clearly the thing that our Lord intended by using this
form of Speech when he ordained this new Sacrament in his Church, viz. This is
my Body. He would that his Apostles, and his whole Church after them should
take his meaning as spoken in this manner, This Emphatically, This
Specifically, This Substantially, This, not the former, yet this mystically,
even as the former was, is my Body, whereby you shall be united together in
bortherly Love, your Faith also shall be Confirmed, and your Souls strengthened
and refreshed unto Life Eternal.

This appears to me (pardon my Confidence) an unquestionable rendering of the
sense of these words, and a manifest clearing of all Difficulties yea and of
all Differences too, which have been raised about them, if men would but follow
the conduct of Truth and Reason.

For let it be considered, though we find a distinction of Gods Covenants with
Mankind, viz. the old, and the new, yet I ask Is not the Covenant of Grace the
same now for Substance, which it was from the beginning? Was not the same
Spirit of Christ in his Ordinances given unto the Fathers under the Law, which
is now given to the faithful under the Gospel, excepting only in the Accidents
and Circumstances of Effusion and Manifestation? How else can Christ be (...),
the same yesterday and to day (as it is said he is Heb. 13.8.) and will be so
for ever? Had the Fathers a Savior and Deliverer exhibited unto them in the
Paschal Lamb, otherwise, more than symbolically, than we have in the Lords
Supper? Did they not all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did they not all
drink the same spiritual Drink, the same not only with and among themselves (as
Popish Writers would have it) but the same with us Christians also? For the
Apostle adds, they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and that
Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4.

Can any truth revealed in Scripture be more plain than this? viz. that Christ
was their Expectation, their Comfort, their Refuge, their Rock in all their
Troubles, the Food and Sustenance of their Souls, the Object of their Faith,
even as he is now in this time of the Gospel to all true Believers? And
consequently that this Sense which is here rendered of our Lords words is most
true.

Well may it therefore be an Amazement unto all men, as it is, God knows,
unto me that such a pudder has been made in the World about these words of our
Savior, which do, and can signify no more in this case unto us, than the
Sacramental Form of Instituting a new Sacrament did necessarily require, in
Rome of the old.

Let therefore the vain words of Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation, and
the Questions de modo sine modo (as they have been well called) of Christ's
Presence in his Sacrament, about which this giddy Generation has been
quarrelling so long, be for ever abandoned by us, and let us for shame content
our selves, as becomes us, and as the Fathers of old under the Law did with
the Overtures of God's love in the Arbitrary Dispensations of his Grace (for we
never hear of such Annimosities and uncharitable Differences among them about
this matter (as have been among us) and whatsoever is in it which for the
present surpasses our Understanding, when we come to see God as he is, we
shall undoubtedly see more clearly the secret of his Covenant, and have a more
perfect knowledge of this Mystery, than we can now be able to attain unto, or
than indeed is fit for us while we are clothed with Mortality to reach at,
much less thoroughly to understand.

In fine, the Judgment of Venerable Mr. Hooker concerning this point, way well
be accounted a ne plus ultra to all sober men: His words are these.

The real Presence of Christ's most Blessed Body and Blood is not to be sought
for in the Sacrament, but in the worthy Receiver of the Sacrament. And with
this the very order of our Savior's words agrees, first, take and Eat, then,
This is my Body which was broken for you; first, drink ye all of this, then
follows, This is my Blood which was shed for you. I see not which way it
should be gathered by the words of Christ, when and where the Bread is his
Body, or the Cup his Blood, but only in the very Heart and Soul of him that
receives them. As for the Sacraments they really exhibit, but for ought we can
gather out of that which is written of them, they are not really, nor do really
contain in themselves that Grace which with them, or by them it pleases God to
be stow. If on all sides it be confessed that the Grace of Baptisin is poured
into the Soul of man, that by Water we Receive it, although it be neither
seated in the Water, nor the Water changed into it, what should induce men to
think that the Grace of the Eucharist must needs be in the Eucharist, before it
can be in us that Receive it?

Now the Reason hereof is, in my Judgment, beyond all exception: For as in the
Sacrament of Baptism, all that the Minister does, or can do, is to Baptize with
water, after he has with solemn Prayer and Supplication set it apart from
other water, it is Christ himself that Baptiseth us with the Holy Ghost and
with Fire. Our Ministry is but very Wash in comparison of that which Christ
does unto us when we are Baptized. So in that other Sacrament of the New
Testament the Priest can do nothing but give the outward Elements after he has
by Prayer and reciting the words of Christ put a distinction between them and
other ordinary Bread and Wine; it is Christ only who by that means feeds the
Soul of a worthy Communicant with his broken Body, and his Blood poured out for
the sin of the World: only, as unless we be Baptized with Water, we cannot
ordinarily expect to be Baptized with the Holy Ghost, so unless when we are
invited unto the Lords Table we come worthily unto it, and there Take and
Receive the Consecrated Elements at the Hands of the Minister, our Souls must
want that spiritual nourishment from, and by Christ which otherwise they might
be sed with and made strong in the Grace of God.

Which being so, as it is a truth not to be denied, what need all those bitter
Conflicts that have been and are about this matter? We should rather say as
that worthy Author had written a little before in the same Paragraph. Shall I
wish (says he) that men would give themselves more to meditate with silence
what we have by the Sacrament, and less to dispute of the manner, how? If any
man suppose that this were too great stupidity and dullness, let us see whether
the Apostles of the Lord themselves have not done the like. It appears by
many Examples that they of their own Disposition were very scrupulous and
inquisitive, yea in other cases of less Importance and less Difficulty, always
apt to move Questions; How comes it to pass that so few words of so high a
Mystery being uttered they receive with gladness the gift of Christ, and make
no show of doubt or scruple? The Reason hereof is not dark to them who have any
thing at all observed how the Powers of the Mind are wont to stir, when that
alone which we infinitely long for presents it self above and besides
Expectation.

Curious and intricate Speculations do hinder, they abate, they quench such
inflamed Motions of Delight and Joy, as divine Graces use to raise when
extraordinarily they are present; the mind therefore feeling present Joy, is
always unwilling to admit any other Cogitation; and in that case casts off
those Disputes, whereunto the intellectual part, at other times easily draws,
etc. Thus he.

And certainly it must be granted by all that he was in the right, unles we
will be still inquisitive after that which is infinitely above our reach, and
consequently break into Gods Pavillion, where we shall find the dark waters
that encompass it will inevitably swallow us up. Neither will it be the
pretended suffrage of the Ancients that will keep us from sinking in this bold
Presumption. Pretended I say, for all that our Pseudo-Catholicks of Rome have
boasted of the Ancient Fathers, as if they were their Coryphaei in their
Heterodox Opinions which they hold of this holy Sacrament, are but Vanity. And
let this Eminent Divine (approved even by them for his great Learning as shall
here be made manifest) be heard speak his Judgment also in this particular.

It appears not that of all the Ancient Fathers of the Church any one did
ever conceive or imagine other than only a mystical Participation of Christ's
both Body and blood in the Sacrament; Neither are their speeches concerning the
change of the Elements themselves into the Body and Blood of Christ, such, that
a man can thereby in Conscience assure himself it was their meaning to persuade
the World either of a corporal Consubstantiation of Christ with those
sanctified and blessed Elements before we receive them, or of the like
Transubstantiation of them into the Body and Blood of Christ; Both which to our
mystical Communion with Christ are so unnecessary, that the Fathers who plainly
hold but this mystical Communion cannot easily be thought to have meant any
other change of Sacramental Elements, than that which the same spiritual
Communion did require them to hold.

Which being so, let the impartial Reader judge whether the Church of Rome has
not lost one of her strongest holds, wherein many of her most able Champions
have thought themselves to be impregnable.

It will be no offense, I presume, to transcribe thus largely the words of that
Renowned Author. For the plain truth is, we who are Clergymen are obliged in
many Respects to be more diligent in perusing his Works, then, I doubt, we are.
But however though we in this Generation slight them, they have certainly been
of very high account with Learned men, in former times. And which is a thing
not common, two Kings there have been in our Land, who for Learning and Piety
were second to no Princes in their Generation, that did much ex^ol Mr. Hocker
and his Works.

First King James of famous Memory gave this Commendation of him, that he had
received more satisfaction in reading a Leaf on Paragraph in Mr. Hookers
writing of the Sacraments, then he had in reading large Treatises of that
subject written by others though very Learned Men.

Again, King Charles the blessed Martyr, the day before his Death gave a charge
to one of his Children (the Lady Elizabeth) which was to be imparted to the
rest, to be very conversant in good Books, and among others he was pleased to
name Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy, which, as he said, would arm them
against Popery. And well may this be a Reflection upon us all that survive him.

If a Father when he is ready to dye shall thus instruct his Children, and such
a Father who is Pater Patriae, Tanti Meriti, Tanti Pectoris, Tanti Oris, Tantae
Virtutis Pater (as St. Austin said of St. Cyprian) a Father so worthy, so Wise,
so well Spoken, so Virtuous, so Learned a King that was (as it has been said
of him in a public Phrontistery) a Defender of the Faith, not only by his
Title, but by his Abilities and Writings, a King who understood the Protestant
Religion so well that he was able to defend it against the whole Conclave of
Rome, and Hell. And when he knew it so thoroughly, and died so Eminently for it,
it will concern us to be very wary, how we depart from his Judgment by falling
off to the apostatical Church of Rome. But for such as have forgotten their
Duty and Reverence to the late King our common Father, and the Pious Advice
that he left us, such had need to have a very profound Judgment of their own,
to bear them out, but that it is much to be doubted they will not in the end
prove to be wiser than Dapiel (as the word of Scripture is) no nor so wise as
our good Father King Charles the faithful Martyr, who gave us all good Counsel,
if we had the Grace to follow it.

However if we be willing to be armed against Popery, let us make use of such
means which he commended unto us, whereof this is one, viz. to be diligent in
Reading Mr. Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy.

Once more therefore I shall add here what the said Author writes, to our
present purpose, in the close of the same Paragraph, wherein he has not only
excelled in casting down strong holds, but all vain Imaginations, 1 Cor. 10.4.
or foolish Reasonings (so the Apostles word (...) does signify) that are
exalted against the simplicity of the Gospel.

When I behold (says he) with mine Eyes some small and scarce discernable
Grain or Seed, whereof Nature makes a Promise that a Tree should come, and
when afterward of that Tree any skilful Artificer undertaketh to frame some
exquisite and curious Work, I look for the Event. I move no Question about
performance either of the one, or of the other: Shall I then simply credit
Nature in things natural? shall I in things artificial rely my self on Art,
never offering to make doubt, and in that which is above both Art and Nature
refuse to believe the Author of both, except he acquaint me with his ways, and
lay the secret of his skill before me? Where God himself does speak those
things, which either for Height and Sublimity of matter, or else for secrecy
of performance we are not able to reach unto, as we may be ignorant without
Danger, so it is no disgrace to confess we are ignorant: Such as love Piety
will as much as in them lies, know all things that God commands, but
especially the Duties of Service which they owe to God; as for his dark and
hidden Works, they preserve as becomes them in such cases, simplicity of Faith
before that knowledge, which curiously sisting what it should adore, and
disputing too boldly of that which the Wit of man cannot search, chilleth for
the most part all warmth of Zeal, and brings soundness of Belief many times
into great hazard.

Let it therefore be sufficient for me presenting my self at the Lords Table,
to know what there I receive from him, without searching or enquiring of the
manner how Christ performs his Promise: Let Disputes and Questions, Enemies
to Piety, Abatements of true Devotion, and hitherto in this cause but
over-patiently heard, let them take their rest, let curious and sharp-witted
men beat their Heads about what Questions themselves will; The very Letter of
the word of Christ gives plain security that these Mysteries do, as Nails
fasten us to his very Cross, that by them we may draw out, as touching
Essicacy, Force and Virtue, even the Blood of his Gored Side, etc. They are
things wonderful which he feels, great which he sees, and unheard of which
he utters, whose Soul is possessed of this Paschal Lamb, and made joyful in the
strength of this new Wine, etc. What these Elements are in themselves, it
skilleth not, it is enough that to me which take them they are the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ: His Promise in witness hereof suffices, his Words he
knows which way to accomplish: Why should any Cogitation possess the mind of
a faithful Communicant, but this, O my God thou art True, O my Soul thou art
Happy.

Thus sweetly, thus Christianly, thus Divinely would this Holy and humble Man
put a peaceable end to this unhappy Controversy. A man, I say, of whom and of
his works, the Bishop of Rome himself that then was ( viz. Clement the Eight)
gives this Character, There is no Learning that this man has not searched into,
nothing too hard for his Understanding, this man indeed deserves the name of an
Author, his Books will get Reverence by Age, for there is in them such Seeds of
Eternity, that if the rest be like unto this, they shall last, till the last
fire shall consume all Learning.

To this purpose did that Pope (if my Historian be of ny Credit) (as I believe
he is) declare his Opinion, Isaac walker.
when he heard one of his Books of Ecclesiastical Policy read before him.

But now to draw toward a Conclusion, I shall only add one story out of our
Martyrologist of a certain Disputation about these very words of our Savior,
viz. This is my Body. It was really most Eminent, the King himself that then
was, viz. Henry the Eight being a chief Disputant in it, the story (omitting
needless Circumlocutions) is as follows.

When a great Assembly of the Nobles and other the Chief of the Nation was
gathered by express Order and Command from the King from all parts of the
Realm, and all the Seats and Places were full of men round about the Scaffold,
within a short time a godly Servant of Jesus Christ one John Lambert was
brought from the Prison with a Guard of armed men, even as a Lamb to fight with
many Lions, and placed right against that where the King's Royal Seat was
prepared, so that now they tarried but for the King's coming.

At length the King himself did come with a great Guard, and when the King was
set in his Throne, he beheld Lambert with a stern Countenance, and turning
himself to his Counselors, he called forth Dr. Day Bishop of Chichester,
commanding him to declare unto the People the Cause of that present Assembly
and Judgment.

After he had made an end of his Oration, the King standing up upon his Feet,
leaning upon a Cushion of white Cloth of Tissue, turning himself toward Lambert
with his Brows bent, as it were threatening some terrible thing to him, said
these words; Hoe good fellow, what is thy name? Then the humble Lamb of Christ
humbly kneeling down, said, my name is John Nicholson, although of many I be
called Lambert. What, said the King, have you two names? I would not trust you
having two names although you were my Brother.

But after many Profaces and much talk had in this manner, the poor man showing
the Reason how his name came to be changed, the King commanded him to go to the
matter and to declare his Mind and Opinion, what he thought as touching the
Sacrament of the Altar.

Whereupon Lambert beginning to speak for himself, gave thanks to God in that
he had inclined the Heart of the King so, as not to disdain to hear and
understand the Controversies of Religion, etc: Then the King with an angry
Voice interrupting him, I came not hither (says he) to hear mine own Praises,
etc. but briesly go to the matter without any more Circumstance.

Lambert being abashed at the Kings angry Words, contrary to all mons
Expectation, stayed a while, considering with himself what he might do in those
great Straits and Extremities. But the King being hasty with Anger and
Vehemence said, why stand thou still? Answer as touching the Sacrament of
the Altar, whether do thou say that it is the Body of Christ, or wilt deny
it? and with that word, the King lifted up his Cap.

Then says Lambert, I answer with St Austin, that it is the Body of Christ
after a certain manner. Answer me (says the King) neither out of St. Austins
nor by the Authority of any other, but test me plainly whether thou say, it
is the Body of Christ or no? Lambert replied, I deny it then to be the Body of
Christ. Mark well (says the King) for now thou shall be condemned even by
Christ's own Words, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my Body.

When this was finished with great Triumphing amongst the Opponents, and sundry
other Arguments used by them against him, all which were common and nothing
sorcible, the King asked him, what say thou? Art thou not yet satisfied?
Will thou live or dye? Thou have yet free choice. Lambert answered, I yield and
submit my self wholly unto the will of your Majesty. Then said the King, Commit
thy self unto the Hands of God, not unto mine. Lambert replied, I Commend my
Soul unto the Hands of God, but my Body I wholly yield and submit unto your
Clemency.

The King replied very smartly upon him, if you do commit your self unto my
Judgment, you must dye, for I will not be a Patron unto Heretics. And
thereupon immediately caused the Sentence of Condemnation to be read against
him, which was Executed in a most terrible manner with greater Cruelty than
ordinary.

Here, if may be said, was a Bolt soon shot, which of it self in Reason could
do no hurt, but being backed with the Venom of Folly and Frenzy proved deadly.
For let all mankind judge, who are able and impartial, was not this a doughty
Argument which that King used, to drive a poor innocent Lamb to the Slaughter?
And will not the very Children of this Generation, that are instructed in the
knowledge of this Truth, as it is here opened and made evident, be amazed and
ashamed to see the Holy Scripture so grossly abused in the maintenance of such a
cursed Error?

Yet was this their Argumentum Achilleum, their dead doing Weapon in those days
of Ignorance and Cruelty, and still is at this very day with our Catholics
(falsely so called, unless it be that they are of a Catholic Confederacy
against Christ and his Gospel) which we shall certainly find to our smart and
sorrow, if ever they come to prevail over us: For their hoc est Corpus meum
will prove to us to be but as a Preface to their Writ de Comburendo, for their
merciless burning of our Bodies. But blessed be God we have hitherto been kept
out of their reach: and blessed for ever of God be the Government which is set
over us whereby, under God, we are still preserved.

Yet neither do we slight the words of our Lord, which he spoke saying (This
is my Body) God forbid that such a Thought should ever enter into our Hearts,
no, but taking them in the sense which he intended, they are the Crown of our
rejoicing: His Promise herein is the greatest Blessing that we can be capable
of in this World; It is our Life, and without it we shall ever be dead in our
Sins and Trespasses; whatsoever spiritual Quicknings we have in us to heavenly
things, it is the Body of Christ, and the Blood of Christ, which we have
Received into our Hearts by Faith that works them in us, for we live not (as
the Apostle St. Paul said) but Christ lives in us. It is the Body of Christ,
and it is the Blood of Christ which fills the whole inward man, inlightning
the Understanding, Rectifying the Will, ordering the Affections, putting
courage into the Heart to encounter any Difficulties for Christ, to suffer any
Torments for his sake that can be inflicted upon us by Men or Devils. Nay more,
It is the Body of Christ, and it is the Blood of Christ separated each from
other, which were so taken and Received in the Lords Supper, and which continue
to be so in the Hearts of those that worthily Received that Holy Sacrament,
which fully satisfies all their Hunger and Thirst, as bringing a clear
Evidence of Christ's Death, and consequently a full Assurance of the Pardon and
Remission of their sins unto them, the memorial of Christ's Death being the main
end why the Sacrament was ordained.

This, in short, is that real Presence of Christ in this Holy Ordinance, which
the Church the Spouse of Christ expects, so as to be entertained by her Lord
at his holy Table, and which indeed is only to be desired, as being most
advantageous unto her.

As for that Presence of Christ in this Sacrament which Papists contend for,
let it pass for a Dream, as it is; It shall even be (to use the words of the
Prophet) As when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, Is. 19.8.
but he awaketh, and his Soul is empty; And as when a thirsty man dreameth, and
behold he drinks, but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his Soul has
Appetite; So shall their hoc est Corpus meum, I mean their Doctrine of the
Transubstantiation, of the outward Elements in the Lords Supper into the Body
and Blood of Christ prove to be unto them but a miserable Delusion. Never never
O my God let my Soul enter into their Secret, nor be baptized with a Baptism
that they are Baptized with. And with this Confidence I do shut up this whole
Discourse, God Almighty give a Blessing unto it.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
BUt now (it seems) to strengthen the Popish Interest Hell is broke loose;
seditious Pamphlets now flutter about for the discrediting our Religion and our
Church (which has been acknowledged the best Reformed Church in the Christian
World) such Pamphlets, I say, as are not only against the Doctrine of the true
Protestant Religion, but against the best Ecclesiastical Discipline also,
witness that scandalous and scurrilous Piece (Gratum opus Agricolis Romany
atque Atheistis) Entitled the Naked Truth, Second Part, whereas in many parts
of it, I say not in all, it rather deserves the Title of impudent Untruth, as
shall be here made manifest past all Contradiction.

The Author thereof whom I care not to know, being he is Prava Avis in Templis,
nigroque simillima Spectro, begins his Epistle to the Reader with a colloguing
Insinuation, I had almost said with much Craft and Cunning, in this manner; No
man does more Reverence good Bishops than my self: and why so? But because he
does, it may be, account himself to be one (it is an ill Bird then that will
defile his own Nest) nor (says he) does any man less dread them with a slavish
fear. But non obstante all his Confidence, I, who am a poor inconsiderable man,
shall here take the boldness, before I go with him a foot further to
expostulate with him in this case. Who (Sir) is there that does so dread them?
I know a man who is in the seventy seventh year of his Age, and in the fifty
third year of his Ordination to the office and order of an Evangelical Priest,
yet in his full strength (blessed be God,) at which Age fears do commonly, as
other weaknesses, take hold of a man, but although he has in his time lived
under the Inspection of many Bishops, yet had he never such a fear of them upon
him, nor have I at this day, for the plain truth is, there neither was nor is
any the least need of it. Nor is there, I believe any one of our Bishops who is
willing to be so dreaded, for if courteous Affability, fatherly Instruction,
brotherly Condescension, tender Compassion toward the weaker sort, be to be
found in them, and that very frequently constantly upon all emergent Occasions
presented before them (as I know by experience to be in some of them) what do
these boasting words signify, but a vainglorious hussing? If they be not a
most unchristian Suggestion and slanderous Susurration sufficient to make all
that follows in the whole Tract liable to suspicion among wise Men. As indeed
many other of his following words do.

I admire them (says he) at my distance (which he presumes is not very great)
but I do not Idolize them (and God forbid that he or any man else should;) I
Honor them, but I do not fall down and Worship them; as if none could kneel
unto them, to crave their Blessing, like dutiful Sons of their Grave and
Reverend Fathers, and as all good Subjects do to the King, being so in Duty
bound because he is Pater Patriae, can none I say, do this, but they must
thereupon make Idols of them and Worship them? I can say (says he) my Lord,
and not add, my God.

But let me ask again, does any do so, or say so? Sure there is not such a
Polytheism to be found among us here in this Nation, though there be (God be
merciful to us) much Atheisin, which is like to grow up to a more prodigious
Height, than it has yet attained, by the means of this and the like prodigious
Pamphlets that are scattered among us.

The man goes on in his Apology thus, You will not find in this ensuing
Inquiry the least tang of Bitterness or yellow Choler, no not so much as one
tart or harsh Expression, being so far from justly disgusting any, that I shall
not so much as set their Teeth on edge, so insipied and simple an Humor have I
cherisht all-a-long through this whole Discourse (for fear of any Satirical
Mixtures) that I doubt you will scarce find any Salt, Savor or smacky Relish
here, 'twill scarce bite the Tongue of a sinner.

'Twill indeed scarce be believed that a man who writes these words should at
all prevaricate, I mean, make at first such a show of Lenity, and yet steep his
words after, in the very Gall of Asps: Nay with what serenity of Mind and
Conscience could he make this Apology for himself, when his design was, it is
apparent, to whet his Pen like a Sword, or, should he say, it was not his
design, when his Spirit was screwed up to a Magisterial Height, he could not
contain himself but must either lash out into a Frenzy, or else fall into a
People-pleasing Whimsie. Which is the most sordid Descent for a man of his
measures to sink into: But possibly he might imagine that those who would
undertake to Read him might be blind, or that they would not be able to discern
his shuffling Diglossia's.

I am sorry that a man of his Rank and Reach that he is thought to be, should
deserve such terms to be put upon him: But let all impartial men that are wise
and godly judge upon their reading him whether he does not deserve it, not only
I say to be accounted Satirical, wherein he has a surpassing faculty, though
he disclaims it, but to be grossly hypocritical in pretending Smoothness and
Gentleness, yet proving really, throughout, rugged and Sarcastical.

If this be not (...) (a word sanctified by the Holy Ghost) naso suspendere, as
the Poet renders it, Gal. 6.7.
to lead his Reader about by the Nose (according to our Proverb) I know not
what is.

But Oh no, by no means, his Reader he would have to be (...), long breasted,
not like her Cosen Welchman, whose heart is near to his mouth, and so may
easily be provoked by him, which he is loath he should because this great Don
Nasutus cannot, as he faith, endure with any equanimity to be crossed.

I shall therefore be as long breasted (to use his word) as I can, not
intending to trouble my self much with his tedious loquacity; only single out
two or three of his naked Pudenda, to lay them open, which he well deserves,
to the view of the World, for this very purpose (which he cannot dislike) that
the naked Truth may not suffer any wrong by them.

First a great picque he has against our Ecclesiastical Courts, as if they
were illegal having no Parliamentary Foundation, and their proceedings unjust,
no good to be done by them without their Fees, etc. I will not contend with him
about Law-matters, it is out of my Road: He is not for Reformation of them, nor
for Edification, but for Destruction; Destruction, Destruction is his continual
song, down with them, down with them even to the very ground, for it is Money,
Money, A common thing in all Temporal. Courts.
as he often repearts the words, which they must have, both of Ministers and
People, or else to the Devil with them all and after to the Jayl, etc.

Behold the insipid and simple Humor of the man, which he says he has
cherisht all-a-long through his whole Discourse for fear of any Satirical
Mixtures.

But by his leave, they that have an office are to wait upon their office, and
is there not Reason then they should live by their office? If they live not
honestly by it, I would they did, wishing also that some legal Course might be
taken with them to compel them thereto, but must the Courts be thereupon
utterly dissolved? That were the next way to bring in all Wickedness and
Debauchery (...) the Nation, as we have found by sad Experience already the
temporary Suspending of Church Censures has been, notwithstanding the
proceedings in Temporal Courts, a great Inlet thereto.

If Corruption in Ecclesiastical Courts has made them unfit to be continued,
there may be the same Plea against Temporal Courts; for where is any thing in
this World of a Human Alloy, such are all Courts Spiritual and Temporal in some
Respects (...) all of them, which is wholly free from failings? Perfection in
Judgment and Perfection in Manners is only to be expected in the Congregation
of just Men made Perfect.

The Honorable House of Commons, I am sure did the last Parliament before
this, take notice both of Bribery and Debauchery in the Election of some that
were to sit in their House, else they would not have made an order among
themselves to prevent such Abuses, though I hope the major part of them are
free from such Corruption; Yea one of them I know, who was then, and is now
again chosen for the said purpose, is far from the Guilt of so odious a
Scandal, being sought unto by the honest People that were to choose, who
entreated him with much Importunity to give his consent to be their Burgess in
Parliament, neither would they rest satisfied with his Denial till he had
accepted of their choice, yea and I my self persuaded him thereto, telling him,
non nobis solum nati sumus; the Town likewise told him, it should not cost him
a Penny, and and I believe they have made good their word.

Yet I cannot say the like of other places interessed in the like Business,
having heard otherwise of them.

But if our High and Honorable Court of Parliament cannot be totally free from
failings, not only in such Elections, but in the managery of their Assairs, as
the World knows they have been in former times, who can say that Inferior
Courts are without any? Yet must we not therefore cry, Down with them, down
with them.

O but our Ecclesiastical Courts have no Legal Foundation now when the Statute
of 1 Eliz. 1. is Retracted. And is it so? How comes it to pass then that It is
still annexed to our public Liturgy? Surely, if the said Statute were quite
Null and Void, it is but a vanity to affix it to our Book of Common Prayer. And
if all Commissions granted to Clergymen be of no force, why are some of that
Rank and Calling put into Commission for the Peace as men fit for such an
Employ as well as any other? yea indeed who are more fit for it than they?

Again who is there that since the Reformation fell under the heavy Censures of
the Church for Trisses, as you say (but it is a foul Slander.) For it is not to
be doubted but that it was for some Heinous Crime, or for their Contumacy and
Contempt of the Court, which is accounted an unpardonable Offense in Temporal
Courts, punished there with Outlawries and I know not what.

But what have I done? I have here made mention of Clergymen; and who alas are
they? If we be to be tutored by this (...) we must not word it, as we have been
wont, for all Gods People, says he, are his Clergy; And it is certain so they
are. But as for Bishops, Priests and Deacons, who have been wont to be called
the Clergy, he speaks of them under this notion of Clergy not like an honest
Clergyman, but like a mar-prelate indeed with infinite Disdain, repeating the
word scossingly enough, Clergy, Clergy. But from whence comes all his clashing
like a vaunting Swashbuckler about this word? Why, he will make us believe we
have all this while been mistaken in the word, the word (Clergy) is indeed
(says he) a Scripture Expression, but never but once found in holy Writ, and
then it signifies Laymen, 1 Pet. 5.3. The Flock, not the Shepherds that feed
the flock, the Presbyter Peter advising his fellow Presbyters, or Priests
(...), neque ut dominantes cleris, not lording it over Gods Lot, over the Flock
there called, Clergymen, that is to say, Laymen, thus he.

Doubtless this man has not Read the Holy Scripture with that care as became
him, or else he has sancied all men to have (as his word is) a wide swallow,
capable of all that he will cram in upon them. Whereas if he had had but Clergy
Spectacles with him (so he wordeth it also) he would have seen his opinion here
to be a grosser Error, even the naked Truth would tell him, the said word is
more than once or twice, or thrice set down in Scripture, for besides this of
sit. Peter which he quoteth, let him see Joh. 19.24. Act 1.20. Act. 8.21. Act.
26.18. Col. 1.12. etc.

Nevertheless he will out of his huge Bounty vouchsafe the favor that the word
shall be appropriated as it has been; For thus he writes: Since this word
Clergy has so long obtained in the World, and also is become part of some
Statutes in England (mark that) I will even let it go as it is, and take it in
its common Acceptance hereafter; I only have said thus much (true enough) to
show that neither the name nor the thing, neither the word Clergy nor yet Gods
Heritage belongs to this Tribe of Levi more than to other Christians, if so
much. Truly (Sir) this Tribe of Levi is little beholding to you; Yet the best
of it is, it is not you that can turn them out of their Inheritance; You have
seemed to be very friendly to them, and Oh how much Reverence you have for
them? But is this your kindness to your Friends? Hah? these are his own words
upon another Account.

But I will here show his naked Untruth to his shame in this particular. It is
not to be denied, (as it is before said) but that all People whatsoever, that
are in Covenant with God, are Gods Clergy, Gods Lot, Gods Inheritance, and
blessed be God for it, that they are so, as all the Israel of God were of old
called Gods Inheritance, Psalm. 78.71. etc. Yet was the Tribe of Levi then
chosen out in a more peculiar manner, as is evident by sundry places of
Scripture, to be Gods Heritage, his especially Numb. 3. Numb. 8. etc. And for
the service which they did at his Altar, he gave them the first Fruits the
Tithes and Offerings which were his Due: And can any man think but that
Ministers of the Gospel have as good a Title to these Privileges, as the
Levites had under the Law (for even so (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 9.14.
(observe) has the Lord ordained that they which Preach the Gospel should even
so live of the Gospel) upon which accounts, they may well be called Gods
Clergy, and the Churches Clergy in a more peculiar manner than other People may.

All Gods People were called his Anointed, Psalm. 105.15.2. Cor. 1.21. yet were
there some in public office among them, who had that Denomination given them
Honor is Gratia: and now are there not Titles common to all the Faithful, which
yet are (without any the least scruple) ascribed Eminemiae Gratia to
Ecclesiastical Persons, viz. Spiritual Men (a term which the Prophet Hosea
likewise applied to the Preachers of Gods Word in his days Hos. 9.7.) Watchmen,
Churchmen, Ministers, Priests, Disciples? And amongst the rest, this of Clergy
men has been commonly so used, till this Objector has devised a Cavil against
it. But,

Observable it is how he is Choakt with the word (Clergy) in his tenth and
twelfth Pages, etc. when he can with much facility swallow the word (Priest) a
term more excepted against nowadays, than this, of Clergy. Neither of which
(though) can in truth be justly cavilled at by him or any man else. For the
naked Truth is, Ecclesiastical Persons are not usually called by us (Clergy or
Priests) with any Reference at all to the order of Aaron, or to the disorder of
Antichrist (as some blasphemously prate) but only in a more excellent way (as
is before said) than the community of the People are, being, as such set apart
by God himself to preserve in his Church his public Worship and Honor, to
keep a Commemoration of the Sacrifice of the Death of Christ, and to offer up
Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving even for the People when they are solemnly
Assembled together in their Congregations.

Neither will the word (Church) please him, as it is upon any Emergency applied
to Clergymen. But so long as the word of our Savior stands in Holy Scripture,
Mat. 18.17. (...).
advising the offended Brother to make his appeal to the Church, meaning the
Sanhedrim, that is the Church-Senate or seventy Elders, who then sat by Gods
Approbation, to hear harder Causes and to decide greater Doubts against Peace
and Charity. I say, so long may we call the Assembly of Ecclesiastical Persons
among us, be they in Convocation, or other Solemn Meetings or Synods, the
Church of England, notwithstanding the Oggannition of all gainsayers whatsoever.

One Instance more, he says, he will produce, as if he had not said enough
already to his shame: He will at last show what little Pretense the Clergy has
to Entitle themselves alone the Church Representative of England distinct from
the Lay-Brethren, and that is in making a Canon to cringe to the East (thus he
wordeth it according to the scossing Language of turbulent. Schismatics) and
to bow at the Name of Jesus.

Was there ever any man that made such Pretensions to truth, and withal did
Print and Publish such notorious Lies? where does he, or any else during this
last Century of years (as for what may be done before it is not now material)
find such a Canon as he here speaks of, that enjoyneth men to cringe to the
East? Out upon it! This false dealing must be Repented, if ever he will look
for Mercy from Almighty God at the last Day.

True it is, of late, viz. in the year 1640, there was a Declaration made by
the Convocation then, concerning some Rites and Ceremonies to be observed in
the Church, which with other Canons was Confirmed and Published under the Great
Seal of England, which Declaration, in that part of it which concerns this
present purpose is verbatim in this manner.

Whereas the Church is the House of God, Dedicated to his holy Worship, and
therefore ought to mind us both of the Greatness and Goodness of his Divine
Majesty, certain it is that the acknowledgment thereof, not only inwardly in
our Hearts, but also outwardly with our Bodies, must needs be Pious in it self,
profitable unto us, and edifying unto others. We therefore think it very meet
and behoveful, and heartily commend it to all good and well affected People,
Members of this Church that they be ready to tender unto the Lord the said
acknowledgment, by doing Reverence and Obeisance, both at their coming in and
going out of the said Churches, Chancels or Chapels, according to the most
ancient Custom of the primitive Churches in the purest times, and of this
Church also for many years of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The receiving
therefore of this ancient and laudable Custom, we heartily commend to the
serious Consideration of all good People, not with any intention to exhibit any
Religious Worship to the Communion Table, the East, or Church, or any thing
therein contained in so doing, or to perform the said Gesture, in the
Celebration of the holy Eucharist, upon any opinion of a corporal Presence of
the Body of Jesus Christ on the Holy Table, or in the mystical Elements, but
only for the Advancement of Gods Majesty, and to give him alone that Honor and
Glory that is due unto him, and no otherwise: And in the practice or omission
of this Rite, we desire that the Rule of Charity prescribed by the Apostle, may
be observed, which is, that they which use this Rite despise not them which use
it not, and that they who use it not, condemn not those that use it.

If this be the Canon that the man means, as I believe it is, I do appeal to
all men that are able to discern between Truth and Error what jost; exceptions
can be taken against these words; is it not evident that they carry in them a
sound of much Piety toward God, much tenderness of Spirit toward the People
of God, in persuading them with meekness of Wisdom, to consent unto that pious
Course there propounded for the advancement of Gods Majesty? And what can be
more Christian like spoken than that which is there added in the close,
desiring that the Rule of Charity prescribed by the Apostle may be obseryed,
which is, that they who use this Rite, viz. of reverential Gesture in the
public Service of God, despise not them who use it not, and that they who use
it not, condemn not those that use it. What imposing then is here upon People a
cringing to the East? It is not expressly disavowed? where is that unlawful
Canon which is said to be obtruded upon the Church? Yea where is that Popish
Superstition which has been and still is mouthed out in these times against
Convocations of the Clergy, the Clergy? Where? It will certainly be sound one
day to be in the Pens, in the Tongues, in the Hearts of those that make these
causeless, uncharitable invectives; It is not in the Clergy, it is not in their
Assemblies nor in their Administrations.

Oh but to the Bowing at the Name of Jesus he has some what more to object, he
will not, he says, let that go so: He will smite it first with his Tongue,
rather than confess with his Knee, or his Tongue that Jesus is The Lord.

And what can he or what does he say, but the same nauseous Crambe which his
old Acquaintance of the Separation have said before him? Quae omnia protrita
and prostigata sunt (as it has been said by a Learned man in another case like
unto this.)

The Convocation in Amo 1603, does indeed order that when in time of Divine
Service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly Reverence shall be
done by all Persons present, as it has been accustomed: Testifying by these
outward Ceremonies and Gestures, their inward Humility, Christian Resolution,
and due acknowledgment that the Lord Jesus Christ, the True and Eternal Son of
God, is the Only Savior of the World, in whom alone all the Mercies, Graces,
and Promises of God to mankind for this life, and the life to come are fully
and wholly comprised.

And is this now to be accounted any so great a Crime in that Synod to make
such a Canon, that they must be condemned; as if they were unworthy to be
called Gods Clergy? Had they done any thing to the Dishonor of our Lord, could
they have had a heavier Sentence past upon them? It is, he says, a Dishonor
to the Father and the Holy Ghost to Prefer the second Person before them, being
coequal in Glory. And therefore may the Lord Jesus Christ account himself
dishonored by this Bowing to him, seeing the Father and the Holy Ghost have
not the same Honor done unto them. These are his chief Objections, as for the
rest, they are so Ridiculous and Profane that they deserve not a Refutation,
but to these I return briefly.

1. If we did believe that our Lord Jesus took upon him the person of a Man,
when he was made of a Woman, and that we do thereupon ascribe unto him this
Honor we should in so doing Dishonor him. For first we should deprive him of
his highest Honor, which is, of being God equal with the Father. 2. We should
thereby derogate from the Father and the Holy Ghost, of which he will never
approve, it being of dangerous consequence to all the three Persons, it being
also written that we should honor the Son even as we honor the Father; Yea
then we should believe a Quaternity of Persons contrary to that which is
Revealed and Believed ever since the Gospel has been Preached and Written,
wherein I consess we should sin sadly. But this we do not. That therefore
cannot be imparted to us, in this case nor in any other. 2. We do not ascribe
this Honor to Christ, as he is the second Person in the Trinity, the Son of
the Father: For then indeed we should be partial in the Worshipping of our God,
presenting one person before another, and consequently should be guilty of
Idolatry in framing an Imagination of our God in our Hearts, otherwise than it
is written.
But thirdly, this Honor we do ascribe to Christ as he is Mediator between God
and us, and no otherwise, not exalting him thereby above the first and third
Persons, but because we would exalt him above every Name that is named among
all the Creatures of God either in Heaven or in Earth, and we believe in so
doing we do not offend.

It will be said, we do give more Honor unto the Name of Jesus, than we do to
the Name of the Father and of the Holy Ghost. It must be answered, Jesus we
know is a proper Name given to our Savior at his Birth, as all we of the same
nature have, but there are no such Names given to the Father and the Holy
Ghost; Neither are the three Persons to be distinguished by Names and Titles,
but only Relatively. For then we should make such a distinction as is
inconsistent with the Catholic Faith, and therefore, it is gross Ignorance in
this Objector and all his Accomplices to dream of such a matter.

But because there seems to be a necessity that this Mystery be explained, I
shall therefore endeavor upon this occasion so far as I can be able to reach
the Sense of the Spirit of God in it revealed in holy Scripture to open it here
more largely.

It is not to be doubted, there is nothing more intelligible than God, because
he is the first, the Perfectest and Truest Being, the first mover which
orders all things, but receives no order from any, the purest Act, the
highest sublimated Elixir, the Supreamest Entity, the most sovraign and simple
Essence, without any the least imaginary Metaphysical Composition at all; Yet
is our Understanding of him (whether we be in the Body, or out of the Body,
whether in this Life, or that which is to come) so short, and so shallow of a
total Penetration into his Essence, that we must let that alone for ever: Job
11.7.8.
Zophar's Question to Job will put us all to a Nonplus, can thou by searching
find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto Perfection? It is high as
Heaven what can thou do? Deeper than Hell, what can thou know? We read (
Genesis 32.29.) how God Rebuked Jacob, for his inquiring after his name, Tell me I
pray thee (says he) thy name, and he said, wherefore is it that thou do ask
after my name? Yet to let him see what he was without telling him any name, He
Blessed him there. So when Manoah, Judge. 13.16. would be inquisitive in the
like kind he met with the same Repulse, Why ask thou thus after my name,
seeing it is secret or wonderful, and accordingly he made it known in his
wonderful Work which he then wrought.

And verily to talk much of Gods Name I mean of an appellative, distinctive
Notamen is not, cannot be safe, the way of Negation is (indeed) and must be
accounted the best and safest for us to take in speaking of God, that is, to
show not what he is, but what he is not. Numb. 23.19. 1 Samuel 18.29.
After this manner did the Prophets of old speak of God; Balaam the false
Prophet as well as Samuel the true, could say God is not a man that he should
Lie, nor the Son of Man that he should Repent. It will not become us boldly to
gaze upon the glorious Excellency of God, or to break into his Pavillion:
rather it is our Duty to settle our Thoughts upon those negative Expressions of
him, viz. that he is Immortal, Invisible, Infinite, Immense, Incorporeal,
Unchangeable, etc. And whosoever he be that shall presumptuously ask, Who is
God, or what is his Name? He may be answered, God is not such an one as thy
self; But he is such an one as will Reprove thee for thy unreverend and rash
Intrusion into the Secret of his Sovereignty. He has no Compeere either in
Nature or in Honor, being Vnissimus Deus, One alone, and none besides him, Es.
45.6. etc. neither has he any proper name at all, such names being used among
us for distinction sake, and for the avoiding of Error in mistaking one for
another, which danger is not Incident to the one only True God. It Is true we
read of names of God in Scripture, but they only show the Essential Properties
of God, being Numina rather than Nomina, for Numen Incomprehensibile est Deus
(was the saying of old) sed omnino absque nomine.

But Christ has a proper Name given him, and he is to be known by it unto his
Church for ever. Undoubtedly therefore it ought to be used with Reverence by
all those that receive Comfort and Benefit by the Sense and significancy of it.

Which Duty should be done according to the Tenor of the aforesaid Canon upon
these two Considerations. First because that for our sakes our Lord Jesus made
himself of no Reputation. 2. Because a sort of wretched men in the World about
us, set on by the Devil, Conspire together to make him of no Reputation also.

First for our sake he made himself of no Reputation, great Reason therefore
that we should account him worthy of all Honor; Not only that which is
spiritual in captivating every Thought to the Obedience of his Gospel, but that
also which is of the Body, in the outward Deportment of it (for he has bought
it with a Price, a great Price, even his dearest Blood, as well as the Soul,)
It was no Robbery for him to be equal with God, for he was and is the
Brightness of his Fathers Glory, the Character of his Person, yet Saint Paul
tells us he emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was
made in the likeness of Men, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross.

Now Quanto pro me vilior tanto mihi charior, said holy Bernard sweetly, the
more Humility appeared in him, it is but meet that the more honor be ascribed
unto him. Admit that it be not a duty of the Text to use Genu-slexions at the
mentioning of his Blessed Name, when we are employed in the public Exercises
of our Religion, yet since the Father has even upon the account of his
Humility, highly exalted him, and given him a name above every Name, it well
becomes the Church upon the same account (in a Conformity to that divine
Pattern) according to her poor strength and ability, by all ways and means to
exalt him likewise. This then (I conceive) may somewhat stop the mouth of
Contradiction against the Religious Canon of our Church, requiring all Persons
to Bow at the Name of Jesus, for why, she has learned it of the Father (whose
Example is without Controversy in this case worthy of Imitation) to exalt him,
because for our sake he made himself of no Reputation.

Again, is not our Lord now (as it has been Prophesied of him, Is. 53.3.)
despised and rejected of men? Do not Jews, Turks and Infidels blaspheme his
worthy Name, by which we are called? Are not Socinians those cursed Heretics
as unwearied now in their malice against him to lay his honor in the dust, as
the Arrians were of old? Is not the Precious Blood of this Immaculate Lamb of
God (shed to take away the sins of the World) in many places beslavered with
the impious Mouths of execrable Swearers? And are not some wretched people
risen up among us in these days, who out of a Luciserian Pride, pretend that
they are as well and as truly God as Jesus Christ, because they have their
Being in God, and are partakers of the Divine Nature? What then should the
Church do, but out of a detestation of these horrid Impieties, and out of a
tender regard to the Honor of her Lord give a signal Testimony of her duty in
commanding all her faithful Children to bow their Bodies in token of Reverence
unto him at the mentioning of his Name in their Solemn Assemblies when they are
gathered together for the holy Service of Almighty God.

I have here given my Reader a sight of some of the ugly Errors contained in
that scandalous Pamphlet unjustly called Naked Truth, which but a few days past
came into my hands: And having perceived that a leading man here in our
Country has been seduced by it, who has, (as I have heard) spoken these
words, What will Mr. Lane say to this? Let him try if he can answer it. I was
willing to set Pen to Paper for the Vindication of Truth which has been
miserably abused by this Pretender unto it.

But having since heard also from some of the Seniors of our College by Winton
that one has already set forth an Answer unto it, I shall forbear any further
meddling therewith. And though the Author of it calls them Babies and Boobies
(such are his immodest terms) that will write against him, yet I am confident
such a work (as it may be managed) will be acceptable to God and all good men.

Nevertheless I wish with all my heart that Abuses in our Ecclesiastical
Courts, those I mean that are not Imaginary but Real (if there be any such)
that they may be removed, which I believe the Chief Governors of the said
Courts will be heartily willing unto.

FINIS.
The Contents of the foregoing Discourse upon the words of our Savior, viz.
This is my Body.
1. OF the sad Differences that have been about the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. Page, 71 2. The Romish Doctrine of Transubstantiation proved to be but
a late upstart Doctrine. p. 72 3. Is is a Doctrine which is destructive to the
nature of the Sacrament. p. 73 4. It is a Doctrine that disanuls the Verity of
Christ's Humane Nature. p. 74 5. Gods Omnipotency not questioned by us in this
case, but vainly urged by our Adversaries in it. p. 75 6. Of the words used in
our Liturgy, viz. The Body and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed Taken and
Received by the Faithful in the Lords Supper. p. 76, 77 7. The Sense of the
Church of England in her twenty eighth Article concerning this Point. p. 79. 8.
The Sense which Orthodox Interpreters give of these words, viz. This is my
Body, approved. p. 80 9. A Resemblance taken from the two Natures of Christ,
Divine and Humane, and ^pplied. p. 81 10. An Additional Sense of these words,
viz. This is my Body, is here offered to Consideration. p. 82 11. Venerable Mr.
Hookers Judgment of the real Presence of Christ's most blessed Body and Blood in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist. p. 84 12. How the words of our Lord which he
spoke, saying, This is my Body, are the Crown of our Rejoicing. 91 13. The
Popish Opinion of the real Presence of Christ in the Sacrament is but a Dream.
92
Books newly Printed for William Crook, viz. 1680, 1681.
AN Institution of General History, or, the History of the World, being a
complete Body thereof from the beginning of the World to the taking of Rome by
Odoacer, and erecting a Kingdom of Barbarians in Italy, describing the several
Empires, their Forms of Government, Magistrates, Laws, Customs, Polity's, etc.
all in such unbroken Order and Method as yet was never extant. By Dr. William
Howel, Chancellor of Lincoln. in Fol. 2 Volums.

Historical Collections, or an exact Account of the Proceedings of the four
last Parliaments of Queen Elizabeth, wherein is contained the Complete Journals
both of Lords and Commons taken from the original Records of their Houses,
wherein are the Speeches, Arguments, etc. of Secretary Cecill, Sr. Fr. Bacon,
Sr. Walter Rawleigh, Sr. John Croke, Sr. Edward Hobby, etc. by H. Townsend
idque Member in those Parliaments. Fol.

The Connexions, being choice Collections of some principal Matters in the
Reign of King James, which does contain several remarkable and learned Pieces
of great Men in that time, as the Duke of Buckingham, Sr. J. Caess. Sr. Francis
Bacon. Which will supply the vacancy betwixt Townsend and Rushworth.

The Moors Baffled at Tangier in a Letter by a learned Person, in Quarto.

Considerations on the Reputation, Loyalty, Manners and Religion of Thomas
Hobbs of Malmesbury, Octavo.

A Sermon in French and English preached at the Savoy, Twelves.

Mercy Triumphant, the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow Bounds
which have been wont to be set to it -- written by this Author.

A Sermon of Mr. Tho, Maningham's, in Quarto.

Two Sermons of Dr. Gregory Hascards in Quarto.

Hobbs, his Life in an English Poem, Fol.

Responsio Valedictoria, ad secundam Sandii Epistolam, etc. per S. Gardinerum,
S. T. D. Octavo. 1681.

Thomae Hobbs Angli Malmesbur. Philosoph. Vita, containing an Account of his
Life, as it was part written by himself, the rest, gathered by those that knew
him well. and put together by Dr. B. wherein is an Account of his Friends and
Enemies, the Books he wrote, and what against, or for him, with other things
relating to his Life, in Oct. 1681.

A new Mystery in Physic discovered by Curing of Fevers and Agues by Quinquina
or Jesuits Powder, where you have the Ancient and Modern Use of it: part
Translated out of French, part out of Italian, and part wrote in English,
Twelves, 1681. price 1 s.

The Court of Curiosity, wherein the most Intricate Questions are Resolved by a
most curious Fortune-Book. With Dreams and Visions Explained and Interpreted
according to the Doctrine of the Ancients and Practice of the Moderns, the
third Ed. cleared from all the Difficulties in the former Editions, the Dreams
Corrected and Enlarged, and the Fortune-book is double what it was, Octavo,
price 1 s. 6. d. 1681.

Advertisement.
There is Printing the whole Art of Rhetoric in English, by Tho. Hobbs of
Malmesbury, Octavo.

FINIS.

