Mercy Triumphant.

THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST ENLARGED Beyond the Narrow Bounds which have been wont
to be set unto it.

By Edward Lane, Minister of the Gospel.

BEING An Antidote against a Book lately come out, of Doctor Du-Moulin's,

CALLED Moral Reflections upon the number of the Elect. WHEREIN The said Author
will prove by Scripture, that not one in a Hundred Thousand (nay probably not
one in a Million) from Adam down to our Times shall be saved.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple-Barr.
1680.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
A Certain Book has lately been scattered among us, Entitled Moral
Reflections upon the number of the Elect, proving plainly (as it pretends)
from Scripture-Evidence, that not one in a hundred Thousand (nay probably not
one in a Million) from Adam down to our times shall be saved.

It is certainly a very bold Sally that is hereby made upon us all (poor men)
the whole World over, Tanto Hiatu to drive us like Sheep so furiously into such
a dreadful Precipice from whence there can be no recovery. The Commander of
this Sally is, it seems, by the Word fixed upon the Front, Dr. Lewis du Moulin
late History-Professor in Oxford, which the Printer, as his Antesignanus,
carries before him, that he might be the more formidable: For as for the Word,
viz. proved plainly by Scripture. Evidence I will not say it is a plain Lie
(though I might without any Offense before wise Men) but it is a false Alarm,
as this following Discourse shall clearly demonstrate. Which Discourse though
it was never intended to put a Stop to his Carriere, for I had not so much as
heard of it till about the time of writing this Epistle; but it was only
commended to the Inspection of an honest Judicious Friend, a Minister of the
Gospel in or about London, with whom I have some Acquaintance, and because I
would not lean too much to my own Understanding, nor yet rely upon the Judgment
of one single man in a Matter of this Moment, I did desire it might be imparted
to others also by him, that they might give their Opinion of it.

But as soon as I heard of this Furious Zealot that he had proclaimed the worst
Defiance that can be imagined, against the major part of mankind, and that in
such peremptory Terms not to be endured by any who are not void of all
Humanity. I could not be quiet in my Mind, till I had caused this poor Scout
armed some Months before, to go with as much speed as might be, to proclaim the
Peace with which I had Entrusted it. Not but that I like well of this Doctors
Zeal in taking men off from their sinful Security, of which there is great need
in this Generation, (only we must not, as good Job advises us, speak wickedly
for God,) but I utterly abhor his Wresting of Holy Scripture to make it a
Patron to his Corrupt Phansy: He considers not (poor man) how much Disservice
he has done to Jesus Christ by this Pestilent Book, nor how much he has
gratified the Devil by it. His Arguments are generally Vain and Childish, which
I could easily make evident: But I doubt not some that are more able will
undertake him, who with a full strength both from Scripture and right Reason
will sufficiently make the Folly of them manifest, nor is it likely he should
escape without a severe Check from our Universities, which Will not, I presume,
suffer our Church and Nation to be tamely Deluded in a Point that deeply
concerns the Honor of our great Redeemer Jesus Christ, and that by a French
Foreiner.

He is indeed a Stranger unto me: I knew, I confess, one of his Name about
fifty Years past, that was a Lecturer in a Church near London-Stone, but for
this Doctor I never so much as saw him that I know of, nor heard of him, till I
heard of this Pamphlet of his, so destructive to the precious Souls of Men, and
by which I would I had not had the Occasion now to know him: but knowing him so
far as I do, I wish heartily he may have Grace to repent him of this his
pernicious Tenet, wherein he utters Words bordering upon Blasphemy, viz. That
what he writes of this Subject is as great a Truth as any can be in the World.
Os durum, Apage, Rather it may be said there can scarcely be found a grosser
Untruth than this that he has now published; But as I have said I wish he may
repent of it by a timely Retractation of it in public, that he may wipe off
that soul Blot which he has by it brought upon his Name, and that he may
himself escape thereby the Hazard he is in, of running Headlong into the same
Danger whereto he judges many Millions of People more dear, it may be in Gods
account than himself, which Danger Mr. Baxter, whom he so highly Extols, was
careful to avoid; for thus he writes in the second Part of his Defense of the
Principles of Love, Page 40. I confess, says he, I Affect none of the Honor
of that Orthodoxness which consists in Sentencing Millions, and Kingdoms to
Hell, whom I am not acquainted with. But this Doctors Ambition is to be the
Chairman amongst all the rest of these Judges of evil Thoughts, viz. to
pronounce the Sentence, though the best of it is, his Sentence will not be
Enrolled in Heaven, when his Rashness in pronouncing it will, without
Repentance, be there upon Record against him. He has likewise, it seems,
Ingratiated himself with a noble Personage to whom he Dedicates his Book, and
whom he humbly Beggs to lay at her Honors Feet for Protection: But it is
scarce to be believed that upon a diligent Searching into the Matter, any of a
noble Extraction, Virtuous Disposition and Christian Education, will so much as
Countenance him in this his Unchristian Assertion. Nevertheless should he so
far prevail with his sly Insinuations as to obtain a Patronizing of it, for my
part my Resolution shall ever be this, Floreat Evangelium, ruat Caelum.

Farewell. E. L.

Mercy Triumphant, THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST ENLARGED Beyond the narrow Bounds,
which have been wont to be set unto it.
IT has been a Tradition a long time among all sorts of People Learned and
Unlearned. That because our Lord Jesus Christ in his Sermon on the Mount gave
such strict Precepts, that never any Lawgiver did the like, adding withal a
severe Warning to his Disciples in these words. Enter ye in at the strait Gate,
for wide is the Gate, Mat. 7.13.14.
and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be which go
in thereat. Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way, which leads
unto Life, and few there be that find it. (Meaning probably thereby that they
should not take to themselves that Liberty which was commonly used by other
People in the World, but be very exact in observing those Rules of an elevated
Nature which he had set them.) That therefore the number of those that shall be
saved at the last Day is but small, very small in comparison of those that
shall be damned in Hell for ever.

But let us now inquire into this matter: For, though I say not but that this
Warning may have a Measure in it Reaching to all, who are the true Disciples of
Christ to the end of the World, yet will it not afford any Warrant for such an
Opinion that is here derived from it. Neither can the said Opinion be Justified
upon any Terms.

Having thus, in short, declared freely my Judgment and Resolution, I may
(possibly) have an Imputation put upon me of a bold Singularity. And some will
be ready to say, Tu autem, who are you that pretend to have more Understanding
than others, and will venture thus to Correct your Elders and Superiors? But O
Benedicite. I do not howsoever take upon me to Correct Magnificat, neither will
I, though I be In Artibus Magister Quinquagenarius, Censure magisterially all
those that maintain the said Opinion, but only offer to consideration my
Conceptions upon it; Wherein if I err, I shall be willing and glad to be better
Instructed. And since the Church of England (which is a chief Pillar and Ground
of Truth, and which under God is my Oracle to guide me in my way to Heaven)
has in her Articles, the Summary of her Christian Profession, lest this Point
undetermined, we may have a Latitude in this case, every man to propound his
Judgment with Humility.

First then, as for this premised Scripture on which the aforesaid Opinion
seems to be Grounded; Dr. Hammond (whom I mention, not as if he were to be
accounted Infallible, but as one approved for Learning and Holiness;) He I say,
does not stretch it to such a Sense; but in his Paraphrase upon it, rendereth
it thus. First upon the thirteenth Verse (where Christ speaking to his
Disciples, in effect says) Let all your Care be to set your selves upon the
Christian Course, and to go thorough with it, be it never so strict, for it is
easy to enter upon a vicious Course, and to go thorough that: Multitudes there
are, great Store (both of Jews and Heathens, as the said Author renders it in
another place) which pass that way to Eternal Destruction. His Prac. catechis.
And upon the fourteenth Verse he adds to the same purpose. There will be
likewise all need of your Care, because the Entrance and whole Course of a
Christian Life is made of perfect strictness, in opposition to the looseness of
the World, and that makes so many to choose it.

And the Lesson which I for my part would learn herehence, shall be through
Gods Grace, to teach me who will be a Disciple of Christ, to be very watchful
over my self, that I may be a Christian indeed by a strict and straight
Conformity to the Rules of our Lawgiver, lest if I follow a Multitude in doing
that which is Evil, I may in the end fall into Perdition. Such or the like use
it would become us all to make of these Words, rather than by an unwarrantable
Interpretation of them, to intrude our selves into the Justice-Seat of the
great and Omnipotent God, taking upon us the boldness to Judge before the time,
as if a liberty were allowed thereto from this Scripture, which upon a due
Search into it, we shall find, yet further, that it intends no such matter;
for let it be considered,

Seeing we are not now under the severe Tutoring of that Rigid Schoolmaster,
the Law, but under the calm and gentle Dispensations of Grace, or (as my
aforesaid excellent Doctor renders it in his Paraphrase upon Romans 6.14.) not
under the weak unefficacious Pedagogy of the Law, which could only forbid Sin
and denounce Judgment, but never yield any man hope of Mercy or amendment, but
under a Kingdom of Grace, where there is Pardon for Sin upon Repentance. Seeing
I say it is so, we may be well assured that the way of teaching the Doctrine of
Salvation is to be by the sweet and peaceable Suada of the Gospel, Which
certainly is most prevailing to lead men to Repentance. Unlikely therefore is
it that Christ himself, now at his first entrance upon his Work, which the
Father had appointed him to do for the Salvation of the World, would begin with
such Terror as to preach Damnation to the greatest part of mankind, which
certainly he did, if he said that few shall be saved by him, and that it was so
decreed by the eternal Counsel of Heaven (as it is likewise pretended by those
that are for this destructive Opinion;) we have heard otherwise out of the
Gospel, that when Christ began to Preach, he said, repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. Thus he began, and so he continued, giving it in charge also
to his Disciples that they should preach the same Doctrine, which without doubt
signified that in all places, and among all People where they were to come, the
World should know, there is a possibility of Salvation, upon Repentance, for
them all. For let me ask what is this Gate, and what is this way that leads
to Life, but Christ himself? I am the Door (says he John 10.9.) By me if any
man enter in, he shall be saved; And again ( John 14.6.) I am the Way, no man
can come to the Father, but by me. And is this Gate so strait, and this way so
narrow that few can go in the one, or enter in at the other? It cannot enter
into my Heart to imagine, let all the World say the contrary, but that the
Righteousness of Christ is sufficient to Justify all mankind, yea that the
major part of mankind shall be saved by him.

It is a saying worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
World to save Sinners; And does he now say that few shall be saved by him? What
a Dishonor must this be both to him, and to his Father that sent him? Yea, did
he come to destroy the Works of the Devil, as became the Captain of our
Salvation, and can the Devil Immure himself still in his Works and strong
Holds, so as to be able to draw, yea to drive the greatest part of the World
under his Power for ever? This unavoidably must be granted, if that Opinion be
true, viz. Because Christ has said, strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way
that leads unto Life, etc. Few therefore shall be saved. These things
considered we must necessarily render some other account of these Words, than
has been wont to be given of them; For, certain it is, the Usual Sense
carries with it such a Sound of Horror, as is utterly inconsistent with the
Nature of God, the Merits of Christ, and the glad Tidings of the Gospel, as may
be here seen at large in the pursuance of this Discourse.

First then, this caution of Christian Strictness and Difficulty seems to be a
Branch of that great Law of Equity written by the Evangelist in the Words
immediately before, which must reach to our very Enemies, as appears Luke
6.27.31. Where this Rule is also prescribed, viz. As ye would that men should
do unto you, do ye also to them likewise. A Precept it is, very difficult to
corrupt Nature, and the broad Road which is contrary thereto, is the Common
walk of worldly minded Men, who are not willing to enter into any Course that
may not agree with their Humor, Interest, and Advantage; Which Road Christ
would have all his Disciples, to the end of the World, carefully to shun.

2. The Word (...) which is set in the beginning of this fourteenth Verse, is
not always Coniunctio Causalis, but sometimes is a Note of Interrogation, or
admiration, as it may be here (...), etc. How strait is the Gate, and how
narrow is the Way that leads to Life, and how few there be that find it? And
accordingly our Translators, as doubting of the Congruity of their Word
(because) have in stead of it set in the Margin the Word (How) Which clearly
signifies, they were not so positive in their Determination here, as they were
before in the other Clause of the wide Gate, and broad way.

3. It is observable that Christ himself varyeth his Words here when he speaks
of the strait Gate and narrow way, from what he had said of the wide Gate and
broad Way; he says not here of the strait Gate, few there be that go in
thereat, for then indeed there had been some Color for this Opinion of the
small number of those that shall be saved. No, but few there be that find it.
And what finding is this? The original Word (...)signifies there are but few in
the World that are so wise as they should be to come to the true knowledge and
understanding of it, meaning without the guidance of Gods gracious and good
Spirit, none shall ever find it. For

4. This Caution must be understood according to the Tenor of the Gospel, even
as all the strict and elevated Precepts, which Christ here gives to his
Disciples are, viz. With a Restriction to the Grace of God, so far as they
concern those that are Interessed in this Grace; And they are raised up to such
a height to this very end, that Grace might be the more exalted thereby.

True it is there is another reason besides this of the strictness in Christ's
Doctrine, which is this. Our beloved Savior knowing the Jews, and among them
especially the Scribes and Pharisees (of whom he speaks expressly, Chap. 5.20.)
to be pertinaciously set upon the bare Letter of the Law, and perceiving that
his Doctrine would be cavilled at by them, as not agreeable to that Law. First
that he might take away Occasion from those that desired Occasion, he says
plainly he came not to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill; And
after that, to show the Vanity of their Pretensions to the Law, he gives the
right Sense of several of these Laws, far surpassing the slender and jejune
Imaginations of those Illegal Expositers of it. As namely, what is meant by the
Law against killing, what of that concerning Adultery, what of Swearing, what
of loving our Neighbor, etc. In all which he far transcends those proud
Boasters of the Law, raising it up to that Elevation which the Lawgiver God
himself intended by it: And consequently it was necessary for these who would
set up the Righteousness of the Law (if it were but in a Rivallity with him) to
hear how strait the Gate should be, and how narrow the way that leads to
Life, and how few should find it.

But to his Disciples his Doctrine has another Lesson; all whatsoever he had
said, or whatsoever he will say is to be understood according to the Terms of
the new Covenant, which he came to Seal and establish. For as he came not to
destroy the Law or the Prophets, so much less did he come to alter, or to
digress from the order and method of Salvation, which he had received from the
Father, that is, to save all those that repent and believe. This is the
irreversible Law of Heaven, nor was there any Word ever came out of the Mouth
of our Lord Jesus Christ contradictory thereunto. This Sermon, as it is
commonly called, which he Preached on the Mount, must not be stretched so far
in the least Particle of it, as to frustrate that Grace whereof he is, by Order
and Decree from the Father to be, by the Holy Ghost, the sole Dispenser and
Administrator.

Away then with all that seeming Zeal which puts Christ out of his Office,
as this undoubtedly does which wresteth these words of his to such a sinister
Sense, as is here declared. We (alas) consider not what Wrong we do unto our
selves thereby, for what are we, the best of us all, without Christ? what, but
nothing? Without him we can do nothing, without him we can hope for nothing.
But as the Holy Apostle said, so may every true Beleiver say, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me, I can enter in at this strait Gate,
I can go upright and safely in this narrow way, which how strait and narrow
soever it be to impenitent Sinners, or to those that are puffed up with their
own Homespun Righteousness, I shall, I doubt not, find easy and sweet to my
everlasting Happiness, though all the Powers of Hell stood in my Way to hinder
me.

So then, let this Gate be strait, and this Way narrow, yet by Gods Grace, and
the special Assistance of Christ's Spirit, many shall find it, and not only so,
but go in thereat.

5. Our Savior himself who is the best Interpreter of his own Words, does
refer it (as he does other of his Sayings of the same kind v. g. Mat. 20.16.
Luke 12.32. Luke 13.24.) not to the Paucity of the Vessels of Gods Mercy which
he had prepared unto Glory, but to the small number of Beleiving Jews at his
first coming unto them.

That this may be made evident, let us single out the last cited place of
Scripture, viz, Luke 13.24. (as being most pertinent to the matter in hand)
there does Christ seem to declare his Sense in this particular, repeating the
very Words which he spoke to his Disciples on the Mount. Strive, says he, to
enter in at the straight Gate, for many I say unto you will seek to enter in,
and shall not be able. It is an Answer (we see) given to a Question put by one
(a Jew) about the number of those that shall be saved, Lord (says he) are
there few that shall be saved? To which Question, no doubt, Christ could have
given him a punctual Answer, for he knows his own, such as are his Called and
Chosen, and Faithful, being all written in his Book of Life, he could therefore
have resolved him whether they shall be few or many. But instead of such an
Answer, he puts the Questionist upon his Duty, strive (says he) to enter in at
the straight Gate, etc. Which is (as a good Author glosseth upon it) intended
to this purpose; You demand of me, whether few shall be Saved, but I admonish
you not to trifle away time in such Questions, but let there be a holy
Contention among you with all speed to enter in at the Door of my Gospel, for
the time is but short in which you have a Capacity of Faith to obtain the
Kingdom of God. For when the Gospel shall be taken from you because of your
Unbeleif, you shall find how few of you will be in a State of Salvation. Now
the Remissness and untowardness of this Jewish People was so great that few of
them did Believe the Gospel, and therefore few of them at Christ's first
Manifestation in the Flesh did enter in by the true Gate, that is Jesus Christ.

And that these Words of the straight Gate and narrow Way, and of the small
number that finds it, were directed to the Contemporary Jews, is evident also
by the Apology which those Jews shall make for themselves at the last Day (as
Christ foretold them in these Words) then (meaning when the Door is shut, the
Day of Grace past) shall ye begin to say, We have Eaten and Drauken in thy
Presence, and thou have Taught in our Streets; Which Apology nevertheless
should do them no good at all, for they that Despised him here, he will not own
them then, but he will bid them depart from him. Yea and that which follows
(ver. 29.) signifies the same thing, viz. They shall come from the East and
from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in
the Kingdom of God, Implying that though but few Jews (So also is it understood
by another good Writer) should receive the Faith, Dr. Hammond.
yet Disciples shall come to Christ from all Quarters of the World, and by him
be received and entertained as at a Feast.

This Scripture then does not at all countenance that Opinion of the fewness of
those that shall be saved at the last Day. Or say, the number of them shall be
by many Millions, as it is commonly Said, less then of those that shall be cast
into outer Darkness.

Which Opinion I shall now more at large examine, and try whether it has any
agreement with the Analogy of Faith, or may preponderate that right Reason
which can be alleged against it. Which of the Creeds is it that has ever been
maintained in the Church that gives the least notice of it? What General
Council in all their Decrees or Canons make the least mention of it! Among all
the Confessions, Protestations, Declarations of the Christian Faith, wherein
the Reformed Churches of Christ in these latter days have Harmoniously agreed,
where can any Title be found (I say not Exproposito, but as Collaterally)
referring unto it? To allege the common Consent of particular Persons that
maintain it, is of no Force, for what would that be, but to set up mere humane
Dictates for our Rule, as if they were Oracles Infallible, and of equal
Authority with the Holy Word of God? (which yet neither is to be yielded to
Creeds, nor to general Councils, nor to public Confessions of Faith) we are to
call no man Master upon Earth in matters of Eternal Salvation) So has our
Master in Heaven given us a Charge; And should any one now in this Generation
mancipate his Judgment to the Arbitrary Opinions of his Forefathers (which is
and has been Decryed sufficiently) or of the times wherein he lives (which
deserves as much to be condemned,) Does he not digress from the Rule, and
disobey the Command that our said Master has set us?

But let me not be misunderstood, I do not in the least detract from Creeds, or
Councils, or Constitutions and Canons of Churches (enacted for public Order or
any other common Good) that Respect and Honor which is due unto them, neither
is this last Warning premised, as if I would Dictator-like, impose upon any a
necessity of Subscribing to me in this present Debate (unless they see just
Cause and cannot avoid it.) It is indeed to render a Reason why I dissent from
others in it (as we are commanded in Holy Scripture) desiring also that a
Liberty be granted unto me, which every man may challenge to make use of his
Asterick or Veru in things that are but circumstantial and undetermined. As
seems good unto him.

Nor can a Discourse upon this Subject be accounted a nice Curiosity, the Glory
of our Lord Jesus Christ our great Redeemer being concerned in it. And it must
be acknowledged to be very Meet and Right, and our bounden Duty to Ascribe unto
Christ all the Honor that can possibly be imagined by us (whether it be by
Circumstantial, or by Fundamental, or by Rational Deductions of Truth) all, I
say, which may be without wrong to Divine Justice: And since it has pleased
God to bruise him, and to put him to Greis, when he has in a quiet Submission
to the Will of his Father, made his Soul an Offering for Sin, that is, for the
Sin of the World: Who among us can choose but say, Let him by seeing his Seed
enjoy the Travel of his Soul, without any lessening of his Delight and Content
therein, that he may be satisfied. ( Es. 53.10.11.)

Whereas therefore it is commonly said that few shall be saved. First, I grant
that in some Sense this Assertion is not to be denied; few they may be of what
number soever in respect of Gods Mercies, which are infinite, and who would
have all to be saved; few also in respect of Christ's Merits which are
sufficient to obtain Salvation for the whole World were it Multiplied into
Millions. But since the Holy Spirit of God in Scripture has said of Gods Elect
that they shall be as the Stars of Heaven for Multitude, and as the Sand of the
Sea that cannot be measured nor numbered, and that the Multitude Clothed with
white Robes, having Palms in their Hands was so great that no man could number
(which large expressions we no where find to be used whenever mention is made
of those that shall Perish, but only it is said of them, they shall be many.)
Since it is so, I would, for my part rather join with those who dare not affirm
that they shall be few in comparison of those that shall be cast into Hell.
Fearing that such a Conclusion will be so far from exalting Christ's Merits
that it will much dishonor them; yea and so far from magnifying Gods Justice
(as it pretends) that it will detract from it.

Which Word though it may sound strangely to some, yet is there no Strangeness
between it and Truth. True it is, Divine Justice must be satisfied before any
of the Sweet and Reviving Influences of Mercy could have fallen upon the
Children of Men, and as true is it that the Satisfaction which Christ has made
for the Sin of the World, has been more powerful to appease Gods displeasure
against the World for Sin, and to bring many Souls out of the Snare of the
Devil unto Glory, than Sin could be able in its most deadly Venom to destroy,
or, than that Satisfaction can be which shall ever be giving by those who are
doomed to everlasting Fire, but never be finished: For in this is only
creature-Satisfaction, but in the other Divine.

Upon the account of which full Satisfaction being foreseen and praedetermined
by the wise Counsel of Heaven to be paid to the uttermost, Mercy even at the
Instant of man's Restoration from his Fall, began her Triumph in the behalf of
her dear Purchase rejoicing against Judgment, looking upon him that was to be
the Executioner of it, that is, the Devil, with infinite Disdain. And that her
Joy might be full, the World was by Gods Decree to be brought under her
Protection for the Sake and Safety of her Beloved Children; her Children, I
say, the Fruit and Offpring of Divine Grace, which is and ever was (as we may
Read Ps. 110.3.) more fertile than the Womb of the Morning that spreads her
Issue over all the Earth.

Let Mercy then Triumph, as she well deserves: And how shall her Triumph be
profited, if her Enemy be permitted to carry captive after him at his will, the
greatest number of those that have been deluded by him? That her Triumph
therefore might be the more Glorious, when in Justice God might have Condemned
all to everlasting Death, he left some to suffer according to their Demerits,
but delivered more up into the Arms of Mercy to be saved; and how else should
the Merit of our great Redeemer Jesus Christ prevail more abundantly to save
(as the Apostle argues the case, Romans 5.15. etc.) than the Sin of Adam was to
bring Death and Destruction upon himself and all his Posterity?

The great Objection that can be here cast in, is that the major part of the
World are and have always been Aliants from the Covenant of Promise.

Which, though it should be granted, yet will it not become us to determine of
their final Estate, so as to judge them to Eternal Perdition. For as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are Gods ways higher than our ways, and
his Thoughts than our Thoughts.

It is his good Pleasure (we commonly say) to save Infants of beleiving
Parents, who never came under the Guilt of any actual Sin, though they cannot
(according to the Tenor of the Gospel) lay hold upon Christ by Faith; yea
though they should suddenly or otherwise by some casualty, die unbaptised
(unless we will believe as the Church of Rome Beleives that there is a Limbus
Infantum where they are shut up for ever, separated from the Joys of Heaven and
the Pains of Hell.) And such as are Invincibly Ignorant, as Idiots and born
Changelings, and those that cannot hear nor speak, nor understand, being born
Deaf and wanting such Intellectuals as are proper to Rational Creatures; yet
these we are apt charitably to believe may also non obstante be in a State of
Salvation. And, I beseech you, may not the Wisdom of the Omnipotent God have
its free Liberty to Act, and his Grace to operate in a way beyond our
Apprehension for the Salvation of many of those who are yet Strangers unto him?
by bringing them sooner or later into the Bond of the Covenant, in such a kind
and manner, and by such means as shall seem good unto him? yea and without
means too? For this is his Perogative, who has said, I will be Gracious to
whom I will be Gracious, and I will show Mercy to whom I will show Mercy.

It must be granted, the Devil has, by Gods Permission, prevailed much to draw
the greatest part of the World into most abominable Idolatries, etc. and
consequently into a State of Condemnation. But we must ever remember, it is God
that Governs the World, and that he will not allow a Scrutiny to be made by us
into the Secret of his Sovereignty, or that we should be busily Inquisitive,
why he suffers so great a part of mankind to abide so long, during many
Generations, in the Region of Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death; In so doing
we shall but show our selves to be ungovernable under him: That which should
satisfy us is this, viz. The Government he manageth by his Incomprehensible
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, according to the Counsel of his own Will (for he
is Sui Juris absolute in his Power,) and for the advantage and advancement of
the Kingdom of his dearly beloved Son; and this I presume will be acknowledged
by all.

For us then to conclude the final Reprobation of whole Kingdoms and Nations
under this Divine Government, because their present Infidelity is not
restrained by the wise Providence of God, which rules in these Kingdoms of
men, what is this, but to set Limits to the glorious and boundless Attributes of
the most high in the Exercise of his Government? or to tell him, in effect, he
must everlastingly condemn all these Aliants that are not acquainted with his
Gospel, else his Government fails in the Administration of it.

Is it fit for us (Poor Worms) to dispute thus of Gods Arcana Imperii? rather
should we humbly adore the Infinite Wisdom of our Governor, and confess his
Judgments to be Unsearchable, and that his Ways are past finding out. What know
we but that God who can bring Light out of Darkness, and Good out of Evil, may
righteously confound his Enemy the great Prince of Darkness (who has brought
all this Mischief into the World) even in his greatest Strength, and in the
thing wherein he has dealt proudly, show that he will be above him?

Such a Reflection as this would (surely) better become us than by an Audacious
Arguing to charge God foolishly (which though it be not uttered in Terminis,
yet has our Pragmatical meddling with Gods Government such a Sense in it;) or
in our have, uncharitably to Condemn the greatest part of mankind (and that by
Virtue of Gods Decree, as is likewise pretended) to everlasting Fire, and in it
to remediless Torments.

Let this then be another Consideration which may lay a Restraint upon us, to
keep us from the too common Arrogance of sentencing millions of millions, etc.
of our own Flesh and Blood to Hell, viz. We are to let God alone to govern the
World, for the Kingdom is the Lords, and he it is who is the Governor among
the Nations ( Ps. 22.18.) God is not the God of the Jews only. Has he the
ordering of them alone? (It was spoken when the Jews were Gods Selected People)
Is he not of the Gentiles also? meaning doubtless at large all the World over.
Yes, (says the Apostle ( Romans 3.29.) And so ought we to say, yes) of the
Gentiles also, of what Nation or Language soever they be in any part of the
World

Add hereto, the Conversions of men are not all after one sort: Ordinarily
(indeed) they are wrought by the Preaching of the Gospel: But high time it is
for us to learn that the Grace and Goodness of God toward men has not been so
Limited. Many Instances are given us by approved Writers, how to men that sat
in the darkness of Sin and Error, Light has other ways sprung up: sometimes
by Afflictions only, sometimes by Voices from Heaven, sometimes by Visions and
other gracious Dispensations of Gods good Providence.

One there was of late who at his Death vowed openly he had learned more good
Touching his Soul in a dark hole within the Tower of London in a few Days, than
ever he could in his Life, when he was in Light and Liberty abroad. But what
speak I of one, when such a Mercy has been common to many other, even in our
Days? Frequently has this work of extraordinary Grace been wrought upon men in
former times to their Conversion. St. Augustine by a Voice from Heaven, viz.
Take up and Read, take up and Read, was directed to that Sentence ( Romans
13.13.) Not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, etc.
and was thereby brought to a Sight of his former Vanities. When Justin Martyr
saw the innocent Christians after their slanderous and false Praducements
carried to their Deaths, patient and joyful that they were thought worthy to
suffer for the Name of Christ, he himself, says in his Apology to the Emperor
Antoninus that it occasioned his Conversion being before a Heathen.

Many Instances might be produced of the Conversions of men which by strange
and wonderful means were brought to pass. But I should fall into a (...) if I
should here render them as they are related by good Authors: It is sufficient
they are well known in the World, not to be vain Romances, but real Truths.
But from thence we may safely infer, if God has been so gracious to those
that are without as to give them knowledge of his Salvation, According to the
good Pleasure of his Will (for is it not lawful for him to do what he will with
his own?) how can we say without a Pharisaical Arrogance that they shall all
Perish for ever in their Infidelity? who among us have known the mind of the
Lord? who among us have been his Counselors? are not these People (how strange
soever they may seem unto us) sprung from the same Root with us? are they not
tempered of the same Mold? are not their Heads upwards toward Heaven, as the
Heads of other Men? nay are they not made after the Image of God even as we?
and do not the creatures (Crassioris Luti) at the very sight of their bodily
Presence among them discern somewhat in them of their Creator more than is in
themselves, which forces them to a Subjection? has not God given a natural
Excellency to them (If not Superior, yet) equal to that whatsoever it be,
wherein we Pride our Selves, as if we had not received it? we know the Parable
( Mat. 20.) I will says the Master of the Vineyard, and I will says God, give
unto this last even as unto thee, which may Reach to Spiritual Endowments as
well as to natural.

To conclude this Argument, as the Conversions of men are not all after one
sort, so probable it is, because God is Rich in Mercy, and Delights in mercy,
that millions of men in the darkest corners of the Earth may have some
Dispensations of his Grace and Goodness to their Souls by several ways
Investigable to us (so is the Apostles word) as may, if not in their life time,
yet at their departure out of this World, be sufficient for their Salvation.

Again God does not require in all, who are ordained to Eternal Life, the same
Degree of Faith and Holiness and Mortification. For as he has some who grow up
Gradatim to a full Stature in Christ, so has he others that are but Babes, who
though they he Adulti, men well grown in years, yet when they depart out of
this Life, may be said without a Meiosis, yea or an Hyperbole, to die in their
Infancy. And he has said that he will not any of his little ones should
Perish. Nor has he set any certain time for the conversion of men, but, as it
is in the Gospel, some are called at the third Hour, some at the sixth and
ninth Hours, and some at the eleventh Hour; even when they have spent the
whole day of their Age in the idle Services of the World, and idolatrous
Service of the Devil, they may through Grace, have the Penny of eternal Life
given them, as well as those who have born the Burden and heat of the Day in
the Service of God: Mercy may come upon the Wing to a poor Soul ready to
perish, Inter Pontem et Fontem (as the proverb is) between the Bridge and the
Brook. I am found of them that sought me not says the Lord ( Es. 65.1.) I said
behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my Name, and again (
Hos. 1.10) In the place where it was said unto them, ye are not my People,
there in shall be said unto them, ye are the Sons of the living God.

I know well, these and the like gracious Words in Scripture refer to the
calling of the Gentiles in general, whom upon the rejection of the Jews God
would freely take into his Convenant, and make those among them that will
hearken to the Voice of his Word and Spirit his beloved Children, as dear unto
him as ever the Jews were. But it is not to be doubted but that they may have a
measure reaching to particular Persons abiding in their Ignorance and
Infidelity.

We (it is true) who are the Baptized of the Lord, and so called with an holy
calling into his Church, have reason to make our boast of God all the day long,
and with all due Trankfulness to acknowledge his goodness in separating us from
the World, and revealing to us the mystery of the Gospel: yet does not our
judging to Hell whole Kingdoms of People that are Strangers to us, become us at
all, as being too bold an Intrusion into Gods Prerogative, for quis novit
Scnsum Domini? (I say again) who has known the Mind of the Lord? or who among
us have been his Counselors?

Nay is it imaginable that the Father of Mercies who is (as he is called Wisd.
11.23.26.) (...), a lover of Souls, whose delight has been, and still is to
be with the Children of men ( Pro. 8.31.) should endure the great Enemy of
Mankind (whose enmity against us is the greater because of Gods goodness unto
us) to drive headlong to eternal Perdition an innumerable Multitude of precious
Souls made after the Image of God, the least whereof is of more value than all
the World, though the Sun, the Moon, and all the Stars be put into the
Balance against it?

If then this our gracious and merciful and almighty God is pleased to
interpose his Power and Goodness in saving the Souls that should not die,
pulling them as Brands out of the Fire, may we not have good reason to believe
that the Number of them is not small, yea that it may exceed the number of
those, who for the glory of his Justice are left to perish in their Infidelity?
because it is written his Mercies are over, or upon all his Works, but
especially upon the Souls of men, of which he accounts it a part of his Glory
that he is the Creator ( Es. 57.16.) and because it is not his Anger, but his
Mercy, his Mercy, his Mercy that endures for ever.

True it is likewise God has had a Church in this World, ever since he made a
Covenant with Abraham, if not before, and so will have to the end of it, till
his holy Purpose and Decree be fully accomplished in the Salvation of all his
Elect, and this visible Church he has thus built and established for excellent
Ends and glorious Designs, according to his infinite Wisdom, viz.

1. That his Name may be here publicly and Solemnly called upon in the
World. 2. That his beloved Son, in whom he is well pleased, may as a Prince and
a Savior be exalted among the Children of men. 3. That his People, who are
also dear unto him, and are solemnly contracted in covenant with him, may here
live together in Unity, Peace, and Love, whereby they may in some measure be
Inured to that perfect State of Life which is to come, and whereto it shall
please God to bring them, 4. That his great Wisdom in finding out a way to save
mankind might be publicly made known to the World. 5. Finally that the Powers
of Hell may publicly also be disappointed and counter wrought in their
Projects and Machinations which they devise against his Crown and Dignity, and
against the glorious work of Redemption which has been accomplished in the
Earth.
It is likewise commonly said that as of old all the World perished in the
Flood of Waters, who were not in the Ark; So out of the Church there can be no
Salvation for any. Nevertheless we are not to set Bounds to this Church,
otherwise than God has appointed, and the Bounds that he has set are
determined upon those Persons of what Nation, or Country, or kindred soever
they are, whom he has chosen to be Heirs of Salvation, unknown unto us (for it
is the Invisible Church which will prove to be Christ's Spouse in the end.) As
for us, I say again, upon whom God has in the Face of the World, written his
new Name, we must wait upon him in his own way set before us, that is, in a
diligent use of his ordained means for Salvation, and woe will be to us if we
neglect them; but undoubtedly the Grace of God is not so straightened, neither is
his Word bound (2. Tim. 2.9.) but it shall run and be glorified in all places
of his Dominion without Control. The great God has an absolute sovereignty
over all his poor Creatures, is free to do unto them, and with them whatsoever
he pleases by the liberty of his own Will, as to create them at first with one
single Fiat so to uphold them, yea to save them by the Word of his Power, and
with a look (as he did upon Peter) to reduce those that are gone astray from
him. And as he is not tied with any Popish or Pelagian Thongs of necessity,
congruity, or condignity, so neither is his Presence shut up in any
Donatistical Limits, or Anabaptistical Conventicles, nor is his Church bounded
within the marches of any, or of all the Kingdoms or Countries which are
usually called by the Name of Christendom, be it Italy, Spain, France,
Germany, England, Scotland, etc. But it shall break forth on the right hand,
and on the left (so says the evangelical Prophet Es. 54.) and her Seed shall
inherit the Gentiles wheresoever they be, and make the desolate Cities, even
the most Barbarous in the World to be inhabited with those that shall be Heirs
of Salvation: for (as the said Prophets words are) the Desolate has many more
Children, than she that has an Husband, that is, than she that was solemnly
contracted to the Lord by a matrimonial, that is, ecclesiastical Covenant.

But should any now be desirous to see this secret Indulgence of God toward
his poor Creatures exemplified at large out of Scripture, or to behold it
commonly produced into Act before their Eyes, I must tell them that were it
commonly Visible, it would not be accounted Secret; but Secret it must be, that
the Order which by the divine Wisdom is appointed in the Church, for the
conversion of Sinners unto God, and for building up his People in their most
holy Faith, may not suffer any prejudice by an ordinary variation from it, nor
be less esteemed by us, as in all likelihood it would, if we could trace the
Footsteps of Gods grace and goodness in this kind, nevertheless some such
Examples I shall produce for their full Satisfaction in the Sequel of this
Discourse. Let that which we read in the 87th. Psalm suffice for the present
to give us some notice hereof.

There we find, if we will understand, how graciously God will be pleased to
deal with a People, who by their continued Aberrations from his righteous Law
are estranged from him. When the Prophet (who ever he was) had said, glorious
things are spoken of thee thou City of God, he presently adds I will make
mention of Rahab and Babylon, behold Philistia and Tire with Ethiopia; and what
mention (alas) can be made of Egypt (called Rabab) or Babylon, A Robore et
Superbia.
and the rest as they are there joined together, all of them Chips of the old
Chammisn Block, unless it be of their Enmity against God and his Church? or to
tell how foulely Polluted they were with most odious Abominations? Well, let it
be so, yet even this miserably depraved People shall also help to build up Sion
and make it Glorious: Multitudes shall be born there, who shall be free of the
Foundation built upon the holy Mountains, and the Lord (says the Prophet) will
account of them as his freeborn when he writes up the People, like a King
taking a Survey of his good Subjects whose Names are enrolled by him, in his
Cense-Book.

But has it ever been known (I will not say, that in those places and
Countries the true God has been religiously Worshipped? for that possibly has
been, or shall be in process of time before the End comes, but) that the
Idolatrous Issue and Offpring of Cham and Canaan (for of such doubtless is the
meaning of the holy Ghost here) did in any Age join together publicly and
unanimously to make this holy City Glorious by their ready obedience to Gods
Law? this certainly has never been done, and I think it may be said nor is it
likely now to be done, while the World stands.

If so, how come they here to have a favorable mention made of them? much
rather (will some usurping Judges among us say) do they deserve to be marked
with a black Coal of perpetual Infamy, and to be held accused. Sed a fabis
Abstinendum, the Memory which is here made and commended, is to be ( Inter
Cognitores, not Inter Contemptores, nor Consultores) not among Despisers,
Censurers, or Jgnaroes, but among such as know God, and are acquainted with his
Grace, and who will therefore say upon better Warrant than these Judges of evil
thoughts, Fiat verbum dei, ruat Coelum; God will have a Generation Maugre the
Malice of Hell, which shall secretly and to the World undiscernably spring up
out of this cursed Root, and be born again.

For to this purpose (says the Psalmist) this man was borne there, and again
this man was born there, viz. In the City of God, signifying that many (the
singular Number being put collectively for the Plural) should be born there,
not of Chush, nor of Miszraim, nor of Canaan (though their Progenitors by
Nature) but of God; who as he formed man at first out of the Dust of the Earth,
so can he form in these Egyptians, Babylonians, Phylistins, Tyrians, Morians
the new Creature out of the Rubbish of Cham and Canaan, etc. in a way and
manner unknown to us, as seems good unto him; Materials (indeed) very unfit,
unapt, and incapable of such a Form, but that the second Adam, being (...), had
his Birth also with them, and in them; for so says the Psalmist again, this
man was borne there, that is, in St. Austins Sense (and a very good Sense it
is) Altissimus qui fundavit Civitatem factus est in ea, i. e. the most High,
viz. Jesus Christ, who establishes Sion, was born there; his Birth it was that
produced theirs.

And doubtless if they were formed by Christ, or, as the Apostles Word is,
Christ was formed in them, though neither Moses nor the Prophets, nor Pastors,
nor Teachers did with their Midwifery give their Attendance at the Travel, we
must say, they were also as new Creatures born again, when the Children were at
the Birth God alone gave strength to perfect it. Hereupon follows singing and
rejoicing in Heaven among the Angels of God ( Luke 15.10) where all Springs of
spiritual Joy do flow abundantly. Thus it is usual with us here in this World
when our Children are borne among us safe and sound, Singers and Players on
Instruments (Praecontor et Chorus) are called to make our Mirth increase, and
our Joy to be more abundant.

If then Gods Heart be enlarged, and his Mercies extended toward his poor
Creatures, the Heathen, and consequently toward the major part of mankind, to
save them from their Sins, is it fit that we should be straightened in our Bowels
to them? what though Multitudes in the World have not such means of Salvation
as we have? The use that we are to make hereof is to be thankful, and fruitful
in all holy Obedience, not to Despise, much less to Condemn others, who may be
as dear in Gods account as our selves: for like as weighty Ears of Corn have
been seen commonly to grow out of the compass of the tilled Field, yea as Corn
has grown up abundantly without any Tillage at all, or any sort of Husbandry
bestowed upon it (called therefore by People in all places self-sown) and
rather than God will suffer his Family here on Earth to want, and his Glory
thereby to be lessened, he will feed them with the Corn of Heaven; so may God
have a People dear unto him scattered abroad in the World without the Verge of
his visible Church, and the Seed of his Word, and Grace may without the use of
ordinary means spring up in the Hearts of Men dwelling in that dark places of
the Earth, though the way and manner of its springing be best known unto
himself, neither are we worthy to be of his Counsel in it.

We read of sundry Persons in Scripture, viz. Job and his three Friends, and
Jethro, and Naaman, and Cornelius, with many more, who did worship the true
God, having (for ought we see) small means of true knowledge; besides the
working Spirit of a gracious God that enlightened them, inclining their Hearts
to a willing submission to his Law; which being so, have we not good reason to
think (because Gods Mercies sail not) the same of others in all the Generations
that have been, and to hope the like of many more in the Generations that now
are, and that are to come?

In short, let a case be here put according to the common way of Arguing. A
good King has a care of all his Subjects without exception; his Protection
reaches to them all, they all have the Benefit of his Laws, and if it lay in
his Power, he would make them all Rich and happy, yea he would make them all
Kings like himself, that so he might have the more Honor by their Subjection
to him; though they for the generality of them keep themselves low and beggarly
by their want of Wisdom, for the improvement of his Favor: In the mean time,
he chooses out some to stand continually in his Presence, to be his Nobles,
Lieutenants, and Counselors of State, while other are kept at a distance from
him, that the Majesty of his Peson, and the Glory of his Kingdom might not be
exposed to contempt in the sight of his Enemies, by their Sordidness and
Simplicity; whom nevertheless when by their taking more special notice of his
goodness, or, by his sending his Son (Incognito) to make his Mind better known
unto them (which he can and will do by his secret Instructions) they thereupon
come to be wiser, and more worthy of his Sight and Presence, he will receive
them all without any distinction into his Grace and Favor: but when any shall
offend by breaking his Laws (who yet are but few in a well-ordered Commonwealth
compared commonly with those that are Loyal and obedient) he then makes them
to feel the Smart of his Displeasure, some by condign Penalties laid upon
their Persons and Estates, and other by suffering Death and Torture, according
to the quality of their Offenses.

Here is the case, and whether or no, the Circumstances do suit well with our
present matter in hand, I will leave to my Readers discretion, let him make the
comparison.

But seeing the Proverb often proves true, viz. Longum iter per praecepta, and
we may add thereto, per Comparata, little good is to be done by telling men of
Rules, or putting Cases, let us further see what force there may be in an
Example which if rightly applied will suffice to convince the upstart Judges of
this World, Ni sapis exemplis desipiendo sapis.
who are hasty to pronunce a Sentence of Eternal Condemnation upon a numberless
Multitude of People, Men, Women and Children, and that before such time as a
Legal Trial has past upon any of them, which is worse than that we read of in
the Psalm, (which nevertheless is an abhorrency to all Flesh) to murder the
Widow, and the Stranger, and to put the Fatherless to Death.

It is an Example which God himself has given of his Pity toward a multitude
of his poor Creatures in sparing them, when the slaming Sword of his Justice
was ready to consume them, such a wicked Crew they were whose wickedness was so
great, that (as it is written of them) it came up before the Lord, I mean, the
City of Niniveh (of which we read in the Book of Jonas) wherein were many
hundred thousand Persons. My Argument intended from thence being this (which
is, as we say, Aminori ad majus) has God showed Mercy to a People because they
were many, so as to save them from a Temporal Destruction, Certo certius he
will then upon the same account much more manifest his goodness to a greater
number in delivering them from everlasting Condemnation.

This Mercy will the more appear by a due Reflection upon the Place and People,
to whom it came: a People as much separated from Gods Church, as any Jews,
Turks, or Pagans are now: it was Niniveh, which was (as it is dissected to my
hand) Niniveh of the Gentiles, Uncircumcised Niniveh, Niniveh of the Assyrians,
Imperious, Insolent, Intolerable Niniveh, Niniveh settled upon her Lees, not
less than thirteen hundred years, Niniveh Infamous for Idolatry with Nisroch
her Abomination, Niniveh with Idleness so esseminated and her Joints dissolved
under Sardamapalus (as some conceive their thirty eighth Monarch) who sat and
span amongst Women, that as it was the wonder and byword of the Earth, so the
Heavens above could not but abhor it.

Yet is this Niniveh become the famous Subject of Gods Mercy, though the
Prophet Jonas (being it seems possessed with the same blustering Spirit, which
now haunteth us against those that are Strangers unto us) was Offended, Vexed,
Angry to the Death that it was so. But God, rich in Mercy, continues to be the
same still, his Compassions fail not, his Mercy appears in her full Luster and
due Magnitude, when this merciless and angry Man was about to Eclipse the Glory
of it: for even then (which is a thing to be admired and adored by all the
World) did God plead for it, and by Irrefragable demonstration justify it
against the perverse disputings of that Techy Opponent, for the saving of a
numerous multitude old and young, who must otherwise have been utterly
destroyed.

It will be said, what is all this to the purpose? what? much every very way,
whether we consider God himself, or those sinful People whom he spared.

First, we see here how God delights in Mercy, Anger pleases him not, and
(as he has elsewhere not only said it, but sworn it) that he will not the
Death of a Sinner, much less (it may well be thought) of a numberless
Multitude, to throw them Headlong out of his Sight promiscuously into the Pit
of Perdition. Now evident it is there were in that great City (because God has
been pleased to give the number of them) more than sixscore thousand Persons
that were young and harmeless, young in respect of their Age, innocent in
respect of their Lives, who knew not their right Hand from their left, not able
to distinguish between good and Evil, and it may easily be guessed how great
the number of other Ages was when there were so many Infants.

These things considered we may here argue (as is before said) from the less to
the greater, if God will have Compassion upon such a multitude of wretched
Sinners, (whom he at first created after his own Image and likeness) partly
because of their great number, to save them from a bodily Destruction, yea and
to plead so earnestly against their Adversary, who would gladly have seen the
City flaming about their Ears, can we think but that he will much more show
Mercy to the Souls of a much greater Multitude, viz. of the greatest part of
the Children of men, to save them from the Vengeance of eternal Fire.

Unless we will say, which God forbid any should say, that after this Life is
ended, his Mercy is quite spent, clean gone from an innumerable company of
precious Souls for ever, and that he will, contrary to his former wont, take
delight in executing his Wrath upon them to the uttermost. Oh! far be it from
us to judge so hardly of the God and Father of Mercies, or to think that he is
like unto us mutable and inconstant, one while kind and pitiful, another while
cruel and unmerciful. The good Prophet will tell us in the Psalm ( 136) not
once but many times for our greater Assurance, that his Mercy endures for
ever, and again and again that his Mercy endures for ever, meaning that his
Mercy in the full Latitude of it (which non Obstante is without any Limits
according to his own nature) endures for ever.

It will I know be objected, wheresoever there is a true Repentance, there
shall most certainly be a Remission of all manner of Sin. But who can say that
the Idolatrous Heathen, etc. wholly Ignorant of the way of Salvation, could or
can possibly repent them of their Idolatries and other their Abominations? the
answer hereto is ready, who among us can say the contrary? true it is, if we
look no further than our own common Experience will lead us, who must be
limited to sense in this case (as we are in all things that come within the Ken
of our observation) we shall then be apt to make such Conclusions. But as the
Apostle argues (1. Cor. 2.11.) What man knows the things of a man, save the
Spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knows no man, bitt
the Spirit of God. Now the true and real Conversions of men are things beyond
our reach, they are known only to him, who searches the Heart and the Reins,
and it is not for us to take our Measure of the great God, according to the
scantling of our narrow Nature in this or any other of the Works of his Grace.

God does not, I say again, deal with men in their Conversion all after one
sort: look but upon these Ninivites (which is the thing we are here secondly to
take into our Consideration.

We see their Repentance was very sudden, for as soon as Jonas had begun, the
first day, to enter into the City, and had made his Proclamation, which God
appointed him, publicly in the Streets of it, the People will not put him to
the Toil of the other two days Journey, but generally believed in God, and
repented of their Wickedness, whereupon even as soon did God repent of the Evil
that he said he would do unto them, and he did it not. So for ought we know may
there be between God and the Souls of men, who for the present are without God
in the World, when they are to depart out of the World such an Intercourse of
Grace on Gods part, and of Repentance on theirs which may open Heaven unto
them, as much as our daily Conversation with God may entitle us to a
Participation of it.

True it is, the Preaching of Jonas, though it was very short, did as 'twere
sound an Alarm to these Ninivites, which did awaken them out of their sinful
Security, it being the means which God ordains to bring men to Repentance,
and he will not digress from his own order, unless it be where time of Life is
near upon the last Period, and those means do fail; for in such cases, where
there is no open Vision, and the Days of man's appointed time are at an end,
there does free Mercy appear in her Eminency (as it did to the Theif upon the
Cross) God giving first the Grace of Repentance, and then Vouchsafing his
favorable Acceptance of that Grace which he himself has freely wrought in the
Hearts of his poor Creatures, though it be by them but weakly exerted and
performed.

We (alas) unprofitable Servants that we are, the best of us all, when we
buckle to our Business, and with all diligence endeavor to work out our own
Salvation (as we are warned) we must, being conscious to our selves of our many
failings in it, do it with fear and trembling, ever confessing it to be of the
Lords Mercies, if we find any acceptance, and that we and our Works together be
not at the last burnt in that Fire which shall never be quenched. Hear how St.
Paul determines the Case ( Romans 9.16.) It is not (says he) of him that wills
(who has only an inward desire to please God by his Obedience, but does not,
or cannot produce it into act) nor of him that runs (who does the best he
can in pressing toward the mark, to obtain the Prize of eternal Happiness) but
of God that shows Mercy, it is Mercy, Mercy only that is all in all from
first to last in the Work of man's Salvation: and this has ever been
acknowledged by all (the Pelagian Heretics only excepted.)

What else is the reason that when we see men among us live dissolutely, and
die it may be desperately, especially if they be of our nearest Relations, or
such for whom we have had a more than ordinary kindness, we do not presently
account of them as cursed castaways, but are willing to suspend our Judgment of
them, as to their final Estate, though possibly we may have some fear of them,
and be greived that they had no more care of their Souls before they died, what
else, I say, is the reason hereof, but that in the multitude of our Thoughts
within us at such times, our Minds are overruled by the remembrance of Gods
infinite Mercies? and I beseech you, should we not impartially have the same
consideration in us, when we reflect upon others that are Strangers unto us, in
what place of the World soever they are? whom howsoever we slight, yet has God
a special regard unto them; for when he at first had selected his Israel to be
a peculiar People unto him, even then he gave them a charge not to vex or
oppress the Strangers, but to love them, as themselves, Ex. 22.21. And very
often does God, in the following Generations renew the same charge unto that
his ancient People: now we cannot but think this Charge has a measure in it
reaching to us under the Gospel, which if it has, and that we will not be
partial (as is said before) in judging Strangers more than those desperate ones
among our selves, how can we so Positively determine of the major part of
mankind, as we do, that they shall inevitably be thrown into Hell to be there
Tormented for ever and ever?

If any who are yet tenaciously set upon this destructive Opinion shall accuse
me of Prolixity (as I think none else will) I hope my endeavor to refute this
Error will sufficiently excuse me among those that follow the conduct of
reason; who will be ready to say in my behalf, seeing so great an Error has
prevailed so long among us, it is but necessary that much be said in the
Conviction of it. Sure I am St. Austin will be my advocate herein, Non est
multiloquium (says he) quando necessaria dicuntur, quanta libet Sermonum
multitudine ac Prolixitate Dicantur. I shall therefore take the liberty to
proceed yet further in showing the Irrationality, I may say the Impiety of this
Soul-murdering Doctrine.

High time it is for us all to forbear judging the World at the rate as we have
been wont, for we do not only condemn to Hell and everlasting Death, those whom
(we may or should have good hope to believe) God has ordained to eternal Life,
but we do, in effect, spend our hasty and audacious Censures upon God himself,
if he shall, contrary to our decision in this case, save those whom we have
marked out to Destruction; wherein we are somewhat like unto that Insolent and
Peremptory Alphonsus in Spain, who like a bold and Atheistical Fool spoke of
the Creation in this manner. If (says he) I had stood by God when he had
created the World, I could have directed him how to have ordered it better than
he has done: So shall we in our precipitant judging the World before the time,
according to the common fancy that has been among us, seem to prescribe unto
God what Course he should take in his Judgment to come, and that he take care
our Orders be punctually observed in it.

An Indignity and contempt so heinous to be put upon the Wisdom of the most
high God, that it will be adjudged by the whole Creation an Impudency most
Inexcusable. And this we shall certainly find to our eternal Shame and Sorrow
(unless we repent of it betimes, and learn to be wiser) when we shall mourn at
the last, and say, we Fools counted them miserable, but now are they comforted,
and we are tormented.

Two Examples shall be here taken out of holy Scripture (seeing that it is
expected) of such Persons, (the one a Heathen, the other (probably) a Jew, but
extraordinarily wicked) who had they been brought into our usurping
Phrontisteries, before we heard they were acquitted by their own lawful Judge,
we should have passed a Damnatory Sentence of Death upon them, when
notwithstanding the Holy Ghost himself would have been their Compurgator.

The first is that Syrophenician Woman (whose Praise is in the Gospel) she was
of the Canaanitish Extraction, and upon that account to be reckoned as a Dog,
an Idolatour among the Phenicians, from whom many heathenish Abominations were
spread into several parts of the World, and her Habitation there was (In
Finibus) in the remote Borders of that Country, where unavoidably she must be
deeply sowst in the Dreggs of Ignorance and Infidelity. Yet even this Woman (so
unlikely as she was) during this her deplorable Condition, had her Name (we may
well presume) written in the Book of Life, and had also somewhat written in her
Heart and Soul well pleasing unto God, which did not outwardly appear, until
Christ, to make her a public Example of Gods abundant Mercy among the Heathen,
was pleased to draw it out of her, by his Wisdom; a Wisdom surpassing that of
Solomon's, which he showed in the case of the true Mother of the Child, that was
brought before him.

It is like enough, she had heard from some of Tire and Sidon, who had been in
Jewry, and had seen or heard the admirable Works, which Jesus did ( Mar. 3.8.)
or from the Jews who did trade into those Parts ( Tire being a Mart which was
much frequented) of the Fame of Christ's Power and Readiness in healing
Diseases, and casting out Devils, and of his descent from David, but she her
self stirred not out of those Coasts, to hear the Doctrine of Salvation from
him, or his Disciples; and the Devil (probably) perceiving more in her against
his Kingdom than men could (for he is a subtle insinuating Spirit) had
afflicted her more than the rest of her Vicinity. Christ takes a long Walk
from his own Country thither for her sake (for as soon as he had done for this
Woman that which he intended, he departed from those Coasts,) and being there,
he entered into an House (says St. Mark) for he would have no man know it, but
he could not be hid; however the end and purpose of his coming he did not
impart unto any, only he himself knew what he would do.

At length, this Woman hearing of him, she makes her address unto him, crying
out, have Mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grievously
vexed with a Devil. But Christ answered her not a Word: Strange! Is he come so
long a Journey for this purpose, to relieve a poor Woman, and will he now take
no notice of her, not so much as speak to her? he, who was wont to prevent
others, asking them what they would he should do for them, does he now refuse
to speak unto her that begged Mercy of him? When the Centurion (a Heathen also)
besought him for his Servant that was Sick, he presently replied, I will come
and heal him, and has he now left his old wont? no such matter, his Silence
here did speak his Wisdom, in bringing that to pass, which he intended; he
answered her not a Word, and St. Austin will tell us why, non ut negaretur
Misericordia, sed ut desiderium accenderetur, Sermon. de Tem. 74.
nec solum ut desiderium accenderetur, sed ut humilitas Commenderetur, i, e,
not that he would deny her the Mercy which she desired, but that her Desire
might be more fervent, nor that only her Desire might be more fervent, but that
her Humility might be commended. Here then is Wisdom, not by his Word, as he
deals with us, but by his Silence to bring forth that which he had designed to
commend in this Woman, and that her Humility might appear to be a Legitimate
Child of Grace which called God, Father.

By his Wisdom he made the Heavens (says the Psalmist) but he spoke the Word
then, and they were made, he commanded, and they stood fast; here, that the
good Work which God, the great Spring and Fountain of all that good is, had
secretly wrought in the Heart of this Heathenish Woman might appear to Gods
Glory, and be extolled, he, at her first approach unto him speaks not a Word.

True, it is usual among men, out of Policy sometimes to forbear speaking, to
try the Wit, or Valor, or Fidelity, etc. of those with whom we converse; but
Christ our Lord and Master needed not to make such Experiments, for he knew
what was in man ( Joh. 2.25.) he knew what this Woman had been, what she then
was, and what she would be, yet is silent, that her continued Humility might be
the more Famous and Exemplary, to the silencing (probably) of all those, who
will be hasty to Judge and Condemn others, yet know nothing at all of what has
passed between God and their Souls.

Not to lose my self and my Reader in a large inquiry after all that we find
written of this new Convert, that which remains shall be breifely drawn up
together. Many were the Discouragments (as one has summed them up) that her
poor Soul digested. First, she was not answered by Christ. 2. She had
backfreinds of his Disciples, who knew her not so well, as their Master did,
and therefore would be rid of her because of her Importunity. 3. She was none
of the Sheep that Christ would then regard (though he had other Sheep abroad,
whom he was in time to bring into the Fold, Joh. 10.16.) 4. She was a Whelp.

Alas he spoke not to her at first, but now when he speaks, his Words are as
Thunder and lightning to drive her from her hold. Yet is she not terrified with
them, but fastens upon Christ with her Prayers, as the Woman of Shumem upon
Elisha with her Hands (thus a good Divine makes the Cmparison) she caught him
by the Feet, and said unto him, as the Lord lives, Bishop King upon Jonas.
and as thy Soul lives I will not leave thee: she wrought a Miracle by the
Force of her Prayers, she made both the Deas to hear, and the Dumb to speak,
she cried to the Ears and Tongue of her Redeemer, Ephata, be ye opened, hear
and answer my Petition, fulfill my request.

What follows? she won and obtained a notable Victory, for she not only
prevailed in her Suite, but was dismissed with a singular commendation of her
Faith from the mouth of Christ himself. O Woman, says he, great is thy Faith,
be it unto thee even as thou will.

Judge then, could this poor Greek, this Syrophaenician, this Canaanitish Woman
(for all these Terms are put upon her in Scripture) be able to discern a Power
in Christ above that which is Humane, and with humble Prostration, zealous
Importunity, and invincible Confidence Parley, yea Struggle in this manner with
him, and breaking through all Difficulties that lay in her way, carry her Cause
in the end with Applause, enjoying her Desire to the full? could she, I say,
have done all so successfully, as she did, had she not been secretly instructed
beforehand (or at that Instant) by a good advocate, the Holy Spirit of God (for
where else could she have it?) how to order and Solicit her business to so
good purpose?

An Example that Clearly demonstrates the powerful Working of Gods Grace
toward such as are without; for this being done to this Woman, why should any
man doubt but the like may be daily done (though in diverse manners, as seems
best to the Almighty worker) to many others in the same condition of distance
from the Visible Church? yea to Millions of Millions, as well as to one, they
being all alike with us before God in respect of their Creation, and alike also
in respect of their Apostasy in Adam, Divine Grace being likewise of so
diffusive a Nature, that we should use it hardly, and do our selves no good, if
we should put a stop to the Current of it, otherwise than the Spring from
whence it sloweth will feed it, and send it.

Another Instance which we read in Scripture of Gods free Mercy to a great
Sinner without the use of ordinary means, is the Penitent The if upon the
Cross; he was, as St. Luke calls him (...), a Malefactor, a worker or Artificer
of Iniquity, one that made a Trade of Wickedness, a common Robber, so the Word
(...) use by St. Matthew, From (...) Praeda
implies; one that spent his Life in making a Prey of all that he could catch
by Fraud or Violence, yea and possibly by Murdering those that came within his
Reach: A great Malefactor (doubtless) he had been, as appears by the Death
which he suffered; for this servile Supplicium (so Crucifixion was called) was
not wont to be inflicted by the Romans (a generous Nation) upon any, but upon
the baser sort of People, and such among them, as were found guilty of
notorious Offenses.

But that which made him a worse Malefactor than all his former Outrages had
done, was (in my Opinion) that when Death was ready with cruel Torments to
seize upon him, yet then did he revile the Lord Jesus Christ, as he was hanging
upon the Cross near unto him: for thus says St. Matthew and St. Mark likewise,
the Thieves also which were crucified with him cast the same in his Teeth, that
is, upbraided him as the Jews had done: (...) the Thieves in the plural Number,
not contradicting St. Luke, who so writes but of one of them, and that the
other rebuked him for it (upon which seeming difference the Renegado Julian
took his liberty to be Julian the Scoffer) but the old Rule is good, Distingue
Tempora et concordabunt Scripturae, let time be observed (without which there
will unavoideably be confusion in many things) and the Scriptures will not
differ: It holds well in this case, both these Malefactors might at their first
Crucifixion (looking upon Christ whom (possibly) they had never seen before,
and hearing the Jews cry out, he saved others, himself he cannot save) cast the
same in his Teeth also. And of this might St. Matthew and St. Mark both give
their Record, to the end that Gods Infinite Mercy might appear in the
Conversion of one of them within a while after. For when the secret and
powerful Operation of Gods Spirit had touched his Heart, after he had seen the
extreme Wickedness which Christ's Adversaries used toward him, how they gaped
upon him with their Months like Ravening and Roaring Lions, and that he
nevertheless, though half dead gave no answer to all their hard Speeches, but
only prayed to his Father to forgive them, and him amongst the rest, then (as
it is written of Saul (1. Sam. 10.16.) when he had a Flash of Gods Spirit
passing by him) he was immediately turned into another Man.

I Know well what fence has been wont to be given of St. Marthews and St.
Marks Words to reconcile them to St. Luke. But because we may here take a fair
occasion to extol the Goodness of God in the Conversion of a Sinner (and no man
should indeed let slip such an Occasion) and because nothing appears in the
Words of the Evangelists compared together, that may give a Check to this
construction, but rather they seem to consent thereto, I would for my part
choose to understand the Sense in the manner here declared for so good a
purpose, as Gods Glory, than to make a difference where is none, and then
compose it again by having a recourse to our Rhetoric (wherein the aforesaid
Apostate Julian, well Skilled in such learning could not be Ignorant) to borrow
a Figure, which when we have made the best of it, will not in Reason be enough
to stop the Cavills which Atheistical Scoffers will be apt with their wide
Mouths to object against these most sacred Oracles of Heaven.

But let it be granted that this Malefactor was a Convert at the Hour of his
Crucifixion, or, at the time when he first heard his fellow-thief revile our
Lord Jesus Christ, he himself forbearing then to use such wicked Language; is
it not strange (though) that he who was but now attached for his many outrages
by the Highway, had scarce shifted himself out of his disguise, or washed his
Hands, it may be, from his bloody Murders, at least from his Rapine and
Violence, should now, when he was under most intolerable Pains, extended upon
the Cross, his Skin (possibly) all torn with Scourging, according to the
Custom, his Hands and Feet, for certain, pierced through with Nails, the
weight of his Body causing the Torment in those tender parts to increase more
and more, when he saw Christ forsaken by his Disciples (which might make him
think that even they were afraid to confess him, or that they doubted he was
not the Man he pretended to be) when he heard the Spectatours round about,
especially the Elders and chief of his Nation reviling him, is it not, I say
matter of Wonder and Amazement that he should now, all on a sudden witness so
good a Confession, not fearing either Jews or Romans, or the Devil, whom he had
served all along, but God only? and that he should now again practice his old
Trade in a better and more commendable way, set upon Christ destitute of all
visible help and succor, break through all, and take Heaven by Violence?

He could not with Patience endure to hear the Blasphemies of his Companion,
but rebukes him sharply, do not thou, says he, fear God, seeing thou art in
the same Condemnation? his meaning is, neither I nor thou have hither to been
kept in any Awe by the Laws of men, but we have transgressed beyond all the
Bounds of Civility, unworthy therefore to live any longer among men in this
World, but what, will thou not now fear God, now when thy Soul is ready to
exhale itself out of thy Body? now, if ever, is a time for us to repent of our
Wickedness when we are upon the very Threshold of Death, and must instantly
appear before the Righteous God, to give an account of our Prodigious Villainies.

And as he thus rebukes his Fellow, so he Justifies Christ against all the
Calumnies of the Jews; he had nothing free about him but his Heart and Tongue,
his Hands and Feet were so nailed to the Cross, that he could not Worship
Christ, as he would, with a humble and religious Incurvation. His Heart and
Tongue therefore he will give up unto Christ, his Heart in a free and faithful
Confession of his Sins, in Sympathizing with Christ in his Misery, not
regarding his own though it was also most Intolerable, in applying Christ's
Merits to himself; his Tongue in proclaiming aloud Christ's Innocence, this Man
has done nothing amiss.

The Jews had Traduced Christ Blasphemously Affirming that he was a Seditious
Person, that he was a Blasphemer, a Wine-bibber, etc. that he would destroy the
Temple, that he made himself a King; this honest Confessor e contra, cried out
Nihil indecens secit, he has done nothing amiss. A King, it is true, he is and
has a Kingdom which his Enemies shall find to their everlasting Confusion,
when he sits upon the Throne of his Glory, to judge them that have said
Nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have this Man to Reign over us; for thus he
makes a Protestation of his Faith with a confident Resignation of himself unto
Christ, as his liege Lord and King, Lord (says he) Remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom.

O admirable Faith, O incomparable Faith! never was the like heard of, neither
indeed could be, since the World began. This was the last Confessor that Christ
had, while he was living in this World, but he outstripped all those that were
before him, fulfilling that Word which was spoken by Christ, viz. The last
shall be fust: he was able (we see) by his Faith to remove Mountains of
Opposition which lay in his way, that he might cleave unto Christ. It was a
Faith I say again that surpassed all other that we read of in Scripture, a
great Word, but by that time it be duly weighed, it will appear to be most true.

One of good Note in the Church makes the Comparison in this manner* what is
more worthy of Wonder and Amazement, than that a Theif should have a better
knowledge of Christ upon the Cross than some of his Disciples had, when they
sat with him at Supper? that a Theif should have a more eminent Degree of
Faith than the Patriarch Abraham the Father of the Faithful, than Moses the
Servant of God, than the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, than his own Domestic
Attendants, to whom it was given by aspecial Grace of Dispensation to know
Christ, and the Mysteries of his Kingdom?

Abraham believed in the Lord, but it was when he was so much honored, as to
have God himself to be his own Messenger, and to parley with him from Heaven.
Moses believed in the Lord, but it was when he appeared to him in the midst of
a Fiery Bush wonderfully. Esaias believed in the Lord, but it was when he saw him
sitting upon a high Throne. The Apostles believed in the Lord, but they were
Eyewitnesses how his Miracles posed Nature, and all the Creatures did their
Homage to him, as to their Creator. These were easy Taskes of Faith; but this
noble Confessor believed in the Lord, when which way soever he looked about
him, his Eyes could meet with nothing but Horror and Misery. He does not
supplicate Jesus sitting at the right Hand of the Father, so he is crowned with
Majesty, nor unto Jesus judging the Quick and Dead, so he is attended with
Angels, etc. But when he saw his Sides, Hands, Feet all bleeding, his Face
Ghastly, his Head drooping, and his Soul heavy to the Death, even then he said
to Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom; as if he had
been lifted upon the Cross to overlook Christ's Debasements, and to make a show
openly that his Faith should outvy his Sense.

But now it may well be demanded from whence has this man this great Power?
where did he learn all these things? not (surely) upon the Highway, not under
Hedges, not in his Dens of Thievery, no, but it was given him from above, by
the immediate Work of Gods Spirit, which breaths where it lists, not
discernable by men ( Joh. 3 8.) And verily whatsoever has been otherwise
thought of this man (the things here premised being well considered) his
Example alone may satisfy us that Gods Mercy is not limited either to time or
means for the Salvation of those whom he has ordained to eternal Life. Which
being so, how can any man (I say again) be so peremptory as to conclude (and
that against the very Nature of the Almighty and Merciful God so often and so
fully made known to the Church in the Holy Scripture) that the greatest Part of
Mankind shall perish eternally in the Torments of Hell without any Remedy?

Sed Obiter, let all men beware that they be not so unwise as to lose
themselves in this Comfortable Doctrine, which, though it be in Truth most
Evangelical, yet I fear, as Grace can Work good out of Evil, so may the corrupt
Heart of man by a Satanical Chimistry draw Evil out of Good, (as many wretched
People have done by making an ill use of this Example of Gods Mercy to the
Thief upon the Cross.)

I do therefore desire all that shall read or hear of this Doctrine of
Salvation thus enlarged, to forbear their hasty and pernicious Misconstructions
of it, till they have informed themselves better by the Cautions that shall be
here added unto it.

Now then, to sum up this whole matter.
Since the Holy Scripture, being rightly understood does clearly speak of a
great Multitude which no man can number, of all Nations and Kindreds, and
People and Tongues that shall be saved, but speaks no where so largely of
those that shall be Damned in Hell for ever, only faith, they shall be many.

If none of all the Churches of Christ in the Primitive times, and since to
this very day, have in any of their public Confessions, Creeds, and
Attestations of Faith applied any part of the Scripture to such a Sense in the
least Tittle and Iota of them, so as to condemn the major part of mankind to
everlasting Fire.

Since God has accepted of that full Satisfaction, which has been given to
his Justice for the Sin of the World by the Blood of the Cross, it being the
Godhead of Christ which did put an infinite worth upon all that he did, and
upon all that he suffered, the Obedience of God to the Rule of the Law
sufficing to justify all sorts of Sinners, of what quality soever they be upon
the Face of the Earth, if they Repent and Believe, and the Blood of God given
up to the Sentence of the Law, being as much as Divine Justice did expect for a
full Satisfaction for the universal Breach of Gods Law throughtout the World,
from the beginning to the end.

If Faith and Repentance may be suddenly wrought by the secret Work of the Holy
Ghost in the Hearts of men who are destitute of the ordinary means of Salvation.

If Divine Grace and Mercy be not limited during man's Life in this World to
time or means for the Conversion of those whom God has chosen to eternal life.

If God Governs the World (not according to the Model of our Imaginations, but)
according to the good Pleasure of his Will, and this Government be managed for
the Glory of his great Name, and for the general Good of those that are in
Subjection to him, and that certainly God will at last be Justified in his
Government against the Malice of Hell (however the Sequel of it prove) and be
clear when he is Judged.

If God takes no Pleasure in the Death and Damnation of Sinners, but delights
in showing Mercy to the Children of men, and where there is but some Goodness
(1. Reg. 14.13.) as there may be in many that are without, he is well pleased
with it, accounting such not far from the Kingdom of God.

Finally if it will well become us to ascribe unto our Lord Jesus Christ, all
the Glory that can well be imagined by us, and undoubtedly this will be a part
of his Glory, that his Kingdom shall be much more enlarged than the Kingdom of
his Enemy the Devil: For (as the wise Preacher faith, Pro. 14.28.) In the
multitude of People is the Kings Honor, and that this inveterate Enemy may not
at last with Triumphant Exultations make his boast Luctationibus robustis
luctatus sum et etiam palmam Tuli, with great wrastlings have I wrastled
against God and his Christ, and I have prevailed.

If, I say, these Principles be granted (as they must unless we will dissolve
all the Bands of Christianity, only, I confess, I cannot be so positive in the
second) what should be the reason that this Opinion has so long been
tenaciously maintained, viz. It is Decreed of God that the number of those that
shall perish for ever in Hell, is much greater than the Number of those that
shall be saved in Heaven? It is (I must say) an Amazement to me to see and hear
the Considence that has taken hold of many among us, in their busy meddling
about this matter, affirming presumptuously without Reason that which is
infinitely beyond the Reach of men or Angels.

One Author there is of reverend Antiquity (whom I am not willing here to name)
who is reported by a late Writer (Ravanellus) to give some reason for it, which
indeed is comprehensive of all that can be said, though upon a diligent Search
I do not find the Quotation agreeing with the pretended Original; the Words in
the Apographon are these, Ita est ut intelligeremus quid omnibus deberetur,
atque adeo ut inde liquidius constaret and quanta sit Ira dei erga peccatum and
Peccatores, and quanta sit ejus Bonitas and Clementia erga Electos, quae eo
pretiosior est quo paucioribus communicatur, ideoque magis ab illis Agnoscenda
and Praedicanda, i, e, so it is that we may know what we have all deserved as
our due, and that it may appear thereupon the more clearly how great Gods Anger
is against Sin and Sinners, and how great his goodness and Mercy is to his
elect, which, the fewer they be that are saved by it, is the more precious, and
by them to be so esteemed and proclaimed.

This is all which I, for my part, have ever read or heard to be alleged in
this case.

But Judge I pray (for I appeal unto all men that are able to discern.) First,
whether we may not much better attain to the knowledge of the just desert of
our Sins, in a way which will more directly give us a right understanding
therein, and which we may be sure is more according to the Rule that the Spirit
of God has set us, than in this way of Reflection upon others who shall perish
in their Sins; though I say not but that this also may be sometimes of good
use, if it be with moderation considered as it ought to be (which I fear is but
seldom among most People.)

But a way (doubtless) may be showed unto us (if we would apply our selves
aright to the using of it) which is more sure and convincing: First, the
Conscience which God has set in every Man's Breast (as it is a faithful Monitor
if it may be suffered to speak, so it) is in stead of a thousand Witnesses
against us all for our eternal Condemnation unless Mercy prevent it. And what
man is there, I except not the Heathen, who doing by nature the things
contained in the Law, show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts ( Romans
2.14.15.) what man, I say, is there, let him be the most holy, most humble,
most zealous man for Gods Glory that ever was in the World (except the Man
Christ Jesus) in whom this faithful Informer has not at one time or other done
his Office in this kind of accusing and judging? Yea the better the Heart of
man is, the more freedom has it there to deal plainly in speaking of the Wrath
which is to come, as due unto all men for Sin.

2. Does not the Written Word of God sufficiently show unto us in many other
places of it, that all mankind has deserved to fall and perish under this
Wrath for ever? Is it not written, cursed is every one that continues not in
all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them? and is it not
written also that in many things we offend all? Is it not written, all have
finned and come short of the Glory of God, and that even the best of us all are
by Nature the Children of Wrath too as others are? But there is no need to
multiply Quotations to this purpose, evident it is, the Holy Scripture does
frequently testify the same Truth, that knowing the Terror of the Lord, we may
be persuaded by it.

Judge again in the next place whether Gods Anger against Sin and Sinners has
not appeared infinitely more in the cursed and cruel Death of his only begotten
Son, being thereby made a Curse for the Sin of the World, than if he had in his
just Indignation cast the whole Race of mankind into Hell for ever; and should
not the Consideration hereof also more work upon us, to make us sensible of
Gods Anger against Sin and Sinners, than to talk unadvisedly with our Lips of
a matter wherein we are totally ignorant, and which will in the end prove to be
(rather than that which is here pretended) too bold an Intrusion into Gods
Pavillion, a derogation also from Christ's Merits, and a Dishonor to the great
Name of our God, to whom belong Mercies and Forgiveness, though to us, and to
all men belongs confusion of Face for ever, because we have rebelled against
him.

But what a Word is this that follows, viz. Gods Mercy is the more Precious,
and accordingly to be the more magnified, the fewer they are who shall be
partakers of it, or, which is all one, because but a few shall be saved.

If this be Evangelical (God be merciful to me) I am yet to learn (after so
many Years teaching and studying the Holy Scripture) what is the true Doctrine
of the Gospel of my Lord and Master Christ Jesus. What, is it come to this?
shall the Rich and superabundant Mercy of God wherein we have trusted and
triumphed all along, be thus streitned? accounted the more precious, because it
reaches but to a few? It grieves me to find so eminent a Leader in the Church,
to be so reported of, as is here written of him, which to my apprehension (if
it be true, and I am not willing to be too Inquisitive) signifies that he has
let fall too foul a Blot upon his most excellent Works, though, I confess, at
first Sight, it did work in me a suspicion of my Judgment in this Point: but
let that searching Fire of Gods Spirit try all our Works of what sort they are.

It is the manner of men (indeed) when Malefactors are to suffer according to
their Demerits, to single out some few by a Decimation, or otherwise as they
shall please, to save them from the Punishment due unto them all, because they
would mingle some Mercy with their Severity, and the smaller the number is that
are so spared, the Mercy is the more joyfully Embraced and applauded by them.
But is this the manner of the Great and Good God, the Father of Mercies, who so
delights in Mercy that he prefers it above Sacrifice, not only the
Sacrifices of his Law, but the Sacrifices of his Justice? (for of so large an
Extent, I believe, may that Word of our merciful God be ( Hos. 6.6.) if we will
according to our dear Saviors Advice ( Mat. 9, 13.) learn aright what it
means.) Gods Ways we must ever remember, are not as our Ways, nor his
Thoughts as our Thoughts. It is therefore a thing both Odious and dangerous
thus to fathom the profound Abyss of Gods Inscrutable Judgments by our simple,
silly, shallow Reasonings, and by such Comparisons (as that must be the only
Ground of this Fancy) to level the everlasting outgoings of his Glorious
Attributes to his poor Creatures with our arbitrary Transactions among our
selves, which however they may seem plausible in the Eyes of men, they are but
foolishness with God: The Mercy of God is so Infinite that no Affection in
Nature, no Dimension or Proportion in the whole Creature has been fit to
express it, as the Holy Scripture does abundantly make manifest.

Neither in Truth, will this be the manner of those who shall be saved from
their Sins by this infinite Mercy, to account themselves the happier because
they are but few, compared with them that shall (as it is said) for ever Perish
in their Sins. It is a poor Exultation and unworthy of Glorified Saints, so to
please themselves in their Happiness (as we here upon Farth do commonly in our
petty Enjoyments) by such oblique Reflections, or to take the rise of their
Altitude in Heaven from the depths of Hell. A man should rather think (charity
being there in her utmost Elevation) that it ought to be said of them, Gods
Mercy is to them the more Precious because there are but few of their own Blood
and Kind that are excluded from it, for the Glory of his Justice (Few I say
comparatively, for certain it is they will be many also that shall fall under
the severity of Gods Wrath for their Impenitency and Unbelief.)

It is the beatifical Vision, in seeing God as he is, which works in them a
Conformity to God, beyond or without which Conformity they will never have the
least desire in them to be happy at all, and particularly it is that which they
see directly in God toward the whole Race of mankind which pleases them
infinitely, be it the cutting off of some from his Grace and Favor, and
casting them into Hell (though they should be such for whom we had an
extraordinary Favor here in this World) or be it the saving of the rest (both
which they are equally delighted with, in respect of the end, a^tending to Gods
Glory) nevertheless because they see God, Goodness there in its Magnitude, of
which they had heard but somewhat before) how great it should be to the
Children of men their Joy will be the more enlarged, when they see this
Goodness accordingly extended to the greatest Number, whereby the Name and
Merits of his dearly Beloved Son, and their dearly beloved Savior shall be the
more exalted, and the Kingdom of his Enemy the Devil shall be subdued, and
brought to a shameful Confusion, after all the proud Insultations that he had
made of his prevailing.

In a Word, Let St. Austin be heard, Secundum praescientiam dei et
Praedestinationem quam multi Oves foris? quid est quod dixi? quam mul^^ Oves
foris? quam multi Blasphemant Christum, credituri in Christum? et hi Oves sunt,
veruntamen modo vocem alienam audiunt, alienos sequuntur, etc. according to
Gods foreknowledge and Predestination, Christ has many Sheep without, a
strange Word, but not to be recalled, Christ has many Sheep without his Fold,
where many blaspheme Christ, yet may be persuaded to believe in him, etc. and
these are certainly Christ's Sheep, though now they hear the Voice of a
Stranger, and follow him, and strange Gods likewise, etc.

Some few Cautions must be here added in the Close, to prevent Mistakes that
may arise upon the preceding Discourse.
First let not this matter be so far prejudged that because it differs from
what has been commonly preached among us by some of good worth and Eminency,
and received for a Doctrine of Truth, it does not agree with the public
Doctrine of the Church, or that it is a Phansy only of the upstart Sect of
Holders forth of new Lights; that is far from me who here write of it, as it
should be from all, who in uprightness of Heart tender the Churches Prosperity.
Neither am I the first who have asserted this Catholic Doctrine, nor am I
alone at present in maintaining it, though, I confess, I have not seen or heard
of any, that have singled out this Subject, to write of it at large, as is here
done Secundum mensuram Donationis Christi, etc.

Much rather may it be said, the contrary Tenet has been a vain Phansy crown
up among seditious Sectaries, and by them obtruded upon the World, to
strengthen their Faction, by shutting up all Piety and True Religion within
their Conventicles, and shutting out of Heaven all that will not join with them
in their mad Vagaries, even in these our Days wherein this erroneous and
unscriptural Doctrine is with too much Zeal maintained, viz. That few shall be
saved. We may see clearly that they who follow any kind of Sect, do for the
most part conclude themselves to be the only men, these are they that are still
harping upon this jarring String, and press upon the World (not with fear and
trembling which would better become them) but tanquam ex Cathedra with Pride
and Insultation, that few only shall be saved, so few, as if they had a List of
their Names, and could almost tell who they are.

These (as a good Author has of late written) style themselves the Brethren,
the Beloved of God, his Chosen and dear Children, or, as the Term is now taken
up and appropriated according to Phansy, his Secret ones; drawing all Gods
Promises to their own Fraternity, reprobating all others, and whatsoever is at
any time spoken against them is spoken against God: these are so selfconceited
that they consine Gods Mercy, like those of Donatus's Party to their own
Acquaintance, so spiritually covetous, as if it would do them little Good to
sit in Abraham's Bosom, unless they saw many a Dives in H^ll.

Hereto I shall add what our Learned and Holy Bishop Sanderson has written in
his third Sermon ad Aulam against this Pharisaical Arrogance, viz. these assume
to themselves the Terms of Brotherhood, of Professors, or Christianity, the
Communion of Saints, the Godly party, as if none but they were to be owned
either as Brethren, or Professors, or Christians, or Saints, or Godly Men.
Such an abhorrency has this destructive Opinion wrought in the Minds of pious
men that have been before us.

And as it is destructive to the eternal Estate of many precious Souls, so may
it, especially by keeping up these separating Distinctions, tend to the
overthrow of Nations and Kingdoms; we here in this Nation have reason so to
account of it. Sure I am the said good Bishop did so long agone (being about
forty Years past) foretell in a manner the dismal Breaches which have since
arisen among us thereby: his Words are these, viz.

Who knows of what ill Consequence the Usage of such Appropriating and
distinctive Titles may prove, and what evil Effects they may produce in future
Times? But such has been our Misery, we may now say, who knows it not? the
Experience that we have had has taught us sufficiently to know it. And we
cannot but know that the same dividing Spirit still haunteth us in this Nation,
as if we had known nothing, or at least as if we had forgotten the woeful
effects which this Spirit of Division and Delusion has produced.

But that I may not do them wrong, these are not the only chief upholders of
this Opinion, there is another sort also that join with them, that is, the
Romanishs, both which (as the same Reverend Bishop has compared them) are like
Sampsons Foxes tied together by the Tails, to set all on Fire, though their
Faces look quite contrary ways: and albeit the former sort be too Fantastical
and selfconceited, yet may these latter likewise well be adjudged, as they have
been, too Fanatical. Do not these make their Church, the only Suburbs of
Heaven, maintaining expressly that none can enter therein but only those that
will pass through their Gates, which in truth are too narrow for any, yea for
themselves to enter? They, contrary to all Truth and Reason make the Roman and
the Catholic Church Terms convertible, exacting eternal Communion with them,
and Subjection to their Bishop as a condition so essentially requisite for the
qualifying any Person to be a Member of that Church of Christ, out of which
there is no Salvation, as that they have inserted a Clause to that purpose into
the very definition of a Church, viz. Ecclesia est coetus hominum sub regimine
Legitimo^um Pastorum, ac praecipue unius christi Vicarii Romani pontificis.
Whereby they do in effect adjudge all that are not under the Popes Jurisdiction
and Government to everlasting Perdition.

And now, I beseech you, are not both these sorts of People miserably deluded
by Satan, that whereas they speak of the Strait Gate and narrow Way that
leads unto Life, and that they have found it, yea that they are the only
Guides to all others that desire to find it? they themselves both one and the
other are extremely mistaken in their way, which, without Repentance they will
undoubtedly find in the end to their everlasting Confusion.

This Opinion therefore having such Authors and Abettors, and producing such
pernicious Effects to the overthrow not only of Christian Charity, but of
Humanity also, yea to the lessening, if not utter annulling of Gods infinite
Goodness (for, besides what Papists foolishly boast of the Church of Rome, that
there can be no Salvation out of it, I have heard a prime Leader among our
Nonconformists Preaching in his Pulpit before a great Congregation in this
manner, what cares God if he throws the greatest part of the World into Hell?)
and being, as it appears, without any express Warrant from Holy Writ, it
should, to speak modestly, be the less regarded by us, though it has been, and
still is countenanced by those that have been, and are at this day of good
esteem among us.

A second Caution shall be this, let no man mistake so far, as to imagine that
this preceding Discourse does aim at any wider way that leads to Life, than
the Holy Scripture, and the Church following the Rule of it, will allow. The
way is plain which is set before us, viz. Jesus Christ, and he whosoever he be,
Christian or Heathen, that will with Faith and Repentance keep steadfastly in
this way, looking upon Jesus to the last Gasp, he shall undoubtedly be saved:
but no other of what Nation, Rank or Condition, or Persuasion soever he be
shall ever be interessed in this Mercy.

Should I here maintain, as an eminent Author of late has Pablished in a Book
called Theologia Veterum, that the Heathen by the light of Nature without
Christ may attain to such a Knowledge of God, as is enough for their Salvation,
or as some of the Ancients even in the primitive Times of the Church (as our
Bishop Mountague reports of them in his Acts and Monuments of the Church before
Christ's Incarnation, Cap. 1. S^ct. 86.) have held that the Heathen by following
only the Rules of Philosophy may be saved, or by Ethica Justitia.
and that Philosophy was necessary to Justification, not alone antecedently by
way of Allistance in promoting or furthering saving Knowledge, but properly,
Primarily, and of it self; (these are the Words of my Author, the said Bishop)
or should I say, Dr. Montague.
as others in these times, that the sweet Disposition of good humoured men
(worthy indeed of all to be beloved) is enough to commend and approve them unto
God, and bring them to Heaven, I may justly fall under the premised Censure,
though my adherence to such Opinions would have added some Strength to my
premised Position.

But for my part, the Sense of my good Mother the Holy Church of England shall,
next to the Holy Scripture, be my Guide herein, and she in the eighteenth
Article of our Confession entitled to eternal Salvation only by the Name of
Christ, thus beleiveth.

They are to be held as Cursed, who presume to say, every man shall be saved by
the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his Life,
according to that Law, and the Light of Nature, for the Holy Scripture does set
out unto us, only the Name of Jesus Christ whereby men must be saved.

Thus has the Church given Judgment in this case, and thus do I hereupon
affirm that where there is nothing of Christ, no Interest in him by Faith, nor
no Influence from him by his Spirit, there can be no Salvation. St. Austin is
very punctual herein, Sermon. de verb. dom. cap. 4.
Qui cuiquam promittit salutem sine Christo, nescio utrum ipse salutem habere
possit in Christum, i, e, whosoever he be that promises Salvation to any
without Christ, I question, whether he himself may ever be saved by Christ.

A modern Divine renders it thus, as all the Stars shining together in the
Firmament do not make Day, it is the Light of the Sun only can do it; so all
the Sweetness that can be found in corrupt Nature, and all the Virtues that
have been famous in the Heathen, are of themselves defective in point of
eternal Salvation, it is an Honor peculiar to Christ alone to bring it to pass.

True it is, the Mettle of these Virtues and Sweetness is very good, but if
they totally want the Image and Superscription of Christ upon them, they will
never pass for current before almighty God. Only, I say still, the way, and
manner, and time, and measure of this Signature is in the Hand of God, neither
are we to be so bold, as to set Bounds thereunto, or to border out the Kingdom
of God, and the many Mansions in it to a few particular Favorites of our own,
according to our Fancies. The Lord knows them that are his (says the
Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.19.) we know them not; this is his Seal whereby at all times
and in all places far and near he marketh them he has appointed to Salvation,
their Names are written in the Lambs Book of Life, which is laid up in
Archivis, that is in his own Custody far beyond our Reach.

Only this we know, Faith and Repentance (as it has been here often said) must
be wrought in the Hearts of Men, before they can be capable of Gods Mercy in
the saving of their Souls; but how they are wrought there at all times is a
Mystery unknown to us. Clouds and thick Darkness are about the Pavillion of
God, let not silly man then dare to Remove them.

To conclude this particular (Bishop Mountague) whom I mentioned before has
written at large very learnedly concerning this Subject, proving even against
Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Epiphanius, St. Chrysostom and others the
good Servants of God (who had, it seems, imbibed this Erroneous Opinion of the
Salvation of the Heathen, that the Heathen who excelled in Moral Virtues did
not, could not attain Eternal Salvation without Christ; neither was he alone in
maintaining this fundamental Truth, but had as it appears, St. Austin to join
with him in several places of his Works.

At length he shuts up that his elaborate Discourse in this manner. Since
Pelagius and his Sectaries undertook against the Grace of God in Christ, the
Value, Force, and extent thereof, it has been more exactly canvassed and more
perspicuously cleared, and so more generally received than formerly, viz. that
the Knowledge of Christ to be sent, and to come into the World as a Mediator,
Redeemer, Savior of Mankind, was of absolute necessity to Salvation in some
Degree or other more or less, in all Ages and times, since Adam recovered after
his Fall, and had that Promise of Grace made unto him, viz. the Seed of the
Woman shall break the Serpents Head.

A third Caution which even plain necessity requires should be here also
inserted (though somewhat of it is given before) is to warn all those whom God
has Chosen to be a People (like his Israel of old) near unto him, and among
whom he vouchsafes to record his name, I mean, such as have been by the
Sacrament of Baptism solemnly admitted into the Household of Faith, which is
his Church, that they beware how they take occasion here hence of slacking
their Zeal in his Service which he has required of them, and to which they
have devoted themselves.

For (as Moses tells Aaron, Lev. 10.3.) God will be sanctified in them that
come nigh unto him, and before all the People he will be glorified; So let us
also consider, it is no small Privilege that is granted to us, to be culled and
called out of the Wilderness of this World, where we were desolate and forlorn,
to come and dwell in the House of God, to see his goings in the Sanctuary, to
hear the joyful Sound, the Sound of his Gospel, his Holy Name and Praises in
our Assemblies and Congregations, to be under his continual Care of Instructing
us, of protecting us, of providing for us: a mighty engagement therefore lies
upon us to walk worthy of his Grace, to be Holy as he is Holy in all manner of
Conversation, and to give all Diligence that the more manifestations we have of
Gods Presence with us, we increase the more in Holiness, in Knowledge, and in
Zeal for Gods Glory. Otherwise, if we profane the Holy Name of our God, by a
negligent and perfunctory discharge of our Duty in any kind, we shall certainly
provoke his Displeasure against us.

But if any among us, calling upon the Name of the Lord shall upon this account
of Gods insinite Mercies toward the major part of mankind, presume, instead of
departing from Iniquity, to take the more Liberty to themselves in fulsilling
their own ungodly Lusts, hoping that they may notwithstanding at the last get
into Heaven in the Through, as the usual Word is, they shall without a speedy
Repentance, undoubtedly find to their everlasting Woo and Sorrow, that it shall
be more tolerable in the Day of Judgment for the Heathen than for them. For
then (as we read in the Gospel, which may have a Reference hereto) many shall
come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South,
and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven; but
the Children of the Kingdom (observe it, such as have been so degenerate, as to
make themselves by their unnatural Rebellions against their good King and
reiterated Disobediences to his Law unworthy of this Honor and Happiness)
shall be cast into outer Darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

It is a Resemblance which the Holy Ghost uses in Scripture, viz. as the
Ground which is well manured should (according to expectation) pay for the
Pains and Cost which is bestowed upon it, by yiedling somewhat a proportionable
return to them, by whom it is dressed, and it shall thereupon receive blessing
from God, to make it more Fruitful, but if it bears Briars and Thorns, it is
rejected (accounted a reprobate Piece) and is nigh unto Cursing, (...)
whose end is to be burned ( Heb. 6.8.) Right so will it be with that People,
who are Gods Husbandry, such whom he has in his abundant Goodness severed from
the wild and waste Desert of the World, and made as a Garden enclosed for his
Delight and Solace, planting and watering and fencing it about with a Wall
reaching up unto Heaven, that is, protecting it from Foreign Incursions, and
casting out the Stones, that is, freeing it from annoyances within; If now it
bear Fruit, well, the end shall be everlasting Life, it shall be a Paradise of
Pleasure unto God for ever.

But if after all is done, it will, in stead of sweet Herbs, which are the
Fruits of the Spirit (such as the Apostle writes of Gal. 5. 20.) bring forth
nothing but rotten, filthy, noisome Weeds of Sin and Wickedness, the Fruits of
the Flesh, odious and abominable in the Sight of God, disappointing his
Expectation, and frustrating all the Labor and Charge that has been spent
upon it, what remains for such but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment
and fiery Indignation burning to Hell? yea more Fuel shall be added to their
Tophet to make their Torments greater in that bottomless Pit, than shall be to
theirs, who never had the Dewes of Heaven, nor the Fatness of Gods Earth, that
is, neither the Influences of Gods Spirit upon their Hearts, nor the fertile
Operations of his Word in their Ears to make them fruitful.

This will be the woeful lot of all careless and presumptuous Wretches, who
having the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God shining round about them,
yet will love Darkness rather than Light: This is and shall be the
Condemnation, the damning Sin above all other, which will sink men deepest into
Hell, Joh. 3.19.
for the Mouth of the most righteous Judge has spoken it. Yea once and twice
has it been pronounced by him, He that knew his Lords Will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his Will shall be beaten with many Stripes,
but he that knew it not, and did commit things worthy of Stripes, shall be
beaten with few Stripes, Luke 12.47.48.

And who will not now say, good Reason it should be so? for when by the
Preaching of the Gospel men have heard of the cruel and numberless multitude of
Stripes which Christ endured for them, and have been sufficiently convinced
that with his Stripes they may, if they will, among other poor Sinners, be
healed (as the Prophets word is) find spiritual Health, everlasting Life and
Salvation, yet these Stripes, and Wounds, and Bruises too of the most tender
Virgin-Body of the Son of God are made of no account with them. Is it not just
and meet they should more than other, who never heard of Christ, fall under the
Lash of Gods Wrath, and be made to feel the Stripes of his incensed Justice
among Devils, with whom they shall have, according to their Deserts Stripes
above measure? for unto whomsoever (says Christ again) much is given, of them
shall be much required, meaning according to that Degree of Knowledge, God has
afforded to any, so shall their Crimes receive aggravation of Guilt and
increase of Punishment, and the more Light and Grace God vouchsafes to any
People, the greater Diligence in his Service will be expected.

Which manner of dealing is commonly to be seen among our selves, for so it
follows in our Saviors Words, viz. to whom men have committed much, of them
will they expect and ask the more: But if they fail in their Trust, do we not
account them worse Enemies unto us, than those in whom we have put the less
Confidence, yea or than those that deal injuriously with us, whom we never
trusted?

The holy Prophet in the Psalm makes his Complaint to some such Purpose,
saying, it was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have borne it
(meaning I could have borne it more patiently) neither was it he that hated me
that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid myself from him (I
could have prevented it more easily) but it was one whom I had obliged, one
that pretended much Kindness likewise unto me, one who had made a show of
Piety, and who joined with me in going to the House of God, one to whom I had
opened my whole Heart and Soul, made him my Guide and my Counselor; this was
it, it seems, that most grieved him. And as the well known Story reports of
Julius Caesar, this was it that struck him to the Heart more than all the Stabs
that were given him in the Senate House, when he saw Marcus Brutus to be his
Enemy. Etiam tu and Brute?
A cold Wind from the South whence refreshing and pleasant Gales are expected
is intolerable, so where a kind requital for Love is due, there to meet with
Ingratitude, is a thing most odious in the hearing of all men, and he that
shall so offend though in other things he may be excusable, Ingratum si dixeris
omnia dixeris.
yet for this alone he will be judged as one unworthy of the Sight and Presence
of all mankind.

Is this then the manner of men to be more sensible of Injuries done by Persons
endeared and obliged, than of those that are done by Enemies or Strangers? do
we expect from one another Love for Love, abhorring those that are Ungrateful?
and can we think (for a Comparison in this case may hold very well) that the
Jealous and Righteous God, when he vouchsafes his gracious Presence to those
that are in Covenant with him, daily loading them with his Benefits to the end
they may serve him without Fear in Righteousness and true Holiness, that he
will endure to be slighted by them whom he has so much obliged? that he will
suffer with Impunity his Royal Law to be made Void, his Ordinances, which are
the Glory of his Kingdom, and the most clear demonstrations of his Grace and
Goodness to the Children of men in this World to be despised? Will he be
partial in Judgment by giving a connivance to us in our Sins because we are in
Covenant with him? no doubtless, he will never do it, it will be too great a
Dishonor to him in the Face of the World, yea he should annihilate his very
Nature and Essence, for take away his Justice, and his Being is ipso facto
dissolved. Neither would the Merits of his Son be a Salvo herein unto him,
unless Faith and Repentance do both together, in due time enter their Plea for
us against the Accusations of the Law: which Plea ('it is true) will (according
to what is before said) be received without a Demurrer: but it is very rare in
such presumptuous Desperadoes, who have in their Jollity made Mercy it self a
Mockery, and wickedly abused that Goodness which would have led them to
Repentance.

It concerns us then to look well about us, that we be not deluded with this
Satanical Sophistry, so as to say in our Hearts because we are in Covenant with
God, we shall have Peace, though we walk on in the Imaginations of our Hearts,
adding Iniquity unto Iniquity; for dreadful are the Threatenings that are gone
out of the Mouth of the Lord against this bold Presumption. And we cannot but
know, it has been Gods usual wont when he enters into Judgment to be so far
from partiality that he commonly begins with those of his own House. 1. Pet.
4.17. Jer. 25.18.29. Amos 3.2.
You only (says God) have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore
will I punish you (first) for your Iniquities.

In short, upon the whole matter let it be considered, how horrid a Presumption
it is, and how near to that great Sin which is unpardonable, for such as we who
are the Baptized of the Lord, who have tasted the good Word of God, and the
Powers of the World to come, for us, I say, to encourage our selves hereupon in
any evil matter whatsoever, what is this but to do despite to the Spirit of
Grace to crucify to our selves the Son of God afresh, and to put him to an
open Shame?

A fourth Caution that seems here sit to be entered, in few Words is this,
though Gods Mercy in the Salvation of the World is not to be limited to such as
are publicly called by his Name, but may be, and is often extended to others
that are Strangers unto him, yet should not this be an hinderance to any who
seek and endeavor the Conversion of those that are without God in the World:
but as Divine Providence shall lead them, or any of us to so good a Work, it is
our Duty to undertake it for the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom amongst men,
which will be the advancement of his Glory, that he may Rule here in the midst
of his Enemies, and that from the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the
same, that is, from the East Indies (as they are now called) to the West his
Name may be great among the Heathen, as the Lord himself has spoken it, viz.
Mal. 1.11.

In the first place, let not this preceding Discourse of the infinite Mercies
of God to his poor Creatures fall under a Prejudice, because some other few
Texts of Scripture that seem to contradict it, have not been here withal taken
into Consideration: The plain Truth is, it was needless to intermeddle with
them in this case, not because they are but few, being but one or two at the
most, for I confess there is not any part of the written Word of God, but is of
greater excellency than the Sun in the Firmament, and therefore should not be
slighted by us. Yet seeing they are but few, it may thereupon be well suspected
that the Sense of them, as to this great matter, has been mistaken; for why,
it is more than probable that if God had Decreed the major part of mankind to
eternal Perdition, the Scripture wherein God has revealed his whole Mind
concerning our suture Estate after this World would have given some clear Light
to the Church by a frequent intimation of his everlasting Decree and Purpose
herein, that so knowing perfectly the Terror of the Lord, we might all be
persuaded by it, and roused up out of our sinful Security, to give all
diligence to make our Calling and Election sure.

But no such matter is Revealed unto us (there being enough besides written in
Scripture to those ends) for as for those other places of Scripture, which are
and have been insisted upon, I doubt not but it shall be here made evident that
they are mistaken.

First that Word which our Savior spoke, Luke 12.32. viz. Fear not little
Flock, it is your Fathers good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Herehence it
is commonly said, does Christ call his Flock a little Flock, and shall not we
call it so too? Yes, God forbid that we should call it otherwise; if he meant
it of his whole Church throughout the World (as it must be confessed that only
is his Flock, which he takes care of, in watching over them, in feeding them,
in defending them, in rescuing them when through their going astray they fall
into Danger) is but little in comparison of those that are wandering about in
the wild and desolate Wilderness of the World, if so, I say, this Concession
will not necessarily infer such a Conclusion as has been wont to be imagined,
from it, for Christ has other Sheep in the World, such as we know not of, whom
he will, as he says, bring into his Fold, when those that come in last shall
be preferred before the first, at which time this term of little Flock, in
respect of number is not to be appropriated to it, for then shall they be as
the Stars of Heaven for multitude, and as the Sand of the Sea that cannot be
measured nor numbered.

But this Sense of our Saviors Words in this place concerning the universal
Church, is but an hypothetical Conjecture, that which is more certain is this.
Christ here speaks to his Disciples only, who were at that time his constant
attendants and his peculiar Care, whom he had taken into his own Tuition and
Charge, and accordingly did make Provision for them during all the time that
they followed him; and though they were encompassed about with Danger by reason
of their Attendance upon him, and should after his departure from them meet
with much Trouble, yet he bids them not fear, for they shall have a full Reward
given them, it is (says he) the Fathers good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom;
where (as it is promised them, Mat. 19.28.) they should sit upon twelve Thrones
Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Signifying (as a good Writer renders the
Sense) ye that are now my Disciples, have constantly followed me and continued
with me in my Temptations, leaving all for my sake, ye shall as soon as I come
to my Kingdom be highly honored and rewarded by me, and not only so, but in
the new Age and State which is to come here in this World after my Ascension,
when all things shall become new, you shall have a Power in the Church Instated
on you, as my Successors, somewhat proportionable to that of the several
Rulers of the Tribes among the Jews: to this purpose also is that Promise which
he made them, Luke 22.29. I bequeath unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit
on Thrones, etc. that is, that you be next unto me, and have at my departure
the Power of Governing the Church, which was actually fulfilled in all places
wheresoever the Kingdom of Christ was set up by the preaching of the Gospel.

These things considered, the aforesaid Word of our Savior concerning his
Flock, calling it little, cannot be meant of the number of Gods Elect all the
World over ordained to Life Eternal, as it has been misinterpreted by some too
long a time.

Nor does the Holy Scripture intend any such Sense of Gods Eternal Election,
where it is said many are called, but few are chosen. e. g. in Mat. 20.16.
These Words are written, but evident it is they refer only to the Parable
beforegoing, in which they that went last to Work in the Vineyard are made
equal with the first who had born the Burden and Heat of the Day, and this is
rendered as a Reason of it, for many are called, but few are chosen, signifying
that whosoever have the Reward it is not for the Works sake, but it is in the
Lords Choice whom he will prefer, and vouchsafe his special Favor unto, in the
distributing his Reward. And that which we are to learn herehence is, God has
his special and choice Favorites among his beloved People, to whom he opens
his Mind more freely than he will unto others: the Apple of the Eye (as one
makes the Comparison) is dearer unto a man than the whole Frame and Circle
about it, the Signet upon the right Hand in more regard, either for the Matter
or for the Form, or for the Use whereto it serves, than all his other
Ornaments, a writing in the Palms of his Hands more carefully preserved than
all his other Papers and Records. Doubtless there are some sew amongst the rest
of their Brethren, whom God does tender as the Apple of his Eye, wear as a
Signet upon his Finger, engrave as a writing in the Palms of his Hands, and
with whom is the Secret of the Lord, and his hidden Treasures.

St. Paul was a chosen Vessel to bear the name of Christ before the Gentilos,
etc. ( Act. 9.15.) above the other Apostles, and according to his Election he
labored more abundantly than they all did, yet were they all the called of the
Lord, and interessed in one and the same Hope of their Calling. St John was the
best beloved Disciple of Christ, and might lean in his Bosom, yet had the rest
of the Apostles the privilege to sit with him at the Table. And did he not
prefer Peter and the two Sons of Zebedee (whereof the said John was one) when
he led them apart into a Mountain, to make them Eyewitnesses of his
Transfiguration, Mat. 17.^? And after that in choosing the same men from the
rest of their fellow Apostles to keep him company, and to watch with him when
he was in his Agony, overwhelmed with Sorrow?

Yea, even here in this Parable, are not those that came in last to work in the
Vineyard, as much favored as those that had been there before them? the
Laborers indeed took Offense thereat, but the good Householder, who is God
himself, justifies his own Act against their causeless Exceptions, asserting
his Liberty to do what he will with his own; neither is there any Wrong done to
them, though he prefers one before another, so long as the first as well as the
last, have a full Reward given them. As at a public Dole a multitude may be
called to it, but it lies in the Breast of the charitable Donour to distribute
it as he pleases, possibly, to some few whom he chooses out he may be more
liberal than he is to the rest, and no man may ask him why he does so? Even
thus will God dispose of his Bounty to his poor Servants, as seems good unto
him, (without rendering an account to any, which cannot justly be required of
him) to give unto the last that enters into Covenant with him (though they do
him but little Service) as he gives to the first who had been laboring all
the day, yea to set the last before the first, and the first after the last,
that it may appear it is not, as has been before said, for the Works sake
(which the Jealous God does much disdain) that his Goodness is more enlarged to
some few, but that whatsoever Favor is showed either to one or other, it is
Grace and Grace alone that they have it vouchsas'd unto them; for why? God will
never endure that any man should boast in his Presence, (to which we are all
for the most part very apt.) Upon this account St. Paul expressly Disavows it,
not of works, says he, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.9.

This I take to be the true Sense of this Scripture, and so is it of the other
where the same words are used Mat. 22.14.

The sixth and last Caution that shall be here put in, is this, viz. whereas it
is written, Wide is the Gate and Broad is the Way that leads to Destruction,
and many there be that go in thereat, but Strait is the Gate and Narrow is the
Way that leads unto Life, and few there be that sind it, the meaning whereof
has certainly been much mistaken, yet I say not, but that these Words carry in
them such a Sense, which may and will, being rightly considered, rouse us all
up out of our carnal Security, and make us fall to our Work, viz. the working
out of our own Salvation, as with fear and trembling, so with all Care and
Diligence, and to strive according to our Saviors Warning ( Luke 13.24.) with
all our might to enter in at the Strait Gate, for without doubt, though they
found terribly, yet is there an Evangelical Truth in them, such as has been
before declared, but to hold that our Savior spoke them Dogmatically, as if it
was so decreed of the Father from Eternity that few should be saved, for my
part I can by no means consent unto it; for what would that signify but that he
did Preach Condemnation to the major part of mankind? Which Doctrine certainly
could not well agree with the Anointing which he had from the Spirit of the
Lord God ( Luke 4.18.) nor with the Commission which he had received from the
Father, for God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World, but that
the World through him might be saved, ( Joh. 3.17.) and accordingly he says, I
came not to judge the World, but to save the World ( Joh. 12.47.)

Nevertheless it is as true that to the Unbelievers and Impenitent, such as
were the Scribes and Pharisees who traduced his Person, despised his Doctrine,
and spoke evil of his Miracles, he spared not to proclaim Woe upon Woe: nor was
it inconsistent with his Commisson so to do, for it was as good Gospel as the
other was to preach the glad Tidings of Salvation. He came, as he says, to
seek and save that which was lest, and he will save them in such a way as
seems good unto him, sometimes by the Spirit of meekness persuading and
inviting men to Repentance, and sometimes by snaking the Rod over them. But for
such as are obstinate in their Wickedness, and will by no means be reclaimed
from their Sins, he says to them, for Judgment am I come into the World that
they which see not (that is will not see) might be made blind ( Joh. 9.39.)
which is a Judgment (questionless) very dreadful, yea what worse can be
imagined than to be struck with a spiritual Blindness? a blindness that brings
such a thick Darkness upon the Soul^ of man, that though the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God shines clearly about him, yet is he not able to
discern it, but walks on still in darkness till he fall into the mist or
blackness of Darkness, which will hold for ever.

But here a doubt must of necessity be resolved, does Christ say that he came
not to judge the World, and does he say also that for Judgment he did come into
the World? does he the same thing, which he says he does not? is Christ
divided? is there yea and nay in the Word of Truth, and dissension in the
Spirit of Unity? God forbid any of us should so think, much less write or teach
so; certainly there is a Truth in both these sayings, which is most infallible:
but how then shall we reconcile them? for my part I cannot better unriddle this
Doubt, than in the Words of a most learned and right reverend Author Dr. Edward
Reynolds, Bishop of Norwich, who, in his Explication of the one hundred and
tenth Psalm, thus writes; there are two events of Christ's coming, the one
Principal and by him intended, the other Accidental and Occasional, growing out
of the Indisposition of the Subject unto whom he was sent. The Main and
Essential Business of the Gospel of Christ is to declare Salvation, and to set
open unto men a Door of escape from the Wrath to come; but when men wilfully
stand out and neglect so great Salvation, then Secondarily does Christ prove
unto those men a Stone of Offense, and the Gospel a Savor of Death unto Death.
As that Potion which was intended for a Cure by the Physician may upon occasion
of the indisposedness of the Body, and stubborn Radication of the Disease,
hasten a man's end sooner than the Disease it self would have done: so that to
the wicked the Word of God is a two-edged Sword indeed, an Edge in the Law, and
an Edge in the Gospel, they are on every side beset with Condemnation, if they
go to the Law, that cannot save them, because they have broken it, if they go
to the Gospel, that will not save them, because they have contemned it.

In short, this we see was our Saviors Work after he had entered upon his
Office, viz, to preach Salvation to all those that would believe in him, and to
preach Damnation to the Unbelievers and Impenitent. And this, if we will make
full Proof of our Ministry, must be ours who are his Ministers. A necessity is
laid upon us, and woe will be to us if we preach not the Gospel, yea and woe
will be to us if we preach not the Law; knowing the goodness of the Lord we are
to persuade men to Repentance, and when we know also the Terror of the Lord
must we be silent? no in no wise, we are, says St. Paul, 2. Cor. 5.11.
upon that account to persuade likewise; but if Persuasions will do no good, we
are to terrify them with the threatenings of the Law.

Examples we have also of the Servants of God upon Scripture-record, Prophets
and Apostles, who were wont not only to bind up the brokenhearted, but to
batter the Hard-hearted with the Hammer of the Law that they might be broken,
they did Preach Liberty to the Captives, and Captivity likewise to the
Libertines. Of what Spirit think ye was the Apostle Paul when he made Eoelix to
tremble, preaching to him of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come?
or when he rebuked Elymas the Sorcerer with indignation as hot as Fire, O full
of all subtilty and mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all
Righteousness, etc. or St. Peter when he had to do with Simon Magus, telling
him to his Face (though he was in his time accounted (...)some great one) that
he was in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity? or John Baptist
when he told Herod that he should not marry Herodias his Brother Philips Wife?
or James and John whom Christ himself Surnamed Boanerges, Sons of Thunder,
their Doctrine being such, as shak'd the World with Terror? (for James was
killed by Herod Agrippa to please the Jews, who, it seems, probably, were
madded with his Preaching, and John was as Thunder and Lightning to the
Heretics that rose up after the Death of the other Apostles, as Ecclesiastical
History makes manifest.)

As the Apostles were, in this Sense, legal Preachers, so were the Prophets
before them; they did not run into Corners to smother the Will of him that sent
them, but with much Considence cried aloud and spared not to tell the Greatest
they were sent unto, their Transgressions and the Wrath that hung over them for
their Sins. Did not Nathan say unto David, thou art the man, pronouncing withal
a terrible Judgment that should fall upon him and his House? and what a
dreadful Message was that which Elijah sent to Jeroboam the King of Israel? and
that which Elijah pronounced upon Ahab and his Posterity? durst Michaiah tell
him the said Ahab, he should not go up to Ramoth Gilead to Eattel, when
notwithstanding he knew the Kings Wrath would be enkindled against him for it?
and was not the Spirit of Elisha notably quickened by the Spirit of God, when he
said to Jehoram a wicked and Idolatrous King, what have I to do with thee? get
thee to the Prophets of thy Father and the Prophets of thy Mother, though he
knew that the King had so much to do with him, that if he had but said the
Word to the meanest Servant that ate the Salt of his Court, go and take his
Head from him, he would have done it?

These Examples may suffice to show unto us the Faithfulness and Zeal of the
Servants of God, Apostles and Prophets, how with particular Application to the
Stoutest that bare an Head, have freely made known Gods Displeasure for Sin by
Smart Reprehensions, as well as by Gentle Persuasions.

Ob. But these were men of an extraordinary Spirit.

Sol. What then? are not Ministers now to deliver the whole Counsel of God, as
well as other before them? or are we fallen into such times wherein men live
more Righteously, more Soberly, more Holy than heretofore, and so we may be
saved the Labor of Reprehending, and making our Philipicks and Declamations
against the World for Sin? I wish it were so, but alas alas! how can we
forbear this part of our Office in pronouncing Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of man that does Evil, when so little
of the Power of Godliness appears amongst us, when Zeal is accounted madness,
and to be pious in any kind is to be exposed to Contempt, when Atheism gives
Check to Christianity it self, and all manner of Debauchery grows up to a
prodigious height, especially when Lasciviousness is become Magnatum Ludus, as
Erasmus called it, and that unmanly Vice of Drunkenness is so common among all
sorts, So King Charles the first called it.
there being now adays Gallanto, Flanto, Ranto, Drunkards as frequently to be
seen in our Streets as drunken Beggars?

Is then the Spirit of Eli sufficient for these times? is it a time now to be
mealy-mouthed, to sooth up Sins with Plausible Euphemismes, and good, (or
rather bad) Constructions? away with such Lukewarmness! never was there more
need of a Rowsing Soul-searching Ministry: let men judge of us what they
please, casting upon us Imputations of railing yet must we not spare to Rebuke
them, sharply lest the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls rebuke us for our
Negligence and unfaithfulness at the last day.

Q. But would not gentle persuading and exhorting do better, and the Promises
of Heaven and Happiness prevail more than the Terrors of Hell?

A. Give me leave to answer this Question in the Words of another Reverend and
Religious Bishop of our own.

Men now adays are so desperately set upon their own sinful Ways, that the
Promises of Life and Salvation are but a mockery to them, Let Mercy be showed
to the Wicked, yet he will not learn Righteousness, Es. 26.10.

Preach Honor, and Glory, and Peace, a Garland of Righteousness, an
Incorruptible Crown, Fruit of the Tree of Life, Sight of the Face of God,
following the Lamb, Fellowship with Angels and Saints, and the Congregation of
the Firstborn, new Names and white Garments, Pleasures at the right Hand of
God, and fullness of Joy in his Presence for evermore. They are as obstinately
bent, and unmovably settled against these Blessings of God, as Daniel against
the Hire of Belshazzer, Keep thy Rewards to thy self, and give thy Gifts to
another, Dan. 5.

Alas, men are not won nor enamoured with the Expectation of good things, and
the Revelation of the Sons of God, which the whole Creature longs and
groaneth for, savoureth no more unto them than a Box of putrified Ointment.
What Is to be done then? Is there no way to save their Souls? or to quicken, and
put Life into them? yes if the Blessings of six Levites upon Mount Gerizim will
not move them, let them hear the Cursings of six other upon Mount Ebal; If they
take no Pleasure in the Beauty of Sion, let the Thunder and Lightning of Sinai
put them in Fear, and make them believe there is a God of Judgment. If the
Spirit of Gentleness take no Place, let them feel the Smart of the Rod, the Rod
of the Law, which possibly through Gods Blessing may be a means to bring them
to Repentance.

Upon the whole matter then, Ministers of the Gospel are not, upon the account
of this preceding Discourse, to forbear preaching the Law, as it is established
by Christ to be a Rule to us all for the ordering of our Conversation aright in
any kind, nor as it may be a means, according to the Example of Christ, to
rouse and awaken the World out of the Lethargy of Sin wherein by the Delusion
of the Devil it is miserably laid asleep, especially in this Generation; but as
it was in the Hand of Moses, that Quondam Mediator (which held it out as a
Covenant of Works of the Law, the Form and Tenor whereof was do this and Live,
otherwise cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are
Written in the Law to do them, Implying that without Justification by the Works
of the Law, no Flesh should be saved) it is not now to be Preached, for such a
legal Preaching must be acknowledged by us all, to be Inconsistent with the
Grace of the Gospel, derogatory from the Honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
overthrows all the Hope of our Salvation.

Deo Gloria mihi Venia.
Books Printed for and Sold by William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar, 1680.
Divinity.
BRevis Demonstratio, proving the truth and excellency of the Christian
Religion by Reason. An Answer to Mr. Ferguson's Doctrine, about Christ's
Justification and Sanctification, with an Account of the ends and intents of
Christ's death and passion, considered as a Reason, by John Knowles, Oct. The
Primitive Institution, or a seasonable discourse of Catechism, wherein is
showed the Antiquity, Necessity, and Benefits thereof, together with its
sutableness to heal the distemper of the Church, by L. Addison, D. D. Twelves.
A Sermon, Preached at the Funeral of a Man found drowned in a Pit, enlarged by
the Author upon the account of sudden death, oct. A Sermon, Preached at a
Visitation in Chichester, by W. Howel, Quarto. The School of Righteousness, A
Sermon Preached before the King on a General Fast day, by his Grace, the
present Archbishop of Canterbury, Qua. A Discourse of the Lawfulness of taking
Use for Money, by Sir Robert Filmer; with a large Preface to it by Sir Roger
Twisden, Tw. A modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is briefly considered their
Original, Antiquity, and Necessity, together with the true and false grounds of
their being so much slighted, neglected, and unjustly despised. Hugo Grotius
Catechism in Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis, Oct. The Spirit of
Prophecy; a Treatise to prove that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets.
Together with the Divine Authority of Christian Religion and the holy
Scriptures, the insufficiency of Humane Reason, and the reasonableness of the
Christian Faith, Hope, and Practice deduced therefrom; and asserted against Mr.
Hobbs, and the Treatise of Humane Reason: Recommended to the Press by Dr.
Gunning, Lord Bishop of Ely, Oct. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits,
delivered to the French King, concerning the re-establishment of the Jesuits in
his Dominion: Written in French by a Learned Roman Catholic. Justifying Faith,
or that Faith by which the Just do live, to which is added an abstract of some
Letters about the Common Prayer, Oct. A Sermon Preached upon the fifth day of
Nov. by G. Hascard, D. D. Rector of St. Clements Danes, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to his Majesty, Qua. A Sermon Preached before Sir J. Edwards, Lord
Mayor of London, at the Election of Sir R. Clayton, by G. Haseard, D. D. and
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. A Sermon Preached before Sir R. Clayton,
Lord Mayor of London, by Tho. Mannyngham, Fellow of New College in Oxford, Qua.
These six last are new.
History.
A Voyage into the Levant, by Sir H. Blount. Caesar's Commentaries, with Mr.
Edmonds his Observations upon it, in Folio, Englished. Heylin's Cosmography in
four parts, in Fol. Sir Tho. Herberts Travels, with additions, Fol. A
description of Candia, with an account of the Siege, and the surrender of it
into the hands of the Turks, Oct. Calliope's Cabinet, wherein all Gentelemen
may know all degrees of Honor, and how to take place; with a Dictionary of
Herald Terms, Tw. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, containing the
Original, Antiquity, Government, Manners, and Qualities of the People. The
present State of the Jews; wherein is contained an exact account of their
present Customs, Secular and Religious: To which is added a discourse of the
Misna, Talmud, and Gemara, by L. Addison, D. D. The Travels of Ulysses,
Translated by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, Tw. Camera Regis, or the present State
of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls, River, Bridge, Gates, Tower,
Officers, Courts, Customs, Franchises, etc. of that City: by J. B. Esquire Oct. The
Circumcision of the Great Turk's Son, and the Ceremony of the Marriage of his
Daughter, sent from the English Ambassador, Fol.
FINIS.

