Imprimatur,

April 11. 1692. GEO. RO^SE.

THE Plain Man's GUIDE TO HEAVEN: Containing his Duty I. Toward God. II.
Toward his Neighbor.


With Proper Prayers, Meditations, and Ejaculations.

Designed chiefly for the Countryman, Tradesman, Labourer, and such like.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

THe Duty of Apprentices and Servants: Containing 1. The Parent's Duty how to
educate their Children that they may be fit to be employed and trusted. 2. What
preparation is needful for such as are entering into Service; with some Rules to
be observed by them, how to make a wise and happy choice of a Service. 3. Their
Duty in Service toward God, their Master, and themselves: Together with
suitable Prayers to each Duty, and some Directions peculiarly to Servants, for
the worthy receiving the Holy Sacrament. Published for the Benefit of Families.
By Richard Lucas D. D. Vicar of St. Stephen's Coleman-street, London, in 80.
Price 1 s. 6 d. Printed for Samuel Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Church yard.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THE Countryman and Trades-man's daily Duty and Devotion. Page 1. Texts
relating to the Worshipping of God by Prayers and Praises. 4 A Prayer to be
used in private every Morning. 5 Texts which relate to the reading the
Scriptures, and serving God in your Families. 7 A Morning Family Prayer. 8 Of
teaching your Children their Prayers. 11 Texts which relate to the Duty of
honest and diligent Labor referred to. ibid. Ejaculations at the beginning of
your Work. p. 12. Of sweetning your Labor by singing of Psalms. 14 Of making
your daily Labor a Religious Service. 15 Of saying Grace at your Meals, with
proper Texts relating to that Duty. 17 Of your Christian Behavior at Meals. 18
Texts concerning the Duty of singing Psalms. ibid. An Evening Family Prayer. 20
Of Self-Examination with Texts of Scripture relating to that Duty. 24 The best
way of doing this Duty, and the End to which it tends. 27 This Duty useful for
your Temporal, as well as Spiritual Estate. 29 An Evening private Prayer, when
upon Examination you find your self guilty, etc. 30 An Evening private Prayer,
when upon Examination of the past day, your Conscience acquits you from wilful
wickedness. 34
SECT. I.
OF the Lord's Day. Proper Texts of Scripture concerning the sanctifying of
that Day. p. 37.
CHAP. II.
A Morning Prayer for the Lord's Day 38 What you are to do before you go to
Church. 41 What you are to do at your Entrance into the Church. 42 Of public
Prayer, with proper Texts of Scripture relating to that Duty. 44 The Absolution
explained. 46 Some Ejaculations when the Absolution is pronounced. 50
Concerning those Curses that we meet with in some of the Psalms. 52 Rules to be
observed when you hear the Chapters read in the Church. 53 How Prayers for the
Public, are of great advantage to your selves. 56 Of that which is called the
Second Service. 57 Proper Texts of Scripture concerning the hearing of God's
Word. p. 59. A Prayer to be used between Morning and Evening Service. 62 You
must not neglect Prayers in the Afternoon, tho there be no Sermon. 65 How to
behave your selves on Sunday-Evenings. 66
SECT. II.
OF Holy Days and Fast-days. 69
CHAP. III.
OF prepartion to the Holy Sacrament. 75 Of Fasting. 81 A General Confession of
Sin. 82 Directions to be observed on the Day before you receive. 86 A Prayer
for Grace according to some foregoing Heads. 88 A short Example of Applying the
Communion Service, the better to prevent the wandering of your Mind. 92 For what
reason you are to kneel at the Sacrament. 94 Short Prayers according to some
foregoing Rules. p. 99 Of Behavior at Baptism and Marriage. 108
CHAP. IV.
THE Country-man's Duty toward his Neighbor. 110
SECT. I.
HIS Duty to his Minister. ibid. Proper places of Scripture relating to that
Duty. ibid.
SECT. II.
DVty to his Superiors. 115 Proper Texts relating to that Duty. 116
SECT. III.
HIS behavior to his Landlord. 121
SECT IV.
HIS Duty to his Wife and Children, with proper Texts relating to that Subject.
124 His Duty to his Servants, with proper Texts. 132 His Duty to his
Neighbors, with proper Texts. p. 139
SECT. VII.
HIS Duty to the Poor, with proper Texts. 145
SECT. VIII.
OF just Dealing, with suitable Texts of Scripture. 149
SECT. IX.
THE Dames Duty to her Husband, with suitable Texts referred to. 152 Meditations
and Ejaculations proper for several Occasions. As, 158 When you find your
Cattle well, or have hopes of seasonable Weather. Or, When you find your Cattle
sick or dying, the Weather be unseasonable. 159 When you begin a new Work. 160
If you are sick or in pain. 161 When you hear talk of Wars and Troubles in
Church or State. 161 When you lie under any Temptations. ibid. Before you read
the Holy Scripture. 163 When you sow your Ground. 164 If you hear any People
talk profanely. 166 If you see any in a miserable Condition. 167 If you find
your self inclined to discontent. 168
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 5. for own read one. p. 89. l. ult. r. from glory to glory. p.
90. l. 7. r. straying. p. 99. l. 2. for chastening r. hastening. p. 107. l. 11.
after endeavor, add by. p. 124. l. 7. after encourage, add her. p. 126. l. 8.
r. Immortal. p. 141. l. 16. for House r. Horse. p. 147. l. 3. for Bedding r.
Begging.

Several Books published by Dr. Richard Lucas Vicar of St. Stephen 's
Colemanstreet, and sold by Sam. Smith at the Prince 's Arms in St. Paul 's
Churchyard.
DR. R. Lueas's Practical Christianity: Or, an Account of the Holiness, which
the Gospel enjoins, with Motives to it, and the Remedies it proposes against
Temptations, with a Prayer concluding ^ach distinct Duty, in Octavo, 1685.
Price 3 s. 6 d.

-- Enquity after Happiness, in several Parts, etc. 1. In Octave, the second
Edition, Englarged, 1692. Pr. 3 s. 6 d.

-- The true Notion of Human Life: Or, A second Part of the Enquiry after
Happiness, in Octavo, 1690. Pr. 2 s. 6 d.

-- The Duty of Apprentices and Servants. 1. The Parents Duty how to Educate
their Children that they may be fit to be employed and trusted. 2. What
preparation is needful for such as enter into Service, with some Rules to be
observed by them how to make a wise and happy Choice of a Service. 3. Their
Duty in Service toward God, their Master, and themselves, with suitable
Prayers to each Duty, and some directions peculiarly to Servants for the worthy
receiving the Holy Sacrament, published for the benefit of Families, in Octavo,
Price 1 s. 6. d.

-- A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Tho. Lamb, July 23 d. 1686. in
Quarto. Pr. 6 d.

-- A Sermon preached at the Assizes held at Horsham, in the County of Sussex,
Aug. 23. 1691. Pr. 6 d.

-- Christian Thoughts for every day of the Month, with a Prayer, wherein is
represented the Nature of unfeigned Repentance, and of perfect Love toward
God, in Twelves. Pr. 1 s.

-- The Plain Man's Guide to Heaven; containing first his Duty toward God,
secondly toward his Neighbor, with proper Prayers, Meditations, and
Ejaculations; designed chiefly for the Countryman, Tradesman, Labourer, and
such like, in Twelves, 1692. Pr. 1 s.

A Sermon conterning Public Worship, preached before the Queen at Whiteball,
on Wednesday the 23d of March, 1692. By Thomas Manningham D.D. Chaplain in
Ordinary to their Majesty's, and Rector of St. Andrew Holborn.

A Sermon preached at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God,
Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln, In Lambeth Chapel, Jan. 10. 1692. By Willam
Stanley, D. D. Clerk of the Closet to her Majesty.

THE Plain Man's GUIDE TO HEAVEN.
CHAP. I.
The Countryman and Trades-Man's daily Duty and Devotion.

I Will not here set down any Hour for your rising, but suppose you allow no
more time for sleep then serves to preserve your health, and refresh your
weariness, otherwise your Temporal, as well as Spiritual Duties, will be ill
performed, and suffer great prejudice: Only consider how to serve God first,
and to that end forecast to rise so early as to have time both for your self
and Family, to worship God before you begin your days work; and be assured that
this loss of sleep shall neither hurt your health, nor on the other hand, be a
hindrance to your Labors. So soon as you wake, and while you are rising,
entertain your self with good thoughts; call to mind the mercies of God to you,
your being kept in safety the past Night, and your Family, from sudden Death,
Fire, Robbers, and the like: Think what Temptations you may that day meet with,
especially to drinking, or overreaching your Neighbor in buying and selling,
and arm your self against them; and what opportunities of doing good; and
encourage your self to do it cheerfully out of obedience and love to God; who
will certainly reward you for it, as well in this Life as that to come. As soon
as you have put on your Clothes, kneel down and make your private Prayer to
God, to thank him for his mercies, beg pardon for your sins, with the
continuance of his Grace and Protection that day; which you may do in the
following words, or what other you like better. But let not your inability to
read, or any other consideration cause the neglect of your worshipping God,
Psalm. 5.3. Romans 8.26, 27. Hebr. 7.25. Luke 11.2. Chron. 29.30. Prove. 15.8. Mark
11.24. Psalm. 145.18, 19, 20. Acts 17.25. Hebr. 4.16. Prove. 28.13. John 1.1, 8,
9. Jer. 33.3. Psalm. 50.15. Numb. 22.4. Psalm. 92.2. Mark 2.35. Matthew. 6.6. Psalm.
55.17. Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 10.19. and 122.6. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. These. 3.1. Ephesians.
4.2.
but the rather make you more diligent to seek Instruction, that so you may be
able to offer up your Prayers from an honest heart, truly sorrowful for your
sins, with an ardent love to God, and a desire to please him; and then he will
except those desires, and pardon such imperfections as are not wilful, or
through negligence, always saying the Lord's Prayer, which endeavor to
understand in its fullest sense, as you may learn from some good Catechism or
Exposition.

A PRAYER to be used in private every Morning.
ALmighty God, the Creator and Preserver of Mankind, I worship and adore thy
incomprehensible Majesty, and desire that my Soul may be always filled with a
devout awe and reverence for thee. I acknowledge that it is thou only who
causest me to dwell in safety. To thee alone I owe the supports and comforts of
this Life, and the hopes of a better; for all which my Soul blesses thee. And I
thank thee, O my God, that thou do cause the light of thy Sun to arise once
more upon me, O grant me thy Grace, that I may so spend this day, that it may
bring me comfort in the day of the Resurrection. Pardon and deliver me O
merciful Father, from all my sins, establish and strengthen my heart in thy
Faith, Fear, and Love. Enable me to trust in thee, and resign up my self to thy
holy will. Make me humble and contented, thankful and industrious in my
Calling, diligent to instruct my Children and Family in the Knowledge of thee,
and careful to be an Example to them of Obedience to thy Commandments; guide
and direct me in my way, bless and prosper the works of my hands, prevent and
restrain me from all sin this day, and give me, if it be thy will, a quiet
Life, but above all a peaceful and comfortable Death, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

So soon as your Wife, Children, or what Family you have, is ready, call them
together, and so often as you can possibly spare time, you will do very well to
read, Joh. 5.36. Rev. 1.3. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Genesis 18.19. Josh. 24.1. Acts 10.2.
Matthew. 11.2.
or cause to be read a Chapter. Choose those Chapters to be read oftenest that
are easy to be understood, and most practical; then stand up and say the
Creed, which is the Sum of a Christian's Faith: Then all kneeling down, adore
and worship God in these or the like words, as you best approve.

A Morning Family PRAYER.
O Gracious God and merciful Father, we bless thee that thou have refreshed and
preserved us this last Night, and thereby fitted us for the labor and service
of this day; it is of thy goodness, O Lord, it is of thy goodness that we are on
this side the Grave, and that the bottomless Pit has not closed her mouth upon
us; for we acknowledge that we have often sinned against thee, and provoked
thee, either through sottish ignorance or presumption, or through neglect or
contempt of thy Words and Commandments; the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
Master's Crib, but we have forgot thee, and been unthankful to thee, and in
many things have acted as though we knew thee not, nor considered thy goodness
and the works of thy hands; O pardon pardon us, thou who delightest not in the
death, but conversion of sinners; pardon us, thou who have given thy Son to be
a Propitiation for our sins, and sow in our hearts, we beseech thee, the Seed
of everlasting life, and grant that whatsoever we learn from thy word to be our
duty, we may carefully and diligently fulfill; keep us this day from the
commission of any thing that may wound our Consciences, wrong others, or
provoke thee: Bless the Children of this Family, granting that they may grow up
in thy fear, increasing in wisdom, and stature, and in favor with God and Man.
Teach every Member of this Family to do their duty humbly and cheerfully, as
out of Conscience toward God, from whom they shall receive their Reward. Let
Peace and Charity rule our hearts, let thy Providence protect and provide for
us; and when thou have carried us through the labors, hardships, and
temptations of this life, bring us into the rest and glory of a better, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Take care that both your private and family Devotion be performed with
reverence and affection, not in a formal careless manner; Do not grudge the
time you give to God, for he can and will repay you; nor think it longer then
it is. The Devotion here prescribed both public and private, will not take up
half an hour. You or your Wife must also take care that your Children must say
every own their Prayers, which you must teach them early. When they can say the
words of some short Prayer, instruct them in the meaning of it; the same do for
those Servants that are ignorant. For others, put them in mind of their Duty,
and encourage them in doing it. This done, cheerfully begin your days labor,
every one employing themselves in what belongs to their places; which the more
diligent they are in, the more acceptable it will be to God. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11, 12.
2 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12. Prove. 18.19. and 21.17. and 28.19. and 6.9, 10, 11. Ephesians.
4.28.
At the beginning of your Work, dedicate it to God in some such Ejaculation as
this: -- O Lord, thy most wise Providence has placed me in this state, to eat
my bread in the swet of my brows; I believe it is best for me, because it is
thy will, for thou art a loving Father to all that obey thee, and wilt do what
is best for them: I submit to thy good pleasure, desiring thou should choose
for me. I rejoice in my Labor, and that I have health and limbs to perform it;
I will be as diligent, and do it as I am able, in all things endeavoring
perfection; for in so doing, I am faithful to my Calling, and shall best please
thee, and advance my own happiness. I desire to do all things for the love of
my God, and in obedience to thy Commands: I dedicate all to thy glory, which
ought to be the end of all I do. Or you may meditate on the Example of Christ,
who submitted to work at a mean Trade: Shall I not rather submit to his Will,
and rejoice in his Dispensation, and do my duty cheerfully, and as perfectly as
I can for his Honor. O Lord Jesus, let the Merit of thy Humiliation sanctify
my labor, and suffer not the business of my hands to indispose my heart for
the acts of thy Worship and Service; suffer me not to indulge my Body by ease
and slothfulness, but use that strength and health thou have given me to thy
glory, and honest provision for my Family.

You may also some times sing such Psalms as you have by heart, or entertain
your self with any other pious thoughts; or if you work with your Servants or
Children, or honest Neighbors, put them on singing Psalms, or some good
Discourse, to encourage one the other in the Service of Almighty God. Would you
but be persuaded to try this method with devout and honest Minds, you cannot
imagine how it would sweeten your Labor, making you cheerful and content,
though poor, and God would comfort and direct you with his holy Spirit, whose
delight is in the Man of an humble heart. And thus to have all Places sound
with God's praise, would make a sort of Heaven on Earth, and fit us for the
Employment of Heaven it self.

Besides, It will much farther your labor; for when one that has no farther
aim then profit and pleasure, is tempted to murmur at every disappointment, and
seeks for diversion in riotous Company and merry Meetings, which instead of
mending his Condition, makes it worse, the honest poor Man's design in his
labor is to please God; he works in obedience to his Commands, and so endures
patiently all the inconveniency of cold and heat, weariness and pain, with
humble submission to his Providence, offers his Sufferings to God, as endured
for his sake; for though they are not altogether voluntary, certainly it is
more acceptable cheerfully and willingly to submit to those Troubles allotted
us by God, then enduring any other of our own choosing; for a poor Man works to
pay his Rent, because it is just, and he has promised so to do: He looks on his
Wife and Children, or Servants, as those for whom he is obliged to take care,
in obedience to God, as well as by the ties of Nature, and is the more careful
that he may by his Industry gain time both for himself and them to serve God,
and be better able to breed his Children to reading, or such other learning as
is necessary for those honest Employments he designs them for.

These, and the like Considerations, are sufficient to make a good Man cheerful
and diligent in his Labor: I am sure they are much more powerful than any that
either Covetousness or Pride can produce; and if all the honest Man's pains
does not succeed as to the World, it is only for the trial of his Patience, and
submission to God, which will be rewarded a thousand fold in heavenly glory,
and it may be to his Posterity in the world after his Decease.

When you come home to Dinner, 1 Timothy 4.4 5. 1. Cor. 10.13. Col. 3.17. Eccles.
10.17. 1 Cor, 9.27. Prove. 23.20, 21. Luke 21.34.
with reverence say Grace, and eat your Meat with a cheerful, thankful heart,
considering your own unworthiness of the least of God's Mercies, and his bounty
in supplying your Necessities. Be not intemperate in your Meat and Drink, but
use both to support your health and strength, not to impair them. If you have
Children, let one of them read a Chapter or Psalm, and the next day another
Child, every one taking their turns; this will take up so little time, that it
can be no ways inconvenient, and it is only want of love to Piety that can
occasion their not doing it; for besides that, you will keep your Childrens
reading, and see how they improve. It will increase both your and their
Knowledge in the Scripture, Of singing Psalms. Ephesians 5.18, 19. Col. 3.16. Jam.
5.13 Psalm. 119.97. Matthew. 12.35. and 15.19, 20. Psalm. 119.59.
which you must above all things attend and observe, as containing the whole
Will of God, both what you are to believe and do, and what you are to avoid,
and by which you must be judged at the last day.

When Dinner is done, return Thanks with Devotion, and a sense that all you
have is from the gift of God; go to your Labor as in the Morning, and support
your self in it by singing Psalms, good Thoughts, Meditations, and the like.
Neither would I by any means be understood to forbid innocent and cheerful
Discourse, nor what is useful to your Business; for the Service of God was not
designed to be our burden, but for our comfort and support in all Conditions.
In the Evening, or some time before you go to bed, be sure to forecast time for
your Devotion your Family, reading a Chapter in the Bible, or small part of a
Catechism, with its Explication; then say a short Prayer, this that follows, or
what you like better.

An Evening Family PRAYER.
O Almighty God, the Father of Mercies, and the Fountain of all good Gifts, for
from thee we receive all Temporal and Spiritual Blessings; we bless and praise
thy Name, that thou have afforded us health and strength and understanding, to
discharge the labors and hardships of our worldly Callings this day; and much
more for whatever means or measures of Grace thou have vouchsafed us to enable
us to do the duties of our Christian Calling. It is of thee that we have been
preserved from Sickness, and Death, and Disasters; it is from thy restraining
Grace that we have been kept back from presumptuous Wickedness, and it is from
the assistance of thy Grace that we have thought or done any good thing: O be
pleased to continue to us the Mercies we enjoy, and confer upon us whatsoever
thou do see us want; enable us to persevere to our lives end with patience,
humility, and thankfulness in the condition of life to which thou do call us,
and to pass the time of our sojourning here in fear, calling upon thee daily, O
holy Father, who without respect of Persons wilt judge every Man according to
his works. We every day are a day nearer to Death and Judgment, grant, O Lord,
that by an impartial Examination of our selves, and by a sincere endeavor of
reforming what is amiss, and perfecting what is begun in us, we may be daily
the fitter for both, that we may come finally to that eternal Rest, where not
only all the labors and travels of the Body will be at an end, but those also
of the Soul, and we shall need watch and contend no more; 'till when let thy
Providence, O Lord, watch over us, and thy Grace preserve and assist us, that
we may pass this night, and the remaining part of our lives, in Virtue and
Safety, in Peace, Contentment, and if thou think fit, Prosperity, but if thou
think fit otherwise, so prepare and strengthen our hearts to endure whatever
thou shall lay upon us, that the trial of our Faith may be to praise, and
honor, and glory in the day of our Lord Jesus, through whom we put up these
our Requests to thee, beseeching thee to accept our Praises, and answer our
Petitions, through thy dear Son, and our dear Mediator, Christ Jesus.

You must not excuse this by your weariness, for it is a greater Duty then to
be omitted for any worldly consideration; but if you are not well, or very
weary, only say the Prayer, which is so short that no one can neglect for any
other cause but a carnal heart. Before you sleep examine how you have spent the
past day, recall as well as you can what sin or infirmity you have been guilty
of, what duty you have left undone? what mercies you have received, Spiritual
or Temporal; or what Corrections? For your better direction, some times read
over the following Example.

I begin with the Morning, Of Examination. Prove. 4.26. Ephesians. 5.15. Luke 2.36.
Psalm. 4.8. Genesis 24.63.
and consider how I performed my Morning Service; if I neglected my part of it
out of carelessness, or want of delight in God's Service; if in my worldly
business I was not provoked to outrageous Anger to any of my Family: Did I not
swear, curse or take God's Name in vain? Did I not omit to reprove sin in my
Children or Servants; or have I not omitted any neighbourly Office that might
have done me no great harm, and my Neighbor good? Have I been surly or morose
to any? have I been merciful to the Poor according to my Ability, at least
given them good words, if I had not wherewithal to relieve them? Have I been
ready to hear or speak of good things when I have had opportunity? Have I been
thankful for any good success given in my business, give God the glory, and
attribute it to his blessing? have I patiently submitted if I have had loss,
and owned it to be the just desert of my sin, begging God to give me grace to
be content, and to sanctify his Corrections to me? Have I been true and just
in my dealing, buying and selling; desiring only an honest gain, and that by
words of truth? Have I not oppressed my Servant or Hireling in their wages?
have I made good my bargain, allowing a reasonable hire? have I not to gain a
small matter to my self caused a great loss to my Neighbor? by Law Suits,
Quarrels, or the like. Have I spent my time and money in excess of drinking, or
tempted others to the like? Have I slandered my Neighbor, or carried stories
from one to the other to cause differences?

These and the like Questions you may put to your self, recollecting all the
day, and as you went from one thing to another, so you will easily discover
your faults; and the better you grow, and the more you read the Word of God,
and other good Books, the better you will do this useful Duty. But you must
consider the end of Self-Examination is not only to know your faults, but to
mend them: as for Example; If you find you were to day guilty of a great
Passion, to be more careful to morrow not to give way to it, to be more silent,
and take care to prevent those faults in your Children or Servants that were
the cause of your Anger, never to reprove when you find you are in a Passion;
to consider your own faults, and God's patience with you; pray for Patience,
etc. If you lost your time, or drank too much, to avoid those People that
tempted you, and those Houses. If you spoke ill of, or slandered your
Neighbors, to unsay it to the same People you slandered them to. Be careful to
speak the good, and let the rest alone. If you have wronged any to make
restitution. Thus undoing what is ill done, if you can, and purposing by the
grace of God, to be no more wilfully guilty of the like. This Examination you
may make at what time in the Evening you find most convenient, or at your
evening labor, if your work is such as will give you leave to think.

Before you sleep, humbly and earnestly beg pardon for your sins, and greater
grace for the future. Thank God for all his Mercies, especially being kept from
sin, and enabled to do any good. -- This method of daily Examination is useful
for your Temporal as well as Spiritual Estate; that so considering the Errors
of every day, what is amiss one day may be mended the next; and where any good
opportunity has been neglected, to be more careful another time; so will you do
more good and less evil, and grow wiser both for your Soul and Body.

An Evening Private PRAYER, if upon Examination you find your self guilty, etc.
O Eternal God who have created me to glorify and serve thee, and has prepared
eternal happiness and glory to crown and reward this my Service, with what
Love, with what Zeal, ought I daily to do thy will; with what meekness and
patience submit to it. But ah wretch that I am! how far short of both have I
fallen this day: the fear of thee has not awed me, nor has the love of thee
moved me, nor thy great and precious promises prevailed upon me, but I have
broke through all to gratify my own vile affections. Ah how have I wandered
from the paths of Truth and Life; [here repeat the sins of the day past] And
now O holy and just God, what shall I say unto thee; shall I lie down in my
wickedness, and either through despair of thy mercy, or presumption upon it,
continue to commit it? Ah no! for then if Death surprise me, and what reason
have I to fear it may, I must be miserable for ever; everlasting remorse of
Conscience, and everlasting burnings in the company of Devils must be my
portion for ever; therefore, O God, thou God of mercy, I come to thee though
ashamed and confounded, though my guilt will not suffer me to look up toward
thee, I come to weep, to condemn my self before thee: O hear me, thou that
delightest not in the death, but the conversion of a sinner; O hear me thou
that have given thine own Son to be a Propitiation for our sins; O thou that
delightest to hear Prayers and forgive the Penitent, have mercy upon me, pardon
and deliver me from my sins, make me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit
within me, and O never suffer me to be at rest 'till I have subdued my
corruptions, and rooted out every habitual sin; 'till I feel the power of
Religion in, and change of my heart and reformation of my life, and find the
Kingdom of Heaven established within me in righteousness and peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost. And here, O my God, I once more dedicate my self to thee, and
vow a perpetual War against those Lusts by which I have been thus wretchedly
misled and betrayed into the paths of darkness and death. [Here particularly
resolve against that sin or sins which thou have been guilty of the day past,
or finds thy self most prone too.] And thou, O God, by whose mighty power the
blind received their sight, the lame walked, the Lepers were cleansed, and the
dead raised; O thou who did call and quicken by thy grace the Gentiles when
dead in trespasses and sins, vouchsafe me the assistance of the same Spirit
that I may continue steadfast and unmovable in these Resolutions, and abound
more and more in the works of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

An Evening private Prayer, when upon Examination of the past day, your
Conscience acquits you from wilful wickedness.
O Gracious God and heavenly Father, I thy poor Servant, frail of my self, and
lying open to many Temptations, do bless and praise thy Name, that thou have
preserved me this day from presumptuous sin, beseeching thee to blot out the
remembrance of whatever has formerly displeased thee in my life past, and
pardon the defects and infirmities of my present state, strengthen my faith,
increase my hope, and let my breast be more and more inflamed with a Divine
love; and O may my love abound more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment,
that I may approve the things that are excellent, and may be sincere and
without offense 'till the day of Christ, being filled with all the fruits of
Righteousness through Jesus Christ, unto the praise and glory of thee my God.
Preserve and bless me in my honest Labors, let me never want things necessary
for me and mine, nor moderation, humility and thankfulness in the use of them:
Keep me in safety, and refresh me with sleep this night, and when I awake let
my thoughts be upon thee, and upon the happiness of those that fear thee, and
trust in thee, so shall I abide in thy love unto my lives end, and be at last
carried from this state of labor, and watchfulness, and trial, into one of
peace, and security, and triumph; which grant, O merciful Father, for thy dear
Son's sake, Amen, Amen.

And so much for your daily Devotion, where for the circumstances of Time and
Persons, you may alter what agrees not with your condition and business, if so
be you are careful, not to wholly omit the Duties of Family and private Prayer,
which you are as a Christian obliged to, and is the surest way to make you
happy here and hereafter.

SECT. I.
Of the Lords Day.

FOR your profitable Observation and hollowing the Lord's Day, Exodus 28.8, 9,
10, 11. Neh. 13.19. Isa. 50.13. Acts. 27.7. and 20.7. 1 Cor. 16. Rev. 1.10.
Psalm. 118 24. Ezekiel. 23.38. Amos 8.4.
it will be of great use so to contrive your Affairs on Saturday; that you may
have as little as possible of them to perform on the Lord's Day.

CHAP. II.
A Morning Prayer for the Lord's Day.

WE adore and worship thee O God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, for thou
speak the word and all things were made, thou commandedst and they were
created, in thee we live and move and have our being, and when thou please we
die and return again unto our dust; blessed be thy Name that thou have made us
rational Creatures, and have continued us in the Land of the living to this
day; and blessed be thou the God of Hope, because thou have so loved the World,
when dead in trespasses and sins, and in a state of enmity against thee, that
thou gave thy only begotten Son, to the end that all that believe in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life, Lord we believe, help thou our
unbelief; we believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; we believe that
the words he spoke are the words of everlasting Life; we believe that he died
for our sins, that we might escape the wrath due to them; we believe that he
rose again for our justification, that he might be a Prince and Savior to all
those who believe and obey him: And now, O Lord, let this Faith we beseech
thee, have its due influence upon our hearts and lives, that the grace of God
which brings Salvation, and has appeared unto all men, teach us to deny
ungodliness and worldy Lusts, and to live righteously, soberly, and godlily in
this present world, looking for the blessed hope and glorious appearance of the
great God and our Savior Christ Jesus. Particularly assist us, we beseech
thee, in the duties of the day, that we may offer up unto thee pure and fervent
Prayers, and praise thee with unspeakable joy and gratitude. Make us to hear
thy Word with a holy fear and devout thirst, and grant that we may be not only
hearers, but doers of thy Word, that so being quickened by thy Word and Spirit,
we may be cleansed from our guilt by the Blood of Jesus, and be made partakers
of his Resurrection and Kingdom, through the same our dear Lord and Savior.
Amen.

After your Morning Prayer, such business as cannot be dispensed with, as
milking and ordering of Cattle, must be done, but no more; at which Employments
you may sing Psalms, have good thoughts, or discourse with those with you.
After which let all get ready for Church; and if any spare time remains, read
some good Book; but be sure so to order your Devotion and necessary Affairs, as
to be at Church at the beginning of Prayers. As you go think of the great
Privilege and Mercy you enjoy in being admitted to the House of God to pray
and hear his holy Law, and the particular blessings of living in a Nation where
God's Word is freely dispensed to all; think what a sad aggravation of your
Fault it will be if you resist or neglect such great Advantages; but let not
the sense of your unworthiness tempt you to despair or negligence, but rather
to love and admire the long Sufferance of God, and to resolve to improve better
these means of grace. Enter the Church with reverence and gravity; it is the
House of Prayer, make it not a Den of Thieves by sinful thoughts and
hypocritical Designs; nor yet a House of Merchandise; by thinking or talking of
worldly Affairs; but so soon as you come to your Seat, make an humble Prayer to
God for attention and zeal, grace to know and do his will, a pure unprejudiced
mind, to apprehend and hold fast the Truth. Pray for a blessing on the Minister
then present, and all other faithful Dispensers of the Word and Sacraments
throughout the World, that they may be successful Laborers in God's Vineyard,
and convince and convert many from their sins, and build up all through Faith
unto Salvation, that the Word may be Seed sown in good ground, bringing forth
Fruit abundantly to the glory of God. Pray also against wandering thoughts and
drowsiness: finally desire the union of your Prayers with all Christians, and
that the Intercessions of the Universal Church, sent up in the Name of its
common Redeemer, may by him be presented acceptably to God, and obtain for it
all good things, notwithstanding the blemishes, imperfections and mistakes of
its particular Members.

These or the like Petitions you may use as time permits, till the Minister
begins; then standing up, Of Public Prayer. Matthew. 18.20. Isa. 56.7. Luke
2.37. Joel 2.15, 16, 17. Hebr. 10.24, 35.
apply those Texts of Scripture that are read to your self. To be able to do
this the better, read them over at home to consider them: then attend to the
Exhortation, which is to inform you of your Obligation to the Worship of God by
holy Scripture, the end and benefit of it, and manner how you should perform
it, with a truly penitent heart; and therefore with seriousness apply it to
your self, and do not hear it as words of course which you are not concerned
in, gazing about as too many do: but being composed and recollected, as in the
Presence of God, with bended knees and a contrite heart, sensible of your great
unworthiness, make the following Confession; next comes the Absolution. To hear
this with profit, you must first understand the meaning of it; it is a short
Declaration of God's Mercy and Pardon to penitent sinners; that is, to those
who being truly penitent of their sins, are heartily sorry they have committed
them, and resolve by the assising grace of God, never more wilfully to do the
like. As for Example:

Almighty God;] These words sets forth God's infinite Power and Ability to
Pardon. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desires not the death of a
sinner:] This shows God's infinite goodness and willingness to pardon, since he
spared not his own Son, will he not with him freely give us all things. But
rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live.] Here follows the
conditions, you must turn from your wickedness before you have any right to the
Promise of Life; and though God had much rather you should repent and live,
being desirous that none should perish, but that all should come to Repentance;
yet here is no encouragement to hope for any that lead wicked lives, but to the
Penitent, that is, such as to the utmost of their power sincerely endeavor to
obey God's Commands, and to avoid what he forbids, doing their Duty as well as
they are able, yet trusts not to any merit thereby; but being sensible of the
weakness of their best performance, expect Mercy and Eternal Life, as the free
gift of God, for the sake and merit of Christ Jesus only to such Penitents. God
has given power and commandment to his Ministers, to declare and pronounce to
his People, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their sins.] Which
is no other then declaring the terms set forth in the Gospel more largely; for
the Minister only declares on what Conditions we may be pardoned by Almighty
God, but does not by this Absolution pardon any who do not perform the
Conditions. He pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent.] Where
observe the Minister does not say, I pardon, but he pardons, that is, God;
and that only those that truly repent, that is, confess and forsake their past
sins; for without amendment Repentance will not profit, so that no one can with
comfort apply this Absolution, that indulges any wilful sin. And unfeignedly
believe his holy Gospel;] that is, the Duties and Threatenings, as well as the
History and Promises. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true Repentance
and his holy Gospel.] Where you may observe you must join Prayer to your
Endeavors, both for Repentance for what is past, and the assistance of God's
holy Spirit to enable you to do your Duty for the time to come; for by our own
strength we are not able to do any thing that is good and acceptable to God;
the rest is so easy that it needs no Explanation. If you are sure of your ^art
in performing the Conditions of Repentance and Amendment, God will most
certainly perform his promise, which he has authorized his Servant to declare
in his Name, on which you may rely with comfort, and apply with confidence to
your self. You must not say the Absolution after the Minister, that being not
properly a Prayer, but setting forth the Condition of our Pardon.

While the Minister is saying the Absolution, offer some such Ejaculations as
these; Let this gracious Absolution, pronounced by the Minister, be extended
unto me: Thou art the Father of Mercy, who willest not the death of a sinner; O
fit me, and all here present, to receive the Remission of our sins, by a
faithful performing the Conditions on our part; Increase our Faith, perfect
Repentance, and by the assistance of thy holy Spirit, help us unfeignedly to
believe and sincerely obey thy Gospel; that those things may please thee which
we do at this present; and that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and
holy, so that at the last we may come to thy Eternal Joy, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

At the end of this and other Prayers, say Amen, which signifies your consent
to Prayer, and desire that God will hear and answer it. Then follow the Lord's
Prayer, which being the most perfect Pattern and comprehensive Form of Prayer,
is in our Liturgy several times repeated; repeating the Answers aloud in the
Liturgy and other places, may be of use to incite your Affection, and keep you
more wakeful; and besides, it makes a joyful and harmonious Melody, when both
the Minister and the People are thus united in the Service of God. Then follows
the Psalms, which are read standing, by reason the greatest of them are either
Prayers to, or Praises of God, and Commemorations of his deliverance of his
Church and People, to excite our Faith and Confidence in him, who also will
deliver us in like manner if we faithfully serve him. There are also
Declarations of God's Judgment to the wicked, to warn us to forsake our sins,
if we will escape the like Punishments.

You must not apply those Curses you meet with in the Psalms to your private or
public Enemies, but only to the irreconcilable Enemies of God, that is, the
Devil, since we are not sure but the most wicked man may repent and be
reconciled to God; we must not pray for the Destruction, but Conversion of all
that are in a possibility of it.

Next comes the Chapters, which you must hear with the greatest reverence and
attention you can, remembering it is the Word of God by which you must be judged
at the last Day. What you hear, apply it to your self, as if it was spoken
purposely for you. If any thing is commanded, think, Do I do this? If any thing
is forbid, Am I not guilty? And so practice accordingly. What you find too hard
for your Understanding, either humbly pass over, praying to God that you may
not be ignorant of any necessary Truth; or else as soon as you have
opportunity, ask your Minister. Above all things, never dare to make that evil
use of God's Word, to remember it only to use profanely in idle Jests, which is
a great sin; nor by misapplying or forcing any part of it to excuse any sinful
practice; but take it altogether as the Rule of your Faith and Life, and do not
think the examples of any holy Man or Woman in Scripture will excuse your
wilful committing the like sins, the use of which is to keep from despair those
who have already committed such Crimes, and repent and amend as they did, not
to encourage sin in those who sin wilfully; who presuming on the grace of
repentance, God may perhaps withhold that grace as a just punishment for the
abuse of his mercy. So that what you are most particularly to observe is the
Commands and Prohibitions of the Gospel, and frame your Life according to those
Rules.

You are to stand up at the Creed, which is a short Summary of all the
Christian Faith, in token that you confess the same Faith, and are ready to lay
down your Life rather then renounce it. Then follows the Prayers and Litany,
which you must attend unto with as much devotion as you can, endeavoring to
keep out all thoughts. And do not think you spend too much time in
Intercessions, that is, in praying for others, as the Church your Governors,
those in Affliction, and the like; for public Prayer is most proper for the
Public, that is, for all men; it being impossible by any such Prayers to suit
to all the particular wants to private Persons. But besides, Prayers for the
Public are not without great Advantages to our selves; for every honest man
finds the benefit of good Governors, peaceable times, seasonable weather, and
the like. And surely, can he be said to love his Neighbor as himself, who
grudges a little time to pray that God would deliver him out of those Evils he
suffers, either outward or inward. Did all Mankind love God, and one another as
they ought to do, 'twould make a sort of Heaven on Earth; there would be no
such thing as Misery in the World: Therefore to be sure, whatever contributes
to this, must likewise contribute, not only to the public, but every
particular person's good.

The second Service or part of Communion Service used on Sundays and Holy days,
is to mind us of the ancient Custom of celebrating the Holy Sacrament; and
though now the coldness of some, and unfitness of others, makes so frequent a
Communion hardly practicable, especially in small Country Towns; yet a devout
Soul may live in a constant habitual preparation and desire of it, which will
help much to preserve a spiritual life and love of God. You are not to say the
Commandments as a Prayer, though you continue on your knees, which is only to
be more ready to make that excellent request after every Commandment, which is
a short Prayer, to implore forgiveness for any past Transgression you have been
guilty of; and the assistance of God's holy Spirit to enable you to keep them
more Perfect for the time to come.

All the Prayers ended, which an honest mind will not think long, and is a good
sign of our love to God when we are not wearied with his Service, that you may
join with greater devotion in singing Psalms, it will be of good use to
practice them often at home, as I have advised. Observe the same reverence and
devotion in joining with the Minister in his Prayer before Sermon, that you may
reap the more profit by the Sermon. Be not prejudiced against the Minister, but
the weaker the Preacher is, the more earnest let your Prayers be, that the
Power and Spirit of God may supply his defects; Of hearing God's Word. Luke
8.18. Eccl. 5.1. Luke 10.16. Joh. 8.47. 1 John 4.1. Isa. 8.20. Gal. 1.8. James
1.22. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Romans 10.14, 15. Hebr. 2.1.
God gives not gifts alike to all, so that in some measure you murmur against
God, in despising his Servants; and an honest heart cannot fail by the worst
Sermons to benefit something; and God will reward the meek and humble hearer,
and as plentifully water with his Spirit the Seed sown, though with some Chaff,
as the more excellent Discourses, when received into a proud heart. If your
Minister divides his Sermon, endeavor to remember the head of each division,
and turn down a Text of Scripture to each head, which will serve to recall the
rest into your memory, when you come to repeat to, or examine your Children and
Servants at home. But especially do what you can to remember the Uses and
Application to practice. I could wish that some such method might be generally
used, especially in a plain Auditory; for as the meanest want most instruction,
so most Congregations are made up by the greater part of these. But if your
Minister takes another method, and goes on in one Discourse, rest content with
his choice, endeavoring to carry away as many useful directions as your memory
will retain; which the more you use, the better it will be if you continue a
like care and diligence.

Sermon and Service being ended, in a short Prayer desire God's blessing on his
Ordinance, and thank him for the opportunity he has given you to serve him.
Depart to your home with a cheerful heart, and if you have far to go, let your
thoughts and discourse be what you have that day heard and learnt. Eat and
drink with thankfulness for God's goodness, but let it be also with moderation,
that you may be fit for holy Exercises after dinner. In some places Prayers
begin at Three or Four a clock, which time you will do well to employ in
examining your Children or Servants what they remember of the Sermon, of their
Catechism; often tell them of the sinfulness of lying and swearing, immodesty
and the like. If you have time sing a Psalm, and after say the following Prayer.

Here may be used the Prayer set down before for Sunday, or this.
WE bless thee, O holy and most merciful Father, for this day of rest, O may it
kindle in us the desires of eternal rest, and be made instrumental both to
obtain it, and prepare us for it: We bless thee for the opportunity that thou
have given us of joining this day with our fellow Christians in the public
Worship of thee our God; Lord pardon whatever defects we have been guilty of in
the performance of it, and grant that we may renew it this Afternoon with that
cheerfulness and devoutness, with that sense of thy goodnesss and our wants, as
may render it acceptable to thee, and profitable to us. We bless thee again, O
Lord, for the public preaching of thy Word and Administration of thy
Sacraments, and beseech thee that thy grace may accompany both through the
whole Nation, and particularly for our selves, we beg that thou would so
assist us, that thy Word may ever be a light to our feet, and a lanthorn to our
paths, and that thy holy Sacraments may nourish and strengthen us in faith and
love. Let our examination of our selves, O Lord, be serious and impartial, let
our meditation be affectionate and delightful, let our conversation be pure and
holy, that there may be nothing thought, said, or done by us this day but what
may best serve and promote the end for which thou have instituted it; and, good
God, make every one of us diligent, not only to save our own Souls, but as much
as in us lies, the Souls of others too. Finally, O thou Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, be thou present in our public Assembly, and build thou up our
Family in faith and virtue, and speak thou to every one of our hearts in
private, and hear all our Prayers, and accept all our Praises, and continue to
us all that is necessary to life and godliness, and crown us at last with
everlasting glory. All which we humbly beg through our great and only Mediator
and Advocate Christ Jesus.

But if Prayers begin early, and you have less time, do so much as you can, not
omitting the Prayer; be careful to be at the beginning of public Service; do
not neglect the Church because there is no Sermon; by Prayer we worship God,
and obtain his blessing: besides, there is read the holy Scripture, which is
the best Instruction and foundation of all Sermons. Be careful to fit your
Children and Servants for Catechizing, and have them present when it is
performed in public. After you return home, so soon as your necessary business
is over, read, or cause to be read some good practical Book, and if you did not
do it before, examine and instruct your Children and Servants, sing Psalms,
make your Evening Prayer, and in these employments spend your Evening till
Bedtime, only allowing time for a cheerful temperate Supper, which you will
eat with great comfort, after so well spending the day, you must not omit your
private Prayers, only enlarge your Praises: To which end call to mind the many
Mercies you have received, and your unworthiness of them, by reason of your
sins, and compare your selves with those below you, who are perhaps more
worthy; but if you want all other blessings, yet consider how great your
happiness is in being a Christian, and so capable, if not your own fault, of
heavenly glory, which incomparably exceeds the greatest temporal felicity.

I do not here allow any time for gossiping Visits, because the greatest part
of Country People are apt to waste the Afternoon in such things; but yet I am
by no means so severe as to forbid a walk in the Fields, or a friendly visit to
a Neighbor for an hours refreshment to those whose necessary business allows
time enough for both, especially if that Neighbor is sick, or under any
affliction; but then you must not spend your time in idle talk, making
bargains, or other worldly business, but in good and useful Discourses. And
those Neighbors that will not endure this, but promote drinking, swearing, or
the like profaneness, are by no means to be visited on that day, that is
sanctified to the Service of God and Spiritual Promise. And indeed, if you
consider as you ought the great advantage of being obliged to spend one day in
seven in holy Duties, you would not be weary of its so frequent return, but
thank God for so profitable an Institution; since, I fear, were the observation
of this day left to every ones choice, the love of profit or pleasure would
prevail with too many to neglect it, and so occasion ignorance and profaneness
to prevail more then it does: The inconvenience of the Sabbaths being
neglected, and the advantages of its observation are so many, especially to the
more unlearned, that no true lover of Piety, that desires the public good,
ought by any means to encourage the Contemners of it.

SECT. II.
Of Holy Days, or Fast Days.

THE use of other Festival days or Holy days, is that People may have more
leisure and opportunity to serve God, and to keep in memory the History of the
New Testament; as the Birth, Suffering, Resurrection, Ascension, of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. The Apostles days are to thank God for the Doctrine
they preached and writ, and to encourage us to the imitation of their holy
Examples. There are also days of Thanksgiving for National Blessings, and the
Fasting days, are to consider and lament your own sins, and also those of the
Nation, especially in times of War or other public Calamity; and to pray for
the averting those Judgments which our sins deserve; some of these I think are
the subject of all Holy days: which is also reasonable upon another account,
the giving Servants and Laborers time, first to serve God, and next for
innocent refreshment and doing their own business. It is not out of any
Superstition that the observation of these days is recommended; for what
Superstition can it be to read, pray, and serve God, as frequently as our
business will admit: I do not say it is a Command from God, and therefore do
not command, but commend their observation. And since such days are appointed,
and Service in the Church ordered, if we prefer these before days of our own
choosing, it will keep greater order, and all Families being employed in the
Service of God, not hinder one the other in worldly business: therefore to
those who are willing to follow my directions, I recommend the doing of no more
work then is needful, not that the obligation is the same as on the Lord's day,
but only on an advantage of your growing in grace. Therefore those that cannot
read, after the Family and Private Devotions is over, had much better work
themselves, or find any innocent employment, then loose their time in idleness
and sloth. After your necessary business is done, spend the rest of the Morning
in reading to your Family, who may at the same time do any quiet or sitting
work, or else catechize your Children and Servants; but be sure, if there is
any Service in the Church, to attend on that with willingness and devotion, and
cause your Family to do the like. The rest of the day, if you are able to
afford so much time, you may spend in seeing an honest Neighbor or Relation,
your Minister or Landlord; but be sure on these days, as on no other, you eat
nor drink not to excess; for by that you make, what was designed for God's
Service and your good, the cause of God's dishonor and your perdition; the
Devil's work ought to be done on no day, and less on a day called holy, and
designed for holy uses; therefore avoid such Company as will tempt you to
excess; it is better work at home then go abroad for such purposes. Come home
early, if you go abroad, that you may have time to enlarge your Devotions by
reading or praying something longer, or singing Psalms; but whatever part of
these Devotions you want time for, be sure that nothing but very great
necessity hinders your going to Church on such days; but when Harvest, or other
unavoidable business hinders, read the same Scriptures you should hear at
Church at home; and at your work be much in singing Psalms, good discourse on
holy Meditations, praying that God will accept your desires to worship him more
solemnly, and give you a share of those blessings others pray for. But take
care whenever you plead necessity to omit God's Worship, that it be not a
pretended necessity, for that will be a great aggravation of your neglect; if
you can loose time in idleness and vanity, and yet fancy you have none for
God's Service, this is plainly because you want a true love to God: For we like
to converse with those we love, and are very ready to contrive means to do it,
if you will but try to be, in the first place, careful to serve God, in the
next, industrious in your business, dare promise that the time you so spend
shall not be lost, but be abundantly rewarded, and is most likely to obtain the
blessing of God on your labors, a contented mind, and sure hope of eternal
happiness.

CHAP. III.
Of preparation to the holy Sacrament.

SUpposing you live an honest and holy life, and sincerely endeavor to do your
duty to God, Of the Sacrament. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24, 25, 26. Luke 22.17, 18, 19,
20. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. and 11.27, 28, 29, 30
your Neighbor, and your self, I would advise you to receive the holy
Sacrament as often as it is administered in your Parish Church. If your life is
wicked you must not come at all till you reform, and are prepared by repentance
and good works. So that there is no excuse for seldom receiving. If you are
unfit for the Sacrament, you are unfit to die, and then there is no time for
delay; but you must speedily mend, and beg pardon and grace that you may be
prepared for both.

But forasmuch as this Book is directed only to such as are engaged in a holy
life, or resolve to be so, for others will hardly submit to these Rules; I
shall suppose my Reader is in a state of grace, and resolved to be God's
faithful Soldier and Servant all the days of his life, as he engaged in his
Baptism: But to avoid all scruple in judging of your right to this holy
Ordinance, take the advice of your Pastors, and submit to it; and if he admits
you once, you ought not after to neglect repeating of this Duty, except you
fall into some wilful sin, temptation, or doubt, in which case it is safest
being advised by your Minister, who will resolve your doubt, and advise you how
to overcome your temptation, and in case of wilful sin, will assist your
repentance, and judge when it is such as will admit your return to the holy
Communion; then you must deal sincerely, else you deceive him, and so are the
cause of his deceiving you, which will be your own misfortune.

When the warning is given, rejoice at the glad Tidings, and hearken with
reverence and attentention to the Exhortation and Instructions contained in it,
during the whole week; have it often in your mind, and as you are at work,
think how you are prepared; what it is makes you most afraid or unwilling to
come to this blessed Feast; if it is any remaining love to sin, if you find any
beloved lust, you are still loath to part with, rest not in this dangerous
state, for your Salvation is in great hazard, when your love to sin is greater
then your love of God, or Heaven, or fear of Hell; which it must needs be, so
long as you cannot resolve to part with it, though you know that the wages of
sin is death, and that no unclean wicked man, so long as he continues so, can
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: therefore if you live in Fornication,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Cheating, Malice, Lying, Covetousness, Unmercifulness,
the neglect of God's Worship, reading and hearing his holy Word, frequent
Prayer, breach of the Sabbath, or any other known wilful sin, come not to the
holy Sacrament, not only not frequently, but not at all, till you amend your
ways; nor immediately so soon as you think you repent, but try your sincerity.
But the safest way in this case is, as I said before, to be advised and
examined by some honest sober Minister, both before your first admission, and
after in case of relapse into your old sins, or doubts of sincerity in your
spiritual state, if your sins are only of infirmity and defects of doing good,
be not discouraged, nor keep from this great means of strengthening your weak
graces, which the Enemy of your Soul will tempt you to; that being without this
spiritual Armor, he may with the more ease overcome; but in the days of your
Preparation, often call to mind and observe what imperfections you find most
prevail, and what temptations to them, and think what may be the best means for
the overcoming of them; also think what is most apt to draw you from the
Service of God and your Neighbor, and fortify your self against such
temptations; and by meditation of the Joys of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell,
certainty of Death, and uncertainty of Life, quicken your Resolutions of
sincere Obedience to all God's Commandments. Fasting. Matthew. 6.16, 17, 18. Acts
10.30.
What time you can spare employ in reading good Books, Prayer and Meditation;
the Friday or Saturday before the Communion, keep as a Fast; but if by reason
of your labor, you find your strength will not hold out, eat a piece of bread
and drink a cup of beer in the Morning, or at Noon, and eat your Supper with
thankfulness, as at other times; and on the day employ an hour or two in
Examination and humble Confession of all your sins, with earnest Supplication
for Pardon, through the Merits of Christ Jesus; to which purpose use the
following Form, or the like, enlarging according to your own particular case.

A general Confession of Sin.
O God, who art light, and in whom is no darkness at all, with whom we can
maintain no communion, unless we walk in the light as thou art in the light, O
God, who though thou art merciful and gracious to Penitents, art a holy and a
just God too, and would by no means acquit the guilty and impenitent, I present
my self before thee at this time with an earnest desire to confess and bewail
my past sins, and to renew my Vows and Resolutions of forsaking them, that I
may find mercy. When I look back upon all the parts of my past life, Ah how do
I find it defiled and polluted by negligence and folly, by wilfulness and
presumption; Ah how often have thou called, and I have refused; how often have
I set at naught thy counsel, and would none of thy reproof: Ah how long have I
resisted thy Spirit, slighted thy Promises, and hardened my self against all the
terrors of God: Ah how often have I broke my solemn Vows and Covenant, and
returned to the same pollutions which I had before endeavored to wash off by
tears and prayers. Lord, when I call to mind -- [Here mention your particular
sin, such especially as are most provoking] my heart would fail me, and I
should sink under the weight of shame and despair, did not thy Gospel raise and
revive me; I believe thy mercy infinite as thy Majesty, O extend that mercy to
me a miserable sinner, who stand in need of mercy not less then infinite; I
believe that thine only Son, the Son of thy bosom, offered up himself a
Sacrifice for sin; O let my Soul be cleansed by his most precious Blood, and
let not my sins be imputed to me: I repent, O my God, and do heartily wish that
these my sins had never been committed. But ah! that cannot be; I am ready
therefore to do all that I can, and this is that thou have promised to accept
through our Mediator, to be sorry for and renounce my sin: To thee belongs the
glory of mercy and forgiveness, to me belongs humility and sorrow; And O! may
this be my business and my delight too, during the time of my pilgrimage; I
will no more hereafter seek my profit, or my pleasure, my ease, or my revenge;
poverty of spirit, meekness, purity of heart, mourning for sin, hunger and
thirst after righteousness, charity and self-denial, these are the things I
will follow after, practice and delight in; this is that I will account my
blessedness. And whatever I have done to any by word or deed, by example or any
other way, if there remain yet any restitution or reparation to be made, I am
ready and willing, O my God, to do it; the business of my following life shall
be by all the ways and means I can, to blot out the remembrance of my past
Offenses, and to advance the glory of God, and the good of Man; and after all,
I desire to glory only in the Lord, to be clothed with humility, and
acknowledge my self an unprofitable servant, and great sinner; and, O do thou
pardon and deliver me from my sins, and confirm and strengthen me in all
goodness, and bring me to everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

On Saturday be very careful of your Conversation, that you quench not the
Spirit by vain pleasures, or too much wordly care: Be much in singing Psalms at
your work, with devout Meditations. If you go to Market, come home as soon as
you can possibly, and be sure not to loose your time in an Alehouse. If you
work at home, leave off two hours sooner then you are wont to do; spend that
time in reading and prayer for the assistance of God's grace and holy Spirit,
to enable you to subdue your sins, and perfect your graces, especially those
you find most defective, and that you may be led unto the ways of holiness and
eternal happiness; also that you may be a worthy partaker of the holy
Sacrament, and that God would make it effectual to those ends. Then look over
your Examination, and if you find your Conscience troubled, go to the Minister,
or some pious Friend, and rest not under Doubts that may be so easily cured.

A Prayer for Grace according to the foregoing Heads.
O Eternal God, the giver of all spiritual grace, and the Author of everlasting
life, thou art pleased to call and invite me by thy Word, and by thy Ministers
to the Communion of the most holy and comfortable Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of my dear Lord; I come therefore, but I come with reverence and
humility, not trusting in my own righteousness, but thy mercy: I am unworthy of
any Temporal blessing, how much more of the gift of thy Son and thy Spirit; but
it is thy good will, it is thy free bounty to bestow grace and everlasting life
upon all those that seek it through the merits and mediation of thy Son Jesus:
grant therefore to me, most gracious God, that I may be made partaker of all
the benefits of his Passion, let me be strengthened in Faith, let my love of
thee, and of my dear Lord, be enlarged, and let the love of my Neighbor dwell
plentifully in me, give me humility and patience, enable me more and more to
mortify all the remains of my Corruption, and make me more fervent and
steadfast in thy Service. Especially grant that I may diligently labor after --
[Here mention such particular Virtues as you need above others.] and never give
over till I find my Soul possessed by them, and transformed from glory. And O
blessed God, who has begun a good work in me, do thou finish and complete it,
and preserve me by thy power through faith unto salvation, that I cleaving
constantly unto thee, and never stray from the faith and obedience of the
Gospel unto my lives end, may be filled with peace and joy in the holy Ghost,
and at last obtain remission of my sins, and an inheritance of glory with all
those that are sanctified through faith in Jesus. All which I beg through the
Agonies and Passion, through the Merits and Intercession of our Eternal High
Priest, Christ Jesus.

On Sunday rise as early, or earlier then on other days; add to your usual or
private Prayers, Petitions for the Spirit of God, spiritual union and communion
with Christ, a new Nature, and sincere Obedience. Read over the Exhortations
before the Sacrament, and as you read consider if you be so prepared as they
require. Indeed the whole Communion Service is an excellent direction for our
preparation to, and meditations at the holy Sacrament; for which cause I would
have you read it over, and make it your Rule, endeavoring to understand it
well; and where you are ignorant, go to your Minister to be more clearly
informed, which will be a means of your joining in it in public with the
greater Devotion.

A short Example of applying the Communion Service, the better to prevent the
wandering of your Mind.
YE that do truly and earnestly repent,] Lord I repent, perfect my repentance:
And are in Love and Charity with your Neighbor,] Increase my Charity; I
forgive, and desire to be forgiven by others. And intend to lead a new Life,
etc.] Assisted by thy grace, I resolve to keep thy Commandments, and walk in
thy holy ways. Draw near with faith,] Confirm my faith that I may receive the
holy Sacrament to my comfort; as I humbly confess, so graciously pardon all my
sins. After this manner you may apply the larger Exhortation before, which I
leave to your own devotion. Then follows the Confession and other Prayers which
you are to join in, and the Prayer of Consecration to these words, Who in the
same night, etc. the rest being proper only to the Minister, who is appointed
alone to consecrate the Bread and Wine for this holy use.

Observe in the Prayer that Christ is said to be but once offered, which was
when he suffered on the Cross; by which Sacrifice he made a full, perfect, and
sufficient Oblation and Satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, that is,
whoever shall repent and believe. Observe also that he commands us to continue
the remembrance of his Death till his coming again; which ought to convince you
of the duty of the frequent coming to the holy Table. The reason of kneeling is
only this being the most solemn time of Prayer, that posture is most proper,
therefore ought not to be a cause of division. As for your private devotion,
observe the following Rules: Employ some time in the Morning to consider how
you must behave your self at the holy Table, how to order your Meditations, and
renewing your Baptismal Covenant, meditating on, and applying the benefits of
Christ's Death for your pardon and reconciliation with God, what sin to be most
humbled for, what grace to beg most earnestly; pray also that no temptation of
the World, the Devil, or your own corrupt Nature, may rob you of the fruit of
this Communion; no sinful, worldly or wandering thoughts trouble you; but that
God would remove whatever may obstruct the operation of his grace. When any of
your Family go along with you to the Sacrament, as you ought to endeavor they
should, when they are of years, and thoroughly instructed; say some Prayer
relating to the Sacrament, besides your ordinary Morning Prayer.

Take care to be at the Church in good time; after Sermon till the Communion
Service begins, spend your time in humble confessing your sins, and
unworthiness of so great a favor. So soon as the Minister begins, leave off
all private Prayer and join with him, with all the attention and zeal you can
possibly: Attend to the Exhortation and apply it to your self, as before
observed; for the Prayers, you must join in them with Devotion. After
Consecration, while the Minister is receiving, and till he comes to you, say
your private Prayer; first pray that God would except all present, and make
them partakers of the benefit of his holy Sacrament. Secondly confess your
sins, and acknowledge that your due desert is death and destruction: Look on
Christ as the only propitiation for your sins; believe that his Death was a
full, perfect, and alsufficient Sacrifice for them, present them to God as
such, desiring that the merits of his Sufferings may be imputed for your
pardon, and his Righteousness for your justification and acceptance with God;
believe firmly that God now offers to renew his Covenant, and grants you
pardon, grace, and glory, if you are faithful on your part, which is forsaking
every sin, and obeying all the commands of God to the utmost of your Power,
desiring to receive it according to the Institution of Christ. Perplex not your
self with nice definitions, believe whatever God has promised, his power is
able to perform, and that Christ, and the benefits of his Death, are
communicated and given to the worthy receivers, in such a manner as it is best
for him, and his spiritual union with Christ most advanced. In the act of
receiving, let your Soul be bowed down with a sense of its unworthiness: Adore
the mercy of God in Christ, desire you may receive the holy Spirit, love God
for his goodness, believe his promises, and resolve to obey his holy commands.
After you have communicated, let the rest of your time, till public Prayers
again, be employed in Prayer for grace to keep your holy Resolutions; for
without God's assistance you can do nothing that is good; praise God for the
great mercy of this Communion, and make earnest Intercession for all Mankind,
especially for their conversion and spiritual welfare, for the destruction of
the power of Sin and Satan, and chastening the Kingdom of Christ, and also for
your Governors in Church and State, for your Friends and Relations, at least
so many of these as time will give you leave to use, saying the rest at home.

Short Prayers, or rather Ejaculations, according to the past Rules.
O God, thou saw me in my blood, and said unto me live, thou saw me in
my pollutions, and thine eye pitied me, and did open the fountain for my
uncleanness. Glory be to thee, O Lord, most good and most high!

O holy and meek Jesus, thou art the Lamb of God that take away the sins of
the World; thou who knew no sin, did become sin for us, O may we be
cleansed from all unrighteousness through thy Blood!

O Savior of the World, may all the ends of the Earth look up unto God through
thee, and be saved; may the Kingdom of Darkness be broken down, and thy
Kingdom, O Christ, be enlarged and established through the whole Earth!

O Lord, I believe that Jesus is the Way, the Truth, and the Light, and
therefore I come unto thee through him, O cast me not off, my Soul thirsts
after thy Salvation: I come to thee in Faith, Repentance and Charity, O receive
me and fill me with grace and comfort, Amen blessed Jesus!

I come, O my God, to renew my Covenant with thee in the blood of Jesus, O
receive me a poor penitent Prodigal! I have wandered from thee, I have hewed out
to my self Cisterns, broken Cisterns that will hold no water, but now my Soul
gaspeth for thee, O thou Fountain of living waters. O give me thy Spirit, that
it may cleanse and refresh me, that it may satisfy the desires of my Soul!

I will be thy Servant, O blessed Jesus, thy Disciple and Follower, O be thou
my Prince and my Savior, be thou my strength and my glory, and let me rejoice
always in thy Salvation! I desire to imitate thee, O holy Jesus, and especially
thy boundless Charity.

I forgive, O let me find forgiveness from the mercy of God, I am ready to do
all the good I can for any one of my fellow Members, and I am sorry I can do no
more; I will weep, I will pray for all that are in distress, and I will feed
and clothe and comfort them as I can, O accept then the mite of thy poor
servant, and remember me in the day of Judgment!

Grant, O God, according to the riches of thy glory, that all we who receive
the Sacrament this day, may be strengthened by the might of thy Spirit in the
inward man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith, that we being rooted
and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that we may be filled with all the fullness of God.

Nor for our selves only do I bow my knees unto thee, thou Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, but also
for the whole Catholic Church; O let the same presence and power^ of thy
Spirit be amongst all those who believe in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
their Lord and ours, build them up in their holy faith, unite them in humility
and love, remove all the scandals and obstacles of righteousness that are in
the midst of thy Church, and support and protect it against all the Adversaries
of the Cross, and all the Enemies of holiness and virtue: Let thy Son Jesus be
glorified in the blameless and exemplary Lives of all that profess his Name;
let profaneness be put to confusion, and Here sie and Error be rooted out, and
let all with one mind and one mouth glorify thee, O God, even the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen, Amen.

O thou in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, guide we beseech thee theirs
whom thou have set over us in thy faith and fear; give them wisdom to rule this
great People, that under them we may live peaceable and quiet lives in all
godliness and honesty; and Lord possess all their Subjects with a due sense of
their Authority, and of the benefits we all reap from them, that we may
dutifully obey them, and cheerfully contribute all we can to the maintenance
and support of Law and Justice in this Realm, that Righteousness and Peace may
through thy blessing flourish amongst us, and our Children after us, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O merciful God and Savior, cause all them that sleep in sin to awake, cause
them to arise from the dead, and let Christ give them light!

O thou God of tender mercies and compassions, hearken to the voice of them
that mourn; break not the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, but bring
forth righteousness unto victory!

O God, who art the God of the fatherless and widow, and judge of the
oppressed, and the Savior of the meek, and poor, and distressed upon the
earth, visit with thy grace and salvation all that are in necessity or
tribulation, and hear them when they cry unto thee for succor, O Lord our
Defense.

O bless my Family and all my Relations, possess them with the fear of God and
Charity toward one another, and make them all love the Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be glory for ever.

O my God, never suffer me to forget thy love, or the love of Jesus, never
suffer me to break my holy Vows, but strengthen me that I may always endeavor
to walk as my Lord walked, and may ever abide in him, and he in me, that I may
be safe through thy protection and grace, and when he who is my life shall
appear, I also may appear with him in glory. Amen, Amen.

Go home with a cheerful gravity, and spend the remaining part of the day
according to the Rule for the Lord's day, only be more strictly careful to keep
up a holy frame of mind, and not by worldly thoughts and light discourse,
grieve the holy Spirit, but improve every good inclination by Prayer, that it
may grow into practice, and endeavor your good Resolutions by meditation and
foreseeing what temptations may assault you, to provide against them; do not go
abroad, but spend that day in devotion, reading and praying with your Family.

Of behavior at Baptism and Marriage.
WHen you are present at the Baptising of Children, attend to what is said; let
it put you in mind of what you vowed your self, and think how well you have
performed it; join with great seriousness in Prayer with the Minister for the
Child, that it may live suitable to this dedication, and enjoy the privileges
of the same. If you are a Surety, think your self obliged to take care that the
Child learn what you undertook for it, for that was the reason of Godfathers
and Godmothers, especially if the Parents die, or are careless worldlings;
otherwise refuse being a Surety, if you think you cannot.

Also at Marriages, Churchings, and the like, avoid all vain behavior, but
join in the Service with Reverence and Devotion, and make particular
applications to your self how you have performed your own duty: when the Bannes
are bid, pray that the marriage may be to the glory of God. These are some
short Directions for your duty to God; I shall now add some for your duty to
your Neighbors.

CHAP. IV.
The Country Man's Duty toward his Neighbor.

SECT. I.
To his Minister.

FIrst for your behavior to your Minister, be very just in paying Tithes and
other Dues to him, Duty to Ministers. Mal. 2.7. Isa. 30.20. Hebr. 13.17. 1 Timothy
5.17. 1 Cor. 6.7. and 9.7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14. Romans 15 27. Gal. 6.6. Matthew.
10.41. and 10.14, 15. Luke 10.16. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 12.13.
and that in obedience to God, who has taught us by his holy Apostle, That they
who wait at the Altar, that is, do the duty of a Minister, should live by the
Altar; and if they minister to us spiritual things, we ought to minister to
them in temporal things; for by attending the Ministry they are made incapable
of gaining a livelihood by other means.

Secondly, Be very respectful in your behavior to him, never speaking rudely,
but believe, in honoring your Minister you please God; and let not any
personal failing make you neglect your Duty, for it is not his person only, but
chiefly his office you must respect him for, and God will reward you for it:
Supposing the worst, that he has faults, consider that he, as well as you, is
liable to the same infirmities and temptations; nay more, for Satan is vigilant
to ensnare him, because by it he hopes to do more mischief, either by his ill
example, or by causing him not to be esteemed, and so rendering his Ministry
less effectual: Therefore to destroy what in you lies these designs of the
Devil, be always more ready to cover, then expose his faults.

In case of doubts, or hard places of Scripture, advise with him, and you will
find great advantages and quiet to your mind: pray earnestly for him, which is
a duty you may find often recommended in Scripture; perhaps your neglect in
this, is one cause of his labors being no more profitable to you. Pray for
God's blessing on the Minister, that it may be successful both for the saving
himself, and them that hear him, that both his Life and Doctrine may be holy,
and fit for imitation; the more defective he is, the more earnest let your
Prayers be that the grace of God may supply his defects; but if his Vices are
very notorious and scandalous to his Office, after meek and frequent
admonitions, let some of the chiefest Parishioners join and complain to the
Bishop, and proving your Accusation by two or three grave and honest Witnesses,
endeavor to have him removed, as it is likely he will be, if your complaint be
well proved. If he amends be glad, and forget all past Faults; for where God
pardons, as he does on repentance and reformation, Man ought much more, who is
himself also a sinner. If he is deprived, and the choice is left to the
Parishioners, be careful to choose well, especially one of a good Life, and a
diligent Preacher of sound Doctrine, and Catechizing. If it depends on a
particular Person, be very earnest in your Prayers to God that he may be guided
to make a good choice. But how bad soever your Minister is, do not think that
will excuse you in any particular of your duty, but you must continue to pay
your Tithes faithfully, which are his by the same Law that preserves your right
to what you profess; and to defraud him of any part thereof is Robbery and
Sacrilege. Give him no just cause of complaint, but be ready to respect him,
and do him and his Family all the good conveniently you can, praying that his
Doctrine may be sound and profitable, though his Example is not. I do not fear
to promise that such a behavior will be both acceptable to God, and profitable
to your self, and it may be in time, he may by your Prayers and mild Behavior
grow better. If he is very bad, I do not prohibit your going sometimes to
another, but for the most part keep to your own Parish.

SECT. II.
His Duty to his Superiors.

SEcondly for your Behavior to your Superiors, be careful to do your Duty to
them. Now Kings and Governors being so far removed above you, and it being so
hard for you to find the truth of their Actions, and harder to understand the
reasons of them, you must avoid all thoughts and discourse, more then heartily
praying, Duty to Superiors. Romans 137. 1 Pet. 2.13.14. 1 Timothy 2 1, 2. Exodus
22.28. Jude 8. Acts 23.5. Eccl. 10.20. Prove. 24.21. Dan. 13.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
-- 6.7.8.9. Acts 5.29. and 16.37, 38, 39. and 22.25, 26, 27, 28. -- 25.10, 11.
Lev. 19.12. Jer. 4.2. Exodus 20.26. -- 25.1. Prove. 14.25. Deuteronomy. 19.16, 19, 20,
21. Prove. 19.5. Deuteronomy. 16.19, 20. Prove. 17 15. Lev. 19.15.
that God would direct them to do what is most for his glory, and good of his
Church, remembering the general Rule, To obey them in all their just Commands;
but no Command is so, that is not agreeable to the Laws of God, or Laws of the
Land: But since you do not know how far all those Laws extended, it is
sufficient you do your duty to the best of your knowledge, without by-ends or
interest, and what you cannot obey with a good Conscience, patiently suffer for
a good Conscience, and you shall have your reward in Heaven.

If you happen to live in a time of War and Persecution, or great Taxes, do not
rail at your Governors for these things, nor inquire after any other cause,
besides sin; for be assured that is the general, if not constant procurer of
trouble; for God being infinitely good, would certainly perform all his promise
in giving temporal, as well as spiritual good things, did not our sins provoke
his anger, and make it necessary to call us to Repentance by correction, when
we abuse Prosperity; therefore when ever you find your self unwilling to pay
Taxes, or groan under the burden by reason of your Necessities, only think
this is the just punishment of my sins, of my prodigality, intemperance,
idleness, neglect of God's service, and the like; and so resolve to amend and
exhort your Neighbors to the same, when you hear them complain; and pray to
God for pardon of sin and mercy, either to put an end to the Miseries of the
Nation, or to sanctify them to the subduing sin, and increasing holiness, and
give you and others patience to support them in a Christian manner. For
inferior Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, and the like, if you are ever
called before them, come with reverence and humility: If it is for a Crime,
consess if guilty, and beg pardon; if innocent, modestly justify your self. If
called to be a Witness, either by Oath or Word, be strict to the truth, with
the greatest exactness you can possibly, and neither to serve your self nor
friend be tempted to give false or deceitful Testimony: for it is a wilful sin,
and of a most heinous nature, and what may so wound your Conscience, as to make
you unhappy all your life time.

If you are your self called to any Office, as Constable, Churchwarden,
Overseer of the Poor, or the like, before you venture on your Office, endeavor
to understand your Duty in it, and what it is you swear and undertake to do;
grudge not to buy a Book for your Instruction, or go to your Minister and
desire him to inform you, and be careful to observe, and to the best of your
power and knowledge perform what you undertake faithfully, more to please God
then Man; and be not afraid of doing your duty, for God will protect you, and
the Laws defend you in it.

SECT. III.
To his Landlord.

THirdly, your Duty to your Landlord is, first, to endeavor to pay your Rent
honestly, and so soon as conveniently you can: If your bargain is hard, in mild
and humble terms acquaint your Landlord, and take some grave and honest
Neighbor with you, to intercede for an abatement, and give an account of the
reasons of it: If you obtain it, be content, and let it not tempt you to insist
on another abatement, but be satisfied in a good honest Bargain; and consider
your Landlord, though he has more then you, yet has so many more occasions for
it, that he can no more afford to let too cheap, then you to pay too dear; and
it is a great fault to be always repining and murmuring when it may be you know
not where to better your self. But if indeed your Landlord be severe, as soon
as you lawfully can, leave your Farm, but do not by running away endeavor to
defraud any, but pay honestly to the best of your Ability, and trust God for a
supply of your wants, who will some way or other provide for you if you serve
him, and are industrious and willing to work. Indeed, few Landlords but will
consider such, and take care of them some way or other; or your Neighbors if
they know you faithful, will not surely see you starve; and food and raiment,
with a quiet Conscience, is far better then riches, and honors, with a
troubled mind. However, set your Landlord be good or bad, behave your self
toward him with respect and humility, not answering rudely, nor refusing any
small thing he requires; but if he tempt you to sin, as by forcing you to drink
or act against your Conscience, there be very resolute in refusing to comply
with him; only answer civilly, and get out of the way of temptation so soon as
you can.

SECT. IV.
His Duty to his Wife and Children.

YOur Duty to your Wife is, first, to instruct her in her duty to God and her
Neighbor, Duty of Husbands to their Wives and Children. Coloss. 3.19. 1 Pet.
3.7. Ephesians. 5.25, 28, 29, 31, 33.
if she is ignorant; if she is good, to encourage by kindness to continue so:
if she is froward, to bear with her weakness, and by mild reproof to convince
her of her fault; and whatever faults she has, endeavor to reform her by your
example, kind precepts, and gentle usage, but eespecially by earnest Prayer for
her Conversion: Be not too severe in expecting more work then she is able to
perform, but be content if she is diligent, and not wastful; allow her
convenient assistance according to your ability, but especially in time of
sickness; also such desent Cloths as is necessary for her and your Children,
and if she is a good Huswife, and not given to gossipping, be not too strict in
requiring an account of what Money passes through her hands.

For your Duty to your Children, To Children. Deuteronomy 6.6, 7. Psalm. 78.5, 7. Prove.
22.6, 15. Ephesians. 6.4. Prove. 29.15, 17. and 13.24. and 19.18. Coloss. 3 21.
I have already directed you, how you should catechize and teach them daily, or
so often as you can, and call upon them, and while young, you or your wife hear
them at least twice a day say their Prayers: if it be possible set them to
School betimes, and at least learn to read English well; work the harder, and
spend the less, to compass so great a good for your poor Children, who have
Souls capable of mortal glory, as well as the Children of Kings and Nobles.
When they come home, keep them as much as you can to their Books, that so they
may have learned that perfect while they are young, and so be the sooner able
to help you in your business; for it is a great neglect in such as you to let
your Children loose their time while young; and then so soon as they begin to
be able to help you, you grudge the time for their School, and so the poor
Children receive great prejudice, whereas did you keep them close to School and
to their Books in their Childhood, reading would be soon attained, and they at
liberty for other Employments; and a little care in making them spend the
Lord's day, and a quarter of an hour on other days in reading, would both keep
and improve what they had learned. It will be of good use if you can afford to
let them learn to write, and do them great service, and may help their
advancement if they are Servants or Tradesmen, or in following Husbandry it
self. Be very strict in breeding them honestly, not suffering them to swear or
lie, or take God's Name in vain; to be rude or quarrelsome with their Brothers
and Sisters, or the Servants. When they commit any fault reprove them first
gently, and by plain Arguments convince them of the greatness of the sin and
punishment it deserves, should God deal with them as in justice he might. If
this does not do, but they continue in their fault, reprove them more severely,
and leave no means untried to reform them: Endeavor by often calling to them,
when at work or at meals, to make them love your company, and though you are
never so poor, do not suffer them to be rude and disobedient, but make them
show you respect, which will keep them in better obedience when they grow up,
and dispose them better to respect their Masters and Superiors; for one great
cause, I verily believe of the barbarity, rudeness, and wickedness of the
poorer sort, has been the neglect of their Parents in not teaching them to show
a due respect to themselves, endeavor to make them sensible of the great
happiness of God's blessing, that without it all their labor is in vain, that
so they may have a holy fear in all they do of offending God, and an earnest
desire to please him, a quiet trust and dependence on his fatherly care, if
they do their duty; this will make their Labors sweet, and their Minds
cheerful. Those you design should follow your own Vocation, it is sufficient
that they can read and write English and instruct them in their Calling. Be
careful to keep them from Alehouses and sinful Sports, and encourage them to
be painful in their own labor, for any that will not be one at any sort of
work with their Servants, and as early in the field as they, is not fit for an
Husbandman: Therefore to this, nor any other Employment, do not force your
Child's inclination, but so soon as capable, let him make his own choice. If
you design him for a Trade, reading, writing, and casting account are
necessary; choose an honest Master, one that fears God, who is most likely to
deal well with you, and keep your Child to his Duty. If you are not able to set
him to Apprentice, or he rather chooses Service, be careful to place him in an
honest orderly Family, exhort him to be humble, and endeavor to deserve a good
place before he aspires to it, to be respectful and diligent in his business,
and faithful in word and deed. There is an excellent Book writ Mr. Lucas's Duty
of Servants.
to teach the Duty of Servants, which you would do well to provide him with.
Whether he is Servant or Apprentice, do not hearken to all his idle Complaints,
but encourage him to patience: though if you think them very just, you may
endeavor to help them as far as the Law allows. Endeavor to maintain Love
among your Children, and keep them, while at home, as much as you can in your
own presence.

SECT. V.
To his Servants.

YOur Duty to your Servants consists principally in keeping them to their Duty,
and paying them their wages honestly; if you will have them do you faithful
Service, pray believe the best way is to teach them the fear of God. To which
end do not neglect to have them all present when you pray and read to your Wife
and Children, at least Morning and Night. See they say their own Prayers daily,
Genesis 18.18, 19. Josh. 24.15. Psalm. 101.9, 10. Lev. 25.49. Ephesians. 6.9. Coloss.
4.1. 1 Timothy 5.8. Job 31.13, 14.
and call on them to spend the Lord's day, and other leisure times, in reading
and learning their Catechize. If they cannot read, encourage them to ask you
Questions as they are at work with you, and convince them of the great comfort
of knowing and doing their duty. And since they cannot read, if they will not
attend to Instruction, they must be wilfully ignorant of the means of their
Salvation, which is a damnable sin. Indeed it is a great shame, that any that
live in a Christian Country, should be so ignorant, as I fear many amongst us
are. Call on them to hear Sermons, and let them miss no opportunity of public
Worship when you can spare them. If they are subject to swear or lie, to be
drunk or talk immodestly, admonish them gravely and sharply, but if they reform
not speedily, turn them away, and let not any worldly consideration tempt you
to keep them, for if you do, your Children are in danger of being infected with
such ill Examples, and you bring a Curse on your Family. Potiphar's House was
blessed for Joseph's sake; how know you but yours may be less prosperous for a
wicked Servant: therefore when you have good ones prize them much, and use them
kindly.

Next their Duty to God, keep to the duty of their Service, allow them
convenient rest and wholesome food, but do not indulge them in idleness, nor
careless trifling in their work, but keep them to a full Employment, and see
they follow it diligently, and do it with as great perfection as they can. It
is far better to allow them now and then an hour of recreation, then to let
them go on in a slothful way, though they always seem employed; keep them to
their work while at it, and then if they have spare time, they may do something
for themselves. Do not suffer your Servant to be rude and surly to your
Children, Neighbors, or Strangers: Good manners is a good preparative for
Religion; and we see where People are least civilized, how Ignorance, Cruelty
and Ill Nature renders them almost barbarous; therefore be often telling your
Children and Servants, how commendable a thing it is to be gentle and affable,
always ready to do a good Office, give good words, and pay respect to their
betters. I recommend this the more earnestly, because it is so common a fault
among those of that rank to be rude to their Superiors, and often to bear a
secret envy and hate to those above them, and be so morose, as not to give a
civil Answer, or tell the way to one in distress: Avoid such faults, and
believe me, by your mild and kind behavior you will find love and many other
kindnesses: Suffer not your Servants to be with such as are vicious, but only
such as live an innocent orderly life; if any have Sweethearts, so soon as you
discover it, acquaint their Parents; if promised, by no means endeavor to
break it off, if they will not own their Affection, yet keep Company, it is best
to part them, or at least often tell them of the folly of deceiving one
another, and the shame and danger of that abominable sin of Uncleanness. Pay
them quarterly their wages, and give them what other reward you can afford, and
they deserve. If your Servant marries from you, let them not go away empty
according to to the Precept in Deuteronomy, Chap. 15.13. If they can change
yours for a better Service, more to their Preferment, do not oppose it, but
trust to God's Providence, and do not endeavor to obstruct the greater profit
with others which you cannot afford to give them your self; only if it is a
disorderly wicked Family that they would go to, you ought to tell them the
dangers and inconveniences, and advise them against it. Do not turn away your
Servants for every trifle, if they are such as fear God, nor keep those that do
not, though they may do you good Service, but prefer God's glory to your own
benefit; those you cannot reform part with.

SECT. VI.
To his Neighbors.

YOur Duty to your Neighbors is to be ready to do them good Offices, To his
Neighbors. These. 5.11. Hebr. 3.13. 1 Cor. 15.23. Prove. 12.26. and 23.20, 21.
and 28.19. 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. Lev. 19.7. Prove. 25.12. and 28.23. Ephesians. 5.11.
advise them when they ask it to the best of your skill; reprove them for their
sins and follies, but with so great meekness and kindness, that they may see it
is a sense of your duty to God, and love of their Souls, that puts you upon
doing it, therefore do it always in private. Whenever you go to see your
Neighbors, endeavor not to part without saying something that tends either to
his or your own good, being as willing to learn as to teach, and so encourage
one another in the ways of God, often talking and thinking of the blessed end
of all your labor, when you shall come to Heaven; this will comfort your
weariness, and make all your troubles light. Be ready also to administer
comfort and help to your Neighbors temporal wants, which will mightily
convince them that your reproof is not out of pride, or to reproach him for his
faults, but real Christian affection: Of this sort of kindness is visiting the
sick, comforting the afflicted, being ready to help if your Neighbor is behind
hand with his Land, and getting in his Harvest; not that you are obliged to
neglect your own Business for another sake, but only when you are first served
your self, or the inconvenience you will suffer is very small, and the good you
can do your Neighbor is great, then you ought to venture your own small danger
to help your Neighbors great loss; and if he should be so ungrateful to forget
it, God will not. If you see your Neighbor's House fall under his burden help
him up; or his Cattle stray out of the way, carry them back, and avoid that ill
nature of pounding his Cattle on every little slight Trespass. Be very careful
of your own Fences, advise your Neighbor to do the like, but if often warnings
will do no good, and his Cattle do you any considerable Damage, you may in a
lawful way endeavor to be made amends; but let this be done with a quiet
Spirit, without brawling and bitterness; and if he will refer it to your
Minister, or some honest Neighbor, go not to Law if you can avoid it, but be
sure do not fall into an Enmity, and whatever your Adversary is, be you
reconciled, and willing to ask and give pardon. If People went to Law or
Reference with such Spiritual Love, only desiring what is just, Differences
would be much easier made up then now they are. If any of your Neighbors
thrive more then you, do not repine or envy them, nor speak slighting, as too
many are apt to do of those they envy; but consider if their thriving come from
God's Blessing, you ought to rejoice, since he knows what is best for every
one; but if he has his Portion in this World, he better deserves your pity then
your envy; and pray that God would not do so by you, but give you such a
Portion only as might advance you in your way to Heaven, where the only durable
Riches are laid up for those that love God. On the contrary, if any of your
Neighbors fail in the World, and grow poor, do not rejoice that you may be
more considerable by their fall; nor rash imputing their Misfortune to the
Judgment of God for their sins: For though it is true that is originally the
cause of all Evil, yet sometimes God corrects those he loves for his Glory, to
manifest those Graces he has wrought in them, to advance them to greater
Perfection, or to perfect their Repentance.

SECT. VII.
His Duty to the Poor.

THE last Duty I shall mention is what you owe to the Poor, To the Poor. Deuteronomy.
15.9. James 2.15. Prove. 7.5. and 11.24. 1 John 3.17.
and that is something, be your Condition never so mean; not that I think a
poor Man is obliged to Relieve all that come: but when you see very great and
present want, let not such a Man depart without a piece of Bread; a good Word
and a Prayer to God to supply those Wants you cannot: this Charity, if sincere,
and designed to please and obey God, not Man, you need not fear will make you
poorer. When you know poor Workmen and Housekeepers are in great necessity,
speak to your rich Neighbors, and recommend their Case, and get something for
them if you can. Teach your Children and Servants to be compassionate of the
Poor, and not despise and rail at them. When you give a small Alms to relieve
their Bodily wants, minister Comfort to their Souls; reprove them gently if you
hear them Swear; try their Knowledge, and if Ignorant, teach them a necessary
Truth, exhort them to love God, to frequent the Church, and be contented with
their Condition. But where any lusty young People take up a Trade of Bedding
out of Idleness, chide them sharply, give them no Relief, unless in great
Extremity.

Thus, I think, I have given you some short Directions for your behavior to
most of those Persons you are like to be much concerned with; for your
particular Duties of a Christian Life, I refer you to other godly Books,
particularly The Whole Duty of Man, where you may be instructed in the several
Duties you owe and are to practice in relation to God, your Neighbor, and your
self; the danger of the contrary Vices, and how you are to overcome them. And
surely now, they that understand the value of their Souls, will not grudge
buying a Book or two to teach them the way to an Eternal Kingdom, the Bible,
and two or three other Books well chose, often read, and faithfully practiced,
may be as profitable, if not more, then reading of many Volumes. In the choice
of your Books advise with some pious Friend, or your Minister.

SECT. VIII.
Of just Dealing.

FOR your behavior in Markets or Fairs, in buying or selling, Of just Dealing:
1 Timothy 6.6. and 9.10. Prove. 28.20. 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Ephesians 5 5 Prove. 21.6. Levit.
25.14. Ezekiel. 23.15. Numb. 5.6, 7.
fear not being undone by honest dealing, not think that Almighty God stands in
need of Deceits or Lies to make you rich, if he sees Riches good for you;
therefore act in these things uprightly, and trust in his Providence, and you
shall be rewarded in this Life, or a better. Sell be sure by an exact and
honest Weight, and Measure; use not many words for fear there should be sin in
them; but speak the Truth, without any Equivocation, whereby your Neighbor may
be deceived, but rather bear the loss of the faults of your Goods your self. Do
not exact on the Ignorance or Necessities of your Neighbor, either in buying
or selling, but be willing to allow, as you expect a reasonable gain. Before or
after the Market, if you have time, go to Church if there is any Service there;
but be sure you avoid spending much time in Alehouses and Drinking. If your
Affairs make it necessary to meet those you have Business with, I do not forbid
you going to a public House, but charge you, as you tender your eternal
welfare, and I may add, though it is as nothing after the other, as you love
your temporal welfare, not to drink to excess, nor spend more time in such
places then your business requires. If you find you cannot command your self
when in the way of Temptation, you must not go at all to such Houses, nor in
the way of drinking, be the Temporal inconvenience never so great, till you
have got more mastery of your self.

SECT. IX.
The Dames Duty to her Husband.

AS for the Duties of the Dame or Mistress, in relation to God, Wives Duty to
Husbands. Ephesians. 5 22, 23, 24. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 2.12. Titus 2
4 5. Prove. 12 4. and 27.15. and 21.19. Prove. 31 Chapt.
they differ very little, only she is to give place in all things to her
Husband. But in case he cannot read, or is from home, I see no inconvenience,
but rather good, for her to read some good Prayer to her Children and Servants;
or if she has a Son able to do it in his Father's absence, let him do it. For
Instruction she must take care of her Children and Maids, and often call on
them to do their Duty; see they pray privately twice a day, besides being
present at Family Prayers, and take care they do it with reverence and
affection, and not for forms sake, and saying the words without understanding
the sense. Let her keep her Children, whilst young, constantly to School, and
when they come home, make them con their Books, get by heart their Catechism,
Chapters, and Psalms, for this will make them come forward apace, so that by
that time they are able to work, they will be perfect; whereas if you neglect
to call on them at home, they will be so long learning to read, that both the
charge and trouble will be much more. Let the Girls, who are more especially
under the Woman's government, be set to work so soon as capable, and learn to
knit, spin, sew, and do the affairs of the House as they are able, and suffer
them not to refuse the meanest work in their Father's House, so they will come
to understand how it is to be done, and be fitter for Service, and to manage a
House of their own. If you can afford it, let them learn to work good
Plain-work, and to write, and keep them to be very neat and cleanly in all they
do, to rise early, sleep and eat moderately, and be industrious, and with God's
blessing such Maids need not fear getting an honest Service, and are fitted to
make good Wives, when their Parents think fit: be especially careful to prevent
fondness in your Daughters and Maids, and often set before them the monstrous
deformity of an immodest Woman, and the great Beauty and Prudence of a chaste,
modest, humble Maid. As your Daughter ought not to marry without your consent,
so do not constrain her where she has an aversion, nor cross her Affection too
much if the Man is sober and honest.

While at your work in the House or Field, be often saying some profitable
thing, causing your Children to repeat what they have learnt by heart, and
instead of idle Ballads, let them learn Psalms to sing at their work, so shall
your House be a little Temple of God, and a Blessing accompany all your Labor,
and make you both happy and contented here, and dispose you for Eternal
Happiness in the World to come, which is so great a Hope, that nothing but sad
Experience could make one think it possible, that they that pretend to believe
the Truth of Eternal Glory and Happiness, can be so miserably negligent in the
pursuit of, and endeavors after it.

Having in the foregoing Directions often Exhorted you to think of God, and
entertain holy Meditations and Ejaculations at your work, I will here give you
some few Examples, not to use in a set formal manner, but for the direction and
quickening to enlarge as your Devotion directs.

Meditations and Ejaculations proper for several Occasions.
IN a Morning, when you find your Cattle well, or have hopes of seasonable
Weather, admire God's goodness, and look not on these Blessings as the Course
of Nature, or what you have a right to, but as the immediate gift of God, and
as if they were newly bestowed on you; and say in your heart -- Lord, I thank
thee for all thy gifts, it is thy bounty that first gave them, and the same
bounty preserve them; O give me grace to use them to thy glory, that I may
never abuse them to sin or vanity, to dishonor thee or hurt my Neighbor, but
be a faithful Steward of all those Talents committed to my charge, that so I
may find Mercy in the Day of our Lord. -- If your Cattle is sick or die, or the
Weather unseasonable, consider it is the Mercy of God, that you lose not all,
or that you had not such losses sooner, for should he withdraw his protection,
you might be by the malice of the Devil (who hates all those that serve God)
reduced to the condition of Job, and let such Accidents convince you of the
great necessity of God's Blessing, and how vain all your labor or care is
without it; not being able to cause a fair day when you want it, or restore a
poor Beast to health; here you may thus meditate -- Lord, thy will be done,
giving or taking what thou have given, thy Name be blessed; I thank thee for all
thy past Mercies, and submit to my present losses, sanctify them to my profit,
my sins deserve worse punishments; whatever thou recallest, let it not be any
degree of grace, or thy favor, for so long as I am thy reconciled Child, I
cannot be miserable; but without thy love I am most wretched could I possess
the whole World; for what shall it profit to gain the whole World and lose my
Soul.

When you begin a new work, dedicate it to God, and say -- Lord, I desire to do
all to thy glory, all for thy love, and in obedience to thy will; bless this my
labor that it may prosper, and grant that I may first seek thy Kingdom and its
Righteousness, and have such a portion of Temporal Blessings as thou see best
for me.

If you are sick or in pain, look on it as sent from God, and submit to it,
saying -- Lord keep me from sin, the worst of evils; the more the Outward man
is afflicted, the more I beg thy grace to support my Spirit with Faith and
Patience. --

When you hear talk of Wars and Trouble in Church or State, or are sad at the
thoughts of Divisions among Christians. Remember that God is infinite in
goodness, wisdom, and power, and will bring good out of all. When you find your
self affected with these Thoughts, retire to pray for your fellow Creatures, or
at least at your work sometimes lift up your heart to God, to pray that he
would enlighten all Mankind, that they may both believe and obey the Gospel;
that he would unite the Divisions among Christians, and reform whatever he
found amiss in their Belief and Practice, that all Christian People might have
a true Christian Spirit, a Spirit of Love and Charity, proving their
Discipleship by their Love to one another, that so God might be worshipped in
Spirit and Truth, to his glory and their salvation.

When you lie under any Temptations, say to this effect -- Lord let thy power
be magnified in my weakness, suffer me not to be tempted above my strength,
take away the Temptation, or enable me to resist and overcome it.

Before you read the holy Scripture, pray that God would assist you with his
enlightening grace, that so your Faith may rest, not on the Wisdom of Men, but
on the Power of God, that you may rightly understand and faithfully practice
what you know, that so obeying the Commands, you may inherit the Promises of
the Gospel, and that the steadfast belief of God's Word may be your Comfort and
Support against all Temptations of the World, the Devil, or your own
Corruptions. Before you go into company, or before you reprove or advise any,
think how you may do most good, and best please God, -- say, Lord be present
with me, sanctify my Heart and Tongue which I dedicate to thee, and give me
both courage and wisdom to speak in due season, for thy glory and my Neighbors
good; and let thy Spirit both assist me, and supply my defects by its powerful
working on the heart of my Neighbor.

As you sow your Ground, you may from thence draw a Meditation of Death and
Resurrection, of the necessity of grace and good works; for as you must do your
part to manure the Grounds, and sow the Seed, and you expect seasonable Weather
to make it bring forth; so must you do your endeavors to prepare your heart to
receive the grace of God, and by Prayer to procure his blessed Spirit, by which
aid alone you are enabled to do the will of God. -- Lord, as without thy
blessing all my labor is in vain, so if thy grace does not assist me, I am all
weakness. O pity thy poor Creature, the work of thy hands, and both sow the
Seed of true Faith in my heart, and water it with thy grace, that it may bring
forth the Fruits of a Holy Life.

When you see Harvest getting in, you may meditate to this effect -- O Lord,
grant that I may be as a fruitful Field ready for Harvest, that so when Death
or Judgment comes, I may rejoice, and not mourn, that my work being done I
shall ever rest, not only from labor but from sin, and be perfect in loving
and serving God.

If you hear profane People talk, or are tempted to doubt in any point of
Faith, say -- Lord I believe, help my unbelief. I believe, and am sure that thy
Word is most true, and that my doubts are only the effects of my own weakness;
Lord I believe whatever thou have revealed, I renounce all my Errors, and beg
thou will either pardon my ignorant Mistakes, or give me light to discover and
forsake them; thy Word is perfect, I believe and desire to obey it.

If you see any in a mean or miserable condition, think of God's goodness to
you, and say -- Who is it that made me to differ, and what have I that I have
not received; and if I have received it, why do I glory as if I had not
received it; let my Brother's misery make me thankful to God, and charitable to
him, that he be not tempted to envy my Prosperity.

If you find your self inclined to discontent, say, -- Lord it is enough for me
that I may but love thee, and be loved by thee. Shall I complain of an ill
Nights lodging in an Inn, when I shall soon be at my Fathers House, and have
there as large a share of glory and happiness as my Soul is capable of? How can
I be more honorable than to be a Child of God, who is Lord of Heaven and
Earth? How can I be richer than to have peace here, and glory hereafter? Let me
instead of murmuring, admire the great goodness of my heavenly Father, and
rejoice in my Neighbor's Happiness; for in Heaven no one envies another, but
is made more happy by the Felicity of the rest.

FINIS.

