A Further ESSAY FOR THE AMENDMENT OF THE Gold and Silver COINS. WITH THE
Opinion of Mr. Gerrard de Malynes, who was an Eminent Merchant in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, concerning the Standard of England.

LONDON, Printed by T. Hodgkin, and Sold by Richard Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1695.

A Further ESSAY ON Gold and Silver Coins.
MEeting with a Book, Entitled, An Essay for the Amendment of Silver Coins,
which being written by the particular Directions of the Lords of the Treasury,
made me more Curious to dive into the Affair.

And upon a strict Survey I found that Mr. Lowndes, like a very Ingenious
Gentleman, has taken a great deal of Pains by informing us, what Records and
Indentures he has consulted, and what assistance he has had from the Masters of
the Mint, to demonstrate the Standard of the Gold and Silver used in several or
most of the preceding Reigns: And he has also showed, how much we have been
imposed upon by the cunning Artificers of the Times; as Goldsmiths, Merchants,
etc. And furthermore, whence the word Sterling took its Derivation, viz. from a
Star or Asterism, impressed thereon, or from the Jews Star, or from
Sterling-Castle in Scotland, etc.

Mr. Gerrard de Malynes, who was an eminent Merchant in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, tells you, That the Standard of the Sterling-Moneys of England, had its
first Birth from a Place so called, being Coined there by Osbright, a Saxon
King, which is about Eight Hundred Years ago, at which time an Ounce of that
Silver was divided into twenty Pieces, and so esteemed as Twenty-Pence, and in
that manner continued until Henry the Sixth's Time.

For what reason the Standard came afterward to be altered, I referr you to
his Book written upon this Subject, Entitled, The Canker of England 's
Commonwealth, being one of the best things extant in its kind.

I must confess, that I am so far of an Opinion with Mr. Lowndes, That the
Standard ought to be altered, for to keep up a certain equality of Trade and
Traffic between us and other Countries, not suffering an over-balancing of
Foreign Commodities with our Home Commodities, or in buying more than we can
vend: For thereby our Treasure will be exhausted, which is the Life of Trade
and Sinews of War: To this known Disease therefore of the Body Politic, some
Public Remedy should necessarily be devised and applied, then sublata Causa,
the Cause being removed, the ill Effect and Consequences thereof will cease.

It is to be considered, That the transporting of our ready Money or Bullion,
makes our Home Commodities sell cheap, and the Foreign Commodities dear,
wherein chiefly consists the over-balancing; so that in effect we give both
Money and Commodities to have Foreign Commodities in exchange for them.

Some Gentlemen who has made it their business for some Years last past, to
melt down all the milled and broad Moneys, will tell you, That altering the
Standard will lessen the Reputation of our Trade abroad, as though all the
Foreign Trade depended upon the exchange of Money. To which Objection I
answered, That that Trade which solely depends upon the exchange of English
Moneys had better be broken off and omitted than supported; as Instance in the
Trade which was maintained for several Years betwixt England and France, where,
by Computation, it was made appear, That the French King received in Specie of
English Money, at least a Million per Annum; and by melting it down into his
own National Coin made at least Ten per Cent. more advantage of it; so that it
never made any return back to us. By which indirect Practices abroad and the
sinister Dealings at home by our own crafty Operators; it is this that has
benumbed our Trade and thrown it into a Lethargick Dilemma.

I humbly conceive, that since such indirect Means has been used both at Home
and Abroad to exhaust our Treasures, and the necessity of supplying the
Exigencies of the War all along has obliged us to transmit our Moneys into
other Countries, that if speedy Remedy is not taken to supply these present
Calamities, the Government will become Apoplective.

But as we are now under an undeniable necessity for to call in the Public
Plate of the Kingdom, so to supply the present Exigency of Affairs, it will be
consistent with the Honor and Interest of this Kingdom to examine and compare
our Weight with that of other Kingdoms, and the Fineness of our Standard with
that of other Countries; and if we differ not in proportion between the Gold
and Silver, then may our exchange run at one Price both for Gold and Silver,
taking the Denomination according to the Valuation of the Moneys of each
Country; and hereby shall we find how much fine Gold or Silver our Pound
Sterling contains, and what quantities of other Moneys of the Netherlands,
etc. have to counter value the same in the like Weight and Fineness to ours,
whether it be by the Pound, Ducket, or Dollar, giving always Value for Value,
which was formerly called Par. This course of Exchange being abused, and of
late Years become a Trade in rising and falling in Price, according to Plenty
or Scarcity of Moneys, in regard of distance of Places it has become
predominant, and does overruled the course of Commodities, and thereby becomes
the efficient cause of the over-balancing of Commodities beforementioned, and
consequently the decrease of our Wealth, and the exportation of our Moneys, as
by demonstrative Reason have already been showed.

As Mr. Lowndes has well observed, that it would be absolutely necessary to
limit the Exportation of Bullion to a certain Sum, which shall be sufficient
to support our Army; yet it would have been much better, had he proposed and
moved for a free Port in Flanders, Spain, and other Confederate Countries,
where we might have Bullion in lieu of our Commodities.

And whereas Money will still be the measure of Trade, as it is valued by the
Public Authority, being reduced to a certainty, whereby it does not only give
a set Price unto all other Metals, but receives (as it were by repercussion) a
Price in it self has made. So that as that studious Gentleman (who has made his
Remarks upon Mr. Lowndes's Book) says, that advancing five Shillings to six
will in no wise advance Trade, by reason you cannot buy therewith more Goods
than you could formerly. I will agree with the Gentleman, if we are to buy
Foreign Goods, there may be some tolerable Plea for it, because they look upon
our Money, in reference to the Value in Weight, and not in Denomination: But it
is otherwise at Home, from common Experience; for I have not yet found, but
that if I had any Moneys that was indifferently good, upon paying down I could
buy as cheap as formerly.

The second Assertion, that lowering the Standard does sink the Value of the
Gentlemen's Estates in the Country; for though they received 100 l. per annum in
the new Coin, they have in effect but 70 l. so they lose 30 l. per Cent.

For the Truth of this Assertion, I do appeal to the Country Gentlemen
themselves, whether in the Year last past they met with those Inconveniences,
as to pay away 100 l. at the Rate of 70. And when there is a prospect of
receiving better Moneys, there can be no such loss. I think the Gentleman need
not be farther answered, than by his own Argument, in saying, that the Price of
Moneys is the measure of Trade.

If so, then I hope when the Price is reduced to a certainty by Public
Authority, it ought to be a Rule for all People to be governed by; as for
example, If the Government should enact that Pieces of Leather should have the
Public Stamp or Impression, for to go for a Penny, though those Pieces are not
worth one Farthing, according to the intrinsic Value, yet they may answer the
end for which they were made, in going for a Penny, to supply the present
Exigencies of Affairs; and as necessity is the Mother of Invention, it ought to
put us on embracing such Expedients as may be useful to our present
Emergencies; as Instance in the Case of the late King James, who called in all
the Plate, and the best Moneys in Ireland, by which means he debarred all his
Protestant Subjects from holding any Trade or Commerce in any other Coin than
Brass Moneys, and that was advanced to an exorbitant Rate; yet they were well
supported by, and as long as it continued at a Price certain, it became Current
in Payment. But upon this Revolution of Government, we were under a necessity
of Calling in those Copper-Moneys, so it proved very detrimental to such who
had great quantities of it by them. And in the same manner it would be with us,
if the late Project should take of that Gentleman who has proposed to advance
the Standard for two Years and no longer; for nothing more preserves the
reputation of Moneys than keeping it to a Certainty, so that the Standard may
not be subject to so many Changes: And as to the Valuation or Alteration of
Moneys concerns only the Sovereignty or Dignity of a Prince or Governor in
every Country, as a thing peculiar to the Prerogative.

An unknown Author has also made his further Remarks, That it is a
disreputation for our Nation to bring in its Plate, by reason it argues our
Ability, and for that we are more esteemed Abroad by the Wealth we have in
Plate.

Is it not more disreputable for to be said on us, that we have proportionable
Riches to discharge the Burden of our War, and at the same time be Indebted to
both our Fleet and Army.

And what necessity is there for every Alehouse-Keeper to have 100 or 200 l. of
Plate, and the Government to want it, unless it be to encourage Rogues and
Vagabonds; for scarce a Sessions happens, but some one or other is Arraigned
for stealing a Tankard, or the like.

I must confess, that I had the Honor to Propose to the Honorable Houses of
Parliament this Project that is now set on foot of Calling in the Plate and
Broad Money, and of altering the Standard, but meeting with such Opponents as
the nameless Author (who I presume is not willing to assist the Government upon
this Term) did help to break the neck of so good a Design; for if it had passed
into an Act at that time of the Day, according to my then Proposals, it had
brought into the Mint at least two Millions of Moneys. And the Coinage upon the
same Proposal, besides appropriating so much ready Money for the use of the
War, would doubtless have been Four Hundred Thousand Pounds advantage to the
Crown: For, according to a strict Computation, there is a Million and one half
of Plate in the Publick-Houses; besides, the advancing the Price of Standard
will encourage private Persons to bring in their Plate. And it had prevented
the Exorbitant Price of Gold, and put a stop to the Baseness of our Coin.

And as I proposed it before for the Service of the Public, without any
Self-Interest, so if my poor Thoughts should in some Measure contribute to
relieve us from the present Calamities, I have attained my End.

I must needs agree with Mr. Lowndes, That the Gold ought to bear equal
Proportion with the Advance of Silver; and according to that Computation, a
Guinea should be established at Four and Twenty Shillings, which, if Coined
into Quarter-Guinea's, would be very useful in way of Trade.

As relating to the Clipped Money, I am sorry I cannot assent to Mr. Lowndes's
Proposal; for I think it very unreasonable that any Person should be compelled
to bring in their Money into the Mint at Eight Shillings per Ounce, when
Sixteen Shillings Current now will scarce make an Ounce; so that the People
shall lose one full half.

Besides, It is to be considered what Inconveniences would happen daily betwixt
the Officers of the Mint and the People, both about the Weight and Validity of
the Moneys. I am afraid it will prove of the same bad Event to a great many
Poor People, as in the Case of the late New-Farthings, where the Patentees were
obliged to change Two Hundred Pounds a Week of the old White-Farthings in lieu
of them; which Contract they faithfully performed for about a Month, but soon
after that time no Farthings must be exchanged but by their own Creatures, and
Factors, who they had empowered to buy up for a third part of what they used to
go at.

I do not find Mr. Lowndes does propose any farther advantage to those that
have unhappily gotten the Counterfeit-Money into their Hands, than the
Intrinsic Value, which will be Sixpence in Half a Crown; so that according to
the Computation that may be made, by the loss of the Clipp'd-Money and
Birmingham-Coin, will amount to no less than a Million and one half; wherefore
Eight Hundred Thousand proposed cannot repair the defect. And who must bear
this Loss but the poor People, for the Rich have gotten all the best Moneys;
and by the Proposal made, they reap an advantage by bringing it into the Mint,
whilst the Meaner sort will lose.

With submission to better Judgments, I do think it but reasonable that the
Government ought to bear the Loss, and that all the Base Moneys (excepting
Copper) should be brought in by a prefixed Time, and a Fund settled to answer
the Defect: And then People will have encouragement to bring in their Moneys.

Lastly, I wish that whilst the New Moneys are Coining, that some Expedient may
be found out to supply the Necessities of the Poor; though in some measure the
Quarter-Guinea's would be very useful in Town, though not so in the Countries, by
reason Moneys are more scarce.

There are several Pieces of small Money that are laid up, as Groats, etc.
which if made Current by the King's Proclamation, would be very useful under
these Emergencies.

And further, if this Project in altering the Coin should be approved and
granted. I wish that Commissioners may be chosen in every County for to take an
Estimate of what Moneys there are; and that instead of delivering Notes for
Peoples Money, that Tallies may be struck gradually as the Money is brought in,
which, in my Opinion, will be much better than Notes: In that Tallies are not
subject to be Counterfeited.

But for the better regulating of the Gold and Silver, as aforesaid, I do
propose the following Expedients.

I. Expedient. That all milled and broad Moneys may be so far advanced as to
induce People to bring it forth, and to prevent the Transportation of the same,
which will be a proper Means to supply us with present Cost.

II. Expedient. That Gold may bear the same proportion in advance with Silver,
according to Mr. Lowndes's Notion, a Guinea will come to Twenty Four Shillings;
so that Coining them down into Quarter-Guinea's, to consist of Six Shillings
Valuation each, will make them equally useful in Trade with the New Shillings.

III. Expedient. That His Majesty would graciously be pleased to Issue out His
Royal Proclamation, That all silver Groats, Two-Pences, etc. might become
Current, by which means they will be brought to Light, and be very useful in
Change, whereas they are at present like so much dead weight.

IV. Expedient. That all Shillings and Six-Pences may be current still, until
the New Coin shall be Issued out, which, with the Moneys aforementioned, I
humbly conceive may be sufficient to supply the common Trade in the Interim.

V. That some Expedient may be found out to supply us with Moneys for the
support of our Army in Flanders, from Holland, Spain, etc. by which means we
shall prevent the Transportation of Bullion, which is so dear and scarce a
Commodity.

VI. Exped. That all Birmingham Moneys may be brought into the Mint by a
prescribed Time, and a Fund settled to answer the defect of it; for, at the
same time, as the Banks and Goldsmiths will get by the broad Money, it would be
unreasonable that the Poor should lose by their base, and according to
Computation, Eight Hundred Thousand Pounds will not repair the Defect; but it
will be as absolutely necessary that such Care be taken that Foreigners may be
prevented from Importing to us base Moneys; for it is to be feared they have
had too great a stroke in this Affair already.

VII. Expedient. I think it very reasonable, That the Public Plate should be
called in, to answer the defect of our base Moneys, and supply us with the New
Coin; for the Government ought not to want Moneys as long as we have it amongst
us.

VIII. Exped. That People may have Tallies struck for the Moneys instead of
Notes, in regard Tallies are not to be counterfeited.

All which Expedients and Reasons I have Offered, nevertheless I submit to the
Considerations of more competent Judges.

W. L.
FINIS.

