The Exceeding Abundant Grace of God, Displayed in the CONVERSION OF William
Gymer A Penitent Malefactor and Murderer, Who was Executed on the Castle-Hill
in Norwich, Sept. 4. 1696.

Written by John Lucas Minister of the Gospel.

Who was before a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and Injurious. But I obtained
mercy, etc. And the Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.

Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And such
were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6.10,
11.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Snowden, for Edward Giles Bookseller in Norwich near
the Marketplace. 1696.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present to thy view one, who was like a little Candle going out with a
stinking snuff, but in a little time lighted again by the Beams of the Sun of
Righteousness, and set upon a Hill: He had been as a Bryer and Thorn that
wounded his Friend to death, and yet became a living Branch of the true Vine:
He was like a Worm that had killed another of its own kind, and thereupon was
trodden to death by (the Devil) that devouring Lion; and yet was restored to
life by his virtue, who was as a Worm despised and rejected of men, Psalm. 22.6.
Isa. 53.3. Of such a one I am writing, who according to the judgment of Charity
proved a sincere Convert. Indeed some bid fairer for our Charity than others,
and in my Opinion he did so.

Reader, come and see how he comes to himself, and then writing to his Wife, he
tells her [This is to let you know, that I did commit the Crime: This I have
openly confessed; and since that I am much more at ease in my mind; and for what
I have done, I am heartily sorry, and earnestly beg pardon at the hands of God
Almighty.] While David kept silence, the hand of God was heavy upon him, but in
acknowledging his iniquity he found relief, Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5.

He discovered his disease, and it much tended to its cure: Being awakened with
the sense of his guilt, he cries unto God, and calls upon his Wife and others
to do the like, [For, says he, God is able, yea willing to hear, but it must
not be bare calling, but that which is in sincerity of heart that will do.]

Having obtained hope of pardon and life, he desires to die and lay down his
life as a debt to Justice, and yet he would have his Friends assured, that he
despaired not of God's Mercy, but did put his whole trust and confidence in
him, as knowing there was no pardon for him, but through Jesus Christ [ I only,
says he, rely on the Merit of Christ, hoping that he, who invited those great
Sinners, who by their wicked hands crucified his dear Son, to repent and live,
will of his mercy look upon my dejected Soul, which I lift up with a humble
confidence in him, that he will not deny me the same mercy.] He discoursed of
death as his familiar Acquaintance with his Friends (in his writing to his
Wife) and though such Discourse might be unpleasing to some, and put them into a
cold sweat, making them tremble, as Pelshazzar did at the writing on the
Plaster of the Wall in his Palace; Dan. 5.5, 6.
yet his hearty desire was with tears in his eyes (if you will believe him)
that his Relations would consider, how their lives were like a Shadow, and
assure themselves they had no greater work to do than to prepare for death.

He looked upon death as the end of misery to the faithful and beginning of
blessedness, but to the secure and careless as the end of their pleasure and
beginning of eternal pain.

Of such like things he writes (which I have seen and read in his Letters to
his Wife) and tells her, that he writ not any thing to her as a ceremony, but
out of an earnest Zeal and well-wishing to her Souls welfare and happiness.

(1.) His Soul being healed by pardoning Grace, he admires the Physicians
mercy: we ought says he above all things to admire the infinite goodness of
God, who has set forth his Son a propitiation through Faith in his blood, Romans
3.25. We cannot often enough make mention of his great kindness, who gave
himself as a free-will-offering for our sins.

(2.) He prizes the precious promises, which he terms [Wonderful] such as
these [God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble, Psalm.
46.1. and they that know thy Name will trust in thee: for thou, Lord, have not
forsaken them that seek thee, Psalm. 9 10.] and others: These were the Treasure
he laid up and took comfort in.

(3.) He pants after a sinless State, and longed to be with Christ in that
better Country, and to live for ever with him.

(4) He was concerned for the Souls of others. In was his extreme grief (as he
expresses his mind) to hear how some of his Relations, who instead of being
humbled under the great Judgment, that had befallen her (in his fall) were
rather hardened: But he entreats them for God's sake to look upon it as a
warning from Heaven, not to presume; for if God leave any of us to our selves,
we are so prone to sin, that we may soon fall into great Transgressions. He
admonishes. He exhorts and prays for them, that they might not live any longer
without Christ; and that the life they led in the Flesh might be by Faith on
the Son of God who loved us, and gave himself for us; the remembrance of which
love (he adds) should be most dear and precious to us, so as to set light by
all wordly vanities: He prays that they might pass their time here as it
becomes those, who expect shortly to give an account to him, who will Judge all
Men according to their Works.

Thus he opened his heart, and showed his good will, and thus he poured out his
Soul in his requests to God for the good of their Souls, who were nearly
related to him.

As to the Prisoners that lived with him, and Lodged with him, he would Read to
them, and Pray with them, and according to the gift he had received, he was
willing to give them, and others that visited him, his advice and caution
against carnal confidence, and yielding to the occasions of sin.

Some of his last words at the place of Execution, were;

[ Gentlemen, You are come to see a poor Creature suffer; and I justly deserve
it. Oh! the Infinite Grace and Mercy of God toward me, that he did not
immediately cast me down to Hell, but gave me so long a space of Repentance.
Beware of the great evil of Sin; beware of Lying and Sabbath-breaking, which
sins I believe were the Foundation of this my present suffering. O! watch and
pray, and do not purchase your Repentance at so dear a rate as I have done. And
now Lord Jesus receive my Soul, into thy hands I commit my Spirit, Lord Jesus
receive my Soul.] Had I known beforehand this lot would have fallen on me to
write these lines, I think I should have been more concerned in the visits I
made to him to observe things more exactly, and set down passages material as
they occurred, which must now be passed over in silence.

But, Reader, come and see, come and read with an honest mind and purpose, that
little which is here presented before thee touching this Monument of Divine
Judgment and Mercy; and the Lord help thee in truth (upon the whole) to say,
[This sight has done my heart good] Thus prays he who desires thy prayers, and
is,

Thy Friend, and Souls well wisher, John Lucas.
October. 22d. 1696.
The exceeding abundant Grace of God displayed in the Conversion of William
Gymer, a penitent Malefactor.
THE Grace and good will of God lays hold on the chief of Sinners: The Elect
obtain it, the rest are hardened; One is taken, the other left: Luke 23.39, 40.
One of the Thieves on the Cross rails on Christ, the heart of the other
Relents; He acknowledges the Righteousness of God in his sufferings, and
accepts of the punishment of his iniquity; and also reproves his
Fellow-Malefactor for his hard speeches (which as an ungodly sinner he spoke
against the Lord Jesus) and the want of the fear of the God, though under the
same Condemnation.

This Grace exerted it self in turning the heart of this great Offender, ver.
42.
and made a gracious and wonderful change in him, renewing a right Spirit in
him. He now at last unfeignedly and sincerely believes in Jesus Christ. He
calls him Lord, and owneth his Divine Nature, who as Man was suffering pain,
and shame, and the curse on the Cross for our sake: He looks upon him as the
Eternal Son of God, and heir of that Kingdom of Glory which he believed his
Lord was going to: He prays to be remembered by him when he came into his
Kingdom, and accounted his remembrance of him was sufficient to make him a
happy man; q. d. Remember me, O Lord, Ps. 106.4, 5.
with the favor that thou bear unto thy people. O visit me with thy
Salvation; that I may see thee good of thy chosen; that I may rejoice in the
gladness of thy Nation; that I may glory with thine Inheritance.

Lesus, who turned as it were a deaf ear to the Blasphemies of his Enemies, to
the derision of the Rulers and Soldiers mocking, graciously inclines to
hearken to this poor Malefactor's request, ver. 43.
and gives him this Answer, Verily, I say unto thee, this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise; q. d. Seeing thou have owned and confessed me in my
suffering-state, blessed art thou; Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee but my Father, who is in Heaven: Fear not, thy Soul shall go from hence
with me to the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innumerable Company of Angels, and to the Spirits of Just men made perfect, and
dwell with me in my Kingdom for ever.

1. It Is certain then, that the Soul of Man is immortal; It dies not with the
body, but passes into another world, and there abides either in a state of
misery or a state of blessedness until the Resurrection-day, when all shall be
awakned and come forth, some to everlasting Life, and some to Shame and
everlasting Contempt.

2. And it is of no less certainty, that a Penitent Malefactor's Soul may go
from a Prison or a Gallows to Paradise or Heaven; as well as the Soul of any
other person that repents.

The Mercy of God in the Salvation of any is exceeding rich and free: the merit
of our Lord and Savior is alsufficient and of large extent; and the offer of
Grace is made to all. Isa. 55.1. Rev. 22.17. John 6.37. Rev. 1.5.6.
Every one that thirsts is invited to come to the waters. Whosoever will let
him take of the water of life freely. And him that comes, Christ will in no
wise cast out. O the height and depth, the breadth and length of the love of
God in Christ Jesus, who loved us and washed us from our Sins in his own blood:
unto him be glory and dominion for ever, Amen.

An eminent instance and Monument of Divine Grace, it pleased God to set up
among us lately in Norwich Castle, concerning which take this relation
following, which for substance according to what I have seen and heard, I set
down as true.

One William Gymer, Sept. 4th. 1696.
who lately was Executed on the Castle-Hill for Robbery and Murder, lived
formerly with one Mr. Bucknam a Tanner of Hadsco in the County of Norfolk, but
afterward being married, he dwelt with his Father-in-law at Alby not far from
Hadsco. Abrve two miles.


In one of his Papers which he left, he tells us, that the course of his life
was led in great ignorance; that about 7 years ago he almost doubted whether
there were a God or no; but afterward walking abroad, by looking on the Herbs
of the Field, he was convinced of his Atheism and Folly, and was heartily sorry
for his former ignorance; upon this Conviction he endeavored (as he writes) to
seek after God, and did heartily beg of God, to enable him by his Spirit; and
so he did continue (as he says) in an humble frame, till about a year and half
before he committed those great Crimes, which brought him to destruction, for
then he gave himself up to the Sin of Lying, and so ran on in that way, at
times (his Conscience accusing him) he was grieved and troubled, yet he still
continued in his course of Lying to blind the world ( i. e. to keep others in
ignorance) of some other Sins he was guilty of (so I understand by his writing)
He was convinced of the wickedness of his way, and daily prayed to God to
forgive him those sins and all other.

But the day before (says he,) I committed these crimes ( i. e. Robbery and
Murder) I was boasting in my self, and thought my self in as happy a condition
as any man in my Station, and it was not in my thoughts to do any such
wickedness half an hour before I did it.

In the year 1695 in or near the time of Harvest, on a Lord's day after morning
he went to his M. Bucknam's house with an intent to borrow 40 shillings of one
of the Servants, concerning which he had spoken to him some time before. But
all being gone to Church excepting the maid servant, he told her the Swine were
got out of the yard, hereupon the maid fearing lest they should get into the
standing Corn, she soon ran out, and having a knife in her hand (which she had
been making use of) she stuck it on the side of her bosom, and hastily went
into the Corn-close near the House. Gymer being now left alone, Satan put it
into his heart to rob his Master, and his evil heart suggested to him what need
he borrow money, when he might get it without borrowing? This motion at first
put him into a trembling, nevertheless knowing where his Masters Cash used to
lie, he went to the place, but yet came back again before he had taken any, as
doubting what to do: But the Tempter putting him forward, he went to the place
again, where having broke open a lock, he took out some bags of money, which
afterward he hid in the ground, not far from the House. Having now yielded to
the Devil thus far, he still pusheth him forward, and tempts him to conceive
mischief against the poor Maid and murder her, that in so doing his Robbery
might be concealed. Then going forth with a bloody mind he finds the Maid in
the Corn-close, and coming to her, trips up her heels, (she saying no more, but
what do you make account to do with me?) and forthwith, with her own knife cuts
her throat, and then throws away the knife.

Having committed this barbarous cruelty, he was soon under such horror, that
he thought to have done the like to himself had the knife been in his hand. I
thought, says he, I could have laid violent hands upon my self: praised be
God, he did restrain me from so doing: But I continued (as he writes) under so
great terror, that I thought would have thanked any man to have knocked me on
the head, and thus it was with me till I came to Prison. Afterward going
homeward (by the way) he cut his Fingers on purpose that the blood which
stained his clothes might be thought to proceed from thence.

The report of this murder soon flying abroad of some, his relations desired
him to go to his Masters-House, and see how things were: He pretends a
willingness to go and make enquiry, but having gone a little way he turns
aside, went not thither at all. His not going caused suspicion, upon which some
ten days after he was apprehended and carried before 2 Justices of Peace
Justice Matthews, and then Sir Nevil Catlin.
, who after examination made his Mittimus and sent him to Norwich Castle.

Here his sorrow for a time was somewhat allayed; yet he repented and bewailed
his Sins in secret to God, though he was unwilling to discover them to the world:
Here being no evil company, he did as others did, although his Conscience
troubled him for so doing. In this frame he continued till the time of his
escape with another Prisoner to Yarmouth.

This Prisoner being minded to get away, tells Gymer of two men that were to
assist him, so that he also was desirous to go with him. I did, says he,
Promise my self, if I got away and were not taken again, I would spend the rest
of my days in some Foreign place, and there work for my Living, and bewail my
self for my Sins; But if I were taken, I was resolved to confess my Sins to the
World, and take the shame belonging to me.

Gymer and his Fellow-Prisoner upon request obtained the liberty of going to
the Jailors-House to spend some money in Drink, but upon their return to the
Castle, (it being in the evening somewhat dark) they both slipped down the Hill
undiscerned, deceiving their Keeper that went before, and so traveled to
Yarmouth.

But being soon pursued, they were both there apprehended: his Heart now smites
him and unlooseth his tongue freely to confess his Sins of Lying, and Swearing,
and the Theft, and Murder, he had committed: These he often acknowledged to
Ministers, and others that visited him, and being arraigned the last Assizes in
Court, he pleaded guilty three times one after another. His Conscience being
awakened and wounded, he has given Glory to God in confessing his wickedness,
and ever since has been diligent in seeking the Lord for the life of his Soul,
and greatly desirous of the Prayers and Assistance of Ministers and of all
serious and Pious Christians. His ingenuity manifested in his frequent
Confessions, his humble and meek behavior in the place and condition, his
iniquities had brought him into, his patient accepting of the punishment
deserved; his readiness to hearken to, and follow good Counsel, and the
diligence he gave both day and night in making his Calling and Election sure,
were remarkable, and gained him so great an interest in the prayers and
affections of all serious Christians (of what persuasion soever) who had any
acquaintance with him, or did believe the good report that was given of him, as
is not ordinary. By these and such like good fruit he obtained a good report,
and it could not well be judged otherwise, but that the Tree must be made good,
which brought forth such good fruit.

After his apprehension at Yarmouth, and being brought again to prison, the
poor Prodigal came to himself; And when I began (says he in writing) to
consider of my sins, and that (for ought I knew) I had sent a Soul to Hell, the
thoughts thereof made me tremble, and almost conclude, there could be no mercy
for so vile a wretch. And in this condition, I was for some time. But in
reading the Scripture, I found a place where it is said, [ Come now let us
reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow, though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool, Isa.
1.18.] These words so affected my heart, that I cannot express the comfort I
found by them. But some time after, I fell into doubts again, because I was in
Fetters, God would not hear my cries in this place: But reading of Manasseh's
finding mercy in Pr^son, 2 Cron. 33.12, 13.
after he had spent a great deal of time in wickedness, and had committed great
sins: This put me in hope, it was not too late for me: And that comfortable
saying of Christ, [ Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest, Matthew. 1^.28.] And many places in Ezekiel. 18. have been my
comfort. By these promises I found, there was a door of hope open for me, which
brought me to so great a change in the thoughts of my heart, that I have
thought I would not exchange them for the whole World, and so I continued in
such a delightful frame, that I thought my heart was almost ravished. But at
times my affections grew cold again, which I have endeavored to raise again.

And in reading the first of John's Epistles, chap. 2. v. 1. [If any man sin,
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous] That, and
other places of Scripture, have been my comfort to this present moment. I have
such comfort in my heart, that I can willingly yield up the Ghost. These are
his expressions, which I find in some of his Papers he sent to me.

In one of my Visits, which I made to him, I advised him (he speaking but
little) to set down in writing the Experiences he had of Gods dealings with his
Soul, and seeing he was not like to live long here, I desired him to show his
Friends the Ground or Reasons of his hope of a better life. He harkened to this
motion, and declared his willingness in doing what I requested, and at last
sent me some Manuscripts written with his own hand.

Having given the Reader this brief Account of some passages of this poor
Malefactor's Life; I shall in the next place from his example make some
observations more particular, which I heartily desire we may wisely improve to
our spiritual Benefit.

There is no trust to be put in the best Nature or Natural Disposition.

Gymer had a good Report in this respect; and was (as I have heard) commended
as a person of sobriety, and meekness, and readiness to do for any that stood
in need of his help; yet he proved at last a Thief and Murderer. Let a man have
never so good a Nature, it is still a nature tainted with sin, and being void of
true Grace in time of temptation has no inclination or power to resist the
Devil. A good nature is easily enticed and led into evil practices: It Is a
nature (not renewed by the Holy Spirit) attended with a hard heart, as a Peach
under a smooth skin has a hard stone: It Is a nature like the Sea, very calm at
times, but rages when the wind and storms arise. It Is said, the tame Fox does
more mischief than any other, when he gets away and runs wild. David was a good
man and of an excellent Spirit, yet in time of temptation he defiles Bathsheba
and kills Uriah her Husband with the Sword. 2 Samuel 11.4. 2 Samuel 12.9.
If a good nature sanctified thus wickedly plays its part and acts so strangely
and cruelly too, what confidence can we put in a nature not seasoned with
grace? O Christian! hear and give ear, your Lord has spoken it [ Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into temptation, Mat. 26.41.] And again [ What I say
unto you, I say unto all, watch, Mark 13.47.] Be not high minded, but fear. Let
him that stands, take heed lest he fall. Consider seriously, there are many
Adversaries, (1.) Many Devils (this lower Region is full of such Monsters) that
are great in power, exceeding subtle, and make it their business to deceive and
destroy immortal Souls. (2.) Your own heart is deceitful above measure, and
desperately wicked, very prone to turn aside and comply with the Enemy. And
(3.) Very wise and holy persons have fallen down wounded in Conscience before
this Enemy, and hardly recovered their peace with God a long time after.

Keep thy heart therefore with all diligence: study the frame and constitution
of thy own mind, and labor to understand where thy weakness most lies, and
where the Tempter is most likely to prevail.

Watch against the occasions, and first sproutings of sin, and pray in good
earnest [Lord, lead me not into temptation, but deliver me from evil.]

A man may pray, and do many commendable good things,

This poor Wretch for some years together, did use to call upon God, and walk
blameless comparatively with many others, yet at last he became a Liar, a
Swearer, a Sabbath-breaker; he coveted an evil Covetousness, and then violently
spilt the blood of an innocent person, one that had done him no harm. Herod
heard John the Baptist gladly, and did many things, and yet put him to death,
though against his own Conscience, Mark 6.20, 26, 27. Judas was receiver of the
Contributions that came in, and. Steward, to lay out upon occasion, Vines on
the Sacrament. p. 59, 60.
but being not faithful to his trust, he is called a Thief, John 12.6. And though
he retained to such a Master, and was a Teacher and Preacher of heavenly
Doctrine, yet he proceeds higher, and of a Thief be comes a Traitor, Luke 22.4,
6. He conceived this sin, and traveled with it, and with no better preparation
comes to the Passover. After the Sop Satan enters into him, John 13.27. And
now, as the Devil would have it, he sells that Blood (says that Reverend
Minister of Christ) which should have been sprinkled on his Door-posts. This is
a fearful Example, says he, to all that after such a President dare venture
upon a Sacracrament, to which they come with purpose to go on in those sins
they bring to it.

I question not but there are, who daily say their prayers, and yet the Devil
puts them upon hating those ways, which their Conscience tells them, are the
best, and to do evil to those persons that would willingly do them good, and
help them forward in the way of Life. And though they pray for grace to walk in
the ways of God, yet their prayers being without Faith unfeigned and
seriousness, Satan still prevails, and puts them upon choosing those ways, the
end whereof is death and damnation. Gymer told me, he prayed that Lord's Day
morning (though but coldly, as he afterward observed) before he went forth: Yet
neither the consideration of the God he prayed to, nor of the day he commanded
to be kept holy, did restrain him from the committing of those heinous crimes.

Reader, if thou truly desire to profit by this Example, make conscience of
praying continually, but take heed of resting in formal, cold and lazy prayers.
Prayer is but one means, and as it is to be followed with care and diligence in
order to the preservation of the inward man; so it is to be joined with the use
of other means of Christ's appointment. We must watch as well as pray, and put
our trust in the Lord, as well as offer the Sacrifices of righteousness, Psalm.
4.5. The total forbearance of food in a few days, does ordinarily bring forth
death; and the giving Nature less than it requires weakens; but if you give it
its due, yet other means are to be used (as apparel, exercise, rest, fire, air,
water) for the maintaining of the Body in health and well-being. Thus we must
pray, and read the Word of God, and hear it Preached, and put on Christ by Faith
for the strengthening of our Soul; and put on the whole Armor of God, that we
may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11.

Temptations to vilest and most detestable deeds beset unwary sinners on a
sudden, yet usually they prevail by degrees.

Gymer little thought of being led into such Temptations, or of yielding to
them, when he went forth to his Masters House: Nay, if you will believe him, he
thought nothing, had no design of Committing those crimes, for which he dyed,
half an hour before he was guilty of them. But one sin made way for another: He
had yielded for some time to the sin of Lying, and sometimes Swearing, and then
to Sabbath-breaking; and having not truly repented of these sins, the Devil
gets ground and grows stronger and stronger upon him, and evil motions
suggested, being not resisted, but admitted and dallied withal, overcome him.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust; then when lust
has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings
forth death, Jam. 1.14, 15. If we provide for the flesh, our prayers will but
little avail and help us against the fulfilling of the lusts of it.

Remember, Friend, into whose hands these papers come; while thou warrest
against that wicked one, thou stand on slippery ground; thou fightest (as it
were) with a burden upon thy Back, and thy Enemy has this Advantage against
thee, in that he is invisible, and has also a party within thee, whom he too
easily persuades, and inticeth to join with him against thy Soul. Be sober, be
vigilant, and pray without ceasing; and when he shoots in his fierydarts, hold
up the Sword of the Spirit, and the shield of Faith, and lift up a cry to him,
who is the hope and help of his Israel, and never yield consent; if thou
consent not, he may disturb thee a while, but cannot conquer. It Is written for
thy encouragement [ Submit your selves therefore to God, who gives grace to
the humble. Resist the Devil, and he shall flee from you, Jam. 4.6, 7.

God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy;

So did that wicked Woman (called a sinner, Luke 7.37.) who forsaking all other
Lovers, Luke 7.47.
inquires after Christ, and knowing where he was, makes bold to enter in
without the Pharissee Invitation: She expresses her love in washing his feet
with her tears, and wiping them with the hair of her head; her heart runs out
at her eyes, as it were, saying, Alas my Lord, that ever I should do as I have
done! O wonderful! that ever thou should admit such a wretch as I am to come
into thy presence: Sinners notorious for lewdness and vile practices have come
to themselves and returned unto their Heavenly Father, and have proved wonders
to themselves and others, and Eminent examples of redeeming time and glorifying
the Lord in bringing forth much fruit, and much more than many hundred, that
make some profession of Religion do.

O what a difference does grace make between a bare Professor and a real
Convert! What a glorious change is made in the Heart and Life of a true
Penitent?

What difference was there between Gymer when first imprisoned, and the same
man after at his apprehension at Yarmouth? At first his heart is shut up, and
he opens not his mouth to give glory to God in Confession; and then he played
at Cards, and complied with his Fellow Prisoners in doing as they did, though his
Conscience grumbled at it, and rebuked him for it: afterward he ingeniously
confesses his wickedness, and all comes out freely; he humbles himself
greatly, as Manitassch did in his affliction, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. He is a man of
sorrow, and is solicitous about the state of his Soul. Now his eyes being open,
his heart is affected and he is thankful to God that he was taken and did not
escape the hand of the pursuers. Now he is much taken with the wisdom and
goodness of God in bringing him to Repentance, in such a way, and giving him a
space of repentance. He now sets upon the work in good earnest, and help comes
in, and he blesses the Divine Majesty of Heaven for exciting and stirring up
the spirit of diverse of his Servants, both Ministers and others, to assist him
by their prayers and instructions.

Sinners that have gone on with an high hand in bloody and deceitful ways, though
the Lord give pardon upon repentance,

I read of one Wasoraw a Gentleman, See fulfilling of Scripture. p. 488.
who was one who took delight in making difference between men, and he stirred
up a Neighbor Gentleman, to kill another, and finding him troubled in mind
about the murder committed, he told him, more of that practice would be the
best cure: For he himself had killed six, and at first he was much disquieted,
but the longer it continued, it became the more easy. But one day he riding to
a place, where two were to decide a quarrel by fighting, his Horse stumbles on
the side of a steep Rock, and he falls a great way down, his Sword falling out
before him, yet without any hurt. Upon this the Lord brake in upon his
conscience, so that he turns home with great trouble and remorse, and a most
kindly change follows thereupon, and for some years after, he manifested much
tenderness and repentance He spent much time alone in mourning before his de
ath and that day he dyed, he was heard in his Chamber wrestling in prayer, and
after long continuance they of the house knocking at the door, and getting no
answer, brake it open, and find him dead upon his knees, and the whole blood of
his body, which from every passage had issued out, swimming about him on the
floor.

Though men may neglect doing of justice, yet Divine Justice will not spare the
murderer, though upon his repentance God will remember his Soul in mercy. The
shedder of man's blood sometimes escapes the Justice of man, but the righteous
Lord of Heaven and earth will not let him go unpunished: though he pardon the
truly penitent sinner, yet he declares to the world the abhorrency of his sin.
And thus he did deal with David, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10.13, 14.

And thus he dealt also with this poor Malefactor, we treat of, he set his sins
in array against him, which as a Lion did sorely bruise and wound his
Conscience. He tells us (in writing) of tumultuous thoughts, that he had in
secret about his condition without Christ, and considering, says he, how Satan
has betrayed me, and led me from one sin to another, God was pleased to make
me sensible of my sins, and I was ready to despair of any mercy. But in reading
those words of Isaiah chap. 1.8. [Come now and let us reason together, says
the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though
they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.] And upon the thoughts of Mary
Magdalen (whose wickedness was great, yet upon her repentance she obtained
pardon) I had comfort. But many other times I have been almost distracted for
fear God would not accept of such a vile wretch as I am. But then I thought of
the Thief on the Cross, and put up many prayers, and have been again refreshed.

And as he was under deep dejection of Spirit, he was sweetly lifted up. As his
afflictions abounded, so did his Consolations in the free and preciouspromises:
His comfort arising from his hope in the word was so strong and steady, that
for some Months before he dyed, he feared not death, no not that kind of death
he expected to die, but rather greatly desired it. O, says he, Psalm. 55.6.
that I had the wings of a Dove! The time seemed long to him, till he came to
his rest He declined not in the least the stroke of death, but that he might be
sure to die, he confessed himself guilty three times upon his Indictment and
Arraignment at the Bar. There could be no positive evidence produced against
him; but by his own Confession he saved the Judge and Jury the trouble of a
Trial. I asked him afterward, whether he were satisfied in his so doing, and
his answer was, very well.

He writ to his Wife, that his sins had so troubled his conscience, that if
every limb of his Body had a several soul or life, he would willingly yield up
all to make restitution for the sorrow and shame he had brought her unto: But
all being not able to do it, he desired of God so to sanctify the affliction,
that it might be a blessed Instrument to purge her from the vain conceits of
the pleasures of this life. I know, says he, our blessed Savior lives, who
suffered and died for us, and that he has great compassion toward those, who
would gladly follow him, though it be through sufferings. He desires above all
things, that he and all his Friends might be made like to him in meekness and
patience, and entirely resign themselves to God's holy Will and Pleasure,
whatever their condition be.

He gave diligence to make his Calling and Election sure,

He made it his business sometimes by night as well as by day to make his peace
with God, and his labor was not in vain: He sought the Lord, and he heard him;
He asked and receive, Psalm 51.14, 15.
the remission of his sins, and his joy in the Lord upon it was his strength.
God did deliver him from blood-guiltiness, and his Tongue did sing aloud of his
Righteousness: The Lord did (in blotting out his great Transgressions) open his
Mouth, and his Lips showed forth his praise. He attained in a little time to a
higher degree of true Christianity, and in the Kingdom of God (which consists
in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost) than many Professors of
long standing (as they have gone to work) could ever reach or attain unto. He
longed for his dying day, and to go to Christ, though it were by the Gallows. He
told me, that way of dying did not dismay or terrify him: He rather wished it
as the desert of his heinous Crimes, than feared it. He lived a sweet and
comfortable Life, especially toward his latter end. When I enquired, how 'twas
with him, his usual answer was, I find comfort in seeking God; and would often
say, Never better: And so, I understand, he said in the Morning before his
Execution [Never better.]

He gave glory to God in taking shame to himself, and his ingenuous Confession
was no disgrace to him, turned to good account, and his great advantage: He
left the world and laid aside the thoughts of Life some Months before he died;
and in so doing he found God, and thereupon lived a contented and comfortable
Life

Comenius tell us, The Brethren of Bohemia placed the beginning, middle and end
of Religion, not in disputing, but in doing; i. e in true Conversion to God,
and solid Faith in Christ. This was the way he walked in: He was like a little
Child, considerate for nothing but simplicity, not coveting any thing, but the
favor of God, making it his business to serve the Lord in Spirit and Truth, to
look up to Heaven to renounce trust in Earth, and take heed of nothing so much
as of oftending God or Man, by neglecting any duty. And being taken up with
these things, he had learned to be content in a Prison. He placed his Religion
in the love of God, and studying his love and goodness and in his praises: He
was more solicitous about his duty to God, than about his dealings with him, as
knowing he would do all things well; and he so lived as one devoted to his
service: He seemed to understand wherein the height of a Christian Life, and
the greatest part of his duty consisted, viz in love to Christ, and delight in
him, and thankful and cheerful obedience to his Will. God called him to a
thankful acceptance of Christ, that made satisfaction for his sins, and enabled
him to proceed in a sweet compliance with the Will of the Redeemer he believed
in

One while I feared (as I told him) his resting on prayer and duties, instead
of trusting in Christ the only Foundation, he must build upon: But as I found,
he was through Grace disposed not only to hear, but also to follow the directions
that were given to him; so I see reason to hope he hearkened to his caution and
counsel, as he did in other particulars, which I observed.

In one of my Visits, I asked him whether he could sing, and would join with us
in singing a Psalm? He consented to the motion, and did accordingly, and
afterward seemed much to delight in that heavenly exercise to the last,
singing heartily as unto the Lord. He determined beforehand, that on the
morning before he came forth to suffer, he would read the 12th chapter of
Isaiah, and so he did, and read also the 40th chapter of the same Prophet; and
also Psalm. 46. and sang part of the 33d Psalm; and after his withdrawing a
while to pray with his fellow-suffer, he came forth again, and put on his
dying-clothes, and took his leave of the Prisoners cheerfully, shaking them by
the hand.

In the Grand Jury Chamber earnest prayers were poured out for him, and the
other that suffered with him, who would not confess he was accessory to the
murder of the Child, he was condemned for. God stirred up the heart of diverse
Ministers to go to him, to instruct and exhort him, and to be fervent in Spirit
while they prayed for him; And I have grounds to hope, God heard their cries.

He was much concerned for the Souls of others.

He did often read to, and pray with the Prisoners. He told a Friend, the
hardness of his fellow sufferers heart had made him shed many tears. He often
was alone spending his time in reading, thinking and praying, and at times
prayed with the Prisoners that would join with him. Having obtained Grace, he
was willing to communicate it in the best manner he could.

He writ a Letter to the Father of the Maid he murdered, wherein he confessed,
whatever Charge he loaded him with, it was still far less than his grievous
Crime, and yet (he tells him) there was no proportion between his Crime and the
Infinite Mercy of God. But what comfort is in this (says he) if I have no
share in it?

I am told, there is mercy with God for me, and that one way to it lies by your
Door. To you therefore I come in meekness of spirit, beseeching you for God's
sake, to forgive your share, and so to forgive, as to become an earnest Suitor
for my pardon from God. Had every Limb of my Body a several living Soul, I
should willingly yield all up as a Sacrifice to Legal Justice: But the Divine
Wrath must be appeased; and mercy obtained by a better Sacrifice, and that is
the Blood, the most precious Blood of the Son of God our Savior Jesus Christ:
This Blood is the only Medicine of Bloodguiltiness. Lord, wash me from this,
and I shall be clean: And I should be in a higher degree of hope to obtain this
blessing, could I but hear you say, as I hope you will to this prayer say,
Amen; which is the most humble desire of a sorrowful Soul in Prison,

William Gymer.


Some have doubted, and so have I, whether these Lines were of his own inditing
and composure; yet I question not (if the words were not) but the sense was his
own, and his heart was in them.

He writ also a Letter to his Wife (see p. 11, 12.) and another for his Child
(as I have been told) which he never saw, it being but about three quarters
old, for its use, if the Lord should let it live, and give it understanding. He
leaves a paper also for others that may read it, wherein he seems to be much
affected with the sorrow and sufferings of Christ, and prays that God would
take away our stony hearts, and give us to consider what he suffered for us.
Thou, says he, whose property it is to have mercy, hear and have compassion:
We commit our hearts unto Thee our God. And let us (as he adds) O my Friends,
take that due care to bring forth fruits that are meet for Repentance, Matthew.
3.8.

The foundation of a holy life is true Repentance, and where that is, we may
believe, there is remission of sins, and eternal life succeeds. O then, let us
not put off our Repentance from day to day, for to morrow is none of ours. O
let us repent to day, for the day is at hand, when we must render an account
not only for one day, but for our whole life. Let us truly call upon God, that
he would turn his face from our sins, and pray unto him, that our sins may
depart from us: For sin is the distemper of the Soul, which moved David to cry
out [ Heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee, Psalm. 41.4] Let us call
upon God, that he would not cast us away from his presence, but restore unto us
the joy of his salvation, Psalm. 51.12. O let us not count calamity and
punishment evil, for many times good proceeds from them: Nay, they may be
called good, because they are God's Messengers, and proceed from him, who is
the Fountain of all good: Moreover, they lead us unto the chiefest Happiness,
which is life everlasting: For Christ by his Passion entered into his glory, and
Christians by tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. O then,
let us count nothing evil but sin, because it draws us from that which is good:
The Sinner is accused by his Conscience, which he has defiled, by his Creator
whom he has offended, and by the sins he has committed. Let us beg of God,
that he would grant us Grace to repent, and endeavor to make our Calling and
Election sure

My Friends, I leave these Lines behind me, heartily desiring you to avoid all
sin, and to avoid Lying, which I believe to be the forerunner of other sins.
Solomon bids us, Prove. 23.23.
buy the Truth, but does not tell us what it must cost, because we must get it,
though it be never so dear: We must love Truth both shining and scorching.

Thus he writes, and thus he spent part of that space of time given him for
Repentance, and owned scorching Truth in a free confession of those Crimes,
which he knew would cost him his life. He admonished such as came to see him,
to take heed of Lying and Sabbathbreaking and let him, says he, that stands,
take heed lest he fall: For I little thought or intended to commit those
grievous Crimes I am guilty of half an hour before the commission of them. And
then he burst out into tears.

He was frequent in Prayer with Thanksgiving. I do confess, says he, it might
be but Justice in thee to damn my Soul, but, O Lord, I pray thee in Justice
remember Mercy, and in thine Infinite Mercy pardon me. It Is dreadful to lose
the Body, but O how much dreadful to lose the Soul to all Eternity! Let my Soul
praise thy Name for what thou have done for me: For I hope, and do believe,
thou have been at work upon my Soul in helping me to repent, for which I give
thee hearty thanks, and am desirous to be most humble under the sense of my
sins, for they are very dreadful to me.

As he prayed, so his prayers were mixed with Faithand a humble confidence: He
would tell me, he had comfort in God upon his praying: He often found the Lord
ready to give what he asked, and more ready to receive the contrite in heart,
into favor (as he acknowledged) then they to offer themselves by unfeigned
Repentance.

Prayer was the employ, in which he spent much of his time, and he heartily
desired the earnest prayers of Ministers, and all good and pious Christians,
that he might grow more and more in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and many were put up for him. The great mercies of God made his heart
glad, and the Company of those, who came to instruct and help him forward in
the way of Life, was very acceptable to him, and he would entreat them to come
again, and not leave him while he was in the Land of the Living. His words were
but few, but his ingenious Confession and meek Conversation, and his Works that
declared his unfeigned Repentance, won the hearts of many to him. His Wife told
me, he writ twice a week to her.

In his last Letter to her he writes thus, My Dear Love,
THIS being the last Letter that ever I shall write; I write to you to look to
your Eternal Stat, aend to prepare for it before it be too late, which is my
hearty prayer to Almighty God, that you should so do, and that you may not be
found as some I once read of, who cried out [O miserable Souls that we are! How
has sin and the world blinded and bewitched us, that we could not see our
condition before it was too late?] God has kept me in the thoughts of death
for some time. Once I thought my self just at the Graves side, but he that laid
me down was pleased to lift me up again. But now he seems to be speedily
finishing my days; to whom through the infinite mercy of Jesus Christ, I call
with some comfort and boldness, saying. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And so
farewell my Friends and Relations; farewell eating and drinking; and I hope
within a few days to say, Farewell sin and sinning. And, My dear, I commend you
and my poor Babe to him, who has promised, To be a Father to the Fatherless,
and to plead the cause of the Widow. And so I earnestly desire you to put your
whole Trust and Confidence in him, who has promised all them that so do, never
to leave them nor forsake them; Which God Almighty grant he never may, for the
sake of his dear Son Christ Jesus our only Savior and Redeemer, into whose
hands I commit you all, bidding You and all the World adieu. Which may be
added to those he spoke on the Ladder, mentioned in the Epistle.





At last he concludes his life with these words (as may be seen in one of his
Papers.)

I resign up my Spirit most cheerfully into the hands of God, hoping to find
mercy with him through Christ. I know no other name under Heaven, whereby I may
be saved, but his alone, who was dead, and is alive again and lives for
evermore. And therefore I am confident of his most precious promises which I
believe to be faithful and true (as he is) for pardon and immortal Life.
Therefore I beseech him to accept of my most hearty thanks for his great mercy
shown unto me, hoping he will receive me into the Company of Spirits of Just
Men made perfect, to give him thanks for ever And as I desire to find mercy
with him so I forgive all mine Enemies, beseeching God to forgive them, and to
bless and comfort all my Friends, that at last we may live together in
everlasting life. -- From the whole of this Narrative and Discourse we may
learn,

1. To despair of none, though never so ignorant and ungodly, but while the
sinner is on this side the Grave, let us use the means of Divine appointment.
It is the good pleasure of the Almighty here and there, to cull out from among
the Children of men, the chief of sinners. Sometimes he lays hold upon the most
unlikely, and draws them by his Spirit to his Son: Sometimes he calls the
deformed and most despicable, and has a time of love for them: Sometimes he
rectifies by his Grace, such as are of as crooked a Nature, as is in Nature to
be found, and renewes in them a right Spirit: Sometimes he (who swears by
himself, that he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but rather that
he return from his evil ways and live) turns the heart of a Swearer, a Liar,
a Thief and Murderer, to mind his Salvation in good earnest. O the unfathomable
depth of goodness and mercy of the most High and Holy One of Israel! I have
more than once or twice read of such as have cried out in the sense of
Superabounding Grace [Let none despair of the worst of sinners for our sake.]

2. Let not any dare to presume in a course of sin because God is gracious. His
mercy is over all: but his special and saving mercy is bounded with his truth,
and granted only to the truly penitent: If thou be a self-willd wretch and
resolved to persist in the way of sinners, I pray ask leave first of the Great
Lawgiver before thou go any further. Ah! but with what face dare thou beg
such a liberty? But if thou will go on without his leave, then go out of his
sight, Jer. 23.24.
where he cannot see thee; but whither can thou flee from his presence? Can
any man hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him? says the
Lord. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? says the Lord. He threatens presumptuous
ones that fear not his glorious and fearful Name, to make their Plagues
wonderful Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. and chap. 29.19, 20, etc.
. But if out of his unspeakable compassion he plucks here and there one as
firebrarnds out of the fire; yet he usually makes such know by sad and bitter
experience, the evil of their ways and doings, and what it is not to fear this
glorious and fearful Name: The Lord thy God, he will wound the hairy scalp of
those that go on in their wickedness; and tho he heals some, whom he sees
walking in destructive ways, yet ordinarily he lays the foundation of the cure
in trouble and anguish of spirit, and deep distress of mind.

3. Let us bless the Lord with our Soul, who leads captivity captive, and
makes a Thief and Murderer happy, in turning to him, and sets him up as a
monument of his stupendous Grace, that we may behold and wonder. Our Converts
are so few and rare among those that walk at liberty, that it cannot but be
looked upon as a singular Example of rich and special grace, when we can find
but one among those that are bound in Fetters, truly converted. Fishers of men,
that have not the liberty to cast their Net in the broad Waters; or if they
have, find little success; are glad to see what they can get in the narrow
Straights. And if they can get but one Soul, they count the gain more worth
abundantly, than all their toil and labor.

Some heretofore have ransackt Prisons to rake out such wretches as they found
willing to swear against their own Consciences to ruin others: But it is more
refreshing to a Servant of Christ, to find out one, that will speak the Truth
in his heart, and from his heart, though it be against his own life: One, that
confessed and gave glory to God; one, that prayed much, and obtained great Faith
(greater than is found among many of a long standing in the profession of the
true Religion) and loved much, because much was forgiven, and his consolations
thereupon were not small.

That wicked one at first prevailed with him, but the good Spirit at last
overcame the Devil. Greater is he, says the Holy Apostle, that is in you, than
he that is in the World. 1 John 4.4.
The blessed Spirit inclined and enabled him to repent of his Evil Works, and
Wickedness, but Satan could not make him repent of his ceasing to do evil; he
was not able by force or fraud, to make him repent of his Repentance, or of the
forsaking of his sins, or of his doing works meet for Repentance.

Converting Grace is the Sinners rescue and deliverance from the God of this
World, and Christ's subduing his iniquities. Henceforth,

(1. The sincere Convert is one blessed of the Lord with all spiritual
blessings: He is one of the number of the Father's peculiar ones, one among
Christ's Brethren and Friends, one in whom his Holy Spirit abides: He is one
that has the mark of God's Election upon him, and the seed of everlasting Love
in him, that will never die, nor leave him, till it spring up to Eternal Life.

A sincere Convert was once a Prodigal, that had wasted all and brought himself
to a starving condition but now he is come to himself, and returned to his
Father, humbly confessing his Folly and Wickedness and is made welcome: He was
as one wounded, and lying in the High Way in his blood and Filth, but now he is
healed, cleansed and revived. Should you see a Christian among the Turks used
like a Horse or a Dog, would not such a sight make your bowels yearn toward
him? Why a poor Unconverted Wretch has worse usage from the Devil, and ought
we not then to pity him greatly and pray for him heartily? But if afterward we
find this sinner set at liberty, and among his Friends, and kindly used, we may
well say to such a one, O Friend, the World is well amended with you; Blessed
be the Lord, who has dealt thus wondrously with you.

(2.) A sincere Convert, whatever his condition be in the World, in what Degree
or Quality soever he stands among Men, is a blessing. Converted Souls are the
Glory and Treasure of the Church; the Riches of the World; the Substance of any
Land or Nation, Isa. 6.13. As good Corn in the Field is the Husband-Mans
Substance, and not the gay Weeds: These are the Pillars of the Earth, or as the
Stones under Ground, which support the stately structure, which those parts
which seem more glorious, do not.

(3.) God is greatly to be praised for the conversion of any poor Soul. Act.
11.18.
The Thessalonians being turned from Idols, to the Service of the Living and
True God; the Apostle tells them [ We give thanks to God always for you all, 1
These. 1.2.] and that he and other Saints were bound so to do, 2 These. 1.3. God
be thanked, says he to the Romans, that ye were the servants of sin (but not
now) but have obeyed from the heart that form of sound Doctrine, whereto ye
were delivered, Romans 6.17. He glorified the Holy One, for turning the ungodly
from their iniquities, and the Churches glorified God in his Conversion, Gal.
c. 1. ver. 22, 23, 24. One Sinner that repents, refreshes the heart of
Saints on Earth, and causes joy in the presence of the Angels in Heaven, Luke
15.10.

Thus under many infirmities it has pleased the Almighty to put me upon
improving that little spare time he has given me from other Employment, in
setting down a few things of many concerning this poor Malefactor: In which
Discourse, though some Circumstances be omitted, and others not so exactly
related as some might expect, yet for the substance, I dare say, the truth is
here delivered.

I heartily desired, this might have been done by a better hand; but seeing
none would engage in this service, I, the least of all, and most unworthy of
any of Christ's Servants, have ventured to cast my mite, such as it is, into
the Treasury. The good Lord accept it in his Son, and make it useful to some
poor Soul for his Name sake.

October. 23. 1696.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Edward Giles
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence.

A Word in Season.

Defensive Armor against four of Satan's most Fiery Darts.

Sermons upon the whole first and second Chapters of the Canticles.

Thirteen Sermons upon several Useful Subjects.

The Happiness of Brethren dwelling together in Unity. All published by John
Collings, D. D. of Norwich.

The Way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to Christ.

The Glory of Christ set forth, with the Necessity of Faith, in several
Sermons; both by Mr. Tho. Allen, late Pastor of a Church of Christ at Norwich.

Enoch's Walk with God, and Christ a Christian's Gain: By Mr. Timothy Armitage,
late Pastor of a Church of Christ at Norwich.

A Discourse of the Preciousness of Christ, and of the Preciousness of Faith.

Precious Promises the Portion of Overcomers.

Sermons on five several Useful Subjects: All by Mr. John Lougher, Minister in
Norfolk.

The Saints Ebenezer: By Mr. Francis English, late Minister in Norwich.

Directions to Spell English right.

The History of the Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther.

The Dead Saints Speaking; being a Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr.
Newcomb, of Dedham in Essex.

The English Presbyterian.

The Miracles of Christ.

The Ordinary Matter of Prayer drawn into Questions and Answers.

Two Treatises; the first of, Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus in all Cases and
Conditions. The second, Of a Christian's Hope in Heaven, and Freedom from
Condemnation by Christ. Both by Mr. Robert Asty, late Minister of Jesus Christ
in Norwich.

Obedience to Magistrates recommended, in a Sermon Preached Sept. 9. 1683. By
Jonathan Clapham, Rector of VVramplingham in Norfolk.

Two Discourses; one of Spiritual Blessings, the other, that God has an high
account of the least Grace in the Saints: By Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of
a Church of Christ in Norwich. Infant


