The Christian Race: A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT KENSINGTON, ON
Sunday the 31th of July, 1692.

By RICHARD LVCAS D. D. Vicar of St. Stephens Coleman-street.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

London: Printed for Samuel Smith at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

The Christian Race: Delivered in a SERMON Preached before the QUEEN at
Kensington, etc.
HEBR. xii. 1. Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great a
Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the Race that is set before us.


TO confront Atheism with the Resurrection of Jesus, and Immorality with the
Lives of Saints, demonstrating the Power of God in the one, and of Faith in the
other, is a way of arguing, which if it do not Reclaim the Infidel and Sinner,
if it do not utterly silence the Objections of the one against the Truth, and
of the other against the Possibility of Religion, must yet needs ruffle and
disturb the Conscience of both, and fill it with an uneasy Shame and Fear; but
how much more must this way of Reasoning prevail wherever there are any
Principles of Natural Religion, or any Seeds of Ingenuity and Probity;
wherever there is but a Form of Godliness, or the least Disposition to the
Power of it. This is the Method the Apostle here observes, he demonstrates the
Force and Virtue of Faith by the insuperable Courage and Patience of such in
all Ages as were acted and supported by it: And then well knowing, that the
Belief of another Life was established upon a brighter Revelation and fuller
Evidence than God had ever yet vouchsafed the World, addressing himself to
Christians, as Men who would be ashamed to be outdone by Jew or Gentile, or
shrink at such Trials as they had triumphed over, he concludes in the words of
my Text, Wherefore, seeing we also are compassed about with so great a Cloud of
Witnesses, etc.

These words contains three Parts: I. A Duty. II. Directions for the successful
discharge of it. III. Motives and Inforcements to it.


The Duty is, To run the Race that is set before us:

The Direction consists of Three Rules: 1. That we must lay aside every weight;
but especially, 2ly, The sin that does so easily beset us. 3ly, That we must
run with patience.

The Motives and Inforcements are partly expressed in these words, Seeing we
are compassed about with such a Cloud of Witnesses; partly implied and involved
in the Metaphorical Description of our Duty, The Race that is set before us;
for this intimates a Crown to be the Reward of him, who so runs as to obtain.

First of the Duty: The Race of the Primitive Christians consisted especially
in the Propagating the Kingdom of Jesus, and securing their own by Sufferings
and Blood. And that this is the Race my Text immediately relates to, is plain;
it being nothing else but an Exhortation founded on the Trials and Tortures in
the former Chapter, and reinforced by the Example of Jesus in this, Who for the
Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the Shame. But if
we take this Exhortation in the utmost latitude we may, and suppose it
addressed to all Christians in general, then our Race will consist in doing the
good which God has appointed us, and especially in surmounting whatever
difficulty or opposition we may encounter in the pursuit of it.

1. In doing Good: The great design of Christianity is to multiply our
Obligations and Encouragements, and to raise and enlarge our Capacities of
doing good. The Holy Scripture was inspired and written that the Man of God
might be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work, and the Holy Spirit
is communicated, to relieve the Weaknesses and Indispositions of our Natures,
and enable us to act the great things which that prescribes. Illumination fills
the Mind of Man with a just comprehension of the Dignity of his Nature, and the
great ends of his Creation. Purification sets him at liberty to pursue them,
and fires the Heart with a holy Ardour and Zeal to do so: and Faith strengthens
and fortifies him against the contradiction of Sinners and Temptations of the
Body. Doing good then is undoubtedly that wherein the Christian Race consists.
But it must be

2ly, That Good which God has appointed us. We must neither contract nor
enlarge the Notion of doing good beyond those Bounds which God has set us. We
must not enlarge it, by placing Religion in those Works which Prejudice or
Prepossession, Fancy or Faction, Lust or Passion, not God prescribes: Nor may
we break in upon the Rights, or invade the Offices of others, out of a design
of doing good. Purity of Intention will hardly expiate Rashness and
Presumption; nor will any Good attained, compensate the Mischiefs flowing from
an Example of so much Injustice and Confusion; nor is it therefore to be
wondered at, if such a one meet with the Punishment of Vzza, not the Crown of
St. Paul.

And as we must not enlarge, so we must not contract the Notion of doing Good.
To which end I must remark to you, That it consists not only, 1. in rescuing
the Wretched and Unfortunate from Temporal, or, 2. the Fool and Sinner from
Eternal Evil, i. e. in rooting out Vice and Error, and propagating Truth and
Virtue, concerning both which there can be no doubt; but also, 3ly, In the due
Discharge of the Duties of Secular Stations or Callings. The Reason of this is
plain; they are all, from the highest to the lowest, in a true and proper
sense, appointed of God; they do minister to excellent ends, and proceed from,
and are conducted by excellent Principles, Faith in God, and Conformity to his
Providence; and then no wonder if Humility, Faith, and Purity of Intention,
transmute Civil into Religious Actions, as the Elixir of Adepts is said to do
inferior Metals into Gold. Hence it is that the subduing Kingdoms, and
working Righteousness, which in the Ideom of the Old Testament, signifies the
protecting and delivering the People of God, the waxing valiant in fight, and
putting to flight the Armies of the Aliens, are recorded by the Apostle Hebr.
11. not only as the Heroic Exploits of Gideon, and Baruch, Jepththa, and
Sampson and David, but as truly and properly Acts of Faith, as the Sacrifice of
Abel or Abraham, the Ark of Noah, or the Flight of Moses. And hence Ephesians. 6. the
Industry and Faithfulness of Servants is interpreted, as truly Religion toward
God, as Service toward Man, and this upon a ground that Ministers
Encouragement to Men of all Conditions and Professions, knowing that whatsoever
good a Man does, the same he shall receive of God, whether he be bond or free:
all this put together, as it furnishes us with a just Notion of the Christian
Race, so does it with a just one of Christianity it self; he derogates from it,
who forms any other Idea of it than this, That it is a most effectual and
comprehensive Design of advancing all the good Mankind is capable of. As it has
its Virtues which adorn the Man, so has it those too which adorn the Prince,
the General, the Judge, and so downwards. As it has its Virtues which perfect
and accomplish Human Nature, so has it those too which cement and support Civil
Society: It is is so far from consisting in Modes and Forms, in Heats and
Enthusiasm, that it consists not in Mortification it self alone; laying aside
every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset us, is in my Text but a
Qualification or Preparation to the running the Race set before us. Whoever
then confines Religion to Private and Solitary Piety, I mean to such a one as
is useless to the World, dissolves the Vigor, and impoverishes the Generosity
of the Christian Spirit. Godliness and Sobriety without Righteousness, would
make but a maimed and imperfect Religion; for it is not the Design of Religion
to resolve Societies and Kingdoms into Hermits and Monks, but to purify and
raise them, and make the Kingdoms of the World the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ.

This is a Design so glorious, so benign and gracious, that one would think,
whoeser ingages in it, should find every thing easy and yielding, propitious
and safavourable to him. But alas! if he consider the Corruption of Nature, the
Malice of Hell, and Degeneracy of the World, he has reason to expect a very
formidable Opposition. In the Conquest of which consists

The Third and most considerable Part of the Christian Race. My Son, said Jesus
the Son of Sirach, Ecclesiasticus the 2d Chapter, and verses 1, 2. if thou come
to serve the Lord, prepare thy Soul for Temptation; set thy heart aright, and
constantly endure, and make not haste in time of trouble. Which, if we should
suppose him to speak Prophetically, will amount to thus much, Whoever thou art
who resolvest to enter the Lists of Christianity, and run the Race that is set
before thee, dream not of a cheap and easy Victory, thou shall be encountered
with violent Opposition from within and from without. Sloth, or
Self-preservation, will solicit thee to ease and rest, why should thou be
righteous over much, and destroy thy self? why should thou exchange thy calm
and security of a quiet private Piety, for the storms and troubles in which thy
Zeal and Rashness will imbroil thee? Diffidence or Distrust in God, Impatience
under thy own Fortune, or Envy of another, will suggest to thee many more
effectual and compendious ways to Honor and Interest, than a conscientious, i.
e. a tame and toilsome discharge of Duty. Sensuality, or at least Lukewarmness,
will endeavor to persuade, that it is a Supreme point of Wisdom to reconcile
the Hopes of another World with the Pleasures and Enjoyments of this; to which
if thou listen thou art undone. For this is a Persuasion which shoots a dead
Palsy through the very Sinews of Zeal, clips the Wings, and takes down the
Sails of Charity. Nor shall thou be less distressed from without, then from
within; the Squadrons of Hell will beset thee round, and Enemies will fall on
from every Quarter; there will be Sadducees and Atheists that will Attaque thy
Faith, and tear up, if they can, thy Righteousness by the Roots: There will be
Scribes and Pharisees who will blaste thy good Actions, and aggravate thy
Infirmities, either out of hatred to the Communion thou art off, or which is
worse, a close and secret Aversion to all Religion. There will not be wanting
Hobbists and Herodians, Machivilians, Craftsmen, and innumerable others, who
will Assault thy Religion consisting in Zeal and Charity; some as Folly, others
as a Scandal and Offense; some as Enemy to Caesar, and others as Enemy to
Trade. For an humble, modest, and a frugal Religion, will not fail of being
Traduced, as menacing the Trade as much as the Sin of a Nation, and as
impairing the Revenues, while it prunes the Luxury of a State. Reformation,
though it disturbed a vicious World, as the Angel did Bethesda's Water, only to
work Cures, yet shall it never escape the Rallery and Reflections, the small
and great Shot of the Loose and Immoral; and whatever Measures it take, whether
it revive old Constitutions, or recommend new, shall ever be branded as Design
and Hypocrisy, by all such as thrive and grow fat by Transgressing the Laws of
God and Man. Nay more yet, there will not be wanting Advocates of Vice, or
Enemies to Virtue, in thine own Train and Family, who will dehort thee from all
expensive and hazardous Sacrifices, and endeavor to divert thee, as St. Peter
would have done our Savior from the Paths which lead to Trials or Sufferings,
to Gethsemane or Golgotha. Finally, to complete the Politics of Hell, thou
shall find the World divided into Factions, Religious and Civil, who will stamp
Vice on the most glorious Actions, and Honor and Virtue on Extravagancies and
Debaucheries, who will persecute the Truth of God as Heresy and Novelty, and
stickle for the Tenets, i. e. the Interest of their Parties, as for the
Fundamentals of Faith, or Precepts of the Decalogue. And after all, God himself
sometimes will withdraw, and seem to abandon and give thee up to the Will of
wicked Men, so that thou shall be ready to cry out with his beloved Son, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Here is the Trial, here is the Patience
of the Saints. These and many more are the Difficulties thou art to conquer, if
thou will so run as to obtain; and therefore prepare thy self by Mortification
and Discipline, and fortify thy Soul by the wisest Advice, and the most
powerful Encouragements, for thou shall have need of all.

This minds me of my Second General Direction for the Discharge of this Duty,
consisting of Three Rules. I begin with the first, that is, to lay aside every
weight, every corrupt Affection, which like a weight would clog and retard us
in our Race.

This Advice contains several important Truths, as First, That whatever the
Disorder or Depravation of Nature be, which we derive from our first Parents,
our Destruction is from our selves; and those Reluctancies and Aversions for
Righteousness, to which we owe our Ruin, are rather contracted, then Original.
It Is true, there is a Law in the Body which wars against the Law of the Mind;
but then it is as true, that there is a Law in the Mind, which wars against the
Law of the Body. The Language of the Body is indeed more soft and insinuating,
but that of the Mind more authoratative and awful. The Body, like Esau, is the
Firstborn; for as Job observes, Man is born like a wild Asses Colt; but the
Mind, like Jacob, comes into the World with a better Title by Divine
designation, and a Capacity which soon defeats it of its usurped Possession of
the Birthright. The Objects finally of the Body are present and sensible; yet
to the Soul, the Glory and Eternity of its Objects make amends for their
distance and futurity, and Faith Supplies the place of Vision; for Faith is the
Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen, Hebr. 11.1. So
that it is evident, the Scale of Victory is not turned on the side of the Body
against the Mind, till false Principles have supplanted the Authority of the
one, and Indulgence and ill Customs increased and fortified the Propensions of
the other to worldly and sensible things. I have remarkt this, that none of us
may go about to remove the Guilt of our Ruin from our selves on our first
Parents, or God, that none may think we have sufficiently discharged our Duty
by accusing our Nature, or excused our Vices by Arraigning our Frailty. This
calls to mind a

Second Truth contained in this Rule, namely, That no Sin is invincible, that
none is so deeply rooted in us, either by Nature or Custom, but it may be
extirpated. This is an Assertion you will easily admit, if you consider by what
glorious Instruments the Conversion of Man is wrought, the Spirit of God, and
the Word of God, i. e. the Wisdom and the Power of God. Or if you consider the
Description of it in Holy Scripture; it is called the Divine Nature, the New
Creature, the Image of God, the Life of Faith, a being transformed from Glory
to Glory, the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, and such like. What Degrees
of Perfection all this may import, I enquire not; it is plain it can imply
nothing less than a Purification from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and
through Sanctification of Spirit, Soul and Body. Nor is this a matter of mere
Speculation; the Converts of the first Times, were living Demonstrations of
this Truth; and their daily Actions were nothing else but the glorious Effects
of an entire Victory, not over the Weakest only, but most Obstinate of their
Sins. All this inculcates this one plain Lesson, That no Man must think to
shelter his Negligence and Lukewarmness, or any Darling Lust, under the
pretense of an insuperable Infirmity; or that by owning himself to be but Man,
he is excused from being a Christian. The truth is, if Christianity did consist
in a Quarrel, only with our Sins, not a Conquest of them, it would be nothing
else but a Circulation of Sins and Follies; for Regret and Remorse, which does
only disturb, not reform, may be reckoned amongst the Infirmities of Man, and
that Repentance which brings not forth Fruit, is it self to be repented of
amongst our other Faults. For,

Thirdly, The last Truth I Will observe to you from this Rule, is, That Spiritual
Liberty is the beginning of Perfection; that the first step toward doing Well,
is ceasing to do Evil; that the Christian must make the first Experiment of his
Zeal upon himself; that Reformation and Charity must begin at home: not only
that his Attempts of doing good, may have in them their proper Luster and
Majesty, their just Authority and Influence; but indeed that he may be
qualified and capacitated for making any: for how weak and unsuccessful must
his Endeavors be, whilst some wretched Lust takes up his time, imployes the
Vigor of his Soul, and alienates his Affection from every thing that is truly
Great or Good. Will the Unclean deny the Importunities of his Lust, to satisfy
those of his Duty? will the Covetous impoverish himself, (so he styles giving
Alms) to support others in Laziness, and yet his Heap of Treasure, like heaps
of Soil and Dung, is good for nothing till it is scattered abroad? Will the
Proud stoop to the humble Offices which our Crucified Savior did? will the
Soft or the Ambitious run those Hazards, or endure those Hardships which are
generally unavoidable in carrying on any considerable Good? or will the
Factious cross the Interest of his Party to promote that of his God, I mean
that of Religion in General? This abundantly demonstrates how inconsistent
every sinful Affection is with Success in our Christian Race, and consequently
how necessary the Advice of my Text is, That we should put it off as a burden
or weight. Nor is this true only of this or that particular Sin, but of all in
general, and therefore me must put off every weight. Strive, said our blessed
Savior, to enter in at the straight Gate; for straight is the Gate, and narrow
is the way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. All our
vigor, all our strength, assisted by the Spirit of God, will be little enough
to open this Way, and storm Heaven. Ah! what can we expect from Affections
divided between God and Mammon, or any other Lust? from Strengths scattered and
disperfed in pursuit of Vice as well as Virtue? and these deserted and
abandoned by the Spirit of God; for the Holy Spirit of Discipline will fly
Deceit, and will not abide when Iniquity comes in, Wisd. 1.

But though all Sin in general obstruct the Christian in his Race, and defeat
him of his Crown, yet none so fatally as the beloved one: And therefore it is
against this, against the sin that easily besets us, that the Apostle in his
second Rule awakens all our Jealousy, and Summons all our Courage; this being
the Sin in which especially lies the strength of Satan, and in the Conquest of
it the first, and I think I may add the greatest Difficulty of Christianity.

To illustrate therefore this Advice of the Apostle, I Will first show what it
is, and then secondly, how to cure it.

First, What it is; As in the Humors of the Body, so in the Vices of the Mind,
there is one Predominant, which is this, (...), it has an Ascendant over us,
and leads and governs us; it is in the Body of Sin, what the Heart is in the
Body of our Nature; it begins to live first, and dies last; and whilst it lives
it communicates Life and Spirit to the whole Body of Sin, and when it dies, the
Body of Sin expires with it. It is the Sin to which our Constitutions leads,
our Circumstances betray, and Custom inslaves us; the Sin to which, not our
Virtues only, but Vices too, lour their Topsail and submit; the Sin, which when
we would impose upon God and our Consciences, we excuse and disguise with all
imaginable Artifice and Sophistry; but when we are sincere with both, we oppose
first and conquer last. It Is, in a word, the Sin which Reigns and Rules in the
Unregenerate, and too often Alarums and Disturbs, ah, that I could say no more,
the Regenerate! Having thus fully discovered what this Sin is, without vexing
and torturing the Text by Criticisins, I Will now proceed secondly, to show you
how to conquer it.

First, Endeavor to possess your Souls with a true Notion of Sin in General,
but especially of this beloved one in Particular; Falsehood and Folly, Levity
and Inconstancy. Cowardice and Ingratitude, and all that is base, constitute
the very Essence of Sin. As to the Effects of it, it dishonours, and as much as
in it lies dethrones God, disturbs and embroyls Human Society, depraves Nature,
perverts the true ends of Life; and for all these Reasons will one day bring
down all the Storms of Eternal Vengeance upon the Guilty and Impenitent Soul.

This is a true Notion of Sin in general, and let nothing ever tempt us to
softer Thoughts of our beloved Sin: The same baseness gives it being, and
though its Effects may not be so injurious, as those of some other Sins, either
to the Honor of Religion, or the Interest of Man, yet they will be no less
fatal to thee. This Sin is like some Diseases, which though they seem
contemptible in themselves, are always deadly to some Families and
Constitutions: But can that be a little Sin, which creates us the greatest
Trouble, Threatens us with the greatest Danger, and Intangles us in the
greatest Difficulties? Is that a little Sin which has so often overthrown our
Solemn Vows and Resolutions, robbed us of our Peace and Hopes, and filled our
Souls with Remorse and Shame? Is that a Sin to be despised which the weightiest
Reasons, the clearest Convictions, and warmest Impressions of the Spirit do
often fail to conquer? Is that finally a Sin to be sheltered and excused which
bewailed, condemned, renounced, detested, baffled, broken, routed, often
r'allies and renews the fight, and recovers for a time its former Dignity and
Authority? Certainly, did we Morning and Evening seriously reflect upon the
strength and mischief of this our favorite Sin, of which each Man ought to
have a Catalogue by him, we should, whenever tempted to it, tremble and grow
pale at the Temptation, and fly back with the horror of Joseph, How shall I do
this great wickedness, and sin against God? But after we have done all this, we
must take as much pains to preserve, as we did to imprint this Notion in our
Souls; we must not suffer our Reason to vary with our Pulse, and our
Resolutions to change with our Company, Fortune, Temper, Humor; otherwise we
shall soon pull down in an Hour of Gaiety, what we built up in many sober ones,
and a fit of Pleasure and Jollity will deprive us in a moment of the Fruit of
many Prayers, Reflections and Meditations. And because we are very liable to
this, therefore

Secondly, We must frequently renew our Resolutions against it: And these
Resolutions must first be levelled, not only against this Sin, but all
Appearances of, and Approaches to it. What is Cruelty in Princes, is Piety in
Penitents; the Expression of our Displeasure must light, not only on the
Criminal it self, but on all its Friends and Relatives. We must deal with this
Sin as Israel was obliged to do with Idols, not only reduce the Idol it self to
Ashes, and bury it in a Stream of Repentant Tears, but cut down its Groves, dig
up his Altars, slay its Priests, and deface whatever might tend to preserve or
revive the memory of it.

Secondly, These Resolutions must be as well fitted to all Occasions and
Circumstances as possible we can; we must consider what Arts, what Arms this
Sin is wont to make use of, where our Nature or our Virtue is weakest, or most
exposed to the Assaults of the Enemy; we must in one word, neither be ignorant
of any Frailty of our own, nor any wile of the Devil, and then our Resolutions
must be so formed, as to obviate each. Is my Temper Rash and Precipitate, Light
and Inconstant? I must resolve to correct it by the Awe of the Divince
Presence, by Meditations, on Death and Judgment. Is it slow, heavy and
unapprehensive? I must resolve to awaken it by Retirement and Prayer; by
entering often into an impartial view of my own state; by Conversation, if I can
find that it has warmth and spirit in it; by the most pathetick portions of
Holy Writ, and by a frequent Recollection of all those Truths which have Edge
and Point in them, or at least have so to me. Is this Sin wont to dart its
Infection through the Eye? Is it wont to wound or defile us by the Ear? we must
block up these Avenues of Death and Damnation; we must guard the Soul, as God
did Paradise with the flaming Sword of an Angel; with that awful Virtue and
inflamed Zeal, that Temptations may fly from before us. Thus must we, in a
word, oppose Art against Art, and Force against Force, and in our Spiritual
Warfare imitate the Wisdom of the Children of this World, who count it
unpardonable Error to be often imposed on by the same Artifice, or betrayed by
the same Methods. After all, you must bind these Resolutions on your Souls, by
Prayer and Sacraments, and this one particular Consideration,

Thirdly. That nothing less than the Conquest of this darling Sin can gain a
Christian true Peace and Liberty. While we retain a Sin that Rivals God in our
Affection, neither our Obedience nor Assurance can be sincere or constant; we
can have no pleasure in our Reflection on our selves, nor confidence in our
Addresses to God. No Man is so wicked, as to be inclined to all sins, nor so
foolish, as to quit none; it is therefore the quitting the predominant Sin,
which is the best proof of our Integrity; with others, we part, as with Civil
Acquaintances, when the Visit is done; but with these, as with Confidents and
Friends, or in the Language of our Savior, with our right Hands, or our right
Eyes. But when this is done, our Freedom and Pleasure will compensate our
Trouble; and Hope, and Joy, reward our Mortification. But then we must take
care that we finish, as well as we begin and complete that Christian Race in
Patience, which we began in Mortification. Which brings me to my third Rule,
That we must run with Patience.

This Rule will contain two or three Things: 1. A Supposition or Insinuation
that such as stand may fall; that such as run may faint and grow weary, and so
forfeit their Crown.

All the Promises which God makes his People of his Presence and Protection in
their Dangers and Trials, are designed to minister Encouragement to the Humble
and the Watchful, and must not be perverted to nourish Confidence and Security,
or to defeat that Humility, Vigilance, and Circumspection which the Spirit of
God in Scripture endeavors, by repeated Exhortations, to beget in every
Christian. Our Savior indeed, when he tells his Disciples, Matthew. 24.24. That
there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets; and then adds, That they
shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible, they
shall deceive the very Elect; seems plainly to imply, that it was not possible;
but then, without flying to the distinction between the Faithful and Elect,
made use of indeed by St. Austin, and some others of the Fathers, whether
sufficiently founded in Scripture, or no, I determine not; without flying, I
say, to this distinction, this Text may easily be reconciled with those which
suppose the possibility of a Righteous Man's Revolt from Virtue; for it is very
obvious to any one, that our Savior speaks not here of the Perseverance of
this or that particular Person, but of the Continuance or Preservation of the
Christian Church, asserting no more here then what he had done before, That the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. It Is true indeed, some of the
Ancients thought that there was a Height or Eminence of Holiness, which when
Man had arrived at, he was raised above the possibility of falling. I examine
not what Countenance this Opinion had from Holy Scripture, because it is, if an
Error, I think at least an harmless one; for the more holy, the more humble;
the nearer to Perfection, the more fervent and watchful. But I Will not entangle
my self in this Matter, since all I intend to build upon this Doctrine, is only
that Caution and Circumspection, which the Scripture every where exhorts
Christians to, and particularly here in my Text.

Now the Advice of Patience referring to that Opposition which the Christian is
to Encounter from within and from without, we may reasonably conceive it to
inculcate these two Things: 1. That we should watch carefully over our selves;
2. That we should bear the shock, and onset of the World with Constancy and
Courage.

First, That we should Watch, etc. Since he that stands may fall, let no Man
presume too soon of an entire Conquest, nor grow Secure or Careless, as if past
the reach of Danger. When we have put off every old Sin, the Seeds of new ones
will remain till we put off the Body; we must therefore continue our Guard and
Watch, and use as much diligence to keep the Enemy under, as we did at first to
subdue it. It is a wise Example St. Paul has set us, who continued the same
Discipline over the Body which he began with; I keep under the Body, and bring
it in subjection, least at any time when I preach to others, I my self may
become a Castaway. It often happens in the Christian as is does in Secular
Wars, that he loses the Fruit of a dear bought Victory, who makes too much
haste to enjoy it. If therefore you will be safe, you must not be secure; be
not too soon confident of a Reconciliation with God, nor too hasty to calm the
Sorrows, and still the Agonies of an afflicted Conscience; the more lasting the
Grief is, the more entire and complete will be the Victory; the more wakeful
and timorous thy Soul is, the more firm will be thy Peace. In this case too
forward Joy is like a too forward Spring, whose early Blossoms seldom come to
Maturity and Perfection. Nay, I must put you in mind, That when the Season of
this Fruit is come, i. e. when Tribulation has wrought Patience, Patience
Experience, Experience Hope, Hope raised high on the Wings of Love, Hope
inebriated by the Joy of the Holy Ghost, we must even then follow the Advice of
the Psalmist, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with trembling.
Even then our Zeal must increase with our Hope, and our Circumspection and
Humility with our Spiritual Pleasure; even then, as if our Work and Duty did
increase with our Strength and Capacity, as if the difficultest Task of our
Christianity was still behind, or all that we have hitherto done would amount
to nothing, if we did not hold out with Patience and Courage to the Goal. We
must immitate the great Apostle of the Gentiles, Brethren, I count not my self
to have apprehended, but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward
the Mark for the Prize of the high Calling of God which is in Christ Jesus,
Phil. 3.13, 14.

And you will see this very reasonable, if you consider what this Rule suggests
in the second place, namely, That we are to meet with much Opposition from the
World, which we must bear manfully; nor will these Trials have an end, but with
our Lives; nay, often the sharpest are reserved, like Martyrdom, for our last
Moments: Therefore the Scripture every where inculcates, That we should not
look on Christianity as a state of Sensuality; or project to our selves the
Pleasure and the Honor, the Ease and Interest of Life; but Hardships and
Labor, Watching, Contention and War: whence it was our Lord did advise his
Auditors, that before they followed him, they should consider what they
undertook, as wise Builders do their Fund before they begin to build, or wise
Princes their Strength and Provision before they engage in a War. It Is true,
the taking up the Cross in a litteral Sense, was a qualification for
Discipleship, more immediately requisite in those Ages; but it is as true, that
in bigger or less proportion, the words of our Lord are applicable to all, If a
Man will not take up his Cross and follow me, he cannot be my Disciple. Whoever
will imitate the Life of the blessed Jesus, who went about doing good, must
resolve to content himself with his own Integrity, to despise Censure, to
digest the Ingratitude of Man, and vanquish and weather those Enmities which a
steady adherence to Truth and Justice, and much more a Zeal for reclaiming
Vice, or reviving decayed Religion, will often create him; he must shrink at no
Toil or Hardship which an excellent Action will put him to, nor must he be
discouraged by those Baffles or Disappointments which he will often suffer in
his most Charitable Designs. In one word, he must always have in his Thoughts
the Words of our blessed Savior, In the World you shall have Tribulation, but
in me ye shall have Peace; but be of good comfort, I have overcome the World:
i. e. he must propose to himself no Peace but from Religion; nor any Comfort
from the World, but from the Conquest of it. This, you will say, is a hard Lesson,
who can hear it? Not so hard neither; for where Affliction dwells, there the
Spirit of God and Glory dwells too. Trials refine and raise the Faith and
Courage of a true Christian, and the overflowing of holy Pleasure, that Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory in St. Peter, do ever and anon compensate the
Toils and Difficulties of his Warfare; and a gracious God has provided Supports
and Encouragements proportionble to his Necessities; which is the last thing I
am to speak to.

3dly, The Motives to this Duty. The first of which is, We are encompassed with
a Cloud of Witnesses: without considering whether this Expression do suppose
departed Saints Spectators and Judges of our Race here below, what I am to
remark from it is, That the Apostle lays before us their Examples as undeniable
Proof of this Truth, that there does no Temptation befall us, but what is common
to men, and what has been conquered by them too. The Apostle has demonstrated
this from the Old Testament, and we may demonstrate it from the New. The
Primitive Times were as bright for their Virtue, as their Miracles, and made as
many Proselytes by the one as by the other: How triumphant did then the
Strength of Faith, the Ardours of Zeal, and the Tenderness of Charity appear.
'Twas as much difficulty then to restrain the Flights of Faith, and Transports
of Love within the Bounds of Christian Prudence, as to enkindle them now to any
degrees of Decency. Then indeed the Just did live by Faith, they acknowledged
themselves to be Strangers, and Pilgrims upon Earth, and sought no Country but
a Heavenly one; then indeed they followed after Righteousness with that
Resolution and Impetuosity, which showed, that they did really believe they
contended for a Crown and Kingdom: But now, alas! our Love of this World vies
with their Contempt of it, and our Contempt of Heaven, with their Passion for
it: Now carnal Prudence eats up our Zeal; Faction consumes our Charity; the
Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life deforms our Mortification; dispirits our
Devotion; and every little blast of Opposition overthrows our Faith. The
Atheist digs up the Foundations, and the Loose and Immoral demolish the
Superstructures; the one denies the Truth, and the other the Power of our
Christian Faith; in one word, we have degenerated to that degree, that there
needs as many Miracles to revive and restore the Life and Spirit of Religion
among us, as ever God has wrought to preserve the public Profession of it; and
were there not a few Names among us dear to Heaven, I persuade my self, God
could no more endure our Vices, than we their Reformation; and do you think now
that in the Day of the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, when he
shall render to every Man according to his Works, it will suffice to present
him with Excuses, instead of good Works; to urge the Temptation of the World
and the Frailties of Nature instead of conquering them; to plead the Hypocrisy
of Pretenders, and the Immorality of this or that Ecclesiastic, that is, the
Vices of the Bad, instead of imitating the Virtues of the Good; Alas, a Cloud
of Witnesses will be produced to baffle this Empty Sophestry, and refute these
poor Shifts; and then those Examples which could not here enkindle and excite
your Virtue will shame and reproach your Vice, and what could not reform, will
then serve to condemn you. But never may this prove the Portion of any one
here, but that Crown which is my second Motive.

Had there been any thing more dazzling upon Earth then Royalty, the Spirit of
God would have described the Felicity of Heaven by it; but since, there is not,
he is content to call the Reward of Righteousness a Crown; the State of the
Glorified a Kingdom, and themselves Kings and Priests to God for ever: But let
not this Metaphor serve to debase our Notion of that State. This is no Kingdom
of secret Fears and splendid Troubles, of wakeful Cares, and glittering
Dangers: No, it is a Kingdom of Philosophy and Love, of Knowledge and
Righteousness, of Beauty and Perfection, of Joy and Triumph, of Tranquillity and
Rest; not bred like that of the Ambitious, sometimes either by Satiety,
Disappointments, or an Increase of Years, but resulting purely from Security
and Ecstasy. In one word, As God is his own Heaven, so next to that, which
results from the Enjoyment of him, every one of the Blessed will be a Kingdom
to himself, being an Image of God drawn in little. And yet after all this, how
little is it of Heaven that we yet know; It Is Joys, for ought I know, are as
boundless as the Perfections of God from whence they flow. Ages may run by,
while we each day survey new Scenes of Wonders, and taste each day new Worlds
of Pleasures. Ah! I cannot wonder that such as were possessed with the Belief
and Expectation of this State, were willing to quit Mesopotamia or an Egypt for
an Heaven, Nets and Fisher-Boats for Crowns and Kingdoms, Trifles for Treasure,
Moments for an Eternity. Ah! did not Lust sully the Idea of Heaven; did not
some degree of Infidelity undermine our Belief of it, what Dangers, what
Difficulties should we not defy in order to secure it? Did doing Good expose
us to as many Reproaches from without, as doing Evil does from within? were the
state of the Righteous as uneasy as that of the Wicked, who are as the
troubled Sea when it cannot rest; yet what would not a Man do, what would he
not suffer, were his Soul fired with the Belief and Hopes of such a Heaven? How
much more fearless and active would Zeal be than Ambition? how much more
wakeful and indefatigable Charity than Lust or Covetousness, Revenge or Envy,
(Ah! with what Transport would Man pour out his Time, his Treasure, his
Strength on this one Design of Doing Good) had he but a Heaven always in his
Eye?

Let us then, that we may neither shrink, nor tire through any Difficulties or
Hazards which may attend us in this Race of Doing Good, look up daily unto
Jesus, till our Faith be turned into Vision; and make Heaven our Meditation,
till God make it our Reward: To whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Several Books published by Dr. Lucas Vicar of St. Stephens Coleman-street, and
sold by Samuel Smith at the Prince 's Arms in St. Paul 's Churchyard, 1692.
PRactical Christianity: Or an Account of the Holiness which the Gospel
enjoins, with Motives to it, and the Remedies it proposes against Temptations,
with a Prayer concluding each distinct Duty, in Octavo 1685. Price 3 s. 6 d.

-- Enquiry after Happiness, in several Parts, Vol. 1. in Octavo. The Second
Edition, Corrected and Enlarged 1692. Price 3 s. 6 d.

-- The true Notion of Humane Life: or, A Second Part of the Enquiry after
Happiness. In Octavo, 1690. Price 2 s. 6 d.

-- The Duty of Apprentices and Servants. 1. The Parents Duty how to Educate
their Children that they may be fit to be employed and trusted. 2. What
preparation is needful for such as enter into Service; with some Rules to be
observed by them how to make a wise and happy choice of a Service. 3. Their
Duty in Service toward God, their Master and themselves; with suitable Prayers
to each Duty; and some Directions peculiarly to Servants for the worthy
receiving the Holy Sacrament. Published for the Benefit of Families. In Octavo.
Price 1 s. 6 d.

-- A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas Lamb, July 23. 1686. Price 6
d.

-- A Sermon Preached at the Assizes held at Horsham in Sussex, Aug. 23. 1691.
Price 6 d.

-- Christian Thoughts for every Day of the Month, with a Prayer, wherein is
represented the Nature of Unfeigned Repentance, and of perfect Love toward
God. In Twelves. Price 1 s.

-- Devotion and Charity: In a Discourse before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, the Honorable the Court of Aldermen, with the Governors of the
Hospitals of London, on Wednesday in the Easter-week, at St. Bridget's Church,
being the 30th of March, 1692.

-- The Plain Man's Guide to Heaven; containing first his Duty toward God,
secondly toward his Neighbor, with proper Prayers, Meditations, and
Ejaculations; designed chiefly for the Countryman, Tradesman, Labourer, etc.
In Twelves, 1692. Price 1 s.

Dr. Thomas Manningham's Sermon about Public Worship, Preached before the
Queen on Wednesday the 23th of March, 1691/2.

The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the Creation. In two Parts. Viz.
The Heavenly Bodies, Elements, Meteors, Fossils, Vegetables, Animals, (Beasts,
Birds, Fishes, and Insects) more particularly in the Body of the Earth, its
Figure, Motion, and Consistency, and in the admirable Structure of the Bodies
of Man, and other Animals, as also in their Generation, etc. By John Ray Fellow
of the Royal Society. In Octavo. 1692.


