A Complaint OF THE OPPRESSED AGAINST OPPRESSORS.

OR, THE Unjust and Arbitrary PROCEEDINGS of some Soldiers and Justices,
against some Sober Godly Persons, in and near London; who now lie in stinking
Goals for the Testimony of a good Conscience.

With Some REASONS why they cannot Swear Allegiance, to obtain their Liberty.

Faithfully Collected by JOHN LOVEWEL, A constant Observer of their Patience in
Suffering, and of the Injustice of their Persecutors.

Zeph. 3.1. Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing City.

Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee: when thou shall
cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to deal
treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.

A COMPLAINT Of the OPPRESSED AGAINST OPPRESSORS.
THe Unjust proceedings of some in present power, against many in this Nation,
fearing God, cannot but be manifest to such sober men, that do or will take a
view of the same. I having knowledge of the Sufferings of many Godly Persons,
especially in and about London, whom their very adversaries cannot blemish
justly with the least spot of Infamy, dare not but let the World know the
Innocence of the men, and the Tyranny of their Oppressors: And in what I shall
say, I dare appeal to the Consciences of all sober and judicious persons of
what Persuasion soever, except the proud Prelate; Whether it be not Tyranny to
the height, for men to be seized and taken out of their Beds at midnight by
Soldiers, in a Hostile manner, with their Swords drawn, by means of which,
their Wives and Children have been much affrighted, to their great detriment in
point of health; and this done in a time of Peace, and without Warrant from
any, no not so much as a Warrant from a Justice of the Peace. Others, taken
from their peaceable Meetings, when they have been in the Lords service in a
public manner, the doors being open for all that would, to see what they did,
and hear what they said. Others, attached as they have passed along the streets
about their lawful Employments; and all this done by Soldiers without Warrant
from any, and by them, carried before some men called Justices, but such only
in Name and Title, nothing so in truth. For They afflict the just, and they
turn aside the poor in the gate from their right, Amos 5.12. But leaving them a
while, Reader take notice, that these Soldiers, to wit, one Liuetenant Wilton,
a man very well known where he lives, (but not for any virtue he has) and
Ensign Spike a man so well educated, that he scarce knows what Law or Religion
is, and as to the business of a Soldier he is also a stranger, as I in charity
judge of him: For these men, with the assistance of Sergeants and Soldiers,
like themselves, have contracted that guilt upon themselves, that had they
known Law, been Religious, or Soldiers, they would have scorned to have
defiled themselves, so much as with a touch with a finger. But their actions
have been such as above said, and how contrary to Magna Charta, and the
fundamental Laws of the Nation, I leave to the Judicious; and how liable they
are to be punished by Law for their so doing, will appear as follows.

Magna Charta, Cap. 29. Anno 9. Hen. 3. says, No free man shall be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or
be Outlawed, or Exiled, or any ways Destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon him,
nor deal with him, but by the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of
the Land; We shall not sell to any man, we shall not deny nor defer any man
Right or Justice. Again, No man of what estate or condition that he be, shall
be put from his Land or Tenement, or taken, imprisoned, or dis-inherited, or
put to death, without being brought in to answer by due process of Law. Anno
28. Ed. 3. Cap. 3. Thus he that has but little sight, may see how contrary to
the good and wholesome Laws of the Nation these men have acted, and how
dishonorable it is to the King and his Government, for such wicked Fellows to
be suffered in such arbitrary and villainous proceedings against sober men, as
they have from time to time practiced. For if no man, of what estate or
condition soever, shall be taken or Imprisoned without a due process of the
Law; then to seize any man without Warrant from some Minister of Justice, is to
take and Imprison him at the Wills and Lusts of these base and inferior
fellows, who matter not the Honor of the King, the Violating of Law, nor the
Liberty of the Subject; then will not these things cry loud to Heaven for
Vengeance? Besides these mercinary fellows, cannot excuse themselves by
pleading ignorance, for the King by open Proclamation, has strictly charged
and commanded all Officers and Soldiers, and all other persons whatsoever,
that they shall not molest nor trouble any of his good Subjects, without
Warrant or lawful Authority; as appears by his Proclamation, Entitled, A
Proclamation prohihibiting the Se zing of any persons, or Searching Houses,
without Warrant, except in time of actual Insurrection: Bearing date the
seventeenth of January, one thousand six hundred and sixty. The which
Proclamation (so much of it as is to our business in hand) I shall here insert,
for the better satisfaction of the Reader, as follows.

And we being given to understand, that during those late Commotions, several
persons have been imprisoned by Soldiers and others, their Houses Searched,
and their goods taken away, without lawful Anthority, and that thereupon
opprobrious words, and terms of discention, and discrimination of parties, have
been used and given to Our great dis-service, contrary to the before said Act
of Pardon and Oblivion; and not withstanding Our Royal pleasure, so often
published and declared to the contrary.

These are therefore strictly to charge and command all Officers and Soldiers,
and all other Persons whatsoever (unless it be upon inevitable necessity of
sudden and actual Rebellion and Insurrection) to forbear to molest or trouble
any of our good Subjects, either in their Persons or Estates, and not to
presume to Apprehend or Secure any Person or Persons, or Seize any Arms what
soever, or to search any Houses, without a lawful Warrant under the Hand and
Seal of some one or more of the Lords of our Privy Council, or under the Hand
and Seal of some one or more of the Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, or
Justices of the Peace, in their respective Liberties, and Precincts, within the
several Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, in our Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed. And we will that the said
Warrants be always directed to some Constable or other known legal Officer,
and that no Soldier do otherwise interpose or meddle with the Execution of the
said Warrants, then by aiding and assisting of the said Constable, or other
such known legal Officer, or Officers as aforesaid: and all Millitary Officers
and Soldiers, are hereby commanded to be aiding and assisting to such
Constable, or other legal Officers, being by them or any of them thereunto
required: And We do hereby declare, that as well all those who shall hereafter
be so hardy, as to offend against this Our Proclamation, shall not only not
receive Countenance from Us therein, but shall be left to be proceeded against
according to Our Laws, and incur Our high displeasure, as persons doing their
utmost to bring Scandal and Contempt upon Our Government.

In all which, there are these things Considerable.

First, That the King was very sensible of the great abuses done to many by the
illegal and lawless proceedings of Soldiers at that time, and the great
dis-service they did him in it.

Secondly, The King from the aforesaid sense, gives a strict Charge and Command
to all Officers and Soldiers, and all other Persons, that they presume not to
Seize the person or persons of any, etc. without Warrant under the Hand and
Seals of such mentioned in the Proclamation.

Thirdly, That no Officer or Soldier is to meddle or interpose in the
Execution of such Warrant, if granted against any, except called by a Constable
or other legal Officers, to their assistance in serving the same.

Fourthly, That the King will be so far from countenancing any that shall be so
hardy as to offend against this his Proclamation, that they shall be left to be
proceeded against according to Law.

Fifthly, Such persons so offending, shall incur his high displeasure, as
persons doing their uttermost to bring Scandal and Contempt upon his Government.

And yet these abovenamed men, would be thought to be high promoters of the
Kings Honor and Government, when their actions (so declared to be by the King
himself in his Proclamation) have been high and bold atempts made against, and
Scandal to his Government.

It is true, if drinking his Health in Bowls of Ale and Beer, and Glasses of
Sack, till they become brutish, Swearing and Blaspheming the holy Name of God,
and such like Debauchery, will Honor the King and make his Government as
famous as Solomon's was, then they are the men that will do it. If their
breaking his Laws, and abusing the good People of the Land, as abovesaid, will
Honor him, they will do it: Such, as I take it, being all the Love to, or
Valor they can show for him or his Interest. But not to enlarge, I will now
return to speak of what Dealing these sober men have sound from the hands of
these Justices. The Soldiers they seize contrary to Law, as you have heard,
and away they carry them; it may be to John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower,
or Thomas Bide Ale-Brewer in Shoreditch, or some other man called a Justice, as
the Soldiers please: And when they are before them, though no matter of Fact
be laid to their charge; none accusing them to their faces of the breach of any
known Law; Seeing they cannot find any thing against them worthy of Bonds, they
presently come to this point; Will you take the Oath of Allegiance; If any
refuse, they send him away to Goal, pretending great matters against them,
which they insert in their Mittimus in general, as dangerous persons, Plotting,
speaking Treason, and the like: Which he that knows any thing in Law, knows
that a general Charge is no Charge; the Law requiring, That no free born
Englishman be kept in durance without some particular Charge be expressed in
the Warrant, by which he is committed and held. By which it is manifest, that
these Justices have as little regard to the Honor of the King, as the
Soldiers; For whereas by Law, they ought to rebuke and punish those Soldiers,
that so illegally seize the persons of these civil men, they justify their
unwarrantable doing, and in stead thereof commit the poor men to prison,
contrary to Law also; making no matter of such arbitrary actions, but willingly
swallow them. And further it is evident, That no one Justice has power to
minister the Oath to any, though some of them will not stick to do it (for I my
self was in place, when Thomas Bide ministered the Oath to two persons, and
never a Justice there but himself, making them manifestly forswear themselves)
contrary to the express letter of the Law, which enables no one Justice to
require any person to take the Oath, much less to minister it to any: For
says the Statute, Entitled, An Act for administering the Oath of Allegiance,
the seventh Year of King James, That it shall and may be lawful, etc. And for
any two Justices of the Peace, within any County, City or Town Corporate,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, to require any person or persons, of the age
of eighteen years or above, under the degree of a Baron or Baroness, to take
the said Oath. By which it is manifest, that no one Justice has power to
tender the Oath to any: And if it be no tender in Law, it is no denial in Law,
though the Prisoner do refuse to take it. For if one Juctice will be so hardy
as to require any to take the Oath contrary to Law, yet none that are
conscientious dare to be so wicked, as to take it from him whom the Law does
not entitle and empower to minister the same, unless he will forswear himself;
for he that takes the Oath, must swear amongst other things, that it is
lawfully ministered to him, as appears in these express words mentioned in the
Oath it self, Which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully
ministered unto me, etc. When one Justice by himself has no more authority than
has a Collier; and yet notwithstanding some have been committed two or three
times within this twelve months, for refusing (as they call it) to take the
Oath, when they were never required to take it by any lawful Authority. And at
this day, several lie in Goal, and have done some months, whose persons were
seized contrary to Magna Charta, and the Kings Proclamation, as abovesaid, for
refusing the Oath, as they are not ashamed to say, and to charge them with in
their Mittimus, when they never at any time of their commitment, were required
to take it according to their own Law, which they make no conscience to break,
though they cry out against others so much for the breach of. And further,
though they say they are Christians, the very Heathens may rise up in judgment
against them; For they would suffer Paul to speak for himself in his own
defense, Acts 21.39, 40. Chap. 24.10. But these men that say they are
Christians and Ministers of Justice, will not suffer any of these sober men
they thus persecute, to speak for themselves, not so much, hardly, as to give a
reason why they cannot Swear.

Nay, when in time of Sessions they are called before their Tribunal, where
though they desire and entreat them to let them know what they had been kept in
Prison for, or what they or any other had against them; they, nor no man else
can charge them with ought that they had done against the Law; which being so,
they might hope to be heard, and those Abuses redressed; but there they can as
little be heard also, nor no notice taken by the Bench of the Illegal
proceedings of those men called Justices; but in stead of Judgment behold
Oppression, and in the place of Righteousness behold a Cry, Isa. 5.7. For when
at the time of the Goal Delivery (as they call it) they ought by Law, and
according to their Oaths, do right impartially to all free born Englishmen,
that is, let every one speak freely for himself, in the face of the Country,
that all may know his Guilt, if Guilty, or his Innocence if Innocent; and if
nothing be found against them, by such proof or sufficient witness as the Law
requires in such cases; they are sworn to deliver them, and to do them right
answerable to the wrongs they have sustained by those Mercenary Soldiers, that
seize them contrary to Law and the Kings Proclamation, and those unjust men,
called Justices, for their false Imprisoning them; or at least to leave both
Soldiers and Justices open to the Law; which could honest men have the benefit
of, against these Tyrants, it would sufficiently repair them. And further, let
them not think, to excuse themselves by tendering the Oath of Obedience to them,
against whom they can charge no matter of Fact: for it is neither Reason, Law
nor Equity, that men should lie in Prison several months, as many have done in
Newgate, and elsewhere, and no Crime committed by them, nor none accusing them
of any; that they should then have the Oath tendered to ensnare them, and hold
them fast. For if it be a fault in Law to refuse the Oath, when tendered in
Court, the fault was but then contracted; all the former Imprisonment, by their
own proceedings appears to be manifestly false. And this is all the Justice
they can have, Will you Swear, if you will not, you shall lie in Prison still.
Thus is Judgment turned away backwards, and Justice stands afar off: For
Truth is fallen in the Streets, and Equity cannot enter: Yea Truth fails, and
he that departs from Iniquity, makes himself a prey; (or as it may be read,
is accounted Mad, or a Phanatick.) and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him,
that there was no Judgment, Isa. 59.14, 15.

The Lord God without doubt sits in Heaven and sees their proceedings, who
says to them, How long will ye Judge unjustly, and accept the Persons of the
wicked: Defend the poor and fatherless, do Justice to the afflicted and needy,
deliver the poor and needy, rid them out of the hands of the wicked, Psalm.
82.2, 3, 4. But surely, they have not God in all their thoughts. For it may be
said of such, as the Lord said by the Prophet Amos, They turn Judgment to
Wormwood, and leave off Righteousness in the Earth, Amos 5.7. And again, For
behold the Lord commands; and he will smite the great house with breaches,
and the little house with clefts; Shall Horses run upon the Rock? will one plow
there with Oxen? for ye have turned Judgment into Gall, and the fruit of
Righteousness into Hemlock, Amos 6.11, 12. And although they may say, in their
hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will be do evil, Zeph. 1.12. Yet let
them know, he that sits in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision; he shall speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure, Psalm. 2.4, 5. Therefore, Woe unto them that decree unrighteous
decrees, and that write grievousness which they have prescribed, to turn aside
the needy from Judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my
people, Isa. 10.1.2. Little do these unjust men know, who thus pervert the Law,
what woes and judgments hang over their heads, for their cruelty to the Lords
People. The Word of the Lord shall surely be performed, and though he suffer
the wicked for a time to afflict his People, yet, The Rod of the Wicked shall
not rest upon the Lot of the Righteous, Psalm. 125.3. And though for a time, the
wicked may spring as grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flourish, (and
tread upon the necks of the godly) it is that they should be destroyed, Psalm.
92.7. For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and it shall certainly come to
pass: For says the Lord, I will undo all that afflict thee, and I will save
her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I will get them
praise and fame in every Land, where they have been put to shame, Zeph. 3.19.
Oh that these men that persecute the Lords people would break off their sins of
Tyranny, Oppression, and Injustice, before the Decree be gone forth against
them, by righteousness.

Thus having given an account to the World, of the unjust and Tyrannical
proceedings against the peaceable of the Land; I shall now give (because they
are not suffered to speak for themselves) the Reasons why they cannot take the
Oath of Obedience, as I have collected from them in my frequent conversation
with them. For the refusing of which (as their Enemies, who are their Judges
say) they lie in stinking Goals, deprived of the comfortable society of their
dear Relations, which God and Nature allows them; and made thereby incapable
of making such good provision for them, as their necessities call for; Choosing
rather, with Moses, to suffer afflictiou with the People of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season; knowing in themselves that they have in
heaven a better and more enduring substance.

The Reasons are as follows.
First, Because it is a Promisary Oath. Now Oaths of such a kind are forbidden
by Christ, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. Who only is head of
the Church, the great and only Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. James 4.12. That it is
an Oath of such a kind, is manifest to all that read it. That such Oaths are
forbidden by Christ, see Mat. 5.34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, etc.
From which place I know that many say, That Christ forbids Swearing vainly, and
Swearing by Creatures, and the like, and does not forbid Swearing of any kind,
provided it be by the Lord, and solemnly done.

That Christ forbids in that place vain Swearing in common talk, or
communication, and Swearing by Creatures though never so solemnly performed, is
true: But that this is not all that is forbidden is as true: For Christ forbids
some kind of Swearing that was in the time of Moses approved, as appears in the
33. verse. Ye have heard, that it has been said to them of old time, thou shall
not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths. Which was
no gloss, as some would have it, but by the Lord required, that if a man Swore
an Oath, or Vowed a Vow, unto which he was not bound by any Law of God to do,
but was at Liberty in; whether they would or would not Swear, yet having sworn,
the Lord requires he should perform his Oath, by which he has bound his Soul.
Number. 30.2. If a man Vow a Vow unto the Lord, or Swear an Oath to bind his Soul
with a bond, he shall not break (or profane) his Word, he shall do according to
all that proceeds out of his mouth. Now says Christ, it was said, thou shall
not forswear thy self, but thou shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I
say, Swear not at all: As much as if Christ should say, though it was your
Liberty, and no Sin, to promise and bind your Soul to the performance of
something or other, you swear to do, provided you break not your word; yet
henceforth, I say, that am the Son, and empowered by my Father, now to be the
Lawgiver; that upon no such account, or in such a kind you Swear, by which you
bind your Souls by promise to perform this or that. But in such cases, let your
Yea be Yea, and your Nay Nay. Thus its evident, that Christ forbids such kind
of Swearing as was allowed by Moses in Old Times, viz. Voluntary, Promisary
Swearing, and not vain Swearing only, in common talk, nor Swearing by
Creatures; both which were forbidden by them of Old Time, as also false
Swearing: For the which there might be a Cloud of Witnesses brought. But if any
should object and say, that Christ indeed does forbid Promisary Swearing, but
it is such only, as is rash and inconsiderable. To such it is answered, That
rash and inconsiderable Swearing and Vowing, was disapproved by them of Old
Time, as well as vain and false Swearing, and may be summed up in the number of
the rest of Swearings that are forbidden, and were spoken against by them of
Old Time, Eccles. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Jer. 23.10. Hosea 4.2. Zech. 5.3, 4. But
further, either (Christ forbids in saying, Swear not at all, Mat. 5.34. and
James 5.12. Above all things my brethren Swear not, etc.) all manner or kind of
Swearing, of what sort soever, or else he forbids all of one kind; else what
signify these words, not at all, the term being universal, and must wholly
prohibit, either, as is said, all kind of Swearing, or all of that kind it
relates to; and therefore while it can be proved that there is a destinction to
be made, by allowance from Christ, between Promisary and Promisary Swearing,
its concluded, that Christ forbids all Swearing of that kind, to wit,
Promisary; And therefore they cannot take the Oath of Allegiance.

Second Reason is, Because they are Christ's liege People, He is their King,
Isa. 33.22. Rev. 15.4. King of Nations, fer. 10.7. Psalm. 47.1, 2, 3. And King
of kings, 1 Timothy 6.15. Rev. 19.16. They stand bound, and engaged to Christ, to
serve, obey, and glorify him, to own and submit to his Laws and Commands, and
not man's Traditions; for he has in his rich and free Love to them, given
himself for them, that he might purchase and buy them with the price of his
precious blood, to the end he might be Lord and King over them, Romans 14.9. And
that they should serve Him and not men, 1 Cor. 6.20. Chap. 7.23. Now if they
take the Oath of Allegiance, they become bound to obey the King in what he
Commands them, whether his Commands agree with Christ's or no. For if they
Swear, they must perform, Number. 30.2. If it be Objected, That, that does not
follow. It Is Answered, It will appear in the ensuing Reasons.

Thirdly, Because he that takes the Oath of Allegiance, swears and binds his
Soul (though not expressly, yet implicitly) to obey the King in whatsoever he
Commands them to do, in things Spiritual as well as Temporal, for he is sworn
to obey the King indifinitely; for by the Oath he has no dispensation to
refuse obedience to any Command of the King whatsoever.

Be not deceived, the Oath excepts nor excludes no one Command, of what nature
or kind soever it be; but as is abovesaid, they that Swear, Swear indifinitely,
That they will bear Faith and true Obedience to the King: The King Commands
Obedience to him, according to his Laws, which he is sworn to maintain; his
Laws they Command in things Spiritual as well as otherwise, as might abundantly
be showed; And therefore they cannot take the Oath of Allegiance.

Fourthly, Because he that Swears Obedience to the King, must be forsworn if
he afterwads frequent Meetings as formerly, to Serve and Worship God according
to the Command of the Spirit, Heb. 10.25. and come not to Common Prayer; for
the King has forbid the one, and the Law Commands the other. Now the plain
truth is, they cannot own Common Prayer, nor the Lordly Bishops, come Life come
Death, nor none of their Rubbish whatsoever; Because they are not the Ministers
of Christ, nor their Ways the Ways of Christ, but their own humane Inventions
and Traditions. For where was such a thing appointed by Christ, or practiced by
his Ministers in the Primitive times, as Common Prayer, which is full of
Babbling and vain Repetitions? contrary to Mat. 7.7. The Apostle Paul says,
What is it then, I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray with Understanding
also: I will Sing with the Spirit, and I will Sing with the Understanding also,
1 Cor. 14.15. But who among them can be said to Pray with the Spirit, that Pray
out of the English Mas Book? and that hears them sing Prick-Song, like Fiddlers
in their Fantastic garb of white Frocks, or Surplices, their Hoods and
Tippets, and such like Fopperies; their Organs, Sackbuts, Cornets, Houboys, and
such like; more like the Worship that Nebuchadnezzar commanded the Three
Children, Dan. 3.14, 15. than any Christ commanded under, or in the time of the
Gospel: Therefore they cannot take the Oath of Allegiance.

Fifthly, Because he that Swears Allegiance, is Sworn to maintain the Kings
Dignity to the utmost of his power. By which it is evident, that the Oath
cannot be kept in yielding (as some say they are only bound to) passive
Obedience, but he must also maintain the Kings Dignities, says the Oath, now
the Dignity of the King, is not only to be Supreme in point of things
Temporal, but in things Spiritual also; the meaning is, that the Law gives him
that dignity, to be Supreme in Spiritual things and causes, as well as
Temporal. See the Oath of Supremacy, in a Statute, Entitled, An Act for
Restoring to the Crown the ancient Jurisdiction; Made in the first Year of
Queen Elizabeth; Some part of which Act, for better satisfaction, is inserted,
as follows:

And that also it may please your Highuess, that it maybe established and
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that such Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Superiorities, and Preheminencies Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as by any
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has heretofore been, or
lawfully may be exercised or used, for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical
State and Persons, and for Reformation, Order and Correction of the same, and
of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enormities, shall for ever by the Authority of this present Parliament, be
united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, etc.

See also a Statute, Anno, 1. Ed. 6. Cap. 12. Let the Reader take notice, that
these things are not cited or said, to show that not the King, but the Pope, or
some man else is Supreme Head of the Church, for such a thing is abhorred by
them, they utterly dis-claiming and dis-owning any Power or Authority the Pope
has, and would rejoice to see the utter desolation of him and all that
Hierarchy. They knowing that no man living upon the Earth has that dignity;
but it is Christ's, to whom All Power in Heaven and in Earth is committed, by
the Father, Mat. 28, 18. Whence then it is clear, That he that Swears, is not
only bound by Oath, to yield actual Obedience to the Kings Commands, in
falling in with Common Prayer, etc. as above; but he is bound by Oath, with a
Sword in his hand to maintain his Dignity in point of Spirituals, as well as
any other, against all attempts made against it; Therefore they cannot take the
Oath of Allegiance.

Sixthly, Because he that Swears, is ignorant of what he binds his Soul to,
which to do is sin, Lev. 5.4, 5. If a Soul Swear, pronouncing with his Lips, to
do evil or to do good, what soever it be, that a man shall pronounce with an
Oath, and it be hid from him, when he knows of it, then he shall be guilty in
one of these; and it shall be when he shall be guilty in one of these things,
that he shall confess that he has sinned in that thing. Now, that whosoever
takes the Oath of Obedience, must be ignorant of what he binds his Soul to, is
evident; because, he binds his Soul not only to the King in being, to whom he
Swears Allegiance, but to his Successors also: And if it were possible for a
man to know, what the King now in being would command in all points: yet it is
impossible to know what his Successors may; For were the present King a man
after God's own heart, as David was; yet who knows but he that succeeds him
may introduce Popery, as Queen Mary, who succeeded Edward the sixth, did? Now
he that takes the Oath, binds his Soul to obey those that shall succeed whether
Papist or Pagan, as much as the King that is in present being; Therefore they
cannot take the Oath of Allegiance.

Seventhly, Because they cannot Swear upon the true Faith of a Christian, as
they are enjoined in the Oath to do. For as much as in part or in whole they
are ignorant, if not at present, yet for the future, what it is they are bound
by Oath to.

Eighthly, Because, he that takes the Oath of Allegiance, must Swear by the
true Faith of a Christian; now to Swear by the Faith of a Christian, is to
Swear by something that is not God, contrary to Jer. 4.2. and James 5.12.
Therefore they cannot take the Oath of Allegiance.

Ninthly, Because, they that take the Oath, must Swear they take it heartily,
willingly and truly; which no man can do except he have great clearness in
himself by undeniable testimony from the Word of Life, that the things he
Swears to perform, are uncontrovertably his Liberty, if not his Duty.

Tenthly, Because, God expressly Commands him that will Swear and bind his
Soul by an Oath, to Swear in Truth, Righteousness and in Judgment, Jer. 4.2.
which no man can do, if ignorant as above said.

These are their Reasons, or at least some of them; besides all which, they are
in doubt in other things relating to the Oath; In order unto which, for
satisfaction, they propound these Queries following;

First. Whether all such that Swear Allegiance, who have been Actors in the
late War, in Person, Estate, or otherwise; do not Build again the things they
Destroyed? and whether so to do be no Sin?

Secondly. Whether all such as have Sworn, or shall Swear Allegiance, who
assisted the Parliament in the War, either in Person or Estate, do not openly
proclaim themselves, and acknowledge upon Oath to the World, that they are
Trattors, Thieves, and Murderers.

Thirdly. Whether all such as have Sworn, or shall Swear, who have set days
apart, either in public or in private, to Fast and Pray for the good Success
of the Parliament; do not manifest themselves to be notorious Dissemblers, and
God-Mockers.

Fourthly. Whether such who shall Swear, as abovesaid, who have kept days of
Thanksgiving, (when any Victory has been obtained) to praise the Lord for his
wonderful goodness and to speak of the might of his terrible Acts; do not by
Swearing, openly throw dirt in the face of God, and conclude that to be of the
Devil, that they then said was the glorious Honor of his Majesty, and his
wondrous Works?

Fifthly. Whether a man, though he make a hundred Exceptions if possible,
against some things in the Oath, and leave be given him so to do, and he take
it after the Exceptions be made; does not Swear (notwithstanding his
Exceptions) according to the plain and express Letter of it, and so make void
his former Exceptions? forasmuch as he Swears according to these express words,
(viz.) And all these things, I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and Swear,
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words, without equivocation, or
mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

Thus may all men see, that these men do not lie in Prison out of any
self-willedness (as some wickedly say they do) but merely upon the account of
Christ, and a good Conscience, which they dare not violate or make shipwreck
of, in following the steps of others; neither dare they engage in any thing
dishonorable to Christ their King, which they conceive Swearing Allegiance to
any man upon the Earth will be; their refusing the Oath, is not without ground:
Their Reasons are prevailing to them, and may be to others, did they duly weigh
and consider them: if any can take them off by the word of Truth, and right
Reason, they will do God service, and them also, in being instrumental to open
the Prison doors; for were they satisfied, then would they Swear, and obtain
their Liberty, and acknowledge their mistake, as I am truly and well persuaded
of them; but till then, their Conscience and the Honor of Christ (who is
precious to them) is more than stone-Walls, iron Grates, Locks and Bolts, to
hold them, and therefore let not their Persecutors think to escape the
dreadful Judgments of God if they repent not of their wickedness, and hard
speeches that they have ungodlily spoken against them; For in touching them
that fear the Lord (and an Oath) they touch the apple of Gods eye, Zech. 2.8.
He reproved Kings for their sake; saying, touch not mine Anointed, nor do my
Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105.14, 15. The Lord will one day arise and have mercy
upon Sion; so the Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all she Kings of
the Earth thy glory, Psalm. 102.14, 15. For he has looked down from the height
of his Sanctuary, from Heaven did the Lord behold the Earth, to hear the
groaning of the Prisoner, to loose those that are appointed to death, Verse. 19,
20. The humble shall see this and be glad, your heart shall live that seek God,
for the Lord hears the poor, and despises not his Prisoners, Ps. 69.32, 33.
Oh happy men are they that thus suffer reproach and bonds for the Name of
Christ, 1 Pet. 4.14. Yea, Blessed are they, when men revile them, and persecute
them, and shall say all manner of evil of them, falsely, for his sake, Mat.
5.11. as that they are Phanaticks or Madmen, for so said they of Christ, John
10.20. And many of them said, he has a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him?
That they have turned the World upside-down, and do things contrary to the
Decrees of the King; saying, that there is another King, one Jesus. So said
those wicked Persecutors of Gods People of Old, Act. 17.6, 7. That they are
Pestilent fellows, and movers of Sedition; So said Tertullus the Orator, of
Paul, Acts 24.5. That they are Heretics, Schismatics, and what not, as says
the Pope, and Englands Lordly Bishops.

Well, notwithstanding let them rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is
their reward in Heaven; for so persecuted they the Prophets, Christ, and his
Servants, that were before them, Mat. 5.12. It being an evident token of
Perdition to their adversaries, but of Salvation to them, and that of God,
Phil. 1.28. Let them therefore be encouraged to stand fast, and keep their
integrity, and not touch with any of the filthy Abominations of the times to
obtain their Liberty: God will one day make up all their losses, and
sufficiently repair them. For if they suffer with Christ, they shall reign with
him, 2 Timothy 2.12. Walk not then, ye Prisoners of Hope, nor ye Saints at
Liberty, in the way of this People; Say ye not a Confederacy to all them, to
whom this People shall say a Confederacy, neither fear ye their fear, nor be
afraid; but sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread; and he shall be for a Sanctuary, Isa. 8.11, 12, 13. Be
ye waiting upon the Lord, until the day that he rise up to the Prey, for his
determination is to gather the Nations, that he may assemble the Kingdoms, to
pour upon them his indignation, even all his fierce anger; For all the Earth
shall be devoured with the fire of his Jealousy: for then will he turn to the
People of pure Language, that they may all call upon the Name of the Lord, to
serve him with one consent, Zeph. 3.8, 9. Wait (I say) on the Lord, and keep
his way, and he shall exalt thee, to inherit the Land, when the wicked are cut
off; Thou shall see it, Psalm. 37.34.

THE END.

