The Good and Faithful SERVANT, Set forth in a SERMON Preached at Hatfield
Broad-Oake in Essex, August 2. the day before the Funeral of Mr. JOHN WARREN,
Sometime Minister of the Gospel there.

Now Published with some small Additions, and a brief Account of his Life and
Character.

By HENRY LUKIN.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, the lower
End of Cheapside. 1696.

THE Good and Faithful Servant.
Matthew 25.21. His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful
Servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over
many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.


AS it was said of the Woman that came with a Box of Ointment of Spikenard, to
pour on the head of Jesus before his Death, She did what she could, she came
aforehand to anoint his Body to the Burying; she took the best way that she
could think of, to express her affection and respect to him, Mark 14. v. 8. So
I am come aforehand, anticipating a little the Funeral of our dear Friend, to
do what I can to improve so sad a Providence for the benefit of his surviving
Friends, and to spread abroad and preserve the sweet savor of his Name (which
is as a precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.1.) when he is gathered to his Fathers. As
under the Old Testament God multiplied Visions, and used similitudes by the
Ministry of the Prophets, Hos. 12.10. So under the New Testament Christ spoke
very often to the Multitude in Parables, Matthew. 13.34. This being a very useful
way of teaching. Some call Images Laymens Books, because they suppose they
represent things so clearly and plainly to the meanest capacities; but though God
is a Spirit, and requires Spiritual Worship, yet he has thought fit to
represent spiritual things by natural; so that as it is said, The invisible
things of him are seen clearly from the Creation of the World, Romans 1.20. And
if we do undersland that of the time ever since the Creation, yet the words
following are to be understood of the Works of Creation. But not only the
things that are made represent to us God's Eternal Power and Godhead, but all
things that are done or transacted in the World serve to represent spiritual
things to us: And while we have such a Teacher as Christ to instruct us in the
resemblance that is betwixt these things; they may be of much use to us to help
our understandings and memories, to quicken our affections, and to invite and
draw our thoughts to heavenly things; so as we can hardly be about any worldly
business, but we may take occasion from thence to raise up our minds to
heavenly things; which is a great advantage to us, because we have so little
command over our thoughts, and because all our actions have their first rise
from our thoughts; out of the heart proceed first evil thoughts, and thence
murders, adulteries, fornications, etc. Matthew. 15.19.

Before I proceed further, I will premise that in similitudes the Scripture is
very brief and concise, so that there is not only an omission sometimes of the
note of similitude (which does frequently occur in Scripture) but the Protasis
and Apodosis, as they are called, are confounded together, and not set exactly
one against another, or explained one by the other, as Prove. 11.22. A fair
Woman is not as a Jewel of Gold, but Beauty in a foolish Woman, as a Jewel of
Gold in a Swines snout: So John 3.8. He that is born of the Spirit, is not like
the Wind, but in the business of Regeneration, the Spirit works freely,
invisibly; yet effectually as the Wind blows. Sometimes that only which belongs
to the Protasis or former part of the similitude is expressed without that in
the latter part of the similitude which answers thereto, as Luke 12.35. Let
your loins be girded about, and your lights burning. We need not busy our
selves to find out what are these loins that should be girt, and those lights
that should be burning, for those expressions belong to the persons that we
should be like to: As those that wait for their Master's coming from a Wedding,
should not only be up and have their Cloths on, but should have those Garments
girded about them, (which were much like Morning Gowns) which they could not
well either run in, or do service in, unless they were girt about them, as you
may see by 1 Kings 18.46. and Luke 17.8. So they should not only have their
lights or lamps by them, but have them ready lighted, that they might not make
their Masters stay when they knocked, till they were prepared to wait on them;
but that they might open to them immediately: So we should not only be in a
Habitual preparation for Death, by being in a state of Grace; but in an Actual
preparation for it, having our Evidences for Heaven ready, our hearts weaned
from the World, a clear prospect of suture Glory, and being always so employed,
as Death may not surprise us idle, or doing that which is evil. I have spent so
many words on this thing, because it may be of use to us for the right
understanding of this Parable, out of which the words of the Text are taken,
wherein he instructs his Disciples how they thould carry themselves in his
absence; the time of his Departure from them being now at hand. We have this
Parable differently set down here, and in Lu. 19.12. For it is here in the
Evangelists, as it is in the Books of Samuel, Kings and Chronicles in the Old
Testament; what is omitted in one Book, is set down in another; so that put
together, they make the History more complete; therefore the Greek Translators
of the Old Testament call the Books of Chronicles, Paralipomena, or
praetermissions, because many things are added in them, which were omitted in
the foregoing Books. In Luke he plainiy foretells what he should meet with from
the Jews, and how he should be rejected of them: But in both he is compared to
one going from home, and leaving his Servants. Luke says a Noble man going to
receive a Kingdom: He must indeed be a great Man that gave so many Talents to
his Servants to Trade with, till he came back again. The Parable plainly shows
that he gave to some more, to some less, according to their places and
abilities. Luke says, Pounds, but the Evangelists have regard rather to the
sense and meaning of Christ, than to his words; they both imply that he gave
different sums of money, or portions of goods: Now when they come to give an
account of the improvement of what he had committed to their trust, the first
had doubled his Stock, or what he was trusted withal; and here in the Text we
have his Lords approbation of what he had done, and his liberal rewarding of
his diligence and faithfulness. It was but little in comparison which he had
trusted him with, but he should be Ruler over much; as he that had been
faithful in the administration of the Affairs of the Household, should be made
Steward of all his Masters Estate, Mat. 24.47 In Luke it is, Have thou
Authority over ten Cities; having respect, as I said before, rather to the
meaning of Christ, than to his words, and therein it is likely he alludes to
the Honor wherewith Princes or Conquerours use to recompense the signal and
eminent service of those that have acquitted themselves well under them,
preferring them to the Govenment of some great Places or Cities, and such an
one should have Rule over many Cities; still observe that these expressions
have respect to the Protasis, or former part of the similitude.

4. As for those words, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, if they be
referred to the Protasis, they only signify that he should enter upon or take
possession of that honor or preferment which he should promote him to, or
delight to confer upon him, as Ahasuerus would know what should be done unto
the man to whom the King delighted to honor, Est. 6.6. I come now to the
spiritual meaning of this Parable, or that which is hereby signified. Now it is
agreed on by all that the scope of the Parable is to show, That Christ being
gone to Heaven, has given variety of gifts to men, which they are to improve
for him in his service for his glory, which he will require an account of when
he comes to Judgment. Men have from this Parable learned to call them Talents
in their ordinary speech, but in strictness they might as well have called them
Pounds from the Parallel place in Luke, yet I dislike not the use of the word
in this case, because it is not so common a word as pound, nor used in so many
cases, and the use of this word may put men in mind of the end and use of those
various gifts which they have received. Now by these gifts we do not understand
only those gifts which he gave unto men at his Ascension, Ephesians. 4.8. The various
kinds whereof the Apostle mentions, Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 12.4, etc. but those
manifold gifts of God, or graces which are but gifts freely given, as they are
called, 1 Pet. 4.10. whereby we are capable or qualified to do good to others
or service to God. The Philosophers use to distinguish them into the goods of
the body, of the mind, and of fortune. By the goods of the body they mean,
Health, Strength, outward Sense, as, Seeing, Hearing, and a good Temper or
Constitution, so as it may be most serviceable to the mind. The Goods of the
Mind are such as quickness of apprehension, good Judgment, a firm and faithful
Memory, Learning, Knowledge; by the Goods of Fortune they mean, Riches, Honor,
Authority, Interest. Now though we do not approve of their calling them the Goods
of Fortune, [ Austin was not pleased that he had so oft-used that word, yet
shows in what sense it may be used, Retractat. Lib. 1. Cap. 1.] yet by what I
have said we may see under what general Heads we may reduce those various gifts
which are committed to our trust; and I will now show you,

First, That we receive all these from God; and these things may indifferently
be said to be given by God the Father, or by Jesus Christ, as Mediator. For
all power is Originally from the Father, to whom it must be again resigned,
when Christ has fulfilled his Mediatory Office, 1 Cor. 15.24, etc. But in the
mean while all power in Heaven and Earth is committed to Christ, Matthew. 18.16.
for the good of his Church, Ephesians. 1.22. and in order to their Salvation, John
17.2. Now it is God that gives to all, Life, and Breath, and all things, Acts
17.25. It is he that did form and fashion us in the Womb, and did not fail of
making any one part of the body, but did fashion us as perfectly as if he had a
model or a receipt in a Book to make us by, Psa. 139.16. And as the Painter
mixes his Colors so as to give the right complexion to a picture; God does so
temper the several humors of the body as they way be serviceable to the mind
in such manner and measure as he pleases, and hence proceeds the different
temper of men whereby they are fitted for several businesses and employments:
and it is God that makes to differ even in our natural Temper and Constitution;
If there be in one (...) or any good natural Inclination, and in another such
an ill Temper, as Socrates acknowledged himself to have it is God that makes
the difference; and hence it is that one has quickness of apprehension and
presence of Mind, another solidity of Judgment, another a curious Fancy,
another a strong Memory; and hereby they are fitted and qualified for Business
and several Employments. So those that they call the Goods of Fortune are from
God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17, etc. Both Riches and
Honor come of him, and in his hand it is to make great and to give strength to
all, 1 Chronicles. 29.12. It is God that gives us all things pertaining to life and
godliness, 2 Pet. 1.3. So that we have nothing but what we have received, 1
Cor. 4.7.

Seondly, We are but Stewards of these manifold gifts of God, 1 Peter 4.10.
Those words of the Apostle may have respect both to what goes before and what
follows after; We are not only to Minister of our Substance with those good
women, Luke 8.3. But of those spiritual gifts which we have received, as we
have occasion and opportunity: he that is Steward to another, if he have any
thing of his own, may employ it as he sees good, but those things which belong
to him, that he is a Steward for, he must improve for his advantage; or he that
is Factor for another must Trade with what he has sent to him, for the best
advantage of him that trusts him, and must not let his money or stock lie dead;
and there will a time come that we must be called to a reckoning, and have that
Summons sent to us, Luke 16.2. Come give an account of your Stewardship, for
you must be no longer Stewards. Now therefore we should consider what we have
committed to our trust; they that have most have but little in comparison, as
it is said to him here that had the five Talents, that he had been faithul in a
few things: As it is said of those extraordinary gifts which they had in the
primitive times; to one was given the word of Wisdom, to another the word of
Knowledge, to another Faith, to another the gifts of Healing, to another
working of miracles, to another Prophecy, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10. So now, some have
Health and Strength; some abilities of Mind, some Riches, some Power and
Authority, some Interest in great Persons whereby they may obtain favors for
others; now we should (as it is said, The Liberal man devises Liberal things,
Isa. 32.18.) cast about what we should do with what we have in our power, as
Peter said, Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have I give thee, Acts
3.6. Some now have Silver and Gold, though they have not the gift of Healing;
Some, tho they have neither of these, are capable of doing good some other way:
The Prophet was inquisitive what he should do for the Shunamite, and he would
know whether she would be spoken for to the King or the Captain of the Host; by
reason of the Miracles which he wrought, he had an Interest in them, 2 Kings
4.13. Job had several Talents (as we speak) committed to him, he was a great
man, he had Riches, Authority, Interest, Wisdom and Understanding, and he
improved them, so that when the Ear heard him, it blessed him, and when the eye
saw him, it gave witness to him, he delivered the poor that cried, and the
fatherless and him that had none to help him; the blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon him, and he caused the widows heart to sing for Joy.
This he might do by his Authority and Interest; by his Riches he was eyes to
the blind and feet to the lame; either taking care of those who were really so,
to make a supply to the defect of their senses or limbs, or he was a guide to
the ignorant, directing and counselling them in those things which they had not
an insight into, Romans 2.19. and supporting them when they were ready to fall,
or to be cast down by others; By his Wisdom he searched out the cause which he
knew not, and by his Authority he brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the
spoil out of his teeth, Job 29.11, etc. that is, he rescued the prey from them,
alluding to Dogs or ravenous Creatures that must sometimes have their teeth
broken to prevent their doing mischief, or to get the prey out of their mouth,
see Psa. 3.7. and 58.6. One had five Talents committed to him, another two,
another one: So we may not have so much committed to our trust as Job had, yet
something we may have whereby we may serve Christ, and do good to others; we
may, if we have Riches, relieve others in their straits, disperse Bibles and
good Books, encourage and promote the Preaching of the Gospel, and so be
helpers with the Ministers of the Gospel in the work of Christ, Romans 16.3. If
God have given us knowledge, we may instruct others in our several Relations
and Capacities; as Husbands, 1 Pet. 3.7. as Parents, Prove. 1.8.6.20. as
Christian Friends instructing others in some things, who in other things may
know more than our selves, Acts 18.23. If we have any interest in others, we
have the greater advantage for doing them good, as we have the greater
obligation thereto.

I come now to speak of the favor they shall find with God, and the reward
which they shall receive from him, that have well improved their Gifts; Well
done good and faithful servant, then shall every man have praise of God, 1.
Cor. 4.5. That is, all that have praise: Men must not then put in to pass their
censures, but we shall depend upon God, for our final Sentence, which shall
determine our Eternal State. But what are we! that God should show us such
favor, or what are our Services that he should approve of them? we must say as
David in another case, 1. Chron. 29.14, 16. Of thine own have we given thee,
all this Store comes of thine hand, and is all thine own; So we are nothing,
2. Cor. 12.11. And whatever we have done, it is not we, but the Grace of God,
which is with us, 1. Cor. 15.10. If God promise any favor to any Grace, or to
any Person qualified therewith: As to those that fear him, Mal. 3.16. To those
that love him, Romans 8.28. He does not therein show the reason of his bestowing
such favors, but the order in which he be stows them: It is he that puts his
fear into our hearts, and circumcises our hearts to love him, Jer. 32.40. Deu.
30.6. And in this respect we may be said to receive grace for grace. I have
before showed you what the literal meaning of those words may be, I will make
thee Ruler over many things. And doubtless the scope of the Parable is to show
how liberally and bountifully God will recompense any Service which is done for
him above our desert.

Those words, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; express more particularly
what shall be done to those whom God does delight to honor. An entrance shall
be ministered to them abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 1.11. The Scriptures do not distinguish so
critically as the Philosophers, who call sensual delights, Pleasures, and
intellectual or Spiritual delight, Joy, for according to the Scripture there is
in the presence of God, fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.
Now the joy of our Lord may be either that joy which we have from him, as the
praise of God, is that praise which we have from God, Joh. 12.43. Or it may be
that joy which our Lord himself has or is entered into; for He, for the joy
that was set behim, endured the Cross, and despised the shame, Hebrews 12.2.

First, I say it is that joy which we have from God, and this is enough to
commend it to us, and raise up our minds to great expectations of it:
Ahashuerus called in help to contrive what should be done to the man whom the
King delighted to honor, Esth. 6.6. and the faithful Servants of Christ are
such as God does delight to honor; and as Ahashuerus in the feast that he made
for his Nobles and Princes, would show both his favor to them, and the riches
of his glorious Kingdom, and the honor of his excellent Majesty, and so gave
them drink in Vessels of Gold diverse one from another (it is likely of
different fashions) and royal Wine in abundance, Esth. 1.4, 7. So God will show
the riches of his Glory on the Vessels of mercy which he had before prepared
unto glory, Romans 9.23. as he will show the riches of his grace in his kindness
toward us in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.7. As it is said, Araunah gave as a King to
David in respect of his bounty and munificence, 2 Samuel 24.23. so God will be a
God to his People, 1 Chronicles. 17.24. Heb. 8.10. dealing as a God with them in
magnificence and munificence; and as none knows the power of his Anger, which
is according to his fear, Psalm. 90.11. so none knows the riches of his Glory,
which is according to our most raised hopes and expectations, yea far exceeding
them; as the Queen of Sheba found the Glory of Solomon far to exceed the report
of it in her own Country, though that report was above her belief, 1 Kings 10.67.
Christ and Heaven suffer no Hyperbole, nothing too great can be said of them:
God needs not to take counsel of any to know what shall be done to those whom
he delights to honor; that manifold Wisdom which could find out a way to save
Sinners without any injury to his Law or Justice, Ephesians. 3.10. can prepare that
happiness for them, which will make him to be glorified in his Saints, and
admired in all those that believe 2 These. 1.10. There are two ways whereby we
may make some conjecture at the Joy of Heaven. First, By the Joy or Pleasure
which we see men take in these worldly sensitive Objects, when there is an
innate instinct, desire, appetite and senses suited to that goodness which is
in any Creature, then it is to us as the Loadstone to the Iron, which draws it
to it. We could not enjoy the fragrant scent of a Flower without the fence of
smelling; and those that want that sense, may well wonder what it is that makes
men delight so much in sweet smells; and (to use a plain similitude) if such an
one were to buy but a pair of Gloves, they would observe the matter of them,
the fashion or making of them, and the color of them, but they could not value
them for their rich perfume, which does so much enhance or raise the price of
them: So others are entranced in Pleasure, by the ravishing melody of Music,
which is nothing to those that want the fence of hearing; and so the most
charming Beauties are nothing to those that want the fence of seeing, or where
desire fails, as the wise man speaks, through the decays of Nature and
declining Age, Eccles. 12.5. But all the Glory of this World is no more to the
Joy of our Lord, than the Husks which the Swine fed upon was to the
Entertainment which the Prodigal had in his Father's house, there we shall have
the most excellent Objects, and we shall perfectly enjoy them, when our
understandings are perfectly enlightened to know what is the Riches of the
Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. and our affections perfectly
renewed so as to follow hard after God, Ps. 63.8. as one said, not panis
Domini, but panis Dominus, so there will be not only Gaudium Domini, the joy of
the Lord, but Gaudium Dominus, the Lord our exceeding joy, Psalm. 43.4. and
there will not be only Glory prepared for us, but we shall be prepared for
Glory, Romans 9.23. we shall be made meet to be partakers of an Inheritance with
the Saints in light, Col. 1.12. There were two things which made Solomon a
competent Judge of what was to be found in these Earthly things, His Riches,
whereby he was able to purchase or procure the best of what this world could
afford, and his Wisdom, whereby he was able both to draw out the quintessence
or virtue of every thing and to make a Critical Judgment of it, Eccl. 2.1, --
9. So in Heaven there will be the most excellent Objects, as Mr. Baxter said a
little before his death; that place, Hebr. 12.22, etc. did deserve a thousand
thousand thoughts, there we shall see God as he is, 1 John 3.2. We shall be fit
to be admitted into that general Assembly, and to join with them in that Divine
service wherein they serve him day and night, Rev. 7.15. without saying, What a
weariness is it, our hearts will be fixed to sing and give praise, Ps. 108.1.
We strive sometimes to wind them up to make melody to the Lord, Col. 3.16. but
as when a Lute or Viol is tuned, the pegs will loosen and the strings slacken
and spoil the melody; so when we would lift up our hearts to God, they sink
down again, but they will not only be prepared but fixed.

Secondly, We may make some conjecture at this joy by the fore-tasts which we
have of it here, where we walk by faith and not by sight, 2. Cor. 5. ver. 7.
but though we see him not, yet believing we rejoice (with joy unspeakable, and
full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. It is that which we cannot express, and is full of
Glory, as that power whereby a Christian is strengthened to all patience and
long-suffering with joyfulness, enabling him to bear long affliction with
joyfulness is a glorious power, Col. 1.11. If we may be filled with all joy and
peace in believing, Romans 15.13. what will it be to see, as we are seen? If
these are such strong consolations that some drops of them will revive our
languishing Spirits in the greatest afflictions, 2. Cor. chap. 8.2. what will
it be to drink of the River of his pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. when we shall have no
affliction to allay the sweetness of it? The joy that Christians have had here,
has been sometimes as much as they could bear, but here we are but as persons
which begin to recover their health, and so find some savor and relish in what
they eat and drink, but in Heaven we shall be as those, that having more fully
recovered their health and appetite, take pleasure in eating and drinking, and
taste the sweetness of their meat and drink. Further as I told you, it is the
joy of our Lord, or that which was set before him to encourage him against his
sufferings, and he will not only come again and receive us to himself, that
where he is we may be also, Joh. 14.3. that we may behold the Glory which the
Father has given him, but he gives the same Glory to them which the Father
has given him, Joh. 17.22.24. as they suffer with him, so they shall be
glorified together, Romans 8.17, 18. To him that overcomes, Christ will grant to
sit with him in his Throne, as he also overcame, and is set down with his
Father in his Throne, Rev. Chap. 3.21. We have a glimpse of this Glory, in the
transfiguration of Christ, Matt. 17.2, etc. his face did shine as the Sun, and
his whole body was so illustrious, that it darted a brightness through his
garments, and there were two of the general Assembly with him; Peter was so
taken with it, that he thought it was good for them to be there, but this
continued only a little while, it is liketheir joy was allaid by the discourse
about his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, Lu. 9.31. but now
this is already accomplished; He has suffered and isentered into his glory,
and we shall go and bewith him which is far better than to be here, Phi. 1.23.

For the Application of this, let us observe and consider what we have
received; formerly in the Apostles times, all were not Apostles, nor all
Prohpers, nor all Teachers, nor all workers of Miracles, all had not the Gift
of healing, all did not sp^^k with Tongues nor all Intepret, 1. Cor. Chap.
12.29, 30. So now all have not Riches, Power, Interest, Learning, Wisdom: But
every one has something, wherewith he may some way promote the Service and
Interest of Christ, and do good to others When the Tabernacle was made Bezaleel
was filled with the Spirit of God in wisdom, in understanding, in knowledge,
and in all manner of Workmanship, to devisecunning works, to work in Gold,
Silver and Brass, Exodus Chap. 31.2, 3. But the Women also that were wise
hearted did Spin with their hands, and brought that which they had Spun of
blue, purple, scarlet and fine Linen, Exodus 35.25. Paul was as a wife
Master Builder, 1. Cor. 3.10. but Aquilla and Priscilla, Tent makers, were his
helpers in Christ Jesus, Romans 16 3. and there were Women which labored with
him in the Gospel, Phil. c. 4. v. 3, not by Preaching, but by Teaching good
things to younger persons, Titus 2.3. to their Children, which is a great help
to Ministers, and such as are more fit to hear the Word with profit (as Petty
Schools fit Children for Grammar Schools) so they may relieve, encourage,
protect such as are capable of doing other service, 1 Timothy 5.10. Romans 16.4. and
hereby we may be fellow-helpers to the Truth, 3 John v. 8. And Ministers could
do little in City or Country in propagating the Gospel, if they had not others
to help with them: As the liberal man devises liberal things, Isa. 32.8. so we
should devise and cast about what we may do any way, or in any capacity for the
furtherance of the work of Christ: We should not only honor the Lord with our
substance, Prove. 3.9. but we should say in truth to him, what is ordinarily
said in complement to others, that all that we have is at his service; as all
things are of him, so it is fit all things should be to him, Romans 11.36. As it
is said, Exodus 31.6. In the hearts of all that are wise-hearted, I have put
wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded th^e. What any have is
from God, and it is that they may employ it in his service. He that had but one
Talent, was punished because he did not improve it; he did not spend it as the
Prodigal did his Portion among Harlots, or in riotous living, but hid it in the
Earth, and returned it to him again, Match, 25. verse 25. It is not enough that
we do not embezel our Lord's goods, or that we do no hurt therewith; as it is
said, Celata virtus paulo distat abinertia, unknown or concealed Virtue differs
little from ignorance, or idleness; and I do not account it much to a man's
praise, to have it said of him, that he is a Man of unknown worth. It is true,
sometimes as folly is set in great dignity, so the Rich sit in low place,
Eccles. 10.6. Where the opposition teaches us to understand it of those that
are Rich in Virtue, Wisdom, Noble Endowments; this is an evil under the Sun,
and an Error that proceeds from Princes, not to advance men according to their
worth, and in such a case men have not occasion or opportunity for putting
forth themseles, or showing what is in them. If some very Learned man were
confined to some obscure Country Village, he would not have much occasion to
show his Learning; or if a man have Prudence, Courage, Conduct to qualify him
for serving his King and Country in Council or Camp, but by Law is made
incapable thereof, he may be as a lighted Candle under a Bushel, and sometimes
again a man's modesty may over awe him that he does not put forth himself, which
is better than boasting of a false gift, Pro. 25.14. or through vain glory to
take all occasions to make ostentation of our own worth or ability, trading for
our selves with our Lords gifts, as Gehazi that would get something by the Cure
which was wrought on Naaman, 2 Kings 5.20. We must take heed of thinking the
service lost that we do for God, wherein we do not pocket up some applause or
praise for our selves. Remember the Leprosy that cleaved to Gehazi, and the
end of Herod that gave not glory to God, Acts 12.23. Those that Minister must
do it, as of the Ability which God gives them, that God in all things may be
glorified, 1 Pet. 4.11. We must not do as Israel that trusted in her beauty,
and played the Harlot because of her renown; for that beauty which was perfect
through that comeliness which God had put upon her, Ezekiel. 16.14. But on the
other hand we must not through a sly and secret pride refuse to trade because
we have but one Talent, or to put forth our selves, because we have no more to
make show of; there is a good sense of that, scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire
hoc sciat alter, what thou know is nothing unless others know that thou
know it, for we have not received it for our selves, as the manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. and as the rust
of silver and gold will be a witness against those that have treasured it up,
James 5.3. So the hiding of men's gifts, that is, not improving them, will be
charged upon them. But what then will the end of those be that abuse their
gifts? in this Case, he that is not with Christ is against him, Mat. 12.30.
because he has received his gifts to employ and improve in his service, as he
that is listed in a Princes service, and receives his pay, is against him, if
he stand neuter or does nothing, much more if he fights against him. If God
give a man Riches, and he make use of them to oppress the poor, Jam. 2.6. or to
make provision for the Flesh to fill the lusts thereof, Rom 13.14. spending it
on Pride or Voluptuousness: If God have given men Power or Interest, that is,
if they either be in Authority themselves, or can make an Interest in such as
are so, and take advantage thereby to crush the Fatherless or the poor; it is
that which Job durst not do, for destruction from God was a terror to him, and
by reason of his highness he could not endure, Job 31.23. If God give a man
Learning and Knowledge, and he set himself therewith to oppose the Truth and
Cause of Christ, and to maintain and support an evil Cause against Christ; If
be give a man quickness of wit and parts, and he make use of it to ridicule
Religion, and expose those that are most strict and conscientious in the
profession of it, or to defraud and overreach his Neighbor; If he give a man
strength and ability of body which he might have used to good purposes in the
service of God or of his Country, and he spend his strength in Luxury and
debauchery, Pro. 5.11, 23, 29. We may ask them as Cyprian does those that used
Painting and such Arts, how they can look upon God, when they are not as he
made them, but as their own lusts have deformed them: This is like taking the
Corn and Wine, and Oil, and Silver, and Gold, which God had given to Israel,
and preparing it for Baal an abominable Idol, Hosea 2.8. And if the
unprofitable Servant that hid his Talent shall be cast into outer Darkness;
sure the wicked Servant that abuses his Talent to the dis-service and
dis-honour of God shall have Hell made, as Nebuchadnezzar's fiery Furnace,
seven times more hot than it was wont to be, Dan. 3.19. In this case there is
not only lucrum cessans, but damnum emergens, not only a loss of what night
have been gained by a good improvement of what men are trusted with, but a
further dan age accrewing by misimploying of their Talent: As if a Person
should leave a Steward to look to the affairs of his household, and leave him
money to buy and make an advantage for his Master, and he should with his money
Drink, and Game, and keep Company so as to neglect his Masters business, and
let that suffer for want of looking after. Or, as if a man should be at charge
to bring up his Son in the study of the Law, that he might get an Estate and be
a support and ornament to his Family, and when he has attained some skill in
the Law, instead of getting an Estate thereby, should use it only to wind
himself into his Fathers Estate and cheat him of it. Rules are made more plain
by Examples, therefore I shall to illustrate what I have spoken, give an
instance of a good and faithful Servant in him, whose death has given occasion
of the foregoing discourse: I do not intend to give an account of his Life, but
only to give a brief account of some things which may show what Talents he was
trusted with, and what use he made of them. God who presides over our forming
in the womb (as I have already showed) gave him (...), Temperamenti, (...),
ingenij, a good Crasis or constitution of body, and a good temper of mind both
of which did much fit him for the work which he was called to. He had somewhat
a deep tincture of melancholy, yet not such as to dull or cloud his mind, but
rather to poise it, and so tempered as he had both a quick apprehension, and
solid judgment; He had so much of it as to make him suspicious, and cautious
of obtruding any crude or indigested notions on others, and it will be found as
soon as any of his labors are made public, (which an excess of modesty has
hitherto kept from the view of the world) that they do Demorsos sapere ungues,
according to the advice of the Poet, saepe stylum vertas iterum quae digna legi
sint Scripturus, well weighing and considering what ever proceeded from him; He
entered early indeed on the work of the Ministry, but he was not more apt to
teach, than apt for teaching: He was none of those that Beza speaks of, which
are Doctores, but Aptiores ad stivam, fitter for the Plow, than for teaching:
While young, he was not only a Titular but real Master of Arts; when Mr. Vines
(a competent Judge of men's abilities) heard him preach, he said, He looked like
a Boy, but spoke like a Man: He came to London in forty two, and did design to
go beyond Sea with some Merchants, but meeting occasionally with Sir Thomas
Barrington, he was so pleased with his Converse, that he prevailed with him to
go to Hatfield in the begnning of forty three; their Lecturer being newly dead,
whom he succeeded in that place, when he was but in the two and twentieth year
of his age, being born on September 29th one thousand six hundred twenty one.
There he continued till he was forced away, and though he had invitations to
several more public places, where he might have had far greater worldly
advantage, I heard him say above fifty years ago, that he would not leave
Hatfield-Christians for any place in England; There being then many Eminent
Christians, most of which are long since admitted into the General Assembly
amongst he Spirits of just men made perfect, whither he is now gone to them. At
his first coming thither, he only preached the weekly Lecture, (which had
continued there many years) and on the Sabbath days in the afternoon, but
after some time the Minister of the place having another Living in Norfolk, was
obliged to reside there and quit Hatfield, and then the whole work did devolve
upon Mr. Warten; So that he preached constantly three times a week at home, and
took his turn in several other Lectures, which were kept by a Combination of
Ministers; Yet his frequent Preaching did not make him slight therein, his
Lecture was frequented by many of the Neighboring Ministers, his Sermons were
chiefly designed and accommodated to the use of serious experienced Christians,
of which there were many then; his Sermons were not as some things which are
Compositions indeed, wherein several things are put together, and the
ingredients appear in gross lumps; and they do not incorporate together, and so
the virtue of them is lost, whereas when they are well mixed they do not so
obviously appear, but there is the virtue of them. So learning does little good
in Sermons, where it appears in long quotations, School terms and distinctions,
exotic or foreign words; but then it does most good in Sermons when Ministers
make use of it to insinuate or work things so into the affections of their
hearers, that they may e're they are aware be made as the Charets of Aminadab,
Cant. 6.12. or come upon them with that power and evidence of Truth, that they
may not be able to withstand the wisdom and spirit wherewith they speak, Acts
6.10. But besides this ordinary work, there were then monthly Fasts, which he
usually kept without the help of others; wherein he did not huddle over the
duties of the day in compliance with the weakness of those that say of such
days as the Jews of their new Moons and Sabbaths, when will they be gone? Amos
8.5. And of the duties thereof, what a weariness is it? Mal. chapter 1. ver. 13.
But he kept them with Solemnity as days of afflicting the soul, and with such
fervency and perseverance in prayer as the condition of the Nation did then
require: And besides these his assistants was frequently desired in days of
Solemn prayer and humiliation, on particular occasions, he being an Israelite
indeed, not only as without guile, but as one that had power with God in
prayer, and did often prevail; for which reason I have several times been desired
by Christians to engage Mr. Warren to pray for them, and have since his death
received Letters from some lamenting the loss of such a praying Friend, and he
has often put me in mind of the words of Mr. Welsh concerning an eminent
Christian in Scotland: Happy is that City, yea happy is that Nation, that has
an Hugh Kennedy; and adds (what I may truly say concerning Mr. Warren I have my
self certainly found the Answers of his prayers from the Lord in my behalf.

And besides all this, there was a monthly Meeting of some Ministers, which he
was the first promoter of, that continued many years, wherein there were
Disputations and Latin Sermons, wherein I have often heard Positions, and
Determinations, which might well have become the Divinity-Schools, or have
entertained an Academical Auditory. All these things required much study, which
he had need be a good Husband to find time for, amidst so much business,
especially considering how much Acquaintance and Company he had; all that knew
him, being so desirous of his Conversation, which was so pleasing and
profitable, and so many having recourse to him for satisfying their doubts, he
having (according to the Proverb) an Eagle's Eye, and a Lady's Hand, in dealing
with wounded Consciences; that is, a deep and piercing in sight into matters of
that nature, and much of tenderness and compassion toward such persons. And
further (as was observed of Mr. Joseph Mede, that profound Scholar, that he
seemed most delighted with those Studies which might strain the sinews of his
Brain, and therefore did set upon the most difficult places of Scripture so.)
Mr. Warren did Preach long upon the Song of Solomon, and the Revelation. As
that pious learned judicious Man Mr. Durham in Scotland likewise did, though
Mr. Warren did not undertake to determine any thing upon the Prophetical part
of the Revelation. I know those are charged with arrogance and overweening,
that will attempt to explain such difficult places of Scripture; yet there is a
blessing promised to him that reads, and to him that hears the words of the
Revelation, Chap. 1.3. There are many things therein that must be kept, and
therefore understood; and certainly there are many things in both these Books
that at first seem very obscure, which (by prayer, study, and comparing them
with other places of Scripture) may be made more plain than could at first be
imagined. As a learned Man says of Mr. Durham's Lectures on the Revelation,
that diverse of the most obscure Texts of that Book, which he understood little
of at the beginning of his Lecture, before he closed his Exercise, were made so
clear to him, that he thought he might well acquiesce in his Exposition without
much more debate. Though he was thus employed, yet he redeemed so much time for
Study, that he was a General Scholar: And when there was once a suspicion
suggested (where there were many persons of Quality together) that some of the
Non-Conformists might be Jesuits, (too great an honor to that Order, as if,
though Learning do not die with them, yet it brings Learned Men, whom others
are not on all accounts satisfied with, under a suspicion that they belong to
them) one in the Company replied, that the fittest person that he knew to make
a Jesuit, was Mr. Warren, not that he had any such suspicion of him, for I know
he gave an high Character of him, both for Piety and Learning: But he accounted
him a Person of such quickness and acumen, which he gave an instance of in his
so baffling a Doctor in his hearing, which was known to some of the Company.
There are some living who can still remember, that about fifty years ago there
was a person of competent Learning (as appears by a Visitation Sermon, long
since printed) but of greater confidence, that Preached a Lecture at a place in
this County, wherein he took upon him to maintain Universal Redemption, and
still after his Sermon he made a general challenge, as Goliath did to the Host
of Israel, Give me a man that we may fight together, 1 Samuel 17.10. He was ready
to dispute with any that should question what he had preached. Now there was a
weekly Lecture not far off, where several Ministers met, and upon consulting
together, they thought it fit for them to accept of his challenge, lest by
their silence they should seem to consent to his Doctrine, or at least that (as
the Host of Israel was dismayed and greatly afraid at the words of Goliath so)
they were afraid to encounter him; So it was agreed amongst them to go the next
Lectureday to hear him, and to dispute with him; and Mr. Warren was desired to
be there with them.

So they went, and he made his challenge as he used to do; and though Mr. Warren
was much younger than most of the other Ministers, they put him upon accepting
the challenge, which he did, and at the first onset put him quite beside his
play; which did non plus him for a time; but after a little while he recovered
himself so far as to ask Mr. Warren a Question, appealing to him, Whether he
thought in his Conscience that the interpretation which he gave of those places
of Scripture which he had alleged for the proof of his Doctrine, was the true
sense of them; to which Mr. Warren made him presently such a reply, that he
came down from the Pulpit as a man confounded, and quitted the field, came
thither no more to make any further challenge. Indeed Mr. Warren did in some
sense acknowlede a general Redemption, yet not that conditional Redemption,
which is contended for by so many Learned men; but such a Redemption whereby
Christ did obtain an Universal Dominion over all, so as not only to be the head
of his Christ, but to be head over all things to his Church, or for their good,
Ephesians. 1.22. and whereby he had power over all flesh that he might give eternal
life to as many as the Father had given him, Joh. 17.2. Amyrald who was a great
Abbetor of this new Hypothesis of Redemption might (I think) say of it as he
once did of the new Philosophy: when two happened to come to visit him at the
same time, and fell into a very warm debate about the old and new Philosophy:
Amyrald after he had heard their several exceptions on one side and the other,
cries out, difficulte pour difficulte, le vicil vaut autant que le nouveau;
Difficulty for difficulty, the old is as good as the new. I doubt the new
Aypothesis of Redemption will do no more to extricate us out of pretended
difficulties than the old.

Some suppose that the four Beasts mentioned, Rev. 4.7. are Emblems of the
Ministers of the Church; that Zeal and Courage; that Patience and
Industriousness; that Prudence in managing the Affairs of the Church; that
insight into the Mysteries of the Gospel that should be in Ministers, and which
are in them in different degrees, some excelling more in one, some in another.
Mr. Warren did not want Courage and Patience under Affliction, suffering
joyfully the spoiling of his goods, (and of his industriousness I have already
spoken) but he was Eminent in prudence, and insight into the Mysteries of the
Gospel. His prudence was such that he was of great use to his Friends in
advising them in several Cases, even about worldly things, though he minded
them so little that he might seem to some to be a mere Scholar: But he was none
of the Philosophers which the Greek Comaedian complains of that were wise in
words only, but in managing business very fools; for managing affairs he was so
fitted, that a Considerable Congregation of Christians of a different
persuasion from him, would have chosen him to be a Teacher in their
Congregation, that they might have the benefit of his preaching and of his
prudence in managing the affairs of their Church, desiring there might be a
mutual forbearance between them in such things wherein they could not be of one
mind. And his writings (something of which is now come out of the Press, and
more may I hope ere long) are such whereby (that I may borrow the Apostles
words, Ephesians. 3.4.) when ye Read, ye may understand his knowledge in the mystery
of Christ. He was of a very peaceable temper, and did study to be quiet, and as
much as in him lay to live peaceably with all men: yet would not jurare in
verba magistri, or (in our Saviors sense, Matt. 23.9.) call any man Father on
earth, resigning up himself to him by an implicit faith. Mr. Baxter was his
ancient friend, and they lived together in the same house, when Mr. Baxter
preached at Bridgworth, yet when he put forth his Aphorisms, Mr. W. being
dissatisfied with some things therein, was his ingenious friend that he speaks
of in the postscript to his book of Infant Baptism, and names in his Catholic
Theology, who attempted something at first, which we do not meet with indeed in
his Polimical writings, because Mr. W. did engage him not to draw him into a
public contest, by publishing any thing which he wrote to him: But it was that
which Mr. Baxter did not slight nor answer una litura with one dash, for he
wrote him an answer to it of one and forty Sheets. To draw toward a Conclusion,
he was a shining and burning light, and might give that for his Motto, Lucendo
pereo. He wasted with giving light to others.

I never heard him wish (with Dr. Whitaker) that he could purchase that health
in his old age, which he empared by his night-Studies in his youth; or repent
him of any pains which he had taken in his Lords work. His strength failed him
for sometime before he died, so that he was carried to the Pulpit constantly
(as his Predecessor likewise at Hatfield was) what a difference is there
betwixt looking on a Body worn out in the service of men's lusts, and mourning
at last when their body and flesh are consumed, and saying, how have I hated
instruction! Prove. 5.11. and looking upon a poor decayed body worn out in the
service of Christ. At length more than three months before he died, his
strength was so far decayed, and his memory did so fail him, that he was forced
quite to disist from his pleasing work, which he had taken so much delight in,
and God did hereby make him not only willing, but desirous to die. Then, as one
said, He had vitam in patientia mortem in voto, was content to live in
submission to the will of God, but having a desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, Phil. 1.23. As a Servant wearied with work earnestly desires the
Shadow, and as an Hireling looks for the reward of his work, Job 7.2. This
you may see by this passage in a Letter to me sometime before he dyed, when he
found his strength much decaying, viz. my inability for service to God, and his
dear people (whom my Soul loves) makes me weary of this world, and willing to
be gone to the remaining rest.

The Lord prepare me for it, and quicken my motion toward it, and bless your
labors who have yet time and opportunity to work in his Vineyard. As for me,
my Flesh fails, and my Heart fails: But be thou, O God! the strength of my
Heart, and my portion for ever. And hereby God likewise brought his Friends to
be willing to part with him: Many years ago when he was near to death through a
sore sickness, and understood that (as it is said of Peter, Acts 12.5.) Instant
and Earnest prayer was made of the Church unto God for him; he wished that God
and his People were agreed to let him go. Now his people were willing to let
him go, he could be no more useful to them, and his strength was but labor and
sorrow, having almost finished the seventy fifth year of his age.

If he had been taken away in his strength, and while he was busied in his
Masters work, how great lamentation would have been made over him? for the loss
of his public labors which had so often been so great a comfort and refreshment
to them, for the loss of his prudent Counsels, Spiritual Consolations, sympathy
in Afflictions, pathetical and earnest Intercessions, and for my self, I may
say, as David for Jonathan, I am distressed for thee, my Brother, very pleasant
have thou been to me, and thy love to me was wonderful, 2 Samuel 1.26. I may
without vanity speak it, for when above forty years ago he seemed to himself
and others to be leaving the world, he was speaking to his nearest Relation
which was with him, of several of his friends, and when he spoke of me, brake
off abruptly only with these words, I loved him. Sir Fuk Grevil (afterward
Lord Brook) desired when he dyed that he might have inscribed on his Grave,
Here lies a Friend of Sir Philip Sidney; and I should think it honor enough to
have it inscribed on mine, Here lies a Friend of Mr. Warren.

I lived in intimate Friendship and Familiarity with him forty five years; and
spent many precious hours with him to my great comfort and advantage: And if I
might have my choice (as Elisha had at the translation of Elijah, 2 Kings 2.9.)
it should be that a double measure of the Spirit of Mr. Warren might be upon
me. Yea, I should account my self happy if I had but his measure of Gifts, and
Parts of Learning, Grace, Temper; How quick was he to apprehend? Of what a
profound Judgment? How inquisitive in the pursuit of Truth? How diligent to
dive into the depth of things, or (as we say) to sift them to the bran? of a
tender Spirit, weeping, like Job, for those that were in trouble, and his Soul
was grieved for the poor, Job 30.25. How great a measure had he of that wisdom
that is from above? which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, without Hypocrisy, James
3.17. (if I may speak impartially and unfeignedly) I never knew any in whom
these things were more plainly exemplified than in him. How tender, indulgent
and prudent an Husband and Father he was? How affectionate and faithful to his
Friends, how able to advise them? how ready to pity them, sympathize with them,
and pray for them? Those only know that were acquainted with him, who lament
the want of him. For though I hope his prayers may be answered, (which he made
while he lived, for his Friends) now he is dead; for we pray that both our
selves and others, whom we pray for, may find Mercy and obtain Grace to help in
time of need, that an answer may be given in (not presently but) as the matter
requires, when it may be most suitable and seasonable, Heb. 4.16. Therefore
though Abraham did not obtain an answer when he prayed, God remembered him soon
enough to deliver Lot, which seems to be the chief thing he aimed at in his
prayers, Genesis 19.29. Yet many dearly miss such a Friend to go to both to
sympathize with them, and advise them as their condition requires; and though
there be a residue of the Spirit with God, to raise up, and send forth such
Laborers into his Harvest; yet the want of such is much lamented, now the
Harvest is so plenteous. But for the Inhabitants of Hatfield Broad-Oake,
Stortford, and other his Christian Friends, whom he had a continual Remembrance
of in his prayers, and who have fully known his Doctrine, manner of Life,
Purpose, Faith, Long-suffering, Charity, Patience, 2 Timothy 3.10. and are
witnesses how holily, and justly, and unblameably he behaved himself among
them, 1 These. 2.10. As they desire his prayers may come up for a memorial
before God; so let them endeavor to have these things always in Remembrance
after his decease, which he was not negligent when living to put them in mind
of, 2 Peter 1.12, etc. And which others have taken care (by publishing some of
them) that they may be kept in their minds, and be followers of him, and mark
them which walk so, as they have him for an ensample, Phil. 3.17. For he taught
by his life as well as by his Doctrine, according to the charge which Nazianzen
gives to Ministers, not to teach at all except they teach by their Conversation.

FINIS.
Books sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, at the lower
End of Cheapside.
A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above one hundred seventy six
Sermons on the lesser Catechism, composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines
at Westminster: With a Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of
Scripture. By Tho. Watson, formerly Minister at St. Stephen's Walbrook, London.

A Paraphrase on the New Testament, with Notes, doctrinal and practical. By
plainness and brevity fitted to the Use of Religious Families, in their daily
Reading of the Scriptures; and of the younger and poorer sort of Scholars and
Ministers, who want fuller helps. With an Advertisement of Difficulties in the
Revelations. By the late Reverend Mr. Rich. Baxter.

Six hundred of select Hymns and Spiritual Songs collected out of the Holy
Bible. Together with a Catechism, the Canticles, and a Catalogue of Virtuous
Women. The three last hundred of select Hymns collected out of the Psalms of
David. By William Barton, A. M. late Minister of St. Martins in Leicester.

Spiritual Songs: Or Songs of Praise to Almighty God upon several occasions.
Together with the Song of Songs, which is Solomon's: First turned, then
paraphrased in English Verse. By John Mason.

Sacramental Hymns collected (chiefly) out of such passages of the New
Testament as contain the most suitable matter of Divine Praises in the
Celebration of the Lord's Supper. To which is added one Hymn relating to
Baptism, and another to the Ministry. By J. Boyse. With some by other hands.

The Psalms of David in Meter: Newly translated, and diligently compared with
the Original Text, and former Translations: More plain, smooth, and agreeable
to the Text, than any heretofore.

Of Free Justification by Christ. Written first in Latin by John Fox, Author
of the Book of Martyrs, against Osorius, etc. And now Translated into English,
for the benefit of those who love their own Souls, and would not be mistaken in
so great a Point.

An Earnest Call to Family-Religion: Or a Discourse concerning Family Worship.
Being the substance of Eighteen Sermons. Preached by Samuel Slater, A.M.
Minister of the Gospel.

Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion: Or the character and happiness of a
Virtuous Woman; in a Discourse which directs the Female Sex how to express the
Fear of God in every Age and State of their Life; and obtain both Temporal and
Eternal Blessedness. Written by Cotton Mather.

The Confirming Work of Religion, and its great things made plain by their
primary Evidences and Demonstrations; whereby the meanest in the Church may
soon be made able to render a rational account of their Faith.

England's Alarm: Being an account of God's most considerable Dispensations of
Judgment and Mercy toward these Kingdoms, for fourteen years last past; and
also of the several sorts of Sins and Sinners therein; especially the Murmurers
against this Present Government. With an Earnest Call to speedy Humiliation and
Reformation, and Supplication as the chief means of prospering Their Majesty's
Councels and Preparations. Dedicated to the King and Queen.

A Family-Altar Erected to the honor of the Eternal God: Or, a solemn Essay to
promote the Worship of God in Private Houses: Being some Meditations on Genesis
3.5.2.3. With the Best Entail, or Dying Parents Living Hopes for their
Surviving Children, grounded upon the Covenant of God's Grace with Believers
and their Seed. Being a short Discourse on 2 Samuel 23.5. By Oliver Heywood
Minister of the Gospel.

The Gospel-Mystery of Sanctification opened in sundry practical Directions,
suited especially to the case of those who labor under the guilt and power of
In dwelling sin. To which is added a Sermon of Justification. By Walter
Marshall Minister of the Gospel, etc.

Death improved, and immoderate Sorrow for Deceased Friends and Relations
reproved. Wherein you have many Arguments against Immoderate Sorrow, and many
profitable Lessons which we may learn from such Providence. By E. Bury,
formerly Minister of Great Bolas in Shropshire, Author of the Help to Holy
Walking, and the Husbandman's Companion, etc.

The Poor Man's Help, and Young Man's Guide: Containing, 1. Doctrinal
Instructions for the right informing of his Judgment. 2. Practical Directions
for the general course of his Life. 3. Particular Advices for the well-managing
of every day with reference to his Natural Actions, Civil Employments,
Necessary Recreations, Religious Duties, particular Prayer, Public in the
Congregation, Private in the Family, Secret in the Closet, Reading the holy
Scriptures, Hearing the Word Preached, and Receiving the Lord's Supper. By
William Burkitt, M. A. of Pembroke. Hall in Cambridge, and now Vicar of Dedham
in Essex, and Author of the practical Discourse of Infant Baptism.

A plain Discourse about tash and sinful Anger, as a help for such as are
willing to be relieved against so sad and too generally prevailing Distemper
even amongst Professors of Religion; being the substance of some Sermons
Preached at Manchester. By Henry Newcome, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel
there, and Author of the Improvement of Sickness.

The Rod or the Sword, the present Dilemma of the Nations of England, Scotland
and Ireland, considered, argued and improved on Ezekiel. 21.14. By a true Friend
to the Protestant Interest, and the Protestant Government.

A Present for such as have been Sick and are recovered: Or, a Discourse
concerning the Good that comes out of the Evil of Affliction: Being several
Sermons Preached after his being raised from a Bed of Languishing. By Nath.
Vincent, M.A. and Author of the Conversion of the Soul. The true Touchstone of
Grace and Nature. Discourse of Conscience. Treatise of Prayer and Love, etc.

Some passages in the Holy Lise and Death of the Late Reverend Mr. Edmund
Trench, most of them drawn out of his own Diary. Published by Joseph Boyse
Minister in Dublin.

Advice to an Only Child: Or, Excellent Counsel to all Young Persons,
containing the sum and substance of Experimental and Practical Divinity.
Written by an Eminent and Judicious Divine, for the private use of an Only
Child. Now made public for the benefit of all.

An account of the Blessed Trinity, argued from the Nature and Perfection of
the Supreme Spirit, coincident with the Scripture Doctrine, in all the Articles
of the Catholic Creeds; together with its Mystical, Foederal, and Practical
Uses in the Christian Religion. By William Borough Rector of Cheyns in Bucks.

A Discourse of Justification, being the sum of Twenty Sermons. By Walter
Cross, M. A.

Practical Discourses on Sickness and Recovery.

A Discourse concerning Trouble of Mind; in three Parts. By Timothy Rogers,
M.A. Also a Treatise of Consolation; by the same Author.

A Plain and Familiar Discourse on the Sacrament. By Bishop Kidder.

Robberts on the Sacrament.

Vines on the Sacrament.

Day's Sacramental Catechism.

Doolittle's Second Part of the Discourse on the Sacrament, concerning Christ's
Sufferings.

The Method of Salvation: In two Parts. 1. A Sinner's Conversion to Saving
Faith in God through Christ. 2. The Progress of a Believer from his Conversion to
his Persection, under the Work of Sanctification. By John Warren, M. A.
Sometime Minister of the Gospel at Hatfield Broad Oak in Essex.

FINIS.

