MEDITATIONS UPON RETIREMENT FROM THE WORLD.

Occasioned By a Discourse with a Gentleman, Who begun to see the vanity of
Worldly enjoyments, whereof he had had a very great share, and thought it
necessary by despising of them, to secure the interest of his Soul, while there
was any time left.

Blessed are they that forsake the World for Heaven, but more blessed are they
that find Heaven, before they go out of the World.

There is no more difference between Heaven and the Kingdom of God, than there
is between Hell and the Kingdom of Darkness.

Heaven consists, in Virtue, Truth and Light. Hell consists in Vice, Lies, and
Darkness

Our Savior leads us the way to Heaven, and the Devil directs people to Hell.

The Reader may consider which of these two he had best to follow.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. MDCXCI.

TO HIS ROYAL-HIGHNESS Prince GEORGE OF DENMARK.
THE nearer you are to Crown and Scepter, the more regard you ought to have to
Him, whose Vicegerents, Kings and Princes are. By your indifferency about
Worldly Affairs, Providence has disposed you, to despise the World, and to
give your Heart to God, who has unimaginable happiness and contentment ready
for those, that with an entire Resignation comply with his Will. If the
following Meditations have such an effect upon your Mind, as to strengthen your
Love to the Ruler of all Hearts, He will never let you want those Affections of
the People, which mark and support a Princes greatness, and I shall certainly
see my Wishes and Hopes of the growth and continuance of your Prosperity
fulfilled. When you see these present Broils of Europe make way for great
changes in Church and State, remember this Dedication, and believe that God
will rescue those that fear, love and trust him, and that you are One of the
few great Ones, not to be touched by the general Calamity, which the unusual
Earthquakes and other Signs of Gods Anger do forebode. Then I shall not
scruple to make my self known to you.

READER.
ALL those render no small service to God and their Country, that endeavor to
help true Christianity to get uppermost. For we would soon have a better Church
and State, if People were thoroughly persuaded, that real Prosperity upon Earth
depended upon our Care for Heaven: This single Notion well fixed in the
generality of minds, would quench many a desire by Factions to disturb the
Peace and quiet of the Nation, or to hinder its welfare by cheating the
Public, both of its Treasure and of those Services, which People less wedded
to luxury and private interest might render. How far the following Meditations
may tend this way, the Christian Reader will judge, who will I hope allow of my
Apology for the Style, when I tell him it is not my Native Language. I hope
these Meditations will not have the misfortune to fall into the hands of any,
that either think God a slave to the course and Laws of Nature, or that fancy,
their Wisdom above Gods Endowments. For such People will conclude me as great
an Euthasiast as they are either Beasts or Foolish-Wisemen. It is my comfort
that I have Witnesses of my Behavior in the greatest adversity, when I had the
fate of the Moneyless, to be disowned almost by every body, and some thought
they discharged the duty of Friendship in desiring the Prayers of the
Congregation, that my health and understanding might be restored to me. People
that do not know of this, will hardly own me a fit Preacher of the obligation
of an entire Resignation to Gods will, if they should see me by a wonderful
Providence raised to make some Figure in the World. But as God alone knows how
much I have been humbled, so it is in his only Breast how for I shall be
exalted.

May First. Heinrich Wilhelm Lud^lf.
The first of July, thou shall have a Commentary.
MEDITATION I.
THe World is an imperious Mistress, who makes those most uneasy that are
fondest of her. Which has induced several to prefer Retirement before
Greatness and Splendour in the World, after they have found the emptyness of all
those things, which men commonly make their Idols. Providence having contrived
it so wisely, that whosoever has a wrong aim in point of happiness, is sooner
or latter made sensible of his having missed the mark: All the mischief comes
from misplacing our affections, and from not bestowing a true value upon the
things we are in pursuit after. If we remembered the, Seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven, we would soon find fullfilled the, All things shall be added unto you.
Since a hearty concern for a future Life, would make us look with so much
contempt upon the trifles of this World, that we would hardly ever disquiet our
selves with the desire of any thing, that is not added to us already. But such
a Resignation to Providence requires perhaps more Religion than is commonly
met with in men. However we all pretend to reason, and those that are not
totally deprived of the right use of reason, will own that they have an
immortal Soul, and that consequently the securing Eternity to the Soul, is not
only the most important business, but that without the hopes of it, our mind
will not be free from grudgings very injurious to its quiet and contentment,
which influences the health of our Body very much. So that reason should tell
every man, he must look after Heaven, if he will enjoy happiness upon Earth,
which cannot subsist, without health in the Body and tranquillity in the Mind.
Gods goodness as well as wisdom having ordered it so, that the interest of
Body, Mind, and Soul is so closely united together, that a concern for the Soul
brings us to the observing of our Saviors Rules, and practicing of those
virtues, whereby the vigor of our Body and the contentment of our Minds is
promoted; and on the other hand, managing the Body according to the Precepts of
Temperance and Sobriety, strengthens our Understanding, and inables it to
descry in Nature and Providence, those glorious Beams of Wisdom and Goodness,
which cannot chose but inflame our desires of obtaining the favor of that
infinite perfect Being Which desire, if it be sincere and earnest, is half way
toward our Souls home. This consideration alone should be enough to keep any
rational man from bestowing any more value upon the Goods and Pleasures of this
World, than is consistent with a due care of the next. Which if they did, they
would not be weary of Earth before they are fitted for Heaven, and even Earthly
pleasures of Body as well as of mind, would be more real, more lasting, and
more easily attained. They would not be at a loss where to find retirement and
quiet. For in my opinion it is not changing of City or Court for the Country,
wherein a quiet Retirement consists, because in the greatest Solitude, and most
concealed Recess our mind may be hurried about with restless passions and
desires; on the other hand, neither the noise of the City nor the hurry of the
Court, can discompose a temper well settled by not depending upon
uncertainties, but entirely relying on Gods Providence, which designs nothing
but good for us. Though it cannot be denied, that every body is not strong
enough to resist the temptations of City and Court, which wheedle us into wrong
courses.

MEDITATION II.
SInce then Retirement, which is to set our mind at ease does not consist in
the bare changing of the place of our abode; it seems to me, that the secret of
enjoying quiet and tranquillity of mind, consists only in withdrawing our-heart
from any thing we are in possession of in this World. This is the way to hold
Riches, and Honor, nay even that more valuable pleasure of friendship, without
the uneasiness of fearing to lose them, or grieving for them, when they give us
the slip. It is a common observation, that Sin and Folly differ but very
little, and that the Wisdom of Providence has put a straight connection
between Sin and Punishment. So that whosoever forgets his duty to his Creator
to such a degree, as to lay him by for the Creature, and to bestow upon the
Creature those affections, which were due only to the Creator; that person must
needs expose himself to a great many inconveniences, which by Gods
unchangeable Law attend the committing of Sin and Folly. We daily see that
Wisemen make themselves ridiculous about those Worldly objects, which they
most dote upon, and never make a worse use of their understanding, than when
they are busied about the things they love best. Love, as well as other
passions, leading commonly their Mistress the Reason, by the nose; and the
Proverb, Love is Blind, is of a larger extent, than to be understood only of
admiring a Woman. For we see Parents, fond of their Children, not only
overvalue their parts, but by too much indulgence to the humor of their
Children, to expose themselves to the just censures of discreet impartial
persons. We meet with bookish men puffed up with some Philological remarks,
that are hissed at by men of sense, and of use to either Church or State.
Children and Books are questionless as harmless objects of our fancy as any,
and yet when our heart is set upon them, they easily betray our folly, and
bring no less an inconvenience upon us, than the lessening of our reputation by
having our judgment called in question. As irrational loving of sensual
pleasures, Money and Fame is more criminal, so it is attended with punishment
more real, than the bare loss of the good opinion of men of sense. I do not
speak only of men that pursue these things by the commission of the most
provoking sins, but even of those that hunt after them in some seeming honest
course. A man may endeavor to grow rich, without Robbing and Cheating, another
may offer at Greatness without Slandering or Supplanting, and yet both these
men will find themselves mistaken at the long run, if they make this their
chief business, and it is a Mercy of God, when he shows them their error, and
directs them to look after that which must render the enjoyment of plenty and
greatness secure and comfortable. This cannot be obtained unless a body be sure
of Gods favor and support, but it is not probable that God Almighty will assure
a man of so great a blessing, unless he thinks it worth the longing for it,
which he is not like to do, as long as his mind chiefly runs upon worldly
things. Wherefore I conclude that withdrawing our heart from worldly things, is
the true retirement, which leads us to calmness of mind, and keeps us from
being disturbed, in the City and Court as well as in the Country. Nay it will
beget that love and trust in God, which makes Prosperity the more comfortable
and adversity the less uneasy, and when our crosses seem to overballance too
much our comforts, this sort of Retirement will make us amends for all, by a
promising prospect of our future hopes.

MEDITATION III.
IT is, I must confess, not so very easy, to withdraw our heart from the
world; for it is hard to blot out the impressions made upon our minds in our
younger years. One that always heard people admired for a great Estate, for a
splendid Housekeeping and magnificent Furniture and Retinue, will be backward
to believe that all those things signify nothing, and are not worth our
seeking them. We hear Great Men so often reckoned among the fortunate, and very
often see so many real advantages of power, that we cannot help almost our
being betrayed into Ambition. Nay when bountiful Nature has bestowed so good
an understanding upon us, as to be convinced, that Wealth and Greatness are
very empty things without Contentedness, there is one object left, from which
it is hardest of all to withdraw our heart, that is, We our selves; The wise
Author of Nature has implanted in us a love of our being, that we might seek
to preserve, and to improve it: And there is no question to be made, but that
it would stand us in very great stead, if we loved our selves with a due regard
to our glorious Maker, for it is more than probable that our Being may be
improved by him, that contrived it so artificially. But when we lay him a side,
and perhaps do every thing to affront him into the bargain, it is no wonder he
should revenge so base an ingratitude, by suffering our Self love to lead us as
a blind Guide. This perverse Self love begets that uncharitableness and envy,
from whence springs all the strife and faction, which disturbs so very much
both public and private. It intoxicates us with that conceit of our own
judgment, that we will hardly allow any body to be in the right but our selves,
making commonly very peevish requitals to those that offer to show us our
mistakes. In one word Self-love is the root of Pride, which is so criminal a
qualification, that it turned Lucifer out of Heaven. The enlightened Author of
The Whole Duty Man, makes very good Remarks upon this subject. Nor can it be
denied that the greater the thing is which we are proud of, the greater is our
Sin and consequently the Fall that attends Pride commonly. The mischief of our
being pleased with our own person is not so great, as to think our judgment
infallible; and being puffed up with a vain conceit of Saintship, is worse
still, and very often occasions those false lights, whereby many a poor soul is
lead into precipices. The reason seems to be, that Pride has ingratitude
toward God Almighty at the bottom, for the proud man does not reflect upon his
holding every thing of God Almighty, and the greater his gifts are, the greater
is his ingratitude, when he ascribes them to himself. Since then Self-love is
so dangerous, and yet so natural to us, we ought to take the more particular
care to break ourselves of that fondness of our selves, which is the last and
hardest difficulty to be overcome by one, who would fain enjoy that Retirement,
wherein we are past being displeased with any thing but what displeases God
Almighty.

MEDITATION IV.
SUCH a disengagement of our hearts from all worldly affections fits us for
that love of God, whereby we endear our selves to him, and receive those
returns from him, which bring us to so much experience of his mercy, that we
never despond even under the worst circumstances, but bear the worst lot of his
Providence without reluctance. It would be strange if God Almighty, who has
given so innumerable proofs of his goodness toward us, should look with
indifferency upon those that endeavor to answer his design in creating of Man,
and endowing him with understanding. If we think we have reason to lessen our
kindness for a person, which does love another besides us. How can we imagine,
that Infinite Being should take it well at our hands, when we kindly entertain
so despicable Rivals besides him. Many pious persons hold, that God created Man
only for a witness to his wonders, to admire and enjoy the beauty of the whole
Creation; and after Man had by his ingratitude, forfeited so great a bliss, and
by his disobedience brought the sad punishment upon him, which has made his
Posterity smart ever since; Yet God was pleased to give still a greater proof
of his Love in pitying Man's deplorable condition, and providing a mean for its
relief. What is not such an Infinite Goodness like to do for one, who is
sensible of so unspeakable a Mercy, and with a due acknowledgement of his
unworthiness makes it his utmost care to please his Creator. If we make never
so few Christian Reflections upon the course he takes with us, we will soon find
that he courts us for our heart, by all the methods imaginable, and when they
do not prevail, he imbitters the enjoyment of those very things which enticed
our heart away from him. He does not deserve so great a favor as affliction,
that does not look upon it, as a design of God Almighty to wean us from those
things which rendered us treacherous to him. Our mind must have some thing to
delight chiefly in, and which way soever it inclines, there it sticks closer
and closer. If it bend toward the world, it will entangle it self faster and
faster in it, and remove further and further from God. But if our mind fix once
upon God, it will despise the world more and more, and grow in delighting in
God Almighty and Heaven. The more our love tends this way, the more our
expectations will be answered. Till by degrees it bring us to so straight a
union with God, that no Temptation will tear us from him. When God once finds
us true to him, he gives us those assurances of his being true to us, that
nothing is able to shake us, or to grieve us; till at length we arrive at such
an intimacy with him, as to have no other will but his, and to bear with an
entire resignation his disposals. Then we begin to see wonders of Wisdom,
Goodness, Mercy and Justice, even in those Events. which the world thinks
chance, and we will find that the more we seek Heaven the more we find
happiness upon Earth, whereas seeking the Trifles of the Earth makes us lose
Heaven and does nothing but inbroil us here upon earth. So that in my opinion
it is Prudence as well as Religion, to give our Heart to God and not to the
World, than I am sure the Vanity of the World will never make us uneasy, nor
puzzle us where to find that tranquillity and cherfullness of mind, which
sweetens this life and gives us a foretaste of that which is to come.

MEDITATION V.
FOr fear any body should think these Notions insignificant whims of my own
brains. I advise to examine, whether they are not agreeable to what was said
before by one, whose Wisdom and Truth no Christian can have an exception to,
There is scarce another sense to be given to those words of our Saviors,
whereby he declared, That the Love of his Heavenly Father was not in us, as
long as we loved the, World. But if people will not mind his Doctrine, how can
they wonder at their not finding the Truth and Benefit of it. Withdrawing our
heart from the World, and giving it to God, is that forsaking of every thing,
which has the promise of an hundred fold recompense. Whereof no body is like
to gain a fortunate experience that does not think it worth his while to
attempt a trial of it. Though I am of opinion the truth of my Notions will be
called in question by no body who owns the Bible to contain Gods Word. The
number indeed of those is far greater, which think it beneath them to submit
their understanding to Gods Wisdom, not to speak of those, which count David a
fool, for calling those Fools, which denied a God. I will not now incroach upon
the province of Divines, and threaten those Sparks with the heavy Judgments,
that are like to befall them, or think so meanly of my time, as to go about the
proving their errors, since they admit only of heathenish arguments, they may
go; those passages in Seneca, which make Contempt of Riches the great Road
toward becoming Rich. And they may learn of Epicurus, that since man's
happiness consists in pleasure he must needs be most happy, whose pleasure is
least subject to uncertainty, or to taste as much of Gall as of Honey. My
Meditations being designed only for the improvement of Christianity. I dare
assure my self, that any person, who will earnestly endeavor for Christ's sake
to forsake his Life, will by Gods blessing find a far better. I have not been
yet in the other World, and cannot speak by experience of what we have to
expect there. But I know that forsaking of those courses which set us at a
greater and greater distance from God, will bring us by degrees to such a life
here upon Earth, which is not only free from disquiet, and fear, but wherein
natural pleasures are easy, and even the thought of their loss most pleasant.
I shall never be persuaded to embrace the sottish conceit of those, that
suppose all the pleasures of the body, were by the bountiful Creator of the
Universe, laid only as so many snares for our Soul, and upon that account deny
their bodies not only recreation but necessaries. It is too low a fancy to
imagine that so infinite a goodness as that of the Almighty can take delight in
making us uneasy, and I have reason to believe, that the infinite liberality
of our Creator desires nothing of us but a grateful enjoyment of what is
given, being so free to grant the desires of those that love him, that they can
scarce thank him heartily for a mercy received, before there is a greater one
ready. Though I am afraid there is not over many that have had a full sense
hereof, since there is so few, that think it worth their while by a real hearty
Contempt of the World to offer at a little more familiar acquaintance with Gods
goodness. My Meditations do not belong to those that had rather live like
Beasts than Men, but those that pay some respects to Reason and Christianity,
will be backward to condemn me too rashly for an Enthusiast, especially if they
do not measure other peoples Corn with their own Bushel, but have humility
enough to suppose, that by others they may be exceeded in Virtue as well as in
Vice, and that consequently they must not think themselves in possession of the
greatest share, of those Blessings, which are promised to Virtue and Piety, in
this Life as well as in the next.

MEDITATION VI.
THis new Life, which it is no paradox to call the beginning of the Eternal
one, is so unspeakable a happiness, that no body ought to grudge forsaking the
Old one, which St. Paul had so contemptible an opinion of, that he did not
think it worth the name of Life, when he desired to be delivered of the body of
this death. I can give so far an experimental description of it, that it puts a
period to those unfortunate jarrings between the Passions, Reason, and Faith,
which so desperately disturb a man in the Old life, and all our Faculties
within us, do in the new Life their parts with such a sweet harmony, that
Reason commands our Appetite and Passions with such an absolute, and yet very
indulgent sway, that both Appetite and Passions, afford nothing but Pleasure,
and such a Pleasure, which leaves no sting behind but increases with the
enjoyment. Reason on the other hand acts with that humble regard to the Divine
Majesty, from whence it had its spring, that it willingly by Faith submits to
those unsearchable Mysteries, which must of necessity be far above an
understanding, darkened by the general corruption of Mankind. But the more we
endeavor by the grace of God to free our selves from that corruption, the more
that veil of the eyes of our understandings will fall off, and by degrees God
Almighty enables us to see, that Faith is no intolerable Mistress to Reason,
but that the perfection of Reason consists, in being convinced of, and in
understanding the Truth and Reality of Divine Mysteries. It is true, it would
be great presumption in any man by his own forces to recover that perfection,
which was forfeited by his Primogenitors ingratitude; But since Gods infinite
mercy has provided the mean of our Mediator for our Restoration, it is the
greatest wonder to me, that there can be such wretches, as to neglect and mock
that, for which no humane tongue or understanding can find proportionate
thanks. I must confess the generality of Christians, is so little behind hand
with the Jews in despising of our Savior, that they boggle as much as the Jews
at the truth of our Saviors asseveration, That, no body ever should see death
that kept his Sayings. But how can any body be enabled to keep those Sayings or
Commandments, if he will not take his refuge to him, whose Merit and
Intercession must procure us the necessary help for it Since then Eternal Life,
or the beginning thereof, a New Life here upon earth, can be attained to, only
by keeping of Christ's Saying, or by following of his Example, it is absolutely
necessary, sincerely to desire, and earnestly to attempt the practice of those
Virtues which Christ reckoned our blessedness, and made them the Subject of all
his discourses, though he knew the World such a stranger to them, that he
thought it necessary to bespeak their attention by Similitudes and Parables. I
will not waste Time and Paper in summing up and describing the Loveliness and
Usefulness of those Virtues, the Practice whereof is, that Keeping of Christ's
Commandments, which he takes as a sign of our belief in, and love of him, for
which he has promised so unimaginable a Reward, that God will love us, come to
us and make his abode with us, Joh. 14. Those that think our Savior too plain
in recommending of those Virtues, may read the Whole Duty of Man, where they
are treated of more methodically, and in a style more suitable to the fashion of
these times. But I am afraid there is such a proud stubborn Generation, which
would hardly hear one appointed, to speak of GODS WILL, though he should comply
with all the fashions of the World, that are not directly opposite to the will
of God. For I believe they would think him as far from being a Prophet, because
he appeared among the wicked, as the old Prophets were contemned for flying
from the wickedness of the World. But God will confound the vain conceit of the
World, by not confining his Providence to the notions of humane Wisdom.

MEDITATION VII.
THE damned Pride of humane Wisdom is indeed come to that pass, that People
will hardly allow the Almighties Prorogative by his uncontrollable Providence
to manage this World. We have a daily experience of Gods disappointing the
subtlety of Men's designs, and of embroiling that success of the crafty, which
Gods unsearchable counsel permits sometimes. And yet we are generally so far
from reflecting more upon God than upon our own brains, that we fancy we are
able to baffle the disposals of Infinite Power, which I am afraid has connived
long enough to convince us of his extraordinary Mercy, and to keep us from
thinking those judgments too severe, which it seems begin to come upon Earth,
and which will very heavily light upon those heads, that have hitherto laughed
at the threatenings of Gods Word. It is not my task by these Meditations to
explain the first part of the Lords Prayer, and to determine what way and how
soon here upon Earth as well as in Heaven; Gods Name is to be hallowed, Gods
Kingdom to come, and Gods will to be done. Those that mind our Saviors
Exhortations, will not neglect to endeavor the being in a readiness for it at
all times. Gods mercy has nevertheless extended so far as to raise of late
persons, understanding those dark Passages both of the Old and New Testament,
which speak of the Triumph of goodness over wickedness. I have seen only some
writings of Mrs. Bourignon and Mr. Poiret, but I know there is more persons
acquainted with the nearness of that time. But I perceive there is scarce any
more heed taken of what they say or Write, than of Noah before the Deluge. It
is an unaccountable thing that even those, which own the Bible to come from
God, should less reflect upon what is contained in it about an universal Reign
of Justice, Peace and Joy; than upon the tricks of the Devil, to turn that
Reign into ridicule by some Millenarians, some Quakers, and some Family of Love
Men. We are questionless too presumptuous of ourselves, if we suppose there was
no need of our Savior for warning us against the fierceness and cheats of the
Devil in the latter times. But our Saviors Doctrine is grown so despicable
with the far greater part, that it is thought below a Wit, either to hold that
our Savior is God, or to believe that there is a Devil.

But Great God have thou in thy infinite Mercy a tender compassion of thy poor
people in this last and most furious assault of the Adversary, hear the sighs
of those that groan under his Tyranny, and prepare those that fear thee, for
thy appearence which thou will shortly make to avenge the Scorn of thy Only
Son, strengthen the Faith of those thou think fit to bring to the fiery
Trial, and do not defer long mercifully to fulfill thy decrees about me; for my
Redeemers sake.

FINIS.

