A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL.

Being the last Sermon preached at COURT, By the Right Reverend Father in God
BENJAMIN LANEY Late Lord Bishop of ELY.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun at the West end of S. Paul's. 1675.

Imprimatur,

THO. TOMKYNS.
Ex. Aed. Lambethanis Maii. 18. 1675.
A SERMON Preached Before His MAJESTY AT WHITE HALL.
GAL. vi. v. 7.8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap.

For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he
that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.


BEfore we look into the particulars of the Doctrine of this Text, we may from
the Preface [Be not deceived] learn so much of the nature of it, that we are
either in danger to be deceived, or in great danger if we should be deceived,
or both. It will therefore be necessary, first to implore the aid and
assistance of Gods grace, which is the best Guide to lead us through the
intricate ways of Error and Deceit, etc.

The Text it self seems not at first sight to answer the expectation which the
Preface has raised of Danger to us. It has but one purpose, but that is
carried upon two Propositions; One General, That whatsoever a man sows, he
shall reap. The other Particular, of what shall be reaped, from the Flesh, or
from the Spirit.

For the General, I must confess, it is a truth wherein few or none are
deceived, not any Gardener or Plough-man, never so simple, that looks to reap
what he has not sown. God gave that virtue in the Creation to all living
things to bring forth after their kind. And our Savior himself made use of it
to a higher purpose, we cannot gather Grapes of Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles.

So far we may possibly digest this truth in the General, and fear not much to
be deceived, but when we come to Particulars, where it touches our own flesh
and spirit, though it be as true as the General, and must be so, being
contained in it: yet because in this case it mixeth with our own Interest and
Affection, what we wish may not be true, we are easily misled to think it so.

To this therefore, at least the Caution in the Preface is proper and
necessary, though not in the General. For this reason I shall lay that aside,
as lefs liable to fraud, and bestow our care at this time upon this to which
the Apostle directs his, where we are in danger to be deceived; He that sows
to the flesh, etc.

And here our first care must be that we be not deceived in the meaning of the
words; which look so like a Description of the Day of Judgment, that some
Expositors have taken them for it, and to be the same with that 2 Cor. 5.10. We
shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive
the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good
or bad.

I do not refuse this Exposition for any danger that might come by mistaking,
for it would howsoever lead us to a point of great consequence, and not a
little necessary for these times in which our beloved Liberty has rifled so
far into the Mysteries of Religion, and dug so much about the Foundation,
that the House is in danger; where, they say, all depends upon the report of
others, who know as little as our selves whether there be a Heaven or Hell, or
Day of Judgment or no. The detection of so dangerous a Deceit had been
necessary, if the occasion had been as fit; I shall therefore leave it to other
Texts, which are more proper for it then this is, knowing well, that Truth
receives not more prejudice any way, then when it is set upon weak and
uncertain Foundations.

to the Flesh, and to the Spirit, (...), and so must have another meaning.

Sowing, so the Reaping also differs from that at the Day of Judgment; for he
that sowes to the flesh shall reap corruption; and it will be hard to find
Everlasting burnings in that word, which naturally signifies no more then
privation of Life or Being. Now they that give themselves over all their lives
to the lusts of the flesh without remorse, would be content with this doom, and
hear no quit all scores with Dying, if they might more of it.

What other sense then will the words more properly bear? To the flesh, and to
the spirit, imply rather the soil wherein they are to sow, then the seed, and
are as two Fields in which God sets all men to work. Every one has two Ploughs
going, one to the flesh, and another to the spirit.

Flesh first, it must be taken abstractly from the sins of the flesh, though it
be hard parting them, as the best of us know; yet we may consider them apart,
and so we saw them in our Savior, who took our flesh upon him, that is, our
natural and civil condition of life, he had all the infirmities of the one
except sin, and the burdens of the other; he was born under the Law, and paid
obedience and tribute to the Civil Power. This is that flesh which God has
given us as a stock to be employed, but upon account. He has not given us our
natural lives to fling away at our pleasures, by disorders, distempers, or
quarrels. Nor has he put us here into the World into the societies of men, to
live in want and contempt, but to improve our industry to the best advantage
both to our selves and others; and may by that attain to some luster and
splendour of riches, honor, and command, to which no oppression, or extortion,
or any lucky sin has advanced us, and that is, though we have brought no
corruption into the flesh, yet we shall reap corruption from it. This is a
Doctrine, which our daily experience abundantly confirms, by the frequent
turnings, changes and vicissitude of things.

But that our desires should be so unchangeably fixed upon things so mutable,
must be some great delusion, or in the Apostles phrase in a like manifest case,
a bewitching, not to trust our own eyes in what we see every day. But because
though the World be full of Deceivers, we are still the greatest deceivers of
our selves; let us take it upon the credit of others, and those the wisest
Kings, Solomon, and his Father David, who may be the better trusted in this,
for that neither of them were any great enemies to the flesh. Solomon, when he
had run through all the glories, pleasures, and delights of the world, never
any King drank deeper in that cup; yet he at last wearied, sat down to write a
Book to teach others, that all was Vanity, and that is but another word to
signify Corruption. And David, as well of observation as experience, I my self
have seen the ungodly in great power flourishing like a green Bay tree; I went
by and lo he was gone, I sought him, and his place could no where be found,
Psalm. 37.36. And least we should think this the portion only of the ungodly,
Psalm. 49.9. Wise men also die and perish together, as well as the ignorant and
foolish, and leave their riches for others; and it may be not that neither; For
riches (says the Wise man Prove. 23.) make themselves wings and fly away from
the owner. And at another time the Owner too makes himself wings and flies away
from them. All things in the World are upon the Wing. And it is a strange
deceit the Prophet observes ( verse. 11.) And yet they think that their houses
shall continue for ever. And to give themselves a kind of Immortality, they
call them after their own names. But they are often times deceived in that too;
so far does Corruption eat into all our designs. The lewd people will be the
Gossips and name the Child in despite of the Father, and that little to his
liking or honor. We are not sure to enjoy that poor vanity to leave a name
behind us upon that which cost us so much care and expense. Lastly, How well
soever he speeds here, and that the Glory of his house be increased, yet this
will be certain, ( verse. 17.) He shall carry nothing away with him when he
dies, neither shall his pomp follow him.

I do not think by this, or any thing that can be said more, to make you out of
love with the flesh, it is neither possible nor needful. I shall only for a
conclusion of this first part beg in the Apostles name, that ye would not be
deceived, as all are who give more for a thing then it is worth. To spend all
our time and cost upon that which will be worth nothing; or as ill, no better
then rottenness and corruption.

I make the more haste through this Field of the Flesh, that we may stay the
longer in that of the Spirit, where our labor and tillage will be to better
purpose, for ye see the best that can be hoped for from the other, is but to
flourish as a Flower of that Field, and that Psalm. 103.19. as soon as the wind
goes over it is gone. Nullus flos nisi novus. Corruption blows upon the most
florid condition in it. But the growth and increase from the field of the
Spirit is incorruptible, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us, 1
Pet. 1.4. for he that sows, etc.

When we see so great a Harvest, and yet so few Laborers in the Field, some
strange delusion there must be, wheresoever it lies; we must confess the
Apostles caution here was no more then needs: Be not deceived, God is not
mocked. For is it possible where so good wages are, so few should set
themselves at work? unless they either mistrusted their pay, Eternal Life, and
so mocked God that promised it; or mistook the sowing, and so deceived
themselves. Both these would deserve to be well considered, but because they
who have some diffidence of a life hereafter to come, have not the confidence
to say so; I have not so much spare time as to spend in proving that which they
will be ready to say they do not deny. I shall therefore now endeavor only to
undeceive them, if it may be, in the vain pretenses they make to it in the
sowing.

That here, first it will be necessary, that whatever else deceives them, to
see, that a misunderstanding of the words give no occasion to it, to know what
this sowing to the Spirit is, and how it comes to make a Title to Everlasting
Life, for there are no mean Competitors in the same Claim. For,

Christ is the Author of this life, For as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall
all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.4. And 2 Timothy 1.10. Our Lord Jesus Christ has
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light.

Being born again by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet.
1.23. It is the Power of God to Salvation.

Faith puts in to the same Claim, The Just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17. And
1 Timothy 1.16. St. Paul professes that Jesus Christ had set forth him as a
Pattern to all them who should hereafter believe on him to everlasting life.

Is there yet another way to Everlasting life by sowing to the Spirit? It is
happy for us that there is any way to it, but yet we may be at a loss and
confounded where there are so many.

To remove that fear, we must know, that all these are but several names of the
same thing, though in diverse appearances, and Phases, as the Astronomers word
is, Christ, the Gospel, Faith, and the Spirit, do all relate to life
everlasting.

Christ as the Author of it, provided all things necessary to it. The Gospel,
as the Register of all that is to be known or done to attain it. Faith is our
submission and obedience to the Gospel. The Spirit is the publisher and
preacher of it, Ephesians. 3.5. The mysteries of Christ which in other ages was not
made known to the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto the Apostles and
Prophets by the Spirit. And for this reason the Apostle expressly calls the
Gospel the Spirit, Gal. 3.3. For whereas they having already embraced the
Gospel, fell back to Circumcision and other rites of the Law, severely charges
them with folly; Are ye so foolish having begun in the spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh? The Spirit is the Gospel, and the Law the Flesh: they are
so called Heb. 9.10. Carnal Ordinances; and the reason why is intimated,
because they were temporal, imposed upon them, until the time of Reformation
and no longer; whereas the Gospel abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23.

Thus we see that Christ, and Faith, and the Gospel, and the Spirit must all
meet in the title to everlasting life; if we separate and divide them, we are
certainly deceived; it is a fallacy a compositis ad divisa, dividing those
things which the Spirit has joined together. And by this we may try and
examine the sufficiency of their Pleas apart and divided.

Mark 10.29. and will not own them for his friends that do not all that he
commands them, John 15. and they shall find more Work-commandments in the
Gospel then a fantastical name of Christianity. Whilst by this means they
think to avoid Schism, they make one, for they are Schismatics upon record, 1
Cor. 1.10. It is declared (says Saint Paul) that there are divisions, the
Greek word is Schisms among you; every one of you says I am of Paul, I am of
Apollos, I am of Cephas, I am of Christ. Is that a Schism to be for Christ? Yes
sure, it is dividing of him; for he adds; Is Christ divided? and how could that
be, but from his Apostles, whom he had appointed to instruct them in the
Gospel, and had made them as it were one person with himself, He that hears you
hears me. And thus was Christ divided.

What could probably be the cause of this separation from them, but that they
were not satisfied either with their Doctrine, or severity of their Discipline,
sought to shroud themselves under the name of Christ, not out of a great
respect to him and his Doctrine, which we may well presume could not differ,
but because it was a more plausible way to shift off their Authority, by
appealing from the Servants to the Master.

Much after this Copy do our Christians of the Latitude write. They believe in
Christ without a Creed, they obey him without doing his Will; they worship him,
no man knows how, but every man as he likes; and if he likes that better, not
at all.

John gives a charge, that if there come any that bring not that Doctrine, not
to receive him, nor bid him God speed, 2 John 10. This Doctrine serves not many
men's purpose, they must have other Doctrines, and to credit them, other Spirits
too. Every one will have a Familiar Spirit of his own to teach him.

But are we to look for no other Instruction from the Spirit, but what is
already taught in the Gospel? that is to depose him of his Office from the time
that the Gospel was first revealed, and leave him no work to do after. God
forbid, there are many other excellent Offices of the Spirit besides
Revelation; there is the Spirit of Sanctification, whereof we have continual
need, to infuse all divine Graces and Virtues into us, to assist and strengthen
us in all our infirmities, to lead us out of temptations, troubles, and
dangers, which every day surround us; yet not to reveal anew what we are to
believe or do, which is already done in the Gospel. And yet the Spirit will
help us in that too; For when any difficulty or contention arise about them, we
may and must pray for the Spirits assistance, to clear our understandings, by
removing pride and prejudice that obscure it; to inflame us with a true love of
truth, not to dictate and reveal, or whisper any thing which is not to be seen
in the Gospel, as well by the eyes of others as our own.

But does not the Spirit bear witness to our spirits that we are the children
of God? This can be no other but a private Spirit. That this Text stand not in
our way ( Romans 8.16.) we must distinguish, not only, as I have said already,
the Spirit by the several operations of revealing and sanctifying: So of the
several kinds of bearing witness, which is either proper, by affirming or
denying any thing expressly, or improperly, by proof and argument from the
Nature and Incidents of the matter in question; as Acts 14.17. God left not
himself without witness in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons. Rain and fruitful seasons affirm nothing of God, yet prove
sufficiently his Godhead, Power, and Providence in governing the World.

Now the Spirit in both these senses does hear witness to our spirits, that we
are the children of God, without the help of private Revelations. For if we
speak of bearing witness properly, the public Spirit in the Gospel will effect
that where it gives this testimony, That whosoever believes, repents, and
amends his life, is the Child of God, when our spirits can experimentally
assume that we are so qualified, then the Spirit in the Gospel bears witness
with our spirits that we are the children of God. And if we speak of bearing
witness in the other sense, of proving by argument and reason, then the Spirit
of Sanctification working a real change in us, a detestation of Sin, and a true
love and practice of Virtue and Godliness, bears witness to our Spirits that
we are the children of God. Here is therefore no place in this Text for private
Revelations, and I wish they had none amongst us; for under color of them,
every one will have a private Spirit, though of his own making. No Chemist can
extract Natural Spirits out of any thing with more ease, then they can Divine;
any vain Dream or Imagination, nay any wicked devilish suggestion shall be an
impulse of Gods Spirit. It were happy for this Kingdom and Church if we could
lay these Familiar Spirits; No Schism in the Church, no Mischief in the
Commonwealth; no Rebellious Practice which was not carried on by the conduct
and impulse of these Spirits. Thus by them they trouble the World, deceive
simple men, and work despite to the Spirit of God.

Life-everlasting upon the same fallacy, by Faith divided from the Gospel.

Faith has been an unhappy word of contention; but I shall only take notice
here of the insufficiency of the Plea of that Faith, which by those that
invented it, is called, Fides specialis misericordiae, that no man is
justified, and by consequence, has right to Life Everlasting, but he that
believes by a special mercy to him in particular, his sins are forgiven; or
which is all one, that he is elected, for without that there is no remission.

The Faith of the Gospel they think is too general, without life, and common to
the Devils, who believe and tremble; they are Believers and Quakers too, and
yet are Devils. I cannot say how much of the Gospel they believe, but by their
trembling, and their own confession to our Savior, Art thou come to torment us
before our time? that they believed the Article of the last Judgment; that they
shall be one day tormented for their sins. By the way, the Devils may shame
them that have not learned so far in their Creed.

But notwithstanding this, we must not be so kind to the Devils, as to think
they have the Faith of the Gospel, because that works by love; Circumcision
avails not any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith that works by love,
Gal. 5.6. I think no man has so much charity for the Devils, as to think they
have any. There is no reason therefore why the Faith of the Gospel should
suffer for their sakes. The word of Faith, says St. Paul, Romans 10.8. is that
which we preach, and that was the Gospel. Our particular election may be
written in the Book of Life in Heaven, but it is no where to be found written
in the Book of the Gospel. True Faith is that which we preach, says the
Apostle, but this Faith of Election no man can preach; for who can say and say
truly of his own knowledge, that I, or you, or any man by name is elected. Now
if this Faith cannot come by hearing, what will become of our Sermons? indeed,
of any thing that can be called Religion or Sowing to the Spirit? for that
leads us a way to Heaven through believing some mysteries we understand not,
through many a heavy and hard law of mortification and denying our selves;
whereas this Faith cuts off all that, and may well go for sowing to the flesh.
For first, in favor to this, it shrinks up all the duties of the Gospel into
Faith; and then all Faith into one Article, and that not in the Creed neither:
and something they pare from that too, it works not as an act which we may call
ours, for that will prejudice Gods free Grace, but as a relation to Christ; and
in the Logic Schools it is disputed, whether Relations have any real being or
no. And thus all hangs upon a Pins point, and leaves not a Corn to be sown to
the Spirit. We may therefore conclude that this, and the other Pretenders are
all deceived, mistake the Field of the Spirit, which is the Gospel, and sow
quite beside it.

It will be now time to enter into the Field it self, and see what work the
Spirit there sets us to. It is a large Field, and reaches as far as the Gospel;
indeed too large to be passed through at one time. But this as a great Country
may be seen in a little Chart.











One thing more I have not yet named, which seems at a farther distance from
the great duties of the Gospel, and yet has the advantage above the rest, that
it is here expressly called, sowing to the Spirit; and what that is, we shall
learn from the Verse precedent; where

him that is taught in the Word, to communicate to him that teaches in all
good things. If there be any coherence in the discourse, any reason in the
rational Particle [for] For he that sows unto the Spirit. The communicating
our Goods for the Gospel, is true sowing to the Spirit.

This duty therefore together with those already named, are all Sowing to the
Spirit, and have a joint tendency to life everlasting. For the meaning is not
that any of them apart make a full Title to it, but according to their quality
and degree carry us their part in the way toward it.

It is therefore but a piece of fraud and Sophistry to discountenance one duty,
by setting up a greater against it, as the manner is, that the main purpose of
the Gospel looks another way. And so run down one duty with another, the less
with the greater, as Great Persons do their Inferiors. This is not only a
Deceit, but plain mocking of God, who commands both, and a setting him against
himself.

I note this Fallacy in common, that it be not made use of here on our
particular, to mislead us from the due regard ought to be given to the
maintenance of those that minister in the Gospel; though it be not the
accomplishment of the great dutie^ (...) ^ath a remote instuence upon all.
S^^^^ in as low a place in Gods House as you please, but for the Spirits sake,
let it not be turned out of doors.

I single out this duty from the rest, that may deserve our care more, and need
it less. It has fewer friends to speak for it I confess, but the true reason
why I do it, is because it was the particular occasion of the Apostles
delivering this doctrine; and in this I shall keep both a better measure with
the Time, and with the Apostles intention, and it is a point too, wherein we
are as much deceived as in any.

Our worldly Goods by nature and kind are Carnal, yet being sown to the Spirit,
become spiritual, they are infranchised and incorporate into the Family and
Retinue of the Spirit, they alter their property, not by imprinting any real
indelible character into them, as envy and ill will objects, but giving only
the respect that persons of low birth have, when they are adopted or affianced
into a more noble Stock. When the Flesh serves the Spirit it is advanced above
her condition, the Volatile nature of the Flesh is fixed by the Spirit, and
helps to make up the title to everlasting life.

This is warrant enough for me to make a Suit, and reward enough for those that
grant it: That for Gods sake and the Spirits, when the Church Revenue comes
into your thoughts to cast an eye, if not of duty, of compassion upon such
miserable places, where there is but too much necessity for it. I can speak of
my own knowledge, that there are many hundreds of Parishes in this Kingdom,
where there is not so much yearly maintenance for serving the Cure, as one of
your Footmen stand you in.

If so great a scandal to Religion, and real obstruction to it, be in these
indigent Times too heavy a burden to be removed, and therefore unseasonable
also to be moved. Though this be no time of sowing to the Spirit, it can be no
season to pull up that which has been already sown by the devotion of others.

It Is strange that the Church maintenance should be thought to hang so loose,
more then other men's Estates, as that any man, when the sullen humor takes
him, can think to blow them away with a Motion, Let the Church Lands be sold.

If they were held only upon Frank almoign, it is as firm a Tenure as any is
in Law. But it is more strange, that they should think to mock and elude God,
who once declared it to be a robbing of him also. When he charged the Jews for
detaining Tithes and Offerings from the Priests of that Altar. What reason can
be given that the Ministers of a better Covenant should have a worse title?
There are not many Estates in the World besides which God himself owns; this
bears the Image and Superscription of the Spirit. It must be a desperate
boldness to break into his peculiar, to stir any thing that is sown in his
Field.

And that it may not seem strange that Carnal things should be thus advanced to
spirituals; for by a like conversion Spiritual things degenerate into Carnal.
This likewise will be worth our observation.

Religion is out of doubt a Spiritual thing, yet if that spread and run into
Schisms, it grows Carnal. For while one says, I am of Paul, and another I am
of Apollos, are ye not carnal, 1 Cor. 3.4. So Romans 16.17. They who cause
divisions among you serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies; if
any thing be flesh sure the Belly is.

If there be so much malignance and sowreness in Schisms and Divisions to turn
Religion into Flesh, what shall we think of a Religion, in Design, that is made
up all of Sects and Divisions? that must be all Flesh. I say no more, it is in
private Design only; as when St. Paul charged the Corinths with strife, and
schism, it was but upon report only. It is reported (says he) by them of the
house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you. So I say, only, it is
reported from a house of Cloe, how these Schisms shall be disposed of. A Church
shall be contrived that will give room and Liberty to them all.

But if the Church must be new modelled for their sakes, they must new model
the Rules of Wisdom and Government too; For by that it was ever thought
necessary that the People should conform to the Laws of the Church; never that
a Church should conform to the humors of the People.

This is so irregular a thing, that it will not be labor lost to take a little
farther notice of it. And first that you may know it by name, it is to be
called, a Comprehensive Church; a name, I must confess, not unfit for the
purpose, though I think it might have been better called a Drag-net, that will
fetch in all kind of Fish, good or bad, great or small, there will be room
enough for Leviathan to take his pastime therein. But how shall the Church be
drawn out to such a breadth and latitude?

That will be no hard matter to do. It is but pulling down the Old Walls, the
Confession of Doctrine, and Canons of Discipline. Lay all common, and then no
doubt there will be room enough for all.

But will these prove so good company when they are in, for whose sake this
should be done? Will they not rather give us cause to fear what the poor
Trojans found, when they broke down the old Walls of their City to let in a
Horse with a Comprehensive Belly, that carried armed enemies enough to ruin
them and their City.

And least we should think this done for love of their company, they let us
know they have no meaner inducement to it, then that which governs all the
World, Gain and Profit, advancement of Trade, and increase of Money. This is
plain dealing, they profess to sow the Spirit to the Flesh. They will make a
Church that shall make us rich. But can there be any blame or harm in this? Can
we not be Religious and rich too? I will not dispute that, if we bring riches
up to Religion. But I will dispute it, and deny it too, if we bring Religion
down to Riches. Godliness may be Gain, but Gain will never be Godliness. Riches
may be a good Nurse to cherish it, but an ill Mother to bring it forth, for
whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh.

It is the greatest dishonor that can be to the Spirit to make it serve for
Compost, only to lay in the Field of the Flesh.

But these, you say, though carnal things, may be secondary ends, which do not
make void the spiritual. Peace and Charity are the two Pillars whereon this
Church is to be built, and they will serve to keep up the Spirit in it.

We cannot deny but that they are true spiritual things, but if both these
Pillars should fail, there would nothing be left in the Church but Flesh.



For answer to this, we must distinguish the quality of the persons for whom
this room is to be made. And they are either such as will be content to leave
their faults and errors behind them; and to those we shall do well to set our
gates wide open, and need not pull down our Walls. Or they are such as bring
their errors, animosities, and divided judgments along with them. And to
pacify these, the taking away the Walls will do no good, for they bring their
Divisions with them into the Bowels of the Church, where the flame will be more
fierce and dangerous, then when it burnt only without. All the benefit can be
hoped for by taking away the Confessions and Canons, is but to secure them from
punishment, but leaves them free to all other causes of dissension, or rather
fortifies and animates them to pursue their differences with more violence.
Impunity and Authority will not cool their zeal of advancing the Interest of
their Sect; for it is not Toleration but Mastery they aim at. In the mean time
our Sowing will be turned into Fighting, our Plough-shares into Swords; the
field of the Spirit into a field of War, and thus we shall live in a perpetual
storm. This is all the hope we have of Peace by it.

Charity, we shall find it has as little to do here. It will be neither want
of Charity to leave them out, nor a work of Charity to take them in.

1. It will be no want of Charity to leave them out, if by that we condemn them
not. And condemn them we do not, if we keep St. Paul's rule. Schismatics are
without the Church, we judge not them; Those that are without the Church, God
judges, 1 Cor. 5.13. They must stand or fall to God. And when we do refuse
them, we do not condemn them to Hell. All we say is, if they will not go to
Heaven our way, they shall not go in our company; and in truth they cannot.

2. It is no work of Charity to take them in with all their faults. For though
Charity be a good natured Virtue, and covers a multitude of sins, but when they
are not known abroad, but cherishes none that are. I could never think it a
breach of Charity to condemn Heresy or Schism, which are known sins, though it
be against Charity to condemn any person of either, of whose guilt there may be
doubt. Charity may sometimes absolve the Offender, but never the Offense. When
the Offense is known to us, and the Fact avowed by them, they cannot be taken
in for Charity sake, if we love our own quiet, and Charity begins at home.

Now if neither Peace nor Charity have any share in framing this New Church, I
may for a Conclusion ask the question our Savior did the Jews concerning
John's Baptism, Is it from Heaven, or of men? or which is all one, is it from
the Flesh or from the Spirit? If they shall say from the Flesh, all men will
adjudge it to Corruption; If they shall say from Heaven, or from the Spirit, I
will ask them another question, Whether a Church without out Walls can be of
Gods making? His Church is a garden enclosed, Cant. 4.12. And when he planted a
Vineyard, Esaias 5.2. and that was his Church, he fenced it in. But when he saw
it brought forth wild Grapes, then he threatens them with this Judgment, I will
take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; and break down the Wall
thereof, and it shall be trodden down. Can it be wisdom to draw that upon our
selves, which God would not inflict but in vengeance? To make the Field of the
Spirit no better then the Field of the Sluggard? Prove. 24.31. I went by it, and
lo it was all grown over with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof,
and the stone wall thereof was broken down. Nothing can be liker then Schisms
to Thorns, and Liberty from Laws to a broken Wall.

If I had kept my self to the proper work of the Preacher this day, which is
Palm Sunday, I should have carried a Palm to the triumph of our Savior entering
into Jerusalem. But finding some so busy in strewing our way with THORNS, in
stead of PALMS, I thought it fitter first to clear the way of them, to prepare
it this day for a greater Triumph at Easter, over Sin, Death, and Hell.

I have no more to say, but to end as I began, Be not deceived, God is not
mocked. That which is dearest to us, our own Credit, that we be not men
deceived; and that which ought to be Gods honor, that he be not mocked, are
both engaged in the Truth of this Doctrine, that we do not rashly adventure to
sow what we would be loath to reap; and unwisely prefer that which will
certainly and suddenly fade away, before that which will last for ever. He that
sows to the flesh, etc.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books, printed for, and sold by H. Brom, since the
dreadful Fire of London, to 1675.
A Guide to Eternity, by John Bona, octavo, 2 s. Dean W. Lloyd's Sermon before
the King about Miracles. 6 d. -- His Sermon at the Funeral of John Lord Bishop
of Chester. 6 d. -- His Sermon before the King in Lent, 1673. 6 d. The
Seasonable Discourse against Popery, in quarto. 6 d. -- The Defense of it,
quarto. 6 d. -- The Difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome, in quarto.
6 d. The Papists Apology to the Parliament answered. 6 d. Mr. Naylor's
Commemoration Sermon for Col. Cavendish. 6 d. Mr. Sayers Sermon at the Assizes
at Reading. 6 d. Mr. Tho. Tannet's Sermon to the scattered Members of the
Church. 6 d. Mr. Stanhopp's four Sermons on several occasions, octavo bound, 1
s. 6 d. Papal Tyranny, as it was exercised over England for some Ages, with two
Sermons on the fifth of Nov. by Dr. Du Moulin, in quarto, 1 s. 6 d. -- His
Sermon at the Funeral of Dr. Turner Dean of Canterbury. 6 d.

