Religious Perfection: OR, A THIRD PART OF THE ENQUIRY AFTER HAPPINESS.

By the Author of Practical Christianity.

Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
Perfection,

Heb. 6.1. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith and Benj. Walford, at the Princes
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCVI.

TO Mr. Whitelocke Bulstrode, of Clifford's-Inn.
I Here present you, my dear Friend, with a Discourse, wherein I labor to
advance the great and true Ends of Life, the Glory of God, and the Perfection
and Happiness of Man. I cannot, I confess, pretend to have come up to the
Dignity of my Subject, yet I have done what I could, and have attempted it with
my utmost Force. I know you too well to imagine you fond of an Address of this
public nature; you love the real and solid Satisfactions, not the Pomp and
Show, those splendid Encumbrances, of Life: Your rational and virtuous
Pleasures burn, like a gentle and cheerful Flame, without Noise or Blaze.
However, I cannot but be confident, that you will pardon the Liberty which I here
take, when I have told you, that the making the best Acknowledgment I could to
one, who has given me so many Proofs of a generous and passionate Friendship,
was a Pleasure too great to be resisted.

I am Dear Sir, Unfeignedly Yours, R. Lucas.

THE CONTENTS.
The Introduction Page. 1.
SECT. I. Of Religious Perfection in general.
Chap. 1. PErfection what. It Is Notion confirmed by Reason and Scripture p. 11.
Chap. 2. This Notion of Perfection countenanced on all Sides, however different
in their Expressions p. 30. Chap. 3. Several Inferences deduced from the Notion
of Perfection p. 42. Chap. 4. A General Account of the Blessed Effects of
Religious Perfection, particularly with respect to Assurance and Pleasure p.
63. Chap. 5. Of the several Steps by which the Christian advances to Perfection
p. 102. Chap. 6. Of the Means of attaining Perfection. And the great Ends to be
aimed at in Instrumental Duties p. 120. Chap. 7. Of some particular Motives to
Perfection p. 176.
SECT. II. Of the several Parts of Perfection.
Chap. 1. OF Illumination, what it consists in p. 188. Chap. 2. Of the Fruits
and Attainment of Illumination p. 227 Chap. 3. Of Liberty in General p. 257.
Chap. 4. Of Liberty as it relates to Original Sin p. 335. Chap. 5. Of Liberty
with respect to Sins of Infirmity p. 367. Chap. 6. Of Liberty as it imports
Freedom or Deliverance from mortal Sin p. 403. Chap. 7. Of unfruitfulness as it
consists in Idleness p. 434. Chap. 8. Of unfruitfulness as it consists in
Lukewarmness, Coldness, or Formality p. 452. Chap. 9. Of Zeal. Or the first
thing to be considered in a State of Zeal, namely, what Holiness or
Righteousness he may be supposed to have arrived at p. 489. Chap. 10. Of Zeal,
as it consists in good Works p. 513. Chap. 11. Of Humility. p. 528.
SECT. III. Of the Impediments of Perfection.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line. 8. pretended, read, pretending, p. 62. l. 4. current, r.
concurrent, p. 94. l. 21. after all add! p. 80. l. 6. effect, r. affect. p. 96.
l. 9. Acts, r. Arts, p. 116. l. ult led, r. let, p. 157. after fervent, add,
such Affections are, p. 167. l. 21. blot out, I. p. 205. l. 31. modeled, r.
molded, p. World, r. Love, p. 223. l. 1. be, r. lie, p. 238. l. 16. Word, r.
World, p. 245. l. 6. add, of, p. 245. l. 14. prevents, r. perverts, p. 258. l.
24. of, r. a, p. 295. l. 14. to, r. by, p. 302. l. 16. Men, r. Man, p. 306. l.
4. the Righteousness thereof, r. their Righteousness therefore, p. 306. l. 6.
Suppose, r. I oppose, p. 334. l. 11. Wounds, r. Wombs, p. 346. l. 24. these, r.
there, p. 421. l. 9. Affection, r. Affectation, p. 422. l. 10. part, r. party,
p. 466. l. 24. now, r. not, p. 489. l. 8. he, r. the Perfect Man, p. 533. l.
ult forwardness, r. frowardness.

THE INTRODUCTION.
BY what Steps I am advanced thus far in my Enquiry after Happiness, and what
Connection or Coherence there is, between This and two other Discourses already
Published on That Subject, is very obvious. In the First, I endeavor to remove
those Objections which represent all Enquiries and Attempts after true
Happiness in this Life, either as fantastic or unnecessary, or which is as
bad, vain and to no purpose: And after I have asserted the Value and
Possibility of Happiness, I do in general point out the true Reasons of our ill
Success and Disappointment in Pursuit of it. In the Second, I state the true
Notion of Human Life, insist upon the several kinds of it, and show what
Qualifications and Virtues the Active and Contemplative Life demand; and then
consider how Life may be prolonged and improved. In This Third, I prosecute the
same Design, which I had in the two Former; the promoting Human Happiness. For
Life, Perfection and Happiness have a close and inseparable Dependence on one
another. For as Life which is the Rational Exercise and Employment of our
Powers and Faculties, does naturally advance on, and terminate in Perfection,
so Perfection, which is nothing else, but the Maturity of Human Virtue, does
naturally end in that Rest and Peace, that Tranquillity, Serenity and Joy of
Mind, which we call Happiness. Now Perfection in an Abstracted and Metaphisical
Notion of it, is a State that admits neither of Accession nor Dimunition. But
talking of it Practically, and in a manner accommodated to the Nature of
things, the Perfection of Man consists in such Endowments and Seize as
Man is generally capable of in this Life. And because Man may be considered
either in Relation to This, or to another World, therefore Human Perfection may
I think, naturally enough be divided into Religious and Secular. By Secular, I
mean that which regards our Interest in this Life; By Religious, That which
secures it in Eternity, the one more directly and immediately aims at the
Favor of Man; the other at the Favor of God; the one pursues that Happiness,
what ever it be, that is to be found in outward and worldly Advantages; the
other, That which flows from Virtue and a good Conscience. It Is easy now to
discern, which of These two kinds of Perfection, is the more desirable; the
one purifies and exalts our Nature, the other polishes and varnishes it; the
one makes a complete Gentleman, the other a true Christian; the Success of the
one is precarious, that of the other certain; having no Dependence on Time or
Chance, the Humor or Fancy of Man, the Pleasure of the one is short and
Superficial; That of the other Great and Lasting: The World admires the one,
and God approves the other. To be thoroughly persuaded of This, is a good step
toward true Wisdom, as being that, which will enable Man to steer the whole
Course of Life aright. But while I prefer the one, I do not prescribe the
Neglect or Contempt of the other, so far am I from it; that I am of Opinion,
That Secular Perfection has very often some Influence upon our Spiritual State,
as well as its use and Advantage in Reference to our Temporal one: That the
most admired Accomplishments of a Secular Life, are so far from being
inconsistent with Religion, that they naturally spring from it, and thrive and
flourish most when they are influenced and cultivated by it; and judging that
it might be of some service to the World, to inform and convince them of This,
I had it sometimes in my Thoughts, to have Treated here as well of Secular as
Religious Perfection: But doubting how well this might suit with my Function,
and how far the best Observations I could make on this Subject, might fall
short of answering the Expectation of Men of worldly Parts and Experience, I
laid aside the Design. Here then, I confine my Meditations wholly to Religious
Perfection; I examine the Nature of it, both in General, and in Particular; not
only stating the true Notion of it, but also descending to the several Branches
and Parts of it; I free it from those Mistakes and Disputes that perplex and
encumber it, I lay down the Motives to it, and prescribe the Ways of obtaining
it.

After this short Account of my Design, the next thing I am to do is, to
prevent if I can, those Prejudices, which may either wholly frustrate, or at
least very much hinder and diminish the success and Influence of it. Some are
apt to startle at the very mention of Perfection, they have entertained such
humble Thoughts, not only of Human Nature, but as it seems, of Divine Grace
too, and Evangelical Righteousness, that all talk of Perfection seems to them
like the Preaching a New Gospel, and an obtruding upon the World a Fantastic
Scheme of proud and pretended Morality. But this Fear will soon vanish, when I
tell such, that I discourse of the Perfection of Men, not Angels: And, that I
treat This, not like a Monk or a Sublime and subtle Schoolman, but like one,
who have been daily conversant with the Doubts and Scruples, with the Fears and
Frailties of Human Nature, and departing Souls. I do not pretend to bless the
World with the Discovery of New Truths. If at any time I place Old ones in a
better Light, if I wipe off the Dust which Dispute and Time, and the Corruption
of Manners has here and there scattered upon them, it is the utmost I aim at.

But how Numerous will some say, are the Controversies that have in every Age
perplexed this Subject? Grace and Nature, Perfection and Sin, Merit,
Superrerogation, etc. These are Themes that have exercised, and embroiled the
Church of Christ, almost through all the several Ages of it down to this Day:
And with how little Advantage to the Honor of Christianity, or the Interest of
Virtue have the brightest Parts and the deepest Learning been here employed? To
This, all I have to say is, I write Practically, and consult the Interest of
Souls, not Parties. I cannot but see, and that with Trouble and Regret, how
much Christianity has in almost all times suffered, by those Nice and Subtle,
by those Obstinate and passionate Disputes, with which Writers have even
oppressed and stifled the most Practical Subjects; and do most earnestly desire
to see the Spirit of Polemical Divinity cast out of the Church of Christ, and
That of a Practical and Experimental one established in the Room of it. Though
therefore, I have considered those Controversies which concern my Subject, it
was with no other Design, then to guard and fortify my Reader, against the ill
Influence of several Errors with which they abound. I decline all useless
Speculations, and labor wholly to restore Religion to its Native Strength and
Beauty; so that I think this Objection will not touch me, who do not propose to
write a Learned, but an Useful Book.

If any Man be apprehensive, that it is impossible to assert the Doctrine of
Perfection without looking a little too favorably toward Pelagianism or
Enthusiasm, or something of this kind, I do here assure such a one, that I
advance no Perfection that raises Men above the Use or Need of Means, or
invites them to neglect the Word, Prayer, or Sacraments, or is raised on any
other Foundation then the Gospel of Christ. I revive not Pelagianism, nor clash
with St. Austin, I need not those Concessions which he makes Coelestius in the
Close of his Book de Perfectione Justitiae. I am persuaded that the strength of
Nature is too slight a Foundation to build Perfection on: I contend for Freedom
from no other Sin then Actual, Voluntary, and Deliberate; And let
Concupiscence, or any unavoidable Distemper or Disorder of our Nature be what
it will, all that I aim at here is, the Reducing, not Extirpating it. And
finally, how earnestly soever I exhort to Perfection, I can very well content
my self with St. Augustin's Notion of it, namely, that it is nothing else, but
a daily Progress toward That pure and unspotted Holiness, which we shall
attain to in another Life.

Thus I think I have sufficiently guarded this following Discourse against the
Misapprehensions and Jealousies of all, who have any serious Concern for
Religion, how much soever they may be swayed by some particular Opinions. But
after all, I do not expect that it should meet with a very obliging Reception
from a great Part of the World. Many there are, who will ever openly rally and
ridicule all Attempts of this kind: And there are Others, who will secretly
slight, and inwardly despise them as the vain and fond Projects of well meaning
indeed, but very weak, and unexperienced Mortals. But this moves me little;
these Men are generally too much strangers to Sincerity, to be competent Judges
of Perfection: Nor do I wonder, if the Corrupt and Vicious part of Mankind, be
infected with as much Malice and Envy against extraordinary Goodness, as some
are against Power and Greatness. The Consciousness of much Baseness and
Corruption in ones self, is apt to make one strive to bring down all Men to the
same Level, and to believe that there is nothing of Perfection in the World,
but only a Groundless, or Hipocritical Pretention to it. This is an Opinion,
that ill Men greedily embrace, because it gives them some kind of Peace,
Security, and Confidence; whereas the contrary Opinion, as it would be apt to
make them ashamed of their Present State, so would it make them fearful and
apprehensive of their Future One. I write not therefore to such as these, nor
can be much concerned what Censure they pass on a Design, against which, they
have an Inveterate and Obstinate Aversion.

The Method I observe in this Treatise is. In the First Section, I consider
Perfection more generally: In the Second, the several parts of it; And in the
Last the Obstacles and Impediments of our attaining it. In the two first
Sections, I always first fix and explain the Notion of that State of Virtue
which I Discourse of. Next I proceed to the Fruits or Advantages of it; and in
the last place prescribe the Method, by which it may be attained.

SECT. I. Of Perfection in general. The Fruit of it. And the way to obtain it.
CHAP. I. The Nature of Perfection explained, and Asserted from Reason and
Scripture.
MOst Disputes and Controversies arise from false and Mistaken Notions of the
Matter under Debate: And so I could show it has happened here. Therefore to
prevent Mistakes, and cut off all occasions of Contention (which serves only to
defeat the Influence and Success of Practical Discourses) I think it necessary
to begin here with a plain account, what it is I mean by Religious Perfection.

Religion is nothing else but the purifying and refining Nature by Grace, the
raising and exalting our Faculties and Capacities by Wisdom and Virtue.
Religious Perfection therefore, is nothing else but the Moral Accomplishment of
Human Nature; such a Maturity of Virtue as Man in this Life is capable of,
Conversion begins, Perfection consumates the Habit of Righteousness: In the
one, Religion is as it were in its Infancy, in the other, in its Strength and
Manhood; so that Perfection in short is nothing else, but a ripe and settled
Habit of true Holiness. According to this Notion of Religious Perfection, He is
a Perfect Man whose Mind is pure and Vigorous, and his Body tame and
obsequious, whose Faith is firm and steady, his Love ardent and exalted, and
his Hope full of Assurance, whose Religion has in it, That Ardour and
Constancy, and his Soul That Tranquillity and Pleasure, which bespeaks Him a
Child of the Light, and of the Day, a Partaker of the Divine Nature, and raised
above the Corruption which is in the World through Lust.

This account of Religious Perfection, is so natural and easy, that I fancy no
Man will demand a Proof of it; nor should I go about one, were it not to serve
some further Ends then the mere Confirmation of it. It has manifestly the
Countenance both of Reason and Scripture; And how Contradictory soever some
Ancient and Latter Schemes of Perfection seem to be, or really are, to one
another; yet do they all agree in effect in what I have laid down. If we appeal
to Reason, no Man can doubt, but that an Habit of Virtue has much more of
Excellence and Merit in it, then single accidental Acts, or uncertain Fits and
Passions; since an Habit is not only the source and spring of the noblest
Actions, and the most elevated Passions, but it renders us more regular and
steady, more uniform and constant in every thing that is good. As to good
natural Dispositions, they have little of Strength, little of Perfection in
them, till they be raised and improved into Habits. And for our Natural
Faculties, they are nothing else, but the Capacities of Good or Evil; they are
undetermined to the one or other, till they are fixed and influenced by Moral
Principles. It remains then, that Religious Perfection must consist in an Habit
of Righteousness. And to prevent all impertinent Scruples and Cavils, I add a
Confirmed and well established One.

That this is the Scripture Notion of Perfection is manifest. First, from the
use of this Word in Scripture. Secondly, from the Characters and Descriptions
of the best and highest State which any ever actually attained, or to which we
are invited and exhorted.

1. From the use of the Word: Wherever we find any Mention of Perfection in
Scripture, if we examine the Place well, we shall find nothing more intended,
than Vprightness and Integrity, an unblameable and unreproveable Life, a State
well advanced in Knowledge and Virtue. Thus Upright and Perfect are used as
terms equivalent, Job. 1. and that Man was Perfect and Upright, fearing God and
eschewing Evil; and Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the upright
Man, for the end of that Man is Peace. Thus again, when God exhorts Abraham to
Perfection, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God; walk before me and be thou
perfect, all that He exhorts him to, is a steady Obedience to all his
Commandments, proceeding from a lively Fear of, and Faith in Him; and this is
the general use of this word, Perfect, throughout the Old Testament, namely, to
signify a sincere and just Man, that fears God, and escheweth Evil, and is
well fixed and established in his Duty. In the New Testament; Perfection
signifies the same thing which it does in the Old; that is, Universal
Righteousness, and Strength, and Growth in it. Thus the Perfect Man, 2 Timothy
3.17. is one, who is thoroughly furnished to every good work. Thus St. Paul
tells us, Coll. 4.12. that Epaphras labored fervently in Prayers for the
Collossians, that they might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
In Jam. 1.4. the Perfect Man is one, Who is entire lacking nothing, i. e. one
who has advanced to a Maturity of Virtue through Patience and Experience, and
is fortified and established in Faith, Love and Hope. In this Sense of the word
Perfect, St. Peter prays for those to whom he writes his Epistle, 1 Pet. 5.10.
but the God of all Grace who called us into his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus,
after that ye have suffered awhile, make you Perfect, Stablish, Strengthen,
Settle you. When St. Paul exhorts the Hebrews to go on to Perfection, Heb. 6.
he means nothing by it, but that state of Manhood which consist in a well
settled Habit of Wisdom and Goodness. This is plain first from ver. 11, 12. of
this Chapter, where he himself more fully explains his own meaning; and we
desire that every one of you do show the same Diligence, to the full Assurance
of hope unto the End; that ye be not slothful, but followers of them who
through Faith and Patience inherit the Promise. Next from the latter end of the
5 Chapter; where we discern what gave occasion to his Exhortation; there
distinguishing Christians into two Classes, Babes and Strong Men, i. e. Perfect
and Imperfect, he describes Both at large thus: For when, for the time ye ought
to be Teachers, ye have need that one Teach you again, which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God; and are become such as have need of Milk, and
not of strong Meat; For every one that uses Milk is unskilful in the word of
Righteousness; for he is a Babe; but strong Meat belongs to them that are of
full Age, even those, who by reason of use have their Senses exercised to
discern both good and evil. And though here the Apostle seems more immediately
to regard the Perfection of Knowledge, yet the Perfection of Righteousness,
must never in the Language of the Scripture, be separated from it. Much the
same Remark must I add concerning the Integrity of Righteousness and the
Christian's Progress or Advance in it. Though the Scripture, when it speaks of
Perfection, do sometimes more directly referr to the one, and sometimes to the
other; yet we must ever suppose that they do mutually imply and include one
another; since otherwise the Notion of Perfection would be extremely maimed and
incomplete. I Will insist therefore no longer on the use of the Words Perfect and
Perfection in Scripture: But as a further Proof that my Notion of Perfection is
truly Scriptural, I will show.

2. That the utmost Height, to which the Scripture exhorts us, is nothing more
then a Steady Habit of Holiness; that the brightest Characters it gives of the
Perfect Man, the loveliest Descriptions it makes us of the Perfectest State,
are all made up of the Natural and confessed Properties of a Ripe Habit. There
is no Controversy that I know of, about the Nature of a Habit, every Man's
Experience instructs him in the whole Philosophy of it; We are all agreed, that
it is a kind of Second Nature, that it makes us exert our selves with Desire
and Earnestness, with Satisfaction and Pleasure; that it renders us fixed in
our Choice, and constant in our Actions, and almost as averse to those things
which are repugnant to it, as we are to those which are distasteful and
disagreeable to our Nature. And that in a word, it so entirely, and absolutely,
possesses the Man, that the Power of it is not to be resisted, nor the Empire
of it to be shaken off; nor can it be removed and extirpated without the
greatest Labor and Difficulty imaginable. All this is a confessed and almost
palpable Truth in Habits of Sin: And there is no Reason why we should not
ascribe the same Force and Efficacy to Habits of Virtue; Especially, if we
consider that the Strength, Easiness, and Pleasure which belong naturally to
these Habits, receive no small Accession from the Supernatural Energy and
Vigor of the Holy Spirit. I will therefore in few words show how that State of
Righteousness which the Scripture invites us to, as our Perfection, directly
answers this account I have given of an Habit.

Is Habit in General a second Nature? This State of Righteousness is in
Scripture, called the New Man, Ephesians. 4.24. the New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. the
Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Does it consequently Rule and Govern Man? Hear how
St. Paul expresses this Power of the Habit of Holiness in himself, Gal. 2.20. I
am Crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me; and the Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son
of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. This is a constant Effect of
Habits, and is equally discernable in Those of Vice and Virtue, that they sway
and govern the Man they possess; Romans 6.16. know ye not, that to whom ye yield
your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of
Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness?

Shall I go on to a more distinct and particular Consideration of the
Properties of an Habit? The first is, a great Aversion for those things which
are contrary to it, or obstruct us in the Exercise of it. And this is directly
the Disposition of the Perfect Man toward Temptations and Sins; he is now
ashamed of those things which before he gloried in; he is filled with an Holy
Indignation against those things which before he took Pleasure in; and what
before he courted with Fondness and Passion, he now shuns with Fear and
Vigilance. In brief, the Scripture describes such an one as possessed with an
utter Hatred and Abhorrence of every Evil way, and as an irreconcilable Enemy
to every thing, that is, an Enemy to his Virtue and his God. Thus Psalm.
119.163. I hate and abhor lying, but thy law do I love, and verse 128.
Therefore I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, and I
hate every false way. And this is a genuine and Natural Effect of Integrity or
uprightness of Heart; whence it is the Observation of our Savior, Math. 6.24.
No man can serve two Masters; for either he will hate the one and love the
other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other. And indeed every
where a Hatred, a Perfect Hatred of Evil is accounted as a necessary
Consequence of the Love of God, Psalm. 37.10. ye that love the Lord hate Evil;
and therefore the Psalmist resolves to Practice himself what he prescribes to
others, Psalm. 101.2.3. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: O when
will thou come unto me? I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart: I
will set no wicked thing before mine Eyes: I hate the work of them that turn
aside, it shall not cleave to me. And how can this be otherwise? The Love of
God must necessarily imply an Abhorrence of Evil, and that Habit which confirms
and increases the one, must confirm and increase the other too.

2. The Next Property of an Habit is, that the Actions, which flow from it, are
(if we meet not with violent opposition) performed with Ease and Pleasure; what
is Natural, is pleasant and easy, and Habit is a Second Nature. When the love
of Virtue, and the hatred of Vice have once rooted themselves in the Soul; what
can be more natural then to follow after the one, and shun the other? Since
this is no more then embracing and enjoying what we love, and turning our backs
on what we detest. This therefore is one constant Character of Perfection in
Scripture; Delight, and Pleasure, are every where said to accompany the
Practice of Virtue, when it is once grown up to Strength and Maturity: The ways
of Wisdom are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace, Prove. 3.17.
Perfect Love casts out Fear, 1 John 4.18. and to him that Loves, the
Commandments of God are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. Hence it is, that the good
Man's delight is in the Law of the Lord, and that he meditates therein day and
night, Psalm. 1.2. Nor does he delight less in Action then Meditation, but grows
in Grace as much as Knowledge; and abounds daily more and more in good works,
as he increases in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost. Consonant to this Property of
Perfection it is, that in Psalm. 19, and 119. and elsewhere frequently, we hear
the Psalmist expressing a kind of inconceiveable Joy and Transport in the
Meditation and Practice of the Commands of God. So the first Christians who
spent their Lives in Devotion, Faith, and Charity are said, Act. 2.46. to have
eaten their Meat with Gladness and Singleness of Heart. And it is a delightful
Description we have of the Apostles, 2 Cor. 6.10 as sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all
things.

3. Vigor and Activity, or much Earnestness and Application of Mind, is a
third Property of an Habit. It Is impossible not to be intent upon those things
for which, we have even an Habitual Passion, if this Expression may be allowed
me; an inclination, which has gathered Strength and Authority from Custom, will
exert it self with some warmth and briskness. Now certainly, there is nothing
more frequently required of, or attributed to the Perfect Man in Scripture,
then Zeal and Fervency of Spirit in the ways of God; and no wonder: For when
Actions flow at once from Principles and Custom, when they spring from Love,
and are attended by Pleasure, and are incited and quickened by Faith, and Hope
too: How can it be, but that we should repeat 'em with some Eagerness, and feel
an Holy Impatience as often as we are hindered or disappointed? And as the
Nature of the Thing shows, that thus it ought to be, so are there innumerable
Instances in the Old Testament, and the New, which make it evident, that thus
it was. Shall I mention the example of our Lord, who went about doing good,
Act. 10.38. Shall I propose the Labors and Travils of St. Paul? These Patterns
it may be, will be judged by some too bright and dazzling a Light for us to look
on, or at least too Perfect for us to copy after; and yet St. John tells us,
that he, who says he abides in Him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he
walked, 1 John 2.6. and we are exhorted to be followers of the Apostles, as
they were of Christ. But if the Fervency of Christ, and St. Paul, seemed to
have soared out of the reach of our imitation, we have Inferior Instances
enough to prove the Zeal and Fruitfulness of Habitual Goodness. Thus David says
of himself, Psalm. 119.10. with my whole Heart have I sought thee: and Josiah, 2
King. 23.25. is said to have turned to the Lord with all his Soul, and with all
his Might. How fervent was Anna, woe departed not from the Temple, but served
God with Fastings and Prayers, night and day? Luke 2.37. how Charitable Tabitha
who was full of good Works and Alms-deeds which she did? Act. 9.36. Where shall
I place Cornelius? With what words shall I set out his Virtues? with what but
those of the Holy Ghost, Act. 10.2. He was a devout Man, and one that feared
God with all his House, which gave much Alms to the people, and prayed to God
always. But peradventure some may imagine, that there is something singular and
extraordinary in these Eminent Persons, which we must never hope to equal; but
must be content to follow them at a vast Distance. Well, let this be so; What
have we to say to whole Churches animated by the same Spirit of Zeal? What are
we to think of the Churches of Macedonia, whose Charity, St. Paul thus
magnifies, 2 Cor. 8.2, 3. in a great trial of Affliction, the abundance of
their Joy, and their deep Poverty, abounded to the Riches of their Liberality.
For to their power I bear record, yea, and beyond their power, they were
willing of themselves. And, St. Paul declares himself, persuaded of the Romans,
that they were full of goodness filled with all knowledge; Romans 15.14. And of
the Corinthians, he testifies, that they were enriched in every thing, and came
behind in no gift; 1 Cor. 1.5, 6. that they did abound in all things, in Faith,
in diligence, etc. 2 Cor. 8.7. I will stop here; it is in vain to heap up more
Instances: I have said enough to show that Vigor and Fervency in the Service
of God, is no miraculous Gift, no extraordinary Prerogative of some peculiar
Favorite of Heaven; but the natural and inseparable Property of a well
confirmed Habit of Holiness.

Lastly, is Constancy and Steadiness the Property of an Habit? It is an
undoubted Property of Perfection too. In Scripture, Good Men are every where
represented as standing fast in the Faith, steadfast and unmovable in the works
of God, holding fast their Integrity: In one word, as constantly following
after Righteousness, and maintaining a good Conscience toward God and Man. And
so Natural is This to one Habitually good, that St. John affirms of such a one
that he cannot sin, 1 John 3.9. whosoever is born of God does not commit sin,
for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God.
Accordingly, Job is said, to have feared God and eschewed Evil, which must be
understood of the constant course of his Life. Zachary and Elizabeth are said
to be Righteous, walking in all the Commandments of God blameless, Luke 1.6.
Enoch, Noah, David, and other excellent Persons, who are pronounced by God,
Righteous and Just and Perfect, are said in Scripture, to walk with God, to
serve Him with a Perfect Heart, with a full purpose of Heart to cleave to him,
and the like. And this is that Constancy which Christians are often exhorted
to; watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit ye like Men, be strong, 1 Cor.
16.13. And of which, the first followers of our Lord left us such remarkable
Examples. The Disciples are said to have been continually in the Temple,
blessing and praising God, Luke 24. And the first Christians are said to have
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers, Acts 2.42.

Thus I think I have sufficiently cleared my Notion of Perfection from
Scripture: Nor need I multiply more Texts to prove, what I think, no Man can
doubt of, unless he mistake the main Design and End of the Gospel; which is to
raise and exalt us to a steady Habit of Holiness: The end of the Commandment,
says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.5. is Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. This is the utmost Perfection Man is
capable of, to have his Mind enlightened, and his Heart purified; and to be
informed, acted and influenced by Faith and Love, as by a vital principle: And
all this is Essential to Habitual Goodness.

If any one desire further Light or Satisfaction in this Matter, let him read
the eighth Chapter to the Romans, and he will soon acknowledge, that he there
finds the substance of what I have hiterto advanced. There, though the Word it
self be not found, the thing called Perfection, is described in all the
Strength and Beauty, in all the Pleasure and Advantages of it: There the
Disciple of Jesus is represented as one, who walks not after the Flesh but
after the Spirit, as one, whom the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus
has set free from the Law of Sin and Death, one who (...), does not mind or
relish the things of the Flesh, but the things of the Spirit, one in whom the
Spirit of Christ dwells: He does not stand at the Door and knock, he does not
make a transient visit; but here he reigns, and rules, and inhabits: One
finally in whom the Body is dead because of Sin, but the Spirit is life because
of Righteousness. And the Result of all this is the Joy and Confidence, the
Security and Transport that becomes the Child of God. Ye have not received the
Spirit of Bondage again to Fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit,
that we are the Children of God; and if Children, then Heirs, heirs of God, and
joynt-heirs with Christ. And now it is no wonder, if the Perfect Man long for
the Revelation of the Glory of the Sons of God; if he cry out in Rapture, if
God be for me who can be against me? who shall lay any thing to the Charge of
God's Elect? who shall separate me from the Love of Christ? and so on. If any
one would see the Perfect Man described in Fewer words, he needs but cast his
Eye on Romans 6.22. But now being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God,
ye have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life.

CHAP. II. This Notion of Perfection countenanced by all sides.
AFter I have showed that this Notion of Perfection is warranted by Reason and
Scripture, I see not why I should be very Solicitous, whether it do, or do not
clash with the Opinions of Men. But the Truth is, if we examine not so much the
Expressions and Words, as the Sense and Meaning of all Parties about this
Matter, we shall find them well enough agreed in it at the bottom. And it is no
wonder, if (notwithstanding several incidental Disputes) they should yet agree
in the Main: Since the Experience of Mankind does easily teach us, what sort of
Perfection Human Nature is capable of; and what can, or can not, actually be
attained by Man. The Pelagians did not contend for an Angelical Perfection, nor
St. Austin deny such a one as was truly suitable to Man: the one could not be
so far a Stranger to Human Nature, as to exempt it in Reality from those Errors
and Defects, which the best of Men complain of, and labor against. Nor was St.
Austin so little acquainted with the Power of the Gospel, and of the Spirit, as
not to be well enough assured that Man might be Habitually Good; and that such
were influenced and acted by a firm Faith, and a fervent Love, and well
grounded Hope. The Dispute between Them then, concerning Perfection, did not
consist in This, whether Men might be Habitually good: This was in Reality
acknowledged on Both sides: Nor whether the best Men were subject to Defects,
for This too, Both sides could not but be sensible of, but in these two things
especially. First, what was to be attributed to Grace, what to Nature? And this
relates not to the Definition or Essence of Perfection, but to the Source and
Origin of it. Secondly, whether those Irregular Motions, Defects and Errors,
to which the best Men were subject, were to be accounted Sins or not? Neither
the one side nor the other then, as far as I can discern, did in truth mistake
the Nature of Human Perfection: Each placed it in Habitual Righteousness; The
one contended for no more, nor did the other contend for less in the Perfect
Man. And when the one asserted him free from Sin, he did not assert him free
from Defects: And while the other would not allow the best Man to be without
Sin, they did not by Sin understand any thing else, but such Disorders,
Oppositions to, or Deviations from the Law of God, as the Pelagian himself must
needs own to be in the Perfect Man. The Dispute then, was not what Man might,
or might not attain to; for Both sides agreed him capable of the same Habitual
Righteousness; Both sides allowed Him subject to the same Frailties: But one
side would have these Frailties accounted Sins, and the other would not.

Numerous indeed have been the Controversies between the Popish and Reformed
Churches about Precept and Counsel, Mortal and Venial Sin, the Possibility of
fulfilling the Law of God, the Merit of Good Works, and suchlike. But after
all, if we enquire what that Height of Virtue is to which the best of Men may
arrive, what those Frailties and Infirmities are to which they are subject,
'twere I think easy to show that the Wise and Good are on all hands agreed
about this. Nor does it much concern my present purpose in what sense, or on
what account Papists think some sins Venial, and Protestants deny them to be
so; since neither the one nor the other, exempt the Perfect Man from
Infirmities, nor assert any other Height or Perfection then what consists in a
consummate and well established Habit of Virtue. Some Men may, and do talk very
extravagantly: But it is very hard to imagine, that Sober and Pious Men should
run in with them. Such, when they talk of Fulfilling the Law of God and keeping
his Commandments, must surely understand this of the Law of God in a Gracious
and Equitable sense: And this is no more then what the Scripture asserts of
every sincere Christian. When they talk of, I know not what transcendant
Perfection in Monkery, they must surely mean nothing more, then that Poverty,
Chastity, and Obedience are Heroic Instances of Faith and Love, of Poverty of
Spirit, and Purity of Heart; and that an Ascetick Discipline is the most
compendious and effectual way to a Consummate Habit of Righteousness. Finally,
by the Distinction of Precept and Counsel, such can never intend surely more
then This, that we are obliged to some things under pain of Damnation; to
others, by the Hopes of greater Degrees of Glory: For it is not easy for me to
comprehend, that any Man, whose Judgment is not enslaved to the Dictates of his
Party, should deny either of these two Truths. 1. That whatever is neither
forbidden, nor commanded by any Law of God, is Indifferent. 2. That no Man can
do more then love the Lord his God, with all his Heart, with all his Soul, and
with all his Might, and his Neighbor as himself. I say, there is no Degree or
Instance of Obedience, that is not comprised within the Latitude and Perfection
of these Words. But whatever some of the Church of Rome, or it may be, the
greater part of it, may think; This, it is plain, was the Sense of the Ancients.
St. Austin Quaecunque non jubentur, sed speciali consilio monentur, tum recte
fiunt, cum referuntur ad deligendum Deum, and proximum propter Deum, Aug. Euch.
cap. 121.
could never understand any Merit or Excellence in those things that were
Matter of Counsel not Precept, unless they flowed from, and had regard to the
Love of God, and our Neighbor. And Cassian's Ac proinde ea quibus qualitates
Statutas videmus, and tempora; and quae sic observata sanctificant, ut omissa
non polluant, Media esse manifestum est, ut puta Naptias, agriculturam,
divitias, solitudinis Remotionem, etc. Cassian. Colla. Patr. Talem igitur
Definitionem supra Jejunii, etc. Nec in ipso spei nostrae terminum defigamus,
sed ut per ipsum ad puritatem Cordis and Apostolicam Charitatem pervenire
possimus, ibid.
Excellent Monks resolved all the value of such things, to consist in their
tendency to promote Apostolical Purity and Charity. And Gregory Nazianzen
(...). Greg. Nazian.
thought it very extravagant, to pretend to be Perfecter then the Rule, and
Exacter then the Law.

The Quakers have made much noise and stir about the Doctrine of Perfection,
and have reflected very severely on others, as subverting the great Design of
our Redemption (which is Deliverance from Sin) and upholding the Kingdom of
Darkness: But with what Justice will easily appear when I have represented
their Sense, which I will do very Impartially, and in as few and plain words as
I can. Mr. W. P. A Key opening, etc.
tells us, that They are so far Infallible and Perfect, as they are led by the
Spirit. This is indeed true, but it is mere trifling: For This is an
Infallibility and Perfection which no man denies, who believes in the Holy
Ghost; since whoever follows His Guidance must be in the right, unless the Holy
Ghost himself be in the wrong? He urges, it is true, a great number of
Scriptures to show (they are his own words) that a State of Perfection from Sin
(though not in fullness of Wisdom and Glory) is attainable in this Life; But
this is too dark and short a hint to infer the Sense of his Party from it. Mr.
Ed. Buroughs Principles of Truth, etc.
is more full. We believe (says he) that the Saints upon Earth may receive
forgiveness of Sins, and may be perfectly freed from the Body of Sin and Death,
and in Christ may be perfect and without Sin, and may have victory over all
Temptations, by Faith in Jesus Christ. And we believe every Saint that is
called of God, ought to press after Perfection, and to overcome the Devil, and
all his Temptations upon Earth: And we Believe they that faithfully wait for
it, shall obtain it, and shall be presented without Sin in the Image of the
Father; And such walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, and are in
Covenant with God, and their sins are blotted out, and remembered no more; for
they cease to commit sin, being Born of the Seed of God. If by Sin here, he
means, as he seems to do, Deliberate or Presumptuous Sin; I do not think any
Established Church, whether Protestant or Popish, Teaches otherwise. Mr.
Barclay Apol. These. 8.
goes very Methodically to work, and first sets down the state of the Question;
then confutes those that differ from Him, answers their Objections out of
Scripture; and lastly, establishes his own Doctrine. As to the Perfection which
he asserts, he lets us know, That it is to be derived from the Spirit of
Christ; that it consists not in an Impossibility of Sinning, but a Possibility
of not Sinning: And that his Perfect Man is capable of Daily Growth and
Improvement. When to This I have added, that he speaks all along of That which
we call Wilful Sin, as appears from his Description of it; for he calls it,
Iniquity, Wickedness, Impurity, the Service of Satan, and attributes such
Effects to it as belong not at all to what we call Sins of Infirmity; when I
say This is added to render his Sense clear, I can readily subscribe to him:
For I know no such Doctrines in our Church as Those which he there opposes;
namely, that the Regenerate are to live in Sin, and that their Good Works are
Impure and Sinful. But then, he either mistakes the Main Point in Debate, or
prudently declines it: For the Question is not, whether good Men may live in
Mortal or Wilful Sin, but whether good Men are not subject to Frailties and
Infirmities, which are indeed Sins though not imputable under the Covenant of
Grace. Whether the Quakers are not in this Point Pelagians, I do not now
inquire; because if they be, they are already considered. Two things there are
in Mr. Barclay's state of the Question, which I cannot so well approve of; the
One is, that he expresses himself so injudiciously about the growth and
improvement of his Perfect Man, that he seems to forget the Difference the
Scriptures make between Babes and full Grown Men in Christ, and to place
Perfection so low in reference to Positive Righteousness, or Virtue, as if it
consisted in Negative only, or ceasing from Sin. The Other is, That though he
does not peremptorily affirm a State of Impeccability attainable in this Life,
yet he seems inclined to Believe it, and imagines it countenanced by 1 John
3.9. But he ought to have considered, That whatever Impeccability may be
inferred from that Text, it is attributed, not to some extraordinary Persons,
but to all whosoever they be that are Born of God, but this is out of my way.
All that I am to observe upon the whole is, that These Men place Perfection
especially in refraining from Sin: I advance higher; and place it in a
well-setled Habit of Righteousness. And I believe they will be as little
dissatisfied with me for this, as I am with them, for asserting the Perfect Man
freed from Sin. For as Mr. Barclay expresses himself, I think he has in reality
no Adversaries but Antinomians and Ranters.

As to That Perfection which is magnified by Mistical Writers, some of Them
have only darkened and obscured the plain Sense of the Gospel, by figurative
and unintelligible Terms. Those of Them which write with more Life and Heat
than other Men ordinarily do, recommend nothing but that Holiness which begins
in the Fear, and is consummate in the Love of God, which enlightens the Mind,
purifies the Heart, and fixes and unites Man to his Sovereign Good, that is
God: And I am sure I shall not differ with These.

There are, I confess, almost innumerable sayings of the Fathers, which
sufficiently testify how little Friends they were to Perfection, in such a
Notion of it as is too generally embraced in the Church of Rome. The Primitive
Spirit breathed Nothing but Humility: It was a professed Enemy to All
self-Confidence and Arrogance, to Supererogation and Merit; and it invited Men
earnestly to reflect upon the Sins and Slips of Life, and on that Opposition
which the Law of the Body maintains against the Law of the Mind, in some Degree
or other, in the Best Men. This Consideration forced the Bishop of Condome to
that plain and honest Confession, Itaque Justitia Nostra licet per Charitatis
Infusionem sit vera, etc. though our Righteousness, because of that Love which
the Spirit sheds abroad in our Hearts, be Sincere and Real, yet is it not
absolute and consummate, because of the Opposition of Concupiscence: So that it
is an indispensable Duty of Christianity, to be perpetually bewailing the
Errors of Life. Wherefore we are obliged humbly to confess with St. Austin,
That our Righteousness in this Life, consists rather in the pardon of our Sins,
then in the perfection of our Virtues. All this is undoubtedly true, but
concerns not me: I never Dream of any man's passing the Course of Life without
Sin: Nor do I contend for such a Perfection as St. Austin calls Absolute, which
will admit of no Increase, and is exempt from Defects and Errors. Though on the
other hand, I confess I cannot but think, some carry this matter too far; and
while they labor to abate the Pride and Confidence of man, give too much
encouragement to Negligence and Presumption. I cannot see how frequent Relapses
into Deliberate Acts of Wickedness, can consist with a well settled and
established Habit of Goodness. The Heat of Dispute in some, and a sort of
Implicit Faith for their Authority in others, has produced many unwary
Expressions, and I doubt very unsound and pernicious Notions about this matter.

CHAP. III. Inferences deduced from the Notion of Perfection.
HAving in the two former Chapters fixed the Notion of Religious Perfection,
and proved it consonant to Reason and Scripture, and not so only, but also made
it appear, that it is countenanced by the Unanimous Consent of All, who have
ever handled This Subject. I have nothing now to do, but by way of Inference,
to represent the Advantages we may reap from it.

1. It is from hence plain, That Perfection must not be placed in Fantastic
Speculations, or Voluntary Observances, but in the solid and useful Virtues of
the Gospel; in the Works of Faith, the Labor of Love, and the Patience of
Hope; in the Purity and Humility of a Child of Light; in the Constancy and
Magnanimity which becomes one who has brought the Body into subjection, and has
set his Affections on things above. This state of Perfection is well enough
described by the Rule of St. Bennet. Ergo his omnibus Humilitatis Gradibus
ascensis, Monachus mox ad Charitatem, etc. The Monk having passed through these
several Stages of Humility or Mortification, will arrive at that Love of God
which casts out fear; by which he will be enabled to perform all things with
Ease and Pleasure, and as it were Naturally, which before he performed with
Reluctance and Dread; being now moved and acted, not by the terrors of Hell,
but by a delight in Goodness, and the force of an excellent Habit: Both which,
Christ by his Spirit Vouchsafes to increase and exalt in his Servant now
cleans'd and purged from all Sin and Vice.

2. This Notion of Perfection proves all Men to lie under an Obligation to it:
For as All are capable of an Habit of Holiness, so is it the Duty of All to
endeavor after it. If Perfection were indeed an Angelical State; if it did
consist in an Exemption from all Defects and Infirmities, and in such an
Elevation of Virtue, to which nothing can be added; then I confess, all
Discourses of it, and much more all Attempts after it, would be vain and
insolent too. If again, it did consist in some Heroic Pitch of Virtue, which
should appear to have some thing so Singular in it, as should make it look more
like a Miracle than a Duty, it were then to be expected but once in an Age,
from some Extraordinary Person, called to it by Peculiar Inspirations, and
Extraordinary Gifts. But if Christian Perfection be, as I have proved, only a
well confirmed Habit of Goodness, if it differ from Sincerity only, when
Sincerity is in its Weakness and Infancy, not when grown up, then it is plain,
that every Christian lies under an Obligation to it. Accordingly the Scripture
exhorts All to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, to go on to Perfection,
Heb. 6. And it assigns This as one great end of the institution of a standing
Ministry in the Churches of Christ, namely, the perfecting the Saints, the
edifying the Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of
the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a Perfect Man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. And hence it is, that we find
the Apostles pursuing this great End, by their Prayers and Labors, earnestly
contending and endeavoring to present all Christians Perfect before God. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. Night and Day praying exceedingly, that we might see your face,
and might perfect that which is lacking in your Faith. Col. 1.28. Whom we
preach, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all wisdom, that we may
present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, see 1 Pet. 5.10. Coll. 4.13. Nay
further, the Scripture frequently puts us in mind, that they are in a State of
Danger, who do not proceed and grow in Grace, and press on toward Perfection.
Now all this is very easily accountable, taking Perfection for a well settled
Habit of Holiness; but on no other Notion of it.

3. This Account of Perfection removes Those Scruples which are often started
about the Degrees of Holiness and Measures of Duty, and are wont to disturb the
Peace, clog the Vigor, and damp the Alacrity of many well Meaning and Good
People. Nay, many of Acute Parts and Good Learning, are often puzzled about this
Matter: Some teaching that Man is not bound to do his best; others on the quite
contrary; that he is so far bound to it, that he is always obliged to pursue
the most Perfect Duty, to choose the most Perfect Means, and to exert the
utmost of that Strength, and act according to the utmost of that Capacity with
which God has endowed him. Now all these things, when we come to apply these
General Doctrines to Particular Instances, and a vast variety of Circumstances,
have so much Latitude, Ambiguity, and Uncertainty in them, that Men of Tender
Consciences, and Defective Understanding, reap nothing from such high flown
Indefinite Discourses, but Doubts and Scruples. It requires a Strong and
Penetrating Judgment, to resolve what is the utmost Extent of our Power and
Capacity; What the best Mean, and what the most Perfect Duty, when many present
themselves to us, and all variously circumstantiated. But now, as I have stated
Matters, we are bound indeed to pursue and labor after Growth and Improvement
in the Love of God, and Charity toward our Neighbor, in Purity, Humility, and
the like. And this we shall certainly do, if we be Sincere; in other Matters we
are left to our Prudence; and if the Error of our Choice proceed only from an
Error in Judgment, not a Corruption in our Hearts, we are safe enough.

4. It Is very easy to discern now where we stand in reference to Perfection;
how remote we are from it, or how near to it. For the nature of an Habit being
plain and Intelligible, the Effects and Properties of it, obvious to the
Meanest Capacity, it is easy to determine upon an Impartial Examination,
whether we be Habitually Good or not, or what Approaches we have made toward
it. And because this is a Matter of no small Importance, and Men are generally
backward enough to advance too far into such Reflections and Applications, as
may breed any Disturbance to their Peace, or any Diminution of their Good
Opinion for themselves, though neither the one nor the other be too well
grounded; I shall not think my time misspent, if I here take this task upon me;
and endeavor by several Particular deductions, to lay every Man's State as
plainly open to his View as I can.

1st. Then, from the Notion I have given of Perfection, it appears, That if a
Man's Life be very Uneven, Unconstant, and Contradictory to it self, if he be
to day a Saint, and to morrow a Sinner, if he yield to day to the Motives of
the Gospel, and Impulses of the Spirit, and to morrow to the Solicitations of
the Flesh, and Temptations of the World, he is far from being Perfect; so far,
that there is not ground enough to conclude Him Sincere or Real, though
Imperfect Convert. The only certain Proof of Regeneration is Victory; he that
is born of God over-cometh the World, 1 John 5.4. Faith, though it be True, is
not presently Saving and Justifying till it have subdued the Will, and
captivated the Heart, i. e. till we begin to Live by Faith; which is evident
from That Corn in the Parable, which though it shot up yet had it not Depth of
Earth, nor Root enough, and therefore was withered up, and brought forth no
fruit. Regret and Sorrow for Sin is an Excellent Passion, but till it has
subdued our Corruptions, changed our Affections, and purified our Hearts, it is
not that Saving Repentance in the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.10. Godly sorrow works
Repentance, not to be repented of. We may have some sudden Heats and Passions
for Virtue, but if they be too short lived to implant it in us, this is not
that Charity or Love which animates and impregnates the New Creature mentioned,
Gal. 5.6. Faith working by Love. Lastly, we may have good Purposes, Intentions,
nay, Resolutions; but if these prove too weak to obtain a Conquest over our
Corruptions, if they prove too weak to resist the Temptations we were wont to
fall by, it is plain that they are not such as can demonstrate us Righteous, or
entitle us to a Crown, which is promised to him that overcomes. And here I
cannot but remark, to how little purpose Controversies have been multiplied
about the Justification of Man. It Is one thing for God to justify us, i. e. to
Pardon our Sins, and account us Righteous and his Children; and another for us
to know, or be assured that he does so. If we enquire after the former, it is
plain to me, that no Man can be accounted Righteous by God, till he really is
so: And when the Man is Sanctified throughout in Spirit, Soul, and Body; then
is he certainly Justified, and not till then. And this I think is confessed by
all, except Antinomians; and whatever Difference there is amongst Christians in
this Matter, it lies in the Forms and Variety of Expression. They that contend
earnestly for the Necessity of Good works, do not, I suppose, imagine, that the
Works are Holy, before the Heart is so; for as is the Fountain, such will be
its Streams, as is the Tree, such will be its Fruits. What Absurdity then is
there in admitting that Men are justified before they bring forth Good Works;
if they cannot bring forth Good Works till they be Sanctified and Changed? On
the other hand, they who contend so earnestly for Justification by Faith
without Works, do not only suppose that the Man is thoroughly changed, by the
Infusion of Habitual Grace, but also that this Grace, as soon as it has
opportunity, will exert and express it self in good Works: And they do readily
acknowledge that the Faith which does not work by Love, is an Historical
Unanimated Faith. And if so, how natural is it to comprise in that Holiness
which justifies, not only the change of the Heart, but of the Actions? But here
I think it is well worth the considering, whether that thorough Change in the
nature of a Sinner, which is called Holiness, be now effected at once, and in a
moment, and not rather gradually and in time? For this may give some light to
the Doctrine of Justification, and draws off from Speculations and Theories, to
more Useful and Practical Thoughts and Discourses about it. It Is true, in the
Primitive times, when the Conviction of a Sinner was wrought by a dazzling
light, by Surprising Miracles, by Exuberant Influxes of the Spirit, and the
Concurrence of many extraordinary things, Sanctification (as in the Jailer and
his Family, Act. 16.) might be begun and finished in the same hour. But I doubt
it is rarely so with us at this day; our Vices are not so suddenly subdued, nor
our Virtues so suddenly implanted. Our Convictions in the Beginning of
Conversion, are seldom so full and clear as Theirs: And if we may judge by the
Effects, it is but seldom that the Principle of a New Life is infused in the
same Plenty and Power it appears to have been in Them. And if so, then these
things will follow; 1. Though in the first Plantation of the Gospel Men being
converted, as it were in a Moment, ingrafted by Baptism into Christ, and
receiving the Holy Ghost, the Earnest of their Justification or Acceptance with
God, and their future Glory: We may very well say of them, that they were not
only Justified, but also knew themselves to be so, before they had brought
forth any other Fruit of Righteousness, than what was implied in the Dedication
of themselves to Christ by that solemn Rite of Baptism; but at this day, when
Conversion is not effected in the same manner; when Faith and Good Works do
mutually cherish one another, when Righteousness is not brought forth into
victory, but by long labor and travel; I see not why Faith and Good Works may
not be pronounced jointly and antecedently necessary to our Justification. 2.
The Doctrine of Infused Habits has been much ridiculed and exposed, as absurd
by some Men; and I must confess, if it be Essential to a Habit, to be acquired
by length of time, and repetition of the same Acts, then an Infused Habit is a
very Odd Expression: But why God cannot produce in us those strong Dispositions
to Virtue in a Moment, which are naturally produced by Time; or why we may not
ascribe as much efficacy to Infused Grace, as Philosophers are wont to do to
repeated Acts, I cannot see? Nor can I see why such Dispositions when Infused,
may not be called Habits, if they have all the Properties and Effects of an
Habit. And that such excellent Dispositions were on a sudden wrought in the
Minds of Christians in the beginning of Christianity, is too plain from the
History of those times to need a proof. But whether such Changes are ordinarily
effected so suddenly at this day, we have much reason to doubt; nay, I think it
appears from what I have said, there is sufficient reason to deny it. And if
so, the Infusion of Habits cannot be so properly insisted on now as then; and
we may be more subject to make unwarrantable Inferences from the Doctrine of
Infused Habits, then they were in those bright and Miraculous days. 3. As our
Progress to Sanctification must be slower then formerly, as it must be longer
before the Grace that is infused so far, master our corruption, and dilate and
diffuse it self through our whole Nature, as that we may justly be denominated
Holy and Righteous from the prevalence of this Holy Principle: So by a
necessary consequence, our Justification must commence later. But after all, I
know not why we should be so inquisitive after the time of our Justification by
God. The Comfort of a Christian does not result immediately from God's
Justifying him, but from his knowing that he does so. And if this be the thing
we are now searching after, namely, what rational Assurance we can have of our
Justification, and when, as indeed it is; then, though I do not pretend to
determine, that Man is not, or may not be Justified or accounted righteous by
God, upon a thorough change of Mind or Soul, before this change discovers it
self in a Series of Victories over those Temptations by which he was led
Captive before; Yet I assert First, That the true and solid proof of the
Sanctification of the Heart, is Sanctity of Life. Next, when I talk of Victory,
I suppose Man engaged, I suppose him encountered by Temptations and Enemies; and
then I affirm, that the Faith which is not strong enough to Conquer, is not
strong enough to Justify; if any Man demand, may not that Faith which is
Foiled to day, Conquer to morrow; I answer, I must leave this to God: I can
pronounce nothing of the Sincerity of the Heart, but by the outward Deportment
and Success. And if this be the proper way of judging of a Man's Sincerity, I
am sure I may with much more confidence affirm, that nothing less then Victory
can be a clear Argument of Perfection. My business therefore shall ever be to
be Holy, and then I Am sure I shall be Justified. If I be Holy, God who cannot
err will certainly account me so; and if I cease to be so, God must cease to
account me so. And this is all which I design by this long Paragraph: That is,
to render Men more careful and diligent in making their Calling and Election
sure, and to prevent Presumption and groundless Confidence. And that nothing
that I have here said, may be perverted to a contrary purpose; that no Man from
some passionate resolutions or sudden changes of his own Mind, may be tempted
to conclude too hastily of his being Justified, as if the change wrought in
him, were equal to that commonly effected in the first Converts of
Christianity; I think it not amiss to put such a one in mind, that even These
were not Justified, unless they did profess Christ with the Mouth as well as
Believe in him with the Heart; and that this public Profession of Christianity
in those days, was equivalent to many Good Works in These.

2dly, He that feels in himself little or no Fervency of Spirit, little or no
Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, has reason to suspect, that his
Regularity is little more then common Decency and Civility, and to doubt, lest
his Religion be nothing else but Custom or common Prudence. I see not how so
much Indifference and Sluggishness can consist with a firm Belief and
Expectation of a Crown, with a sincere Love of God and Righteousness. But if we
may suppose such a one restrained from Evil, and preserved in the way of Duty,
after a sort, by the Fear of God, and a Desire of Heaven, yet certainly this
can be but the Infancy of the New Creature at most: And the best advice that
can be given such a one, is surely that of St. Peter, that by adding one degree
of Virtue to another, he would use all diligence to make his Calling and
Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

3dly, If a Man's Religion produce very few Good Works, or such only as put him
to little travel or expense, we may conclude, that this Man is not Perfect; his
Charity is too weak, too narrow to be that of an exalted Christian: The best
that we can think of such a one is, That he is yet taken up in the Discipline
of Mortification, that he is contending with his Lusts and Passions, which are
not yet so far reduced, so far subdued and brought under, as to leave him in a
State of Liberty and Peace, and in a capacity of extending and enlarging his
Charity. This Remark, that the Inconsiderableness of our Good Works is reason
enough to question, not only one's Perfection, but Sincerity, holds good in
such Cases only, where neither the Opportunity nor Capacity of higher and
nobler Performances is wanting. I dare not pronounce that no Man can be a
Christian, unless he be fit to be a Martyr: It Is true, the lowest degree of
Sincerity must imply a purpose and Resolution of Universal Obedience, in
Defiance of all Temptations; but yet That Grace, for ought I can prove to the
contrary, may be sufficient to Save a Man, that is, sufficient to master the
Difficulties he is to encounter with, although he should not be to grapple with
the Distempers and Trials to which the Body and the State of another Man may be
subject. Surely the Wisdom and the Faithfulness of God can be no further
concerned, then to qualify any one for the discharge of those duties which he
thinks fit to call him to: And if the discharge of such duties be not a
sufficient Proof of our Sincerity, we can never have any, but must be always
held in suspense and torture about our future State. I see no reason to
question, but that the Disciples of our Lord were in a State of Grace before
the Resurrection, and the following Pentecost: And yet I think I have plain
Reason to believe, that they were not fit to be Martyrs and Confessors till
then; the Grace they had before might, I doubt it not, have enabled them to
live Virtuously amidst Common and Ordinary Temptations: But it was necessary
that they should be endowed with Power from on High, before they could be fit
to encounter those fiery Trials, to which the Preaching of the Gospel was to
expose them. To this surely our Master refers, when he tells the Pharisees,
That the Children of the Bride-chamber were not to fast while the Bridegroom
was with them: when he tells his Disciples, I have many things to say, but you
cannot bear them yet: when he asked the Sons of Zebedee. Are ye able to drink
of the Cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the Baptism that I am
baptized with, Matthew. 20.21? If this be true Divinity, as I am (I had almost
said,) confident it is, then I am confident, that which requires very
unaccountable Tests of a Man's Sincerity, is very extravagant. For example,
when Men talk at this rate, that a Sincere Christian should have such an
Abhorrence for Sin, as to fear Guilt more then its Punishment: Such a Love of
God, as rather then offend Him, to be content to Precipitate and Plunge himself
into the Jaws, not of Death, like the Martyrs, but of Hell it self.

4thly, If the Duties of Religion be very troublesome and uneasy to a Man, we
may from hence conclude, that he is not Perfect: For though the Beginning of
Wisdom and Virtue be generally harsh and severe to the Fool and Sinner, yet to
him that has Conquered, the Yoke of Christ is easy, and his Burden light, to
him that is filled with the Love of God, his Commandments are not grievous;
hence is that observation of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 4.17, 18. For at the
first she will walk with him by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon
him, and torment him with her discipline, until she may trust his Soul and try
him by her Laws, then will she return the straight way unto him, and comfort
him, and show him her secrets. The reason of this Assertion is palpable, it is
the nature of an Habit to render difficult Things easy, harsh Things pleasant,
to fix a floating and uncertain Humor, to Nurse and Ripen a weak and tender
Disposition into Nature. And it is as reasonable to expect these effects in
Religious, as in any other sorts of Habits.

Lastly, He who does not find Religion full of Pleasure, who does not Glory in
God, and rejoice in our Lord Jesus, he who is not filled with an humble
Assurance of the Divine Favor, and a Joyful expectation of Immortality and
Glory, does yet want something, he is yet defective, with respect, either to
the brightness of Illumination, the Absoluteness of Liberty, or the Ardor of
Love; he may be a Good Man, and have gone a great way in his Christian Race;
but there is some thing still behind to Complete and Perfect him; some Error or
other creates him groundless Scruples, some Encumbrance or Impediment or other,
whether an Infelicity of Temper, or the Incommodiousness of his Circumstances,
or a little too warm an Application toward something of the World, retards his
Vigor and abates his Affections.

I have now finished all that I can think necessary to form a general Idea of
Religious Perfection: For I have not only given a plain Definition or
Description of it, and Confirmed and Fortified that Description by Reason and
Scripture, and the current Sense of all Sides and Parties, but have also by
various Inferences, deduced from the General Notion of Perfection, precluded
all groundless Pretensions to it, and enabled Men to see how far they are
removed and distant from it, or how near they approach it. The next thing I am
to do, according to the Method I have proposed, is, to consider the Fruits and
Advantages of Perfection. A consideration which will furnish us with many
great, and I hope effectual Incitements or Motives to it; and demonstrate its
Subservencie to our Happiness.

CHAP. IV. A General Account of the Blessed Effects of Religious Perfection.
THE Glorious and Delightful Fruits of Religious Perfection, may be reduced to
these four Heads.

First, It advances the Honor of the True and Living God, and of his Son Jesus
in the World. Secondly, It promotes the Good of Mankind. Thirdly, It produces
in the Perfect Man, a full Assurance of Eternal Happiness and Glory. Fourthly,
It puts him in Possession of true Happiness in this Life.
Of the two former, I shall say nothing here; designing to insist upon them
more particularly. In the following Section under the Head of Zeal, where I
shall be obliged by my Method to consider the Fruit of it; only I cannot here
forbear Remarking, That Perfection while it promotes the Honor of God, and the
Good of Man, does at the same time promote our own Happiness too; since it must
on this account most effectually recommend us to the Love of the One and the
Other; Them that Honor me, says God, I will Honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. And our
Savior observes, that even Publicans and Sinners love those who love them,
Matthew. 5.46. Accordingly St. Luke tells us of Christ, Luke 2.52. That Jesus
increased in Wisdom and Stature, and in favor with God and Man; and of those
eminently Devout and Charitable Souls, Act. 2. that they had favor with all
the People; so resistless a charm is the beauty and loveliness of Perfect
Charity, even in the most depraved and corrupt Times. And what a Blessing now,
what a Comfort, what a Pleasure is it, to be the Favorite of God and Man!

The Third and Fourth I will now discourse of, and that the more largely,
because as to Assurance, it is the foundation of that Pleasure which is the
richest Ingredient of Human Happiness in this Life. And, as to our present
Happiness, which is the fourth Fruit of Perfection, it is the very thing for
the sake of which, I have engaged in my present subject. And therefore it is
very fit that I should render the tendency of Perfection to procure our present
Happiness, very conspicuous. Beginning therefore with Assurance, I will assert
the Possibility of attaining it in this Life; not by embroiling my self in the
Brakes of several nice and subtle Speculations with which this subject is
overgrown, but by laying down in a Practical manner, the Grounds on which
Assurance depends; by which we shall be able at once to discern the truth of
the Doctrine of Assurance, and its dependence upon Perfection.

Now Assurance may relate to the time Present or to Come: For the Resolution of
two Questions, gives the Mind a perfect ease about this Matter. The first is,
am I assured that I am at present in a state of Grace? The second, am I assured
that I shall continue so to my Life's end? To begin with the first, the Answer
of this Enquiry depends on three Grounds.

First, A Divine Revelation, which declares in General, who shall be Saved;
namely, They who Believe and Repent. Nor does any Sect doubt but that
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, as St. Paul speaks,
are the Indispensable Conditions of Life. It Is true, the Notion of Repentance
is miserably perverted by some, and that of Faith by others: But what remedy is
there against the Lusts and Passions of Men? The Scripture does not only
require Repentance and Faith, but it explains and describes the Nature of Both,
by such Conspicuous and Infallible Characters, that no Man can be Mistaken in
these two Points, but his Error must be owing to some Criminal Prejudices or
Inclinations that Bias and pervert him. Good Men have ever been agreed in
these Matters: And Catholic Tradition is no where more uncontrollable then
here; the General Doctrine of all Ages has been, and in this still is, that by
Repentance we are to understand a New Nature and New Life: And by Faith, when
distinguished from Repentance (as it sometimes is in Scripture) a Reliance upon
the Mercy of God through the Merits and Intercession of Jesus, and Atonement of
his Blood. Heaven lies open to all that perform these Conditions; every Page of
the Gospel attest this; this is the Substance of Christ's Commission to his
Apostles, that they should Preach Repentance and Remission of Sins through his
Name amongst all Nations. And this is one Blessed advantage, which Revealed
Religion has above Natural; that it contains an express Declaration of the
Divine Will, concerning the Pardon of all Sins whatsoever upon these Terms.
Natural Religion indeed teaches us that God is Merciful, but it teaches us that
he is Just too, and it can never assure us, what Bounds God will set to the
Exercise of the one or the other; and when Justice, and when Mercy shall take
Place: What Sins are, and what are not capable of the benefit of Sacrifice and
Repentance. And this uncertainty, considering the Sins of the best Life, was
ever naturally apt to beget Despondencies, Melancholy, and sometimes a
Superstitious dread of God.

The Second Ground of assurance as it relates to our present State, is an
Application of the Condition of Life laid down in the Gospel to a Man's own
Particular Case, thus; They that Believe and Repent shall be Saved; I Believe
and Repent, therefore I shall be Saved. Now that a Man upon an Examination of
himself, may be thoroughly assured that he does Believe and Repent, is evident
from Scripture, which does not only exhort us to enter upon this Examination,
but also assert, that Assurance, Joy, and Peace, are the natural Fruits of it:
But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and drink of
that Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove
your own selves: Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. But Sanctify the Lord God in your
Hearts, and be ready always to give an answer to every Man that asks you a
reason of the hope, that is in you with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3.15. And
hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; 1 John 2.3.
Beloved, if our Hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, 1 John 3.2. It Is true, Men do often deceive themselves, and entertain a more
favorable Opinion of their state then they ought. But whence proceeds this?
Even from too Partial or Superficial Reflections on themselves, or none at all.
And therefore the Apostle teaches us plainly, that the only way to correct this
Error, is a Sincere and diligent search into our selves: For if a Man think
himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself: But let
every Man prove his own Work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself
alone, and not in another, Gal. 6.3, 4. But it is Objected against all this,
that the Heart of Man is so deceitful, that it is a very difficult Matter to
make a thorough discovery of it. We often think our selves Sincere, when the
success of the next Temptation gives us just reason to call this Sincerity into
question: such is the contradictions Composition of our Nature, that we often
act contrary to our inward Convictions, and frequently fail in the execution of
those designs, in the performance of those resolutions, which we have thought
very well grounded, and this being not to be charged upon the Insufficiency of
God's Grace, but the Levity or Insincerity of our own Hearts, how can we safely
frame any right Opinion of our Selves from those affections and purposes which
are so little to be relied upon? To this I Answer. First, We are not to
conclude any thing concerning our Progress or Perfection too hastily; we are
not to determine of the final Issue of a War by the success of one or two
Engagements; but our Hopes and Assurances are to advance slowly and gradually
in proportion to the abatement of the Enemy's Force, and the increase of our
own; so that we may have time enough to examine and prove our own Hearts.
Secondly, A Sincere Christian, but especially one of a Mature Virtue, may
easily discern his spiritual state by the inward movings and actings of the
Soul, if he attend to them: For is it possible that such a one should be
ignorant, what Impressions Divine Truths make upon him? Is it possible he
should be ignorant, whether his Faith stand firm against the shock of all
Carnal objections, whether he earnestly desire to please God, as loving him
above all things, whether he thirst after the Consolation and Joy of the
Spirit, more then after that of sensible things? Is it possible the Soul should
bewail its Heaviness and Dryness which the best are liable to at some season or
other? Is it possible that the Soul should be carried upwards frequently on the
Wings of Faith and Love, that it should maintain a familiar and constant
Conversation with Heaven; that it should long to be delivered from this World
of trouble, and this Body of Death, and to enter into the Regions of Peace, of
Life, and Righteousness? Is it possible, I say, that these should be the
Affections, the Longings, and Earnings of the Soul, and yet that the Good Man,
the Perfect Man, who often enters into his Closet, and Communes with his own
Heart, should be ignorant of them? It cannot be. In a word, can the Reluctances
of the Body, and the Allurements of the World, be disarmed, weakened, and
reduced? Can the Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness be very eager, the
relish of spiritual Pleasure, brisk and delightful, and the contempt of worldly
things be real and thoroughly settled, and yet the Man be insensible of all
this? It cannot be. But if we fell these Affections in us, we may safely
conclude, that we are Partakers of the Divine Nature, that we have escaped the
corruption that is in the World through Lust; and that the New Creature is at
least growing up into a Perfect Man, to the Measure of the Stature of the
fullness of Christ. Thirdly, The surest Test of a State of Grace, is our
abounding in Good Works: You shall know the Tree by its Fruit, is our Masters
own Rule, and it can never deceive us: He that does Righteousness is born of
God. If then we be frequent and fervent in our Devotion toward God; if we be
modest and grateful in the Successes, Patient and Resigned, Calm and Serene
under the Crosses and Troubles of Life: If we be not only Punctual but
Honorable in our dealings, if we be Vigorous and Generous in the Exercises of
Charity, if we be not only just and true, but meek, gentle and obliging in our
Words, if we retrench not only the sinful, but something from the innocent
Liberties and Gratifications of Sense, to give our selves more entirely up to
the Duties and Pleasures of Faith: If finally, we never be ashamed of Virtue,
nor flatter, complement, nor wink at Vice if we be ready to meet with Death
with comfort, and retain Life with some degree of Indifference: If these
things, I say, be in us, we have little reason to doubt of the goodness of our
State: For Good Works being the natural Fruit of Grace, it is impossible we
should abound in the one without being possessed with the other. One would
think now, that there should be nothing further needful to establish the
Consolation of a Christian; and yet God out of regard, no doubt, to the vast
Importance and happy Influence of Assurance has furnished us with another
ground of it, which is,

The Third and Last, namely, the Testimony of the Spirit. This Spirit, as it
assists us in our Examination, so it ratifies and confirms our Sentence by its
suffrage; fortifying our assurance and increasing our Joy. All this the
Scripture expressly teaches us; for the Spirit is called The earnest of our
Inheritance, the Seal of our Redemption, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. Ephesians. 4.30, 31. 2 Cor.
2.10. 2 Cor. 5. And though it be not improbable, but that these and such like
Places may relate more immediately to that Spirit of Promise which was
conspicuous in Miracles, and seems to have accompanied all that believed in the
Infancy of the Church, according to those Words of our Savior, And these signs
shall follow them that believe, in my Name shall they cast out Devils, etc.
Mark 16, 17. Yet are there Texts enough which assure us, that the Spirit of God
should be imparted to believers through all succeeding Ages, and that this
should be one effect of it to comfort us, and be a pledge to us of the Divine
Favor, thus, Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace
in believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power of the Holy Ghost,
and Romans 8.15, 16. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to
fear, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father;
the Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of
God, and if Children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. If
it be here demanded what this Testimony of the Spirit is, I answer, it is a
Powerful Energy of the blessed Spirit, shedding abroad and increasing the Love
of God in our Hearts, Romans 5. Tribulation works Patience, Patience
Experience, and Experience Hope, and Hope makes not ashamed; because the love
of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.
This is the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of Obsignation, the Spirit of Glory,
and the Spirit of Love; happy is he who is partaker of it, he has attained the
Maturity of Perfection and Pleasure. I can scarce forbear going in with some of
the Fathers, who thought that such as these could never finally fall. I can
scarce forbear applying to such, those words, Rev. 20.6. Blessed and Holy is he
that has part in the first Resurrection, on such, the second Death has no
power. Thus far have I considered Assurance as it relates to the present time.
But,

2. Assurance may regard the Time to come; and it conduces very little less to
the Peace and Pleasure of a Christian to be assured that he shall persevere in
a good State, then that he is now in one. Let us therefore in the next place
examine what grounds the Perfect Man may have for such a persuasion: Now these
are likewise three.

First, The Propension and Favor of God for the Perfect Man. Secondly, The
Sufficiency of Divine Assistance. And, Thirdly, The Conscience of his own
Integrity:
1. The Favor of God, I need not go about to prove that God will be ever ready
to assist the Perfect Man, I need not prove that his Eyes are always upon the
Righteous, and that his Ears are always open to their Prayers; that they are
the dear Objects of his Delight and Love, Reason and Scripture both do
abundantly attest this, and the repeated Promises of God to good Men, encourage
them to hope from God whatever beloved Children may from a tender and kind
Father. Is not this enough then to inspire the Perfect Man with great and
confident Hopes? He knows, not only, that God is an immutable God, free from
all Levity and Inconstancy; and therefore, that nothing less then Presumptino
and Obstinacy, Habitual Neglect, or Wickedness, can Tempt him to recall his
Gifts, or repent him of his Favors: He knows not only that God is faithful,
and will not suffer him to be Tempted above what he is able, but he knows also,
that he has a powerful Intercessor at the Right Hand of God, an Advocate with
the Father, who cannot but prevail. Nor is this all yet; he has a great many
things that plead for him with God: There are his Tears which are Botled up,
there are his Prayers and Alms which are gone up for a Memorial before God;
there is a Book of Remembrance written wherein all his pious Discourses are
Registered; and God is Faithful, and cannot forget his Works and Labor of Love.
The Spirit of God will not soon quit the Bosom that it so long resided in; it
will not suffer it self to be divided from that Person with whom it had entered
into so close an Union, that it seemed as it were inanimated or incorporated
with him, and become essential to his Being: Whence it is, that the Spirit is
said to be grieved when he is forced and compelled to retire.

2. The Second Ground of Aslurance for the time to come, is the sufficiency of
Divine Assistance. The good Man is well assured, that God will never refuse the
Protection of his Providence, or the Aid of his Spirit: And what can be too
difficult for these? Providence can prevent a Temptation, or remove it, the
Spirit can support him under it, and enable him to vanquish it; nay, it can
enable him to extract new strength and vigor from it, my Grace is sufficient
for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. the Truth of which Assertion has been Illustriously
proved by the victories of Martyrs and Confessors, who have triumphed over
United Force of Men and Devils. Though then the Conscience of Human Frailty,
may awaken in the best of Men, Fear and Caution, the Assurance of Divine
Assistance cannot but beget in them an Holy Confidence, the Snares and
Temptations of the World, the subtilty and vigilance of the Devil may justly
create a Solicitude in the best of Men, but when they consider themselves
encompassed with the Divine Favor, they can have no reason to despond.

3. The Conscience of his own Integrity is, a Third Ground of a good Man's
Confidence; he knows that nothing but crying Provocations can quench the
Spirit, and oblige God to desert him, and he has reason to hope, that this is
that he cannot be guilty of. He is sure, that presumptuous Wickedness is not
only repugnant to his Principles, but to the very bent of his Nature, to all
the Inclinations and Passions of his Soul, I speak here of the Perfect Man; can
he ever wilfully dishonor and disobey God, who loves him above all things, and
has done so long? Can he forsake, and betray his Savior, who has long rejoiced
and gloried in him, who has been long accustomed to look upon all the Glories
and Satisfactions of this Life, as dung and dross in comparison of him? Can he,
in one word, ever be seduced to renounce and hate Religion, who has had so long
an Experience of the Beauty and of the Pleasure of it? Good Habits when they
are grown up to Perfection and Maturity seem to me as natural, as it is possible
Evil ones should be: And if so, it is no less difficult to extirpate the One
then the Other. And I think I have the Scripture on my side in this Opinion:
Does the Prophet Jeremy demand, Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the
Leopard his Spots, then may you that are accustomed to do Evil learn to do
Well, Jer. 13.23. St. John on the other hand does affirm, Whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin, for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin
because he is born of God, 1 Ep. 3.9. Whosoever abides in him sins not, v.
6. These are the Grounds of Assurance with respect of the time to come. As to
Personal and Peremptory Predestination to Life and Glory, it is at least a
controverted Point, and therefore unfit to be laid as the Foundation of
Assurance. But suppose it were granted, I see not which way it can effect our
present enquiry, since the wisest amongst those who stickle for it, advise all
to Govern themselves by the general Promises and Threats of the Gospel; to look
upon the Fruits of Righteousness as the only solid proof of a state of Grace;
and if they be under the Dominion of any Sin, not to presume upon Personal
Election, but to look upon themselves as in a state of Damnation, till they be
recovered out of it by Repentance. Thus far all sides agree; and this I think
is abundantly enough: for here we have room enough for Joy and Peace, and for
Caution too; room enough for Confidence, and for Watchfulness too: The
Romanists indeed, will not allow us to be certain of Salvation, Certitudine
fidei cui non potest subesse falsum, with such a Certainty as that with which
we entertain an Article of Faith, in which there is no room for Error; i. e. we
are not so sure that we are in the Favor of God, as we are or may be that
there is a God. We are not so sure, that we have a title to the Merits of
Christ, as we are, or may be, that Jesus is the Christ. Now if this assertion
be confined to that Assurance which regards the time to come, as I think it
generally is; and do not deny Assurance in General, but only certain Degrees or
Measures of it; then there is nothing very absurd or intolerable in it. For a
less Assurance then that which this Doctrine excludes, will be sufficient to
secure the Pleasure and Tranquillity of the Perfect Man. But if this assertion
be designed against that Assurance which regards our present State, then I
think it is not sound, nor agreeable, either to Reason, Scripture, or
Experience. For first, the Question being about a matter of Fact, it is in vain
to argue that cannot be, which does appear manifestly to have been: And
certainly they who rejoiced in Christ with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory,
were as fully persuaded, that they were in a State of Grace and Salvation, as
they were that Jesus was Risen from the Dead. Secondly, it is one thing to
balance the Strength and Degrees of Assurance; another to balance the Reasons
of it. For it is very possible that Assurance may be stronger, where the Reason
of it may not be so clear and evident as where the Assurance is less. Thus for
Example; the evidence of Sense seems to most learned Men to be stronger then
that of Faith: And yet through the assistance of the Spirit, a Man may embrace
a Truth that depends upon Revelation, with as much confidence and certainty as
one depending upon Sense. And so it may be in the case of Assurance: The Spirit
of God may by its Concurrence raise our Assurance as high as he pleases;
although the Reason on which it be built, should not be Divine and Infallible,
but merely Moral, and subject at least to a possibility of Error. But Thirdly,
Why should not the certainty I have concerning my Present State, be as Divine
and Infallible, as that I have concerning an Article of Faith? If the Premises
be Infallible, why should not the Conclusion? He that Believes and Repents is
in a State of Grace, is a Divine an Infallible Proposition: and why may not
this other. I Believe and Repent, be equally Infallible, though not equally
Divine? What Faith and Repentance is, is revealed; and therefore there is no
room for my being here mistaken: Besides, I am assisted and guided in the Trial
of my Self by the Spirit of God. So that the truth of this Proposition, I
Believe and Repent, depends partly upon the evidence of Sense; and I may be as
sure of it, as of what I do or leave undone: partly upon the evidence of inward
Sensation, or my Consciousness of my own Thoughts; and I may be as sure of it
as I can be of what I love or hate, rejoice or grieve for: And lastly, it
depends upon the evidence of the Spirit of God, which assists me in the
Examination of my Self according to those Characters of Faith and Repentance,
which he has himself revealed. And when I conclude from the two former
Propositions, that I am in a State of Grace, he confirms and ratifies my
Inference. And now, let any one tell me, what kind of certainty that is, that
can be greater than this? I have taken this pains to set the Doctrine of
Assurance in a clear Light, because it is the great Spring of the Perfect Man's
Comfort and Pleasure, the source of his Strength and Joy. And this puts me in
mind of that other fruit of Perfection, which in the beginning of this Chapter,
I promised to insist on, which is, Its Subserviency to our Happiness in this
Life.

That Happiness increases in proportion with Perfection, cannot be denied,
unless we will at the same time deny the Happiness of a Man, to exceed that of
an Infant, or the Happiness of an Angel that of Man. Now this truth being of a
very great Importance, and serving singly instead of a thousand Motives to
Perfection, I will consider it impartially, and as closely as I can. Happiness
and Pleasure, are generally thought to be only two words for the same thing:
Nor is this very remote from truth; for let but Pleasure be solid and lasting,
and I cannot see what more is wanting to make Man Happy. The best way
therefore, to determine how much Perfection contributes to our Happiness, is to
examine how much it contributes to our Pleasure.

If with the Epicurean, we think Indolence our supreme Happiness, and define
Pleasure by the absence of Pain, then I am sure the Perfect Man will have the
best claim to it. He surely is freest from the Mistakes and Errors, from the
Passions and Follies, that embroil Human Life: he creates no evil to himself,
nor provokes any unnecessary danger. His Virtue effectually does that which
Atheism attempts in vain; dispels the terror of an invisible Power: he needs
not drown the Voice of Conscience by Wine, or Noise, or the toil of Life; it
speaks nothing to him, but what is kind and obliging; it is his Comforter, not
his Persecutor: And as to this World, he reaps that satisfaction and
tranquillity from the Moderation of his Affections, which Ambition and Avarice
do in vain promise themselves from Preferments or the increase of Wealth. If
therefore there were any state on this side Heaven exempt from Evil, it must be
that of the Perfect Man. But he knows the World too well to flatter himself
with the expectation of Indolence, or an undisturbed tranquillity here below;
and is as far from being deluded by vain Hopes, as from being scared by vain
fears, or tortured and distended by vain desires. He knows the World has its
Evils, and that they cannot wholly be avoided; he knows it, and dares behold
them with open Eyes, survey their Force, and feel and try their Edge. And then
when he has collected his own strength, and called in the Aid of Heaven, he
shrinks not, nor desponds; but meets Evil with that Courage, and bears it with
that evenness of Mind, that he seems even in his Afflictions nearer to
Indolence, then the Fool and Sinner in his Prosperity. So that I cannot forbear
professing, there appears so much Beauty, so much loveliness in the deportment
of the Perfect Man, with respect to the Evils of Life, that for that reason
alone, were there no other, I should admire and prefer his Virtue above any
Possession or Enjoyment of Life. Give me leave to compare the Saint and Sinner
on this occasion; and but very briefly. The wise Man's eyes, says Solomon,
Eccles. 2.14. are in his head; but the fool walks in darkness: The wise Man
sees that he has Enemies, I mean Evils; and therefore he informs himself well
of their Strength, observes their Motion, and prepares for the Encounter: but
Ignorance and Stupidity, is the greatest blessing of the Sinners Life; and his
most admired Quality is not to be apprehensive of Evil, till it crush him with
its Weight. But if the Sinner be not fool enough to arrive at this degree of
brutality, then as soon as the report of the most distant Evil, or the most
inconsiderable, reaches his Ear, how it fills his Imagination, how it shakes
his Heart, and how it embitters his Pleasures? And to what poor and despicable
Arts, to what base and dishonorable shifts does his Fear force him? When on
the same occasion we discover nothing in the Perfect Man, but a beautiful
mixture of Humility and Faith, Devotion and Confidence, or Assurance in God, He
is not afraid of evil tidings; his Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm.
112. a frame of Spirit, which to those who have opportunity and sense to
observe it, renders him both more beloved and revered. Lastly, if we consider
the wicked and the good Man, actually under the weight and pressure of Evil,
how much unlike is the state of the one in reality to that of the other, even
while the outward circumstances are the same? What Cheerfulness, what Courage,
what Resignation, what Hopes adorn the One! What Instruction to all, what
Satisfaction to his Friends and Relations does his Deportment afford! And how
does it inspire and warm the Breasts of those that converse with him, with an
esteem for, and love of Goodness, and himself! What Charm, what Delight is
there in those gracious Speeches, that proceed at this time out of a Good Man's
Mouth! I know that my Redeemer lives: The Lord gives, and the Lord takes
away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord: Thou of very faithfulness has caused
me to be afflicted: God is the strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever:
And suchlike. And how often does he pour out his Heart in secret before God?
How often does he reflect on the gracious and wise ends of Divine Chastisement!
And how often does he with desire and thirst, Meditate on that fullness of Joy
which expects him in the Presence of God! But let us cast our Eye now on the
Voluptuary, on the Ambitious, on the Covetous, or any other sort of Sinner,
under Disgrace, Poverty, Sickness, or any such Calamity; what a mean and
despicable Figure does such a one make! What Impatience, what Despondency, what
Guilt, what Pusillanimity, does every Word, every Action betray! Or it may be,
his Insolence is turned into Crouching and Fawning; his Rudeness and Violence,
into Artifice and Cunning; and his Irreligion into Superstition. Various indeed
are the Humors, and very different the Carriage of these unhappy Men in the
Day of Trial; but all is but Misery in a different dress, Guilt and Baseness
under a different appearance. Here I might further remark, that that Faith
which produces Patience in Adversity, produces likewise Security and Confidence
in Prosperity. I will lay me down (may every good May say in the words of the
Psalmist) and sleep, and rise again, for thou Lord shall make me dwell in
safety. And surely the one is as serviceable to the ease of Human Life as the
other. But I think I have said enough to show, that if Pleasure be supposed to
imply no more then Indolence, the Perfect Man has without Controversy a far
greater share of it than any other can pretend to.

But let us take Pleasure to be, not a mere Calm, but a gentle Breeze; not to
consist in mere Rest and Quiet, but a delightful Motion; not in the mere
Tranquillity of the Mind, but in the Transport of it, or some thing nearly
approaching it. Perfection, I Am confident, will suffer nothing by this change
of the Notion of Pleasure. How many Pleasures has the wise Man which depend not
on Fortune, but Himself (I mean his Diligence and Integrity) and to which the
Sinner is an utter Stranger! What Pleasure, what Triumph is equal to that of
the Perfect Man, when he Glories in God, and makes his boast of him all day
long? When he rejoices in the Lord with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory? When
being filled with all the fullness of God, transported by a Vital Sense of
Divine Love, and strengthened and exalted by the mighty Energie of the Spirit
of Adoption, he maintains a Fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus?
All Communion with God, consists in this Joy of Love and Assurance, and has a
taste of Heaven in it. Let the most Fortunate, and the wisest Epicurean too,
Ransack all the Storehouses and Treasures of Nature, let him Muster together
all his Legions of Pleasures, and let him, if he can, consolidate and
incorporate them all, and after all, being put into the Scale against This
alone, they will prove lighter then Vanity it self. To be the Care, the
Delight, the Love, of an Almighty God, to be dear to him, who is the Origin
and Fountain of all Perfections, Lord! What Rest, what Confidence, what Joy,
what Extacy, do these thoughts breed! How sublime, how lofty, how delightful
and ravishing are those Expressions of St. John! 1 Epist. 3.1, 2. Behold, what
manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God: Therefore the World knows us not, because it knew him not.
Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be; but we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. And those again of the Psalmist, I am continually with thee,
thou do hold me by my right hand: Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and
afterward receive me into Glory, Psalm. 73.23, 24. But I will descend to cooler
and humbler Pleasures. It is no small Happiness to the Perfect Man, that he is
himself a proper Object of his own Complacency. He can reflect on the Truth and
Justice, the Courage and Constancy, the Meekness and Charity of his Soul, with
much Gratitude toward God, and Contentment in himself. And this surely he may
do with good Reason: For the Perfections of the Mind, are as justly to be
preferred before those of the Body, as those of the Body before the Gifts of
Fortune: nor is it a Matter of small importance to be pleased with one's self.
For grant any one but this, and he can never be very Uneasy or very Miserable:
but without this, there are very few things which will not disturb and
discompose; and the most obliging Accidents of Life will have no relish in
them. It Is true, Folly and Vanity does sometimes create a self-Complacency in
the Sinner; why, even then, it is a pleasing Error. But there is as much
difference between the Just and Rational Complacency of a wise Man in himself,
and the mistaken one of a Fool, as there is between the false and fleeting
Fancies of a Dream, and the solid satisfactions of the Day. This will be very
manifest upon the slightest View we can take of those Actions, which are the
true Reason of the good Man's Satisfaction in himself, and render his Conscience
a continual Feast to him.

It is commonly said, that Virtue is its own reward: and though it must be
acknowledged, this is a reward which is not sufficient in all Cases, nor great
enough to vanquish some sorts of Temptations, yet there is a great deal of
Truth and Weight in this saying. For a state of Virtue is like a state of
Health, or Peace, of Strength and Beauty; and therefore desirable on its own
account. And if Pleasure, properly speaking, be nothing else, but the agreeable
Exercise of the Powers of Nature about their proper Objects; and if it be then
absolute and complete, when these Powers are raised, and the Exercise of them
is free and undisturbed, then certainly Virtue which is nothing else but the
Perfect Action of a Perfect Nature, as far as the One and the Other, may be
admitted in this state of Mortality, must be a very considerable Pleasure. Acts
of Wisdom and Charity, the Contemplation of Truth, and the love of Goodness,
must be most natural and delightful exercise of the Mind of Man: and because
Truth and Goodness, are Infinite and Omnipresent, and nothing can hinder the
Perfect Man from contemplating the one, and loving the other, therefore does he
in his degree and measure participate of his Self-sufficiency, as he does of
other Perfections of God; and enjoys within himself an inexhaustible spring of
Delight. How many, how various are the Exercises and Employments of the Mind of
Man! And when it is once polished and cultivated, how agreeable are they all to
invent and find out, to illustrate and adorn, to prove and demonstrate, to
weigh, discriminate and distinguish, to deliberate calmly and impartially, to
act with an absolute Liberty, to despise little things, and look boldly on
dangers; to do all things dexterously, to converse with a sweet and yet a manly
Air, in honest and open, yet taking, obliging Language! How delightful are
these things in themselves! How much do they conduce to the service, the beauty
and dignity of Human Life! To these accomplished Minds we owe Histories,
Sciences, Arts, Trades, Laws. From all which, if others reap an unspeakable
Pleasure, how much more the Authors, the Parents of them? And all this puts me
in Mind of one great Advantage which the Perfect Man enjoys above the most
Fortunate Sensualist; which is, that he can never want an Opportunity to employ
all the Vigor of his Mind, usefully and delightfully. Whence it is that
Retirement, which is the Prison and the Punishment of the Fool, is the Paradise
of the Wise and Good.

But let us come at length to that Pleasure which depends upon External
Objects; where, if any where, the Fool and Sinner, must dispute his Title to
Pleasure with the Wise and Good. How many things are there here which force us
to give the Preference to the Wise Man? I will not urge that a narrow, a
private Fortune can furnish Store enough for all the Appetites of Virtue; that
a wise Man need not at any time purchase his Pleasure at too dear a rate; he
need not lie, nor cheat, nor crouch, nor fawn: This is the price of sinful
Pleasure. I will not, I say, urge these and the like Advantages, since the
World thinks it want of Spirit to be content with a little; and want of wit not
to practice those Acts, let them be never so base, by which we may compass
more. I Will only remark these few things. First, the Wise Man's Prospect, is
enlarged. He is like an Artist or Philosopher, which discovers a thousand
Pleasures and Beauties in a Piece, wherein the Idiot can see none: he sees in
all the Works, in all the Providence of God, those Depths, those Contrivances,
which the Fool cannot Fathom; that Order, that Harmony, which the Sinner is
insensible of. Next, the Pleasure of Sense, that is not refined by Virtue,
leaves a stain upon the Mind: it is course and turbulent, empty and vexatious.
The Pleasure of Virtue is like a Stream, which runs indeed within its Banks,
but it runs smooth and clear; and has a Spring that always feeds the Current:
But the Pleasure of Sin is like a Land flood Impetuous, Muddy, and Irregular:
And as soon as it forsakes the Ground it over-flow'd, it leaves nothing behind
it, but slime and filth. Lastly, the Wise Man, forming a true Estimate of the
Objects of Sense, and not looking upon them as his Vltimate end, enjoys all
that is in them, and is not fooled by an Expectation of more. Thus having
considered the Objects of Human Pleasure, two things are plain, first, That the
Perfect Man has many Sources or Fountains of Pleasure, which the Sinner never
tastes of, which he cannot relish, which he is a Stranger to: Next, as to
outward things, that He has even here, many Advantages above the other. But
what is more considerable yet, is,

All the claim the Sinner lays to Pleasure is confined to the Present Moment,
which is extremely short and extremely uncertain, the Time that is Past and to
Come he quits all Pretention to, or ought to do so. As to the time Past, the
thing is self evident: For the Sinner, looking back, sees his Pleasures and
Satisfactions, the Good Man his Trials and Temptations past and gone: The
Sinner sees an end of his Beauty and his Strength; the Good Man of his
Weaknesses and Follies; the one when he looks back is encountered with Sin and
Folly, Wickedness and Shame, the other with Repentance and Good Works; Guilt
and Fear haunt the Reflections of the one, Peace and Hope attend those of the
other. As to the time to come, the Atheist has no Prospect at all beyond the
Grave, the Wicked Christian a very dismal one, the weak and Imperfect a
doubtful one; only the Wise and Perfect an assured, joyful, and delightful one.
And this puts me in mind of that which is the proper Fruit of Perfection, and
the truest and greatest Pleasure of Human Life, that is Assurance, assurance of
the Pardon of Sin, assurance of the Divine Favor, assurance of Immortality and
Glory.

Need I prove, that Assurance is an unspeakable Pleasure? One would think that
to Man who is daily engaged in a Conflict with some Evil or other, it were
superfluous to prove that it is a mighty Pleasure to be raised, though not
above the Assault, though not above the Reach, yet above the Venom and
Malignity of Evils: To be filled with Joy, and Strength, and Confidence; to
ride triumphant under the Protection of the Divine Favor, and see the Sea of
Life, swell and toss it self in vain, in vain threaten the Bark it cannot sink,
in vain invade the Cable it cannot burst. One would think, that to Man, who
lives all his Life long in Bondage for fear of Death, it should be a surprising
Delight to see Death lie gasping at his Feet, Naked and Impotent without Sting,
without Terror: One would finally think, that to Man, who lives rather by Hope
then Enjoyment, it should not be necessary to prove, that the Christian's Hope,
whose Confidence is greater, its Objects more glorious, and its Success more
certain than that of any worldly Fancy or Project, is full of Pleasure; and
that it is a delightful Prospect to see the Heavens opened, and Jesus, our
Jesus, our Prince and Savior, sitting at the Right Hand of God.

Thus I have, I think, sufficiently made out the Subserviency of Perfection to
the Happiness of this present Life, which was the thing proposed to be done in
this Chapter. Nor can I imagine what Objections can be sprung to invalidate
what I have said; unless there be any thing of Color in these two.

1. To reap the Pleasure, will some one say, which you have discrib'd here, it
requires something of an exalted Genius, some Compass of Understanding, some
Sagacity and Penetration. To this I Answer, I grant indeed that some of those
Pleasures which I have reckoned up as belonging to the Perfect Man, demand a
Spirit raised a little above the Vulgar: But the richest Pleasures, not the
most Polished and Elevated Spirits, but the most Devout and Charitable Souls
are best capable of. Such are the Peace and Tranquillity, which arises from the
Conquest and Reduction of all inordinate affections; the satisfaction which
accompanies a sincere and vigorous discharge of Duty, and our Reflections upon
it; the Security and Rest which flows from Self-resignation, and Confidence in
the Divine Protection: And lastly, the Joy that springs from the full assurance
of Hope.

But 2ly, It may be Objected, it is true all these things seem to hang together
well enough in Speculation, but when we come to examine the matter of fact, we
are almost tempted to think, that all which you have said to prove the ways of
Wisdom, ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths, Peace, amounts to no more then
a pretty Amusement of the Mind, and a Visionary Scheme of Happiness. For how
few are there, if any, who feel all this to be truth, and Experiment the
Pleasure you talk of? How few are they in whom we can discover any signs of
this Spiritual joy or fruits of a Divine Tranquillity or Security? I answer, in
a word, The examples of a perfect and mature Virtue are very few; Religion runs
very low, and the Love of God and Goodness in the Bosoms of most Christians
suffers such an allay and mixture, that it is no wonder at all, if so imperfect
a State breed but very weak and imperfect Hopes, very faint and doubtful joys.
But I shall have occasion to examine the force of this Objection more fully,
when I come to the Obstacles of Perfection.

CHAP. V. Of the Attainment of Perfection, Particularly an account of the
Manner by which Man Advances or grows up to it.
I Have in the first, second, and third Chapters explained the Notion of
Religious Perfection. In the fourth Chapter, I have insisted on two effects of
it, Assurance and Pleasure: My method therefore now leads me to the Attainment
of Perfection. Here I will do too things. 1st. I will trace out the several
Steps and Advances of the Christian toward it, and draw up as it were, a short
History of his Spiritual Progress, from the very Infancy of Virtue to its
Maturity and Manhood. 2ly, I will discourse briefly of the Motives and Means of
Perfection.

Of the Christian's Progress toward Perfection.

Many are the Figures and Metaphors by which the Scripture describes this;
alluding one while to the Formation, Nourishment, and Growth of the Natural
man; another while to that of Plants and Vegetables: One while to the dawning
and increasing Light, that shines more and more to the perfect Day. Another
while to that succession of Labors and Expectations, which the Husbandman runs
through from Plowing to the Harvest. But of all the Similes which the Spirit
makes use of to this end, there is one especially that seems to me to give us
the truest, and the liveliest Image of the Change of a Sinner into a Saint. The
Scripture represents Sin as a state of Bondage, and Righteousness as a state of
Liberty; and teaches us, that by the same steps by which an enslaved and
oppressed People arrive at their Secular, by the very same does the Christian,
at his Spiritual Liberty and Happiness.

First then, as soon as any Judgment or Mercy, or any other sort of Call,
awakens and penetrates the Sinner, as soon as a clear Light breaks in upon him,
and makes him see and consider his own state, he is presently agitated by
various Passions according to his different Guilt and Temper, or the different
Calls and Motives by which he is wrought upon: One while Fear, another while
Shame; one while Indignation, another while Hope, fills his Soul: He resents
the Tyranny, and complains of the Persecution of his Lusts; he upbraids himself
with his folly, and discovers a meanness and shamefulness in his Vices, which
he did not reflect on sufficiently before; he is vexed and troubled at the
plagues and mischiefs his Sin and Folly have already procured him, and thinks
he has reason to fear, if he persist, others far more intolerable. Then he
calls to mind the Goodness, the long-suffering of God, the love of Jesus, the
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power; and how distant soever he be from
Virtue, he discerns there is a Beauty and Pleasure in it; and cannot but judge
the Righteous happy. These thoughts, these Travels of the mind, if they be not
strangled in the Birth by a Man's own wilfulness or Pusillanimity, or unhappily
diverted upon some Temptations, do kindle in the Bosom of the Sinner, the
desires of Righteousness and Liberty; they fill him with Regret and Shame, cast
him down, and humble him before God, and make him finally resolve on shaking
off the Yoke. This may be called a state of Illumination; and is a state of
Preparation for, or Disposition to Repentance: Or if it be Repentance it self,
it is yet but an Embrio: To perfect it, it is necessary.

Secondly, That the Sinner make good his Resolutions, and actually break with
his Lusts; he must reject their Solicitations, and boldly oppose their
Commands, he must take part with Reason and Religion, keep a Watch and Guard
over his Soul, and must earnestly labor by Mortification and Discipline, by
Meditation and Prayer to root out Vice, and Plant Virtue in his Soul. This in
the Language of the Prophet is ceasing to do Evil, and learning to do well,
Isa. 1.16, 17. He that has proceeded thus far, though he feel a great Conflict
within, though the Opposition of Lust be very strong, and consequently the
discharge of his Duty very difficult, he is nevertheless in a state of Grace;
but in a state of Childhood too; he is sincere, but far from being Perfect. And
yet this is the state which many continue in, to the end of their Lives, being
partly abused by false Notions, and taught to believe from Romans 7. that there
is no higher or perfecter state; partly entangled and encumbered by some unhappy
circumstances of Life: Or it may be, the Force or Impetus of the Soul, toward
Perfection, is much abated by the Satisfaction of Prosperity, and the many
Diversions and Engagements of a Fortunate Life: But he that will be Perfect
must look upon this state as the beginning of Virtue. For it must be remembered,
that a stubborn and powerful Enemy will not be subdued and totally brought
under in a Moment. The Christian therefore must prosecute this War till he has
finished it; I will not say by Extirpating, but disabling the Enemy. But here I
would have it well observed, that the Reducing the Enemy to a low condition, is
not always effected by an uninterrupted Series of Victories; for seldom is any
so Fortunate, or so Brave, so Wise, or so watchful, as to meet with no Check in
the long Course of a difficult War; it is enough if he be not discouraged, but
instructed and awakened by it. And to prevent any fatal disaster, too Errors
must carefully be avoided. First, a hasty and fond confidence in our selves,
with an overweaning contempt and neglect of the Enemy: And next, all false and
cowardly Projects of Truces and Accommodations: Nor is the sitting down content
with poor and low Seize very far removed from this Latter. This is the
second Stage of the Christian's Advance toward Perfection; and may be called
the state of Liberty. The third and last, which now follows, is the state of
Zeal, or Love, or as Mystic Wrighters delight to call it the state of Union.

The Yoke of sin being once shaken off, the Love of Righteousness, and a
delight in it, is more and more increased: And now the Man proceeds to the last
round in the Scale of Perfection. The Wisdom, Courage, and Vigor of a Convert,
is generally at first employed in subduing his corruptions, in Conquering his
ill Habits, and Defeating his Enemies, in watching over his own Heart, and
guarding himself against Temptations. But this being once done, he is in full
Liberty to pursue the works of Peace and Love. Now he may advance from
necessary to voluntary Acts of Self-denial, which before would have been
putting old Wine into new Bottles, contrary to the Advice of our Master, Mat.
9.17. Now he may enlarge his Knowledge, and exchange the Milk of the Word for
strong Meat, for the Wisdom and the Mysteries of it: Now he may extend his
watchfulness, his care; and whereas they were before wisely, for the most part,
confined to his own safety, he may now, like our Savior, go about doing good,
Act. 10.38. protecting, strengthening, and rescuing his weak Brethren;
propagating the Faith, and enflaming the bosoms of Men with the love of Jesus
and his Truths: Now in a word, he may give himself up to a Life of more exalted
Contemplation, Purity and Charity, which will be natural and easy now, though
it were not so in the beginning. And this Life is accompanied with Peace and
Joy in the Holy Ghost; with Confidence and Pleasure: Now the Yoke of Christ is
easy, and his burden light, now he rejoices with Joy unspeakable, and Hopes
full of Glory, Now it is not so much he that lives, as Christ that lives in him,
For the life which he now leads, is entirely the product of Faith and Love, and
his greatest business is to maintain the Ground which he has got, and to hold
fast the steadfastness of his Hope unto the end.

To render this short account of the growth of Virtue, from its very Seed to
Maturity, the more useful, and to free it from some scruples, which it may
otherwise give occasion to, I will here add two or three Remarks. 1. That the
State and Habit of Perfection, is a different thing from some sudden Flights,
or Efforts of an Extraordinary Passion, and so is the fixed, and established
Tranquillity of the Mind, from some sudden Gusts, and short lived fits of
spiritual Joy. No man attains to the Habits of Virtue and Pleasure but by
degrees; and the natural method and order by which he advances to either, is
that which I have set down. But as to some Sallies of the most pure and exalted
Passions, as to short lived fits of Perfection, as to transcient Tastes, short
and sudden transports of spiritual Pleasure, it is very often otherwise. God
sometimes, either to allure the frailty of a new Convert, or to Fortify his
Resolution against some hazardous Trial, does raise him to an extraordinary
height, by more then usual Communications of his blessed Spirit; and ravishes
him by some Glances, as it were of the Beatifick Vision. Raptures of Love, the
melting tenderness of a pious Sorrow; the Strength of Resolution and Faith, the
Confidence and Exultancy of Assurance, do sometimes accompany some sort of
Christians in the beginnings of Righteousness, or in the state of Illumination.
Where the Conviction is full, the Imagination lively, and the Passions tender,
it is more easy to gain Perfection then to preserve it. When a Profligate
Sinner in the day of God's Power is snatched like a Firebrand out of the Fire,
rescued by some amazing and surprising Call, like Israel by Miracles out of
Egypt, I wonder not, if such a one loves much, because much has been forgiven
him; I wonder not if he be swallowed up by the deepest and the liveliest sense
of Guilt and Mercy; I wonder not, if such a one endeavor to repair his past
Crimes by Heroic Acts, if he make have to redeem his lost time by a zeal and
vigilance hard to be imitated, never to be parllel'd by others. Hence we read
of Judah's Love in the day of her Espousal, Jer. 2.2. And of the first love of
the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.4. as the most Perfect. And in the first times of
the Gospel, when Men were Converted by astonishing Miracles, when the Presence
and Example of Jesus and his Followers, when the Perspicuity and Authority, the
Spirit and Power, the Luster and Surprise of the Word of Life, and Salvation
dazzled, overpowered and transported the Minds of Men, and made a thorough
change in a moment; and when again, no man professed Christianity, but he
expected by his Sufferings and Martyrdom to seal the truth of his Profession, I
wonder not if Virtue ripened fast under such miraculous Influences of Heaven,
or if Assurance sprung up in a moment from these bright proofs of an unshaken
Integrity. But we, who live in colder Climates, who behold nothing in so clear
and bright a Light as those happy Souls did, must be content to make shorter
and slower Steps toward Perfection, and satisfy our selves with a natural,
not miraculous Progress. And we, whose Virtues are so generally under-grown,
and our Trials no other then common ones, have no reason to expect the Joys of
a Perfect Assurance, till we go on to Perfection.

2ly, As Perfection is a work of time, so is it of great Expense and Cost too,
I mean, it is the effect of much Labor and Travel, Self-denial and
Watchfulness, Resolution and Constancy. Many are the Dangers, which we are to
encounter through our whole Progress toward it. Why else are we exhorted, to
learn to do good? To perfect Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1, 2. To be
renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, from day to day? Ephesians. 4.23. To watch, stand
fast, to quit us like Men, to be strong? 1 Cor. 16.13. To take to us the whole
Armor of God that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, and
when we have done all, to stand, Ephesians. 6.11.13. To use all diligence to make our
calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. and such like? Nay, which is very
remarkable, these and the like Exhortations were addressed to Christians in
those times, which had manifold advantages above these of ours. If I should
say, That the Spirit of God, the Sanctifying Grace of God, was then power'd
forth, in more plentiful measures then ever after, not only Scripture, as I
think, but Reason too, would be on my side. The Interest of the Church of
Christ required it; Sanctity being as necessary as Miracles to Convert the Jew
and the Gentile. But besides this, the then wonderful, and surprising Light of
the Gospel, the Presence of Jesus in the Flesh, or of those who had been
Eyewitnesses of his Glory, a crowd of wondrous Works and Miracles, the
expectation of terrible things, Temporal and Eternal Judgments at the door; and
an equal expectation of Glorious ones too: All these things breaking in, beyond
expectation, upon a Jewish and Pagan World, overwhelmed before by thick
darkness, and whose abominations were too notorious to be concealed, and too
detestable to be excused or defended, could not but produce a very great and
sudden change. Now therefore, if in these times, many did start forth in a
moment fit for Baptism, and Martyrdom, if many amongst these were suddenly
changed, justified and crowned, I wonder not; this was a day of Power, a day of
Glory wherein God asserted Himself, exalted his Son, and rescued the World, by
a stretched out Hand. I should not therefore from hence be induced to expect
any thing like at this day. But yet if notwitstanding all this, Christians in
those happy times, amidst so many Advantages, stood in need of such
Exhortations, what do not we in these Times? If so much Watchfulness, Prayer,
Patience, Fear, Abstinence, and earnest Contention became them, when God as it
were bowed the Heavens and came down, and dwelt amongst Men, what becomes us in
those days, in the dregs of time, when God stands as it were aloof off, to see
what will be our latter end, retired behind a Cloud, which our Heresies and
Infidelities, Schisms and Divisions, Sins and Provocations, have raised? To
conclude, he that will be Perfect must not sit like the Lame Man by Bethesdah's
Pool, expecting till some Angel come to cure him; but like our Lord, he must
climb the Mount, and Pray; and then he may be transformed, he may be raised as
much above the Moral Corruption of his Nature by Perfection, as our Savior
was, above the Meanness and Humility of his Body, by his Glorious
Transfiguration. These two Observations are of manifold use. For many expect
Pleasure when they have no right to it; they would reap, before Virtue be grown
up and ripened; and being more intent upon the Fruit of Duty, then the
discharge of it, they are frequently disappointed and discouraged. Others there
are, who mistaking some fits and flashes of Spiritual Joy for the Habitual
Peace and Pleasure of Perfection, do entertain too early Confidences, and
instead of perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, they decline, or it may be,
fall away through Negligence and Security; or which is as bad, the Duties of
Religion grow tasteless and insipid to them for want of that Pleasure which
they ignorantly or presumptuously expect should constantly attend 'em: And so
they are disheartened or disgusted, and give back; which they would never do,
if they did rightly understand, that Perfection is a work of time, that a
settled Tranquillity, an Habitual Joy of Spirit, is the Fruit only of Perfection,
and that those short Gleams of Joy, which break in upon new Converts, and
sometimes on other imperfect Christians, do depend upon extraordinary
Circumstances, or are peculiar Favors of Heaven. Lastly, there are many, who
have entertained very odd Fancies about the Attainment of Perfection; they talk
and act as if Perfection were the Product, not of Time and Experience, but an
Instant; as if it were to be infused in a moment not acquired; as if it were a
mere Arbitrary Favor, not the Fruit of Meditation and Discipline? It Is true,
it cannot be doubted by a Christian, but that Perfection derives it self from
Heaven; and that the Seed of it, is the Grace of God: Yet it is true too, and
can as little be doubted by any one who consults the Gospel, and the Experience
of the best Men, that we must watch, and pray, and contend, labor, and
persevere, and that long too, e're we can attain it. And whoever fancies
himself, rapt up into the third Heaven on a sudden, will find himself as
suddenly led down to the Earth again; if he do not use his utmost diligence to
fortify his Resolutions, to cherish the Newborn Flame, and to guard and
improve his Virtues.

3ly, It may be Objected against the account I have given of the growth of
Virtue, that when I come to the Maturity of it, my Colors are too bright, my
Strokes too bold, and the Form I have given it too Divine. For you discribe it,
will one say, as if Man, now grown Perfect, had nothing to do, but to enjoy
God, and himself; as if he were already entered into Rest, and did actually sit
down with Christ in Heavenly places: as if in a word, Virtue were no longer his
task, but Pleasure; as if he had nothing to do, but to rejoice continually,
nothing further to press after, nothing to combat, nothing to contend with:
Whereas the Fathers generally, and all Judicious Modern Writers seem to place
Perfection in nothing higher, then in a perpetual Progress toward it; they
look upon Life as a perpetual warfare, and utterly deny any such Height or
Eminence as is raised above Clouds and Storms, above Troubles and Temptations.
But to this, I have several things to say, which will clear my sense about this
Matter, and dispel all Objections. First, I have described the last Stage of
the Christian's spiritual Progress, which I call a state of Zeal, and in which
I suppose the Christian to commence Perfect; this I say, I have described in
the same manner, and, as near as I could in the same words, which the Scripture
does. Secondly, I do not pretend any where to assert, that there is any state
in this Life, raised above Trials and Temptations. Alas! The most Perfect Man,
will find it work enough, to make good the Ground he has gained, and maintain
the Conquest he has won; much watchfulness and labor, much humility and fear,
and many other Virtues are necessary to Perseverance in a state of Perfection.
Thirdly, As the World goes now, and indeed ever did, Perfection is a state we
arrive at very late; and all the way to it, full of Labor and Travel, full of
Dangers and Difficulties; so that upon this account, the Life of Man may well
enough be said to be a perpetual Warfare. But Fourthly, I do by no means
affirm, that the Perfect Man is incapable of Growth and Improvement. Of this I
shall have occasion to unfold my sense more fully afterward. In the mean time
I cannot forbear observing here, that there is a great difference between the
growth of an Imperfect and a Perfect Christian; for supposing Grace to be
always increasing, and the very Maturity of Virtue to admit of Degrees, yet the
marks and distinctions of such different Degrees are so nice and delicate, that
the Advances of the Perfect Man are scarcely perceptible to himself, without
the closest and strictest Enquiry: Much less can they fall under the
Observation of others. The first Change of a Sinner from Darkness to Light,
from Vice to Virtue, from an aversion for God and Goodness to a Sincere, though
not a Perfect Love of both, is very palpable: So again, the change from a state
of weakness and inconstancy, to one of strength; of conflict and difficulty, to
one of ease and liberty; of fear and doubt, to one of confidence and pleasure,
is little less evident and sensible. But the several degrees of growth
afterward, the improvements, whatever they be, of a Mature state, are of
another Nature, not consisting in a Change, but Adition; and that made
insensibly. Here therefore, the Perfect Man, in order to maintain the Peace and
Pleasure of his Mind, need not enter into a Nice and Scrupulous Examination of
the Degrees and Measures of his Virtues; it is sufficient that he make good his
Post, it is enough if he follow the advice of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.58. If he be
steadfast and unmovable, and always abounding in the Works of the Lord.

CHAP. VI. Of the Means of Perfection.
SHould I insist particularly, on every one of the Means or Instruments of
Perfection, it would lead me through the whole Systeme of Religion; it would
oblige me to treat of all the Articles of our Faith, and all the Parts of Moral
Righteousness. For the Virtues of the Gospel do all afford mutual support and
nourishment to one another; and mutually Minister to their own growth and
strength. And Prayer and the Lord's Supper, not to mention Meditation,
Psalmody, Conversation, Discipline, are founded upon the belief of all the
Mysteries of our Religion; and consist in the Exercise of almost all Christian
Graces, as Repentance, Faith, Hope, Charity: But this would be an endless task.
I purpose therefore, here only to lay down some few General Observations, which
may serve for directions in the use of Gospel Means, point out the End we are
to aim at, and enable us to reap the utmost Benefit from them. These
Observations are.

1. The Practice of Wisdom and Virtue is the best way to improve and strengthen
both.

2. The Two general and immediate Instruments, as of Conversion, so of
Perfection too, are the Gospel and the Spirit.

3. The natural and immediate Fruit of Meditation, Prayer, Eucharist, Psalmody,
and good Conversation, is, the quickening and enlivening the Conscience, the
Fortifying and Confirming our Resolutions, and the raising and keeping up an
Heavenly Frame of Spirit.

4. The immediate Ends of Discipline, are the subduing the Pride of the Heart,
and reducing the Appetites of the Body.

5. Lastly, Some kinds of Life are better suited and accommodated to the great
Ends of Religion and Virtue, than others. I will very briefly Illustrate each
of these Observations, and suggest from them such Rules, as I shall judge most
serviceable to promote Perfection.

. 1. The Practice of Wisdom and Virtue, is the best way to improve and
strengthen both. This is a Proposition almost Self-evident: For besides that,
it is acknowldg'd on all Hands, that the frequent repetition of single Acts of
Virtue, is the natural way to arrive at an Habit of it; the Practice of Virtue
gives a Man great boldness toward God, mingles Joy and Pleasure in all his
Addresses to him, purifies and enlightens the Mind; and entitles him to more
plentiful Measures of Grace, and higher degrees of Favor. If ye continue in my
Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed; and ye shall know the Truth, and the
Truth shall make you free, Joh. 8.31.3, To him that has, shall be given, and
he shall have more abundance, Mat. 13.12. If this be so, as undoubtedly it is,
it is plain, That we ought not to be fond of such a Solitude or Retirement, as
cuts off the opportunity of many Virtues, which may be daily practiced in a
more public and active Life. The true Anchorite or Hermit, was at first,
little better then a Pious Extravagant: I will not say how much worse he is
now. Meditation and Prayer are excellent Duties, but Meekness and Charity,
Mercy and Zeal are not one jot inferior to them. The World is an excellent
School to a good Christian; the Follies and the Miseries, the Trials and
Temptations of it, do not only exercise and employ our Virtue, but cultivate
and improve it: They afford us both Instruction and Discipline, and naturally
Advance us on toward a solid Wisdom, and a well-setled Power over our selves.
It Is our own fault if every Accident that befalls us, and every one whom we
converse with, do not teach us somewhat; occasion some wise Reflection; or
enkindle some Pious Affection in us. We do not reflect on our Words and
Actions, we do not observe the motions of our own Hearts as diligently as we
ought; we make little or no Application of what we see or hear, nor learn any
thing from the Wisdom, and the Virtue, the Folly and the Madness of Man, and
the consequences of both: And so, we neither improve our Knowledge, nor our
Virtue, but are the same to day we were yesterday, and Life wastes away in
common Accidents, and customary Actions, with as little alteration in us, as in
our Affairs: Whereas, were we mindful, as we ought of our true Interest, and
desirous to reap some spiritual Benefit from every thing, the Virtues of Good
Men would enkindle our Emulation, and the Folly and Madness of Sinners would
confirm our abhorrence for Sin; from one we should learn Content, from another
Industry, here we should see a Charm in Meekness and Charity, there in
Humility; in this Man we should see Reason to admire Discretion, and Command of
himself, in that Courage and Constancy, Assiduity and Perseverance: Nor would
it be less useful to us, to observe, how Vanity exposes one, and Peevishness
torments another; how Pride and Ambition embroil a third, and how hateful and
contemptible Avarice renders a fourth; and to trace all that variety of ruin,
which Lust, and Prodigality, Disorder, and Sloth leave behind them.

And as this kind of Observations will fill us with solid and useful Knowledge,
so will a diligent attention to the Rules of Righteousness, and discretion in
all the common and daily actions of Life, enrich us with true Virtue, Religion
is not to be confined to the Church, and to the Closet, nor to be exercised
only in Prayers and Sacraments, Meditation and Alms; but every where, we are in
the Presence of God, and every Word, every Action, is capable of Morality. Our
Defects and Infirmities, betray themselves in the daily Accidents and the
common Conversation of Life; and here they draw after them very important
Consequences; and therefore here they are to be watched over, regulated and
governed, as well as in our more solemn Actions. It Is to the Virtues or the
Errors of our common Conversation and ordinary Deportment, that we owe both our
Friends and Enemies, our good or bad Character abroad, our Domestic Peace or
Troubles; and in a high degree, the improvement, or depravation of our Minds.
Let no Man then, that will be Perfect or Happy, abandon himself to his Humors
or Inclinations in his Carriage toward his Acquaintance, his Children, his
Servants: Let no Man, that will be Perfect or Happy, follow Prejudice or
Fashion in the common and customary Actions of Life: But let him assure
himself, that by a daily endeavor to conform these more and more to the
excellent Rules of the Gospel, he is to train up himself by degrees to the most
absolute Wisdom, and the most Perfect Virtue, he is capable of. And to this end
he must first know himself, and those he has to do with, he must discern the
proper Season and the just Occasion of every Virtue; and then, he must apply
himself to the acquiring the Perfection of it by the daily Exercise of it, even
in those things, which, for want of due Reflection, do not commonly seem of any
great Importance. To one, that is thus disposed, the dullness or the carelessness
of a Servant, the stubbornness of a Child, the soureness of a Parent, the
Inconstancy of Friends, the Coldness of Relations, the Neglect or Ingratitude
of the World, will all prove extremely useful, and beneficial; every thing will
instruct him, every thing will afford an opportunity of exercising some Virtue
or another; so that such a one shall be daily learning, daily growing better
and wiser.

. 2. The two great Instruments, not of Regeneration only, but also of
Perseverance and Perfection, are the Word and the Spirit of God. This no Man
doubts, that is a Christian: And therefore I will not go about to prove it: Nor
will I at present discourse of the Energy and Operation of the one, and the
other; or examine what each is in its self, or wherein the one differs from the
other. It Is abundantly enough, if we be assured, that the Gospel and the
Spirit, are proper and sufficient Means to attain the great Ends, I have
mentioned, namely, our Converversion and Perfection. And that they are so, is
very plain from those Texts, which do expressly assert, That the Gospel contains
all those Truths, that are necessary, to the clear Exposition of our Duty, or
to the moving and obliging us to the Practice of it. And that the Spirit
implies a supply of all that supernatural strength, be it what it will, that is
necessary to enable us, not only to will, but to do, that which the Gospel
convinces us to be our Duty. Such are, Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death, 2 Timothy
3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. That
the Man of God may be Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Cor.
12.9. And he said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee, for my Strength is
made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my
Infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest upon me, 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are
kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in
the last time? It Is needless to multiply Texts on this occasion, otherwise
'twere very easy to show; That all things necessary to Life and Godliness, are
contained in the Word and Spirit; that what ever is necessarily to be wrought
in us to prepare us for, or entitle us to, Eternal Salvation, is ascribed to
the Gospel and the Spirit. This truth then being unquestionable, that the
Gospel and the Spirit are the two great Instruments of Perfection; we may from
hence infer two Rules, which are of the most Universal use, and of the most
powerful efficacy in the pursuit of Perfection. 1. We cannot have too great a
Value, too great a Passion for the Book of God; nor fix our Thoughts and Hearts
too earnestly upon the truths of it. We must imitate the Thessalonians, in
behalf of whom St. Paul thanks God, because when they received the Word of God
which they heard of him, they received it not as the Word of Men, but as it is
in Truth, the Word of God, 1 These. 2.13. that is, we must entertain the Gospel,
as that, which has Infallible Truth in all its Doctrines, uncontrollable
Authority in all its Precepts, a Divine Certainty in all its Promises and
Threats, and a Divine Wisdom in all its Counsels and Directions: And he that
thus believes, will certainly find the Gospel to work effectually in him, as it
did in the Thessalonians. What Light and Beauty will he discern in all its
Descriptions of our Duty! What force in all its persuasions! what Majesty, what
Dignity, what Life, what Power, what Consolation, what Support! In one word,
what Heavenly Virtue will he discern in each part of it, and what vast and
unfathomable Wisdom in the whole Composure and Contrivance of it! How will he
then admire it, how will he love it, how will he study it, how will he delight
in it! How will he be transported by the Promises, and awed by the Threats of
it! How will he be pierced and struck through by those Exaggerations of Sin,
and Captived and Enamored by those lively and Divine Descriptions of Virtue he
meets in it! How will he adore the Goodness of God, conspicuous in our
Redemption! How will he be inflamed with the love of Jesus, and be amazed at
his Condescension and Humility! This and much more is the natural effect of our
receiving the Gospel as we ought, and pondering the truths of it with devout
and incessant Meditation. This the Royal Psalmist was abundantly sensible of,
Thy word have I hid in my Heart; that I might not sin against thee, Psalm.
119.11. Thou through thy Commandments has made me wiser then mine Enemies: for
they are ever with me. I have more understanding then all my teachers: for thy
Testimonies are my Meditation, ver. 98. To which I might add many other verses
out of that Psalm, containing the various and mighty Effects of the Word of
God. Nor will any one think, that I attribute too much to the study of this
Word of Life, who shall consider that it is one of the great Works of the Holy
Spirit, to incline our Hearts to the Testimonies of God, to write his Laws in
our Hearts, to dispose us to attend to revealed Truths; and in one word, to fix
our Minds and Thoughts upon them. 2. Since the Spirit together with the Gospel,
is a joint Principle of Regeneration and Perfection, it is manifest, That we
ought to live in a continual dependence upon God. He must be our Hope and
Confidence in the Day of Trial: He must be our Praise and Boast in the Day of
Victory, and in the Day of Peace: when we lie down, and when we rise up, we
must say with the Psalmist, it is thou Lord that make me dwell in safety,
Psalm. 1.4. We must look upon our selves as surrounded by Enemies, and besieged
by Spiritual Dangers, as David was by Temporal: And as he in the one, so must
we in the other, expect Strength and Salvation from Him. Through God we shall
do valiantly; for he it is that shall tread down our Enemies, Psalm. 60.12. Many
Nations compass me round about; but in the name of the Lord I will destroy
them. And when we have conquered Temptations, and routed the Powers of
Darkness, we must ascribe all, not to our own strength, nor to our own
watchfulness, but to the Grace and the Power of God. If the Lord himself had
not been on our side: Now may Israel say, if the Lord himself had not been on
our side, when the Legions of Hell combined with the World and Flesh against
us, they had swallowed us up alive, Psalm. 124.1, 2, 3. Now many will be the
happy effects of this dependence upon God: we shall be passionately desirous of
his Presence, of his Grace and Favor; we shall dress and prepare our Souls, we
shall awaken and dispose all our Faculties to receive him; we shall ever do the
things that may invite and prevail with him to abide with us; we shall be
apprehensive of his forsaking us, as the greatest Evil that can befall us. Lift
up your Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting Doors; and the
King of Glory shall come in, awake O my Soul, raise thy self above this World
and Flesh, that thou may be fit for the King of Glory to dwell in thee: who
is the King of Glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle;
that Holy Spirit that subdues our Enemies, that strengthens us with might, and
fills us with Courage and Holy Alacrity, Psalm. 24.7, 8. Nor does the Psalmist
prepare his Soul for God by Meditation only, and Spiritual Recollection, and
Soliloquies, but by a careful and circumspect Regulation of all his Actions,
Psalm. 101.2, 3. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: O when will thou
come unto me? I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart. I will set no
wicked thing before mine Eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside, it
shall not cleave to me. And how earnestly does he pray against God's forsaking
him? Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away from thy Presence, and take not thy Holy
Spirit from me. The Result of all this, must needs be Steadfastness and Growth
in Holiness and Goodness. For first, This is the natural influence of such a
dependence upon God; it places us as always before Him, and makes us walk
humbly and circumspectly as becomes those, that are awed by the Presence of so
Holy a Majesty: I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my
right hand, I shall not be moved, Psalm. 16.1. Secondly, we cannot doubt but
that God will plentifully bestow his Grace on those, who thus rely upon him.
For where can He bestow it with more Advantage to his Glory, or to the
Propagation of Holiness; both which are so dear to him? Who is a Subject more
capable of it, or who can be better entitled to it, then he who thus depends
upon God? As he begs it Humbly, and receives it Thankfully; so he will Husband
it Carefully, and employ it Zealously.

. 3. In Prayer, Meditation, and other Instrumental duties of Religion, we are
to aim at one or all of these three things. 1. The Quickening and Enlivening the
Conscience. 2. The Confirming and Strengthening our Resolutions of obedience. 3.
The Raising and Keeping up Holy and Devout Affections. Great is the benefit of
each of these: Tenderness of Conscience will keep us, not only from Evil, but
every appearance of it; increase of Spiritual Strength, will render us
steadfast and unmovable in all the Works of God; and Holy Passion will make us
abound in them. To spiritual Passion we owe the Zeal and Pleasure; to spiritual
Strength, or Liberty, the Constancy and Uniformity, of an Holy Life; and both
Strength and Passion are generally owing to a Tender and Enlightened
Conscience. For while the Conscience preserves a quick and nice sense of Good
and Evil, all the great Truths of the Gospel will have their proper Force, and
natural Efficacy upon us. These then are the Genuine Fruits of Meditation, the
Eucharist, Psalmody, and suchlike: If they do not add Life and Light to the
Conscience, if they do not augment our Strength, nor exalt our Passions, if
they do not increase our detestation of Sin, and our Love to God and Goodness;
if they do not quicken and excite Devout Purposes, if they do not engage and
refresh the Soul by Holy Joy and Heavenly Pleasure; if, I say, they do not in
some degree or other promote these things, we reap no benefit at all from them,
or we can never be certain that we do. But though the Ends I have mentioned, be
of this great use to all, and consequently all are obliged to aim at them, yet
may the different Defects and Imperfections of different Christians, render one
of these Ends more necessary then another: And by consequence, it will be
Wisdom, more immediately and directly to intend and pursue that. For Example,
if a Man's Temper be such, that his Passions do soon kindle, and soon die
again; that he is apt to Form wise and great Projects, and as unapt to
accomplish any thing; in this Case, it will be his Duty to aim especially at
the increase of Strength. But if on the other hand, a Man's Temper be Cold and
Phlegmatic, Slow and Heavy; it is but fit, that he should particularly apply
himself to the awakening and exciting Devout Affections in his Soul. For as
excellent purposes do often miscarry for want of Constancy and Firmness of
Mind: so Steadiness and Firmness of Mind, does seldom effect any great matter,
when it wants Life and Passion to put it into Motion. Again, if one's past Life
has been very Sinful, or the present be not very Fruitful, it will behove such
a one to increase the Tenderness of Conscience, to add more Light and Life to
its Convictions; that by a daily Repetition of Contrition and Compunction, he
may wash off the Stain, or by the Fruitfulness of his following Life, repair
the Barrenness of that Past. Having thus in few words, both made out the
Usefulness of those three Ends I proposed to a Christian in the performance of
Instrumental duties of Religion, and showed in what Cases he may be obliged to
aim more immediately at one then another, I will now enquire, and that as
briefly as I can, how these three Ends may be scured and promoted.

1st. Of Tenderness of Conscience, or the full and lively Convictions of it.

To promote this, the first thing necessary is Meditation. No Man, who
diligently searches and studies the Book of God, can be a Stranger, to himself,
or to his Duty. Not to his Duty; for this Book reveals the whole Will of God in
clear and full Terms, it gives us such Infallible Characters of Good and Evil,
Right and Wrong, as render our Ignorance or Error inexcusable: It points out
the great Ends of Life so plainly, and conducts us to them by such general and
unerring Rules, that there is no variety of Circumstances can so perplex and
ravel our Duty, but that an honest Man by the help of this, may easily discover
it. For this Reason it is, that the Word of God is called Light, because it does
distinguish between Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, and like a Lamp does
manifest the Path which we are to choose, and disperses that Mist and Darkness,
with which the Lust of Man, and the Subtilty of Hell has covered it. And for
this Reason it is, that the Good have such a Value, and the Wicked, such an
Aversion for the Book of God. For, every one that does Evil hates the Light,
neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved. But he that
does Truth comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest, that they
are wrought in God, Joh. 3.20, 21. Nor can he that Studies the Word of God, be
a Stranger to Himself any more then to his Duty. For this Light ransacks all
the Recesses of the Soul; it traces all its Affections back to their first
Springs and Sources; it lays open all its Desires and Projects, and strips its
most secret Purposes of all their Disguise: For the word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two Edged Sword; piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow; and is a discerner of
the thoughts, and intents of the Heart, Heb. 4.12. In a word, if we would
preserve the Conscience quick, and sensible, we must be daily conversant in the
Book of God. For this commands with that Authority, instructs with that
clearness, persuades with that Force, reproves with that Purity, Prudence, and
Charity, that we shall not easily be able to resist it; it describes
Righteousness and Sin in such true and lively Colors, proclaims Rewards and
Punishments in such powerful and moving Language, that it rouses even the Dead
in Sin, penetrates and wounds the stupid and obdurate.

To Meditation we must add Prayer. For this is a very proper and essential
Means to refresh and renew in the Soul, the Hatred of Sin, and Love of
Goodness; and to improve those Impressions which Meditation has made upon it.
We cannot easily put up Petitions to God with Confidence, unless we do the
things that please him; for our Hearts will misgive us, and our very Petitions
will reproach us: And the mere Thought of entering more immediately into the
Presence of God, does oblige us to a more careful Trial and Examination of our
Actions. For God being not only Omniscient but Just and Holy too, we can no
more flatter our selves with the Hope of Pardon for any Sin into which we are
betrayed by fondness or negligence, then we can imagine him Ignorant of it. But
this is not all; we are to pray, that God would enable us to search out and
discover our own Hearts, Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me O God, and know my Heart:
Try me and know my Thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead
me in the way Everlasting. And if we do this sincerely, God will undoubtedly
grant our Requests; and will lay open to us all our present Defects, and
Infirmities, and show us how far short we come of the Glory of God: that
Perfection of Holiness and Happiness, which many Eminent Saints actually
arrived at upon Earth. And we way be sure, that Light which breaks in upon our
Mind with this Brightness, will not suffer any latent Corruptions to continue
undiscovered; nor permit us to forget the Stains and Ruins, which the Sins of
our past Life, have left behind them. Conversation is another way, by which we
learn to know our selves, and by which, Conscience is kept awake, and in its
Vigor. How Convictive, how moving is the Discourse of a Devout and Pious
Friend? When he complains, or when he rejoices, when he relates the History of
his own Experience, when he lets us see the Designs he has Formed, and the
excellent Ends his Soul thirsts after, how does our Heart burn within us? What
variety of Affections does it raise in us, when he makes his remarks on Human
Nature and the World, when he bewails the dishonor of God and the decay of
Religion amongst us, when he relates the misery and misfortune of Sinners, and
observes the particular Sins and Follies that occasioned it? How often does he
hereby provoke us to wise Reflections on our selves? How many new Beauties does
he discover to us in Virtue, how many Deformities in Sin, which had escaped our
Observations? But it is not the Conversation only of my Friend, but his Life
also, from which I derive, or may do so, Instruction and Admonition. The
Perfections of my Friend, are the gentlest and the mildest, and yet the most
awakening Reproofs too of my own Defects; and by the Freshness and Luster of
his Virtue, I discern best the Weakness and the Dimness of my own. How often
have I been moved to turn my Thoughts with some Indignation on my own Heats and
Commotions, while I have admired and blessed the sweetness and the gentleness,
the softness and the calm, very conspicuous in an excellent Friend? And when I
have heard another mention his Nightly Praises, and those Divine Thoughts which
filled the Intervals of his Sleep, and made those Hours that are so burdensome
to some, the most entertaining and delightful parts of his Rest, how have I
been inwardly filled with Confusion and Shame? How have I upbraided and
reproached my self, condemned the sluggishness of my Days, the dullness and the
wanderings of my Soul by Night? And I believe every sincere Man must find
himself thus affected on the like occasions. For in this kind of Reproof, which
I talk of, there is something more of Force and Authority than is to be found
in any other; for the Example of Friends, does not only teach us what we are to
do, but demonstrates also that it may be done. Nor does Virtue any where appear
with so lovely and charming an Air as in a Friend. But after all, amongst all
the benefits we gain by excellent Friendships, we ought not to reckon this as
the least, that it is one, and that an indispensable Office of Friendship, to
admonish and reprove: For the reproofs of Instruction are the Paths of Life,
Prove. 6.23. But then, that we may be capable of this Blessing, we must dispose
our Minds to expect and bear reproof: We must strive after an humble and
teachable temper; and we must invite and encourage our Friends to this kindest
Office; not only by unaffected requests, but also by obeying their advice,
pardoning whatever Infirmity may be interspersed with it, and loving them the
better, as indeed they deserve: For there is scarce any better proof of their
Affection, Prudence, and Courage, which they are capable of giving us.

2ly. A Second End of Instrumental Duties is the Increase of Spiritual
Strength. Now Spiritual Strength consists in the Power and Dominion we have
over our Affections and Actions: and it stands upon two Bases; the Reduction of
Sin, and the Growth of Virtue; whatever does weaken and reduce our propensions
to Sin, whatever promotes the subjection of the Body, adds Power and Authority
to the Mind, and renders Virtue more easy and pleasant. And because Virtues
have a mutual Connection and Dependence upon one another; therefore whatever
promotes any one, promotes all. But especially whatever strengthens our Hope,
or quickens our Fear, or enlarges our Knowledge, and increases our Faith; this
does confirm and establish our Resolution more then any thing else. Faith is
the Root, Fear the Guard, and Hope the Spur of all our Virtues. Faith convinces
us what is our Duty; Fear makes us Impartial, Diligent and Watchful; Hope
resolved, and active in the Prosecution of it. It being thus clear, what our
Spiritual Strength consists in, it will be easy to discern by what means we
are to gain it. But I can here only suggest those Hints and Intimations which
the Reader must upon occasion, as he needs, enlarge and improve. 1. Meditation
is the first thing necessary. We must often survey the Grounds and Foundations
of our Faith; we must consider frequently and seriously the Scripture Topics
of Hope and Fear, such are the Death of Jesus, a Judgment to come, the Holiness
and Justice, and the Omnipresence of God: We must diligently observe the Wiles
and Stratagems of Satan, the Arts and Insinuations of the World and Flesh, and
mark the Progress of Sin from its very beginning to Maturity; and all this with
a particular regard to the Corruption of our own Nature, and the deceitfulness
of our own Hearts. We must often ponder upon the Beauty and Peace of Holiness,
the love of God and of Jesus, the Virtues, sufferings, and Crowns of Martyrs.
And finally, if we will increase in strength, we must practice this duty of
Meditation often, and we must not suffer our selves to be withdrawn from it, or
be prevailed with to intermit it on any slight and trivial pretenses. And
because we are not always Masters of our own Affairs, nor consequently of our
Time, therefore ought we to have ever ready at hand, a good Collection of
Texts, which contain in few words, the Power and Spirit of Gospel Motives, the
Perfection and Beauty of Duties, and the substance of Advice and Counsel: And
to fix these so in our Memory, that they may serve as a Shield for us to
oppose, as our Savior did, against the Darts of the Devil, and as a supply of
excellent and useful Thoughts upon a sudden, so that in all the little
Interruptions of business, and the many little vacancies of the Day, the Mind,
which is an active and busy Spirit, may never want a proper subject to work
upon; much less loose it self in wild and lasie amusements, or defile it self
by vain or Vicious Thoughts. But we must not only take care that Meditation be
frequent, but also that it be not loose and roving. To which end it will be
necessary to Study our selves as well as the Scriptures, and to be intimately
acquainted with the advantages and disadvantages of our Constitution, and our
State; that so in our Meditations on the Scriptures, we may more particularly
have an Eye on those Vices we are most obnoxious to, and those Virtues which
are either more necessary, or more feeble and under-grown.

Next after Meditation must follow Prayer. Great is the Power of Prayer in
promoting Christian Strength and Fortitude; whether we consider its Prevalence
upon God, or its natural Influence upon our selves. If we consider the latter,
what Divine Force and Energy is there in the Confidences of Faith, the Joys of
Hope, the earnest Longings and Desires of Love, the tender Sorrows of
Contrition, the delight of Praises and Thanksgivings, the Adorations and
Self-depressions of a profound Humility, and the Resolutions and Vows of a
perfect Abhorrence of, and Holy Zeal and Indignation against Sin! How do these
things mellow and enrich the Soul? How do they raise it higher and higher above
the Corruption which is in the World through Lust! How do they renew it daily,
and make it a Partaker of the Divine Nature! The Repetition of the same acts
naturally begets an Habit; and Habit is the Strength and Perfection of the
Soul; for it is a disposition ripened and confirmed by Custom. How naturally
then must Prayer fortify the Mind, ripen good Dispositions, or add Strength
and Perfection to good Habits! Since it is nothing else, but a repeated
Exercise of almost all the Graces of the Gospel, Repentance, Faith, Hope,
Charity, and the like: And it ought to be observed, that Prayer gives us a
frequent opportunity of exercising those Virtues, which we should not otherwise
be so often obliged to do. If Secondly, we enquire into the Prevalence of
Prayer with God, we shall have further Reasons yet to resolve, that it is a
most effectual means of increasing our spiritual Strength. What will God deny
to the Prayer of a Righteous Man? He may deny him temporal things, because they
are not good for him: He may refuse to remove a Temptation, because this is
often an occasion of his own Glory and his Servants Reward, but he will never
refuse him Grace to Conquer it. He will no more deny his Spirit to one that
earnestly and sincerely begs it, than the natural Parent will Bread to his
hungry and craving Child. And no wonder, since Grace is as necessary to the
spiritual Life as Bread to the natural, the goodness of God is more tender and
compassionate than any Instinct in Human Nature; and the Purity and Perfection
of God more zealously solicitous for the Holiness and Immortality of his
Children then Earthly Parents can be for a Sickly, perishing Life of theirs.
Thus then it is plain, that Prayer contributes wonderfully to the Strengthening
and Establishing the Mind of Man in Goodness. But then we must remember, that
it must have these two Qualifications; it must be frequent, and incessantly
Importunate. 1. It must be Frequent. I would have this Rule complied with as
far as it may, even in our stated, regular, and solemn Addresses to God. But
because Business, and several Obligations we lie under to the World, do often
press hard upon us, therefore must I give the same Counsel here, which I did
before under the Head of Meditation, that is, to have always ready and
imprinted in our Memory several Texts of Scripture, containing the most weighty
and important Truths, in the most piercing and moving Language; that we may be
able to form these on a sudden into Ejaculations, in which, our Souls may
mount up into Heaven, amidst the Ardours and Transports of Desires and Praises,
as the Angel did, in the Flame of Manoah's Sacrifice. 2. Prayer must be
incessantly Importunate. Importunate it will be, if the Soul be prepared and
disposed as it ought; that is, if it be disengaged from this World, and
possessed entirely with the Belief and earnest Expectation of a better; if it
be humbled in it self, disclaim all Strength and Merit of its own, and rest
wholly on the Goodness and All Sufficiency of God. I add Incessantly in
Conformity to the Parables of our Lord, Luke 11.8. and 18.5. and the (...) of
the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. And whoever considers Human Nature well, and
remembers how soon pious Motions vanish, and how little they effect, will
discern a plain Reason, both for Vehemence and Perseverance in Prayer: For
Vehemence, that the Soul may be deeply impressed by pious Passions; for
Perseverance, that such Impressions may not be effaced and obliterated* Nor let
any one fancy, That Prayer thus qualified has not a better influence upon God
as well as upon our selves: It Is true, God is void of the painfulness and
defects of Human Passions, but not of the Perfection of Divine ones. Woe were
to us, if God were an inflexible, inexorable Deity, and incapable of being
wrought upon by the incessant Importunity of his poor Creatures: Woe were to
us, if the softness and the tenderness of the Divine Nature, did not infinitely
exceed the little resemblances of it in Man. If in a word, God did not abound
in Goodness, Mercy, and Compassion, more easily to be moved and excited than
those Human Passions that bear some Analogy to them. Next to Conversation with
God by Prayer, the Conversation of good Men does wonderfully contribute to the
building us up in Faith and Virtue. How does the Sense and Experience of such
as deserve our esteem and affection, settle and establish our Judgment when
they concur with us? How does their Knowledge enlighten us, their Reason
strengthen our Faith, and their Example inflame us with Emulation. A pious
Friendship renders Religion it self more engaging: It Sanctifies our very
Diversions and Recreations, and makes them minister to Virtue; it minds us when
we are forgetful, supports and encourages us; when we faint and tire, reproves
and corrects us when we give back, and recalls us into the right path, when we
go out of it. This is, or this should be, the business of Conversation, the end
and advantage of Friendship: We should be often talking together of the things
of God, communicating and laying open the state of our Souls, our Fears, our
Hopes, our improvements and defects; we should watch over one another, comfort
and support one another; our Discourse should always minister new warmth, or
new strength to our Holy Faith and Love. But among all the means of Grace,
there is no one does so much corroborate and nourish the Soul of Man as the
Holy Eucharist. How many wise and Impartial Reflections does the Preparation
for it occasion? What unfeigned Humility, and what a profound Awe of the Divine
Majesty, does a previous Self-Examination beget in us? What a tender sense of
the Divine Love does the Contemplation of the whole Mystery enkindle? What
Firmness and Resolution do we derive from fresh Vows and repeated Engagements;
and these offered up with so much Solemnity. And how much, finally is the Habit
of Holiness improved by that spiritual Pleasure, which the sensible Assurances
of Grace and Salvation work in us, by that Awe and Holy Fear which the whole
action leaves behind on our Minds, and the Zeal, Vigilance, and Circumspection
it obliges us to for the time following: Not to mention here, how the
Participation of this Holy Sacrament obliges us to a most solemn Exercise of
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus, of Brotherly Love and
Charity, and the Hope of Immortality and Glory. Here, in a word, we prepare to
meet God, as we would do in Death and Judgment; here we make an open Profession
of our Holy Faith, renounce the World and Flesh, all our sinful or vain
desires; devote our selves to the Service of Jesus; and learn to expect
Happiness from nothing else, but the Merits and the Imitation of his Cross. So
profound is the Wisdom of this Institution, that it evidently speaks God the
Author of it, and proclaims the too common neglect of it in most parts of this
Nation, an in-excusable Sin and Folly.

3. A Third end of Instrumental Duties of Religion, is, the raising and keeping
up Holy and Devout Affections. I know not why Passion is so commonly
undervalued and disparaged in Religion, unless they who thus treat it, mean
nothing by it, but a short-lived and superficial commotion of the Mind, which
leaves no print or relish behind it, and is presently succeeded by Sin and
Folly. Holy Passion is the vigor and strength of the Soul; it is the state and
frame of the Mind when it is thoroughly moved and affected. And therefore to
form to ones self Religion destitute of Passion, is little better than to
content ones self with one that is lazy, lukewarm, and lifeless. And though
there be some Tempers very unapt to be moved, yet it is hard to imagine how even
these can be wrought up to a Resolution, or that Resolution be supported and
continued without their being affected so thoroughly, as to feel either a real
Passion, or something very nearly approaching one. It Is an excellent Frame of
Spirit, when the Soul is easily elevated, and transported into Holy Passion:
And I find that all those Virtues or rather Acts of Virtue which are described
to the Life, and which are by all judged most Perfect, and Lovely, have most of
Passion in them. How warm and Passionate was the Love of David for his God!
What Flame, what vehemence of Desire was he moved by, when he cries out Psalm.
42.1, 2. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after
thee, O God: My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God. What awful
Concussions and Agitations of Spirit did he feel, when he thus describes his
Fear, My Flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments,
Psalm. 119.120. What afflictions of Soul, what tenderness of Heart do we meet
with in the Repentance of St. Peter, when He went forth and wept bitterly! Of
Mary Magdalen, or whoever that Woman in Luke 7. was, when she washed the Feet
of our Savior with her Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of her Head! And
of the Royal Psalmist when he watered his Couch with his Tears, Psalm. 6.6. Nor
were the Pleasures of Assurance less sensible and vehement then the sorrows of
Repentance, when the first Christians rejoiced with Joy unspeakable, and Hopes
full of Glory. Shall I here add that Holy Indignation against Sin, that
vehement desire of making some Reparation for it, which is the effect of Godly
Sorrow, that Zeal and Fervency of Spirit in the Service of God, which is the
highest Character of Perfection it self? Shall I call these Passions? I must
not; for though they have the heat and agitation of Passion, they have in them
the firmness and steadiness of an Habit. And I wish with all my Heart, that all
those other excellent Affections of Soul, which I before named, could be
rendered Natural and Habitual. The nearer we come to this, undoubtedly the
Perfecter. I doubt Mortality is incapable of any such height: But the more
frequent as well as the more vehement and fervent, the better certainly. For
great is the Force and Virtue of Holy Passion: the flame of Love refines our
Nature and Purifies it from all its Dross; the Tears of a Godly Sorrow,
extinguish all our carnal and worldly Lusts, and the Agitations of Fear
preserve the chastity and purity of the Soul. It Is plain then, that our
Religion ought to be animated by Holy Passions, that the more frequent and
natural these grow, the more Perfect we are; that being the most excellent
frame of Spirit, when we are most apt to be sensibly and thoroughly affected by
Divine Truths. By what Means we may attain to this, is now briefly to be
considered. It Is certain, that great and Important, wonderful and glorious
Truths will not fail to affect us, and that thoroughly, unless Lust or
Infidelity have rendered us stupid and impenetrable. And that Gospel Truths are
such, is no doubt at all, let the Conviction be full, the Representation
lively, and the Truth will do its work. It Is for want of such circumstances and
such sensible Notions of an Object as may strike the Imagination; for want of
close and particular Applications, when Divine Truths do not move us. This now
does not only call us to the frequent Meditation of the most Affecting
Subjects, the Majesty and Omnipresence of God; the Sufferings of Christ, Death
and Judgment, Heaven and Hell; but it shows also, how to model and form our
Meditations, that they prove not cold and sluggish. Let the Object of our
Thoughts be described by the most sensible Images or Resemblances, let it be
clad with the most natural circumstances, let it be made as particular as it
can, by fixing its Eye upon us, and pointing its Motion toward us; but above
all, and in the first place, let the Proof of it be clear and strong. Prayer is
an Exercise very apt to move the Passion: The Mind having disengaged it self
from all Earthly and Bodily Affections is prepared for the impression of Truth
and the Spirit of God; it draws nearer into the Presence of God, and the sense
of this sheds an awful Reverence upon it; it has a clearer, calmer and more
serious View of Divine Things, then when it is obscured and disturbed by
worldly Objects. In a word, Meditation is in this Exercise rendered more solemn
and more particular; and when the Holy Fire is kindled in the Soul, it dilates
and diffuses it self more and more, till the strength of Desire, the vehemence
of Holy Love, transcending the weakness of this Mortal Nature, we faint under
the Passions that we cannot bear. The Lord's Supper is an Holy Rite,
wonderfully adapted to raise excellent Passions: Here Christ is, as it were,
set forth Crucified amongst us; we see His Body broken, and His Blood poured
forth; here with a devout Joy we receive and embrace Him by Faith and Love in
those Symbols of His Body and Blood, and Pledges of His Love. The Soul must be
very ill prepared, it must have very imperfect Notions of Sin and Damnation,
the Cross of Christ, Grace and Salvation, which is not sensible of a Crow'd of
Holy Passions springing up in it at this Sacrament. Hymns and Psalms have, by I
know not what Natural Magic, a peculiar Force and Operation upon a pious Mind.
Divine Poetry has a noble elevation of Thoughts it does not devise and
counterfeit Passions, but only vents those which it feels; and these are pure
and lovely, kindled from above. Therefore are all its Characters natural, its
Descriptions lively, its Language moving and powerful; and all is so directly
suited to a Devout Mind, that it presently enters, it, moves, and actuates it,
inspires and informs it with the very Passions it describes. And though all
good Men are not equally moved in this Duty, yet all, I believe, are more or
less moved. It was very much the business of the Prophets, and all of
Prophetic Education; our Lord and his Disciples practiced it frequently; it
was ever a great part of Religious Joy, and one of the greatest Pleasures of
pious Retirement: And I wish from my Heart the esteem of it were revived in our
Days; I persuade my self it would add much to the Warmth and Pleasure of
Devotion, it would contribute to introduce Religion into our Families; and for
ought I know, into our very Recreations and Friendships. And this minds me,
that as I have under every foregoing Head, taken notice of the Advantages of
Conversation, so I should not forget it here. This has a lively influence upon
our Minds, and always kindles in the Soul a gentle heat. And did we but
accustom our selves to entertain one another with Discourse about another
World; did we mingle the Praises of God with the Feasts and Joys of Life, did
we retire to our Country-Houses to contemplate the variety and riches of Divine
Wisdom and Bounty in those natural Scenes of Pleasure which the Country
affords, and did we now and then invite our Friends to join with us in offering
up Halelujahs to God on this account, what Brightness and Serenity, what Calm
and Pleasure, would this diffuse through all our Souls, through all our Days!
To this that I have said touching the exciting Holy Passions, I will only add
one Observation, formed upon those words of the Apostle, Jam. 5.13. Is any
among you afflicted? Let him Pray, is any merry? Let him sing Psalms, That
Religion must be accommodated to Nature, and that devout Passions will soon
shoot up, when they are engrafted upon a Natural Stock. With which I will join
this other, That since we are most affected by such truths as are most
particular, circumstantiated, and sensible, and therefore imprint themselves
more easily and deeply on our imagination; for this Reason, I should recommend
the Reading the Lives of Saints and excellent Persons, were they not generally
writ so, that we have reason to desire somewhat more of the Spirit of Piety in
the Learned, and more of Judgment in the Pious, who have employed their Pens on
this Argument.

. 4. The immediate Ends of Discipline are, the subduing the Pride of the Heart,
and the reducing the Appetites of the Body. By Discipline, I here understand
whatever voluntary Rigours we impose on our selves, or whatever voluntary
Restraints we lay upon our allowed Enjoyments. And when I say that the
Humiliation of the Heart and subjection of the Body are the immediate Ends of
both, I do not exclude any other which may be involved in these, or result from
them. Now, of what Importance these two things are, I need not show. For since
all Sin is distinguished in Scripture into the filthiness of the Spirit and the
Flesh, it is plain, that the Pride of the Heart, and the Lust of the Body, are
the two great causes of all Immorality and Uncleanness. And therefore, these
are the two great Ends which the Wise and Good have ever had in their Eye in
all their Acts of Self-denial and Mortification. This is sufficiently attested
by the Example of David, Psalm. 131. Lord, I am not high minded: I have no proud
looks. I do not exercise my self in great matters; which are too high for me.
But I refrain my Soul, and keep it low, like as a Child that is weaned from his
Mother: Yea, my Soul is even as a weaned Child. And from that other of St.
Paul, 1 Cor. 9.25, 26, 27. And every one that striveth for the Mastery, is
temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we
an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly: So fight I, not as
one that beats the Air: But I keep under my Body, and bring it into
subjection; lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway. Whoever thus mortifies the Pride of the Heart, whoever
thus brings under the Body, will soon find himself truly set free, and Master
of himself and Fortune: He will be able to run the way of God's Commandments,
and to advance on swiftly toward Perfection, and the Pleasure and Happiness
that attends it.

And to attain these blessed Ends, I do not think that we need ensnare our
Souls in the perpetual Bonds of Monastic Vows; I do not think that we are to
expose our selves by any Ridiculous or Fantastic observances: There is, I say,
no need of this; for we may, as often as we shall see fit, retrench our
Pleasures, abate of the Show, and figure of Life; we may renounce our own Wills
to comply with theirs, who cannot so well pretend, either to Authority or
Discretion: And if these things cannot be done in some circumstances without
becoming Fools for Christ, that is, without that Tameness, that Condescension,
that Diminution of our selves which will never comport with the Humors and the
Fashions of the World; here is still the more room for Mortification, and for a
nearer and more eminent Imitation of the Blessed Jesus: Provided still we
decline all Affectation of Singularity; and when we Practice any extraordinary
instance of Self-denial, we be ever able to justify it to Religious and
Judicious Persons by the Proposal of some excellent End. Fasting indeed is
plainly prescribed in Scripture, and though the Obligation to it with respect
to its Frequency and Measure be not the same on all, yet all should some time
or other Practice it, as far as the Rules of Christian Prudence will permit.
And I have often thought, that Fasting should generally consist, rather in
Abstinence from pleasing Meats, than from all; not the Food which nourishes our
strength, but that which gratifies the Palate, ministering most directly to
Wantonness and Luxury.

For the better Regulation of Voluntary Discipline, I propose by way of Advice
three things. 1. I do not think it best to bring our selves under any perpetual
and unalterable ties in any instance of Self-denial: There is a Virtue in
Enjoying the World as well as in Renouncing it; and it is as great an Excellence
of Religion to know how to abound as how to suffer want: Nay what is more, all
voluntary Austerities are in order to give us a Power and Dominion over our
selves in the general course of a prosperous Life; and Lastly, I very much
doubt, when once a Man has long and constantly accustomed himself to any
Rigor, whether it continue to have much of Mortification in it, or whether it
so effectually tend to promote our Spiritual Liberty, as it would if we did
return to it but now and then as we saw occasion. 2. We must not multiply
unnecessary Severities; and that no Man may think more needful than really are,
I observe here, that as there are very few who have not in their Nature very
considerable Infirmities, so are there as few who have not in their Fortune
very considerable Inconveniences: And if they would apply themselves to the
Mastering of both these as they ought, they would stand in less need of the
Discipline of Arbitrary Austerities. There are many things too trifling to be
taken notice of, which yet do prove sufficient to disturb the quiet of most,
and betray them to many Passions and Indecencies: Nay, the weaknesses of good
Men are sometimes fed by Temptations of very little moment. Now to surmount
these Temptations, and to frame and accommodate the Mind to bear the little
shocks and justles, which we daily meet with, without any Discomposure or
Displeasure, is a matter of great use to the Tranquillity of Life, and the
Maturity of Virtue. To be able to bear the Pride of one and the Stupidity of
another; one while to encounter Rudeness, another while Neglect, without being
moved by either; to submit to Noise, Disorder and the Distraction of many
little Affairs, when one is naturally a lover of Quietness and Order, or when
the Mind is intent upon things of Importance; in one word, to digest the
perpetual disappointments which we meet with, both in Business and Pleasure,
and in all the little Projects which not the Elegant and Ingenious only, but
People of all Stations and all Capacities pursue; to suffer all the Humors and
Follies, the Errors, Artifices, Indecencies and Faults of those we have to do
with, with that Temper we ought, that is with a Calmness which proceeds not
from an unconcernment for the good of others, but a just Dominion over our own
Spirits; This is a great Height; and to train our selves up to it daily with
much Patience, Vigilence, and application of Mind is the best Discipline.
Though I do not mean hereby to exclude all voluntary Impositions; for in order
to Master the Evils which we cannot avoid, it may be of good use now and then
to form the Mind by voluntary Trials and Difficulties of our own choosing. 3.
Lastly, we must ever have a care not to loose the Substance for the Shadow, not
to rest in the Means, and neglect the End; being much taken up in Discipline
without producing any Fruits of it. For this is taking much pains to little
purpose; traveling much without making any Progress. But much more must we
take care in the next place, that the Discipline we put our selves upon do not
produce any ill Fruit. To which end, we must carefully observe three things. 1.
That we keep to that Moderation which Spiritual Prudence requires; neither
exposing nor entangling our selves, nor discouraging others by Excesses and
Extravagancies. 2. That our Self-denial never betray us into Pride or
Incharitableness; for if it tempt us to over-rate our selves and despise
others, this is a flat Contradiction to one of the main Ends of Christian
Discipline, which is, the Humiliation of the Heart. 3. That we ever preserve,
nay, increase the Sweetness and Gentleness of our Minds; for whatever makes us
sour and morose, or peevish and unsociable, makes us certainly so much worse:
And instead of begetting in us nearer Resemblances of the Divine Nature, gives
us a very strong tincture of a Divelish one. Athanasius therefore in the Life
of Anthony the Hermit observes, amongst other his great Virtues, That after
Thirty Years spent in a strange kind of retired and solitary Life, (...). He
did not appear to his Friends with a sullen or savage, but with an obliging,
sociable Air: And there is indeed but little reason, why the Look should be
lowering and contracted, when the Heart is filled with Joy and Charity,
Goodness, and Pleasure. A Serene open Countenance, and a cheerful, grave
Deportment, does best suit the Tranquillity, Purity, and Dignity of a Christian
Mind.

. 5. Lastly, Some kinds of Life, are better suited and accommodated to the
great Ends of Religion and Virtue than others. I shall not here enter into an
Examination of the Advantages or Disadvantages there are in the several kinds
of Life with reference to Religion. The settling this and several other things
relating to it was one main design of my last Book. All therefore that I have
here to do is but to make one plain Inference from all that has been advanced
in this Chapter. If Perfection and Happiness cannot be obtained without a
frequent and serious Application of our selves to the Means here insisted on,
then it is plain, that we ought to cast our Lives, if we can, into such a Method
that we may be in a capacity to do this. To speak more particularly and
closely, since Meditation, Prayer, and Holy Conversation, are so necessary to
quicken the Conscience, excite our Passions, and fortify our Resolutions, it
is evident that it is as necessary so to model and form our Lives, that we may
have time enough to bestow on these. For they, whose Minds and Time are taken
up by the World have very little leisure for things of this Nature, and are
very little disposed to them, and as ill qualified for them. As to
Conversation, as the World goes now, it is not to be expected that it should
have in it any relish of Piety, unless between such as have entered into a
close and strict Friendship. But the Worldly Man is a stranger to true
Friendship, it is too sacred, too delicate a thing for a Mind, devoted to the
World to be capable of. A regard to Interest, to some outward Forms and
Decencies; the gratification of some natural Inclination, the necessity of some
kind of Diversion and Enjoyment, may invite him to more Familiarity with some,
than others. But it is hard to believe, that there should be any thing in such
Combinations, of that which is the very Life and Soul of Friendship, a sincere
and undesigning Passion, increased by mutual Confidences and Obligations, and
supported and strengthened by Virtue and Honor. As to Prayer, Men of business
do I doubt oftener read or say Prayers, than Pray; for it is very hard to imagine
that a Soul that grovels perpetually here upon Earth, that is incessantly
Solicitous about the things of this World, and that enters abruptly upon this
Duty without any Preparation, should immediately take Fire, be filled with
Heavenly Vigor, and be transported with earnest and impatient desire of Grace
and Glory. Ah! How hard is it for him who Hungers and Thirsts perpetually after
the profits of this World, to Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness too! If
such Minds as these retain the Belief of a Providence, some awe of God, and
some degree of Gratitude toward Him, it is as much as may reasonably be
expected from them; and may this avail them as far as it can! Lastly, as to
Meditation, how can it be imagined that such whose Minds and Bodies are
fatigued and harrassed by Worldly Business should be much inclined to it, or
well prepared for it? How should these Men form any Notion of a perfect and
exalted Virtue, of devout and Heavenly Passion? What Conceptions can they have
of the Power and Joy of the Holy Ghost, of Poverty of Spirit, or Purity of
Heart, or the Diffusion of the Love of God in our Souls? What Idea's can they
entertain of an Heaven, or of Angelical Pleasure and Beatitude? In a word, the
Religion of Men intent upon this World, when they pretend to any, which too
often they do not, consist especially in two things, in Abstaining from
Wickedness, and doing the Works of their civil Caling; and how far they may be
sensible of higher Obligations I determine not. Good God! What a Mercy it is to
these poor Creatures, that it is the Fashion of their Country, as well as a
Precept of our Religion, to Dedicate one Day in seven to the Service of God and
their Souls! But have I not often taught, that Purity of Intention Converts the
Works of a secular Calling into the Works of God? I have so, it is Universally
taught, it is the Doctrine of the Gospel; and therefore I shall never retract
it; but ah! How hard a thing is it for a Worldly Man to maintain this Purity of
Intention! How hard a thing is it for a Mind eaten up by the Love and Cares of
this World to do all to the Honor of God! Though therefore I cannot retract
this Doctrine, yet the longer I live, the more reason do I see, for qualifying
and guarding it with this Caution: Let no Man that desires to be Saved, much
less that desires to be Perfect, take Sanctuary in Purity of Intention, while
he suffers the Works of his secular Calling to ingross his Soul, and entirely
Usurp his Time. If secular Works exclude and thrust out of doors such as are
properly Religious, it will not be easy to conceive, how the Power of
Godliness should be maintained, how any wise Thoughts, or Heavenly Desires
should be preserved in such Men; or how, finally, those who have utterly given
up themselves to the wisdom of this World, should retain any true value for
those Maxims of the Gospel, wherein consists the true Wisdom, that is from
above. All that I have said against a Life of Business may, with equal or
greater force, be urged against a Life of Pleasure: I mean, that which they
call Innocent Pleasure: The one and the other entangle and ensnare the Mind;
the one and the other leave in it a peculiar relish, which continues long after
the hurry, both of Pleasure and Business is over. But all this while, I would
not have what I have said be extended further, then I design it, to raise
scruples in Virtuous and Good Men, instead of reforming the too eager
Applications of the Earthy to the things of this World.

CHAP. VII. Of Motives to Perfection.
INnumerable are the Motives to Perfection, which offer themselves to any one,
that reflects seriously on this Argument. An hearty endeavor after Perfection
is the best proof of sincerity; the nearest approach to Perfection, is the
nearest approach to the utmost security this Life is capable of. Great is the
beauty and loveliness of an exalted Virtue, great the Honor and Authority of
it; and a very happy Influence it has even upon our Temporal Affairs: And to
this may be added, the Peace and Tranquillity of a wise Mind, sanctified
Affections, and a Regular Life. Besides, the Love of God is boundless, and the
Love of Jesus is so too, and therefore I demand not a lazy, feeble, or unsteady
Virtue; but a strong and vigorous one, a warm and active; such as a true Faith,
great Hopes, and a passionate Love do naturally excite us to. To all this I
might add, that the Spirit of God is always pressing on and advancing, desirous
to communicate himself to us more and more plentifully, if we be not backward
or negligent our selves. But these and many other Enforcements to the duty of
Perfection, should I enlarge on them, would swell this Treatise to an
intolerable bulk. Nor indeed is it necessary; for the 4th Chapter, where I
treat of the Fruits of Perfection, does contain such Motives to it, as are
sufficient to excite in any one that reads them, a most vehement desire and
thirst after it. Here therefore all that I think fit to do, is, to put my
Reader in mind of another Life: In the Glories and Pleasures of which, I need
not prove that the Perfect Man will have the greatest share. This is a Motive,
that must never be out of the thoughts of the Man that will be Perfect; and
that for three Reasons, which I will but just mention.

1. Without another Life, we can never form any true Notion of a Perfect
Virtue. Sociable and Civil Virtues may be supported by Temporal Motives, and
framed and modeled by Worldly Conveniences; but a Divine Virtue must be built
upon a Divine Life, upon a Heavenly Kingdom. The Reason of this Assertion is
plain; the Means must always bear Proportion to the End; where therefore the
end is an Imperfect, Temporal Good, there needs no more then imperfect
unfinished Virtue to attain it; but where the the end is Heavenly and Immortal,
the Virtue ought to be so too. Were there no other Life, the Standard and
Measure of the Good or Evil to be found in Actions, would be their subserviency
to the temporal Good or Evil of this World; and by a necessary consequence, it
would be impossible to prove any higher degrees of Poverty of Spirit, Purity of
Heart, Charity and the like, to be truly Virtue, then what we could prove truly
necessary to procure the Good, or guard us against the Evil, of this Life: And
if so, it is easy to conclude what mean and beggarly kind of Virtues would be
produced from this ground.

2. Without another Life, all other Motives to Perfection will be insufficient.
For though, generally speaking, such is the Contrivance of Human Nature, that
neither the common Good of civil Society, nor the more particular Good of
private Men, can be provided for, or secured, without the practice of sociable
and political Virtues; yet it is certain, that not only in many extraordinary
Cases, there would be no Reward at all for Virtue, if there were not one
reserved for it in another World; but also in most Cases, if there were not a
future Pleasure, that did infinitely outweigh the enjoyments of this Life, Men
would see no Obligation to Perfection. For what should raise them above the
love of this World, if there were no other? Or above the love of the Body, if
when they died they should be no more for ever? And certainly our Minds would
never be able to soar very high, nor should we ever arrive at any Excellence or
Perfection in any Action, if we were always under the influence of the love of
the World, and the Body.

3. A Life to come is alone a sufficient Motive to Perfection. Who will refuse
to endure hardship as a good Soldier of Christ Jesus, who firmly believes that
He is now a Spectator, and will very suddenly come to be a Judge and Rewarder
of his sufferings? How natural is it to run with Patience the Race that is set
before us, to him who has an Eternal Joy, an Eternal Crown, always in his Eye?
And if a Life to come can make a Man rejoice even in suffering Evil, how much
more in doing Good? If it enable him to Conquer in the day of the Churches
Trial and Affliction, how much more will it enable him to abound in all Virtues
in the day of its Peace and Prosperity? How freely will a Man give to the
distressed Members of Christ, who believes that he sees Christ himself standing
by, and receiving it as it were by their Hands, and placing it to his own
account, to be repaid a thousand-fold in the great day of the Lord? How easily
will a Man allay the storms of Passion, and cast away the weapon of Revenge and
Anger, with Indignation against himself, if his Faith do but present him often
with a view of that Canaan, which the Meek in Heart shall inherit for ever? How
Importunately will a Man pray for the Pardon of Sin, whose Sense, whose Soul,
whose Imagination is struck with a dread of being for ever divided from God,
and excluded from the Joys and Virtues of the Blessed? How fervently will a Man
pray for the Spirit of God, for the Increase of Grace, whose Thoughts are daily
swallowed up with the Contemplation of an Eternity; and whose Mind is as fully
possessed of the certainty and the Glory of another World, as of the emptiness
and vanity of this? How natural, finally, will it be to be poor in Spirit, and
to delight in all the Offices of an unfeigned Humility, to that Man who has the
Image of Jesus washing the feet of his Disciples, and a little after Ascending
up into Heaven, always before him?

But I know it will be here Objected, we discern not this Efficacy you
attribute to this Motive. The Doctrine of another Life is the great Article of
the Christian Faith, and it is every where Preached throughout Christendom; and
yet Men generally seem to have as much fondness for this World, as they could
were there no other: They practice no Virtues but such as are Profitable and
Fashionable, or none any further than they are so. To this I answer, though
most act thus, there are many, I hope, very many, who do otherwise; and that
all in general do not, proceeds from want, either of due Consideration, or firm
Belief, of this Doctrine of another Life. First from not Considerating it as we
should. It Is the greatest disadvantage of the Objects of Faith, compared with
those of Sense, that they are distant and invisible. He therefore that will be
Perfect, that will derive any Strength and Virtue from this Motive, must supply
this distance by devout and daily Contemplation; he must fetch the remore
objects of Faith home to him; he must render them as it were present; he must
see and feel them by the strength of Faith, and the force of Meditation; which
if he do, then will his Faith certainly prove a vital and victorious Principle;
then will no Pleasure in this World be able to combat the assured Hopes of an
Heaven, nor any worldly Evil or difficulty sustained for Virtue be able to
confront the Terrors of an Hell. A Second Reason why this Motive does not
Operate as it should, is want of Faith. We doubt, we waver, we stagger, or take
things upon trust; assenting very slightly and superficially to the Doctrine of
another Life, and looking upon good Works rather as not injurious to this World
then serviceable to a better: And then, it is no more wonder that the
unbelieving Christian does not enter into Perfection and Rest, than that the
unbelieving Jew did not: It Is no more wonder, if the word of Life do not profit
the Christian, when not believed by him, then if it do not profit a Pagan, who
has never heard of it. And what is here said of Infidelity, is in its measure
and proportion true when applied to a weak and imperfect Faith. He, therefore
that will be Perfect must daily pray, Lord, I Believe; help thou mine unbelief.
He must daily Consider the Grounds on which the Faith and Hope of a Christian
stand; the express declarations of the Divine Will concerning the future
Immortality and Glory of the Children of God; the demonstrastration of this
contained in the Resurrection of Jesus from the Dead, and his Ascension, and
Session at the Right Hand of God: And to this he may add, the Love of God, the
Merits of Jesus, and the State and Fortune of Virtue in this World. From all
which one may be able to infer the undoubted certainty of another World. The
Sum of all amounts to this; whoever will be Perfect, must daily, I should, I
think, have said, almost hourly ponder the blessedness that attends Perfection
in another Life; he must ponder it seriously, that he may be thoroughly
persuaded of it; he must ponder it often, that the Notions of it may be fresh
and lively in his Soul.

SECT. II. Of the several Parts of Perfection.
WHat the several Parts of Religious Perfection are, will be easily discerned
by a very slight Reflection, either on the Nature of Man, or the general Notion
of Perfection already laid down. If we consider Man, whose Perfection I am
treating of, as it is plain that he is made up of Soul and Body, so it is as
plain that Moral Perfection relates to the Soul, as the chief subject of it,
and to the Body no otherwise then as the Instrument of that Righteousness which
is planted in the Soul. Now in the Soul of Man we find these three things;
Understanding, Will, and Affections: In the Improvement and Accomplishment of
which Human Perfection must consequently consist. And if we enquire wherein
this Improvement or Accomplishment lies, it is a Truth so obvious that it will
not need any proof, that Illumination is the Perfection of the Understanding,
Liberty of the Will, and Zeal of the Affections. If, in the next place, we
reflect upon the Description I have before given of Perfection, nothing is more
evident than that to constitute a firm Habit of Righteousness, three things are
necessary: 1. The Knowledge of our Duty, and our Obligations to it. 2. The
Subduing our Lusts and Passions, that we may be enabled to perform it. Lastly,
not only a free, but warm and vigorous Prosecution of it. In the first of these
consists Illumination; in the second, Liberty; and in the third, Zeal. Upon the
whole then it is evident, both from the Nature of Perfection, and of Man, that I
am now to treat in order of these three things, Illumination, Liberty and Zeal,
as so many Essential Parts of Religious Perfection. Nor must I stop here, but
must to those three unavoidably add Humility: For whether we consider the Sins
of the Perfect Man's past Life, or the slips and defects of his best State; or
whether we consider Man's continual dependence upon God in all respects, but
especially in reference to the Beginning, Progress, and Consummation of his
Perfection; or whether, Lastly, we consider the scantiness, and deficiency, not
only of this or that Man's Perfection in particular, but of Human Perfection in
general, we cannot but conclude, that nothing can become Mortal Man (even
though all the Excellence Human Nature is capable of were United in one) better
then Humility. Humility therefore must begin, and complete, Religious
Perfection; it must accompany the Christian in every Stage of his spiritual
Progress; it must Crown all his Actions, and add that Beauty and Excellence,
that Grace and Luster to all his other Virtues, that is wholly necessary to
render them acceptable to God.

The general Notion of Perfection being thus resolved into its Parts, it is
plain I am now to Discourse of each of these. And what I have to say on each,
ought according to the strict Rules of Method to be comprised within the same
Chapter: But to consult the ease and benefit of my Reader, I shall slight this
Nicety, and distribute my Thoughts into as many Chapters as I shall judge most
convenient for the case and support of the Memory.

CHAP. I. Of Illumination, what it consists in.
THE Method I have set my self, obliges me here to three things.

1. To state the Notion of Illumination, and resolve what it is: 2. To consider
the Fruits of it: And 3. To show how it may be obtained.
. 1. What it is. It happens in the point of Illumination, as it does in that of
Happiness: All Men at first hearing form in general an agreeable and pleasing
Notion of it, all Men admire and love it; but few have any distinct and true
Understanding of those things which it is made up of. All Men conceive
Illumination to be a state of Light and Knowledge, as they do Happiness to be a
State of Pleasure: But are as little agreed in particular, wherein consists the
Light or Knowledge which makes the one, as wherein consists the Pleasure that
makes the other. The Lust and Passion of some, the Superstition and Prejudice
of others, Curiosity and Confidence, Weakness and Design, Enthusiasm and Fancy,
embroil and perplex all things. However, every honest Man has a Clue by which
he may escape out of this Labyrinth. The Scripture shines with bright and
gracious Beams throughout all this Darkness: And if we will attend to it, we
cannot wander into any dangerous mistake. This describes the state of
Illumination very plainly to us; calling it sometimes Wisdom, sometimes
Knowledge and understanding, sometimes Faith, sometimes the Spirit of Wisdom
and Revelation. Next, it acquaints us with the Design and End of it; namely, to
convert us from the power of Satan to the service of the Living God, to Purify
and Sanctify us, to enable us to approve the Holy acceptable and perfect Will
of God, and in one word, to make us wise unto Salvation. Nay it procedes
further, and points out to us particularly the Truths in the Knowledge of which
Illumination consists. Thus the Old Testament reckons Wisdom to be, sometimes
the Knowledge of God, sometimes the Knowledge of his Law, sometimes the
Understanding of Proverbs and Parables; these containing as it were the Soul of
Moral Instruction, and wrapping up in few and lively Words, whatever the
Experience of the Aged, or the observation of Men of the most piercing
Judgment, thought best deserved to be transmitted to Posterity. But all this
amounts to the same thing, and all the Descriptions of Wisdom in the Old
Testament may be sum'd up into that one, Job 28.28. Behold the fear of the
Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. The New
Testament tells us, this is Life Eternal, to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: That Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life: That in Him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge: That true
Understanding consists in knowing the Will of God; which Will is our
Sanctification. And when St. Paul understands by Wisdom, as sometimes he does,
the penetrating into the Spirit and Mystery, the Depths and Recesses of the Old
Testament, and discovering the great Design of Man's Redemption carried on,
through all the Ages of the World, and through a wise variety of Dispensations,
this alters not the Notion of Illumination: For this does not point out to us
any new, or different Truths, but only regards one peculiar way of explaining,
or establishing and confirming the great Christian Doctrines. To conclude, we
may easily learn what sort of Knowledge the Spirit of God recommends to us
above all other, from those Petitions which St. Paul puts up for the Ephesians,
and Collosians. For the Former he Prays thus; That the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the knowledge of him; the Eyes of your Understanding being
enlightened, that ye may know, what is the Hope of his Calling, and what the
Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power to usward who Believe, according to the working of his
Mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the Dead, and
set him at his own Right Hand in the Heavenly places, etc. Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19,
20. For the Latter thus: That ye might be filled with the Knowledge of his
Will, in all Wisdom and Spiritual Understanding; That ye might walk worthy of
the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing
in the Knowledge of God, etc. Col. 1.9, 10. If from these and the like Texts we
form a general Idea of Illumination, it will be this: Illumination is a State
of Knowledge, consisting, in the abolishing or relinquishing those Errors,
which deprave and pervert our Affections, and undermine and supplant the Empire
and Authority of Reason; and in entertaining and embracing those Truths, which
purify the one, and restore and establish the other: All this in order to
entitle us to the Favor of God, and a blessed Eternity. I might content my
self with this general Delineation of Illumination. But because this is a
subject from which we cannot but reap so much Pleasure and Advantage, as will
abundantly requite whatever Labor can be bestowed upon it, I will proceed to a
fuller discovery of it, if I can.

Illumination then being a State of Knowledge, the Object of this Knowledge
being Truth, it is plain, that in order to form a just and distinct Notion of
Illumination, it will be necessary to enquire into two things: First, what kind
of Truth; and Next, what kind of Knowledge of these Truths, constitutes
Illumination.

1. Of the Truths which Illuminate. We have many noble Characters, in the Old
Testament, and the New, which distinguish these from Truths of an inferior
Nature: All which are, I think, comprised by Solomon in very few words; Prove.
24.13, 14. My Son, says he, eat thou Honey, because it is good; and the Honey
Comb, which is sweet to thy taste; so shall the knowledge of Wisdom be unto thy
Soul, when thou have found it; then there shall be a reward, and thy
expectation shall not be cut off. Solomon here, as is very usual with inspired
Writers, does compare Spiritual with Corporeal Things, or Illustrates the one
by the other. He tells us that, what Honey is to the Body, that Wisdom is to
the Soul: And recommending the Former from two incomparable Properties, its
Ministering to Health, and Pleasure, he recommends the Latter from Advantages,
which bear indeed some Resemblance; but are as much Superior to these, as the
Soul is to the Body. My Son, eat thou Honey because it is good; i. e. because
it both cleanses and purges all noxious Humors, and nourishes and strengthens
the Body: And the Honey Comb because it is sweet to the taste; which is the
second Excellence of this sort of Food, namely, its Pleasantness; and properly
urged to invite the Eater: Then proceeding to complete the Comparison, he adds,
so shall the Knowledge of Wisdom be to thy Soul, when thou have found it; i. e.
it shall Minister to the Purification, Strength, and Delight of thy Soul. But
this is not all: Though the Parallel can be extended no further between Honey
and Wisdom, yet he does not think fit for that Reason to omit one of the
greatest Excellencies of Wisdom: And therefore he adds, then there shall be a
reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut off. Wisdom does not only perfect
and entertain our Minds, but also it gives us a title to those Rewards, for the
enjoyment of which it prepares and fits us. Here then we have from Solomon the
true Properties of true Wisdom: By these we may pronounce safely of all the
different kinds of Knowledge; distinguishing the precious from the vile, and
fixing the true Estimate of Each. If there be any sort of Truths, whose
Knowledge does not promote, but obstruct these great Ends, these we are to
despise and slight, to shun and hate. But if there be any Knowledge, that does
neither oppose or hinder, nor yet contribute to these Ends, unless
accidentally, and very remotely, for this we may have some, but no very great
regard or esteem. But whatever Knowledge that be, which is attended by these
Fruits, this is that which we are to search for as for hidden Treasure: This is
that which, when we have found it, we are to value above the Gold of Ophir, the
Topaz, and the Carbuncle, and all precious Stones. The distinguishing
Characters then of Illuminating Truths are four: 1. They Purify us. 2. They
Nourish, and Strengthen us. 3. They Entertain and Delight us. 4. They procure
us a glorious Reward.


1. They Purify us. This is a Property, which the Royal Psalmist frequently
attributes to the Word of God, that it is pure and clean, Psalm. 119. and
elsewhere. And the New Testament frequently ascribes to Faith, and Hope, that
they purify the Heart, 1 John 3.3. Acts 15. And this sure is the first thing
necessary to the Perfecting the Soul of Man. It Is with the Soul, as with the
Body; it must be first cleansed from hurtful Humors, before it can be fed, and
nourished; purged of its Errors, and Vices, e're it can be enriched with Divine
Virtues, and attain that Liberty, and Strength, wherein consists the true
Greatness and Excellence of the Mind of Man. The first Step toward the
Perfection of Virtue, is the relinquishing our Vice; for we must cease to do
Evil, e're we can learn to do Good: And the first Step toward the Perfection
of Wisdom, is the dispelling those Errors, which deceive and mislead the Mind,
and pervert Life. What these were in the Jew, and Gentile, and what they are at
this day in us, it is easy enough to discern. The Mind of Man, as far as I can
observe, is naturally prone to Religious Worship. Not only the consideration of
the wonderful Mechanism and contrivance of the World, and of Events, strange,
sudden, and unaccountable, but also the Conscience of his own Impotence, and
Obnoxiousness, inclining him to the Belief, and prompting him to seek the
Patronage, of an Invisible, All-sufficient Power. In the next place, the Mind
of Man is ever prone, to propose to him some great, some sovereign Good; in
which he may acquiesce, and by which he may secure himself, as well as he can,
against the Indigence and Poverty of his Nature, and the Changes and
Revolutions, the Disasters, and the Miseries, to which this Mortal State is
exposed. These are two things of that Importance, that no man can err in them,
but the Error must prove fatal to his Repose. He that sets up to himself for
his ultimate End, an empty and uncertain Good, instead of a Solid and Eternal
one, must needs be as miserably deluded and disappointed, as he must, who sets
up to himself a false God, instead of the true; or goes about to endear and
recommend himself to the true, by a false and superstitious Worship. Now in
these points, the Jew and Gentile were miserably, though not equally mistaken.
The Gentile worshipped Devils, instead of God: Their Mysteries were either
sensual, or cruel; their Religion did oftener encourage Sin, than Virtue. And as
to their sovereign Good, their Hearts were set upon this World, upon the Pomp
and Pleasure, upon the Ease and Honor of it; and they had either none, or very
dark, and uncertain Prospects beyond the Grave: All beyond it was an unknown
Region, full of Fables and idle Phantoms. The Jews, though they enjoyed the
Oracles of God, and generally preserved the Worship of one true and living God,
yet were they not free from very deplorable Errors relating to these points:
They seemed, to have turned the true God into an Idol, and to have entertained
some Notions of Him very repugnant to his Nature: they looked upon him as the
God of the Jews, not of the Gentiles; as a Respecter of Persons, as fond, and
partial to their Nation; and as delighted with a Religion, made up of numerous
Rites, and Ceremonies, and external Observances. And this could not but have a
very sad influence upon their Religion, as it really had: The Holiness which is
truly acceptable to God, being neglected, and abolished; and Sadducism, or
Pharisaism, i. e. Sensuality, or Hypocrisy, introduced in the room of it. And
as to their ultimate End, or supreme Good, the Sadducees denied the
Resurrection, Angels, and Spirits; and therefore it is not to be expected, they
should entertain any design above the Pleasure of the Body. And though the
Pharisees acknowledged Angels, and a Resurrection, yet can we not discern, that
they had a real value for any thing, besides the Honor, Power, and Wealth of
this World. And no wonder; since they could, upon their Principles, satisfy
themselves in a Religion, which had nothing of internal Purity, or solid
Righteousness, in it. So that upon the whole, the Jew and Gentile were alike
wicked: Only the Wickedness of the Jews, had this Aggravation in it above that
of the Gentiles, that they enjoyed the Oracles of God, and the Favor of a
peculiar Covenant. This being the state of Darkness, which lay upon the Face of
the Jewish and Gentile World, our Lord, who was to be a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the Glory of his People Israel, advanced, and established in the
World that Doctrine, which directly tends to dispel these Errors, and rescue
Mankind from the Misery that attends them. For all that the Gospel contains may
be reduced to these three Heads: First, the Assertion of one only true God;
with a bright and full Revelation of his Divine Attributes and Perfection.
Secondly, an Account of the Will of God, or the Worship he delights in, which
is a Spiritual one, together with suitable Means, and Motives; in which last is
contained a full Declaration of Man's supreme Happiness. Thirdly, the
Revelation of one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus; through
whom we have access with boldness to the Throne of Grace; through whom we have
obtained from the Father, Grace, and Pardon, and Adoption; and through whom,
Lastly, all our Oblations and Performances are acceptable to Him. The Design of
this glorious Manifestation was to open Men's Eyes, to turn them from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the Living God: That they might obtain
Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance of Glory. These then are the truths which
Illuminated the Gentile and Jewish World: And these are the truths which must
Illuminate us at this day. These dispel all destructive Errors, that lead us to
Vice, or Misery: These point out our supreme Felicity, and the direct way to
it: These open and enlarge the Eye of the Soul, enable it to distinguish, and
judge with an unerring Exactness, between Good and Evil, between Substantial
and Superficial, Temporal, and Eternal Good. And I wish from my Soul, whatever
Light we pretend to at this Day, we were well grounded and established in these
Truths. I doubt notwithstanding our Belief of one God, and one Mediator; and
notwithstanding we are well enough assured, that God who is a Spirit, must be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; and notwithstanding our pretending to
believe a Life to come; I say, I am afraid, that notwithstanding these things,
we do generally err in two main points; namely, in the Notion we ought to have
of Religion, and the value we are to set upon the World and the Body. For who,
that reflects upon the Pomp and Pride of Life, upon the ease, the softness, and
the luxury of it, upon the frothiness and the freedom, the vanity and
Impertinence, to say no worse, of Conversation, will not conclude, that either
we have renounced our Religion, or form to our selves too complaisant, and
indulgent a Notion of it? For is this the imitation of Jesus? Is this to walk
as he walked in the World? Can this be the Deportment of Men to whom the World
and the Body is Crucified? Can such a Life as this is flow from those Divine
Fountains, Faith, Love, and Hope? Who again can reflect upon the Passion we
discover for Superiority and Precedence, our thirst of Power, our ravenous
desire of Wealth, and not conclude, that we have mistaken our main End, that
we set a wrong value upon things, and that whatever we talk of an Eternity, we
look upon this present World as our portion, and most valuable Good? For can
such a tender concern for, such an eager pursuit after temporal things flow
from, nay consist with, purity of Heart, and poverty of Spirit, the Love of
God, and a Desire of Heaven? Whoever then will be Perfect, or Happy, must
carefully avoid both these Errors: He must never think that Religion can
subsist, without the strength and vigor of our Affections: Or that the Bent
and Vigor of our Souls can be pointed toward God, and yet the Air of our
Deportment and Conversation be earthy, sensual, and vain, conformed even to a
Pagan Pride, and show of Life. Next, he must never cherish in himself the love
of this World: He must never look upon himself other than a Stranger and
Pilgrim in it: He must never be fond of the Pleasure of it: He must never form
vain Designs and Projects about it; nor look upon the best things in it, as
ingredients of our Happiness, but only as Instruments of Virtue, or short
Repasts and Refreshments in our Journey. And because all our mistakes about the
Nature and Perfection of Religion, and the Value of Temporal things, do
generally arise from (...), that peculiar Sin to which our Constitution betrays
us; therefore the Knowledge of our selves, an intimate Acquaintance with all
our natural Propensions, and Infirmities, is no inconsiderable Part of
Illumination. For we shall never address our selves heartily, to the Cure of a
Disease which we know nothing of; or to the rectifying any inclination, till we
are thoroughly convinced that it is irregular, and dangerous.

2. The Second Character of Illuminating Truths is, that they are such as feed
and nourish, corroborate and improve, the Mind of Man. Now the Properties of
Bodily strength are such as these: It enables us to Baffle and repel Injuries,
to bear Toil and Travel, to perform difficult Works with speed and ease, and
finally, it prolongs Life to a much further date, than weak and crazy
Constitutions can arrive at. And of all these we find some Resemblances in
Spiritual Strength: But as much more Perfect and Excellent, as the Spirit is
above the Body. Those Truths then are indeed Illuminating, which enable us to
vanquish Temptations, to endure with Constancy and Patience the Toils and
Hardships of our Christian warfare, to discharge the Duties of our Station with
Zeal and Vigor, and which, Lastly, render us firm, steady, and immortal. And
these are the glorious effects which are attributed to the Truths of God. Hence
is the Gospel called the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1.16. and hence it
is, that we read of the Armor of God, Ephesians 6.11. The Sword of the Spirit,
the Shield of Faith, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, etc. to intimate to us
the Strength and Virtue of the Word of God, and that it brings with it safety
and success. And hence it is, that the Word of God is said to quicken and
strengthen; that Man is said to live, not by Bread alone, but by every word
that proceeds out of the Mouth of God; that Righteousness is called
Everlasting; and that he that does the Will of God is affirmed to abide for
ever: To teach us plainly, that there is nothing steady and unalterable,
nothing durable, nothing eternal, but God, Divine Truths, and those that are
formed and modeled by them.

There are Truths indeed which are merely Barren, and Vnactive, which amuse and
suspend the Mind, but never benefit it: but there are others which are, in the
Language of Solomon, like Health to the Navel, and Marrow to the Bones: Wisdom
and Virtue, Life and Honor, the Favor of God and Man, attend them where e're
they dwell. And these are the Truths which Illuminate: Truths that are Active,
and Fruitful; that make us wise and good, perfect and happy: such as we have a
mighty Interest in, such as have a strong Influence upon us, such as give a new
Day to the understanding, and new Strength and Liberty to the Will; such as
raise and exalt our Affections, and render the whole Man, more rational, more
steady, more constant, more uniform. These are the Truths which make Men great
and modest in Prosperity, erect and courageous in Adversity; always content
with this World, yet always full of the Hopes of a better: Serene, Calm, and
well assured, in the present state of their Souls, and yet thirsting after
Perfection, Maturity, and the absolute Consummation of Righteousness in the
World to come. Now the Truths that effect all this, are all reducible to those
which I have mentioned under the former Head: For in those we find all that is
necessary to Life and Godliness, to Virtue and Glory; in those we find all that
is necessary to raise and support true Magnanimity, to enlarge and free the
Mind, and to add Strength and Courage to it. For what can more certainly
promote all this than Immortality and Glory? What can be a surer Foundation for
the Hope of both to rest on, than the Favor of God himself? And what can more
effectually reconcile and ingratiate us with God, than sincere, universal
Righteousness, and the Mediation of his dearly Beloved Son?

3. The Third Character of Illuminating Truth is, that they are Pleasant and
Agreeable to the Soul. Hence it is that the Royal Psalmist pronounces the Word
of God sweeter than the Honey, and the Honey Comb: that he ascribes to it
Delight and Joy; For he tell us, that it rejoices the Heart, that it enlightens
the Eyes. And accordingly we find the true Servants of God, not only
continually blessing and praising God in the Temple, but magnifying him by
Psalms* and Hymns in their Prisons, and rejoicing in the midst of Tribulation.
But when I reckon Pleasure and Delight amongst the Fruits of Illumition, I must
add, that there is a vast difference, between the Fits and Flashes of Mirth,
and the serenity of a Fixed and Habitual Delight; between the Titillations of
Sense, and the solid Joys of the Mind; and lastly, between the Pleasures of
Fancy, and of Reason. And when I say, Illumination consists in the Knowledge of
pleasant and agreeable Truths, I mean it of rational Pleasure, an habitual
Tranquillity of the Mind: And then the Matter is beyond Question. Whatever
Truths do contribute to promote this, the Study and Contemplation of them, must
be our true Wisdom. Joy, when it is solid and rational, does enlarge and exalt
the Mind of Man: It Is, as it were, Health to the Navel, and Marrow to the
Bones; it renders us more thankful to God, more kind and courteous to Man. It Is
an excellent Preparation to invite more Plentifully Influxes of the Spirit of
God. Hence did Elijah call for a Musical Instrument, when he desired to
Prophecy: And we find the Company of Prophets rejoicing with Hymns, Music,
and Dances; all outward Testimonies of the inward Transports, and Ravishment of
their Minds. And as I am persuaded that, that which distinguishes a Godly
sorrow, from a Worldly or Impious one, Repentance and Contrition, from the
Agonies and Perplexities of Despair, is the peace and tranquillity which attends
it; so am I persuaded, that God does press and invite us to Mourning and Sorrow
for Sin, for this Reason, not excluding others, because it naturally leads on
to Peace and Joy: A soft and tender Sorrow dissipating the Fears and Distresses
of Guilt, like mild and fruitful Showers that do lay Storms. In a word, there
is no such powerful. Antidote against Sin, nor spur to Holy Industry, as Holy
Pleasure, Pious Joy, or Spiritual Peace and Tranquillity. This is a Partaking,
or Anticipating, the powers of the World to come; and the mightiest
Corroboration of every thing that is good in us. The Study then of such Truths,
is true Wisdom. And Illumination thus far will consist in quitting those
Errors, which beget Melancholy, Superstition, Desperation; and in such Truths,
as enlarge our view of the Divine Perfections, and exhibit to us a nearer
Presence of his Goodness, and Glory: Such, again, as unfold the Dignity of
Human Nature, and the wise and gracious Ends of our Creation: Such, Lastly, as
extend our Prospect, and enlarge our Hopes; support our Frailties, and excite
our Vigor.

4. The last property of those Truths in the Knowledge of which Illumination
consists, is, that they are such as procure us a Reward. If we reflect upon
those three Heads, under which I ranged those Truths, which Illuminated the
Gentile and Jewish World, we shall easily discern how well they fit this
Character: They fill the Mind with Joy and Peace, and make it abound in Hope;
they Purge the Man from his natural Corruption, and fortify the Mind against
such Impressions* from outward Good, or Evil in this World, as disquiet and
torment the Sinner; they procure him the Protection of God's Providence, and
the Assistance of his Spirit, in this Life; and they invite him to hope for
Glories and Pleasures, in another, far above any thing that the Heart of Man
can conceive. God is the God of Hope; He has all Fullness and Sufficiency in
himself: And therefore Blessed must all they be, who have the Lord for their
God. Jesus is the Fountain of all Consolation: He is made unto us of God,
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption: Happy is he that
does rejoice always and glory in Him. Righteousness is a state of Health and
Strength, of Perfection and Beauty, of Peace and Tranquillity, of Rest and Hope:
Blessed are they who are possessed of it, who are made free from Sin and become
Servants of God; who have their Fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting
Life. Such are already past from Death to Life; for the Spirit of Life and
Holiness of God and Glory, rests upon them. This is the Character that
distinguishes Gospel Knowledge, from all other sorts of Knowledge. No knowledge
of Arts or Sciences, and much less the most exquisite knowledge of all the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Darkness, can pretend to an Eternal Reward. A short
and impure Pleasure, and a transcient Interest, is all that this sort of
Knowledge can bestow; and very often, instead of Pleasure and Profit, it
requites its Disciples with Pain and Trouble. The Gospel only contains those
Truths, which confer Life and Immortality on those that Believe, and Obey them.
It Is the Gospel alone that teaches us, how we are to gain the Love and Favor
of God; and it is God alone who Rules and Governs the visible and invisible
World. He therefore alone is to be feared, and He alone is to be loved. Fear
not them, says our Savior, Matthew. 10.28. which kill the Body, but are not
able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him who is able to destroy both Soul and
Body in Hell. And St. John gives the same Precept concerning the World: Love
not the World, neither the things of the World: And backs it by the same
reason; for the World passes away, and the Lust thereof: But he that does the
Will of God abides for ever. That is, the World can at best but gratify for a
moment the Appetites of the Body, or the Desires of a sensual Fancy; therefore
love it not; but love the Father, who after the dissolution of the vital Union
betwixt Soul and Body, is able to confer Life and Happiness on both to all
Eternity.

Thus have I considered the Characters of Illuminating Truths. And the whole of
what I have said amounts to these two things. 1. There are Truths of very
different kinds: Truths that are of no use; such are those which are either
trifling or merely notional, and can have no Influence on Human Life: Truths
that are of ill use; such are those of which consists the Arts of Sensuality,
Avarice, Vanity and Ambition: These are to be detested, the former to be
contemned, by all that seek after true Wisdom. Again, there are Truths of an
inferior use; such as concern our Fortunes, our Relations, our Bodies; and
these may be allowed their proper place, and a reasonable Value. But the Truths
which concern the Peace, and Pleasure, and Strength, and Liberty of our Souls;
which procure us the Favor of God, and the Grace of his Spirit; the Truths, in
a word, which secure our Temporal and Eternal Happiness; these are Illuminating
Truths, these have a transcendent worth, and inestimable Excellence, or
Usefulness, and consequently can never be too dear to us. 2. Since the great
Characters of Illuminating Truths do exactly fit the Gospel of Jesus, it is
plain, that this is that Systeme of Knowledge, which we are to Study day and
night; this is that Divine Philosophy, whose Principles and Laws we must
incessantly revolve and ponder. It Is not without reason, that the Psalmist
bestows such glorious Elogies upon the word of God, Psalm. 19. and elsewhere:
That he magnifies, one while the intrinsic Excellence and Beauty, another
while the Force and Efficacy of it; and ever and anon, enlarges himself upon
the advantages, the unspeakable advantages, which reward the Meditation and
Practice of it. Of all Perfections I have seen an end: But thy Commandments are
exceeding broad. They are pure, they endure for ever; they enlighten the Eyes,
and rejoice the Heart. Moreover by them thy Servant is warned; and in keeping
of them there is great Reward. That is, by them we are preserved from all real
Evil, and put in possession of, or entitled to, all real Good. How well did St.
Peter answer, when our Lord asked his Disciples, will ye also go from me? Lord,
whither shall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life. And how wisely did
St. Paul resolve, to know nothing but Christ Jesus and him Crucified? For He is
the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and in Him are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge.

But after all, as there is a Form of Godliness, so there is a Form of
Knowledge, without the power of it. The Knowledge of the same Truths, as I
observed in the beginning, in different Persons may be very different; as
meeting with a very different Reception. Our Conceptions may be more clear, or
confused, more lively, or faint, more perfect, or maimed: And our Assent may be
stronger, or weaker. In some they may only float superficially, in others they
may penetrate deeper: And the Degrees of their Influence and Operation, will be
certainly proportioned to the different manner of their Reception. For this
reason it will be necessary to the right understanding of a state of
Illumination, to discourse.

2. Of the Nature of that Knowledge we must have of the Former Truths; to show,
what sort of Conception we must form of them, what kind of Assent we must pay
them, and what kind of Consideration we must employ about them. As I have
therefore laid down the Properties of those Truths, so will I now lay down the
Properties of that Knowledge of them, which is Essential to Illumination.

1. Illuminating Knowledge must be deeply rooted. This our Savior has taught
us in that Parble, wherein he has observed to us, that the Seed which had not
depth of Earth, as it soon sprung up, so it soon withered and dried away. We
often know, or pretend to do so, the Rudiments of our Religion, without the
Grounds and Foundation of it. We embrace Conclusions, without examining the
Principles from whence they flow: and contrary to the advice of the Apostle, we
are unable to give a reason, to any one that asks us of the Faith, and the
Hope, that is in us. And then ours, is not properly Knowledge, but Opinion;
it is not Faith, but Credulity: It Is not a firm Persuasion, but an easy,
customary Assent. And this is overthrown by every Temptation; defaced, or much
blur'd by every Atheistical suggestion, or Profane Objection. Does the World
or our Lust tempt us, as the Devil did our first Parents, ye shall not surely
Die? how easily is that Faith shaken, which is no better founded? How easily is
a Man induced to Hope, that Sin is not very fatal and pernicious, that God will
easily be prevailed with to pardon it, that the Flames of Hell are
Metaphorical, and its Eternity a mistaken Notion, and groundless Fancy, if he
be ignorant of the true Reasons of God's Wrath, and Indignation, which are
founded in the very Nature of God and Sin? Whereas on the other hand, he that
well understands both these; the Deformity, and Tendency of Sin, and the
Holiness, and the Purity, of the Divine Nature, cannot but discern an
irreconcilable Opposition between them; and be convinced, that were there no
Tribunal erected for the Sinner, yet would Sin be its own Punishment; and that
an intolerable Hell, consisting in the disorder of Nature, an exclusion from
God, etc. would be the natural and necessary Issue of it. The sum of this
Argument is, that Knowledge, which has no deep root is subject to be overthrown
by ever blast: That Faith which is little more than Credulity does very seldom
stand against any very rude shock. Now the Grounds of our Faith and Duty are
fully and clearly expounded in the Gospel: And here especially we must seek
them. When I say this, I reject no Collateral Arguguments, I refuse no Foreign
Aids, which contribute any thing to confirm and fortify our Belief of Gospel
Truths. The Faith of St. Thomas did, in part at least, depend upon the Evidence
of sense. Thomas, because thou have seen thou have believed, Joh. 20.29. And so
did that of the rest of them, who were Eye witnesses of the Resurrection and
Ascension of the Blessed Jesus. The Doctrine of one God, and a Judgment to
come, may receive much light and strength from natural Reason: And whatever
establishes a revealed Truth, will be so far from diminishing, that it will,
increase the Virtue and Efficacy of it. All the Caution I think fit to give
here is, that we be sure that the Ground be Plain, and Firm, on which we build
the Belief of an Illuminating Truth. Philosophy, in many cases, is clear and
convictive: St. Paul himself amongst the Gentiles frequently appeals to Reason.
But too often we call our Fancy, Philosophy; and obtrude upon the World, the
wild and undigested Theories of a warm and confident Imagination, for new
Discoveries. What strange stuff was Gnostick Philosophy once? What did it
produce but the Corruption of the Christian Faith? And what can be expected
from Mystic, Enthusiastic Philosophy, or Divinity, in any Age, any Man may
guess, without any deep Penetration. Nor do I doubt but that all judicious and
experienced Men, do as much despise and nauseate the Blendures and Mixtures of
pretended Philosophy with our Faith and Morals, as the World generally does,
the subtilties and perplexities of the Schools. For my part, I cannot endure, to
have my Religion lean upon the rotten props of precarious Notions. I admire, I
love, the Elevations and Enlargements of Soul: But I can have no value for
unaccountable Amusements or Rambles of Fancy. An itch of Novelty or Curiosity
has a Tincture in it of our Original Corruption. I ever suspect an Opinion that
carries an Air of Novelty in it; and do always prefer a vulgar Truth before
refined Error. They are vulgar Truths, which like vulgar Blessings, are of most
use, and truest worth: And surely our Savior thought so, when he thanked his
Father, that he had hid these things from the wise, and prudent, and revealed
them unto Babes. And when he himself taught the People with power and
authority, and not as the Scribes, he did advance no subtle Theories, but
bright, and dazzling, useful, and convictive Truths. This minds me of another
property of Illuminating Knowledge.

2. This Knowledge must not be obscure, and confused; but Distinct and Clear.
Where the Images of things are slight, faint, and vanishing, they move Men but
very weakly, and affect them but very coldly; especially in such Matters as are
not subject to our Senses. And this I persuade my self is one chief Reason, why
those glorious and wonderful Objects, God, a Judgment to come, Heaven, and
Hell, do strike us so feebly, and operate so little. We have generally no
lively, distinct, and clear Conception of them: It being otherwise impossible,
That things in their own Nature dreadful, and amazing, should excite in us no
Fear; or that things in their own Nature infinitely amiable, should enkindle in
us no Passion, no Desire. The Notions we have of Spiritual and Invisible Things
are dim, dusky, and imperfect: Our Thoughts pass over them so slightly, that
they scarce retain any print, or traces of them. Now this sort of Knowledge
will never do the work: These drousie notices of things will never ferment, and
raise our Passions for Heaven, high enough to confront and combat those we
have for the World. From hence we may give a fair account, what the use is of
Prophetic Retirement, and Prophetic Eloquence: What is the purpose of all
those Schemes, and Tropes, which occur in inspired Writings: And why the best
of Men have ever so much affected Solitude, and Retreats, from the noise and
the hurry of the World. Serious, frequent, and devout Contemplation is
necessary to form in our Minds clear, distinct, and sprightly Notions: And to
communicate these well to the World, they must be expressed, in moving
Language, in living Tropes and Figures. Ah! Did we but consider this, we should
sure allot more time to the study of Divine Truths; and we should not think
that to discover them thoroughly, it were enough to let our Thoughts glance upon
them. But we should survey and ponder them, with all the exactness and
diligence, that were necessary to make lasting, and distinct impressions upon
us. Could we know by Intuition, doubtless wonderful Objects would raise very
extraordinary Passions in us. But this we cannot, let us come as near it as we
can. Only let us avoid forming absurd and false Notions of things, whilst we
endeavor after distinct and clear ones. Spiritual things do not answer
Corporeal, like Face to Face in a Glass: And therefore, though to give some
light to things that are above us, we may find out all the Resemblances of them
we can in those things we are acquainted with here below; yet we must still
remember, that the one do vastly exceed the other, and that we cannot thus get
a just and adequate Notion of them.

3. This Knowledge must not be in the Understanding, crude and undigested; but
it must be thoroughly concocted, and turned into Nourishment, Blood, and
Spirits. We must know the true value and use of every Principle, of every
Truth; and be able readily to apply them. For what does it signify, how
important Truths are in themselves, if they are not so to me? What does it
avail that they are impregnated with Life and Power, if I feel not any such
Influence? Of what use is the Knowledge of Gospel Promises to me, if I reap no
Comfort from them? Or the Knowledge of Gospel Threats, if they are unable to
curb and restrain my Passions? And so is it with other Truths: What will it
avail me that I know, the Life of Man consists not in the multitude of the
things which he possesses, if notwithstanding I cannot content my self with a
Competency? That Righteousness is the chief Good, and the richest Treasure of
the Soul of Man; if notwithstanding I seek this World, and the things of it,
with a more early and passionate Concern? That sin and pain are the most
considerable, if not only Evils of Man, if notwithstanding I be cast down, and
broken, under every Adversity? And thus I might go on, and show you, that the
Knowledge which is not digested into Nourishment is, if not a burden, of no
benefit to us. It Is plain, that is to me nothing worth, which I make no use of.
We must then follow the advice of Solomon, and never quit the Search and
Meditation of Truth, till we grow intimate and familiar with it; and so have it
always ready, for a Guide, and Guard, for our Support, and Strength, and for
our Delight and Pleasure. We must bind it about our Heart, as he speaks, and
tie it as an Ornament about our Neck. Then, when we go forth, it shall lead us,
when we sleep, it shall keep us, and when we awake, it shall talk with us: For
the commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is light, and reproofs of Instruction
are the way of Life, Prove. 6. In a word, nothing can render the most important
Truths, powerful and operative in us, but such a Digestion of them by serious
and devout Meditation, as may in a manner incorporate them with us. And this
the Scripture plainly teaches, when to signify the Force and Virtue of the
Gospel, above that of the Law, it uses these words: For this is the Covenant
that I will make with the House of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I
will put my Laws into their Minds, and write them in their Hearts, Heb. 8.10.
intimating, that no Laws, no Principles, can ever influence us, till they be
deeply imprinted in our Hearts.

To wind up all. There are several kinds of Knowledge of the same Truths: There
is a Knowledge which serves us, only as Pisga's top did Moses; to show us
Canaan, but not to bring us into it. There is, again, a Knowledge which serves
us, only as the Talent did the wicked Servants; not to procure Rewards, but
Punishments. And finally, there is a Knowledge, which like the Talents in the
Hand of the faithful and good Steward, enriches us first, and recommends us
afterward, to higher Trusts and Dignities: which improves and perfects our
Nature first, and then puts us into possession of such Blessings, as only
Nature thus improved and perfected is capable of. And this Knowledge must not
be a slight, superficial, and undigested one; it must not be a confused, and
obscure, a weak and imperfect one: This is not the Knowledge which will bring
forth those excellent Fruits, which we have reason to expect from true
Illumination. But it must be a Knowledge that has all the quite contrary
Characters: even such as I have before described at large. That this is an
Observation of the greatest weight and moment, is evident to any one, who will
give himself leave to make any Reflection on the present State of Christianity.
For how does the power of Darkness prevail, amidst the Light of the Gospel? How
has the Devil erected his Throne in the midst of that Church, which should be
the Kingdom of God? and Sin and Death reign where Life and Immortality are
Preached. Whence is this? Are Men ignorant of those Truths which make up the
Systeme of true Wisdom? This is not easy to be imagined; scarcely of the
darkest corners of the Popish Churches; much less of ours. And therefore we
must conclude, that this is because our Knowledge is not such as it ought to
be, with respect to its clearness, certainty, and Digestion.

CHAP. II. Of the Fruits and Seize of Illumination.
HAving dispatched the Notion of Illumination in the foregoing Chapter, and
showed both what Truths, and what sort of Knowledge of them is requisite to it;
I am next to treat, 1. Of the Fruits. And 2. Of the Attainment of it.


S. 1. As to the Fruits of Illumination, I have the less need to insist upon
them, because whatever can be said on this Head, has been in a manner
anticipated: All the Characters of Illuminating Truth and Illuminating
Knowledge being such as sufficiently declare the blessed effects of true
Illumination. I will, therefore, be very short on this Head; and only just
mention two Advantages of Illumination. As the use of Light is especially
twofold, to Delight, and Guide us; so do we reap two benefits from Illumination.

1. The first, and most immediate one is, That it sets the whole Man, and the
whole Life right; that it fixes our Affections on their proper and natural
Object, and directs all our Actions to their true End. I do not mean that the
Understanding constantly and necessarily influences and determines the Will.
Expeperience tells us, that we have a fatal Liberty: That our Affections are
too often independent of our Reason; that we sin against the Dictates of
Conscience; that we pursue false Pleasure, and a false Interest, in opposition
to the True, and in plain opposition to our Judgment too; at least to a sedate,
and calm one. And the Reason of all this is, because we consist of two
different and repugnant Principles; a Body, and a Soul: and are solicited by
two different Worlds, a temporal, and an eternal one. But all this
notwithstanding, it is certain that Illumination in the Mind has a mighty
Influence upon us: For it is continually exciting in us wise Desires, and
excellent purposes: It Is always alluring and inviting us toward our Sovereign
Good, and restraining and detering us from Sin and Death: It alarms, disquiets,
disturbs, and persecutes us, as often as we err and wander from the Path of
Life. In one word, the great Work of Illumination is, to be always representing
the Beauties, and Pleasures, and the Beatitude, and Glory, of Virtue; and
remonstrating the Evils, and Dishonours, the Deformities, and Dangers of Vice:
so that a Man will never be at rest, who has this Light within him, till it be
either extinguished or obeyed.

2. This Light within us, if it be followed, and complied with, not mud-died,
and disturbed; if it be not quenched, and extinguished, by wilful Sin, or
unpardonable Oscitancy, and Remisness; if in a word, its Influence be not
interrupted, disperses all our Fears, as well as Errors; creates an unspeakable
Tranquillity in the Soul; spreads over us a calm and glorious Sky; and makes
every thing in us, and about us, look gay and verdant, and beautiful. The
Dissipation of Pagan Darkness, and all Participations, or Resemblances of it;
Deliverance from a state of Bondage and Wrath; the Peace of God, the Love of
Jesus, the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, the Immortality of the Soul, the
Resurrection of the Body, the Perfection and Blessedness of Eternity, good God!
what surprising, what ravishing Themes are these, for the thoughts of an
enlightened Soul to dwell upon! Blessed and Happy is he who enjoys this
Pleasure upon Earth. And that we may, I am now to Discourse

S. 2. Of the Attainment of Illumination. Now whatever advice can relate to
this, may be reduced under two Heads: 1. What Qualifications do render Man
capable of Illumination. 2. What it is that one duly qualified is to do in
Pursuit of it.


. 1. To begin with the Qualifications requisite to Illumination. One Man is
distinguished from another several ways: By his Estate, or Fortune; by Natural,
or acquired Endowments; and by Moral Dispositions: and each of these may have
some, though a very different, Influence upon Human Perfection. For if we
enquire after only the Essence, and Integrity of Perfection; then are there two
or three Moral Qualifications, which are all that is required in order to this:
But if we enquire after the largeness of its Stature, the Symmetry of its
Features, the Luster of its Complexion, and the Elegance of its dress; then may
we allow something to be ascribed to Fortune, to Nature, and a liberal
Education. This is an Observation very necessary to be made. For though every
Man may be capable of Perfection, that is, Habitual Holiness, if it be not his
own fault; yet is not every Man capable of being equally Perfect: because of
that accidental Variety which I have suggested; and which flows from different
Gifts of God, which depend not on our selves. This being premised in order to
prevent my being mistaken, I proceed and determine.

1. That Illumination depends not upon a Man's outward Fortune. There are
indeed several sorts of Knowledge which we can never arrive at without much
leisure, and much expense: And in order to support the one, and enjoy the
other, it is requisite that we be Masters of a good Fortune. Hence is that
Observation of the Author of Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 38.24. The Wisdom of a
Learned Man comes by opportunity of leisure; and he that has little business
shall become wise. And therefore in the following Verses, he excludes the
Husbandman, the Statuary, the Engraver, the Smith, the Potter; and all
consequently whose Time and Mind is taken up in the Labors of their
Profession, and in making the necessary Provision for Life; these, I say, he
excludes from all Pretentions to Wisdom. How can he get Wisdom that holds the
Plough, and that glories in the Goad; whose talk is of Bullocks? etc. But this
is not the Wisdom that I am enquiring after, and which constitutes
Illumination. That consists not in the Laws of our Earthly, but Heavenly
Country: Not in Arts and Sciences which relate to the Body and minister to a
temporal Life; but in those Divine Truths which purify the Soul, and minister
to an Eternal one: no, not in Notional Improvements of the Mind, but in
Spiritual, and Vital ones. And therefore the Husbandman, and the Artist, the
Mechanic, and the Trader, are as capable of this sort of Wisdom, as the Man of
Office, Money, or Quality. There needs no Wealth to render one the Child of
Light and of the Day. There is the Book of Nature; the Book of Revelation; both
the Books of God, both writ throughout with glorious Illuminating Truths: These
lie wide open to every honest Christian. The Being, and Nature, of God; the
Mediation of Jesus; and a Judgment to come; the Nature, and Necessity, of
Holiness, are fully revealed, and unanswerably proved. And though every honest
Man be not able to discover all the Arguments on which they stand, yet may he
discover enough: and what is more, he may have an inward, vital, sensible proof
of them; he may feel the Power, the Charms of Holiness; experiment its
Congruity and Loveliness to the Human Soul; and observe a thousand
Demonstrations of its serviceableness to the Honor of God, and the good of
Mankind: He may have a a full convictive sense, of the Manifestation of the
Divine Perfections, in the great work of our Redemption; and the excellent
Tendency of it may be so palpable, and conspicuous to him, as to leave no room
for Doubts, or Scruples. But besides all this, there is a Voice within, there
is a Divine Teacher and Instructor, which will ever abide with him, and lead
him into all necessary Truths: All which is implied in those words of our Lord,
If any Man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine; whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self, Joh. 7.17.

2. Extraordinary Natural parts, such as Sagacity, or Acuteness of Judgment,
strength of Memory, the liveliness of Imagination, are not necessary to
Illumination. The Gospel, as I remember, takes no notice of these. Such is the
beauty of Holiness, that it requires rather purity of Heart, then quickness of
Apprehension, to render us enamoured of it. And the very same thing may be said
of the Power and Energy of all Gospel Motives, and of the Proofs and Evidences
too of Divine Truths. To convince and affect us, there is no need of Sagacity,
and Penetration, but Probity, and Sincerity. However I have two or three
Reflections to make here, which may not be unuseful: For though Acuteness, and
Retention, by which I mean quickness in discerning, and firmness in preserving
Truth, be commonly accounted Natural Parts, and generally are so; yet I think,
where the one, or the other, are most defective, they may be much helped, and
wonderfully improved. To which end I remark, First, That those defects of
Understanding, or Memory, which some are wont to accuse themselves of in
Spiritual things, are with more Justice to be imputed to want of concern, and
affection for such things, than to any incapacity of Nature. It Is plain, we
easily understand, and easily remember, what we desire and love: And wherever
we follow the Impulse, or Conduct of strong Inclinations, we seldom fail of
excelling. Let us therefore take care, that our Hearts be set upon the things
of God; and we shall soon see that our Judgment and Memory will no more fail us
here, then in those worldly Interests and Pleasures, which we are most intent
upon. Secondly, as to Memory; it depends very much upon the Perspicuity,
Regularity, and Order, of our Notions. Many complain of want of Memory, when
the defect is in their Judgment. And others, while they grasp at all, retain
nothing. In order then to relieve this infirmity of Memory, it were an
excellent way to confine our search and Meditation to a few Objects, and to
have these clearly and methodically handled. A Catechetical way of expounding
and asserting the Rudiments of our Faith, if done as it ought to be, is of
great service to Persons of all Capacities; but especially to those of meaner.
For thus they may not only be enriched, with the Knowledge of the most useful
things, and of the grounds on which our Obligation, either to Belief, or
Practice, is bottomed; but also may be furnished with general Principles of
Reason, by which they may steer their Judgment in all cases; and with certain
Heads of Faith, and Morals, to which they may be able to reduce most of what
they read or hear. Thirdly, it is with the Understanding, as with the Eye of the
Body: One sees further off, and in a fainter Light; but another sees as well,
with regard to all the uses of Life, who yet requires that the Object should be
nearer, and the Light better. Men of slow Capacities, must not be Daring, or
Precipitate, in passing their Sentence, and forming their Notions. They must
examine, whether the Matters they enquire after, be not too remote and obscure:
whether the Object may be brought nearer, and placed in a better Light; or
whether they may be furnished with Telescopes, or Microscopes, fit for them. If
not, they must quit the search of such Truths, as improper, and unnecessary for
them: By which means they will, at least, avoid being deceived, or perplexed;
which is no small advantage. To be enriched with a kind of Universal Knowledge,
is a great thing; but I doubt too great for Man. Next to this is, to be endowed
with a Knowledge of necessary, and important Truths; and to be freed from
Errors, and Perplexity, in Matters of any moment: And methinks it were no great
excess of Modesty, or Humility, for Man to be content with this.

3. There is no great need of acquired Learning in order to true Illumination.
Our Savior did not exact of his Disciples, as a necessary Preparation for his
Doctrine, the Knowledge of Tongues; the History of Times, or Nature, Logic,
Metaphysics, Mathematics, or the like. These indeed may be serviceable to
many excellent Ends: They may be great accomplishments of the Mind; great
Ornaments, and very engaging Entertainments of Life: They may be, finally, very
excellent and necessary Instruments of, or Introductions to, several
Professions, or Employments. But as to Perfection, and Happiness, to these they
can never be indispensably necessary. A Man may be excellently, habitually
Good, without more Languages then one: He may be fully persuaded of those great
Truths, that will render him Master of his Passions, and independent of the
Word; that will render him easy, and useful in this Life, and glorious in
another; though he be no Logician, nor Metaphysician. Yet would I not all this
while be supposed to exclude the use of true Reason, and solid Judgment. Though
the meanest capacity may attain to its proper Perfection; that is, such a
measure of Knowledge, as may make the Man truly wise and happy; yet the more
capacious any Man's Soul is, and the more enlarged his Knowledge, the more
Perfect and Happy He.

4. The Qualifications previously necessary to Illumination, are two or three
Moral ones, implied in that Infant Temper our Savior required in those who
would be his Disciples. These are Humility; Impartiality; and a Thirst, or
love, of Truth. First, Humility. He that will be taught of God, must not be
Proud, or Confident in himself. He must not over-rate his own Parts, and
Capacity; nor lean too stiffly to his own understanding. He must firmly believe,
that Illumination is the Work of God; and on Him he must depend. He must
confess the weakness of his own Faculties, the natural Poverty and Indigence of
his understanding; and so look up to God, who is the Fountain of Wisdom; and
gives Grace to the Humble, but resists the Proud. Secondly, Impartiality,
Sincerity, or a certain Purity, and innocence of Judgment, if I may be allowed
to speak so. That the Understanding may be capable of Divine Light, it must not
be blur'd and Stained, by false Principles: It must not be biassed, nor
influenced by any corrupt inclinations. Some to prove their Impartiality or
Freedom of Judgment, abandon themselves to the scrupulousness of Skepticism,
and a wanton itch of endless Disputation, and Contradiction. But I cannot think
it necessary to our Freedom and Impartiality, to deny the Evidence of our
Senses; to oppose the Universal Reason of Mankind; and to shake off all
Reverence for the Integrity of Man, and the Veracity of God. No, this savours
too much, either of Ostentation, or of a raw and unexperienced Affectation of
new Theories and Speculations. He secures his Freedom sufficiently, who guards
his Reason against the force of groundless Prepossessions and senseless Modes
and Customs; against the Lusts of the Body, and the prejudices of Parties: Who
keeps a strict Eye upon the Motions and Tendencies of his inferior Nature; who
admits not the Dictates of a Single Person, or Party, for Catholic Reason; who
considers, that there are Revolutions of Philosophy and Opinions as well as
States and Kingdoms; and judges well of Times, and Men, e're he pay much
deference to Authority. But Thirdly, this is not all that is necessary to any
complete Degree of Illumination. Impartiality is necessary to the first
Dawnings of it; but if we would have it increased, and diffuse its self into a
perfect Day of Spiritual Wisdom, and Understanding, we must hunger and thirst
after Truth. An unprejudiced Mind is necessary to qualify us for the first
Rudiments of Truth: but we must be inflamed with Desire and Love of it, e're we
shall enter into the Sanctuary or Recesses of it. Therefore our Savior invites
to him every one that thirsts, Joh. 7.37. And St. Peter exhorts us, as new born
Babes to desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby, 1
Epist. 2.2. And St. Paul imputes the Damnation of those that perish, to want of
Love of the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. It Is too trifling to Object here, how come we
to thirst after what we do not know? For it concerns every Man to enquire, what
will become of him for ever; and if he be already assured, that there is
another World, and a glorious Salvation to be attained, it is natural to thirst
after the Resolution of such Questions as these, What shall I do to be saved?
What shall I do to inherit an Eternal Life? And such is the Beauty of
Illuminating Truth, that every Glance of it kindles in our Hearts the Love of
it: And such its boundless Perfection, that the more we know, the more still
shall we desire to know. Having thus considered what qualifies Man for
Illumination, my next business is to enquire.

. 2. What one thus qualified, is to do for the actual Attainment of it. All the
Advice, that I can think fit here to be given, may be reduced to four Heads: 1.
That we do not suffer our Minds to be engaged in quest of Knowledge foreign to
our purpose. 2. That we apply our selves with a very tender and sensible
Concern to the Study of Illuminating Truths. 3. That we act conformable to
those Measures of Light which we have attained. 4. That we frequently and
constantly address our selves to God, by Prayer, for the Illumination of his
Grace.


1. That we do not suffer, etc. This is a natural and necessary Consequence of
what has been already said concerning Illumination. For if Illumination consist
in the Knowledge, not of all sort of Truths, but the most necessary, and
important, such as purify and perfect our Nature, such as procure us sacred
and stable Pleasure, and all the Rewards that flow from our Adoption to God, it
is then plain, he who would be Perfect, ought not to amuse and distract his
Mind in Pursuit of trifling, or divertive Knowledge: that he ought to shun, and
not to admit, whatever is apt to entangle, perplex, or defile him; and to fix
his Thoughts, and confine his Meditations, to the great Truths of the Gospel.
He that knows the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, knows
enough to oblige him to Virtue, and to open the way to Glory and everlasting
Life. He that knows nothing but Jesus Christ; and him Crucified, knows enough
in order to Peace, Grace, and Joy; enough to promote Holiness, and Hope: Hope
that abounds in Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.

2. We must apply our selves with a very tender and sensible Concern to the
Study of Illuminating Truths. This Rule must be understood to enjoin three
things. 1. Great Care and Caution, in examining Doctrins proposed; and in
distinguishing between Truth and Falsehood. 2. Great Diligence and Industry, to
increase and enlarge our Knowledge. 3. Frequent and serious Reflection upon the
Truths we know.

1. There is need of great Caution, in the Trial and Examination of Doctrins.
This the Scripture it self frequently puts us in mind of: and not without
Reason; because the Devil sows his Tares amongst the Wheat; Errors, and these
too fatal and destructive ones, are frequently obtruded upon the World for the
Revelations of God, and every Party, nay, every single Author lays the stress
of Salvation on their peculiar and distinguishing Opinions. Beloved, believe
not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God: because many
false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 John 4.1. It Is needless to
multiply Texts, or Words, on this occasion. When the Peace and Purity of our
Mind, the Rectitude and Happiness of our Lives, and the Blessedness of Eternity
have so close and necessary a Dependence upon the Doctrins we imbibe, that we
hereby either secure or forfeit them, who sees not, unless he be stupid, and
infatuated, that greater Care and Solicitude is necessary here, than in any
matter whatever, because there is no other equal moment? Bad Money, or bad
Wares, instead of good; an ill Title, or Conveyance, instead of a firm, and
clear one, may impoverish us: bad Drugs instead of good, may infect the Body,
and destroy the Health: but what is all this, to the dismal Consequences of
Error and Heresy, which impoverishes, and infect the Mind, prevents the Life,
and damns the Man to all Eternity? The Example of the Bereans is never forgot:
and indeed never ought to be on this occasion. We must admit nothing hastily;
assent to nothing without examining the Grounds on which it stands. Credulity,
Precipitation, and Confidence, are irreconcilable Enemies to Knowledge and
Wisdom.

2. We are to use great Diligence and Industry, to enlarge and increase our
Knowledge. The Treasures of Divine Wisdom are almost infinite; and it fares
with those that Study them, as with a Traveller when he ascends a rising
Ground: every new step almost, enlarges his Horison, and presents new
Countries, new Pleasures, to his Eye. It Is our own Negligence, if we do not
daily extend the Compass of our Knowledge: if our View of things grow not more
distinct and clear, and our Belief of them more firm and steady. This is to
grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, 2 Pet. 3.18. This
is to have the eye of our Understanding opened, Ephesians. 1.17. this is to be filled
with the Knowledge of God, in all Wisdom, and Understanding, Col. 1.9. this is,
finally, for the Word of God to dwell in us richly, Col. 3.16. And of what
Importance this is, is manifest from what I have before proved: namely, that
Illumination consists not in a credulous and ill-grounded, in a slight and
superficial, or a confused and obscure, or imperfect sort of knowledge, but in
a clear, distinct, firm, and well established one. And the acquiring such a one
demands a very diligent and an indefatigable Study of the Word of Life. To fill
the Mind with numerous, great, and beautiful Ideas, and these, clear, and
distinct; to have them engraven in the Memory in deep and lasting Characters;
to have them lodged and disposed in that Order, as to be able in an Instant to
have recourse to them; to discern, and demonstrate plainly, the Connection, and
Dependence* of one upon another, and the unquestionable Evidence of each; this
is a Work of Time and Labor; the Fruit of a Regular and Assiduous Search after
Truth; and if the Capacities and Fortunes of all Men will not suffer them to
come up to this, they must come as near as they can. But if such a search as
this, be not necessary to penetrate the Depths, and to discover the Beauties,
of Divine Truths, or to convince the World, and our selves, of the Certainty of
them, yet certainly without it we shall never be able to extract their Force
and Virtue, and to derive Purity and Nourishment from them: Which is the next
thing implied in the Rule laid down.

3. We must make frequent and serious Reflections on the Truths we do know.
This again naturally follows from the Notion of Illumination as it is before
settled. For if it is not every Knowledge of the best things, that suffices for
Illumination, but a Vital and operative one, that is, a well grounded, clear,
distinct, and well-digested one, it is plain, that constant, daily, and devout
Meditation is necessary to Illumination: because it is not a transcient, and
perfunctory Reflection upon the most important Truths; it is not a fleeting,
rambling, irregular, and desultory Meditation of them, that will possess us
with such a kind of Knowledge. To imprint a Truth in lively Notions upon our
Minds, to digest it into Nourishment and Strength; and make it mix it self with
all our Affections, and all our Actions, it is necessary that we dwell upon it
with Constancy and Delight. And accordingly we find that excellent and elevated
Souls, both under the Old Testament, and the New, have been daily, nay, almost
hourly, conversant in the Book of God: they have been passionately devoted to
the Study of it, and delighted more in it, than in Treasures, or Honors; than
in the most profitable Employments, or engaging Diversions of Life. It Is this
kind of Meditation on God, on Jesus, the World, and our selves, that can alone
acquaint us thoroughly with each: it is this kind of Meditation on Death, and
Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, that can make us wise unto Salvation.

The sum of all that I have said on this Rule amounts to this. That
Illumination is not to be attained without Labor, and Travel. It is indeed the
Gift of God: but such a one as he will never bestow but upon those who ask, and
seek, and knock. Divine Bounty, and Human Industry, do here very well accord:
the Spirit of God generally joins them together; and it is Boldness and Impiety
in Man to go about to divide them, Prove. 2.4, 5, 6. If thou seek her as
silver, and searchest for her as hid treasures; then shall thou understand the
fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God. For the Lord gives Wisdom:
out of his mouth comes Knowledge and Understanding. Nor will any one surely
think it much to devote his Time and Labor to the Attainment of Illumination.
For what is there that can more justly challenge, or better deserve, both? Can
Pleasure? There is none, but what flows from Wisdom, that is either pure,
great, or lasting. Can Business? What Business can be of greater Importance,
than what secures our Salvation, our Eternity? Wisdom then is the principal
thing, therefore get Understanding, Prove. 4.7. for without this, the most
desirable Possessions, and Pleasures of Life, are but Cheats and Illusions,
Mischiefs and Snares. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them; and
the Prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1.32.

3. That we act conformable to those Measures of Light which we have attained.
The more Spiritual we grow, the fitter we are for the Residence of God's
Spirit, and the more capable of his Influences. The more we subdue all
inordinate Affections, the clearer does the Understanding grow, and the more
absolute its Authority. The Grace of God, if it be complied with, and obeyed,
while it renders us more like God, renders us more dear to him too: and one
Favor, if it be not our own fault, qualifies us for another. Whoever shall
observe the Scriptures, will find that Holiness and Illumination advance with
equal steps, and grow up by the same degrees of Maturity; That as we pass on
from the Infancy, to the Manhood, of Virtue, so do we from the first Rudiments
of Wisdom, to the Heights and Mysteries of it. But on the other hand, Lust
obscures and eclipses the Light within: Sin depraves and corrupts our
Principles: and while we renounce our Virtue, we quench, or chase away the
Spirit. Into a malicious Soul Wisdom shall not enter; nor dwell in the Body
that is subject unto Sin: For the holy Spirit of discipline will flee deceit,
and remove from thoughts that are without understanding; and will not abide
when unrighteousness comes in, Wisd. 1.4, 5.

4. We must frequently and constantly address our selves to God, by Prayer, for
the Illumination of his Grace. There is nothing that we do not receive from
above: and if the most inconsiderable things be the Gift of God, from what
Fountain, but from him, can we expect Illumination? The Raptures of Poets, the
Wisdom of Lawgivers, the noblest Pieces of Philosophy, and indeed all Heroic
and Extraordinary Performances, were by the Pagans themselves generally
attributed to a Divine Inspiration. And the Old Testament ascribes a
transcendant skill even in Arts and Trades to the Spirit of God. It is not
therefore to be wondered at, if Illumination, be attributed to Him in the New.
Wisdom and Understanding are essential Parts of Sanctity; and therefore must
proceed from the sanctifying Spirit. We must therefore constantly look up to
God, and depend upon Him for Illumination; we must earnestly Pray in the Words
of St. Paul, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, would
give unto us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. This Dependence
upon God, in Expectation of his Blessing on our search after Knowledge, puts
the Mind into the best Disposition and Frame to attain it: because it naturally
frees and disengages it from those Passions, Prejudices, and Distractions,
which otherwise entangle, and disturb it, and render it incapable of raised,
sedate, and coherent Thoughts. But what is more than this, there are repeated
and express Promises made it; so that it can never fail of Success: Ask, and it
shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened to
you. The Reason of which is added; If ye then being evil, know how to give good
Gifts unto your Children; how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven
give good things (or as it is Luke 11. the Holy Spirit) to them that ask him?
Mat. 7.7, 11. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God; that gives to all
Men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him, Jam. 1.5. nor do
I doubt but every good Man has these Promises verified to him. There are
sudden Suggestions, unexpected Manifestations, extraordinary Elevations of
Mind, which are never to be accounted for, but by a Divine Principle. Nor does
this Doctrine of Spiritual Illumination, or Irradiation, in the least diminish
the Power and Excellence of the Gospel of Christ: no more than the Instruction
of the Gospel, does supersede that of the Spirit. For we must not think that
the Spirit does now Reveal any new Truth, of general Use or Importance; since
the Canon of Scripture would on this supposal be but a defective Rule of Faith
and Manners. But first, the Spirit may assist us in making a fuller Discovery
of the Sense of Scripture. Secondly, the Spirit may help us to form clearer and
distincter Notions of, those things we have yet but an imperfect and general
Knowledge of; and to fix, and imprint them, in more lasting, as well as more
legible Characters, in our Minds: or it may recall to our Remembrance, such
things as are obliterated, and forgotten: Or finally it may produce in us a
more earnest and steady Application to the Truth of God. Thirdly, I see no
Reason why the Spirit may not vouchsafe us particular Impulses, Directions, and
Intimations, upon extraordinary Occasions, and sudden Emergencies; where Holy
Writ affords us no Light, and Human Prudence is at a Loss. Nor does any thing
that I attribute to the Spirit in all this, detract, or derogate from the
Dignity, or the Efficacy of the Scripture. This then I conceive is what the
Spirit does in the Work of Illumination. But how it does, it is not necessary,
nor, I doubt, possible to be determined. Nor ought our Ignorance of this to be
objected against the Truth of Divine Illumination. We are sure we understand
and remember, and exercise a Freedom, or Liberty of Will, in our Choices,
Resolutions, and Actions: but the Manner how we do this, is an Enquiry that
does hitherto, for ought I can see, wholly surpass and transcend our Philosophy.

I will here close this Chapter with a Prayer of Fulgentius, Lib. 1. cap. 4.
After he has in the beginning of the Chapter disclaimed all Pretenses to the
fetting up himself a Master, Doctor or Dictator to his Brethren, he breaks out
into these devout and pious Words. -- I will not cease to Pray, that our true
Master and Doctor Christ Jesus, either by the Oracles of his Gospel, or by the
Conversation of my Brethren, or Joint-disciples, or else by the secret and
delightful Instruction of Divine Inspiration, in which without the Elements of
Letters, or the sound of Speech, Truth speaks with so much the sweeter, as the
stiller and softer Voice; would vouchsafe to teach me those things, which I may
so propose, and so assert, that in all my Expositions and Assertions, I may be
ever found conformable, and Obedient, and firm to that Truth, which can neither
Deceive, nor be Deceived. For it is Truth it self, that enlightens, confirms,
and aids me, that I may always obey and assent to the Truth. By Truth I desire
to be informed of those many more things which I am ignorant of, from whom I
have received the few I know. Of Truth I beg, through preventing and assisting
Grace, to be instructed in what ever I yet know not, which conduces to the
Interest of my Virtue, and Happiness: to be preserved and kept steadfast in
those Truths which I know: to be reformed and rectified in those points; in
which, as is common to Man, I am mistaken; to be confirmed and established in
those Truths wherein I waver; and to be delivered from those Opinions that are
erroneous or hurtful. I beg, lastly, that Truth may ever find, both in my
Thoughts and Speeches, all that sound and wholesome Doctrine I have received
from its Gift; and that it would always cause me to utter those things, which
are agreeable to it self in the first place; and consequently, acceptable to
all faithful Christians in the next.

CHAP. III. Of Liberty.
AFter Illumination, which is the Perfection of the Understanding, follows
Liberty, which is the Perfection of the Will. In Treating of which, I shall
First give an account of Liberty in General: And then discourse of the several
Parts of it; as it regards Wickedness, Vnfruitfulness, Human Infirmities, and
Original Corruption.

. 1. What Liberty is. There have been several Mistakes about this Matter: But
these have been so absurd, or extravagant, so designing or sensual, that they
Need not, I think, a serious Refutation. However, it is necessary in a word or
two to remove this Rubbish and Lumber out of my way, that I may build up and
establish the Truth more easily and regularly. Some then, have placed Christian
Liberty in Deliverance from the Mosaic Yoke. But this is to make our Liberty
consist in Freedom from a Yoke to which we were never subject; and to make our
Glorious Redemption from the Tyranny of Sin and the Misery that attends it,
dwindle into an Immunity from external Rites and Observances. It Is true, the
Mosaic Institution, as far as it consisted in outward Observances and Typical
Rites, is now dissolved: The Messiah being come, who was the Substance of those
Shadows; and the Beauty of Holiness being unfolded and displayed, without any
Vail upon her Face. But what is this to Ecclesiastical Authority? Or to those
Ecclesiastical Institutions, which are no Part of the Mosaic Yoke? From the
Abrogation, indeed, or Abolition of Ritual and Typical Religion one may infer,
First, That Christianity must be a Rational Worship, of Moral, Spiritual
Service. And therefore, Secondly, That Human Institutions, when they enjoin any
thing as a necessary and essential Part of Religion which God has not made so,
or when they impose such Ri^es, as through the Number, or Nature of them,
cherish Superstition, obscure the Gospel, weaken its Force, or prove
burdensome to us, are to be rejected and not complied with. Thus much is
plain, and nothing farther. There have been Others, who have run into more
intolerable Errors. For some have placed Christian Liberty in Exemption from
the Laws of Man: And Others, advancing higher, in Exemption even from the moral
and immutable Laws of God. But the Folly and Wickedness of these Opinions
sufficiently confute them: Since it is notorious to every one, that Disobedience
and Anarchy is as flat a Contradiction to the Peaceableness, as Voluptuousness
and Luxury is to the Purity, of that Wisdom which is from above. But how absurd
and wicked soever these Notions are; yet do we find them greedily embraced and
industriously propagated at this day; And behold, with Amazement, the baffled
and despicable Gnostics, Priscilianists Libertines, and I know not what other
spawn of Hell, reviving in Deists and Atheists. These indeed do not advance
their Errors under a Pretense of Christian Liberty, but, which is more
ingenious, and less scandalous of the two, in open Defiance, and confessed
Opposition to Christianity. They tell us, that we impose upon the World false
and fantastic Notions of Virtue and Liberty: That Religion does enslave Man,
not set him free; awing the Mind by groundless and superstitious Principles,
and restraining and infringing our true and natural Liberty: Which, if we will
believe them, consists, in giving Nature its full swing; letting loose the
Reins to the most headstrong Lusts, and the wildest and the most corrupt
Imaginations. But to this, it is easy to answer, That while these Men attempt
to establish their Errors, and fortify their Minds in them, by Arguments of
some sort or other, as they do, it is plain, that they suppose and acknowledge
with us, That we ought to be ruled and governed by Reason. And if this be true,
then, by undeniable Consequence, true Liberty must consist, not in doing what
we list, but what we ought; not in following our Lust, or Fancy, but our
Reason; not in being exempt from Law, but in being a Law to our selves. And
then I appeal to all the World, whether the Discipline of Virtue, or
Libertinism; whether the Schools of Epicurus, or Christ, be the way to true
Liberty. I appeal to the Experience of Mankind, whether Spiritual, or Sensual,
Pleasure; whether the Love of God and Virtue, or the Love of the World and
Body, be the more like to qualify and dispose us to obey the Dictates of sober
and solid Reason. But the Truth is here is no need of Arguments: The Lives and
Fortunes of Atheists and Deists proclaim aloud what a glorious kind of Liberty
they are like to bless the World with, 2 Pet. 2.19. Whilst they promise
Liberty, they themselves are the Servants of Corruption. And this Corruption
draws on their Ruin. The dishonorable and miserable Courses, in which these
poor Wretches are plunged, and in which, generally, they perish before their
time; are such an open Contradiction to Reason, that no Man doubts but that
they have abandoned its Conduct, that they have given themselves up to that of
Lust and Humor: And that they earnestly endeavor to force, or betray their
Reason into a Compliance to Screen themselves from the reproach and disturbance
of their own Minds, and from the shame and contempt of the World. I have dwelt
long enough on this Argument, It Is now time to pass on, and resolve what
Christian Liberty really is.

This is in a manner evident from what has been suggested already. For if
Reason be the governing Faculty in Man, then the Liberty of Man must consist in
his Subjection to Reason: And so Christian Liberty will be nothing else, but
Subjection to Reason enlightened by Revelation. Two things therefore are
Essential to true Liberty: A clear and unbiassed Judgment; and a Power and
Capacity of Acting conformable to it. This is a very short, but full Account of
Liberty. Darkness and Impotence constitute our Slavery: Light and Strength our
Freedom. Man is then free, when his Reason is not awed by vile Fears, or bribed
by viler Hopes: When it is not tumultuosly transported and hurried away by
Lusts and Passions; nor cheated and deluded by the gilded appearances of
Sophisticated Good; but it deliberates impartially, and commands effectually.
And because the great Obstacle of this Liberty is Sin; because natural and
contracted Corruption are the Fetters in which we are bound; because the Law in
the Body, wars against the Law in the Mind, obscuring the Light, and enfeebling
the Authority, of Reason; hence it is, that Christian Liberty is as truly, as
commonly, described, by a Dominion over the Body, by the subduing our corrupt
Affections, and by Deliverance from Sin. This Notion of Liberty may be
sufficiently established upon that Account of Servitude or Bondage which the
Apostle gives us, Romans 7. where he represents it as consisting in Impotence, or
Inability to do those things, which God commands, and Reason approves: for to
will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find not,
ver. 18. Liberty, therefore, must on the contrary consist, in being able, not
only to will, but to do good; in obeying those Commandments, which we cannot
but acknowledge to be holy and just, and good. And this is the very Notion
which our Lord and Master gives us of it, Joh. 8. For, when the Jews bragged of
their Freedom, he lets them know, that Freedom could not consist with
Subjection to Sin: he that commits Sin is the Servant of Sin, ver. 34. That
honorable Parentage, and the Freedom of the Body, was but a false and
ludicrous Appearance of Liberty: that if they would be free indeed, the Son
must make them so, ver. 36. i. e. they must, by his Spirit and Doctrine, be
rescued from the Servitude of Lust and Error, and be set at Liberty to work
Righteousness. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed: and
ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free, ver. 31* 32.
Finally, not to multiply Proofs, of a truth that is scarce liable to be
controverted, as the Apostle describes the Bondage of a Sinner in Romans 7. so
does he the Liberty of a Saint in Romans 8. For there, ver. 2. he tells us, That
the Law of the Spirit of Life has set the true Christian free from the Law of
Sin and Death. And then he lets us know, wherein this Liberty consists; in
walking, not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: in the Mortification of the
Body of Sin, and Restitution of the Mind to its just Empire and Authority. If
Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of Sin, but the Spirit is Life
because of Righteousness, ver. 10. And all this is the same thing with his
Description of Liberty, Chapter 6. where, it is nothing else, but for a Man to
be made free from Sin, and become the Servant of God. Thus then we have a plain
account of Bondage and Liberty. Yet for the clearer understanding of both, it
will not be amiss to observe, that they are each capable of different Degrees;
and both the one and the other may be more or less entire, complete, and
absolute, according to the different Progress of Men in Vice and Virtue. Thus,
in some Men, not their Will only, but their very Reason is enslaved. Their
Understanding is so far infatuated, their Affections so entirely captived, that
there is no Conflict at all between the Mind and the Body: they commit Sin
without any Reluctance beforehand, or any Remorse afterward: their s^ared
Conscience making no Remonstrance, inflicting no wounds, nor denouncing any
Threats. This is the last Degree of Vassalage. Such are said in Scripture to be
dead in Trespasses and Sins. Others there are in whom their Lust and Appetite
prevails indeed, but not without Opposition. They Reason rightly; and, which is
the natural Result of this, have some Desires and wishes of Righteousness: but
through the Prevalency of the Body, they are unable to act and live conformable
to their Reason. Their Understanding has indeed Light, but not Authority: It
consents to the Law of God, but it has no Power, no Force to make it be obeyed:
it produces indeed some good Inclinations, Purposes, and Efforts; but they
prove weak and ineffectual ones, and unable to grapple with the stronger
Passion raised by the Body. And as Bondage, so Liberty is of different Degrees,
and different Strength. For though Liberty may be able to subsist, where there
is much Opposition from the Body, yet it is plain that Liberty is most absolute
and complete, where the Opposition is least, where the Body is reduced to an
entire Submission and Obsequiousness, and the Spirit reigns with an
uncontrolled and unlimited Authority, And this latter is that Liberty which I
would have my Perfect man possessed of. I know very well it is commonly taught
by some, that there is no such State: But I think this Doctrine, if it be
thoroughly considered, has neither Scripture, Reason, nor Experience, to support
it. For as to those Places, Romans 7. and Gal. 5. urged in favor of an almost
Incessant, strong, and too-frequently prevalent lusting of the Flesh against
the Spirit, it has been often answered, and proved too, that they are so far
from belonging to the Perfect, that they belong not to the Regenerate. But on
the contrary, those Texts, that represent the Yoke of Christ easy, and his
burden light; which affirm the Commandments of Christ not to be grievous to
such as are made Perfect in Love; do all bear witness to that Liberty, which I
contend for. Nor does Reason favor my Opinion less than Scripture. For if the
Perfect man be a New Creature, if he be transformed into a New Nature; if his
Body be dead to sin, and his Spirit live to Righteousness; in one word, if the
World be as much crucified to him, as he to it; I cannot see why it should not
be easy for him to act consonant to his Nature: why he should not with
Pleasure and Readiness follow that Spirit, and obey those Affections, which
reign and rule in him. Nor can I see why a Habit of Righteousness should not
have the same Properties with other Habits; that is, be attended with ease and
pleasure in its Operations and Actions. It Is true, I can easily see why the
Habits of Righteousness are acquired with more Difficulty than those of any
other kind: but, I say, I cannot see, when they are acquired, why they should
not be as natural, and delightful to us, as any other. Lastly, how degenerate
soever Ages past have been, or the present is, I dare not so far distrust the
Goodness of my Cause, or the Virtue of Mankind, as not to refer my self
willingly, in this point, to the Decision of Experience. I am very well
assured, that Truth and Justice, Devotion and Charity, Honor and Integrity,
are to a great many, so dear and delightful, so natural, so easy, that it is
hard to determine, whether they are more strongly moved, by a sense of Duty, or
the Instigations of Love and Inclination, and that they cannot do a base thing
without the utmost Mortification, and Violence to their Nature. Nor is all this
to be wondered at, if we again reflect on what I just now intimated; that the
Perfect Man is a new Creature, transformed daily from Glory to Glory: that he
is moved by new Affections, raised and fortified by new Principles: that he is
animated by a Divine Energy; and sees all things by a truer and brighter Light;
through which the things of God appear lovely and beautiful, the things of the
World, Deformed and worthless; just as to him who views them through a
Microscope, the Works of God appear exact and elegant, but those of Man coarse,
and bungling, and ugly. My Opinion then, which asserts the absolute Liberty of
the Perfect Man, is sufficiently proved here, and in Chap. the first. And if I
thought it were not, I could easily reinforce it with fresh Recruits. For the
glorious Characters that are given us in Scripture, of the Liberty of the
Children of God, and the blessed Fruit of it, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost,
would easily furnish me with invincible Arguments: Nor would the contrary
Opinion ever have been able to have kept the Field so long as it has done, had
it not been favored by a weak and decayed Piety; by the Fondnesses of Men for
themselves, in spite of their Sins and Frailties; and by many mistaken Texts.

But that this Matter may, if possible, be freed from all Objections. 1. I here
distinguish between Inordinate, and Natural, Affections. By Inordinate
Affections, I mean the Tendencies of the Soul toward that which is Unlawful:
by Natural, its Propension to the Body with which it is invested; the Desire of
its Health, and Ease, and the Conveniences and Necessaries of Life for this
end. Now when Religion enjoins Repugnances to the former Appetites, the
Obedience of the Perfect Man has no Reluctance in it: but when it enjoins
things, as sometimes occasionally it does, which thwart and cross the latter;
here the Obedience even of Christ himself could not be exempt from Conflict;
for our Natural Appetites, in this sense of them, will never be put off till
our Bodies be. I think this is so clear, it needs not be illustrated by
Instances: or else 'twere easy to show, that though good men have practiced
Temperance, Chastity, Charity, and other Virtues of this kind, with ease and
pleasure too; yet has Nature shrunk and startled at Persecution and Martyrdom:
though even here too the Courage and Resolution of some has appeared to be
much above what Human Nature ever seemed capable of. 2. I do not in the least
suppose that Nature is so changed, but that the Inclinations to sinful
Pleasure, or Profit, or any other forbidden Object, will soon revive again,
even in the Perfect Man, unless he keep a watch and guard upon himself, and
pass the time of his sojourning here in fear. Not to be subject to disorderly
Desires, not to be liable to irregular Motions, is the Privilege of Souls when
stripped of a Mortal Body, or clothed with an Immortal one. Till then, the
Conjunction of Flesh and Blood will ever render the poor Soul obnoxious to
carnal and worldly Appetites: And the natural Appetites of the Body do so
easily pass those Bounds that divide them from sinful ones, that the best of
men can never be secure, but when the Mind is taken up in Contemplation,
Devotion, good Works, or engaged in the Prosecution of some just, and honest
Design; or amused by some innocent Recreation: for in these Cases, the Body is
either made the Instrument of Righteousness; or at least wise, it is innocently
busied, and diverted from those Objects, to which it has too too impetuous a
Tendency. I have now, I think, sufficiently stated the Notion of true Liberty;
and I hope, sufficiently guarded it. And have nothing to do, but to proceed to
the Fruits of it. Which will serve for so many Motives, or Inducements to its
Attainment.

. 2. Of the Fruits of Liberty.

These may be reduced under four Heads.

1. Sin being a great Evil, Deliverance from it is great Happiness.

2. A second Fruit of this Liberty is Good Works.

3. It gives us a near Relation to God.

4. The great and last Fruit of it is Eternal Life.

These are all comprised by the Apostle in Romans 6.2.1, 22, 23. What fruit had
ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end of those
things is death. But now being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God,
ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the end everlasting Life. For the wages
of sin is Death, but the Gift of God is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. And these are the great Ends which the Gospel that perfect Law of
Liberty, aims at, and for which it was Preached to the World: as appears from
those Words of our Lord to St. Paul, Acts 26.17, 18. unto whom now I send thee,
to open their Eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of Sins, and inheritance
among them which are sanctified by Faith that is in me. I will here insist on
these Blessed Effects of Christian Liberty; not only because the Design of the
Chapter demands it, but also to prevent the being obliged to any tedious
Repetition of them hereafter, under every distinct Branch of Christian Liberty.

. 1. Sin is a great Evil; and therefore Deliverance from the Dominion of it is
a great Good. To make this evident, we need but reflect a little on the Nature
and Effects of Sin. If we enquire into the Nature of Sin, we shall find that it
is founded in the Subversion of the Dignity, and defacing the Beauty, of Human
Nature: and that it consists, in the Darkness of our Understanding, the
Depravity of our Affections, and the Feebleness and Impotence of the Will. The
Understanding of a Sinner is incapable of discerning, the Certainty and Force
of Divine Truths, the Loveliness of Virtue; the unspeakable Pleasure which now
flows from the great and precious Promises of the Gospel, and the incomparably
greater which will one day flow from the Accomplishment and Fruition of them.
His Affections, which if fixed and bent on Virtue, had been Incentives, as they
were designed by God, to noble and worthy Actions, being biased, and
perverted, do now hurry him on to lewd and wicked ones. And by these the Mind,
if at any time it chance to be awakened and rendered sensible of its Happiness
and Duty, is overpowered and oppressed. If this were not the true State of a
Sinner, if the strength of Sin did not thus consist in the Disorder and
Impotence of all the Faculties of the Soul, whence is it that the Sinner acts
as he does? Is it not evident that his understanding is infatuated, when he
lives as if he were merely, wholly, Body? As if he had no Soul, or none but one
resulting from, and dissolved with, its Temperament and Contexture? One
designed to no higher purpose, than to contrive, minister to, and partake in
its Sensualities? Is it not evident that He has little expectation of another
World, who lays up his Treasures only in this; and lives as if he were Born
only to make Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof? It Is true,
all Sinners are not equally stupid or obdurate: but even in those in whom some
sparks of Understanding and Conscience remain unextinguished, how are the weak
Desires of Virtue baffled, and overpowered, by the much stronger Passions
which they have for the Body and the World? Do they not find themselves reduced
to that wretched state of Bondage, wherein the good that they would do, that
they do not, but the evil that they would not do, that is present with them?
It Is plain then, that Sin is a Disease in our Nature: that it not only
extinguishes the Grace of the Spirit, and obliterates the Image of God stamped
on the Soul in its Creation; but also scatters and diffuses, I know not what
Venom, and Infection thorough it, that makes it eagerly pursue its own Misery.
It Is a Disease that produces more intolerable Effects in the Soul, than any
whatever can in the Body. The Predominancy of any noxious Humor can breed no
Pain, no Disturbance, equal to that of a Predominant Passion^ no Scars or Ruins
which the worst Disease leaves behind it* are half so deformed and loathsome as
those of Vice: Nay, that last Change, which Death it self produces, when it
converts a beautiful Body into Dust and Rottenness* is not half so contemptible
or hateful as that of Sin; when it transforms Man into a Beast or Devil. If we
do not yet sufficiently comprehend the Nature of Sin, by viewing it as it
exists in our Minds and Hearts, we may Contemplate it in our Actions. And here,
it is Blindness and Folly, Rashness and Madness, Incogitance, Levity, Falsehood
and Cowardice; it is every thing that is mean, and base: and all this aggravated
by the most accursed Ingratitude that Human Nature is capable of. These and the
like Reflections on the Nature of Sin, cannot choose but render it hateful. And
if,

Secondly, we make any serious ones on the Effects of it, they cannot fail of
rendering it frightful and dreadful to us. These Effects may be especially
reduced to Three: 1. The ill Influence Sin has upon our Temporal Concerns. 2.
Guilt. And 3. Fear. As to the First of these, I shall only say that we suffer
very few Evils but what are owing to our own Sins: that it is very rarely any
Calamity befalls us, but we may put our Finger on the Fountain, the, Sin, I
mean, from whence the Mischief flows. Whence come Wars and Fighting amongst
you, says St. James, come they not from your Lusts, which war in your Members?
This is every jot as applicable to Private, as Public Contentions: and where
Envy, Strife, and Contention is, no evil Work, no Disaster, will be long
absent. I might run through all the different kinds of Evils, that infest the
Body, or embroil the Fortune; that blast our Hopes, or stain our Desires* and
easily show, that they all generally spring from our Vices. Nay what is worse
yet, I could show that Sin converts our good things into evil, and our
Enjoyments into Punishments: that it renders the slightest Evils intolerable;
turns Scratches into Wounds, and Wounds into Gangrenes. But this is too copious
a subject; and would insensibly render me Voluminous, when I would be as short
as possibly I can. A Second Effect of Sin is Guilt: which is nothing else, but
a Consciousness of having done ill, and an Obligation to Punishment resulting
from it. And though Men often Sin with Hopes of Impunity, yet it is hard to
imagine; even on this supposal, that they should sin without suffering the
Reproaches of their own Minds; which surely must be very uneasy to them: To be
perpetually vex't at ones own Folly to commit those things which we inwardly
condemn, and be in continual Pain lest they should come to Light* to be always
displeased at ones self, and afraid, not only of the Reflections of others, but
our own: This is, methinks, a great Evil, did no other attend our sin. But*
Thirdly, Fear is almost inseparably joined with Guilt: for Guilt does not only
damp the Cheerfulness, and enfeeble the Vigor, of the Mind; it does not only
destroy that Confidence Man would otherwise naturally have in God and render
him Cowardly and Pusillanimous; but it terrifies his Soul with Melancholy
Apprehensions, and makes him live continually in fear of Death and Punishment.
And thus the Scripture represents the state of a sinner: The wicked flee when
none pursue: but the righteous are bold as a lion, Prove. 28.1. If our heart
condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things, 1 John 3.2.
There is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord, Isa. 48.22. To deliver them,
who through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage, Heb.
2.15. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surpised the Hypocrites;
who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell
with everlasting burnings? Isa. 23.14. Nor let any one wonder, that
notwithstanding the outward Gaiety of the sinner, the Spirit thus describes the
inward Condition of his Soul. As long as Men retain the Belief of a God, it is
impossible they should wholly free themselves from the Fear of him. They may
indeed forget him in the Fits of Lust or Passion: but in their Intermissions
his Terrors will return upon them with more Violence. Again, as long as Men
retain the common Principles of Truth and Justice; if they acknowledge but the
Obligation of that universal Law, Thou shall do to others, as thou would
they should do unto thee, it is impossible they should reflect on their sins
without Regret and uneasiness; for there is no sin but has, more or less
Repugnancy in it to Truth, Justice, and Goodness. Finally, as long as Men are
persuaded that there is such a Faculty as Conscience, that God has prescribed
them a Law, and that they are accountable to Him; the natural Conscience cannot
choose but by Fits, and upon Occasions, scourge and torture, lance and gash
them. And it is a hard matter to wear out these Notions: they are so natural and
obvious; the Proofs of them are so clear; their Reputation and Authority in the
World is so well established; and the Providence of God so frequently
inculcates them. Men may easily wear out all sense of the Beauty, and of their
Obligations to the Heights and Perfections, of Virtue: but they cannot so
easily do this in reference to Virtue in general; because it is tempered and
accommodated to Human Nature, and Society; and necessary to the tolerable
well-being of the World. Men may soon, I confess, extinguish their
Christianity; but not Humanity: and while this remains, Sin will leave a Stain,
and Guilt behind it; and Guilt will be attended by uneasiness, and Fear. The
very Pagans, who had advanced so far in Wickedness, as to be given up to all
dishonorable Passions, and to commit all Uncleanness with Greediness, had not
yet so mortified and stupefied their Consciences but that it gave them much
Disturbance, Romans 1. ver. 32. it is said of them, that they knew the Judgment of
God, that they which committed such things, were worthy of Death. And Romans
2.15. their Consciences are said to accuse and condemn them. And it is of very
wicked Men, that the Author to the Hebrews affirms, that through fear of Death
they were all their life time subject to bondage.

But are there not, will some say, many Ingenious and Brave Spirits, who have
dispersed these vain Specter, and burst those superstitious Fetters, by which
you labor to scare and enslave the World? I do not doubt; indeed, but that
there are too many who have vigorously endeavored to cashier all Principles of
Natural and Revealed Religion, and utterly to extinguish all Conscience of Good
and Evil. But this is such an Attempt, in which, I confess, I could never have
believed, that the most daring sinner could have proved succesful, had not the
Scriptures told me that there are some, who are past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. of a
feared Conscience, 2 Timothy 4.2. who are not ashamed when they have committed
Iniquity, neither can they blush, Jer. 6.15. who call good, evil, and evil,
good; that put darkness for Light, and light for darkness; that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa 5.20. Such sinners there are then: but what
does this amount to? What can their Sense or Example weigh? I am sure these
poor Wretches are as far distant from any true Happiness, as from true Sense;
and deserve our Pity, not Imitation. As will easily appear from these following
Considerations.

1. It Is true, Conscience depends upon Opinion: but what if this Opinion depend
upon Sense, and Truth? What if it be built upon the Demonstration of the Spirit
and of Power? In what a deplorable Condition are these Men of Wit? The Fear of
an angry God, a Judgment to come, and an Hell, is no common or ordinary Fear.
It Is not the Fear of a scratch, or wound in the Body; of a ba^^e in the Pursuit
of Preferment; or a Disappointment in that of Pleasure; it is not the loss, or
the forfeiture of Estate, in part, or whole: it is not a Blot, upon our
Reputation; it is not the Death of a Child, a Brother, or what is more unless he
be such, a Friend: it is not any thing of this kind that is the Object of this
Fear; but Misery, pure, and unallay'd* complicated, accumulated Misery: Misery
unalterable, incurable, and lasting as long as Eternity. Methinks before one
should venture on a Sin, which is threatened with such a state as this; and much
more, before one should resolve to continue in it; were reasonable to be very
sure, that the Notion of a Hell were false, and the Doctrine of Eternal
Punishment a mere Bugbear. Nay, I protest, in a matter of this Importance, I
think one should scarce trust to a Demonstration; unless it had passed the Test
of the most solid and Impartial part of Mankind, and stood the Shock and Trial
of many Ages. But, alas after the utmost Efforts of Wit and Lust, what has
ever yet been produced, that has been able to undergo the Examination even of
an honest Man? What Arguments have yet been started against a Judgment to come,
that have been able to work upon any who were truly serious in the Point? And
if a Judgment to come, why not an Hell? Revelation is plain; and Reason can
find no Inconsistency in the Doctrine. Human Laws punish a single Offense
sometimes with Death or Banishment; with loss of Estate: and by this, and
diverse other Ways, extend the Punishment of the Criminal to his Posterity: that
is, make it as Eternal as they can. And shall it be thought unjust in God to
punish the repeated Provocations of an impenitent Life; the Neglect of that
great Salvation wrought by the Blood and published by the Mouth of his dearly
Beloved Son; and all this wilfully in Defiance of the Light of the Gospel, and
Solicitations of the Spirit; in Defiance of Mercies and Chastisements; shall
it, I say, be thought unjust in God to punish this by a miserable Eternity?
when Infinite Goodness has in vain tried all imaginable means to reclaim a
Sinner, what has he to complain of, if God leave him to the Effects of his own
Choice? Sin as it alienates our Affections from God, here, so must it certainly
exclude us from his Presence, and his Favor, hereafter? And what can be the
Case of that wretched Creature, who is banished for ever to those black and
dismal Regions, which no Ray, no Influence of Divine Goodness can ever reach?
Where shall those unhappy Creatures dwell, which shall be chased by the
Presence and Glory of God out of the new Heavens and the new Earth (or which
rather can never approach either) but in that outward Darkness, which is parted
from the World of the Blessed by an unpassable Gulf? Ah! then, if this be so,
what do wretched Men gain by growing impudent in Wickedness? alas! the more
insensible Men are of the Deformity and Danger of Sin, the more desperate their
state, the more incurable their Disease; and the nearer they to Death and
Destruction, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man. This is indeed a
blessed Advantage to stand upon the brink of Damnation! It Is a glorious
Victory, to have defeated all the Means of Grace and Happiness! It Is an Heroic
Achievement, to be able to extinguish all true Sense, and Reason, as well as
Religion, and become impregnable, impenetrable, to all Arguments, to all
Motives, which either the tenderest Love, or the profoundest Wisdom of God and
Man can attack us by!

2. I cannot but think that those very Men, who for the most part are obdurate
and insensible, do suffer some, though rare returns of Anxiety and Fear. Why
else are they such avowed Enemies to Solitude and Retirement? to all serious
and calm Reflections, that they are ready to take up with a most trifling and
contemptible Business or Diversion? nay, tired with a dull and tasteless
Repetition of a Folly, they choose to repeat it to their Lives End, rather than
be alone, and thoughtful? What is this but to confess, that there is something
within, which they are afraid to awaken? that there is such a Brightness in
Divine Truth, that they dare not open their Eyes upon it, lest it should fill
their Souls with the Terrors of God. This Height of Wickedness then, at best,
is a state fit only for Fortunate Sinners; who can roll and tumble from Folly
to Folly, from one Impertinence or Extravagance to another, endlesly: and yet
what becomes of these poor Things, when a Disaster, when a Disease, nay but a
wakeful hour by Night, forces them to retire into themselves?

3. A Sinner does not soon arrive at this state of Insensibility. It costs him
very dear to grow impudent in his Lust. Many a Pang, many a Torment has he
suffered first, often has he felt the Wounds of Conscience: often has he
trembled and shrunk at the Menaces of God. The Soul can no more be reconciled
to Sin, than the Body to Excess; but by passing thorough many painful and
sickly Fits, many uneasy Pangs and Qualms. And is it not worth the while to
endure so much in order to be damned? Is it not an infallible Mark of more than
vulgar Wisdom to purchase Misery at so dear a rate? To endure hardship, as good
Soldiers of Christ Jesus, for a Crown, a never-fading Crown, this, with them,
is an undertaking that deserves to be exposed, and lashed with the utmost
severity of Spite and Confidence: but to suffer, as it were, repeated
Martyrdoms, to gain an Hell, this is what they think becomes Men of their Parts
and Gallantry. Blessed God! to what Degree of Madness and Stupidity may Men of
the finest Natural Parts sink, when abandoned by Thee? or rather, when they
themselves abandon Thee and that Light which Thou have set up in the World? Our
Lord and Master thought the Profits and Pleasures of the whole World, a poor
Compensation for the Loss of the Soul: What is a Man profited, if he gain the
whole World, etc. Matthew. 16. But these Men rather than it should not perish for
ever, will charge through Shame and Pain, Remorse and Sickness; and all the
Obstacles that God has set between us and a desperate Height of Wickedness.

4. Though a Sinner may come to that Pass, as to suppress his Conscience, and
master his Fears; yet he must ever be conscious to himself, of the
Fruitlesness, and the Meanness of a Course of Sin. He must needs be inwardly
sensible, that he has wearied himself to commit Iniquity to no purpose; that
his Mind has been restless, and tempestuous, like a troubled Sea, casting up
its own Mire and Dirt: He must be conscious to himself, that he is false, and
unjust, unconstant, and ungrateful; and in Bondage to such Lusts, as are mean
and poor, and injurious to his Repose, and which he has often wished himself
free from. And this, no doubt, must be a blessed Condition, when a Man's own
Mind does to his face assure him, that he is that very thing, which all the
World condemns and scorns; and which he cannot endure to be charged with,
without resenting it as the highest Affront! Certainly it were better that all
the World should call me Fool, and Knave, and Villain, than that I should call
my self so, and know it to be true. My Peace and Happiness depends upon my own
Opinion of my self, not that of others: it is the inward sentiments, that I have
of my self, that raise or deject me; and my Mind can no more be pleased with
any Sensation but its own, than the Body can be gratified by the Relishes of
another's Palate.

5. The more insensible a Sinner grows, the more intolerable is the Disorder
and Distraction which Sin produces in his Affairs. While Men are under any
little restraints of Conscience, while they are held in by Scruples, and Fears,
and Fits of Regret; while, in a Word, they Sin with any Modesty; so long Sin
will tollerably comport with their Interest, and Reputation: but as soon as
they grow insensible, and impudent, they pass all bounds; and there is nothing
so dear and considerable to them, which they will not Sacrifice to their
Wickedness. Now Wife and Children, Friends, Estate, Laws, Vows, Compacts,
Oaths, are no stronger Ties to them than Sampson's Withs, or Cords. Such a one
as this is very well described in the Prophet: Thou art a swift Dromedary,
traversing her ways; a wild Ass used to the Wilderness; that snuffeth up the
Wind at her pleasure: in her occasion who can turn her away? Jer. 2.22. And
again, he is fitly represented to an Horse rushing into the Battle. He has as
much Contempt for his safety and Happiness, as for Reason and Religion: he
defies Shame, Ruin, and Death, as much as he does God and Providence: in one
word, with an impudent and lewd stupidity, he makes all the have he can to be
undone: and since he will be so, it were well if he could be undone alone. I am
sure we have too many Instances at this Day, of the miserable and fatal Effects
of Atheism and Deism, to leave any room to doubt whether I have strained the
point here or no.

Upon the whole, it does appear, that Sin is a great Evil: and that the Evil of
it is not lessened, but increased by Obduration. And from hence the Proposition
inferred does naturally follow, that Deliverance from it is a great Good: so
great, that if we estimate it by the Evil there is in Sin, Health to the Sick,
Liberty to the Captive, Day to the benighted, weary, and wandering Traveller; a
Calm, a Port, to Passengers in a Storm, Pardon to Men adjudged to Death, are
but weak and imperfect Images or Resemblances of it. A Disease will at worst
terminate with the Body and Life and Pain will have an End together. But the
Pain that Sin causes will endure to all Eternity; for the Worm dies not, and
the Fire will not be quenched. The Error of the Traveller will be corrected by
the approaching Day, and his Weariness refreshed at the next Stage he comes to:
but he that errs impenitently from the Path of Life, is lost for ever. When the
Day of Grace is once set upon him, no Light shall e're recall his wandering Feet,
into the Path of Righteousness and Peace; no Ease, no Refreshment, shall e're
relieve his Toil and Misery. Whilst the Feet of the Captive are loaded with
Fetters, his Soul may enjoy its truest Liberty; and in the midst of Dangers,
and Dungeons like Paul and Silas, he may sing Songs of Praise and Triumph: but
the Captivity of Sin defiles, oppresses, and enslaves the Mind, and delivers up
the miserable Man to those intolerable and endless Evils, which inexorable
Justice, and Almighty Wrath inflicts upon Ingratitude and Obstinacy. A Storm
can but wreck the Body, a frail and worthless Bark: the Soul will escape safe
to Shore, the Blessed Shore, where the happy Inhabitants enjoy an undisturbed,
an Everlasting Calm: but Sin makes Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience,
and he that perishes in it, does but pass into a more miserable state; for on
the wicked God will rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, storm and tempest; this
shall be their portion forever, Psalm. 11. And Lastly, a Pardon sends back a
Condemned Criminal to Life, that is, to Sins and Sufferings, to toils and
troubles, which Death, if Death were the utmost he had to fear, would have
freed him from: But he that is once delivered from Sin, is past from Death to
Life; and from this Life of Faith, of Love, of Hope, shall soon pass to another
of Fruition and Glory.

. 2. A Second Fruit of Liberty is, Good Works; Here I will show Two things:
First, and this but briefly, that the Works of Righteousness contribute
mightily to our Happiness; and that immediately. Secondly, That Deliverance
from Sin removes the great Obstacles and Impediments of Righteousness, and
throws off that Weight, which would otherwise encumber and tire us in our Race.
1. Holiness is no small Pleasure, no small Advantage, to him who is exercised
therein. When Nature is renewed and restored, the Works of Righteousness are
properly and truly the Works of Nature: and to do good to Man, and offer up our
Praises and Devotions to God, is to gratify the strongest and most delightful
Inclinations we have. These indeed are at first stifled, and oppressed, by
Original Corruption, false Principles, and Vicious Customs: But when once they
have broke through these, like Seeds through the Earthy Coats they are enclosed
and imprisoned in, and are impregnated, warmed and cherished by an Heavenly
Influence, they naturally shoot up into good works. Virtue has a Celestial
Original, and a Celestial Tendency: from God it comes, and toward God it
moves: and can it be otherwise than amiable and pleasant? Virtue is all Beauty,
all Harmony, and Order: and therefore we may view, and review, consider, and
reflect upon it with Delight. It procures us the Favor of God and Man; it
makes our Affairs naturally run smoothly and calmly on; and fills our Minds
with Courage, Cheerfulness, and good Hopes. In one word, Diversion and
Amusements give us a Fanciful Pleasure, an Animal sensitive Life, a short and
mean one; Sin a deceitful, false, and fatal one: Only Virtue, a pure, a
rational, a glorious, and lasting one. And this is enough to be said here: the
Loveliness of Holiness being a subject which ever and anon I have occasion to
engage in. 2. I am next to show, that Deliverance from Sin removes the
Impediments of Virtue. This will easily be made out, by examining what
Influence, selfishness, sensuality, and the Love of this World, which are the
three great Principles or Sources of Wickedness, have upon the several Parts of
Evangelical Righteousness? 1. The first Part is that, which contains those
Duties, that more immediately relate to our selves. These are especially two,
Sobriety, and Temperance. By Sobriety, I mean a serious and impartial
Examination of things; or such a state of Mind as qualifies us for it. By
Temperance, I mean the moderation of our Affections and Enjoyments, even in
lawful and allowed Instances. From these proceed, Vigilance, Industry,
Prudence, Fortitude; or Patience and Steadiness of mind in the Prosecution of
what is best. Without these it is in vain to expect, either Devotion toward
God, or Justice and Charity toward Man. Nay nothing good or great can be
accomplished without them: since without them we have no ground to hope for,
either the Assistance of Divine Grace, or the Protection and Concurrence of
Divine Providence. Only the pure and chaste Soul is a fit Temple for the
Residence of the Spirit: and the Providence of God watches over none, or at
least none have Reason to expect it should, but such as are themselves vigilant
and industrious. But now, how repugnant to, how inconsistent with those
Virtues, is that Infatuation of Mind, and that Debauchery of Affections,
wherein Sin consists? How incapable, either of Sobriety or Temperance, do
selfishness, Sensuality, and the Love of this World, render us? What a false
Estimate of things do they cause us to form? How insatiable do they render us
in our Desire of such things, as have but false and empty Appearances of Good?
and how imperiously do they precipitate us into those Sins, which are the
Pollution and Dishonor of our Nature? On the contrary, let man be but once
enlightened by Faith; let him but once come to believe, that his Soul is
himself, that he is a Stranger and Pilgrim upon Earth, that Heaven is his
Country, and that to do good Works is to lay up his Treasure in it; let him, I
say, but once believe this, and then, how Sober, how Temperate, how Wise, how
Vigilant, and Industrious will he grow? And this he will soon be induced to
believe, if he be not actually under the Influence of vicious Principles, and
vicious Customs. When the Mind is undeceived and disabused, and the Affections
disengaged, it is natural to Man to think calmly, and to Desire and Enjoy with a
Moderation, suited to just and sober Notions of worldly things: for this is to
think and act as a Man. A Second Part of Holiness regards God as its immediate
Object, and consists in the Fear and Love of Him; in Dependence, and
Self-Resignation; in Contemplation and Devotion. As to this, it is plain, that
whoever is under the Dominion of any Sin, must be an Enemy, or at least a
Stranger to it. The Infidel knows no God: and the Wicked will not, or dares
not, approach one. Their Guilt, or their Aversion keeps them from it.
Selfishness, Sensuality, and the Love of the World, are inconsistent with the
Love of the Father, and all the several Duties we owe him: They alienate the
Minds of Men from Him, and set up other Gods in his room. Hence, the Covetous
are pronounced guilty of Idolatry, Col. 3.5. and the Luxurious and Unclean are
said to make their Belly their God, and to glory in their shame, Phil. 3.19.
But as soon as a poor Man discerns, that he has set his Heart upon false Goods;
as soon as he finds himself cheated, and deceived in all his Expectations by
the World, and is convinced that God is his proper and his Sovereign Good; how
natural is it to turn his Desires and Hopes from the Creature upon the Creator?
How natural is it to contemplate his Greatness and Goodness, to thirst
impatiently for his Favor, and dread his Displeasure? And such a Man will
certainly make the Worship of God a great part, at least, of the Business and
Employment of Life. With this he will begin, and with this he will end the Day:
nor will he rest here: his Soul will be ever and anon mounting toward Heaven,
in Ejaculations; and there will be scarce any Action, any Event, that will not
excite him to praise and adore God, or engage him in some wise Reflections on
his Attributes. But all this, will the Loose and Atheistical say, may be well
spared, it is only a vain and idle Amusement. War and Peace, Business and Trade,
have no Dependence upon it: Kingdoms and Commonwealths may stand and flourish,
and sensible Men may be rich and happy, without it. But to this I answer,
Religion toward God is the Foundation of all true Virtue toward our
Neighbor. Laws would want the better part of their Authority, if they were not
enforced by an Awe of God: the wisest Counsels would have no Effect, did not
Virtue and Religion help to execute them: Kingdoms and Commonwealths would be
dissolved, and burst to pieces, if they were not united and held in by these
bonds: and Wickedness would reduce the World to one great Solitude and Ruin,
were it not tempered and restrained, not only by the Virtues, and Examples, but
by the Supplications and Intercessions too, of devout Men. Finally, this is an
Objection fit for none to make* but the Sottish and the Ignorant: Men of
desperate Confidence and little Knowledge. For who ever is able to consider, by
what Motives Mankind has ever been wont to be most strongly affected, by what
Principles the World has ever been led and governed; how great an Interest even
Superstition has had, either in the Civilizing and Reforming Barbarous Nations;
or the Martial Successes of the first Founders of Monarchies, and the like;
whoever, I say, is able to reflect, though but slightly, on these things, can
never be so silly, as to demand what the use of Religion is; or to imagine it
possible to root up its Authority in the World.

The Third Part of Holiness regards our Neighbor; and consists in the Exercise
of Truth, Justice, and Charity. And no where is the ill Influence of
Selfishness, Sensuality, and the Love of the World, more notorious than here:
For these rendering us impatient and insatiable in our Desires, violent in the
Prosecution of them, extravagant and excessive in our Enjoyments; and the
things of this World being few and finite, and unable to satisfy such
inordinate Appetites; we stand in one another Light, in one another way to
Profit and Pleasures, or, too often at least, seem to do so: and this must
unavoidably produce a thousand miserable Consequences. Accordingly, we daily
see that these Passions, Selfishness, Sensuality, and the Love of the World,
are the Parents of Envy and Emulation, Avarice, Ambition, Strife, and
Contention, Hypocrisy and Corruption, Lewdness, Luxury and Prodigality: but
are utter Enemies to Honor, Truth and Integrity; to Generosity and Charity. To
obviate therefore the mischievous Effects of these vicious Principles, Religion
aims at implanting in the World others, of a benign and beneficent Nature;
opposing, against the Love of the World, Hope; against Selfishness, Charity;
and against Sensuality, Faith: And to the end the different Tendency of these
Different Principles may be the more conspicuous; I will briefly compare the
Effects they have in reference to our Neighbor. Selfishness makes Men look
upon the World as made for him alone; and upon all as his Enemies, who do any
way interfere with, or obstruct his Designs: it Seals up all our Treasures;
confines all our Care and Thoughts to our private Interest, Honor, or
Pleasure; employs all our Parts, Power, and Wealth, and all our Time too, in
Pursuit of our particular Advantage. Sensuality tempts a Man, to abandon the
Care and Concern for his Country, his Friends, and Relations, and neglect the
Duties of his Station, that he may give himself up to some sottish and
dishonorable Vice: it prevails with him to refuse Alms to the poor, Assistance
to any public or Neighbourly good Work, and even a decent, nay sometimes a
necessary Allowance to his Family, that he may waste and lavish out his Fortune
upon some vile and expensive Lust. In a word, it makes him incapable of the
Fatigues of Civil Business; and much more of the Hardships and Hazards of War:
So that instead of imitating the glorious Example of Vriah, who would not
suffer himself to be courted into the Enjoyment even of allowed Pleasures, nor
indulge himself in the Tendernesses and Caresses of a Wife and Children, while
Joab and the Armies of Israel were in the Field; he, on the contrary, dissolves
and melts down his Life and Fortunes in Uncleanness and Luxury, the shame and
burden of his Country and his Family, at a time when not only the Honor, but
the Safety, of his Country lies at stake, and Prince and People defend it by
their Toil and Blood. What should I mention the Love of the World? are not the
Effects of it as visible, amongst us, as deplorable? does not this, wherever
it reigns, fill all Places with Bribery and Corruption, Falsehood, Treachery,
and Cowardice? Worse cannot be said on it, and more needs not: for what
Societies can thrive, or which way can Credit and Reputation be Supported; what
Treasures, what Counsels, what Armies, what Conduct, can save a People, where
these Vices prevail? Let us now, on the other side, suppose Selfishness,
Sensuality, and the Love of the World, cashiered; and Faith, Hope, and Charity,
entertained in their Room; what a blessed Change will this effect in the World?
how soon will Honor and Integrity, Truth and Justice, and a public Spirit
revive? how serviceable and eminent will these render every Man in his Charge?
These are the true Principles of great and brave Actions: these, these alone,
can render our Duty dearer to us than any temporal Consideration: these will
enable us to do good Works, without an Eye to the Return they will make us:
These will make it appear to us very reasonable, to Sacrifice Fortune, Life,
every thing, when the Honor of God, and public good, demand it of us. The
Belief, and Hope of Heaven, is a sufficient Encouragement to Virtue when all
others fail: the Love of God, as our Supreme Good, will make us easily surmount
the Consideration; of Expense, Difficulty, or hazard, in such Attempts as we
are sure will please Him; and the Love of our Neighbor as our selves, will
make us compassionate to his Evils and Wants, tender to his Infirmities, and
Zealous of his good as of our own. How happy then would these Principles make
the World? and how much is it the Interest of every one to encourage and
propagate these, and to discountenance and suppress the contrary ones? I have
done with the second Effect of Christian Liberty; and will pass on to the
Third, as soon as I have made two Remarks on this last Paragraph. First, it is
very evident from what has been said in it, that solid Virtue can be Graffed on
no Stock, but that of Religion: that universal Righteousness can be raised on
none but Gospel Principles, who is he that overcomes the World, but he that
believes that Jesus is the Christ? 1 John 5. I do not oppose this Proposition
against Jew or Gentile. God vouchsafed in sundry times and in diverse manners,
such Revelations of his Truth, and such Communications of his Grace, as he saw
fit, and to these, is the Righteousness hereof, whatever it was, to be
attributed, not to the Law of Nature, or Moses. But suppose it against the bold
Pretensions of Libertin's and Atheists at this day. Honor and Justice in their
Mouths is a vain Beast; and the Natural Power they pretend to over their own
Actions, to square, and govern them according to the Rules of right Reason, is
only a malicious Design to supplant the Honor of Divine Grace; and is as
false, and groundless, as arrogant. Alas! they talk of a Liberty which they do
not understand: for did they but once admit Purity of Heart into their Notion
of it, they would soon discern what Strangers they are to it. How is it
possible, but that they should be the Servants of the Body, who reject and
disbelieve the Dignity and Pre-eminence of the Soul? How is it possible, they
should not be Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God, who either believe no
God, or none that concerns himself much about us? and how can they choose but be
selfish, and sensual, and dote upon this World, who expect no better, who
believe no other? Take away Providence and a Life to come, and what can oblige
a Man to any Action, that shall cross his temporal Interest or his Pleasure;
what shall reward his espousing Virtue, when it has no Doury, but Losses,
Reproaches, and Persecutions? what shall curb him in the Career of a Lust, when
he may commit it, not only with Impunity, but as the World sometimes goes, with
Honor and Preferment too? Though, therefore, such Men as these may possibly
restrain their outward Actions, yet are they all the while enslaved and defiled
in their Affections; and the very Liberty they boast of in their Conduct and
Management of themselves openly, springs from their secret Servitude to some
vile Passion or other. Nor yet can I be so soft and easy as to grant, that
such Men as these, either do or can arrive, at the Liberty they pretend to: I
mean, that of Regulating and Governing all their outward Actions by the Rules
of Virtue. They too often throw off the Disguise, which either Hypocrisy, or
Enmity to Religion, makes them put on; and prove too plainly to the World; that
when they lay Restraints on themselves in this or that Sin, it is only to
indulge themselves the more freely and securely in others. Secondly, My next
Remark is, That it is gross Stupidity, or Impudence, to deny a Providence and
another World, when the Belief of both is so indispensably necessary to the
well-being of this. The Frame and Nature of Man, and the necessities of this
World, require both. Without these selfishness must undoubtedly be the
predominant Principle. This would breed unreasonable Desires; and these would
fill us with Fears and Jealousies: so that a State of Nature, would indeed be a
State of War; and our Enmity against one another would not be extinguished by
Civil Society; but only concealed, and restrained, till a fit Occasion for its
breaking out should present it self: Laws would want that Force, Commonwealths
that Bond, or Cement, Conversation, that Confidence, and our Possessions, that
security which is necessary to render them Blessings to us.

. 3. A Third Fruit of Christian Liberty is that Relation which it creates
between God and us. We are no longer of the World, but are separated, and
sanctified, devoted, and dedicated to God. Thus St. Peter, 1 Epist. 2.9. Ye are
a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People. And
thus St. Paul, Romans 8.15, 16. ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again
to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the
Children of God: and if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs
with Christ. God is our God: we are his People. He is our Father; and we are
his Children, we are ingraffed into his Family. The Consequence of this is, his
Dearly Beloved, and Only Begotten Son, is our Advocate at his right Hand, the
Propitiation for our Sins, and Intercessour for us. His Spirit resides with us,
to comfort, and assist us; his Angels guard us, and minister to us: for we are
no longer the Object of his Wrath, but of his Love, and Care. How does the
Apostle triumph on this Argument. Heb. 12.18, 19* etc. For ye are not come unto
the Mount that might be touched, and that burned with Fire, nor unto blackness,
and darkness, and tempest, and the sound of a Trumpet, and the Voice of Words;
which voice they who heard, entreated that the word should not be spoken to
them any more: For they could not endure that which was commanded; and if so
much as a Beast touch the Mountain it shall be stoned* or thrust through with a
Dart: And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and
quake: But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem; and to an innumerable Company of Angels: To the general
Assembly, and Church of the First Born, which are written in Heaven; and to
God, the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect: and to
Jesus, the Mediator of the new Covenant; and to the Blood of sprinkling, that
speaks better things then that of Abel. And thus again, 1 Cor. 3.2. Therefore
let no Man glory in Men; for all things are yours: whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephus, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come;
all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. These are great and
glorious things. What Dignity, and Eminence, does this Adoption raise us to?
what Blessedness flow from Communion and Fellowship with God? what can we want,
or what can we fear, when we have so mighty an Interest in the Sovereign of
Heaven and Earth? when all his Divine Perfections are employed to promote and
secure our Happiness? Now, sure, we may rejoice, now we may glory and triumph;
for certainly all things must work together for our good. But as fallen Angels
envied the Happiness of New Created Man, so do Apostate and Debauched Men envy
that of the Godly. And one of these will be apt to say, hold, Sir, you run too
fast; these glorious Privileges are yet but in the Embrio, and all your
Happiness is yet but in the Reversion: Notwithstanding all these big words, you
must grant me, that you are, yet, but in a State of Probation; that you are to
undergo Hardships and Difficulties, and to live upon the thin Diet of Hope, and
Expectation: and so, I think, I might take you down, from Heirs of God, to
Servants, at the best. Well, I will grant that we, yet, live by Faith, and wait
for the Hope of Glory: Nor will I, at present, contend about those Pleasures,
that are but in the bud: I will, for once, quit all that Preference, both as to
Nobility, and Pleasure, which Adoption, and the full Assurance of Hope, gives a
Godly Man above a Sinner; and I will take the State of a Child of God to be, as
the Objector would have it: I will suppose him to be under Age, till he come to
another Life; and to differ nothing from a Servant, whilst he is so, though he
be Heir of all. Yet, after all, if I can prove, that it is our Duty to serve
God, it will be no contemptible Fruit, no small Commendation of Liberty, that
it enables us to do our Duty. And that it is our Duty to serve God is plain:
For is it not fit, that He who made and still upholds the World, should govern
it? ought we not to pay Obedience to His Laws, whose Infinite Perfections, and
Immence Beneficence, invest Him with an absolute and uncontrollable Sovereignty
over us? whom should we honor with our Soul, and Body, but Him who is the
Author of both? to whom should we devote and Sacrifice what we have, but to
Him, from whom we received all? whose Praise should we show forth, but His who
has called us out of Darkness into his marvelous Light? whom should we obey and
adore, but Him, who has translated us out of Bondage into Liberty, out of the
servitude of Satan, into the Kingdom of his dear Son; having redeemed us, by
the Blood of his Son, from that Wrath to which our Sins had deservedly
subjected us? But this is not all: I shall prove it not only to be our Duty,
but our Honor, and our Happiness to serve God; even on the supposition on
which the Objection proceeds, and which I, at present grant. 1. It Is our Honor
to serve Him, whom Angels serve, to whom all things in Heaven and in Earth do
bow and obey: it is the highest Prerogative we can derive from Grace or Nature,
to be capable of serving Him. His Divine Perfections transcend the Conceptions
of inferior Creatures; and can be known, contemplated, and adored, by none,
but such as are made but a little lower than the Angels; such as are endued,
not only with the Light of Reason, but with a far brighter, that of the Spirit
of God. This is indeed our utmost Perfection, and must be our utmost Ambition:
this alone makes us considerable, who are in all other Respects, but mean and
contemptible: for we draw but a precarious, and dependant Breath; and the World
we inhabit is a dark and tempestuous one, full of Folly and Misery. But even
this will serve for a further Confirmation of what I further contend for. For
being indigent and needy, standing at an infinite Distance from
self-Sufficiency, it is plain, that what we cannot find within us, we must seek
without us. Some All-sufficient Good we must find out: something we must rest
in, and repose our selves upon: and this will be our God, this we shall serve,
and adore. And what shall this be? shall we serve Evil Spirits? These are our
avowed and inveterate Enemies, and go about, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom
they may devour. Shall we serve the Good? this were to dishonor our Nature, to
serve our Fellow Creatures, and Fellow Servants: Besides that such will never
Sacrilegiously usurp their Maker's Honor, nor admit that Service which is due
to Him alone. Shall we then serve Man? Alas! the Breath of great Ones is in
their Nostrils; their Life is but a Vapor, tossed to and fro, with restless
Noise and Motion; and then it vanishes, they dye, and all their Thoughts and
Projects perish. What then, shall we at length be reduced to serve our Lust?
this is worse than Pagan Idolatry, Stocks and Stones, indeed, could not help or
reward their Votaries: but our Lusts, like wild and Savage Tyrants, destroy
where they rule, and oppress and overwhelm us with Ruins and Mischiefs, while
we servily court and flatter them. I have not done yet: I have proved it,
indeed, to be our Duty and Honor, to serve God; but these, with some, are cold
and lifeless Topics. I will now prove it to be our Interest and Happiness: and
this too laying aside at present, as I promised, the Consideration of a future
Reward, and the Joys springing from it. To make good this Assertion, it will be
necessary, briefly to examine two things. First, the Design, or End; and
Secondly, the Nature, of this Service. If we enquire after the End of it, it is
evidently our own Advantage, and Happiness. The Lusts, or the Humors, the
Wants, and Necessities of Man, may put him upon invading our Liberty, or
purchasing and contracting with us for our Servitude: But God is All-sufficient
to himself, and has no need of our Service: When He will be glorified by us,
it is that we may enjoy his Protection and Bounty: When He obliges us to obey
his Commands, it is in order to perfect our Natures and purify and qualify us
for the Enjoyment of Spiritual and Divine Pleasures: When He enjoins us Prayer,
it is because it does exalt and enlarge our Minds, and fit us for the Blessings
it obtains* When He prescribes us self-Resignation, it is because he will choose
for us, and manage our Affairs, better than we can our selves. Let us in the
Next place consider the Nature of this Service. To serve God, what is it, but
to love what is infinitely lovely; to follow the Conduct of infinite Wisdom;
and to repose our Confidence in that Being, whose Goodness, is as boundless, as
his Power? to serve God, it is to pursue the great End of our Creation, to act
consonant to the Dignity of our Nature, and to govern our Lives by the Dictates
of an enlightened Reason. How wisely has Our Church in one of her Collects
expressed her Notion of the Nature of God's Service? whose service is perfect
Freedom. The Devil maintains his Dominion over us, by infatuating our
Understandings, by enfeebling and fettering our Will, by deluding and
corrupting our Affections: But, on the quite contrary the more clear and
impartial our Understandings, the more free and absolute our Wills, the more
unbiased and rational our Affections, the fitter are we to worship God, nay,
indeed, we cannot worship Him at all, as we ought to do, unless our Souls be
thus qualified. Therefore is the Service of God called a Rational Service,
(...): and the Word of God is called, (...), Sincere Milk: to signify to us,
that in the Service of God, all is real and solid Good. Such is the Perfection
of our Natures, the might, and Joy, of the Spirit; the Protection, and Conduct
of Providence; and all the great and precious Promises of God in Christ, are
yea, and Amen. But in the Service of Sin, all is Cheat and Imposture: and under
a pompous show of Good, the Present is Vanity, and the Future, Repentance: but
such a Repentance as does not relieve, but increase the Sinners Misery.

This is enough to be said of the Nature of God's Service: And by the
Concessions I made my Objector about the Beginning of this Head, I am
restrained from taking notice of the more glorious Effects of it: Yet some
there are, very great and good ones, that fall not within the Compass of the
Objection, which I will but just mention. The first is Rest. While Religion
regulates the Disorder, and reduces the Extravagance of our Affections, it
does, in Effect, lay a storm, and compose a Mutiny in our Bosoms. Whilst it
Enlightens our Minds, and teaches us the true Value, that is, at least the
comparative, Worthlesness of Worldly things, it extinguishes the Troubles which
present Disappointments and Losses, and prevents those Fears which the Prospect
of future Changes and Revolutions is wont to create in us. A Mind that is truly
enlightened, and has no Ambition but for Immortality and Glory; whose Humility
with reference to these temporal Things is built upon a true Notion of the
Nature of them; this Soul has entered already into its Rest. This is the
Doctrine of our Lord and Master, Matthew. 11.28, 29. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, that is, all ye that are oppressed by the Weight of
your own Cares and Fears, that are fatigued, and toiled in the Designs and
Projects of Avarice and Ambition, and I will give you rest. Take my Yoke upon
you, and learn of me; for I am meek, and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest
unto your Souls. I need not, I think, here show, that the more we fear and
serve God, the more we love and admire Him, the more clear is the
Understanding, and the more pure the Heart. For the more we converse with solid
and eternal Good, the more insignificant and trifling will temporal Things
appear to us: and the more the Mind rejoices in the Lord, the oftener it is rapt
up into Heaven, and, as it were, transfigured into a more glorious Being, by
the Joy of the Spirit, and the Ardours of Divine Love, the more flat and
insipid are all earthly and carnal Satisfactions to it. Another Effect that
attends our shaking off the Dominion of Sin, and our devoting our selves to the
Service of God, is our being purified from Guilt. The Stains of the past Life
are washed off by Repentance, and the Blood of Jesus: and the Servant of God
contracts no new ones by wilful and presumptuous Sin. Now, therefore, he can
enter into himself, and commune with his own Heart, without any Uneasiness: he
can reflect upon his Actions, and review each day when it is past, without
inward Regret, or Shame. To break off a vicious Course; to vanquish both
Terrors, and Allurements, when they persuade to that which is mean and base;
to be Master of ones self; and entertain no Affections, but what are wise, and
regular, and such, as one has Reason to wish should daily increase and grow
stronger; these are things so far from meriting Reproach and Reproof from ones
own Mind, that they are sufficient to support it against all Reproaches from
without* Such is the Beauty, such the Pleasure of a well established Habit of
Righteousness, that it does more than compensate the Difficulties, to which
either the Attainment, or the Practice of it, can expose a Man. Lastly, He that
is free from Guilt, is free from Fear too. And indeed this is the only way to
get rid of all our Fears: not by denying, or renouncing God, with Atheists, but
by doing the things that please Him. He that is truly Religious, is the only
Man, who upon rational Ground, is raised above Melancholy and Fear. For what
should he fear? God is his Glory, his Boast, his Joy, his Strength: and if God
be for him, who can be against him? neither things present, nor to come;
neither Life, nor Death, can separate him from the Love of God in Christ Jesus.
There is nothing within the Bounds of Time, or Eternity, that he needs fear.
Man cannot hurt him: he is encompassed with the favor and loving kindness of
God, as with a Shield. But if God permit him to suffer for Righteousness sake,
happy is he: This does but increase his present Joy, and future Glory. But what
is most considerable, Death it self cannot hurt him, Devils cannot hurt him:
the sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law; but thanks be to
God, who gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. For there is no
Condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus; who walk not after the Flesh but
after the Spirit. These Considerations prove the present Condition of a Servant
of God happy: Happy in Comparison of the Loose and Wicked: but in Comparison
with what he shall be hereafter, he is infinitely short of the Joy and Glory of
his End. In this respect, indeed, he is yet in a state of Trial and Trouble, of
Discipline and Probation: in this respect his Perfection and Happiness do but
just peep up above the Ground: the Fullness and Maturity of both he cannot
enjoy, till he come to Heaven. And this is,

. 4. The Last Fruit of Christian Liberty. That Heaven will consist of all the
Blessings, of all the Enjoyments, that Human Nature, when raised to an Equality
with Angels, is capable of: that Beauties and Glories, Joys and Pleasures, will
as it were, like a fruitful and ripe Harvest here, grow up there in all the
utmost Plenty and Perfection that Omnipotence it self will e're produce, is not
at all to be controverted. Heaven is the Masterpiece of God, the
Accomplishment, and Consummation of all his wonderful Designs, the last and
most endearing Expression of boundless Love. And hence it is, that the Holy
Spirit, in Scripture, describes it by the most taking, and the most admired
things upon Earth: and yet we cannot but think, that this Image, though drawn
by a Divine Pencil, must fall infinitely short of it. For what temporal things
can yield Colors or Metaphors, strong and rich enough to paint Heaven to the
Life? One thing there is indeed, which seems to point us to a just and adequate
Notion of an Heaven: it seems to excite us to strive and attempt for
Conceptions of what we cannot grasp, we cannot comprehend, and the laboring
Mind, the more it discovers, concludes still the more behind: and that is, the
Beatifick Vision. This is that which as Divines generally teach, does
constitute Heaven: and Scripture seems to teach so too. I confess I have often
doubted, whether our seeing God in the Life to come did necessarily imply, that
God should be the immediate Object of our Fruition; or only, that we should
there, as it were, drink at the Fountain Head; and being near and dear to Him
in the highest Degree, should ever flourish in his Favor, and enjoy all Good,
heaped up, pressed down, and running over. I thought the Scriptures might be
easily reconciled to this sense: and the Incomprehensible Glory of the Divine
Majesty inclined me to believe it the most reasonable, and most easily
accountable. Enjoyment, and especially where an Intelligent Being is the Object
of it, seemed to imply something of Proportion, something of Equality,
something of Familiarity. But ah! what Proportion, thought I, can there ever be
between Finite and Infinite? what Equality between a poor Creature and his
incomprehensible Creator? what Eye shall gave on the splendours of his
essential Beauty, when the very Light He dwells in is inaccessible, and even
the Brightness he vailes himself in is too dazzling even for Cherub and Seraphs,
for ought I know, to behold? Ah! what Familiarity can there be between this
Eternal and inconceiveable Majesty, and Beings which He has formed out of
nothing? And when, on this occasion, I reflected on the Effects, which the
Presence of Angels had upon the Prophets; and saw Human Nature in Man Sinking,
and dying away, because unable to sustain the Glory of one of their
Fellow Creatures; I thought my self in a manner obliged to yield, and stand out
no longer against a Notion which, though differing from what was generally
received, seemed to have more Reason on its side, and to be more intelligible.
But when I called to mind, that God does not disdain, even while we are in a
state of Probation, and Humility, of Infirmity, and Mortality, to account us
not only his Servants, and his People, but his Friends, and his Children; I
began to question the former Opinion: and when I had surveyed the Nature of
Fruition, and the various Ways of it, a little more attentively, I wholly
quitted it. For I observed, that the Enjoyment is most transporting, where
Admiration mingles with our Passion: where the beloved Object stands not upon
the same Level with us, but condescends to meet a Virtuous and aspiring, and
ambitious Affection. Thus the happy Favorite enjoys a gracious Master: and
thus the Child does with respectful Love meet the tenderness of his Parent: and
the Wisdom and Virtue, which sometimes raises some one happy Mortal, above the
common size and height of Mankind, does not surely diminish, but increase the
Affection, and the Pleasure, of his Friends that enjoy him. Again, the Nature
of Enjoyment varies, according to the various Faculties of the Soul, and the
senses of the Body. One way we enjoy Truth, and another, Goodness: One way
Beauty, and another Harmony; and so on. These things considered, I saw there
was no necessity, in order to make God the Object of our Fruition, either to
bring Him down to any thing unworthy of his Glory, or to exalt our selves to a
Height we are utterly incapable of, I easily saw, that we, who love and adore
God here, should when we enter into his Presence, admire and love him
infinitely more. For God being infinitely amiable, the more we contemplate, the
more clearly we discern his Divine Perfections and Beauties, the more must our
Souls be inflamed with a Passion for Him: And I have no Reason to doubt, but
that God will make us the most gracious Returns of our Love, and express His
Affections for us, in such Condescensions, in such Communications of Himself,
as will transport us to the utmost Degree that created Beings are capable of.
Will not God, that sheds abroad his Love in our Hearts by his Spirit here,
fully satisfy it hereafter? will not God who fills us here with the Joy of his
Spirit by, I know not what, inconceivable ways, communicate Himself in a more
ravishing and Ecstatick manner to us, when we shall behold him as he is, and
live for ever encircled in the Arms of his Love and Glory? Upon the whole then,
I cannot but believe, that the Beatifick Vision will be the Supreme Pleasure of
Heaven: yet I do not think that this is to exclude those of an inferior
Nature. God will be there, not only all, but in all. We shall see him as he is;
and we shall see him reflected, in Angels, and all the Inhabitants of Heaven;
nay, in all the various Treasures of that Happy Place: but in far more bright
and lovely Charcters than in his Works here below. This is a state, now, that
answers all Ends, and satisfies all Appetites, let 'em be never so various,
never so boundless, Temporal Good, nay a state accumulated with all temporal
Goods, has still something defective, something empty in it: That which is
crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be numbered.
And therefore the Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with hearing:
but all things are full of Labor; Man cannot utter it. And if this were not
the state of temporal Things, yet that one Thought of Solomon that he must
leave them, makes good the Charge of Vanity and Vexation: And the contrary is
that which compleats Heaven; namely, that it is Eternal. Were Heaven to have an
End, that End would make it None. That Death would be as much more intolerable
than this here, as the Joys of Heaven are above those of Earth. For the
Terror, and the Evil of it, would be to be estimated, by the Perfection of
that Nature and Happiness which it would put an End to. To Dye in Paradise,
amidst a Crowd of Satisfactions, how much more intolerable were this, than to
Dye in those accursed Regions that bred continually Briars and Brambles, Cares
and Sorrows? And now, I doubt not, but every one will readily acKnowledge, that
an Heaven, were it believed, were such a Fruit of Christian Liberty, such a
Motive to it, as none could resist. Did I believe this, have I heard one say, I
would quit my Trade, and all Cares and Thoughts of this World; and wholly apply
my self to get that other you talk of. There was no need of going thus far: But
this shows what the natural Influence of this Doctrine of a Life to come is;
and that it is generally owing to Infidelity, where it is frustrated and
defeated. What is in this Case to be done? what Proof, what Evidences, are
sufficient to beget Faith in him, who rejects Christianity, and all Divine
Revelation? He that hears not Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
neither will he believe though one rose from the dead. This Doctrine of a Life
to come was generally believed by the Gentile World. It was indeed very much
obscured, but never extinguished, by the Addition of many fabulous and
superstitious Fancies; so strong was the Tradition, or Reason, or rather both,
on which 'twas built. The Jews universally embraced it. The general Promises of
God to Abraham and his Seed, and the several Shadows and Types of it in the
Mosaic Institution, did confirm them in the Belief of a Doctrine, which, I do
not doubt, had been transmitted to them even from Enoch, Noah, and all their
pious Ancestors. Nor must we look upon the Sadduces amongst the Jews, or the
Epicureans amongst the Gentiles, to be any Objection against this Argument of a
Life to come, founded in Tradition, and the universal Sense of Mankind: because
they were not only inconsiderable, compared to the Body of the Jewish, or Pagan
World, but also Desertors and Apostates from the Philosophy and Religion
received. To what End should I proceed from the Gentile and Jew to the
Christian? were Christianity entertained as it ought, the very supposal of any
Doubt concerning a Life to come would be impertinent. Here we have numerous
Demonstratitions of it. Not only the Fortune of Virtue in this Life, which is
often very calamitous, but even the Origin, and Nature of it, do plainly
evince a Life to come. For to what End can the Mortification of the Body, by
Abstractions and Meditations, be enjoined, if there be no Life to come? What
need is there of Renovation, or Regeneration by the Word and Spirit of God,
were there no Life to come? One would think, 'the common End of this natural
Life, might be well enough secured upon the common Foundation of Reason and
Human Laws. What should I here add, the Love of God, and the Merits of Jesus?
from both which we may derive many unanswerable Arguments of a Life to come.
For though, when we reflect upon it, it appears as much above our Merit, as it
is above our Comprehension, yet when we consider, that Eternal Life is the Gift
of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, what less than an Heaven can we expect
from an infinite Merit, and Almighty Love? The Love of God must be Perfect as
Himself: and the Merits of Jesus must be estimated by the Greatness of his
Person, and his Sufferings. He that cannot be wrought upon by these and the
like Gospel-Arguments, will be found, I doubt, impenetrable to all others. It Is
in vain to argue with such a one from natural Topics: and therefore I will
stop here.

I should now pass on to the Third Thing, the Attainment of Christian Liberty:
But this Chapter is grown much too big already: And to the consideration of the
Fruit of this Liberty, which I have so long insisted on, nothing more needs to
be added, but the Observation of those Rules, which I shall lay down in the
following Chapters. For whatever Advice will secure the several Parts of our
Liberty, will consequently secure the whole. I will therefore close this
Chapter here; with a brief Exhortation, to endeavor after Deliverance from
Sin. How many and powerful Motives have we to it? Would we free our selves from
the Evils of this Life? let us dam up the Source of them, which is Sin. Would
we surmount the Fear of Death? let us disarm it of its Sting, and this is Sin.
Would we perfect and accomplish our Natures with all excellent Qualities? it is
Righteousness, wherein consists the Image of God, and Participation of the
Divine Nature: it is the cleansing our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh
and Spirit, and the perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, that must transform
us from Glory to Glory. Would we be Masters of the most glorious Fortunes? it is
Righteousness that will make us Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Christ: it is
the Conquest of our Sins, and the abounding in good Works, that will make us
rich toward God, and lay up for us a good Foundation for the Life to come. Are
we ambitious of Honor? let us free our selves from the servitude of Sin. It Is
Virtue only, that is truly honorable, and Praiseworthy: and nothing surely
can entitle us to so noble a Relation; for this allies us to God. For as our
Savior speaks, they only are the Children of Abraham, who do the Works of
Abraham; the Children of God, who do the Works of God. These are they, who are
born again: not of the Will of the Flesh, or of the Will of Man; but of God.
These are they, who are incorporated into the Body of Christ; and being ruled
and animated by his Spirit, are entitled to all the blessed Effects of his
Merit and Intercession. These are they, in a word, who have overcome, and will,
one day, sit down with Christ in his Throne; even as He also overcame, and is
set down with his Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. Good God! how absurd and
perverse all our Desires and Projects are! We complain of the Evils of the
World; and yet we hugg the Causes of them, and cherish those Vices, whose fatal
Wounds are ever big with numerous and intolerable Plagues. We fear Death; and
would get rid of this Fear, not by disarming, but sharpning its Sting; not by
subduing, but forgetting it. We love Wealth and Treasure: but it is that which
is Temporal, not Eternal. We receive Honor one of another; but we seek not
that which comes from God only. We are fond of Ease and Pleasure; and at the
same time we wander from those Paths of Wisdom, which alone can bring us to it.
For, in a word, it is this Christian Liberty that makes Men truly free: not the
being in bondage to no Man, but to no Sin: not the doing what we list, but what
we ought. It Is Christian Liberty that makes us truly great, and truly glorious?
for this alone renders us, Serviceable to others, and Easy to our selves;
Benefactors to the World, and delightsome at home: it is Christian Liberty makes
us truly prosperous, truly fortunate; because it makes us truly happy: filling
us with Joy and Peace, and making us abound in hope, through the Power of the
Holy Ghost.

CHAP. IV. Of Liberty as it relates to Original Sin.
WHatever Difficulties the Doctrine of Original Sin really be involved in, or
seem at least to some to be so, they will not concern me, who am no further
obliged to consider it, than as it is an Impediment of Perfection: For though
there be much Disputes about Original Sin, there is little or none about
Original Corruption; the Reality of this is generally acknowledged, though the
Guilt, the Sinfulness or Immorality of it, be controverted. And though there be
Diversity of Opinions concerning the Effects of Original Corruption in
Eternity, yet there is no Doubt at all made but that it incites and instigates
us to actual Sin; and is the Seed-plot of Human Folly, and Wickedness. All Men
I think, are agreed, that there is a Bias and strong Propension in our Nature
toward the Things of the World, and the Body; That the subordination of the
Body to the Soul, and of the Soul to God, wherein consists Righteousness, is
subverted and overthrown: That we have Appetites which clash with, and oppose
the Commands of God, not only when they threaten Violence to our Nature, as in
the Cases of Confession and Martyrdom, but also when they only prune its
Luxuriancy and Extravagance: That we do not only desire sensitive Pleasure, but
even to that Degree, that it hurries, and transports us, beyond the Bounds,
that Reason and Religion set us: We have not only an Aversion for Pain and Toil
and Death, but to that Excess, that it tempts us to renounce God, and our Duty
for the sake of Carnal Ease, and Temporal safety. And finally, that we are so
backward to entertain the Belief of revealed Truths, so prone to terminate our
Thoughts on, and confine our Desires within this visible World as our Portion,
and to look upon our selves, no other than the mortal, and corruptible
Inhabitants of it; that this makes us selfish, and sordid, proud and ambitious,
false, subtle, and contentious to the endless Disturbance of Mankind and our
selves. That this I say, is the state of Nature, that this is the Corruption we
Labor under, all Men, I think, are agreed: And no wonder; for did a
Controversy arise about this, there would be no need to appeal any further,
for the Decision of it, than to ones own Experience; this would tell every one
that thus it is in Fact; and Reason, if we will consult it, will tell us, why
it is so: for what other than this, can be the Condition of Man, who enters the
World with a Soul so dark and destitute of Divine Light, so deeply immerced and
plunged into Flesh and Blood, so tenderly and intimately affected by Bodily
Sensations; and with a Body, so adapted and suited to the Things of this World,
and fastened to it by the Charms of Pleasure, and the Bonds of Interest,
Convenience and Necessity. This Account of Original Corruption, agrees very
well with that St. Paul gives us of it, Romans 7. and elsewhere: And with that
Assertion of our Lord and Master, on which he builds the necessity of
Regeneration by Water and the Holy Spirit. Joh. 3.6. That which is born of the
flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. Having thus
briefly explained, what I mean in this Chapter by Original Sin, I am next to
consider these two Things.

1. How far this Distemper of Nature is curable.

2. Which way this Cure is to be effected.

As to the first Enquiry, I would not be understood to proceed in it with a
regard to all the Regenerate in General, but only to the Perfect; for the
strength of Original Sin cannot but be very different in new Converts, or Babes
in Grace, and in such as are advanced to an Habit of Righteousness. This being
premised, I think, I may on good Ground resolve. That Original Sin in the
Perfect Man, may be so far reduced and mastered, as to give him but very rare
and slight Disturbance. This seems to me evident from the great Change, that
must be wrought in him, who is converted from a Sinner into a Saint; If any Man
be in Christ, he is a new Creature: old things are past away, behold all things
are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. and it is hard to conceive this new Nature,
without new Propensions, and Inclinations, not only different from, but
repugnant to, our former Original and Corrupt ones; or at least we must suppose
this new Creation, so far to have reformed and corrected the Man, that Original
Corruption has lost the Strength and Force, which before it had. This will be
more clear yet, if we observe never so slightly, the several Parts of this
great Change. First, the Soul of an excellent Person is filled with an
unfeigned and habitual Sorrow for, and Detestation of, all Sin; I hate, says
the Psalmist, every false way. And how inconsistent is the strength, and Heat
of corrupt Propensions, with the Tears and Aversions of a true Penitent? how
tame is the Body, how pure the Mind, when the Man is possessed with a firm and
holy Indignation against Sin, when he dissolves in the pious Tenderness of a
contrite Spirit! Next the Soul of a good Man, is possessed with an ardent Love
of God and of Jesus, with a firm Belief, and a steady Hope of a blessed
Eternity; with enlightened Eyes he beholds the Vanity of all earthly Things,
and admires the Solidity, the Weight, and Duration of Heavenly Glory: he is
risen with Christ, and therefore seeks those things that are above where Christ
sits on the right hand of God: He has set his Affection on things above, and
not on things on the Earth; for he is dead, and his Life is hid with Christ in
God. And must we not now suppose such a one cleansed and purified from all
corrupt Affections, when the very Bent of his Soul is quite another way? must
we not suppose the Force and Strength of depraved Nature, overpowred and
subdued, by these heavenly Affections? How mortified must such a Man be to the
World and to the Body? how feeble is the Opposition, that inferior Nature can
raise against a Mind, invested with so absolute and sovereign Authority, and
endowed with Light and Strength from above? Lastly, the Perfect Man has not
only crucified the Inordinate and sinful Lusts and Affections of the Body, but
has also obtained a great Mastery even over the natural Appetites of it; how
else can it be that his Desires, and Hopes, are in Heaven; that he waits for
the Lord from thence; that he desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ;
and groans to be rid of the corruptible Tabernacle of the Body? He that is thus
above the Body, may certainly be concluded, to be in some degree above, even
the most natural Appetites. He that has set himself free in a great Measure,
even from his Aversion to Death, and in his Affection at least very much
loosened the bond, the knot, that unties Soul and Body, may certainly very
reasonably be presumed to be much more above all covetous, ambitious, or wanton
Inclinations. These are the Grounds on which I attribute to the Perfect Man, so
high a Degree of Freedom from Original Sin as I do in the Proposition laid down.

2ly. But yet I do not in the least think, that the most Perfect Man upon
Earth, can so extinguish the sparks of Original Corruption, but that if he do
not keep a Watch and Guard upon himself, they will gather Strength and revive
again: And the Reason of this is plain; because it has a Foundation in our very
Nature. The Dispute concerning the Existence of Original Corruption in us after
Baptism, or Regeneration is, methinks a very needless one: For if it be about
the Notion we ought to entertain of it, that is, whether it be properly Sin or
not, this is a Contention about Words; for what signifies it by what Name we
call this Remainder of Original Pravity, when all grant, that the Stain and
Guilt of it, is washed off and pardoned: But if it be about the Force and
Efficacy of it, this indeed is a Controversy of some Moment; but a very
foolish one, on one side: for to what purpose can it be, to say a great many
subtle and puzling Things against a Truth, that every Man feels and experiments
at one time or other. Upon the whole then, I may thus describe the Liberty of
the Perfect Man with respect to Original Sin: He has mortified it, though not
utterly extirpated it, he has subdued it though not exterminated it; and
therefore he is not only free from sinful and inordinate Lusts and Affections,
but also, in a far greater measure than other Men, from those Infirmities and
Irregularities which are, as it were, the struglings and Ebullitions of
Original Sin, not yet sufficiently tamed. He has advanced his Victory very far,
even over his natural Appetites; he has no stronger Inclination for the Body,
or for the World, and the Things of it, than such as becomes a Man that is
possessed with a deep sense of the Vanity of this World, and the Blessedness of
another. The World is in a high Degree crucified to him, and he counts all
things but dung and dross in comparison with the Excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus his Lord. His Sorrows and his Joys, his Desires and his Fears, be
the occasion never so just or lawful, pass not the modest Bounds of a wise
Moderation. He desires without Impatience, cares and contrives, hopes and
pursues, without Anxiety, or Solicitude; he is cautious without Fear and
Pusillanimity, he is sad without Dejection or Despondency, and Pleasant without
Vanity. All this indeed shows him, not only to have conquered Sin and Folly,
but in a great Measure also, his natural Propension to them. But after all,
this happy Creature must remember, that he is still in the Body, in the Body
whose Appetites will soon pass beyond their due Bounds, if he be indulgent or
careless: he must remember that he is not immutably holy, his Understanding is
not so clear and bright, but that it may be deceived, nor the Bent of his
Affections so strongly set upon good, but that they may be perverted; and
therefore he must be sober and vigilant, and fear always. Thus have I stated
the Cureableness of our Original Corruption. And as I think, I have plainly the
Countenance of Scripture, so I do not see, that I in the least clash with that
Clause, in the Ninth Article of our Church, which affirms concerning Original
Sin thus. And this Infection of Nature does remain, yea, in them that are
regenerated, whereby the Lust of the Flesh, called in Greek (...), which some
do expound the Wisdom, some sensuality, some the Affection, some the Desire of
the Flesh, is not subject to the Law of God. For this must not be understood
surely, as if the Flesh did always Lust against the Spirit in the Regenerate,
but only that the Regenerate themselves are liable and obnoxious to these
Lustings; which, on supposal, that the Perfect Man were here thought upon by
the Compilers of this Article, imports no Contradiction to any thing I have
delivered. The Truth is, I have asserted no more concerning the Cureableness of
Original Corruption, than what is necessary to secure the Interest of Holiness,
as well as the Honor of the Word and Spirit. I have too often had occasion to
observe, that the stating our Obligation to reduce Original Corruption too
laxly, ministers not a little to the Carnal Confidence of supine and careless
Persons. How greedily do some imbibe, and how fond are they of this Notion,
that the Flesh, even in the Regenerate, does always Lust against the Spirit?
and the next thing is, to look upon their darling Errors, as unavoidable
Infirmities, flowing from the uncurable Distemper of Original Sin. To the end
therefore, that under Color and Pretense of the Impossibility of a perfect
Cure and Restitution of our Nature to perfect Innocence and unspotted Purity,
we may not sit down contented in an impure State; and never advance to those
Degrees of Health and Innocence, which we may, and ought actually arrive at, I
think fit here, to guard the Doctrine of Original Sin, with this one general
Caution.

That we be very careful not to mistake Contracted for Natural Corruption; not
to mistake a Super-induced Nature, defaced by all the Slime and Mud, which
popular Errors and Fashions leave upon it, for Original Nature, or Nature in
that State in which it enters the World. It Is I doubt, a very hard thing to
find, but one arrived at any Maturity of Years, in whom Nature is the same
thing now, that it was in the Womb or the Cradle; in whom these are no worse
Propensions, than what necessarily flow from the Frame and Composition of his
Being. Alas! our Original Depravation, be it what it will, is very betimes
improved by false Principles and foolish Customs; by a careless Education, and
by the Blandishments and Insinuations of the World: and every Man is so partial
to himself, that he is very willing to have his Defects and Errors pass under
the Name of Natural and unavoidable ones, because this seems to carry in it its
own Apology. This is a fatal Error and continues Men in their Vices, nay gives
them peace in them too, to their Lives End; for why should not a Man forbear
attempting what he despairs of effecting? To prevent which, I earnestly desire
my Reader to consider, that all, who have treated this Doctrine of Original Sin
with any Solidity or Prudence, do carry the Matter as far at least, as I have
done: They teach not only that Original Corruption may be Pruned and Lop't, but
that it may be cut down, mortified, and dried up. That since no Man can assure
himself how far he may advance his Conquest over his natural Corruption, and
the Interest of every Man's safety and Glory obliges him to advance it as far
as he can, he must never cease fighting against it, while it fights against
him. That since every Sin is so far Mortal as it is voluntary, and has as much
Guilt in it as Freedom, every Man ought to be extremely jealous, least he be
subject to any vicious Inclination, that is in Reality the Pruduct not of
Nature, but of Choice. And Lastly, since though much less than habitual
Goodness may constitute a Man in a State of Grace, yet nothing less can produce
Perfection, or a constant Assurance of Eternal Happiness: therefore no Man
ought to acquiesce, while he sees himself short of this: and every Man should
remember that his Goodness ought to consist in a Habit of those Virtues, to
which, he is by Nature the most averse. I have now dispatched My first Enquiry,
and resolved how far Original Sin is curable. The Next is,

. 2. How this Cure may be effected. And here it is plain, what we are to aim at
in general; for if Original Righteousness consists, as I think it cannot be
doubted in the Subordination of the Body to the Soul, and the Soul to God; and
Original Corruption in the Subversion of this Order, then the Cure must consist
in restoring this Subordination by the weakening and reducing the Power of the
Body, and by quickening and strengthening the Mind, and so re-establishing its
Sovereignty and Authority. The Scriptures accordingly let us know, that this is
the great Design of Religion, and the great Business of Man, 1 Cor. 9, 25. And
every Man that striveth for the Mastery, is temperate in all things. Now they
do it to, obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible. And this St.
Paul illustrates and explains by his own example in the following Words. I
therefore so run, not as uncertainly: so fight I, not as one that beats the
Air: But I keep under my Body, and bring it into Subjection. The Preference,
given to the Cares and Appetites of the Body or of the Mind, is the
distinguishing Character which constitutes and demonstrates Man either Holy or
Wicked, they that are of the flesh do mind the things of the flesh, and they
that are of the Spirit the things of the Spirit, Romans 8.5. And the Threats of
the Gospel belong to the Servants of the Flesh, its Promises to the Servants of
the Spirit; For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. He that
sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to
the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6.8. I grant that
in these Places, and elsewhere very commonly, as by the Spirit is meant the
Mind enlightened and aided by the Grace of God, so by the Body or Flesh is
meant our inferior Nature, not just such as it proceeds out of the Womb, but
as it is further depraved by a Carnal and Worldly Conversation. However since
Original is the Seed, or Root of Voluntary or Customary Corruption, these Texts
do properly and directly enough, serve to the Confirmation of the Doctrine for
which they are alleged. This then is the great Duty of Man, this is the great
End which he is always to have in his Eye, the mortifying the Body, and
entirely subjugating it to the Reason of the Mind. Here the Christian Warfare
must begin, and here end; for he who has crucified the Body with the Lusts and
Affections thereof, has entered into rest, as far as this Life is capable of
it: He that lays the Foundation of Morals here, does build upon a Rock, and he
that here pushes his Success to the utmost point, has reached the highest Round
in the Scale of Perfection, and given the finishing strokes to Holiness and
Virtue. This I say then, he that will be free, must lay down as a general Rule
to himself, from which he must resolve never to swerve; That he is by all
rational and possible Methods to diminish the Strength and Authority of the
Body, and increase that of the Mind. By this we ought to judge of the
Conveniences or Inconveniences of our worldly Fortunes; by this we are to
determine of the Innocence or Malignity of Actions; by this we are to form and
estimate our Acquaintance and Conversation, and by this we are to judge of the
Bent and Tendency of our Lives; by this we are to regulate our Diversions; by
this we may resolve of the Nature and Degree of our Pleasures, whether lawful,
whether expedient or not: And in one word, by this we may pass a true Sentence
upon the Degrees and Measures of our Natural Affections. There are many things,
that are in their own Nature indifferent enough that prove not so to me; and
there is such a Latitude in the Degrees and Measures of Duty and Deviations
from it, that it is a very hard matter in several Cases, to define nicely and
strictly what is lawful or unlawful. But I am sure in all Cases this is a wise
and safe Rule that we are to aim at the strengthening the Authority of our
Minds, and the weakening the Force and Power of our carnal Appetites. By
Consequence every Man ought to examine himself, by what Arts, by what Practices
the Light of his Understanding comes to be obscured, the Authority of his
Reason weakened, and the Tenderness of his Conscience to be so much blunted and
worn off. And when he has discovered this, he must avoid these things as
temptations and snares; he must shun these Paths as those that lead to Danger
and Death; and whatever he finds to have a contrary Tendency, these are the
things that he must do, these are the things that he must Study contrive, and
follow, how happy would a Man be, how perfect would he soon grow, if he did
conduct himself by this Rule? how little need would he have of outward
Comforts; how little value would he have for Power and Honor, for the State
and Pride of Life? how little would he hunt after the Pleasures of Sense; what
Peace should he maintain within, when he should do nothing that were repugnant
to the Reason of his Mind; what Joy and Hope would he abound with, when he
should have so many daily Proofs of his Integrity, as the living above the Body
would give him? and how would all this strengthen and exalt the Mind; what
Flights would it take toward Heaven, and how invincible would it prove to all
Temptations? Happy and Perfect that Man, who has the Kingdom of God thus within
him, whose Life is hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is his Life shall
appear, he also shall appear with him in Glory! This is a comprehensive Rule,
and, if well pursued, sufficient of its self to do the Work I am here aiming
at: But that it may be more easily reduced to Practice, I think it not amiss,
to take a more particular View of it; And then it may be resolved into these
two.

1. We must lay due Restraints upon the Body.

2. We must invigorate and fortify the Mind, partly by the Light of the
Gospel, and the Grace of the holy Spirit, and partly by accustoming it to
retire and with draw it self from the Body.

. 1. As to the Restraints we are to lay upon the Body, what they are, we easily
learn from the Scriptures; for First, these expressly forbid us to gratify the
Lusts and Affections of the Flesh, and that not only because they are injurious
to our Neighbor, and a Dishonor to our holy Profession, but also because they
have an ill Influence upon the strength and Liberty, the Power and Authority of
the Mind; Dearly beloved I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims abstain from
fleshly Lusts which war against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. And whoever enters into
the account of things, will easily discern this to be true; there is a
Deceitfulness in Sin, a sensuality in Lust; Who sees not that there is more
Attraction in the Pride, and Ostentation of Life, than in the Simplicity and
Plainness of it. That there is more Temptation, and Allurement in Riot and
Luxury, than in frugality and a Competency? that the Imagination of a Solomon
himself cannot but be wretchedly abused, if he give it leave to wander and
wanton in variety? In a word, if the Mind follow a carnal or worldly Appetite
and Fancy in all its Excesses and Debauches, it will soon find it self
miserably enslaved and intoxicated; it will be wholly in the Interest of the
Body, and wholly given up to to the Pleasures of it. Secondly, Though the
Scripture do not prohibit some States or Conditions of this Life, which seem as
it were more nearly allied to, or at leastwise at less Distance from the Lusts
of the Flesh than others are, yet it forbids us to covet and pursue them. Thus
St. Paul, Romans 12.16. Mind not high things. The Apostle does not here oblige
any Man to degrade himself beneath his Birth, or to fly from those Advantages,
which God's Providence and his own Merits give him a just Title to; but
certainly he does oblige the Christian not to aspire ambitiously to great
Things, nor fondly to pride himself in successes of this kind: so when a little
after he commands us in Honor to prefer one another, certainly he does not
teach how to talk, but how to act, not how to court and compliment, but how to
deport our selves consonant to those Notions with which Charity toward our
Neighbor and Humility toward our selves ought to inspire us. Thus again we
are not forbidden to be rich; no Man is bound to strip himself of those
Possessions which he is born to, or to shut out that Increase, which God's
Blessing, and his own Diligence naturally bring in. But we are forbid to thirst
after Riches, or to value our selves upon them, and commanded to be content
with those things that we have; and if God bless us with Wealth to enjoy it
with Modesty and Thankfulness, and dispense it with Liberality, 1 Timothy 6.6, 7,
8, 9, 10. Godliness with Contentment is great gain: for we brought nothing into
this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out, and having Food and
Raiment, let us be therewith content. But they that will be rich, fall into
temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish, and hurtful Lusts, which drown
Men in Destruction and Perdition. For the Love of Money is the root of all
Evil, which while some coveted after they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many Sorrows. ver. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that
are rich in this World, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain
Riches, but in the living God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy. That
they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute; willing to
communicate. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life. And to multiply no more
Instances of Restraints of this or the like nature, thus we ought to stand
affected toward Praise and Reputation, Interest and Power, Beauty, Strength,
etc. We must neither be too Intent upon them, nor enjoy them with too much Gust
and Satisfaction; for this is that Disposition which appears to me to suit best
with the Spirit and Design of the Gospel, and with the Nature of such things as
being of a middle sort, are equally capable of being either Temptations or
Blessings, Instruments of Good or Evil.

3ly. The Scripture regulates and bounds our natural and necessary Appetites,
not so much by nicely defining the exact Degrees and Measures within which
Nature must be strictly contained, as by exalted Examples, of, and Exhortations
to, a Spiritual, pure and heavenly Disposition. Thus our Lord and Master seems
to me, to give some check to the stream of natural Affection, and to call off
his Disciples from it to the Consideration of a Spiritual Relation, Mark 3.34,
35. And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said, behold my
Mother and my Brethren. For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my
Brother, and my Sister, and Mother. To which words of our Lord I may join those
of St. Paul, henceforth know we no Man after the flesh, yet now henceforth know
we him no more, 2 Cor. 5.16. The Answer of our Lord to a Disciple, who would
have deferred his following him till he had Buried his Father, Matt. 8.^1. and
to him who begged leave to go and bid farewell, first to his Relations and
Domestics, Luke 9.61. does plainly countenance the Doctrine I here advance;
and so does St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.29. so often cited by me. Not that our Savior
or his Apostles did ever account our natural Affections vicious and impure; for
it is a Vice to be without them, Romans 1.31. not that they went about to
diminish, or abate, much less to cancel the Duties flowing from them, no; They
only prune the Luxuriancy of untaught Nature, and correct the Fondnesses and
Infirmities of Animal Inclinations. Our natural Affections may entangle and
enslave us, as well as unlawful and irregular ones, if we lay no Restraint upon
them. Religion indeed, makes them the Seeds of Virtue; but without it, they
easily betray us into Sin and Folly. For this Reason I doubt not, lest, under
pretense of satisfying our most natural and importunate Appetites, we should be
ensnared into the Love of this World, and entangled in the Cares of it, our
Savior forbids us to take thought for to morrow, even for the necessaries of
to morrow, what we shall eat, and what we shall drink, and where-withal we
shall be clothed, Matt. 6. These are the Restraints laid upon the Body in
Scripture, which if any Man observe, he will soon discern himself as far
purified and freed from Original Corruption, as Human Nature in this Life is
capable of. And that he may,

. 2ly. He must fortify and invigorate the Mind. And this must be done two
ways, First, by possessing it with the Knowledge of the Gospel and the Grace of
the Spirit. Secondly by withdrawing it often from the Body. As to the former
Branch of this Rule, the Necessity of it is apparent; since the state of Nature
is such, as has before been described, we stand in need, not only of Revelation
to enlighten us, but also of Grace to strengthen us; Of the former to excite us
to exert all the Force and Power we have; of the Latter to enable us to do that
which our natural Force never can effect. It cannot be here expected, that I
should treat of the Operation of the Spirit, and the Ways of obtaining it,
grieving, and quenching it: this would demand a peculiar Treatise. I will here
only observe, That it is the Work of the Spirit to repair, in some Degree at
least, the Ruins of the Fall; to rectify Nature; to improve our Faculties, and
to imprint in us the Divine Image: That Meditation and Prayer, and a careful
Conformity to the Divine Will, obtain and increase the Grace of the Spirit;
That Negligence and presumptuous Wickedness grieve and extinguish it. As to the
Knowledge of the Gospel, I shall not need to say much here; I have considered
this matter in the Chapter of Illumination; and will only observe that the
Doctrines of the Gospel are such, as if they be thoroughly imbibed, do
effectually raise us above a state of Nature, and set us free from the Power
and Prevalence of our Original Corruption. Were we but once persuaded that we
are Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth, That all Carnal Gratifications do war
against the Soul, That our Souls are properly our selves, and That our first
Cares are to be for them; That God is himself our Sovereign Good, and the
Fountain of all inferior Good; that our Perfection and Happiness consist in
the Love and Service of Him; That we have a mighty Mediator who once Died for
us, and ever Lives to make Intercession for us; That a Kingdom, incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fades not away, is reserved in Heaven, for all meek,
faithful, and holy Souls: Were we, I say, but once thoroughly persuaded of
these Truths, with what Vigor would they impregnate our Minds? how clear would
be the Convictions of Conscience; how uncontrollable the Authority of Reason;
how strong the Instincts and Propensions of the Mind toward Righteousness and
Virtue? These would alienate the Mind from the World and the Body, and turn the
Bent of it another way; these would inspire it with other Desires and Hopes,
and make it form different Projects from what it had before; old things are
done away, and all things are become new. The Second Branch, of this second
particular Rule is, that we must accustom our selves to retire frequently from
the Commerce and Conversation of the Body. Whether the Eating the forbidden
Fruit did open to the Mind new Scenes of Sensuality, which it thought not of,
and so called it down, from the Serenity and Heights of a more pure and
contemplative Life, to participate the turbulent Pleasures of Sense, immersing
it as it were by this means deeper into the Body, I pretend not to judge. But
it is certain, a too too intimate Conjunction of the Mind with the Body and the
satisfactions of it, does very much debase it. It Is our great Unhappiness that
the Soul is always in the Senses, and the Senses are always upon the World; we
converse with the World; we talk of the World; we think of the World; we
project for the World; and what can this produce, but a carnal and worldly
Frame of Spirit? We must meditate Heavenly Things; we must have our
Conversation in Heaven; we must accustom our selves to inward and Heavenly
Pleasures, if we will have Heavenly Minds: We must let no day pass, wherein we
must not withdraw our selves from the Body, and sequester our selves from the
World, that we may converse with God and our own Souls. This will soon enable
us to disdain the low and beggarly satisfactions of the outward Man, and make
us long to be set free from the Weight of this corruptible Body, to breath in
purer Air, and take our fill of refined and spiritual Pleasure. I have insisted
thus long on the Cure of Original Sin, not only because it is the Root of all
our Misery, but also, because there is such an Affinity between this and the
Sin of Infirmity, which I am next to speak to, that the same Remedies may be
prescribed to both: so that I am already eased of a part of the Labor which I
must otherwise have under-gone in the following Chapter.

I am now, by the Laws of my own Method, obliged to consider the Effects of
this Branch of Christian Liberty in the Perfect Man; and to show what Influence
it has upon his Happiness. But having, Sect. 1. Chap. 4. discoursed at large of
the Subserviency of Perfection to our Happiness; and in Sect. 2. Chap. 3. of
the happy Effects of the Christian Liberty in general, I have the less need to
say much here on this Head: Yet I cannot wholly forbear saying something of it.
The Conquest over Original Corruption, such as I have described it, raises Man
to the highest pitch of Perfection that our Nature is capable of; makes him
approach the nearest, that Mortality can, to the Life of Angels; and plants him
on the Mount of God, where Grace, and Joy, and Glory, shines always on him with
more direct and strong Rays. Now is Virtue truly Lovely, and truly Happy; now
the Assurance of the Mind is never interrupted, its Joy never over cast; It
enjoys a perpetual Calm within, and sparkles with a peculiar Luster that cannot
be counterfeited, cannot be equaled. Some faint and partial Resemblances, I
confess, of this Virtue, or rather of this State or Consummation of it, have I,
though very rarely, seen in some masterly strokes of Nature. I have observed in
some that sweetness of Temper, in others that Coldness and absolute Command
over themselves with respect to the Pleasures, and in several that innate
Modesty and Humility, that natural Indifference for the Power, Honor, and
Grandeur of Life, that I could scarce forbear pronouncing that they had so far
each of them escaped the Contagion of Original Corruption, and could not but
bless and love them. But after all, there is a vast Difference between these
Creatures of Nature and those of Grace; the Perfection of the one is confined
to this or that particular Disposition, but that of the other is in its Degree
Universal; The Perfection of the one has indeed as much Charm in it as pure
Nature can have; but the other has a Mixture of something Divine in it, it has
an Heavenly Tincture which add something of Sacredness and Majesty to it that
Nature wants; The Perfection of the one is indeed easy to its self, and
amiable to others, but the Perfection of the other is Joy and Glory within, and
commands a Veneration as well as Love from all it converses with. Blessed
State! when shall I attain thy lovely Innocence! when shall I enter into thy
Divine Rest! when shall I arrive at thy Security, thy Pleasure!

CHAP. V. Of Liberty with respect to Sins of Infirmity.
THis is a Subject, wherein the very Being of Holiness or Virtue, the Salvation
of Man, and the Honor of God, are deeply interessed: For if we allow of such
Sins for Venial, as really are not so, we destroy the Notion, or evacuate the
Necessity of Holiness; endanger the Salvation of Man, and bring a Reflection
upon God as a Favourer of Impiety. On the other hand, if we assert those Sins
damnable, which are not really so, we miserably perplex and disturb the Minds
of Men, and are highly injurious to the Goodness of God; representing Him as a
severe and intolerable Master. But how important soever this Subject be, there
is no other, I think, in the compass of Divinity, wherein so many Writers have
been so unfortunately engaged; so that it is overgrown with Dispute and
Controversy, with Confusion and Obscurity, and numberless Absurdities and
Contradictions. This I have thought necessary to observe in the Entrance of my
Discourse, not to insult the Performances of others, or to raise in the Reader
any great Expectation for my own; but indeed for a quite contrary Reason,
namely, to dispose him to a favorable Reception of what I here offer toward
the rendering the Doctrine of Sins of Infirmity intelligible, and preventing the
Disservice which Mistakes about it do to Religion.

By Sins of Infirmity, both Ancients and Moderns, Papists, and Protestants, do
I think, understand such Sins as are consistent with a State of Grace and
Favor; from which the best Men are never entirely freed in this Life, though
they be not imputed to them. This then being taken for granted, I shall Enquire
into these three Things.

1. Whether there be any such Sins, Sins in which the most Perfect live and dye.

2. If there are, what these be. What it is that distinguishes them from
Damnable or Mortal ones.

3. How far we are to extend the Liberty of the Perfect Man in Relation to
these.

1. Whether there be any such. That the best Men are not without Errors,
without Defects and Failings, and that not only in their past Life or
unregenerate State, but their best and most Perfect one, is a Truth which
cannot, one would think, be controverted: For what Understanding is there which
is not liable to Error? what Will that does not feel something of Impotence,
something of Irregularity? What Affections, that are merely Human, are ever
constant, ever raised? Where is the Faith that has no Scruple, no Diffidence,
the Love that has no Defect, no Remission; the Hope that has no Fear in it?
what is the State which is not liable to Ignorance, Inadvertency, Surprise,
Infirmity? where is the Obedience that has no Reluctance, no Remisness, no
Deviation? This is a Truth which, whether Men will or no, they cannot choose but
feel; the Confessions of the Holiest of Men bear Witness to it. And the
Pretension of the Quakers, to a Sinless and Perfect State, is abundantly
confuted by that Answer, one of the most eminent of them, makes to an
Objection, which charges them with arrogating and assuming to themselves
Infallibility and Perfection, viz. That they were so far Infallible and
Perfect, as they were led by the Spirit of God. For what is this, but to desert
and betray, not defend their Cause? It Is plain then, as to Matter of Fact, that
the most Perfect upon Earth are not without Frailties and Infirmities; and such
Infirmities as discover themselves in actual Slips and Errors. But the Question
is, whether these are to be accounted Sins? I must confess if we strictly
follow the Language of the Scripture, we should rather call them by some other
Name; for this does so generally understand by Sin, a Deliberate Transgression
of the Law of God, that it will be very difficult to produce many Texts wherein
the Word Sin is used in any other sense. As to Legal Pollutions, I have not
much considered the matter. But as to Moral ones I am in some Degree confident,
that the word Sin does generally signify such a Transgression as by the Gospel
Covenant is punishable with Death; and rarely does it occur in any other sense,
I say rarely; for, if I be not much mistaken, the Scripture does sometimes call
those Infirmities I am now talking of Sin. But what if it did not? It Is plain,
That every Deviation from the Law of God, if it has any Concurrence of the will
in it, is in strict speaking Sin: and it is as plain that the Scripture does
frequently give us such Descriptions and Characters, and such Names of these
Sins of Infirmity, as do oblige us both to strive and watch against them, and
repent of them. For it calls them Spots, Errors, Defects, Slips, and the like.
But, what is, Lastly, most to my purpose, it is plain, That this Distinction of
Sins, into Mortal, and Venial, or Sins of Infirmity, has its Foundation in
express Texts of Scripture. Numerous are the Texts cited to this purpose: But
he that will deal fairly must confess, that they are most of them improperly
and impertinently urged, as relating either to Falls into Temporal Calamity, or
to Mortal, not Venial, Sins; or to the Sins of an unregenerate State; or to a
comparative Impurity, I mean the Impurity of Man with respect to God; a Form of
Expression frequent in Job. I will therefore content my self to cite three or
four, which seem not liable to these Exceptions, Deuteronomy, 32.4. they have
corrupted themselves; their Spot is not the spot of his Children: They are a
perverse and crooked Generation. Here two things seem to be pointed out to us
plainly, First, That the Children of God are not without their Spots, Secondly,
That these are not of the same Nature with those of the wicked, in comparison
with whose wilful and perverse Transgressions, the Children of God are,
elsewhere, pronounced blameless without Offense, without Spot, Psalm. 19.12, 13.
Who can understand his Errors? cleanse thou me from secret Faults: keep back
also thy Servant from presumptuous Sins, let them not have dominion over me,
then shall I be upright and I shall be innocent from the great Transgression.
Here again the Psalmist seems to me to place Uprightness in Freedom from
Deliberate or Mortal Sin, and to admit of another sort of Transgressions, into
which, even upright Men slip sometimes. Nor does the Psalmist here only assert
Venial Sins, but he seems to me to suggest the Springs and Sources of them,
namely, some secret Dispositions in our Nature to Folly and Error, which he
prays God to cleanse and free him from more and more; cleanse thou me from
secret Faults. The word Fault is not in the Original; but something of that
kind must be supplied to render the sense entire in our Language. The words of
Solomon, Prove. 20.9. seem to relate to this Corruption lurking in us, and never
utterly to be extirpated; Who can say I have made my Heart clean, I am pure
from my Sin? For if this should be applied to Mortal Sin, every one sees, that
it will contradict a hundred places in Scripture, which attribute to Righteous
Men, Purity of Heart, and Deliverance from Sin. Lastly, James 3.2. we are told
plainly, that in many things we offend all, (...); not Sinners only, but
Righteous and Upright Men, have their Defects and Slips. And accordingly there
is not any Life which we have the History of in Scripture, how excellent soever
the Person be, but we meet with some of these recorded; as will appear from
those several Instances I shall produce, when I come to describe the Nature of
these Sins. And certainly when David says of himself, my Sins are more in
number than the hairs of my head. He that shall interpret this Place of Mortal
or Presumptuous Sins, will both contradict the Scriptures, which acquit him,
except in the matter of Vriah, and highly wrong the Memory of David, making him
a Prodigy of Wickedness, instead of a Saint. Nor does that make any thing
against me, which he adds in the next Words, my heart fails me; or that in the
foregoing Verse, mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able
to look up. For I do not affirm that the Psalmist here has regard only to Sins
of Infirmity exclusively of others, no, he reckons all together, and so
discerns the one aggravated by the other; and the Guilt of all together very
far enhansed. Nor do I, Secondly, interess my self here in that Dispute between
Protestants and Papists, whether Sins of Infirmity are not damnable in their
own Nature though not imputed under the Covevenant of Grace? Nor do I, Lastly,
examine what a vast Heap of Sins of Infirmity may amount to, though the Gilt of
this or that alone were not so fatal. I have then, I think, proved the matter
in Question; having showed both from the Experience of Mankind, and the
Scripture, That the best Men have their Infirmities and Defects; And that these
may properly enough be called Sins. I think it superfluous to prove, that they
consist with a state of Salvation; since it is not by any, that I know of,
denied; and may be easily enough made out, from what I have already said. I am
now to Enquire,

S. 2. What these Sins be; and how distinguished from Mortal or Damnable ones.
To this purpose we may distinguish Human Actions (under which I comprise both
Internal and External) into three sorts, Voluntary, Involuntary, and Mixed.

. 1. There are Actions properly and truly Voluntary; such are those deliberate
Transgressions of a Divine Law, which Man commits in Opposition to the direct
Remonstrances of Conscience; he knows the Action is forbid, he sees the
Turpitude and Obliquity of it; he is not ignorant of the punishment denounced
against it, and yet he ventures upon it: This is plainly Mortal, Damnable Sin,
and I cannot think, that any Circumstance or Pretense whatever, can render it
Venial. And therefore I must be pardoned, if I cannot be of their Opinion who
supposed, that the smalness of the Matter, the Reluctance of Conscience, or the
Length and Force of a Temptation, can so soften and mitigate a Voluntary
Transgression, as to diminish it into a Sin of Infirmity. 1. As to the smalness
of the Matter. Some cannot but think those Transgressions Venial, which are,
for the Matter of them, so slight and insignificant, that they seem to be
attended by no mischievous Con^sequence, nor to offer any Dishonor to God, nor
Injustice to Man. But I doubt this Notion of Venial Sin has no Solidity in it;
For either Men perform such Actions Deliberately, or Indeliberately, knowing
them to be sinful, or believing them to be innocent. Now if we perform any
Action Deliberately, and knowing it to be sinful, we never ought to look upon
this as a little Sin, much less a Venial one. The Reason of this is plain. The
First Notion that every Man has of Sin, is, that it is forbidden by, and
displeasing to God; and then to do that deliberately, which we know will
provoke God, is an Argument of a fearless and irreligious Heart, a Heart
destitute of the Love of God, the Love of Righteousness, and Heaven. But if a
Man transgress in a trifling Instance indeliberately; this alters the Case; for
the Matter not being of Importance enough to excite the Intention and
Application of the Mind: and there being consequently no Malignity of the Will
in an Action, where there was no Concurrence of the Judgment, I cannot but
think, this may very well pass for an Human Infirmity; for all the fault that
can be here laid to the Charge of Man is, Incogitancy or Inadvertency; and that
too as excusable a one as can be. Lastly, where the Matter of an Action is very
trifling and inconsiderable, and draws after it no ill Consequence, either with
respect to God or Man, in this Case, if a Man judge it no Sin, I cannot think
it i^ any to him; though by a Nice and Scrupulous Construction, it may fall
within the Compass of some Divine Prohibition. The Distinction of the Schoolmen
is good enough here; it is besides the Law, but not against it: or it is
against the Letter, but not the Design and Intention of the Law of God. I
cannot think that it is consistent with the Infinite Goodness of God, to punish
such things as these with Eternal Misery, or that it can become a Man of sense,
seriously to afflict his Soul for them. I cannot for my Life, persuade my self
that I should provoke God, if passing thorough a Field of my Neighbor's Corn
or Pease, I should pull off an Ear or Cod; or passing through his Orchard,
should eat an Apple. The Notion I have of God, and the great End and Design of
his Laws will not suffer me to entertain such trifling, weak, and superstitious
Fancies. And here I cannot but take notice of two Things, which very much
perplex the Minds of some good People; that is an Idle Word and Jesting:
concerning both which, it is very plain, That such are miserably mistaken; and
that they are no sins at all, unless unreasonable and superstitious scruples
make them so: This I say, on supposition, that by Idle word, they mean only
such talk, as does not tend to Edification; and by Jesting only that which is
Innocent and Divertive. By an Idle Word ( Matt. 12.) our Savior plainly means
a blasphemous Word, if that saying of our Savior, of every idle Word, etc. be
to be limited, and confined by the sense of the Context: For the occasion of
that Assertion of our Lord, was the Blasphemy which the Jews belched out
against his Miracles. Or if our Lord here, on this occasion, advances a general
Doctrine, then, by an Idle Word, we must understand a wicked one, proceeding
from a corrupt and naughty Heart; and tending as directly to promote Impiety,
as gracious and wholesome Discourse does to promote Edification. This is evident
from ver. 25. a good Man, out of the good treasure of the Heart, brings forth
good things; and an evil Man, out of the evil treasure brings forth evil
things. And ver. 37. for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. By Jesting, Ephesians. 5.4. The Apostle understands the
modish Raillery of the Greeks, which was generally made up of Profaneness and
Wantonness; or brisk and sharp Ironies. This is plain, both from the Company we
find it in (...), Filthiness and Foolish Speaking; and from the Character,
given it in common with the other two: (...) being the very same, that is given
the most infamous, and vilest Lusts and Passions. Romans 1.28. Things not
convenient is a diminutive Expression, implying such things as contain much
Turpitude and Wickedness in them. Beza, as appears by his Notes, read (...) not
(...) in this place, foolish speaking, or (not and) Jesting; which (as he
observes) makes Jesting the same thing with foolish Speaking, or Buffoonry. And
justifies that Jesting, which consists in a pleasant, and divertive
Facetiousness from 1 King. 18.27, 2 King. 3.23. Isa. 14.11.

2. Some think, that the mere Reluctance, and Opposition of Conscience against
Sin, is sufficient to constitute a Sin of Infirmity. And this has received no
small Countenance, from such an Interpretation of Romans 7. as makes Holiness to
be nothing else but a Vicissitude of Desires and Actions, repugnant to one
another. But at this rate no Man's Sins would be Damning but his, whose
Conscience were seared, and when ones Heart did condemn one, God would be sure
to acquit one: which agrees very ill with St. John, If our heart condemn us,
God is greater than our heart and knows all things, 1 John 3.21. No man,
unless arrived at a Reprobate Sense, can do that which is evil without
Reluctance; for his Conscience will forbid him, as long as it has the least
Degree of Tenderness in it; and restrain him as far as it has power. And as to
Romans 7. it has been abundantly considered; and, I think, sufficiently proved to
belong to those, who are the Servants of Sin; as Romans 8. does to those, who are
set free. St. Austin indeed tells us, that he understood that Chapter at first
as the Pelageans did, for a Person under the Law, and under the Power of Sin;
But that he found himself constrained afterward, to understand it of St. Paul
himself. I will not examine the Solidity of his Reasons: It Is enough to me, that
his Change of Opinion does Religion no harm: For he is so far from making a
state of Holiness to consist with Acts of Deliberate Sin against Conscience,
that he will not excuse so much, as rebellious Motions and Appetites, if
consented to. All that he contends for, in a good Man from this Chapter is,
That Lapsed Nature will sometimes exert it self, even in the best Men, in
disorderly and distempered Appetites.

3. Others, Lastly, will have those Sins, into which we fall, either
overpowered by the strength, or wearied out by the Assiduity or Length of a
Temptation, pass for Infirmities. But this Opinion has as little ground as the
two former. I can find no Scripture that countenances this Notion. There are
indeed, some of great Reputation, who have promoted it; But, I think, the words
of St. Paul make against it, 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you,
but such as is common to Man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that you are able; but will with the temptation also make a
way to escape; that ye may be able to bear it. The Design, of which Words, is
certainly, to encourage Christians against the bigest Temptations, by an
Assurance of Relief from God, proportionable to our Necessities; and
consequently must imply, that if we yield to a Temptation, it is our own fault.
God expects, we should stand firm, under the highest Trials. Be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. But whosoever shall
deny me before Men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in Heaven,
Matt. 10.33. If therefore, by Sins of Infirmity, Men mean, such as are
consistent with the state of Grace. i. e. such as good Men may frequently fall
into, without forfeiting the Peace of Conscience, and the Favor of God, I
cannot possibly think, that any Deliberate Sin, can be such, upon the score of
the Temptation; or that any of those Sins, reckoned in the Catalogue, Gal. 5.
and Ephesians. 5. can be such on the account of the Violence or Perseverance, with
which, they attack us. But, Secondly, if by Sins of Infirmity they mean, such
Sins as Righteous Men are liable to, I know not what they are, from which, they
are exempted. But if, Lastly, by Sins of Infirmity, they mean such, for which
God is more easily entreated, then there is no Question to be made, but that
there is a Difference in Sins; which is to be estimated, by the different
Measures of Grace and Knowledge; by the different Degrees of Deliberation and
Surprise; and by the Force or Weakness, the Continuance or Shortness, of a
Temptation: And Finally, by the different Effects, and Tendencies of Sins. To
all which, I do not question, but that the Spirit has regard in those
Directions, which it gives us, for our Behavior toward such as fall, Gal.
6.1. Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a fault, ye, which are spiritual,
restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness; considering thy self, lest thou
also be tempted. And of some have compassion, making a difference: And others
save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Jude 22* 23.

. 2. A Second sort of Actions are such, as we call Involuntary; that is, those,
wherein we exercise no Deliberation, no Choice. Some have reduced Sins of
Infirmity to this Head, but with what Color of Reason any one may judge. For
since Actions, truly Involuntary, are neither the Object of the Understanding
nor Will, it is hard to conceive what Morality there can be in them. The
Grounds, on which this Opinion is built are such as these. First, the Measure,
say they, of Good and Evil is the Law of God; But Involuntary and unavoidable
Actions are not a proper Subject of Laws: for to what purpose is it to
prescribe Rules, or to propose Rewards and Punishments to such Actions, as are
no way subject to our Choice. Secondly, they tell us, it is inconsistent with
the Goodness of God, and the Riches of Gospel Grace, to impute those things to
a Man as Damnable Sins, which fall not within the Compass of his Power of
Deliberation. Now, I must confess, I am so far from denying any Actions, that
can lay a just claim to this Apology to be Venial, that I cannot forbear
thinking, that they are not sinful: For where there is no Law there is no
Transgression. But how does this way of arguing, for the Excusableness of
Involuntary Transgressions, consist with those other Doctrines which they
maintain concerning them; namely, That we are bound to Repentance for them;
That these Sins are not Venial in their own Nature, but only through the Favor
of God. For the Law, taken in its Rigor, denounces Death against all Sin in
general, without Limitation or Exception; so that if God should judge
rigorously, even Involuntary Sin, would fall under that Sentence, the wages of
Sin is Death. This, I must confess, seems to me very incoherent. For if an
Action be of that Nature, that it cannot properly be the Matter or Subject of a
Law, how can it fall under the Condemnation of Law? If it be of that Nature,
that it is incapable of any Moral Regulation, nor subject to the Influence of
Reward or Punishment, how can it be mere Matter of Grace, that a Man is not
Damned for it? In a word, if an Action be truly, and properly Involuntary, it
can by no means be Sin: and if it be Voluntary, it is subject to the Regulation
of Laws: It Is a proper Instance of Deliberation and Freedom, and capable of
Rewards and Punishments. And the Truth is, the one needs no Apology, and the
other is not capable of any; the one is a Mortal Sin, and the other no Sin at
all. And therefore, we must look for Venial Sin, in some other Species of
Action.

. 3. The last Class of Actions are those which are of a mixed Nature; partly
Voluntary, and partly Involuntary: And here, I think, we must place Sins of
Infirmity, by whatever Names we may call them. For these surely, if they are be
rankt (as by all they are) amongst Actual Sins, must be such Actions, as have
in them something of Voluntary, something of Involuntary, much of Human
Frailty, and something of Sinful, much of unavoidable, and something of Moral
Obliquity. These are the Transgressions, which the Scripture seems to me, to
intend by Errors, Defects, Slips, Motes the Spots of God's Children; and these
certainly, if any, must be the Sins that can consist with a state of Grace. For
these do not imply a Deliberate Wickedness in the Will, much less an Habitual
one; nay, they do not include in them any Wickedness at all, strictly speaking,
but are truly the Effects of Human Frailty, and the unhappy Circumstances of
this Mortal Life. Thus then I describe a Venial Sin; it has in it so much of
Voluntary as to make it Sin, so much of Involuntary as to make it Frailty; it
has so much of the Will in it, that it is capable of being reduced; and yet so
much of Necessity in it, it is never utterly to be extirpated: it has some
thing in it Criminal enough to oblige us to watch against it, repent of it; and
yet so much in it pitiable and excusable, as to entitle us to Pardon under the
Covenant of Grace. And thus I distinguish Venial from Mortal Sin: Mortal Sin
proceeds from a Heart, either Habitually corrupted, or deceived and captived
for the time; but Venial Sin results from the Imperfections and Infelicities of
our Nature, and our State. Mortal Sin is truly Voluntary and Deliberate in the
Rice and Birth of it, and mischievous and injurious in its Consequence: But
Venial Sin is very far Indeliberate in its Beginning, and, if not indulged,
almost harmless in its Effects: Deficiency is, as it were, the Essence of the
one, Malignity of the other; in the one we see more of Frailty, in the other
more of Wickedness: in the one something nearly allied to Necessity, in the
other to Presumption: the one is the Transgression of the Law of Perfection,
the other of the Law of Sincerity; the one is repugnant to the Letter, the
other to the Design and End of the Law; the one is a Violation of God's
Commands, taken in the most favorable Construction, the other a Violation of
them in a rigorous one. That this was the Notion of St. Austin, St. Jerome, and
others, who impugn'd the sinless Perfection of the Pelagians, is very plain. 1.
From the Distinction they made between (...) and (...), Crimen and Peccatum, i.
e. between Wickedness and Defects, between Crimes and Faults: for this is
plainly the Sense wherein they used those Words. And next from those very clear
and lively Descriptions of Venial Sin, which occur frequently in St. Austin;
after whom, it is well known, others writ. Such is that -- Fit ut per
Ignorantiam vel Infirmitatem non exertis adversus eam totis viribus voluntatis,
eidem ad illicita etiam nonnulla cedamus, tanto magis and crebrius quanto
deteriores, tanto minus and rarius quanto meliores sumus. Tom. 7. De Peccat.
Rem. P. 689.
through Ignorance or Infirmity, for want of exerting our utmost strength
against Concupiscence, we are drawn away by it to some unlawful things; and the
worse we are so much the more and the oftener, but the better we are so much the
less and the seldomer do we give way to it. And thus Hoc and nos dicimus, posse
Hominem non peccare, si velit, pro tempore, pro loco, pro imbecillitate
corporea, quamdiu intentus est Animus quamdiu chorda nullo vitio laxatur in
Cithera Dial. 3. adv. Pelag. p. 201.
St. Jerome imputes Venial Sin, to our not making use of our utmost Strength
and Diligence. I might content my self with having given this general
Description of Sins of Infirmity, did I not know, how ill a Talent some have at
Application of Generals to any particular Case; and how little satisfactory,
such Account is, to the weak and scrupulous. For the sake of these therefore, I
think, fit to be a little more distinct and particular on this Argument. In
Venial Sin then, two Things must be considered.

1. The matter of it. 2. The manner of Committing it.
1. As to the Matter, I conceive, it ought to be slight and inconsiderable.
There is no room for a Venial Sin in things of a crying provoking Nature; as in
Adultery, Idolatry, Murder; for in these the Injustice and Wickedness, with
respect to God and Man, is palpable and formidable; and can never, for ought I
see, be extenuated by any Circumstances into Sins of Infirmity. But when I say,
the Matter of the Sin of Infirmity, must not be a detestable and crying
Provocation, I do not mean to extend this to the first Tendencies and
Dispositions even toward such Sins. Thus though Adultery cannot be a Venial
Sin, yet the first Sallies of the Desire, the first Glances and Wanderings of
the Eye, may. And the same thing may be said, of the first Motions toward any
other Sin.

2. As to the next thing to be considered in a Venial Sin; that is, the manner
of committing it, it must proceed from Ignorance, Frailty, or Surprise.

1. From Ignorance. By Ignorance I do not mean that which is utterly
invincible, but that which has some Defect, some Frailty, some Degree of
Negligence it it. Of this kind, I take those Errors to be, against which, David
prays, Psalm. 19.12. who can understand his Errors? cleanse thou me from secret
faults. He that considers Human Nature, and the Power of Education; the
Influence of Prejudices, which we suck in betimes, and suchlike, will easily
acknowledge, that there may be such Errors. When we have used a moral Diligence
in examining our Lives, and trying our own Hearts; Yet considering the vast
Variety of Duties, we are to run through, no humble Man can be confident, that
he has omitted nothing, that he is mistaken in nothing. This I take to be the
sense of Solomon, Prove. 20.9. who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am
pure from my Sin? And this I take to be the sense of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4. For
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judges
me is the Lord. There are Mistakes and Errors, which might indeed have been
prevented or removed, by the strictest Impartiality, and the strictest
Diligence. But alas! how often do good Men fall short of both these? how common
is it for good Men to be too far transported by the best of Principles, even
Zeal? how often do good Men mix their Errors in Reproof and Reprehension, and
in the one and the other, they discern it not.

2. Surprise and Inadvertency is another thing, that renders Sin, Venial. The
Multitude of Affairs and Temptations, the Suddenness and Unexpectedness of some
unusual Temptation, or something of this kind, may betray a good Man into some
Slips or Errors, in Word or Deed. This I take to be the Case of Sarah, when she
said, I laughed not: of Jonah, when he replied upon God, I do well to be angry,
Jon. 3. Of David, when he pronounced rashly, do thou and Zibah divide the Land,
2 Samuel 16.4. Of Saul and Barnabas, when they broke out, into Heat and Anger.
But that which was a Sin of Infirmity in the beginning, became, I doubt, a
Deliberate one in the end, when they parted from one another. Some extend this
Circumstance of Surprise to excuse Sins, which imply notorious Wickedness, and
are of very ill Consequence: But I think very erroneously. It Is true, these
Sins of Surprise, whatever the matter of them be, are generally conceived, to
be much extenuated, through want of Opportunity to summon our strength, and to
make use of mature and sober Deliberation; especially where the Temptation is
not only sudden, but violent too. For in this case, the Soldier of Christ,
taken, as it were, in an Ambush, or blown up with a Mine, seems to be lost and
defeated, before he discern his Danger: I do not doubt then, but this
suddenness of a Temptation, does very much diminish the Guilt of a Sin. But we
ought to remember too, that there are many things, that do abate, and take off
from this Excuse: As First, It is not easy to conceive how any thing, that is
a direct Wickedness, that is a Sin of a deeper Die than ordinary, on the
account of its mischievous Consequences, should make its Approach so silently,
and so suddenly, that we should fall into it indiscernably. Secondly, The
Christian is bound to shun not only every Evil, but every Appearance of it; and
it is hard to imagine, that a sincere Man, who does indeed strain at a Gnat,
should swallow a Camel. He that preserves the Tenderness of Conscience, as he
will have an Aversion for small Sins, so will he have an Horror for great ones.
Thirdly, The Mind of a Christian ought to be possessed and awed by the Fear of
God; and that not a slight and transient, but a deep and lasting one. The
Psalmist was not content to say, I am afraid of thy Judments, but to express
how thoroughly this Fear had seized him, he adds, my flesh trembles for Fear
of thee, Psalm. 119. And certainly, this Fear is a sort of impenetrable Armor,
which extinguishes all the fiery Darts of the Devil. In vain is the Suddenness,
or the Briskness of a Temptation, unless we first lay aside this Shield.
Fourthly, We are bound to be always on our Watch and Guard; and therefore if we
relax our Discipline, if we live secure and careless, if we rashly cast our
selves upon Dangers, our Sin then will be but the Consequence of our Folly: and
therefore one Error cannot be an Excuse or an Apology for another. I think
therefore, the Apology of Surprise, should be confined and limited to slight
Offenses; it cannot properly have room in great ones, or if it have, it may be
urged in Mitigation of our Punishment; but never, I doubt, for total Impunity.

3. Lastly, Venial Sin has its Rise from the Defects and Imperfections of our
Nature, and the disadvantageous Circumstances of our State. Here come in the
Failures and Defects in the Measures and Degrees of Duty; if these can be
properly reckoned for Sins: I say, if they can; For I do not see that this is a
good Argument, we are bound to the highest Degree of Love by that Law, thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart; therefore whatsoever falls
short, of the highest and most absolute Degree of Love, is a Sin: For at this
Rate, whatever were short of Perfection, would be Sin. We must love nothing
better than God, nothing equal to Him: This will constitute us in a State of
Sincerity. What is further required is, that we are bound to aim at, and pursue
after the highest, and most perfect Degrees of Love: but we are not bound under
Pain of Damnation to attain them. But on the other hand, I readily grant, that
our falling short, in the Degrees of Faith, Love, Hope, and the like, may be
properly reckoned amongst Sins; when they spring from Defects of Vigilance and
Industry: And if these Defects be such, as can consist with Sincerity, then are
the Imperfections, or the Abatements of our Virtues, pardonable; and then only.
Here again fall in Omissions, wandering Thoughts, Dullness and Heaviness in Duty,
the short Titillations of some irregular Fancies, Forgetfulness, slight and
short Fits of Envy, Discontent, Anger, Ambition, Gaiety of Mind. Thus we find
the Disciples falling asleep, when they should have prayed, Mat. 26. and David
praying, quicken thou me, Psalm. 119. Thus his Soul too was often cast down, and
disquieted within him, Psalm. 42. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19. Job cursed the Day of his
Birth. In short, our Natures are Human not Angelical; and our State is full of
Variety of Accidents, that they are too apt to discompose the Mind and divert
it from its great End. The Ebbs and Flows of Blood and Spirits, and an unlucky
constitution, or a Distemper; the Multitude or Confusion of Affairs; the
Violence or the Length of Trials, the Ease and Flattery of Prosperity, the
Weariness of the Body, or of the Mind, the Incommodiousness of Fortune,
Roughness of Conversation, these, and a thousand other things, are apt to
produce Defects and Failures in our Obedience, short Disorders in our
Affections; and such Emotions and Eruptions as abundantly prove the best to be
but Men; and the highest Perfection, if it be but Human, to be wanting and
defective. I think, I have now omitted nothing necessary to form a true Notion
of Sin of Infirmity. My next business therefore is, to consider,

S. 3. How far the Liberty of the Perfect Man, in respect of Venial Sin, ought
to be extended. There is great Affinity between Venial and Original Sin; and
therefore the Perfect Man's Liberty, as it relates to the one and the other,
consists in much the same Degrees, and is to be attained by the same Method; so
that I might well enough dismiss this Subject, and pass on to Mortal Sin. But
reflecting on the Nature of Man, how prone we are to Sin, and yet how apt we
are to think well of our selves, I judge it necessary to guard the Doctrine of
Venial Sin, by some few Rules, which may at once serve to secure our sincerity,
and point out the Perfection we are to aspire to. 1st. then, If we would
prevent any fatal event of Sins flowing from Ignorance, we must take care, that
our Ignorance it self be not Criminal: and that it will not be, if our Hearts
be sincerely disposed to do our Duty, and if we use moral Diligence to know it:
if we be impartial, humble, and honest, and have that Concern for the Knowledge
and Practice of our Duty, that is in some sort, proportionable to the
Importance of it. The Ignorance, that arises from natural Incapacity, or want
of sufficient Revelation, is invincible; and therefore innocent, Joh. 9.41.
Jesus said unto them, if ye were blind ye should have no Sin, but now ye say we
see, therefore your Sin remains: and, 15.22. if I had not come and spoken
unto them they had not had Sin: but now they have no cloak for their Sins. This
Rule must be understood of necessary Knowledge in General; and more legible and
conspicuous Lines of Duty: Both which, notwithstanding there may be room for
Sins of Infirmity to enter, where Mortal ones cannot: there may be imperfect
Dispositions of Mind, and latent Prejudices; there may be Instances of Duty of
a slighter moment; there may be several Circumstances, and small Emergencies
that may either be, without the Aim, or escape the Discovery of a moral Search,
that is, of a Human one: which, though it be without Hypocrisy, is yet not
without more or less Frailty. As to Perfection, it differs in this, as it does
in other Cases, from sincerity only in the Degrees, by which it is advanced
above it. He that will be Perfect, must search for Wisdom as for hid Treasures:
his Delight must be in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law must be meditate day
and night: his Thirst of Truth must be more eager, and impatient, his Diligence
more wakeful, more circumspect, more particular, more steady and constant than
that of the Beginner; or of one who is no farther advanced, than such Measures
of Faith and Love, as are indispensably necessary to Sincerity, will carry him.
2ly. Sins that are occasioned by Surprise and Inadvertency will not prove
destructive; if the Inadvertency it self be in a manner innocent: That is,
First, there is no room for Inadvertency in complete Acts of crying Sins.
Secondly, There is no pretense for Inadvertency, if we had any Misgivings
within, or Warnings without concerning that particular Sin, into which we fell
afterward; much less, if we cherish ill Motions till they grow too strong for
us. And Last of all, if we repeat the same Sin frequently and contemptuously.
And to this I may add, he cannot be said to Sin through Surprise, who throws
himself into the Way of Temptation, even though he be conscious of his own
Infirmity. 3ly. As to those Moral Defects, which flow from natural Infirmity,
they will not destroy us; if the Infirmity it self be pardonable. There are
Infirmities which we acquire; Infirmities which grow stronger by Indulgence;
Infirmities which continue merely because we do not take Pains to subdue them:
Our Moral Defects must not flow from these kinds of Infirmities; but from such,
as considering Human Nature, and the State of this World, it is impossible
utterly to root out. These moral Defects will do us no harm; if, First, we take
Care to settle in our Minds the Habits of those Virtues that are directly
opposite to them. Secondly, If we watch and fight against our natural
Infirmities; and endeavor to reduce our Appetites, even our natural Appetites,
within strict and narrow Bounds. Thirdly, If we wash off the Stains of our
Slips, and Defects by a general Repentance: For upon the Notion I have here
given of Venial Sin, Repentance appears to be very necessary: for I require in
them, something of Voluntary, someting of Freedom; enough to make an Action
sinful, though not to prove the Heart corrupt, or wicked. And because the
Degrees of Voluntary and Involuntary, are not so easily distinguishable from
one another, it is plain, our best security against any ill Consequence of our
Defects and Frailties is a Godly Sorrow. And therefore I wonder not, if David
charge himself more severely than God does, my Sins are more in number than the
hairs of my head: this was a Confession that became the Humility and
Solicitude of a Penitent; That became the Reflections of a wise and Perfect
Man; and the Corruption of Human Nature; the Alloy of Human Performances; the
slips and Defects; the Interruptions, Neglects, and Deviations of the best Life.

CHAP. VI. Of Liberty as it imports Freedom or Deliverance from Mortal Sin.
HERE I will Enquiry into three Things,

1. What Mortal Sin is; or what kind of Sins they be, which are on all hands
acknowledged, to be Inconsistent with a state of Grace and Favor.

2. How far, the Perfect Man must be set free, or delivered from this kind of
Sins; or how remote he is from the Guilt of them.

3. Which way this Liberty may be best attained.

S. 1. The First thing necessary is, to state the Notion of that Sin, which
passes under the Name of Mortal, Wilful, Presumptuous, or Deliberate Sin: For
these in Writers are equivalent Terms, and promiscuously used to signify one
and the same thing. Sin (says St. John 1 Ep. 3.4.) is the Transgression of the
Law. This is a plain and full Definition too of Sin. For the Law of God is the
Rule of Moral Actions; it is the Standard and Measure of Right and Wrong, of
moral Good and Evil: whatever is not within the Compass of the Law, is not
within the Compass of Morality neither: whatever cannot be comprehended within
this Definition, cannot have in it the entire and complete Notion of Sin; or,
which is all one, it cannot be Sin, in a strict, proper and adequate Sense of
the Word: Hence St. John in the same Verse tells us, That whosoer sins
transgresses a Law; and St. Paul, Romans 4.15. where there is no Law there is no
Transgression. Sin then must always suppose a Law; without which, there can be
neither Vice nor Virtue, Righteousness nor Wickedness: For these are nothing
else, but the Violation or Observation of the Law of God; or Habits and States
resulting from the one or the other. But this is not all. Two Things more must
be remarked to render this Definition, which the Apostle gives us of Sin, clear
and full. First, The Law must be sufficiently revealed. Secondly, The
Transgression of it must be truly Voluntary.

1. By sufficient Revelation of a Divine Law every one understands, That the
Law must be so published to the Man, who is to be governed by it, that the
Authority and Sense of it may be, if it be not his own fault, rendered evident
to him. If the Divine Authority of any Rule or Precept be doubtful and
uncertain, the Obligation of it will be so too; And it is as necessary, that
the sense of the Law should be evident, as its Authority. The Law that is penned
in dark and ambiguous Terms is, properly speaking, no Law at all. Since the
Mind of the Lawgiver is not sufficiently made known by it. Whatever is
necessarily, to be forborne or done by us, must be fully and clearly prescribed
in the Law of God; and if it be not, it can never be necessary. Men, through
Weakness or Design, may Enact Laws that are but a heap of Letters, a Crowd of
dubious, Delphick Sentences. But God can never do so; because this is repugnant
both to his Wisdom and Goodness, and to the very End of a Law too: which is to
be a Rule not a Snare; it is to give Understanding to the Simple; to be a Light
to our Feet, and a Lamp to our Paths: not, like an Ignis fatuus, to betray us
into Brakes, and Precipices, and Ruin, and Death.

2. Transgression must be a Voluntary one. And this imports two Things. 1. A
Knowledge of Law. 2. A Consent to the Breach of it. First, As to the Knowledge
of the Law. All that I have to say here, in few words, is, That Ignorance of
the Law excuses a Transgression when it is it self excusable; but if the
Ignorance it self be Criminal, the effect of it must be so too. We must never
think of excusing our Sins by alleging an Ignorance, into which, not our own
Incapacity, or any other reasonable Cause, but Neglect or Contempt of the
Truth, or some other vicious Lust or Passion, has betrayed us. Secondly, As to
the Consent of the Will. This is necessary to demonstrate any Action sinful or
virtuous; without this, the Mind will be no Partner in the Sin; and by
Consequence cannot be involved in the Guilt of it. Whatever we cannot help is
our Misfortune, not our Fault, Actions merely natural, or merely forced, can
neither be good nor evil. The concurrence of Reason and Choice, is
indispensably necessary, to the Morality of an Action. All this is plainly
taught us by St. James 1.14, 15. But every Man is tempted; when he is drawn
away of his own Lust, and enticed; then when Lust has conceived it brings
forth Sin; and Sin when it is finished brings forth Death. Which words do
certainly imply, That the Spring and Principle of Sin is within our selves;
That it is our natural Corruption, that entices and allures us; and it is our
Consent to its Enticements, that gives Being to Sin, and defiles us with Guilt.

From all this now put together, it is easy to conclude, what sort of a
Description we are to form of Mortal Sin. It Is such a Transgression of the Law
of God, as is vicious in its Original, deliberate in its Commission, and
Mischievous in its Tendencies or Effects: The Heart is corrupted and misled by
some Lust or other, and so consents to the Breach of the Moral Law of God, a
Law of Eternal and Immutable Goodness: or if the Sin consists in the Breach of
any Positive Law, it must yet imply in it some moral Obliquity in the Will; or
in the Tendency of the Action, or both. So that Presumptuous, or Mortal Sin,
call it by what Name we Will, is a Deliberate Transgression of a known Law of
God, tending to the Dishonor of God, the Injury of our Neighbor, or the
Depravation of our Nature. Such are those sins which the Prophet Isaiah,
exhorts those, who will repent, to cease from. And such are those we have a
Catalogue of Ephesians. 5. Gal. 5. and elsewhere, Now the Works of the Flesh are
manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and suchlike. These are
the sins, of which, as of so many Members, the Body of sin consists: These
constitute the old Man: These are sometimes called, the filthiness of the Flesh
and Spirit, Ungodliness, Wickedness Iniquity, the Lusts of the Flesh, worldly
Lusts and suchlike. These and the like sins have, as I said, in them very
apparent Symptoms of Malignity and Mortality: They are always the Effect of
some carnal and worldly Lusts, prevailing over the Law of the Mind; and they
imply a contempt of God, Injustice to our Neighbor, and some kind of
Defilement, and Pollution of our Nature. And that these are the plain
Indications, of such a Guilt, as excludes a Man from Heaven, and the Favor of
God, is very plain, from the account, which the Scripture gives us, both of the
Origin and Influence of sin; from the Care it takes to fortify the Heart
against all Infection, from the constant Representations it makes us of the
shamefulness, and the Mischief of sin, even in Reference to this World, as well
as the other. I cannot see any thing further necessary, to the Explication of
Deliberate, or Presumptuous sin; unless it be here fit to add, That it is
Mortal, though it proceed no further than the Heart. There is no need at all,
that it should be brought forth into Action, to render it Fatal, and Damnable.
This is evident, not only from the Nature of Divine Worship, which must be
entire, sincere and spiritual; and therefore can no more be reconciled to the
Wickedness of our Hearts, than of our Actions; but also, from the express words
of our Savior, Out of the Heart proceed Fornication, Adultery, Theft, etc. And
elsewhere, he pronounces the Adultery of the Heart Damnable, as well as that of
the Body, Mat. 5.28. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks upon a Woman to
lust after her, has committed Adultery already with her in his Heart.

S. 2. I am next to give some account of the Liberty of Perfect Man, in
reference to the sin, I have been discoursing of. I shall not need to stop at
any General or Preliminary Observations; as, That Abstinence from sin regards
all the Commandments of God alike; and to do otherwise were to mutilate and
maim Religion, and to dishonor God, while we pretend to worship and obey Him:
For the Breach of any single Commandment is a manifest Violation of the
Majesty, and Authority of God, whatever Observance we may pay all the rest:
For, he that said do not commit Adultery; said also, do not kill. Now if thou
commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the
Law, Jam. 2.11. That the Restraints, Man is to lay upon himself, relate no less
to the Lusts of the Soul, than the Actions of the Body; Except your
Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall
by no means enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.10. That to begin well
will avail us little, unless we finish well too. Universality, Sincerity, and
Perseverance are generally acknowledged to be essential and indispensable
Properties of Saving, Justifying, Faith. These things therefore, being but just
mentioned, I proceed to the Point to be inquired into, and resolve.

1. To be free, from the Dominion and Power of Mortal Sin, is the first and
lowest step; this is indispensable to sincerity, and absolutely necessary to
Salvation; Let not Sin reign in your mortal Bodies to fulfill the Lusts thereof,
Romans 6.12. And the advancing thus far, does, I acknowledge, constitute Man in a
state of Grace; For in Scripture, Men are Denominated righteous or wicked, not
from single Acts of Vice or Virtue, but from the Prevalence and Dominion, from
the Habit or Custom of the one, or the other, know ye not, that to whom ye
yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey:
whether of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness? Romans 6.16. But
then I must here add two Remarks by way of Caution. 1st. We must not presume
too soon of Victory over an Habitual Sin. An evil Habit is not soon broken off;
nor is it an easy Matter to resolve, when we have set our selves free from the
Power of it. Sometimes the Temptation does not present it self as often as it
was wont; or not with the same Advantages: sometimes one Vice restrains us from
another; sometimes worldly Considerations, or some little Change in our Temper,
without any thorough Change in our Minds, puts us out of humor for a little
while with a darling Sin; and sometimes the Force and Clearness of Conviction,
produces some pious Fits, which, though they do not utterly vanquish a Lust, do
yet force it to give way and retreat for a while, and interrupt that Love which
they do not exstinguish: All this may be, and the work not yet be done; nor our
Liberty yet gained. If therefore we fall, though but now and then, and though
at some Distance of time, into the same sin, we have great reason to be jealous
of its Power and our Safety: Nay, though we restrain our selves from the
outward Commission of it, if yet, we feel a strong Propension to it; if we
discern our selves ready to take fire on the Appearance of a Temptation; if we
are fond of approaching as near it as we can, and are pleased with those
Indulgencies, which are very near a kin to it, we have reason to doubt that our
Conquest is not yet entire. Nay, the Truth is, we cannot be on good Grounds
assured, that we are Masters of our selves till we have a settled Aversion for
the sin, which before we doted on; and shun the Occasions, which before, we
courted; till we be possessed of a Habit of that Virtue, which is a direct
Contradiction to it; and take as much pleasure in the Obedience, as ever we
did, in the Transgression of a Divine Command.

2ly. There are some Sins of that provoking Nature, so criminal in their Birth,
and mischievous in their Consequences, That one single Act, or Commission of
one of these, is equivalent to a Habit of others: such is Murder, Idolatry,
Perjury Adultery; these cannot be committed without renouncing Humanity, as
well as Christianity; without resisting the Instincts, and Impulses of Nature,
as well as the Eight of the Gospel, and the Grace of the Spirit. We must break
thorough a great many Difficulties, and Terrors e're we can come at these Sins;
we must commit many other, in order, to commit one of these; we must deliberate
long, resolve desperately, and in Defiance of God and Conscience; and what is
the Effect of Habit in other Instances, is a necessary Preparative in these,
that is, Obduration. In this Case therefore, the unhappy Man, that has been
guilty of any one of these, must not look upon himself as set free, when he is
come to a Resolution of never repeating it again; But then when he loathes, and
abhors himself, in Dust and Ashes, when he has made the utmost Reparation of
the Wrong he is capable of: when, if the Interest of Virtue require it, he is
content to be oppressed with Shame and Sufferings: when, in one word, a long
and constant Course of Mortification, Prayers, Tears and good Works have washed
off the Stain and Guilt.

2. We must be free, not only from a Habit, but from single Acts of deliberate
presumptuous Sin. The Reason is plain; Mortal Sin cannot be committed without
wounding the Conscience, grieving the Spirit, and renouncing our Hopes in God
through Christ, for the time at least. The wages of Sin is Death; is true, not
only of Habits, but single Acts of Deliberate Sin. Death is the penalty, the
Sanction of every Commandment; and the Commandment does not prohibit Habits
only, but single Acts too. Nor is there indeed any room for Doubt or Dispute
here, but in one Case; which is, If a Righteous Man should be taken off in the
very Commission of a Sin, which he was fallen into? Here indeed, much may be
said, and with much Uncertainty. But the Resolution of this Point, does not, as
far as I can see, minister to any good or necessary End; and therefore I will
leave it to God. In all other Cases, every thing is clear and plain; For if the
Servant of God fall into a presumptuous Sin, it is universally acknowledged,
that he cannot recover his Station but by Repentance. If he repent presently,
he is safe; but if he continue in his Sin, if he repeat it, he passes into a
state of Wickedness; widens the Breach between God and his Soul; declines
insensibly into a Habit of sin, and renders his Wound more and more incurable.
It Is to little purpose, I think here, to consider the vast Difference there is
in the Commission, even of the same sin, between a Child of God, and a Child of
Wrath; because a Child of God must not commit it at all: if he do, though it be
with Reluctance, though it be, as it were, with an imperfect Consent, and with
a divided Soul; though the Awe of Religion and Conscience seems not utterly to
have forsaken him, even in the midst of his sin, though his Heart smite him,
the very Minute it is finished, and Repentance and Remorse take off the Relish
of the unhappy Draught, yet still it is Sin; it is in its Nature Damnable: and
nothing but the Blood of Jesus can purge the Guilt.

3. The Perfect Man may be supposed, not only actually to abstain from Mortal
Sin, but to be advanced so far in the Mortification of all his inordinate
Affections, as to do it with Ease and Pleasure, with Constancy and Delight. For
it must reasonably be presumed, that his Victory over ungodly and worldly Lust,
is more confirmed and absolute; his Abhorrence of them more deep and sensible,
more fixed and lasting than that of a Beginner or Babe in Christ. The Regenerate
at first fears the Consequence of sin; but by Degrees he hates the Sin it self.
The Purity of his Soul renders him now incapable of finding any pleasure in
what he doted on before; and the Love of God and Virtue raises him above the
Temptations which he was wont to fall by; old things are past away and all
things are become new.

4. Lastly, The Perfect Man's Abstinence is not only more easy and steady, but
more entire and complete also, than that of others: He has a regard to the End
and Design of the Law; to the Perfection of his Nature; to the Purity and
Elevation of his Sowl; and therefore he expounds the Prohibitions of the Law in
the most enlarged Sense, and interprets them by a Spirit of Faith and Love. He
is not content to refrain from Actions directly criminal, but shuns every
Appearance of Evil; and labors to mortify all the Dispositions and Tendencies
of his Nature toward it; and to decline whatever Circumstances of Life are apt
to betray the Soul into a Love of this World, or the Body: he has crucified the
World and the Body too. That Pleasure, that Honor, that Power, that Profit,
which captives the Sinners, tempts, and tries, and disquiets the Novice, is but
a burden, a trouble to him: he finds no Gust, no relish in these things. He is
so far from Intemperance, so far from Wantonness, so far from Pride and Vanity,
that could he without any Disadvantage to the Interest of Religion, he would
imitate the Meanness, the Plainness, the Laboriousness, the Self-denial of our
Savior's Life; not only in Disposition and Affection of his Soul, but even in
his outward State and Deportment; and would prefer it far above the Pomp and
Show of Life. In one word, he enquires not how far he may Enjoy and be Safe,
but how far he may deny himself and be wise: he is so far from desiring
forbidden Satisfactions, that he is unwilling and afraid to find too much
Satisfaction in the natural, and necessary Actions of an animal Life. I need
not prove this to any one who has read the foregoing Chapters: for it is what I
have been doing throughout this Treatise. It is nothing, but what is consonant
to the whole Tenor of the Scripture; and to the Example of the best Times. And
it is conformable to what the best Authors have writ, who have any thing of Life
and Spirit in their Works: or have any true Notion of the great Design of
Christian Religion, which is, an heavenly Conversation. Let any one but cast
his Eye on St. Basil, or any other after him, who aimed at the same thing I now
do, the promoting Holiness in the World in the Beauty and Perfection of it, and
he will acknowledge, that I am far from having carried this matter too high. I
will quote but one or two Passages of St. Basil, (...). p. 454.
his Description of the Perfect Man with regard to his Self-denial runs thus.
He is one that consults the Necessities, not the Pleasure of his Nature; and
seems to grudge the Time which he bestows on the Support and Nourishment of a
corruptible Body. He is so far from looking upon eating and drinking, etc. as
an Enjoyment, that he rather accounts it a Task or troublesome Service, which
the Frailty of his Nature demands at his hands. Nor was this great Man more
severe against the Lusts of the Flesh, than against those other Branches of the
Love of the World, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. (...) p. 456.
All Vanity and Affection of Praise and Respect, all the Ostentation (says he)
and show of Life, is utterly unlawful for a Christian. And all this is directly
consonant to his Gloss (...), p. 457.
on those words of S. Paul, they that use the World as not abusing it, whatever
is beyond use is abuse; directly consonant to his Definition of Temperance.
(...). p, 454.
That it is the Extirpation of Sin; the Extermination of unruly Passions, and
the Mortification of the Body, extending even to the natural Appetites, and
Affections of it.

I know not what Scruples or Mistakes, the Doctrine I here advance concerning
this Part of my Perfect Man's Liberty, may be encountered with: But I am
Confident, I have given no just Occasion for any. I do not say of the Perfect
with Jovinian, that they cannot fall; but I say, they may, and ought to stand;
and, if it be not their own fault, will do so. I do not affirm of them, as the
Heretics in Vincentius Lyrinensis did of their Part, that they are priviledg'd
from sin by a peculiar Grace, and transcendent Favor; but I affirm, that they
shall not want Grace to preserve them from it, unless they be wanting to
themselves. I do not go about to maintain that God sees no sin in his Children;
but I maintain, That Mortal Sin is not the Spot of his Children. But do not I
in this fall in with the Papists, who assert the Possibility of keeping the
Commands of God? I answer, That taking them in the sense, in which they
themselves in the Conference at Ratisbone defend this Doctrine, I do. They
there tell us, that when they talk thus, they take the Law or Commands of God,
not in a strict and rigid; but in a favorable and equitable; i. e. a Gospel
Construction: And this is so far from being Heterodox, that Davenant accounts
it, a plain giving up the Question in Controversy. But am I not run into the
Error of the Pelagians, and Quakers? I answer, if the one or the other assert,
That the Perfect Man passes thorough the whole Course of Life without falling
into any Sin; or, That in the best part of Life, he is impeccable, and not
subject to sin (as in the Heat of Disputation their Adversaries seem sometimes
to fasten on them) I am at a wide Distance from them. But if they teach, That
the Perfect Man has Grace and Strength enough to forbear Wilful Sin, and that
many actually do so, I am I must confess exactly of their Mind. But then, I am
at the same time of the same Mind with St. Austin and St. Jerome too; For they
teach the very same Doctrine: For they never contended about the Possibility of
Freedom or Deliverance from Mental Sin, but only from Venial. St. Jerome Dial.
Secund. adv. Pelag. p. 189.
shall explain his own Sense, Etenim absque vitio. quod greece dicitur (...),
hominem posse esse aio: (...), id est, sine Peccato, esse nego. Which is the
same thing that St. Austin commonly admits; That Man may be sine Crimine, but
not sine Peccato, without Mortal, but not without Venial Sin. And in this, they
are certainly of the Mind of the Scripture; which every where represents the
Perfect Man, as holy, blameless, undefiled, without Spot walking with God: and
in one word, as free from Sin. If any Man can reconcile these Texts, which are
very numerous, with Mortal Sin, I will not say in the best state of the best
Men, but a state of Sincerity, and Regeneration, I will acknowledge my Mistake.
But till then, I cannot but think, the Doctrine I advance, necessary to
establish the true Notion of Holiness; and convince us of our Obligation to it.
This Doctrine is again necessary to wipe off those Aspersions and Calumnies,
the Quakers cast upon our Church; as if it held, That the Regenerate themselves
may continue in their Sins; nay, cannot be freed from them. Our Church teaches
indeed ( Artic. 14.) That the most Perfect Men are never utterly exempt from
Defects, Failings, and Human Infirmities; and I believe they themselves are not
confident enough to teach otherwise: only they will not call these Infirmities
Sins: And then the whole Controversy is reduced to this; we agree in the
thing, but differ in the Name; And in this Difference, we are not only on the
humbler, but the safer side too: for acknowledging them Sins, we shall be the
better disposed sure, to be sorry for them, to beg pardon of them and watch
against them.

The Fruit of this Liberty has been sufficiently accounted for Chap. 3. And
therefore I proceed.

S. 3. To propose some Rules for the Attainment of it.

1. The Mind must be grounded and rooted in the Faith; it must be thoroughly
convinced and persuaded of these great Articles of the Christian Religion, That
there is a God, and such a God, Holy, Just, Omniscient, and Omnipotent one; the
Incarnation, Suffering and Glory of the Blessed Jesus; a Judgment to come, and
the Eternal Rewards and Punishments of another Life. The firm Belief of these
things does naturally promote these two Effects. 1. It will awaken a Sinner out
of his Lethargy and Security; it will disturb him in his sinful Enjoyments, and
fill his Mind with guilty Fears, and uneasy Reflections. And when the Man
finds no Rest, no security in his Sins, this will naturally oblige him to
endeavor the Conquest of them. But then, we must not stifle and suppress these
Thoughts, we must give Conscience full Liberty; we must hear the Dictates of
our own Minds patiently; and consider seriously those terrible Truths, which
they lay before us; till we go from this Exercise deeply impressed with such
Notions as these: That our Sins, sooner or later, will certainly bring upon us
temporal and eternal Misery; That nothing, but sincere Righteousness, can
produce true and lasting Happiness; That it is a dreadful Danger to dally too
long with Indgination, or presume too far on the Mercy of a just, and holy and
Almighty God: That the neglecting the great Salvation tendered by the Gospel,
and procured by the Blessed Jesus, the slighting the blood of the Covenant, and
grieving the Holy Spirit (all which we do by willful Sin) is a Guilt, that will
sink down the obstinate Sinner into the lowest Hell; and render his Condition
more intolerable, that that of Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah. 2. The
Second Effect of the firm Belief of these Gospel Truths, is, that it begets in
us a Contempt of this World; and all the things of it. To him that Beelieves.
How short is Time compared to Eternity? How false, how empty are the Pleasures
of Sin, compared with those of Heaven, how insignificant the Esteem or Love of
Man to that of God? How worthless are all our worldly Hopes and Pretensions in
respect of an Interest in Jesus? Now the Soul that is once possessed thoroughly
with these Notions, what will it not do, what will it not suffer, rather than
fall short of, or forfeit its Crown? In what state will it not be contented,
nay, in what state will it not abound in Joy, whilst it holds fast the
steadfastness of its Hope, and is secure of the Love of Jesus? Here begins that
Purity of Heart, which is the Fountain of true Epicureism, that Greatness of
Mind which alone is true Honor and Fortitude. But that Faith may have these
Effects upon us, it must not be only a true but a lively Faith: therefore my

2. Second Rule, or if you please, another Branch of the former Rule, shall be
this. They, that will be free indeed, must not only believe the great Truths of
the Gospel, but must frequently and seriously ponder them, till they have
imprinted in themselves as clear, distinct and perfect Ideas of them as we are
capable of. This will soon mortify the Appetites of the Body, corrrect our
false Opinions of worldly Things; and baffle all the Sophistry and Confidence
of Lust. A lively Faith, is a Faith that imports the most clear and natural,
the most full and enlarged Notions of its Objects; a Faith, that not only looks
upon the Articles of our Creed as true, but beholds them in a manner as
present; and so represented and drawn to the Life, that they fill the Soul with
great and moving Considerations. This Faith does not only Believe, that there
is a God, but it beholds Him and walks before Him as present; it sees Him
arrayed in all his Glory, and in all his Majesty, in all the Power, and all the
Terrors, in all the Beauties and all the Graces of the Divine Nature: it does
not only believe that there are Rewards and Punishments, but is extremely
sensible of the Terrors of the one, and Attractions of the other; and looks
upon both as at the door. It does not only acknowledge a Mediator, but takes a
full view of the Misery of that state, wherein we lay through Sin; and of the
Blessedness of that, into which, we are translated by the Redemption which is
in Jesus. It Contemplates this Mediator in all the several steps of
Condescension, and Humiliation; in all the Tenderness, and Transports of his
Passion; in all the melancholy Scenes of his Sufferings; and the bright and
cheerful ones of his Glory. This is the Faith that sets us free.

3. We must not stop in Faith, till it be made perfect in Love. We must
meditate Divine Truths till they have fired our Souls, till they have enkindled
our Affections, till we be possessed by an ardent Love of God, of Jesus, of
Righteousness, and of Heaven; till all our other Desires and Passions be
converted into, and swallowed up of Love; till God becomes the Center of our
Souls; and in Him we rest, in Him we glory, and in Him we rejoice. O Love, how
great and glorious are the things that are said of thee! It Is thou who do
impregnate and animate Faith it self; it is thou who do surmount the
Difficulties of Duty, and make the Yoke of Christ easy and his Burden light:
it is thou, who do cast out Fear, and make Religion full of Pleasure; it is
thou that do make us watchful against Temptations, and impatient under the
Interruptions of Duty: it is thou that make us dis-relish the Pleasures of
this World, and long to be dissolved and to be with Christ. Here is the Liberty
of the Sons of God. Blessed are they even in this World who attain it. But one
Caution I must here add, That our Love must not be a Flesh, a Bit, but a steady
and well settled Affection, an Affection that has the Warmth of Passion, and the
Firmness of Habit. We must therefore by repeated Meditations, and Prayers,
daily nourish this Flame of the Altar, and not suffer it to go out.

4. We must never be at rest, till we have possessed our Minds with a perfect
Hatred of the sin which we are most subject to. The Love of God, his
Long-suffering and forbearance, the Sufferings of Jesus, the struglings of the
Spirit, the Peace and Pleasure of Holiness, the Guilt and Vexation, the Shame
and Punishment of Sin, its ill Influence on our present Perfection, and
Happiness, on our Peace and Hopes, are proper Topics to effect this. A
thorough Hatred of Sin once settled and rooted in us, will produce that Sorrow,
that Indignation, that Watchfulness, that Zeal, which will remove us far
enough, not only from the Sin, but also from the ordinary Temptations to it;
and place us almost, without the Danger of a Relapse.

To this former Rule, I should add this other; that when once a Man has
resolved upon a new Course of Life, whatever Difficulties he finds in his Ways,
whatever Baffles he meets with, he must never quit the Desgn of Virtue and
Life: he must never give over Fighting, till he Conquer. The reason is plain;
for he must either Conquer or Dye. But this belonging rather to Perseverance in
Virtue, than the Beginning of it, therefore I but just mention it.

5. It will not be imprudent in this Moral as in Physical Cures to observe
diligently, and follow the Motions, and Tendencies of Nature. Where there are
Seeds of Generosity and Honor; the Turpitude and Shame of Sin, the Baseness
and Ingratitude of it, the Love of God and of Jesus, and such like, are fit
Topics to dwell upon. Where Fear is more apt to prevail, there the Terrors of
the Lord are the most powerful Motive: And so whatever the Frame and
Constitution of Nature be, it will not be difficult to find Arguments in the
Gospel adapted to it, which will be so much the more prevalent, as they are the
more natural.

6. Lastly, We must use all Means to obtain the Spirit of God; and to increase
and cherish his Influence: We must ask, and seek, and knock, i. e. we must
pray, and Meditate, and Travel with Patience, and with Importunity, that our
Heavenly Father may give us his Holy Spirit: And when we have it, we must not
grieve it, by any Deliberate Sin; nor quench it by Security or Negligence, by
sensual Freedoms and Presumption; but we must cherish every Motion; improve
every Desire, and Passion, that it works in us: we must shun every Appearance
of Evil: we must press on toward Perfection; we must watch unto Prayer; we
must spend the Time of our sojourning here in fear; we must rejoice and glory
in the Lord; and we must wait for the blessed Hope, and the glorious appearance
of the great God and our Savior Christ Jesus. And now I have finished what I
had to say on this Subject, of the Perfect Man's Liberty as it relates to
Mortal or Wilful Sin. I have showed what this Sin is; how far Man may be freed
from it, and referring the Reader to Chap. 4. for the Fruit of this Freedom. I
have here, Lastly, given that Advice which I thought most serviceable to the
Attainment of it. And thorough this whole Chapter, I have had regard, not only
to Perfection but Sincerity; it being indeed improper to do otherwise; since we
cannot arrive at the one, but thorough the other. For Sincerity is Perfection
in its Infancy, or Nonage: and Perfection is nothing else but Sincerity
cultivated by Meditation and Discipline, and cherished by the Influence of
Heaven. And now let no Man's Heart fail him while he contemplates the
Difficulties which block up the Way to his Liberty. The Way indeed is steep,
and the Top is high; but Serenity and Happiness, Security and Glory dwell
there. Many indeed are the Temptations which would forbid our assent and thrust
us down: But we are Armed all over; they cannot hurt us; the Spirit supports
and encourages us; and nothing but our Cowardice and Inconstancy can prevent
our Success: Watch ye, stand fast, quit ye like Men, be strong; and then, you
shall be sure to Conquer, and enter into Rest.

CHAP. VII. Of Unfruitfulness as it consists in Idleness.
UNfruitfulness is a fit Subject to conclude a Discourse of Liberty with, or
begin one of Zeal; for lying, like a Tract of Ground, between two bordering
Kingdoms, it may indifferently be laid to either. As it implies a direct
Opposition to Spiritual Life and Sincerity, it naturally falls in under the
Consideration of Zeal; As it implies a Servile Subjection to some vile Lust or
or other, it naturally falls, in under the Consideration of Liberty: So that by
allotting it this Place, I shall at once complete my Reflections on the
Argument of Liberty, and make a good progress into that of Zeal.

Barrenness, or Unfruitfulness may in general best be understood, by comparing
it with a State of Wickedness: From which, as it is usually distinguished in
the Notion of the Vulgar, so does it really differ on many Accounts. The one
has in it an Air of Defiance, the other of Vnconcernment for Religion; the one
forgets God, the other contemns Him; the one has no Relish nor Savor of that
which is good, the other finds too much Gust and Pleasure in that which is
evil; the one makes us by Degrees Enemies, the other Strangers to God. In
short, there is little Doubt to be made, but that the Omission of a Duty, and
the Commission of a Crime; Lukewarmness in that which is good, and Eagerness
and Confidence in that which is evil, may, and generally do differ very widely
in the Degrees of Guilt: From hence it is (the Sinner being always a partial
and indulgent Judge of himself) that it is not unusual for many, who seem to
have some Abhorrence of Wickedness, to be far enough from apprehending much
Evil, or much Danger in Unfruitfulness. This is a fatal Error; it frustrates
the great Design of Religion, and robs it of its truest Honor, good Works. For
what can Religion effect by that Man, who retains nothing of it, but the bare
Form and Profession, and dares promise himself not only Impunity but a Heaven,
in an useless and unprofitable Life?

Unfruitfulness, if more particularly inquired into, consists in two Things, a
Neglect of Duty, or a lifeless and unprofitable Performance of it. The Former I
will call Idleness, the Latter Lukewarmness, Coldness, Formality; and treat of
each in order, Of the Former in this, and of the Latter in the following
Chapter. And because each of them are encumbered with Mistakes, and Errors,
which arise not only from Self-Love and Partiality, but also from Shallowness
of Judgment, joined with Tenderness of Conscience, I shall endeavor so to
manage this Subject, as neither to discourage the weak, nor embolden the
careless.

. 1. Of Idleness. The Omission of a Duty may be either Habitual or Occasional
and Accidental: And accordingly the Case of Omission may be very different.

1. An Habitual Omission of Duty cannot consist with Sincerity: A general
Neglect of Duty defeats the main End of Religion, which is to Honor God, adorn
our Holy Profession, and promote the Good of Human Society; all which can never
be attained but by following after Righteousness, and abounding in the Fruits
of it. By this Rule, an idle, though innocent, Life must necessarily be
accounted irreligious and vicious, being a flat Contradiction to our excellent
Profession, He who does not pray, nor meditate, nor pursue any End of Charity,
though he be otherwise civil and regular in his Life, yet because be does not
work Righteousness, because he is so far from imitating the Zeal or Charity of
the Blessed Jesus, that he acts directly repugnant to both; therefore must he
not be looked upon, as a Disciple of Jesus; but as an Alien, and a Stranger. He
whose Life is spent in Vanity or Drudgery, in Pleasure or Business, though his
Pleasure be not impure, nor his Business unjust, yet is he, before God, a
Criminal, because unprofitable: he has received the Grace of God in vain; the
Light of the Gospel has risen upon him in vain; and he has served no Interest
of Virtue, or Religion in his Generation: and therefore he will be excluded
Heaven, with the slothful Servant, who hid his Masters Talent in a Napkin, Luke
19.20.

2. The Case of an accidental, or occasional Omission of Duty, is very
different from that of habitual Neglect of it: an occasional Omission may be,
not only lawful, but necessary; but the Neglect of Duty never can be either.
The Circumstances of positive Duty, and the Measures or Degrees of Moral Good,
are not strictly fixed and settled; and therefore a single Omission, either in
the one or the other, wherever there is a sufficient Reason for it, can
neither grieve the Spirit, nor frustrate the Design of Religion; nor
consequently imply any Corruption in the Heart. But then we must take Care.

1. That our Omission be not too frequent. We must always have regard, in this
matter of Duty, to the great End and Designs of its Injunction; we must take
care that our Omissions in moral Duties be not so often, that either the Honor
of our Religion, or the Welfare of our Neighbor suffer by it, Nor must we so
often omit Instrumental Duties, Prayers, Reading, the Sacrament, and the like,
as thereby to abate, or much less extinguish, our Spiritual Gust and Fervor.
Omission of Duty, too often repeated, breeds a kind of Indifference, or
Lukewarmness; and soon passes into Coldness, and Insensibleness: and this often
ends in a reprobate Mind, and an utter Aversion for Religion.

2ly. We must endeavor, some way or other to compensate the Omission of a
Duty; to make up by Charity, what we have defalc'd from Devotion; or to supply
by short Ejaculations, what we have been forced to retrench from fixed and
regular Offices of Prayer. And he that watches for Opportunities, either of
Improvement, or doing Good, will I believe, never have Reason to complain of
the want of them: God will put into his hands either the one or the other; and
for the Choice, he cannot do better, than follow God's.

3ly. A single Omission must never proceed from a sinful Motive; from a Love of
the World or Indulgence to the Body; Necessity or Charity is the only just and
proper Apology for it. Instrumental or Positive Duties may give way to moral
ones; the Religion of the Means, to the Religion of the End: and in Moral
Duties, the less may give way to the greater. But Duty must never give way to
Sin, nor Religion to Interest or Pleasure.

Having thus briefly given an account, what Omission of Duty is, and what is
not sinful; and consequently so settled the notion of Idleness, that neither the
careless, nor the scrupulous, can easily mistake their Case, I will now propose
such Considetations, as I judge most likely, to deter Men from it; and such
Advice, as may be the best Guard and Preservative against it.

1. The First Thing, I would have every one lay to heart is, That a State of
Idleness is a State of damnable Sin. Idleness is directly repugnant to the
great Ends of God, both in our Creation, and Redemption. As to our Creation,
can we imagine that God, who created not any thing but for some excellent End,
should Create Man for none, or for a silly one? The Spirit within us, is an
active and vivacious Principle: our rational Faculties capacitate, and qualify
us for doing Good; this is the proper Work of Reason, the truest and most
natural Pleasure of a rational Soul. Who can think now, that our wise Creator
lighted this Candle within us, that we might oppress and stifle it by
Negligence and Idleness? That he contrived and destined such a Mind to
squander, and fool away its Talents in Vanity and Impertinence? As to our
Redemption, it is evident both what the Design of it is, and how opposite
Idleness is to it. Christ gave himself for us, to Redeem us from all Iniquity;
and to purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, Tit. 2.14.
and this is what our Regeneration, or Sanctification aims at: We are God's
Workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. How little then can a useless
and barred Life, answer the Expectations of God? What a miserable Return must
it be to the Blood of his Son; and how utterly must it disappoint all the
purposes of his Word, and Spirit? But What need I argue further, the Truth I
contend for is the express and constant Doctrine of the Scriptures: is not
Idleness, and fullness of Bread, reckoned amongst the Sins of Sodom? what means
the Sentence against the barren Fig Tree, Luke 13.7. but the Destruction and
Damnation of the Idle, and the Sluggish? the Indignation of God is not
enkindled against the Barrenness of Trees, but Men. What can be plainer, than
the Condemnation of the unprofitable Servant, who perished because he had not
improved his Talent, Matt. 25.38. and how frequently does the Apostle declare
himself against the idle, and disorderly? and all this proceeds upon plain and
necessary Grounds: Our Lord was an Example of Virtue, as well as Innocence; and
he did not only refrain from doing Evil, but he went about doing good. We can
never satisfy the Intention of Divine Precepts, by Negative Righteousness;
when God prohibits the Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, he enjoins the
perfecting Holiness in his Fear: when he forbids us to do evil, he at the same
time, prescribes the learning to do well. What need I multiply more Words;
Idleness is a flat Contradiction to Faith, Hope, Charity; to Fear, Vigilance,
Mortification; and therefore certainly, must be a damning Sin; These are all
active, and vigorous Principles; but Idleness enfeebles and disspirits,
manacles and fetters us: These are pure, strict and self-denying Principles;
but Idleness is soft, and indulgent: These Conquer the World, and the Body,
raise and exalt the Mind; but Idleness is far from enterprising any thing; from
attempting any thing that is good; it pompers the Body and effeminates, and
dissolves the Mind; and finally, whatever Innocence, or Inoffensiveness it may
pretend to, it does not only terminate in Sin, but has its Beginning from it;
from Stupidity, and Ignorance; from Vanity and Levity; from Softness, and
Sensuality, from some prevailing Lust, or other.

2. Next after the Nature, the Consequences of Idleness are to be considered;
and, if it be taken in the utmost Latitude there is scarce any Sin, which is
more justly liable to so many tragical Accusations; for it is the Parent of
Dishonor and Poverty; and of most of the Sins and Calamities of this mortal
Life. But at present, I view it only as it is drawn with a half Face, and that
the much less deformed of the two: I consider it here, as pretending to
Innocence; and flattering it self with the Hopes of Happiness: And yet even
thus, supposing it, as harmless and inoffensive as it can be, yet still, these
will be the miserable Effects of it: It will rob Religion, and the World of the
Service due to both; it will bereave us of the Pleasure of Life, and the
Comfort of Death; and send us down at last to a cursed Eternity. For where are
the Virtues, that should maintain the Order, and Beauty of Human Society; that
should relieve and redress the Miseries of the World? where are the Virtues
that should vindicate the Honor of Religion, and demonstrate its Divinity, as
effectually as Predictions or Miracles can do? where are the bright Examples,
that should convert the unbelieving part of Mankind, and inflame the believing
part with a generous Emulation? Certainly, the lazy Christian, the slothful
Servant, can pretend to nothing of this kind. As to the Pleasure of Life, if
true and lasting, if pure and spiritual, it is easy to discern, from what
Fountains it must be drawn. Nothing but Poverty of Spirit, can procure our
Peace, nothing but Purity of Heart, our Pleasure. But ah! how far are the Idle
and Unactive from these Virtues? Faith, Love, and Hope are the Seeds of them:
Victories and Triumphs, Devotion, Alms, and good Works, the Fruits of them: But
what a stranger to these, is the Drone and Sluggard? Then for the Comfort of
Death, it must proceed from a well spent Life: he that sees nothing, but a vast
Solitude and Wilderness behind him, will never, like the Israelites, see a
Canaan before him. Life must be filled with good Works, or else Death will look
but dark and gloomy, when the Conscience enquires every where after the Effects
of the Word, and the Spirit, and the Blood of Jesus; and can discover in all
the parts, in all the paths of Life, no Tracks of any thing, but Fancy and
Fortune, Humor and Indulgence: How will it shrink, and faint, and tremble;
what pensive, melancholy Doubts, will damp and choke its Hope. And how can it
be otherwise? Alas, the Mind of a Christian, is sufficiently informed, that
every Man shall receive according to what he has done in the Body; God will
judge every Man according to his Works; what then must become of him, who has
none to show. If Immortality and Glory, if Life and Peace, be the Reward of
well-doing; nay, of patient continuance in well-doing, what will become of the
drousie, and supine, and careless, the Sot and the Sluggish, who have slept,
and fooled, and trifl'd away Life.

3. I might aggravate the Guilt of Idleness, by taking an Estimate of the
Talents it wastes, the Obligations it slights, and the Hopes it forfeits. I
might render Man more jealous and apprehensive of falling into it, by observing
how generally it prevails; which is a plain Proof, either of the strength of
the Temptation, or our Propension; a plain Proof, either that there is, I know
not what secret Magic in the Sin, or else, that the Cheat, it imposes upon the
World, is a very clever, a very dexterous one. But I have said enough; and
where the former Considerations fail, these will hardly succeed; Therefore I
will now pass on from Arguments to Advice; which was the next thing proposed to
be done.

And here, my Advice must have regard to two different sorts of Persons. 1. To
such as are born to plentiful, or competent Fortunes. 2. To such as are to
raise their own; or to provide for the Support, and Maintenance of themselves,
and their Families, by their Labor or Industry, in some Calling or profession.
To the Former, the best Directions I can give are these.

1. He that is Master of his Time, ought to devote the more to Religion; to
whom God has given much, of him much will be required: Nor has such a one any
Excuse left, either for Omission, or a hasty, and cursory Performance of Duty,
but one, one, that will increase his Guilt, i. e. Laziness, Pleasure, or some
Sin or other. Such a one therefore, ought to be constant, and diligent in
frequenting the public Assemblies of the Church; his Attendance upon Prayers,
Sacraments, Sermons, must be such, as becomes a Man, who, as it has pleased
God, seems born not to provide for Life, but only to live, only to improve, and
enjoy Life; and carry on the nobler Designs of it: and as becomes a Man, whose
good, or ill Example, is of such vast Importance to the Service or Dis-service
of Religion. Nor must such a ones Attendance on the Public, excuse him from
the religious Offices of the Closet, or his Family; he ought to abound in each:
He may be more frequent in Meditation and Prayer; in Reading and Instruction;
and perform each with more Justness, and Solemnity than others can.

2. Persons of Fortune, ought to be careful in the Choice of Intimates, and
Friends. Conversation is not always a Loss, but sometimes a Gain of Time: We
often need to have our Forgetfulness relieved, our Drowsiness awakened, by the
Discourses and Reflections of our Friends. If Discourse were generally seasoned
with Grace, Conversation would be the greatest Blessing; if with Sense, and
Reason, Innocence, and Prudence, it would be the most agreeable Entertainment
of Human Life. But how mischievous is the Acquaintance which infects us with
Vanity, and Lightness of Spirit, which shows us nothing, but a Gaudy outside,
and a Frothy Soul; whose Example binds Men in Civility to be foolish, and makes
Confidence, and Vice, and Mis-spence of Time, a Fashion.

3. It were to be wished, That Persons of the best Rank, were ever bred up to
something; to something, that might improve; to something that might amuse, and
innocently engage their Minds; to something, that might employ Life without
encumbring it. And yet alas, what need I wish this; how many excellent
Qualities are necessary to render a Gentleman worthy of the Station, where God
has placed him? Let him pursue these; how many are the Virtues, how many the
Duties, to which a Christian is obliged? for him attend these; There is a great
deal requisite, to make a good Master, a good Husband, a good Father, a good
Son, a good Neighbor, a good Parishioner, an excellent Subject, and an
excellent Friend! and yet there are many other Relations, besides these. In a
word, there is no Man, who when he shall appear before God, will not be found
to have omitted many Duties; and to have performed many other with less Care,
and Diligence, than he ought: and surely, such a one cannot justly complain,
for want of Business. I doubt rather on the contrary, That whoever takes a just
and full view of things, will have reason to complain; That Life is short, and
our Work great; That let us use all the Diligence we can; and be as frugal of
our Time as we will, we arrive much sooner at a Maturity of Years, than of
Knowledge and Virtue.

4. The Diversions of Persons of this Quality, ought to be well regulated; such
as become the Character of a Gentleman, and the Dignity of a Christian, that
is, that must be neither mean nor vicious. But I have treated this, and the
foregoing Heads, more copiously in Human Life; to which I refer my Reader.

As to such, in the next place, who are engaged in a Profession, I have
particularly considered their State in several Places; and find little to add
here; but only to mind them, That they may be guilty of Idleness too; That
their Idleness is the more criminal, the less Temptation they have to it. They
may neglect the Duties of their Calling. I mean, their Secular Calling; and if
they be unfaithful and negligent in their Temporal Concern, it is not to be
expected, that they should be more Sollicitous and Industrious about their
Spiritual one. They may again, suffer the Cares of this Life to thrust out
those of another; and then they are truly idle and slothful Servants to God,
how industrious, and faithful soever they are, to the World: for Life is but
wasted, and misspent, if it make not Provision for Eternity: and it matters
little, whether it be wasted in Pleasure, or in Drudgery.

CHAP. VIII. Of Unfruitfulness as it consists in Lukewarmness, Coldness, or
Formality.
IN the former Chapter, I considered that part of Unfruitfulness, which
consists in the Omission of Duty: I am now to consider another part of it,
which consists in too perfunctory a Performance of it. Besides those, who are
truly unprofitable, because they slight or neglect the Duties of Religion;
there is another Sort of Men, who at the last Day, will fall under the same
Character, and Condemnation; not because they perform no Duties, but because
their Performance of them is depretiated by Coldness, and Formality: Men, who
make a fair Appearance of Religion, and yet have no inward spiritual Life: Men,
who do generally observe the external Duties of Religion, but with so little
Gust, with such Indifference and Lukewarmness, that they are neither acceptable
to God, nor useful to themselves. This State of Deadness, may be considered
either more generally, as it runs thorough the whole course of our Lives and
Actions; or more particularly, in this or that Instance of Religion.

1. When it is so general, that the Bent and Course of our Lives, is, for want
of relish of the Things of God, perverted and depraved; when we have no
Designs, drive on no Ends, that are suitable to the Excellency and Dignity of
our Nature; to the Holiness of our Profession and to the great and manifest
Obligations of God: when we have no Joys or Pleasures, no Thirsts or Appetites,
that do truly become a Christian: when we make no Progress, no Advance toward
our great End: when our Discourses and Employments, have no Tincture of the
Spirit, and no Tendency to Edification. I think we may then boldly conclude,
that this is a state of Carnality, and Death. And that this want of Relish in
the general Course of our Lives, proceeds from a real want of a Sincere Faith,
and true Illumination. For were the Mind, once truly Enlightened; were it once
clearly convinced, firmly and habitually persuaded, of the Beauty and
Excellence of the Things of God; as we should have Notions different from those
of worldly, carnal Men, so would there consequently be a Difference in the
Nature of our Hopes, and Fears; of our Desires and Designs; of our Joys and
Sorrows; and as necessarily in the main Scope, and Tendency of of our
Conversation. Whoever therefore finds this general Stupidity in the Course of
his Life, let him not flatter himself in the Performance of any of the Duties
of Religion: he has a corrupt, carnal and blind Heart; his Performances proceed
not from true Principles, and have not that Life and Vigor in them that they
ought; they are as different from the Performances of a Man, truly regenerate,
and sanctified, as the Civilities and Complements of a well-bred Acquaintance,
from the substantial Offices of a Sincere, and affectionate Friend. Nor can any
Man, who will take the least pains to examine himself, be ignorant of, or
mistaken in, the Condition of his Soul, if this be it. For whoever, will act
honestly and impartially, ought not to pass a Sentence of Absolution on
himself, upon the bare Performance of some relative, or instrumental Duties of
Religion; but he ought to Inquire, First, What Virtues he Practices, which put
him upon Expense, Hazard or Travel; what Works of Piety or Charity, he
performs; and what Proportion they bear to his Ability. Next, he ought to
consider the Design and End, he proposes to himself, in all his Religious
Performances; whether he seek the Honor of God, the Welfare of Man, and his
own Improvement and Growth in Goodness, or whether he does this merely to
acquit himself of a task, and discharge himself of what he takes for granted,
as a Duty; though he finds no pleasure, no advantage in it. Thirdly, he must
reflect upon the Frame and Temper of his Mind, in reference to these Duties;
what hunger and thirst he has for Righteousness; what Warmth, Ardor, Elevation,
or Earnestness of Mind, accompanies his Performances; what Peace, and Pleasure
his Reflection on them; or whether Religion be not a burden to him, or
something to which Custom only reconciles him. Lastly, he ought to examine what
Operation, what Influence his Religious Performances have upon him. Prayer,
Hearing, Reading, and suchlike Duties, do naturally tend, to enlighten the
Mind, purify the Heart, increase our Love, strengthen our Faith, and confirm
our Hope; and therefore, where this is not the Effect of them, we may conclude,
that they are not discharged in that manner, and with that Sincerity, they
ought. He therefore that will examine himself aright, must not ask himself how
often he reads, how often he hears, etc. and then rest there; but must ask
himself, what Effect these Performances have had upon his Mind; which he will
soon discern; if he demand of himself, what the bent and scope of his Life is:
how much he advances, and improves in the Conquest of any Vice, and the
Attainment of any Virtue; what he loves, or what he hates; what Esteem he has
for the Things of God, and what for the things of Men. And in a word, how he
follows after Universal Righteousness; and how he increases in Purity of Heart,
and Poverty of Spirit.

2. Lukewarmness, or Coldness, may be considered more particularly, as it
discovers it self in the Performance of this or that Duty; in Hearing, Reading,
Prayer, and Participation of the Lord's Supper. Now it is certain, that there is
a Deadness in these Duties, which proceeds from a carnal, and unsanctified
Heart; and is a plain Symptom of a State of Sin: And yet it is too common, that
they, who are subject to it, make little Reflection upon it, and are little
concerned for it. On the other hand, many complain of Lifelessness in Duty,
where there is no just ground for this Complaint; And this is no small Evil to
such; for it disturbs the Peace of their Minds, damps the Cheerfulness and
Alacrity of their Service, and clogs and encumbers their Religion, with
needless doubts, and Scruples. Some have gone about to set this matter right
very unskilfully; and whilst they have, as they thought, shunned Enthusiastic
Raptures, and irregular Heat, have really betrayed the Cause of true and solid
Fervency of Spirit; and talked of Prayer, and such other Duties in such a
manner, as cannot but reflect disadvantagiously on themselves, amongst such, as
are moderately versed in the Scriptures; and have any Experience of the Power
of God's Word, and Spirit, upon their Souls. But what surprises me most is,
that some, of very deserved Repute, have taught, That the seeking spiritual
Pleasure in Prayer, is an Enemy to Perfection; That Heat and Ardor of Spirit in
Prayer, does, often happen to the weakest Christians; and very seldom to the
Perfect. But my business not being to combat the Opinions of Men, but to
advance Truths in the most charitable, and in the most effectual manner, that I
can; Therefore without taking Notice of the Motives, or Reasons, which have
biased any on this Subject, I will lay down two or three Propositions, which
will, I hope, clear this Matter, and promote the Design, I am now carrying on.

1. Then, Lifelessness, or Lukewarmness in these Duties, must never be
constant. There is a vast Difference, between habitual and accidental Coldness
in Duty; the Former is the Symptom of worldly, carnal, and unregenerate Minds;
but not the Latter. Many are the Accidents, which disturb, and indispose the
Body; many are the things which distract, and clog the Mind; from both which,
because we shall never be utterly free in this World, therefore our Devotion
will never be so constant, and uniform; but that it will have its
Interruptions, and Allays; and Dullness and Lifelessness, will sometimes seize
upon the best of Christians. But then, if this spiritual Deadness, in Religious
Exercises, be fixed, constant, and habitual, it must needs be a Proof of a
corrupt Mind; For it is impossible, that there should be a true Principle of
Grace within, which should never, or very rarely, show it self in the
Sincerity, and Fervency of our Devotion. How is it possible, that that Man, who
is generally slight, and superficial in his Confession, should have a true
Compunction, and sincere Contrition for Sins? How is it possible that he, who
is generally indifferent, formal and cold in his Petitions, should have a just
Sense, either of his Wants, or Dangers; or a true Value, for the Grace and
Favor of God? The Sum is, Deadness in Duty, is either General or Rare, Common
or Accidental: If it befalls us Commonly, it is an Argument of an unregenerate
Heart; if Rarely, it is not. But if the Returns of Life and Deadness in Duty, be
so frequent and unconstant, that it is impossible to determine, whether the one
or the other, prevail most; then it is plain, that the State also of such a Man
is very dubious.

2. Duty must never be Destitute of Sincerity, though it may of Pleasure and
Transport; it must never be without Seriousness and Concernment, though it may
be, very defective in the Degrees of Love, and Ardency. Thus in Prayer, the
Tenderness and Contrition of the Soul, dissolved in Love, and Sorrow, is a
Frame of Spirit, much above, what the Penitent commonly arrives at. But an
Aversion for Sin, a firm Resolution to forsake it; and a hearty Desire to be
enabled by the Grace of God, so to do, is what he must not want. So again, Joy
and Transport, the Ardor and Exultancy of Mind, is the Effect of a clear
Understanding; an assured Conscience; a Heart enflamed with Love, and a strict
Life; Whoever therefore, falls short in the one, will generally fall short in
the other too. But every Christian, that is truly such, must have a true Sense
of his Wants, a hearty desire to please God; a true Notion of his Goodness, and
a steady Dependence upon it thorough Christ. And these things are sufficient,
to unite our Hearts, and our Lips in the same Petitions; to make us in earnest,
in all the Duties we perform; and careful to intend, the main end of them.

3. The Prayer of the Perfect Man, is generally offered up, with the tenderest
and most exalted Passion; and a holy Pleasure mingles it self, in every part of
his Office: his Petitions and Praises; his Confessions, Deprecations, and
Confidences, are all of them, Expressions of warm, and Delightful Passions. And
how can we well conceive it otherwise? must not those Praises and Magnificates,
be full of Joy and Transport, which flow from a full Assurance of the Divine
Favor, from a long Experience of his Love, and from the glorious Prospect of a
blessed Eternity? can those Deprecations, and Confidences want a heavenly Calm,
and Tranquillity of Spirit, which rest upon the Mediation of Jesus, the Promises
of an immutable God, and the Pledge of his Spirit? can those Confessions want
Contrition, that have all the Tenderness, that holy Zeal, and the humblest
Reflections, can inspire them with? which are powered forth by a Soul
enlightn'd, purified, strong in the Faith, rooted and grounded in Love, by a
Soul consequently, that has the liveliest Sense of the Deformity, and Danger of
Sin, of the Beauty and Pleasure of Holiness, of the infinite Goodness of God,
and of that Love of Christ, that passes Knowledge? Can finally, those
Petitions want Desire and Flame, which are offered up by a Soul, that hungers
and thirsts after Righteousness, that counts all things, but dung and dross in
comparison of Jesus, that pants after God, that long^ to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ? And as we may thus, from the Nature of things collect, what
kind of Prayers, those of the Perfect Man generally are; so may we, from the
Example of the Royal Psalmist, and others, demonstrate all this, to be no vain
Speculation; but real Matter of Fact. It Is true, Weight and Dignity of Matter,
Gravity and Significancy of Expression, are the Characters, most conspicuous in
Public Offices, in the best and most ancient Prayers: and particularly in the
Lord's Prayer. We find in them, few or no Figures of Speech, no Vehemence of
Expression. But it is true too, That the Devotion of a Soul disengaged as it
were, from the Body, retired from the World, collected within it self, raised
by daily Contemplation, and accustomed to Converse with Heaven, flows
naturally, and easily. Those great Ideas, which such a Prayer as that of our
Lord's Composure present to the Mind, inflame the Desire, awaken all the
Passions of the Holy Man, without any Labor of Imagination, or Artifice of
Words.

Thus have I considered the Nature of Lukewarmness; and showed how far the
Perfect Man is removed from it. My next business is, to persuade and exhort Men
to quit it; and become sincere, and zealous. Only I must, First, take notice by
the way, That besides Idleness, and Lukewarmness, there is sometimes a Third
Cause, or occasion of Unfruitfulness; which deserves never to be slighted: that
is, Fickleness, Vnsteadiness, or Inconstancy. Many there are, who often
purpose, project, and resolve great Matters; but never bring forth any Fruit to
Perfection: What they Build one day, they throw down another. They put on, as
many various moral Forms, as Proteus in the Poets does, natural ones; sometimes
they are in a fit of Zeal; at other times, nothing but Coldness and bare Form;
sometimes they are in the Camp of Virtue; sometimes in that of Vice. In a word,
they halt, like the Israelites, between God and Baal; and are divided, and
distracted, between a Sense of Duty, and the Love of the World and the Body;
between the Checks and Incitements of Conscience, on the one hand; and some
foolish Inclinations on the other. This State, I have had an Eye too very
often, nor shall I forget it here; but shall propose such a Method for the Cure
of Lukewarmness, and Formality, as may be also of very good use to all such, as
fall short of the main End of Religion; being not truly, and thoroughly
changed; but are only almost persuaded to be Christians: and only not
altogether so far from the Kingdom of Heaven, as others. This being premised, I
proceed, and

1. I will Enquire into the Causes from whence Lukewarmness, and all abortive
Attempts after Virtue, flow.

2. I will show the Folly, Guilt, and Danger of a Laodicean State.

. 1. Of the Causes, etc. These are generally Four.

1. Men finding themselves under great Difficulties in coming up to Holiness,
in the true genuine and Gospel Notion of it, have endeavored to enlarge the
Way, and widen the Gate that leads to Life; and have therefore formed to
themselves, more soft and pliant Notions, of Vice and Virtue: Such as may be
more easily accommodated, either to their particular Inclinations, or to the
Modes, and Fashions of the World, than those of Christ, and his Apostles can.
Hence it is, that amongst such as pretend, to some regard for Religion,
Humility, Poverty of Spirit, Self-denial, Abstinence and Mortification, are so
far from being visible in their Practice, that we seem to have almost lost the
Notion of them. And the Pride of Life, and the Lust of the Eyes, are so
universally practiced, that though we know, that these in St. John, are the
Names of Vices, we scarce know what the Things themselves are. We have
confounded the Mears and Bounds of Vice and Virtue; and such are the Freedoms,
I will now say of those who profess Debauchery, but Christianity, that if they
be consistent with the Sanctity and Purity of the Gospel, 'twill be hard to
determine, what Excess is. And in a word, how many are there, who making a
Profession of living by Faith, and looking for the blessed Hope, and the
glorious Appearance of Christ, do yet live, as if all the business of Life,
were to get, and enjoy as much of this World as they can; who professing
themselves the Disciples of Christ, whose Heart was lowly, his Fortune mean,
and his Appearance humble, do yet lay out their Time, their Labor, their
Wealth, on this one Design, to make such a show, such a Figure in the World, as
may render them the Gaze, and Envy of their Neighbors? And, as our Indulgence
to our selves in these things, which relate to the Pride, and Vanitfy of Life,
and the Ease and Appetites of the Body, is very great, so on the same ground,
and for the same reason, is our Zeal for the Interest of Virtue, and the Honor
of God, very little, faint, and remiss. Conversation has very little Savor,
very little Grace in it; and we are so far, from being resolute, and
industrious to awe, or shame Vice abroad, that we our selves should be almost
out of Countenance, if we should be observed to pay any particular Respect to
Religion or Virtue in Company. The Government of our Families, is so lax and
easy, that it savours more of Coldness and Indifferency, than Fervency of
Spirit. It Is true indeed, these I am speaking of, do generally frequent the
House of God; and they sit before him as his People; and delight to hear his
Word: But so did the Jews, when God tells them, in the Prophet Ezekiel. 33.31.
that their hearts went after their Covetousness: And in the Prophet Isaiah, we
have but an odd Character of the Morals of these People; of whom, God says,
yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways: nay further, they delight
in approaching to God, Isa. 58.2. Now though such, as I am speaking of, may not
be guilty to this Degree, so as to be chargeable with open Wickedness; yet I am
very much afraid, that even in this Duty, they but promote the Cheat, and
Imposture they put upon themselves; and make their Diligence in this point,
minister to quiet their Consciences in their Laodicean State; for 'twere easy
to prove, that such as these, do more generally aim at the Entertainment of the
Ear, than the Reformation of the Heart. And we may say of Preachers now, as God
did of Ezekiel; And lo, thou art unto them as a lovely Song, of one that has a
very pleasant Voice, Ezekiel. 33.32. the Music of the Voice; the Gracefulness of
Delivery; a Flow of Words; the Surprise of Novelty, and Notion; the Beauty of
Sentences; and the Sparkling of Wit and Fancy, or an Appearance of Learning,
these are, I doubt, too aften the things that draw together, and charm an
Auditory: And so all are pleased, but none converted or edified; for who sweats
or blushes, who trembles or grows pale at these Sermons? who goes away from
them wounded, or struct through, serious, and pensive, full of pious Fears, and
devout Desires.

2. A Laodicean State, springs from Sloth and Pusillanimity, or the Want of a
thorough, and well-grounded Resolution. This was one Cause of the Israelites
Fluctuation, and Uncertainty; they were indeed, desirous of a Canaan, but were
not forward to purchase it, by tedious Marches, hazardous Encounters, and the
Hardship of Hunger, and Thirst, and such like: They were ever and anon willing
to have preferred, the Dishonor and Servitude of Egypt, with Security and
Fullness, before a Canaan on these Tems. And thus it is, this day with
Christians of a Laodicean Spirit, and a doubtful, staggering Allegiance. An
Heaven they would have, but would not purchase it at too dear a ra^e; they
would be accounted the Disciples of Christ, and share in the Merits of his
Sufferings, but they would not take up his Sufferings, but they would not take
up his Cross, in any sense, and follow him. But alas, Israel might as well have
gained their Liberty, without going out of Egypt; or a Canaan, without Travel
and Hardship, and Blood, as these, Virtue, and Heaven without Watchfulness and
Industry: We may as well hope to-support, and increase the Health and Strength
of the Body, without Food or Exercise, as that of the Soul, without Meditation,
and Prayer: we may as soon Conquer our Enemies, without Discipline, Expense and
Blows, as master our Corruptions, and become Virtuous, without spiritual
Watchfulness, Travel, or Contention. There is indeed Force and Efficacy enough,
in the Word of God, to enlighten the Mind, and purify the Heart; if we would
but frequently and seriously Read, and Meditate it. The Grace of the Spirit is
sufficient to conquer our Corruptions, and strengthen, and establish us in
Faith, and Obedience, if we did but earnestly and frequently pray for it; and
cherish and improve it, when obtained. The Means, which God has prescribed, are
undoubtedly proper, and suitable, powerful, and effectual to the Attainment,
Preservation, and Increase of Holiness; and all his Ordinances, have a Divine
Virtue, and Energy in them, if they be but duly, and consciensciously made use
of. But if we do not watch; if we do not meditate; if we do not pray; if we
expose our selves to a vain, and trifling Conversation, if we Indulge the Body,
all the Ease it is inclined to; and put our selves upon no Duties; practice no
Discipline, that we have any Reluctance for, it is not to be wondered at, if our
Virtue be crazy, and sickly; if our Performances be cold, and unedifying; our
Faith weak; our Affections low, and grovelling; our Life unsteady, and
unprofitable; our Religion destitute of true Pleasure; and our latter End of
any rational Comfort, or well-grounded Confidence? It Is naturally to be
expected, that the Soul of the Sluggard, should be like his Field, Prove. 24.30.
I went by the Field of the Slothful, and by the Vineyard of the Man void of
understanding; and lo it was all grown over with Thorns; and Nettles had
covered the face thereof; and the stone wall thereof was broken down: this is
one plain Cause, and commonly the First, of our halting between God and Baal;
namely our Idleness, and Sloth in Religion, joined with Pusillanimity and
Cowardice, which moves us to decline all Difficulties, and disables us to make
a bold Resistance against Temptations: how criminal and guilty, this must
render us in the sight of God, it is no difficulty to guess. Is this the Zeal,
the Revenge of an humble, and active Penitent? Is this to redeem the Time, and
efface the Memory of our past Sins and Provocations? Is this the Conversation,
that becomes the Children of the Light, and of the Day? Is this our hunger and
thirst after Righteousness? is this our Ambition, our Passion for an Heaven?
Finally, is it thus we requite the Mercies, and Obligations of God, and the
Love of Jesus, that passes Knowledge? shall such halting trimming Christians
as these, think ye, ever be judged, endued with a true and living Faith, who
express it the whole Tenor of their Lives, so much Coldness, and Indifference
for that Salvation, which the Son of God, thought worth the purchasing, by so
much Travel, and so much Sorrow, so much Shame, and so much Blood?

3. A Third Cause of our Halting between God and Baal is some Degree of
Infidelity. This was the Case of Israel too. They were ever prone to Idolatry;
partly trained up to it in Egypt, and elsewhere; partly being more capable of
forming an Idea of a Finite and Topical God, than of an Infinite and Universal
one, Jer. 23.23. Partly being fond of following the Fashions of other Nations.
And lastly, moved, partly by that great and long Prosperity, which Egypt, and
other Idolatrous Nations enjoyed: and no doubt, comparing it too, with the
Variety and Uncertainty of their own Fortune and the frequent Disappointment of
their Expectations, Hose. 2. never laying it to Heart all the while, that the
way to secure their Prosperity, was to change, not their God but their Manners.
I would to God, this were not too lively a Description of the State of too many
Christians; and that we could not trace our Lukewarmness and Fickleness in
Religion, too plainly back, to the same Source or Origin; namely, some Degrees
of Infidelity. I wish the Prosperity of the wicked, do not somewhat undermine
the Belief of a Providence: I wish whatever we talk of a Treasure in another
World, we do not now and then think it wisest to have our Portion in this. I am
afraid, that the Decays and Dissolutions of our Nature in Death, the Rottenness
and Corruption of the Grave, and the Variety of Changes and Fortunes, our very
Dust undergoes, may tempt us to some Scruples, and Jealousies about a
post-humous Life. But however it be in these points, I am too too well assured,
that we do often doubt, whether Virtue be the true Blessedness of Life; whether
there be that Pleasure in Righteousness, the Scripture affirms there is. I am
confident, the Notions of Righteousness and Holiness, with which the Scripture
furnishes us, are often blur'd and blotted by the Maxims and Customs of the
World: and persuade my self, that there is scarcely one of those, that are
Laodiceans and Trimmers in Religion, that do not flatter themselves, that God
will not be as severe as his Threats; and that he will receive them into
Heaven, upon milder and softer terms, than the Gospel proposes. Some such kind
of Infidelity as this, must possess the Heart, wherever the Life is so
infinitely below our Profession. When the Word preached does not profit, it is
because it is not mingled with a due Measure of Faith, in those that hear it.
If we did truly believe the Revelations of God; if we did see the Promises of
God as evident and present by Faith, though distant in themselves, 'twere
impossible, but they must move, but they must take us; 'twere impossible, but
they must enkindle in us another sort of Desire, and this Desire would soon
produce another sort of Endeavors, another sort of Life. When Moses beheld
Canaan from Pisga, how passionately did he desire to enter into that good Land?
When the Disciples had seen Jesus. Ascend up into Heaven, how were they
transported with a Desire of following him! how unspeakable was their Joy! how
fervent their Prayers! how lasting and enlarged their Gratitude! they returned
to Jerusalem, with great Joy; and were continually in the Temple, praising and
blessing God. How does a Prospect of Gain captivate the Covetous? How does the
Fancy or Expectation of Pleasure, inflame the Voluptuary? how does the Sight of
Vanity, and Grandeur, infect the proud? and the Hope of Glory fire the
Ambitious? What, has the Beauty and Pleasures of Holiness, no Attraction? has
Heaven no Charms in it? has the Favor and Love of God, and of Jesus no Force,
no Power in them? Surely we have not the face to deny, but that the Promises of
God, are great and precious one: and if they raise no Passion in us, it must
not be through want of Excellent and Loveliness in them, but want of Faith in
us. And then judge you, how acceptable this kind of Infidelity must render us
to God; what Value can God have for a People whom no kindness can oblige, no
Arguments convince; with whom, no Miracles can gain Belief; no Assurances or
Promises find Credit? Hell is the portion of the fearful, and unbeliever, Rev.
21.8. And what dreadful Judgments did overwhelm Israel, as often as they thus
halted between God and Idols! It did not excuse them, that they had some sort
of Veneration for the Memory of Moses, and his Miracles; since this was not
able to overruled their Prejudice, and Superstition; that they retain some
Honor, for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and that God, which was the Fear of
their Fathers; since they had as much, or more, for the Nations round about
them; and their Gods too. And whatever Power they did acknowledge in the God of
Heaven; or whatever Benefit they did own themselves to have derived from him,
as I can hardly think, the Memory of either was utterly extinguished amongst
them, all this availed them nothing, while they made their Court to other Gods
too; and put their Trust in their Patronage, and Protection. Though this be
sufficient to make us sensible of the Guilt of a Laodicean Virtue, and an
uncertain halting Faith, yet I must advance on, and observe unto you a worse
Principle, if worse can be, of this Deportment yet, which is,

4. The Fourth Fountain of this Unsteadiness and Remisness in Religion is, some
Remains of Corruption; the Prevalency of some vicious Passion or other. Men's
Actions, are the plainest Indications of their Affections. If the Life looks
two ways, we need not doubt, but that the Heart does so too. This was that made
the young Man in the Gospel fluctuate so between Christ and Mammon; this was
the Case of Herod, he had yielded, no doubt, to the Power and Force of the
Baptists Reasons; if he had not been drawn back by the Charms of his Herodias.
And this is the Case of every Man, who is but almost a Christian; he is under
the Ascendant of some silly or vile Lust or other: this is that, which spoils
the Taste of the hidden Manna; and diminishes the Price of Canaan. Without
doubt, Men would apply themselves more vigorously, to spiritual Things, were
they not too fond of the Body, and the Pleasures of it: they would certainly
seek the Kingdom of Heaven, more earnestly; and make a better provision than
they do for the other World, were they not too much taken with this; and
therefore too apt to set up their Rest on this side Jordan. Now if this be so,
what can we expect; they only who conquer, are crowned; they that sow to the
flesh, and to the world, can reap nothing from these but Corruption. These kind
of Christians, though peradventure, they are not Slaves to any infamous and
scandalous Lusts, are yet entangled by some other, not muchless injurious,
though not to Reputation, yet to Purity of Heart; they are captived to the
World, and Flesh, though their Chains seem better polished, and of a finer
Metal; they cannot mount upwards, they cannot conquer, being retarded, and kept
under, if not by the Strength of Temptation, yet by their own Softness and
Weakness: and yet, why should I doubt, but these are conquered by Temptation?
The more innocent the Object of any ones Passion is, generally the more fatal;
because we are the more apt to indulge our selves in it. The Causes of
Lukewarmness being thus pointed out, it is evident, what the Cure of it consists
in, namely, in forming just, and correct Notions of Virtue, and Vice; in
strengthening, and confirming our Faith; and in perfecting, and completing our
Reformation. I will now endeavor to possess the Minds of Men, with an Aversion
and Dread of this State of Lukewarmness, by showing, 1. The Folly. 2. The
Guilt, and 3. The Danger of it.


1. The Folly. How reasonably may I here, address my self to the Lukewarm, in
the words of Elijah to the Israelites; How long halt ye between two Opinions;
if the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then follow him, 1 King. 18.21. If
you do indeed believe, that your Safety and Happiness, depends upon God, then
serve him in good earnest: but if you think, this depends upon the World, the
Flesh and the Devil, then serve these: if you really think, that Virtue and
Religion, are the most solid and stable Treasure, then strive sincerely and
vigorously to possess your selves of them: but if you really think, that the
Ease and Pleasure of the Body, Respect, and Pomp, and State is the proper
Portion, and sovereign Good of Man, then devote, and offer up your selves to
these. For what a folly is that Life, which will neither procure us the
Happiness of this World, nor of another? To what purpose is it, to listen only
so much to Conscience, as to damp and chil our Pleasure; and so much to
Pleasure, as to disturb the Peace and Repose of Conscience? But indeed, as the
Words of Elijah were rather an Irony than any real Doubt, whether Baal or the
Lord were God, rather a scornful Derision of their Folly, and Stupidity, than a
Serious Exhortation to deliberate, whether Idolatry or the Worship of the true
God, were to be chosen: I doubt not, but mine will seem to you, to carry no
other Sound in them. The Disparity is so vast between God and the World,
between Religion and Sensuality, Covetousness or Ambition; between those Hopes
and Enjoyments, we may reap from the one, and those we can fancy in the other;
that there is no place for doubting, what Choice we are to make, or to which
Side we are to adhere: Nay, in this we are more criminal than the Israelite,
being self-condemned. The Israelites indeed, seem to be at a Loss, whether the
Lord, or Baal were God; they doubted under whose Protection they might thrive
best. But at this day, whoever believes a God, knows very well, there is none
besides him. Whatever passion we have for the World, and the Things of it;
whatever spiritual Idolatry, we are guilty of, our Opinions are not yet so far
corrupted, as to attribute to them, in Reality, any thing like Divinity. Whilst
we dote on, Wealth, we at the same time know that it makes its self Wings, and
flies away: whilst on Greatness, and Power we know, that it is but a piece of
empty, and toilsom Pageantry; and often the Subject of Misery and dismal
Tragedies, not incident to a lower State: whilst we dote on Pleasure, we are
well assured, that it is dishonorable and short, and intermixed with Fears, and
Shame, and Torment: We know that nothing here below is able to free our State,
and Fortune from Calamity; our Mind from Guilt; the Body from Death, much less
the whole Man from a miserable Eternity. In one word, we know that what we
admire is Vanity, and what we worship is indeed an Idol. This being so, I will
insist no longer on this Topic; for since the World bears no Competition with
God in our Opinion, though it often rival him in our Affections, we are not to
impute the halting of a Laodicean Christian to any Persuasion of Omnipotence or
Alsufficiency; or any thing like Divinity, in the things he dotes on, serves
and worships: but we must find out some other Reason of it. And that is
generally this, we are willing to believe, that our Fondness for the World, and
our, Indulgence to the Body is consistent enough with Religion; That it is no
Violation of our Faith, nor Provocation to God; nor conserquently, Prejudice to
our Eternal Interest: And then it is no wonder, if we blend and compound
Religion, and Sensuality; and stand divided in our Affections: and consequently
halt in our Service between God and the World. To prevent this I will show.

2. That this is a great Sin; which is sufficiently evident from this Single
Consideration, That it frustrates the Efficacy of the Gospel and the Spirit;
and entirely defeats the great Design of the Christian Religion. For, 1.
Religion has no effectual Influence upon the Lukewarm himself: the Gospel works
no thorough Change in him. The Sinner is not converted into a Saint; nor Human
Nature perfected by Participation of a Divine one. 2. The Laodiceans can never
offer up to God any Gift, any Sacrifice worthy of him; nor render him any
Service acceptable to him; the Kingdom of God is Righteousness and Peace and
Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. He that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of Men. But alas! these Men are almost utter
Strangers to these things; a few, faint, and irresolute Wishes, formal and
customary Prayers, nigardly and grumbling Alms, and an Attendance upon God's
Word, rather out of spiritual Wantonness, than Devotion, these are the
Offerings, they can make God; and will God be better pleased with these, than
he was with those of Israel, that were deformed with Maims and Blemishes, Mal.
1.8. offer now these to thy Governor: will he he pleased with thee, or accept
of thy Person, says the Lord of Host. The Magi indeed, left their Country, and
offered Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh to our Savior, Mat. 2. David would not
Sacrifice to God of that which cost him nothing, 2 Samuel 24. 24. The Primitive
Christians offered up to God, Prayers, and Tears, Labors, and Travels; Nay
their Honors, their Fortunes, their Lives, their Blood. But alas, what have
these Men to offer? they have not Love enough to put them upon any Expense, nor
Faith enough, to put them upon any Hardships, for the sake of God, and Virtue.
For though they think themselves rich and incresed in goods; and to have need
of nothing, yet are they poor, wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked,
Rev. 3.17. And shall these receive a Crown of Righteousness? shall these share
in the Kingdom of Jesus? shall these partake in the Triumph of the Last Day, it
can never be; they do nothing worthy of the Gospel, nothing that can entitle
them to the Benefit of the Cross of Christ.

3. The Life of the Laodicean Christian will never do any do any Credit to
Religion; or reflect any Honor on the Gospel. No Man will be ever able to
discern the Beauty of Holiness, or the Power and Efficacy of Divine Truths,
from the Practice and Conversation of such an one. Ah! had the Carriage of the
Primitive Times been such as his, I know not what Miracles might have done, I
am sure Examples would never have made many Proselites. But the Christians then
acted those Virtues, which the Pagan only pretended to: and Faith in Jesus
achieved those Victories over the World, which the Jews (so debauched and
stupid were they grown) did in the Declension of that State neither understand
nor pretend to: This was that which made the World admire, and love
Christianity. After thus much said of the Effects of this sort of Carriage; I
need scarcely put any one in Mind, what will be the last and saddest Effect of
it; for if our Christianity be such, that it neither truly sets us free from
our Bondage to the World and Flesh; nor enrich our Soul with true and solid
Virtues; if it neither promote the Honor of God, nor the Good of Man, it must
unavoidably follow that having no true Title to God's Favor, nor any rational
Ground, on which to build an Assurance of it, we can reap no true Comfort or
Pleasure from Religion here, nor any Reward from it hereafter. Alas! what talk
I of Comfort and Reward? Distress and Anguish must take hold of the Sinners in
Sion; and Fearfulness must suprize the Hypocrite: And from the Troubles and
Miseries of thu Life, they must go down into the Everlasting Torments of
another. The Scripture is plain; God will spue them out of his Mouth, as he did
the Laodicean: He will shut the Gate of Heaven against them, as against the
foolish Virgins that had no Oil in their Lamps: And their Hell will have one
Torment in it, which is incident to no others, that they had once the Hopes of
Heaven; and it is no small Aggravation of Misery to fall into it, even from the
Expectation of Happiness.

This is not, as I observed above to be applied to accidental Dullness or
Deadness in Duty; nor are the Decays or Abatements of Love, which good Men
sometimes suffer, immediately to be pronounced damnable. But yet these are to be
put in Mind of the Danger they are in; and recalled to their former Zeal, in
the Words of the Spirit to the Church of Ephesus, Nevertheless, I have somewhat
against thee, because thou have left thy first Love. Remember therefore from
whence thou art fallen; and repent, and do the first Works; or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will remote thy Candlestick out of his place, except
thou repent, Rev. 2.4, 5.

CHAP. IX. Of Zeal. Or the First thing to be considered in a State of Zeal;
namely, what Holiness or Righteousness he may be supposed to have arrived at.
I Am arrived at the last Stage of Perfection, which I choose to call a State of
Zeal; not only because the Scripture seems to direct me to this Expression, but
also because, it seems to me, more full and proper than others, that may be, or
are made use of, for the same End. A State of Union is an Expression that
better suits another Life that this. For the Lesson, the Perfect Man is ever
and anon to revolve in his Mind is, That the present Life is a Life of Labor,
and Travel, and Sufferings; the future one, of Rewards, and Crowns, and
Enjoyments. Then as to that other Expression, the State of Love, it suits my
purpose well enough; but does not come up so justly and exactly to it, as the
State of Zeal; for I take Zeal to be Love, in the utmost Elevation and
Vivacity, that it is capable of.

And now, what a noble, what a fruitful Argument, am I entering upon? Methinks,
I feel my Soul grow warm, and enkindle upon my approaching it; and my first
Views, or contemplations of it, inspire me with Desires of the same Nature,
with it self. I am concerned to see my self, confined and limited, by the Laws
of Method; and find my self inclined to wish, That I were now to write, rather
a just Volume, than a few Pages. Here the Heroic Acts, or what is more, the
Heroic Lives of Saints, Martyrs and Confessors, present themselves to my
Thoughts: Here Human Nature, enriched, adorned, and elevated to the utmost
Degree, by a Participation of the Divine one; Here the Power of God's Word, the
Energy of the Holy Ghost, the Triumphs of Faith, and the Exstasies of Love,
would be described; Here the different Excellencies of different Virtues, and
the different Value of good Works should be stated and settled, and the various
Paths, in which, Men pursue the Heights of Virtue; and the noblest Designs be
examined, and solid Piety and true Wisdom be refined, from the Alloys and
Mixtures of Enthusiasm, Superstition, Fancy, or whatever else they are
disfigured, and debased by. But this cannot now be done, and it may be it could
not at all be done by me: No Measure of the Spirit, peradventure, below that
with which the Apostles were inspired, is sufficient to treat this Argument, as
it requires. Besides, according to my Capacity, I have been all along making
this point. When, in the First Section, I stated the Notion of Perfection,
showed by what Steps we advanced to it, what Means we are to make use of, and
what would be the Fruit of it, I did in Effect describe to my Reader, the State
of Zeal, and marked out the Path that leads to it. When, in the Second, I
labor to establish the true Liberty of Man, upon the Overthrow, and
Extirpation not only of Mortal Sin, and of Idleness and Lukewarmness, but also,
as far as it might be, even of Sin of Infirmity, and Original Corruption, what
else was I doing, but prosecuting this one Design, namely, the implanting, and
propagating in the World, the State of Zeal? However, something there seems to
me yet wanting, to complete my Undertaking; and that I am to endeavor now. To
which End I will here discourse of three Things.

1. What it is in general I mean by Zeal.

2. What is that Perfection of Holiness, or Righteousness, wherein it consists.
And

3. Of the Efficacy or Force of this Holiness, as it exerts it self in good
Works. Of these the two Former shall be the Argument of this; the Third of the
following Chapter.

. 1. of Zeal in General, what it is. I do not exclude, some Degrees of Zeal,
from every Period of the Christian's Life; Sincerity cannot subsist wholly
without it. The Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, which is the subject of
one of our Savior's Beatitudes, must be more or less in every Child of God.
But it may signify one thing in the Infant, another in the Adult Christian; in
the one, the Conquest of Sin, or rather, of the Relics and Remains of former
sinful Habits, and the Attainment of habitual Goodness is the Object of this
Hunger and Thirst: In the other it imports, a vehement Desire of whatever is
yet wanting to a further Accomplishment, and Consummation of Righteousness
already fixed and established; the entire and ultimate Perfection of it in
Heaven; and in the mean Time, the promoting the Divine Glory upon Earth,
whatever it cost him to do so. By a State of Zeal then, I here mean Virtue or
Holiness, not in the bud, or in the blossom, but in its full Strength and
Stature, grown up, and ripe, and loaded with blessed Fruits: I mean that
Holiness that is the Result of Illumination, or Clearness of Judgment, of the
Strength and Force of Holy Resolution, and the Vigor and Energy of Holy
Passions. In a word, I mean that folly, spiritual, and operative Religion,
which may be felt and enjoyed by us our selves, in the Serenity and Tranquillity
of Conscience, the Longings and Breathings of Pious Desires, the Joys and
Pleasures of a Rational Assurance; discerned by the World, in our Lives and
Actions, in the Modesty of our Garb, in the Plainness and Humility of all
things else, that pertain to the Port of Life, in the Temperance of our Meals,
the Purity and Heavenliness of Conversation, the Moderation of our Designs and
enjoyments, the Instruction of our Families, with a tender and undefatigable
Watchfulness over them, the Constancy of our Attendance upon, and the
Devoutness of our Deportment in, the public Worship of God; and finally, in
the Activity, and Generosity of our Charity; Or, to speak my Thoughts in the
Language of St. Paul, a State of Zeal is that Perfection or Maturity of
Holiness, which abounds in the Work of Faith, the Labor of Love, and the
Patience of Hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God, and our
Father, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. Now the end of all this is, the advancing the Glory of
God: and therefore Zeal is well enough described, or defined, by an ardent or
vehement Desire of doing so. Now this is advanced two Ways: First, by our
Personal and Inherent Holiness: And, Secondly, by the Fruit of it, good Works.
Of both which, I will now speak a little more particularly.

. 2. Of that Perfection of Holiness which constitutes the State of Zeal. Here I
will Enquire into two Things.

1. Whether the Perfect Man, must be possessed of all the Treasures of
Goodness: Whether he must be adorned by a Confluence, and an Accumulation of
all Virtues.

2. What Height of Virtue, what Degree of Holiness, he may be supposed to
arrive at.

1. Of the Extent of Righteousness. It is generally thought, That Universality,
is as essential and necessary a Property of Gospel Righteousness, as Sincerity,
and Perseverance; That there is an inseparable Connection and Union, between all
Christian Virtues, so that he who wants any, must be concluded, to have none:
This want being, not like a Blemish that diminishes the Beauty, or a Maim that
weakens the Strength, but like a Wound that dissolves, the Frame and
Contexture, of the Natural Body. This Opinion is partly built upon Reason,
which tells us, That there is a native Luster and Beauty in all Virtues; and
therefore, there is no one in the whole Systeme of Morality, but must be lovely
and amiable to a good Man. Partly, upon Scripture, in which, we find the
Christian represented as holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15.
perfect in every good work, Heb. 13.21. as filled with all the Fullness of God,
Ephesians. 3.19. as fruitful in every good work, Col. 1.10. and exhorted, in the most
comprehensive Terms imaginable, to the Practice of every Virtue. Finally,
Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely,
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any Virtue, and if there be
any praise, think (...) these things. To which may be added numerous Texts,
importing, That Faith is a Principle of Universal Righteousness; and That the
Fear and Love of God, do equally oblige us to all his Commandments; and That
the Violation, of one, involves us in the Guilt of all. And the result of all
this seems to be plainly this, That the whole Chain of Graces is dissolved and
lost, if there be but one Link wanting. But at this rate, as the Sincere Man
must be endowed with all manner of Virtues, so must the Perfect excel in all:
But the one and the other Assertion. If we consider things closely, seems to
have in them insuperable Difficulties, There is a vast Variety in the Natures
of Men, in the States and Conditions of Life, and in the kinds and Degrees, as
well of the Sanctifying, as of the Miraculous Gifts of God. St. Paul tells us,
every Man has his proper Gift of God, 1 Cor. 7.7. From whence it seems
naturally to be inferred, That every Man is not capable of attaining to an
Excellence and Eminence in every Virtue. Experience tells us, That there are
different kinds of Natures, as well as Soils; and that some kinds of Virtues,
like some kinds of Seed, will thrive better in one than in another. Nor does
Grace alter the Matter much; since it generally accommodates it self to Nature.
Lastly, it seems very hard, That every Man should have the Virtues of all Men,
of all States, of all Capacities; every particular Member, the Virtues of the
whole Church; the Beauty and Strength of the Church, as well as of the natural
Body, or Commonwealth, consisting, not in the All-sufficieney of every Member,
but in that Variety of Gifts and Graces, that cements and unites, enriches, and
Supports the whole. To come up to Matter of Fact; I read of the Faith of
Abraham, the Meekness of Moses, the Patience of Job, the Love of Mary Magdalen,
the Zeal of St. Peter, and the Labors and Travels of St. Paul; which Firmness
and Constancy is too mean a Name for. These Virtues seem therefore, to have
been the peculiar Excellencies of these Persons; and to have shone in them with
more transcendant Luster, than any other: These seem to have been the Virtues,
for which Grace and Nature eminently qualified them; and to which the
Providence of God, more immediately, and directly, called them. All this
considered, seems it not enough, to come up to the Perfection of these great
Men? may it not suffice, to excel in these Virtues, which Nature, Grace, and
Providence prescribed? may not the Perfect be allowed to want, what he does not
need; would one not think, that, in many Respects, it were enough for him to be
free from this or that Vice, rather than to expect that he should be adorned
with this or that Virtue, which he has no use for? Especially, if by Virtue, we
understand strictly, such a Habit as enables us to act easily, and
delightfully. To adjust this Matter.

1. The Perfect Man must, as I have proved before, not only be set free from
the Dominion of Sin, but also abstain even from a single Act of presumptuous
Wickedness: he must neither Criminally omit a Duty, nor Deliberately commit any
thing repugnant to it.

2ly, He must be endowed with Spiritual Wisdom and Understanding, with Faith,
Hope, Charity, with the Graces which I will call Universal, because necessary,
and indispensable to all as Christians, abstracting from their particular
Capacities and Relations; and that too, in an eminent Degree; so as to be
strong in the Grace which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. This will render him
holy in all manner of Conversation: and thoroughly furnished to all good Works.
These two things, constitute Universal Righteousness, complete the Perfect Man,
and fully satisfy the Texts alleged. Or if not, what follows will.

3ly. He must excel in those Virtues, which are most Natural. I call those
Virtues Natural, to which Grace and Nature, most powerfully dispose, and
incline him; for these he seems to be designed by God; these will soon grow up
to Maturity; and much will be their Fruit, and great their Beauty. I do not all
this while suppose, that the Perfect Man, ought not so far to subdue, and
rectify his Temper, as not only to overcome the Sin of this Constitution, but
in some Degrees, possess the Virtue, that is most repugnant to it. But to
expect him to be eminent here, is, I doubt, too hard and unreasonable. For
here, when he has bestowed much Pains and Travel, much Care and Cost, his
Progress may not be so much, as where he bestowed least. But here I must add
two Cautions; the one is, That no Man mistake contracted Habits for Nature, and
then conclude, that it will be impossible for him to attain the Perfection of
this or that Virtue, through a natural Incapacity. In the next place, let no
Man satisfy, and content himself, in a weak and imperfect State of that
Virtue, which is directly opposed to the Sin of his Constitution; but let him
think, that here, if any where, his Virtue must be always growing; and let him
not doubt, but that our Savior's Promise, as far as it can be accomplished on
Earth, belongs to his sincere Endeavors here; Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after Righteousness; for they shall be filled, Matthew. 5.6.

4. The Perfect Man must be eminent in those Virtues, which are most Necessary:
Such are those, which his particular Station and Calling, or any other
Dispensation of Providence, he is under, requires of him. Whatever Virtues may
be more delightful, these are more important; others may be more natural, these
have more or Use and more of Merit. A Man may fall short of Perfection in
others, without either Disparagement, or Guilt; but Deficiency in these, can
hardly escape both. Besides, every thing is lovely it its place, and in its
time. There is a peculiar Grace and Luster, that attends the Virtues of a Man's
Station, that is scarcely to be found in any other. I would therefore, have my
Perfect Man, truly great in his own Business; and shine with a dazzling Luster
in his own Sphere. To this purpose, surely, speaks the Advice of St. Paul, Romans
12.6, 7, 8. Having then Gifts, differing according to the Grace that is given
to us, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to the proportion of Faith:
or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that teaches on teaching:
or he that exhorts, on Exhortation: he that gives, let him do it with
Simplicity: he that rules, with Diligence: he that shows Mercy, with
Cheerfulness.

5. Lastly, as there is a different Guilt in Sins, so there is different Merit
in Virtues: as amongst Miraculous, so amongst sanctifying Gifts, some are more
excellent than others; and he is the most Perfect Man, who is enriched with the
most Perfect Gifts. The three Heroic Virtues of the Gospel are, Faith, Love,
Humility. Nor do I presumptuously, contrary to the Apostle, exclude Hope; but
comprehend it under Faith. Of Faith I have often had occasion to speak.
Humility will make the last Chapter of this Section; and therefore, I will only
exhort to Love. Love is the noblest Fruit of Illumination and Faith, the true
Source and Parent of Joy and Peace. Love is the most pregnant Seed of a Divine
Life; it is the Principle that animates, moves, and forms the whole Body of
Righteousness: Love is the bond of Union, and Communion with the Father and his
Son Jesus through the Spirit. And it is but fit, that what renders as most like
God, should render us most dear to him too: and this Love does; for God is
Love. In short Love is the fulfilling of the Law; it is the Beauty and
Perfection of a Disciple of Jesus; and the great Subject of Praise and Glory in
the Day of Judgment. Love is the last Round in the Scale of Perfection; and
therefore my Perfect Man, must abound in this. What Degrees of Love of Desire,
or Complacency for the things of this present Life, may consist with Sincerity,
what with Perfection, may be easily learned from several parts of this Work.
There is no doubt but the Perfect Man, must love God to that Degree, that he
must always cleave to him, walk as always before him, ever meditate and
contemplate on Him, and his Works; contrive and study, labor and contend to
please Him: It must be an Affliction to him to be divided from Him but for a
little while; and he must ever and anon, by Day and Night, break out into his
Praises, and rejoice and Glory in him. 2. He must love God to that Degree, as
that all things, in Comparison of Him, must appear blasted and withered, empty
and contemptible, without Pleasure, without Beauty: And consequently, he must
so thirst after the Beatifick Vision, after the Presence and Fruition of God,
that he must earnestly desire to be dissolved, and pant, and long to be
dismissed from the Pilgrimage of this World, and from the corruptible
Tabernacle of the Body. Nor do I, Lastly, doubt, but that this Love is often
sensibly transporting: it is a fire within, that strives to break out, and exert
it self in the Fruitions of Heaven: it is a rich and mighty Cordial, that raises
Nature above it self, and makes it all Purity, all Glory.

Thus have I considered, the Extent or Compass of the Perfect Man's Virtues.
And the Sum total is: In some he must excel, because Natural and Easy; in
others, because necessary. Universal ones he cannot want; they are essential to
Christianity; others, of a peculiar Nature, he may, unless his Circumstances
exact them: Nor is this any Diminutton of his Perfection. Patience, Fortitude,
Moderation, Vigilance, etc. are the Virtues of Earth, not Heaven; and yet, none
thinks, the blessed Inhabitants of that Place Imperfect, because not endowed
with Habits which they do not want. Above all, he that will be Perfect, must
abound in those Graces, which are of the most Heroic Nature; Faith, Love, and
Humility: For these are they, which most effectually exalt Man above himself,
and above the World; which inflame him with a Zeal for the Honor of God, and
the Good of Man; and enable him to surmount the Difficulties, which he meets
with, in prosecuting this Glorious Design. I am next to Enquire,

. 2. To what Height, to what Degrees of Virtue, the Perfect Man may advance. I
have in part anticipated this Enquiry already; yet cannot forbear adding here
two Observations. First, That Reason and Scripture seem to press us on toward
an endless Progress in Virtue. And yet, Secondly, That both seem to propose to
us, such a State of Perfection as attainable, beyond which, we cannot go; that
so the Beginner may not despair of Perfection, nor the Perfect abate any thing
of their Vigilance, and their Industry. Such a Degree of Excellence, to which
nothing can be added; such a Height, above which, there is no room to soar, if
applied to Man, and this World, is surely but an Imaginary Notion. To dream of
such a Perfection, were to forget our Nature, and our State: no Sagacity of
Judgment, no Strength of Resolution, no Felicity of Circumstances, can ever
advance us to this Height. Such a Perfection as this, that is incapable of any
Increase, belongs, I believe, to God alone: or if we may allow it to Angels, we
must certainly deny it to Man: In whom, one would think, the Appetites of the
Body can never be so entrely subdued, that there should be no place to extend
his Conquest, or render his Victory more entire, and complete: and in whom, one
would think, the Spirit of God should never reside in that Measure, that there
should be nothing to be added to his Fullness. It Is hard to conceive, how we
should study the Systeme of Divine Faith, how we should daily reflect upon our
Lives and Actions, without growing in spiritual Wisdom and Understanding; It Is
hard to conceive, how we should give God, the World, and our selves, repeated
Proofs of our Integrity in the day of Trial, without increasing our Strength
and Assurance: and Love must naturally increase with these. Whence it is, that
St. Paul, acknowledging himself not yet Perfect, resolves, that forgetting
those things that are behind, and reaching forwards to those things that are
before, he would press on toward the Mark, for the prize of the high Calling
of God, in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.13, 14. And St. Austin resolves, plenissima
Charitas, quam diu hic homo vivit, est in Nemine; an absolute Plenitude of
Charity is in no Mortal upon Earth.

And yet, if we come to Fact and Practice, one would be tempted to think, that
the Disciples of our Lord and Master, had arrived at that State, wherein their
business was not to climb higher, but rather to make good the Ground they had
gained. What could render St. Paul's Victory over the Body more complete, who
assures us, I am crucified with Christ? And again, I am crucified to the World,
and the World is crucified to me? What could render the Authority and Dominion
of his Mind more absolute, or its Graces more consummate, and entire? who could
say with Truth, it is not I who live, but Christ who lives in me. What would you
have added to that Faith, and Love, which made him ready, not only to be bound,
but to die at Jerusalem, which made him long to be dissolved and to be with
Christ? As to those words of his, Phil. 3.13. forgetting those things that are
behind, and reaching forwards, etc. they relate to his Trials and Performances,
to his Perils and Conflicts, not to his Seize: he does not here deny
himself to be Perfect, though that might well enough have become his Modesty,
and Humility; but only, that he was not to look upon himself as already at his
Goal, a Conqueror and Crowned; there being much yet behind to do and suffer,
notwithstanding all that he had passed through. This is the Sense of his (...),
which we render, not as though I were already perfect. As to St. Austin, I am
of his Mind; for he speaks Comparatively, and does in effect no more than
affirm, That no Man living is as Perfect in this World, as he will be in
another, which no Man sure can ever doubt. -- If we consult Reason, will it not
be apt to tell us, That as every Being has its Bounds set it, so has every
Perfection too? That there is a Stature, as of the Natural, so of the Spiritual
Man, beyond which it cannot grow? That as to Grace, no more can be infused,
than our Natures are capable of? Otherwise, like too rich a Cordial, it will
not strengthen, but fire our Natures; or like too dazzling a Light, it will not
assist, but oppress our Faculties. And does not the Parable of our Master
countenance this, Matthew. 25.2. wherein he tells us, That God gave to one, five
Talents, to another, two, to another, one, to every Man according to his
Ability. By which one would think our Lord insinuates, That the Measures of
Grace are usually distributed in Proportion to the Capacities of Nature; and
that he who improved his two Talents into four, arrived at his proper
Perfection, as well as he, who improved his five into ten; it being as absurd
to expect, That the Perfection of every Man should be the same, as to expect,
that all Men's Bodies should be of the same Height, or their Minds of the same
Capacity.

Reflecting on all this together, I cannot but be of Opinion, That some have
actually arrived at that strength of Faith, at that ardour of Love, that they
seemed to have been incapable of any considerable Accessions in this Life. But
yet, new occasions may still demand new Virtues; which were indeed before
contained and included in Faith, and Love; but no otherwise, than as Fruits and
Trees are in their Seeds. And some Degree of Original Corruption may still be
lurking in the most sanctified Nature; and some Venial Defects and
Imperfections or other, may still leave room, for the greatest of Saints to
extend his Conquest. Besides, it is hard to determine or fix the Bounds of
Knowledge, and every new Degree of Light seems to make way for more. So that
after all, nothing hinders, but that the Path of the Perfect Man, may, as well
with respect to his Righteousness as his Fortunes, be like the shining Light,
which shines more and more unto the Perfect day; I mean, the Day of a blessed
Eternity.

The Motives to Perfection, the Fruit of it, the Means and Methods of attaining
it, laid down in the First Section, will all serve here: therefore I have
nothing to offer of this sort; only, if I forgot to pay that Deference to the
Institutions of our Church, which they justly deserve, I do it now: and do
earnestly persuade my Reader, to a strict Observance of them. I do not only
think this necessary to maintain a Face of Religion amongst us, but also,
highly conducive to true Perfection. I am fully satisfied, That there is a
peculiar Presence of God in his public Ordinances; That the Devotion of good
Men does mutually inflame and enkindle one another; That there is a holy Awe
and Reverence seizes the Minds of good Men, when they draw near to God in
public Worship; And finally, That if the Offices of our Liturgy do not affect
our Hearts, it is because, they are very much indisposed, and very poorly
qualified for the true and spiritual Worship of God.

CHAP. X. Of Zeal, as it consists in Good Works.
AND now, let not any one think, that I have taken Pains to advance the
Illumination of a Sinner, to knock off his Chains and Fetters, to raise him as
far as might be above the Corruption of Nature, and the Defects and Infirmities
of Life; to scatter those lazy Fogs and Mists which hung upon his Spirits, and
to enrich him with Heroic Virtues; let no Man, I say, fancy, that I have
labored to do all this, that after all, my Perfect Man might sit down like an
Epicurean God, and enjoy himself; might talk finely of Solitary Shades and
Gardens, and spend a precious Life, fitted for the noblest Designs in a
sluggish Retirement. No, no; as Virtue is the Perfection of Human Life, so is
Action the Perfection of Virtue: and Zeal is that Principle of Action, which I
require in a Saint of God. Accordingly, the Scriptures describe this great,
this happy Man, as, full of the Holy Ghost, fervent in Spirit, zealous of good
Works. Such a one was Moses, mighty in Word and Deed, as well as learned in all
the Knowledge of the Egyptians; Such a one was St. Stephen, as full of a Divine
Ardour and irresistible Fervency of Spirit, as of an irresistible Wisdom: And
such a one was the excellent Cornelius a devout Man, one that had transfused
and derived the fear of God from his own Bosom, throughout his Family, and
Relations, and Friends too; one that gave much Alms, and prayed to God always.
What need I multiply Instances? this is that, which distinguishes the Perfect
Man from all others; the Victories of Faith, the Labors of Charity, the
Constancy and Patience of Hope, and the Ardors of Devotion.

Need I here distinguish a Zeal of God, from the Fierceness of Faction, the
Cruelty of Superstition, from the wakeful and indefatigable Activity of Avarice
and Ambition, from the unruly Heats of Pride and Passion, and from the
implacable Fury of Revenge? it needs not: No foolish, no false, fantastic,
earthly, or devilish Principle can counterfeit a Divine Zeal. It Is a
Perfection, that shines with such a peculiar Luster, with such an Heavenly
Majesty and Sweetness, that nothing else can imitate it; it is always pursuing
Good, the Honor of God, and the Happiness of Man: it contends earnestly for
the Faith once delivered to the Saints; but it contends as earnestly too, to
root out Wickedness, and implant the Righteousness of the Gospel in the World.
It is not eager for the Articles of a Sect or Party, and unconcerned for
Catholic ones. When it presses for Reformation it begins at home; and sets a
bright Example of what it would recommend to others. It Is meek and gentle under
its own Affronts, but warm and bold against those which are offered to God. In
a word, though Love fill its Sails, Divine Wisdom and Prudence give it Ballast:
and it has no Heat, but what is tempered and refracted by Charity and Humility.

Need I in the next place, fix or state the various Degrees of Zeal? Alas, it
is not requisite: Zeal being nothing else, but an ardent Thirst of promoting
the Divine Glory by the best Works. It Is plain, the more excellent the Work,
and the more it cost, the more Perfect, the more exalted the Zeal that performs
it. When like Mary, we quit the Cumber and Destraction of this World, and choose
Religion for our Portion, then do we love it in good earnest. When with the
Disciples, we can say Lord, we have forsaken all and followed thee or are ready
to do so; when we are continually blessing and praising God; when, if the
Necessities of Christ's Church require it, we are ready to call nothing our
own; when we are prepared, if the Will of God be so, to resist even unto Blood;
when nothing is dear, nothing delightful to us but God and Holiness; then have
we reached the Height of Zeal. In a word, Zeal is nothing else, but the Love of
God made Perfect in us. And if we would see it drawn to the Life, we must
contemplate it in the blessed Jesus, who is the Perfect Pattern of Heroic
Love. How boundless was his Love, when the whole World, and how transcendent
when a World of Enemies, was the Object of it? how indefatigable was his Zeal?
how wakeful? how meek? how humble? how firm and resolved? His Labors and
Travels, his Self-denial, Prayers and Tears, his Silence and Patience, his
Agony and Blood, and charitable Prayers poured out with it for his Persecutors,
instruct us fully, what Divine Love, what Divine Zeal is. And now, even at this
time, Love reigns in him, as he reigns in Heaven: Love is still the
Predominant, the darling Passion of his Soul. Worthy art thou, O Jesus to
receive Honor, and Glory, and Dominion! worthy art thou, to sit down with thy
Father on his Throne! worthy art thou to judge the World, because thou have
loved, because thou have been zealous unto Death, because thou have overcome!
Some there are indeed, who have followed thy bright Example, though at a great
Distance. First, Martyrs and Confessors. Next, those beloved, and admired
Princes, who have governed their Kingdoms in Righteousness; to whom, the Honor
of God, and the Good of the World has been far dearer, than Pleasure, than
Empire, than absolute Power, or that ominous Blaze that is now called Glory.
And next follow, hold! this is the Work of Angels; they must Marshal the Field
of Glory in the End of all things. O my God, may I, at least, be one, to fill
the Train of this Triumphant Procession in that blessed Day, when thou shall
Crown the Zeal, and Patience of thy Saints! Thus have I given, a short Account
of Zeal. I will now endeavor to kindle it in every breast by some few
Considerations; which will at once, evince, the Necessity, and declare the
Fruit of it.

1. Our own Security and Happiness, demand of us a Zeal fruitful in good Works.

2. It is indispensable to the Welfare and Good of our Neighbor.

3. It ministers most effectually to the Glory of God.

1. Our own Salvation and Happiness depend upon it. For without this, we
reject, on at least frustrate the Counsels of God, against our own Souls, 'twas
for this Christ Died, that he might purify to himself a peculiar People
Zealous of good Works. This is the great End of our Election, God has chosen
us in Christ before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy, and
without blame before him in Love, Ephesians. 1.4. which is to be explained by Ephesians.
2.10. where God is said to have before ordained that we should walk in good
Works. And the beginning of the ver. minds us, that it is for this End God
imparts the Light of his Word, and the Vigor of his Spirit; that for this End
he sanctifies and renews our Nature: We are his Workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus unto good Works. St. Peter tells us, That this is that which all the
great and precious Promises of God immediately aim at: First Godliness; then
Life: First Virtue; then Glory. What shall I say more? Our Lord in his
Narrative of the Last Judgment, and elsewhere; and his Apostles in almost
innumerable Places, have with great Power, and great Earnestness, inculcated
this Doctrine; that we shall be judged according to our Works: that Immortality
and Glory is the Portion, not of Knowledge, but Patience and Charity; not of an
Orthodox Belief and Specious Pretention, but of Righteousness and Zeal: for the
incorruptible, the never-fading Crown, is a Crown of Righteousness. Or if Men
will be judged by their Faith, which is not the Language of the Gospel, this
does not alter the Matter at all: Since Faith it self will be judged by its
Works. And as a happy Eternity depends upon our Zeal, so nothing else can give
us any comfortable, any rational Assurance of it in this Life. The Reason is
plain; because it is Zeal that is the only unquestionable Proof of our
Integrity; and Good Works are the Fruit which alone can evidence the Life and
Truth of our Faith and Love: hereby we know, that we know him if we keep his
Commandments, 1 John 2.3. Yea, a Man may say, thou have Faith and I have Works:
show me thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works,
Jam. 2.18. Do thou believe in God? why art thou not holy as He is holy? Do
thou believe in Jesus? why do thou not deny thy self, take up thy cross and
follow him? why do thou not walk as he walked? Do thou believe a Judgment
to come? why do thou not work out thy Salvation with fear and trembling? why
do thou not prepare to meet thy God? why art thou not rich in good Works,
that thou may lay up a good foundation against the time to come, and lay
hold on Eternal Life? Nor are good Works less necessary to prove our Love than
Faith. Certainly if we love Holiness, if we hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, we shall never live in a direct Contradiction to the strongest
Passions of our Soul: we shall never refuse to gratify an Inclination, which
is not only fervent in us, but its Gratification will procure us Eternal
Rewards too. Certainly, if we love God, we cannot but seek his Glory; we cannot
but be desirous to maintain Communion with him. And if so, do we know any
Sacrifice, that is more acceptable to God than good Works? do we know any that
he delights in more than Zeal? Do we Love the B. Jesus? are not good Works the
very Test of this Love, which himself has appointed? If a Man love me, he will
keep my Commandments, Joh. 14.15. Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I
command you, Joh. 15.14. The Love of Christ, says the Apostle, constrains us
what to do to live not to our selves, but to him that Died for us, and rose
again, 2 Cor. 5.15. What other Returns can we make to Jesus? what other way can
we express our Gratitude to him? He sits on the Right hand of God: all Power is
given him in Heaven and in Earth: he does not himself need our Ministry, nor
want our Service and Charity: But hear what he says, in as much as you did it
to one of these my little ones, you have done it to me, Matt. 25.40.

2. Our Zeal is indispensably necessary to the Welfare and Happiness of Others.
Do we regard our Neighbors Eternal Interest? it is Zeal represses Sin, and
Propagates Righteousness: it is Zeal defends the Faith, and suppresses Heresy
and Error? it is Zeal converts the Unbeliever, and builds up the Believer: it is
Zeal that awakens the drousie, quickens the lukewarm, strengthens the weak, and
enflames the good with a holy Emulation: it is Zeal that baffles all Objections,
refutes all Calumnies, and vanquishes all Oppositions raised against Religion,
and oppresses its Enemies with Shame and Confusion. It Is, in a word, Zeal and
Zeal alone, that can make Religion appear lovely and delightful, and reconcile
the World to it: for this alone can adorn the Gospel; for it renders Virtue
more conspicuous, more taking in Life and Example, than it can be in the
Precepts and Descriptions of Words. Nor is Zeal less serviceable to the
Temporal, that Eternal Interest of Mankind. When God laid the Foundations of
the World, he laid the Foundation of Virtue too: and when he formed Man, he
wove the Necessity of good Works into his very Nature. How necessary is Justice
to poor Creatures who lie so open to Wrongs and Injuries? how indispensable is
Charity, or Generosity to these who are exposed to so many Accidents, to so
many Wants, to such a Viscissitude of Fortune? and being all subject to so many
Follies and Infirmities, to so many Mistakes and Fancies, how strong must be
our Obligation to mutual Forbearance, Patience, and Gentleness? In a word, Sin
and Misery abounds in the World: and if there were not Virtues and good Works
to balance the one, and ^o relieve and support us under the other, Life would
be intolerable. So that Revealed and Natural Religion do necessarily terminate
and center in a Zeal for good Works as their ultimate End, and utmost
Perfection in this Life: and that Rule of our Savior, whatsoever ye would that
Men should do to you, do ye even so unto them, is an Abstract, not only of the
Law and the Prophets, but of the Code of Nature too; and this single Principle,
if sincerely pursued, will ferment and work us up to the noblest Heights of
Zeal. I might here, if it were necessary, easily show that Zeal has as happy an
Influence on the public as the private: that this must animate that Justice
and Mercy that supports the Throne: that it is the Soul of that Honor,
Integrity, Generosity, and Religion, which support the States and Kingdoms of
the World; and without which all Politic Systems must needs tend to a
Dissolution. But I have said enough: And from what I have said the Truth of my
Third Consideration naturally appears.

3. Viz. That Zeal ministers most effectually to the Glory of God. For if Zeal
be in it self thus lovely, thus necessary; if the Fruits and Effects of it be
thus serviceable to the Temporal and Eternal Interest of Man: what a Lovely,
what an agreeable Notion of God shall we form from this one Consideration of
him, That he is the great Author of it? That he, is the Origin and Fountain of
that Light and Heat, of that Strength and Power of which it is compounded and
constituted? He commands and exacts it; he excites and encourages to it by the
Promise of an Eternal Crown, and the ravishing Fruition of himself: he has
planted the Seeds of it in our Nature, and he cherishes them by the blessed and
vigorous Influences of his Word and Spirit. How gracious is the Divine Nature!
how gracious is the Divine Government! when the Substance of his Laws is, that
we should love as Brethren, that we should cloth the naked, feed the hungry,
deliver the captive, instruct the foolish, comfort the afflicted, forgive one
another, if need be, seven times a day; and such like. If to do all this, be an
Argument of being Regenerate and born of God; if this be a Proof of his Spirit
ruling in us, his Nature communicated to us, and his Image stamped upon us, how
amiable must God be when we discern so much Benefit, and so much Pleasure, and
so much Beauty, and so much Loveliness in those Qualities which are but faint
and imperfect Resemblances of Him! In a word, the Holiness of his Children and
Servants, is a Demonstration of the Holiness of God himself: and in this
consists the very Luster of Divine Glory. Holiness is the Flower of all his
Attributes: the most Perfect because the most Comprehensive of all his Divine
Perfections: For Holiness includes Wisdom, Power, and Goodness. As to Goodness
the Case is so plain, that Holiness and Goodness are commonly used as Terms
equivalent. As to Wisdom it is evident, That no Action is commendable and
lovely, whatever the Matter of it be, unless the Principle, the Motive of it be
Wise and rational: therefore Wisdom cannot be separated from the Notion of
Holiness. Lastly as to Power, this must needs be comprised in it too: for
Beneficence, which is at least one great branch of Holiness, must unavoidably
imply Power in the Benefactor and Impotence and Want in the Beneficiary. And
this is the Notion wherein Holiness, when ascribed to God in Scripture, is
generally taken. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts: Heaven and Earth are full
of thy Glory does express the Greatness and Majesty, as well as the Rectitude
and Purity, of the Divine Nature: and to sanctify the Lord God in our Hearts
is, in the Language of the Scripture not only to love him for his Goodness, but
revere and fear him for his Majesty and Greatness. Need I here add that the
Excellencies of the Creature, their Fitness and Subserviency to the great Ends
of their Creation, is the Glory of the Creator, just as the Beauty Strength and
Convenience of the Work is the Honor of the Architect? if the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, the irrational and inanimate Parts of the Creation, show forth the Glory
of God, how much more do spiritual and rational Beings? and Virtue is the
Perfection of Reason, and Zeal of Virtue; for this is that which does directly
and immediately advance those great Ends that are dearest to God, as I have, I
think, abundantly made out.

CHAP. XI. Of Humility.
OUR Savior has so often pronounced the humblest, the greatest in the Kingdom
of Heaven; He has so often promised the first place and the greatest Exaltation
to the lowest Condescensions; He was Himself so illustrious an Example of
Lowliness of Heart, of Poverty of Spirit; and the Apostle has so expressly
asserted his Joy and Crown to be the Reward of his Humility, Phil. 2. That I
can never think that Man can ever rise to a more eminent Height than that to
which the Imitation of this Virtue of Christ will advance him. The more Perfect
therefore Man is, the more humble must he be too: The clearer View, and the
more assured Hope he has of Heaven, the more unconcerned must he be for all
those things which the World pays a Respect and Honor to, the more he must be
above them: The more fervent his Love of God and his Neighbor grows, the more
confidently must he place all his Glory in this one thing, the Conformity of
his Affections and Life to that of the blessed Jesus. Then is he Perfect; and
the same Mind is in him that was in Christ Jesus. Finally, the more he knows
God, the nearer he is admitted into Communion with him; the more plainly will
he discern at how infinite Distance he stands from the Divine Majesty and
Purity, and will prostrate himself even into Dust and Ashes before him. The
Perfect Man admires, adores, obeys, loves, relies, trusts, and resigns up
himself and all that is dear to him to God. He is nothing in his own Eyes; he
pretends to nothing, he lays Claim to nothing on any other Title than that of
the Goodness and Bounty of God. Whatever Virtues he has, he ascribes them to
the Grace of God: and the Glory and Immortality he expects, he expects only as
the Gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And whatever he be in himself,
he compares no himself with others, but he proves his own Work, that he may
have Rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. Nothing but Zeal for God
or Charity for Man can put him upon the asserting his own Merit or Service: but
when glories, it is like St. Paul, in his Infirmities; that the Power of Christ
may rest upon him.

Need I here insist on the Fruit of Humility? Surely it is conspicuous to every
one that thinks at all. Great is the Peace and Rest of the humble Soul here;
and great will be his Glory hereafter. He who loves not the World nor the
things of it, the Lust of the Fesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of
Life, enjoys a perpetual Calm and Serenity of Mind. There is no Object that can
raise any Storm in him; there is nothing that can breed in him uneasy Desires
and Fears. He that loves the Father is fixed on an immutable and perfect Good:
and he that now quits all for God, shall one day participate of the Fullness of
God, and that for ever.

Need I invite and exhort Man to Humility? need I guard him against spiritual
Pride? one would think 'twere altogether useless to attempt it. Is it possible
that the Creature should think himself so independent of his Creator, that he
should be able to pay him more Service than were due to him? Is it possible
that Man should set such a rate upon his own Righteousness, as to think it
capable of deserving the utmost Rewards that an Infinite God can bestow upon
him? Is it possible, in a word, that Man, poor, frail, sinful, Man, Man that
can do nothing that is good, but by the Assistance of Divine Grace; Man
depraved, and corrupted in his Nature, and but a very ill husband of Grace; is
it possible, I say, that Man should be proud toward God, toward that glorious
and incomprehensible Being, who is the Creator and Lord, the Monarch and
Patron, the God and Father of Heaven and Earth? But as absurd as this is,
universal Experience teaches us, that Humility, true Humility is a hard Lesson:
and that very excellent Persons are not out of the Danger of falling into
vicious Elations of Mind. In order therefore to promote the one and secure us
against the other, I will propose these two or three Considerations.

1. There never was mere Man yet that did not fall short of his Duty.

2. Man is the Creature of God, depends upon Him, and has received all from
him: and therefore let him do the utmost he can, he does no more than his Duty.

3. God stands in no Need of our Service: and it is our own not his Interest we
promote by it.

1. There never was mere Man yet, etc. For Proof of this, I will not fly to
Original Corruption, or Sins of Infirmity. Alas! I need not. The Apostle, Romans
1. and 2. lays the Foundation of Justification by Faith, in the universal
Defection and Depravation of Mankind. They are altogether gone out of the way,
there is none that does Good, no not one. And what Sins he there charges the
World with, the Catalogue he gives us of them will inform us. But are we no
better than they? I answer the Light of the Gospel, and the preventing Grace of
God has undoubtedly given a great Check to the Progress of Sin in the World:
but since no Man can be Justified but through Faith in the Blood of Jesus, it is
plain that we too must be concluded under Sin. And though our Sins may not in
the Number, or Scandal of them, equal theirs, yet we ought to remember too,
that every Sin is the more provoking, the more voluntary it is; and the greater
the Grace is which it resists and despises. But what need I compare our Selves
with the Jew or Gentile? what need I prove by Argument and Authority that no
Man ever yet lived, or will live without Sin? I mean Mortal Sin. Who ever yet
looked back diligently into his past Life, and did not meet with Stains and
Deformities enough? when I consider what Legions of Sins are ranged under those
two Banners of the Devil, the Filthiness of the Flesh, and of the Spirit; when
I call to mind Envy, Discontent, Murmuring, Distrust, Pride, Covetousness,
Ambition, Wilfulness, Contention, Forwardness, Passion, Dissimulation,
Falsehood, Flattery, and a thousand other Sins; and when I reflect upon the
Weaknesses and Prepensions of Nature, and the almost innumerable Temptations to
which we are exposed, I must confess I am not at all surprised to think, that
no Flesh can be Justified in the Sight of God by a Covenant of Works: And when
ever I find any upon a Deathbed, as I do some, acquitting themselves from the
Guilt of any Deliberate Wickedness, I rather admire their Ignorance, and
Partiality, than their Innocence. And yet, after all, a good Man is not to
examine himself, only concerning the Evil that he has done, but also concerning
the Good which he has omitted. He must enquire, how far he has fallen short of
that Poverty of Spirit, and Purity of Heart, which he ought to have come up
too: and how far he has been wanting in those Duties which a thorough Zeal
would have pushed him on too: And when he has done this, let him be proud if he
can.

2. Man is the Creature of God, depends upon him, and has received all from
Him. And therefore let him do the utmost he can, he does no more than his Duty:
and strictly speaking, cannot merit of him. He that will pretend to Merit, must
be his own Master; he must have a Right over his own Actions; he must be free
to dispose of his Affections and Services as he pleases. For if he be
antecedently bound, if he have no Liberty, no Freedom, no Right to dispose of
himself, or any thing he is possessed of, it is plain such a one cannot merit.
And this is the direct Case between God and Man. God is the great Lord, the
great Proprietor of Heaven and Earth. He that gives Alms, does but restore a
part of what God lent him: he that takes patiently the Loss of Goods, or Health
or Friends, does but give back what he had no right to retain: he was but
Tenant at Will, and had no Right to any thing longer than God thought fit to
continue it. And in all other Instances of Duty the Case will be still plainer.
If he adore, and worship God, there is infinite Reason that he should; for he
depends upon him for his Being, and Preservation. If he love God never so much,
God has deserved much more than he can pay Him: not only the Enjoyments of
Life, but even Life it self being derived from Him. From this Argument it will
follow, that it is impossible for a Creature to merit of its Creator. Angels
themselves never could. For might it not be said with as much Truth concerning
them, as concerning Man, who made thee to differ, or what have thou which thou
did not receive? and if thou have received it, why do thou boast as if thou
had not received it? 1 Cor. 4.7. And the same may be concluded concerning
Adam in Paradise. For I demand, had he kept the Covenant of God, had he done
this by Divine Grace, or by his own Strength'? If by the Grace of God, as
Divines generally hold, then may we apply the Expression of St. Austin to Adam,
as well as to any one now under the Dispensation of the Gospel: That when God
rewards the works of Man, he does only crown in him his own Gifts. But suppose
he had done this by his own natural Strength: were not the Endowments of
Nature, as much the Gifts of God as the Endowments of Grace* the one were
Natural, the other Supernatural Gifts: both Gifts still, though of a different
kind. If it be here Objected, if this be so, how comes St. Paul to affirm, to
him that works is the reward due not of Grace but of Debt? Romans 4.4. I
answer, First, God seems, when he enters into Covenant with Man, to suspend, or
lay aside the natural Right which He has over him as his Creature; and to
transact with him as free, and Master of himself: But this is all infinite
condescension. Secondly, it seems unsuitable to the infinite Goodness of God,
to bereave Man of the Life and Happiness he has once conferred upon him, unless
he forfeits it by some Demerit: The Gifts and calling of God are without
Repentance; nor can I think how Death, which has so much Evil in it, could have
entered the World, if Sin had not entered it first. In this Sense, unsinning
Obedience gives a kind of right to the Continuance of those good things, which
are at first the mere Effects of Divine Grace and Bounty. Lastly, a Covenant of
Works being once established, it is plain that as Sin forfeits Life, so
Obedience must give a right to it: and as the Penitent could not be restored,
but by an Act of Grace, so he that commits no Sin, would need no Pardon. But
then Life it self, and an Ability to work Righteousness, must be owing to Grace
antecedent to the Covenant: and so such a one would have whereof to boast
comparatively, with respect to others who fell; but not before God. The Sum of
all is, Man has nothing to render to God, but what he has received from him:
and therefore can offer him nothing but his own: Which is no very good
Foundation for Merit. But suppose him absolute Master of himself: Suppose him
holding all things independent of God. Can the Service of a few Days merit
Immortality and Glory, Angelical Perfection, and a Crown? He must be made up of
Vanity and Presumption, that dares affirm this.

3. God stands in no need of our Service, and it is our own not his Interest we
promote by it. The Foundation of Merit amongst Men is Impotence and Want: the
Prince wants the Service and Tribute of the Subject; the Subject the Protection
of the Prince: the Rich needs the Ministry and the Labor of the Poor; the Poor
Support and Maintenance from the Rich. And it is thus in Imaginary, as well as
Real Wants. The Luxury and Pleasure of one, must be provided for and supported
by the Care and Vigilance of others: and the Pomp and the Pride of one part of
the World cannot subsist, but on the Servitude of the other. In these Cases
therefore, mutual Wants create mutual Rights, and mutual Merit. But this is not
the Case between God and Man. God is not subject to any Wants or Necessities:
Nor is his Glory, or Happiness capable of Diminution or Increase. He is a
Monarch, that needs no Tribute to Support his Grandeur, nor any Strength or
Power, besides his own, to guard his Throne. If we revolt, or rebel, we cannot
injure Him: if we be loyal and obedient, we cannot profit Him. He has all
Fullness, all Perfection in himself: He is an Almighty and All-sufficient God.
But on the quite contrary, though God have no Wants, we have many: and though
his Majesty and Felicity be subject to no Vicissitude, we are subject to many.
Our Service to God therefore is our own Interest; and our Obedience is designed
to procure our own Advantage: we need, we daily need his Support and
Protection; we depend entirely on His Favor and Patronage: in him we live, and
move, and have our Being: and from Him, as from an inexhaustible Fountain, we
derive all the Streams of Good, by which we are refreshed and improved. To
know, and love Him is our Wisdom; to depend upon Him, our Happiness and
Security; to serve and worship Him, our Perfection and Liberty; to enjoy Him
will be our Heaven; and those Glimpses of his Presence, which we are vouchsafed
thorough the Spirit in this Life, are the Pledges and Foretaste of it. This is
the constant Voice of Scripture: Every good Gift, and every perfect Gift is
from above, and comes from the Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17. If I were hungry,
I would not tell thee; for the World is mine, and the Fullness thereof. Will I
eat the Flesh of Bulls, or drink the Blood of Goats? Offer unto God
Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows unto the most high: and call upon me in the day
of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.12, 13.
etc. If thou be Righteous what give thou unto him? thy Wickedness may hurt a
Man, etc. Job 35.7, 8.

SECT. III. Of the Impediments of Perfection.
THough I have been all along carrying on the Design of this Section, that is,
the Removing the Obstacles of Perfection, yet I easily foresaw there might be
some which would not be reduced within the Compass of the foregoing Heads: For
these therefore I reserved this Place. These are Five.

1. Too easy and loose a Notion of Religion.

2. An Opinion that Perfection is not attainable.

3. That Religion is an Enemy to Pleasure.

4. The Love of the World; in a higher Degree at least than will consist with
Perfection.

5. The Infirmity of the Flesh.

. 1. Some seem to have entertained such a Notion of Religion, as if Moderation
here, were as necessary as any where else. They look upon Zeal as as an Excess
of Righteousness: and can be well enough content to want Degrees of Glory, if
they can but save their Souls. To which End they can see no Necessity of
Perfection. Now I would beseech such seriously to lay to Heart, that Salvation
and Damnation are Things of no common Importance: and therefore it highly
concerns them not to be mistaken in the Notion they form to themselves of
Religion. For the Nature of Things will not be altered by their Fancies; nor
will God be mocked or imposed on. If we will deal sincerely with our selves, as
in this Case it certainly behooves us to do, we must frame our Idea of Religion,
not from the Opinions, the Manners, or the Fashions of the World, but from the
Scriptures. And we must not interpret these by our own Inclinations; but we
must judge of the Duties they prescribe, by those Descriptions of them, by
those Properties and Effects, which we find there. We must weigh the Design and
End of Religion; which is to promote the Glory of God, and the Good of Man, and
to raise us above the World, and the Body: and see how our Platform, or Model
of Religion suits with it. And if after we have done this, we are not fully
satisfied in the true Bounds and Limits which part Vice and Virtue, it cannot
but be safest for us to err on the right hand. We ought always to remember too,
That the repeated Exhortations, in Scripture to Diligence and that the most
earnest and indefatigable, to Vigilance, to Fear, and Trembling, to Patience,
to Steadfastness, and suchlike, are utterly inconsistent with an easier, lazy,
gentile Religion. That the Life of Jesus is the fairest and fullest Comment on
his Doctrine: and, That we never are to follow the Examples of a corrupt World,
but of the best Men, and the best Ages. This, this one thing alone, will
convince us, what Endeavors, what Virtues are necessary to gain an
incorruptible Crown. See with what Eagerness the Disciples of Jesus pressed
toward the mark! See with what Courage, nay Joy too, they took up their Cross
and followed Him! how generous were their Alms! so that the Riches of their
Liberality were conspicuous in the very Depth of their Poverty. What Plainness,
and Singleness of Heart; what Grace and Warmth, what Peace and Joy, showed it
self in their Conversation! what Modesty, what Humility, in their Garb,
Deportment, and the whole Train of Life! how frequent, how fervent, and how
long too, were their Prayers and Retirements! In one word, the Spirit and
Genius of a Disciple of Christ discovered it self in all they said and did: and
the Virtues of their Lives did as evidently distinguish a Christian, from a
Jew, or Pagan, as their Faith. How lovely was Religion then! how full its Joy,
how strong its Confidence! Then did Christians truly overcome the World: then
did they live above the Body: then was the Cross of Christ more delightful,
than the Ease, or Honor, the Pride, or Pleasure, of a sinful Life: then did
they truly thorough the Spirit, wait for the Hope of Righteousness by Faith.
Let us now compare our Lives with theirs, and then sit down content with poor
and beggarly Seize if we can. Let us put our Virtues in the Scales
against theirs; and, if we have any Modesty, the Inequality will put us out of
Countenance: we shall blush at our Vanity; and shall not have the Confidence to
expect the same Crown, the same Kingdom with them. But as too laxe a Notion of
Religion is apt to beget too much Indifference, and Unconcernment; so will it
be said, too exalted a one is apt to beget Despair: which is a Second and no
less Obstacle of Perfection.

. 2. Many there are, who forming their Judgment upon the Slips and Defects of
good Men, and the Corruption of Human Nature, conceive Perfection to be a mere
imaginary Notion. They believe indeed, that, considering how apt Man is to fall
short of his Duty, it is very fit that the Rule prescribed him should be exact;
and that he should be frequently pressed, and exhorted to Perfection: but that
the thing it self is too too difficult for Mortal Man to attain in this Life.
But to this Objection I must oppose these few things which I believe will be
sufficient to remove it. 1. The Beginning of Virtue is the most difficult part
of it: the nearer we approach to Perfection, the easier, as well as pleasanter,
is Religion. And therefore, whoever startles at the Difficulties, which lie in
the way to an exalted Virtue, has as much reason to be startled at those which
will encounter him in his first Entrance upon Religion: and yet these must be
conquered. 2. The avoiding the Difficulties of Religion, does but plung us into
worse. We are necessarily under this Dilemma: If we will attain the Peace and
Tranquillity of the Mind, we must mortify and reduce the Appetites of the Body:
if on the other hand, we propose to gratify the Appetites of the Body, and
enjoy the Pleasure of Sin, we cannot do so without offering much Violence to
the Mind. And if this be so; if such be the War and Opposition between the Soul
and the Body, that there is no way to a true and well settled Peace and
Pleasure, but by the Reduction and Mortification of the one, or the other; then
it will be easy to resolve what we are to do. For those Appeals which Atheists
themselves make to Reason, proclaim the Soul of Man to be the Ruling and Nobler
part of him. Besides, the Soul is the more vital, the more tender, and sensible
part of us: and consequently, the Affliction of this must render us far more
miserable, than any Hardships, or Difficulties, Virtue can impose upon the
Body. 3. Whatever be the Difficulties of Virtue, they will soon vanish if we
often call to mind, That Peace and Joy are the Fruit of Virtue; but shame and
Remorse of Sin: That no Man ever yet did not repent of following his Lust;
unless he died as much a Brute as he lived: That Heaven is a cheap purchase,
whatever it costs us; but the Pleasure of Sin a very dear one, how easily
soever we come by it: And finally, That we are not our own Masters: there is a
God to whom we stand accountable for our Actions: and consequently, whether we
will, or will not, we must either undergo the Hardship and Discipline of
Virtue, or the Eternal Plagues and Punishments of Sin. Lastly, the Truth is,
this Opinion of the Impossibility of Perfection has both been begot and
cherished by those wild Schemes of it, which have been drawn by the hands of a
flaming, indeed, but an indiscreet Zeal. But I have here recommended to the
World, no fantastic, or Enthusiastic Perfection. I have advanced no Heights
of Virtue; but what many do, I hope, at this day actually feel and experiment
in themselves: none, I am sure, but what the Followers of the blessed Jesus
actually attain and practice. Be ye followers of us, said the Apostle, as we
are of Christ. Their Lives were as bright a Rule as their Doctrine: and by
their own Actions they demonstrated the Power of the Faith they taught, They
did not like the Scribes and Pharisees, bind heavy Burdens upon others, and not
move them with their finger; they did not like Plato and Aristotle magnify
Temperance and Modesty at the Tables and Carnivals of Princes; nor commend the
Pleasure of Wisdom in in the Gardens of Epicurus: but they lived as they
taught, unspotted by the Pleasures, unbroken by the Troubles, of the World;
modest, Serene, equal and Heavenly minded, in Honor, or Dishonor, Want, or
Abundance, Liberty, or Prison Life, or Death. Let us then no longer Object, or
Dispute, but with Faith and Patience be followers of those who have inherited
the Promises: being encompassed with a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside
every Weight, and the Sin which does so easily beset us; and let us run with
Patience the race that is set before us: looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of
God. For consider him that endured such Contradiction of Sinners against
himself; lest ye be wearied and faint in your Mind, Heb. 12.1, 2. I have done
with those who endeavor to soften or shun the Difficulties of Religion not to
conquer them.

3. There are others who will look upon this setting up the Doctrine of
Perfection, as a Design against the Pleasures of Mankind. What, says such a
one, shall I let go my present Pleasures out of my hands, to hunt after I know
not what, and I know not where? Shall I quit Pleasures tha^ are every where
obvious, for such as have no Being, it may be, but in Speculation? or at least
are never to be enjoyed by any, but some few, rare and happy Creatures, the
Favorites of God and Nature? Pleasures that have Matter and Substance in them,
for such as I can no more grasp and relish than I can Dreams and Visions? But
to this I answer, this pretty talk is all but stupid Ignorance, and gross
Mistakes. For, 1. As to innocent and virtuous Pleasure, no Man needs part with
it. I endeavor not to deprive Man of this; but to refine and purify it. And
he that prefers, either silly, or vicious Pleasure before Religion, is
wretchedly mistaken. For, 2. Perfect Religion is full of Pleasure. Had we but
once arrived at true Purity of Heart, what could be so full of Pleasure as the
Business of Religion? what can be more delightful than blessing and praising
God, to a grateful Soul; Allelujahs, to a Soul snatched from the brink of
Destruction, into the Bosom of its Master? what can be more Transporting than
the melting Tendernesses of a holy Contrition; made up, like Mary Magdalen's,
of Tears and Kisses, Sorrow and Love, Humility and Glory, Confusion and
Confidence, Shame and Joy? what can be more transporting than Love, the Love of
a Christian; when he is all Love, as God is Love; when he desires nothing in
Heaven, nor on Earth, but God; when all things are dung and dross to him in
Comparison of Jesus? 4. If the Pleasures of the World be more transporting than
those of Religion? it is because our Faith is weak, our Love imperfect, and our
Life unsteady. A constant and exalted Pleasure is, I grant it, the Fruit of
Perfection alone. The Peace and Joy of the Holy Ghost reigns no where, but
where that Zeal and Love, which is an Effect of the Fullness of the Spirit,
reigns too. I had once proposed to have insisted on the Reasons of this here:
but this Labor is prevented; for they are very obvious to any one, who has
read the Chapter of Zeal with Seriousness and Attention. Lastly what is
insinuated in the Objection, that the Pleasures of the World are more numerous,
or obvious, than those of Religion, is altogether a false and groundless Fancy.
In every Place, and in every State, do the Pleasures of Virtue wait upon the
Perfect Man. They depend not, like those of the Body, on a thousand things that
are not in our power, but only on God, and our own Integrity. But this part of
the Objection I have, I think, for ever baffled, Sect. 1. Chap. 4. These
Obstacles of Perfection being thus removed, and the Mind of Man being fully
convinced of the Happiness that results from a State of Perfection, and of his
Obligation to surmount the Difficulties which obstruct his way to it; there
seems to be nothing now left to disappoint the Success of this Discourse, but
somewhat too much Fondness for the World, or somewhat too much Indulgence to
the Body; which I am next, though but very briefly, to consider.

. 4. There is a Love of the World, which though it be not either for the
Matter, or Degree of it, Criminal enough to destroy our Sincerity, and our
Hopes of Salvation, yet is it strong enough to abate our Vigor, hinder our
Perfection, and bereave us of many Degrees of Pleasure at present, and Glory
hereafter. The Indications of this kind of Love of the World are, too much
concern for the Pomp and Show of Life; too much Exactness in the Modes and
Customs of it; too quick a Sense of Honor and Reputation, Pre-eminence and
Praise; too much Have, and too much Industry to grow rich, to add House to
House, Land to Land, and to cloth our Selves with thick and heavy Clay; too
brisk a Relish of the Pleasures of the World; too great a Gaiety of Mind upon
the Successes, too much Dejection upon the Disasters and Disappointments of it;
too much Care, and too much Diligence; an encumbring and embroiling ones self
too far in worldly Affairs; too much Diversion, too much Ease. These, I say,
are the Symptoms of a Mind tainted with a Love of the World; though not so far
as to Sickness and Death. However, it will be enough to check the Vigor, and
dilute the Relish of the Mind. Now the only way to overcome this Defect, and to
captivate the Mind entirely to the Love and Service of Religion and Virtue, is
to consider frequently and seriously the Rewards of Perfection, the Pleasure
that will attend it in another Life. Had the young Man in the Gospel done this,
had he had as lively a Notion, and as true an Estimate, of the Riches of
Eternity, as he had of Temporal ones, he would never have gone away sorrowful,
when he was advised to have exchanged the Treasures of Earth for those of
Heaven. Had the Soul of Martha been as much taken up with the Thoughts of
Eternity, as that of Mary, she would have made the same Choice as she did. They
who often think, how soon the Fashion, the Pomp and Grandeur of this World
passes away, and how much better their Heavenly Country is than their Earthly;
how much more lasting, and how much more glorious, the New Jerusalem, that City
that has Foundations, whose builder and maker is God, than this City of ours,
which may be over-thrown in a moment; will neither weep, nor rejoice, with too
much Passion; neither buy, nor possess, with too much Application of Mind. In
one word, he that so often and devoutly thinks of that day, wherein Christ, who
is our Life, shall appear, and we also appear with him in Glory, that he comes
to love and long for it; such a one will have no great Taste of the Honors, or
the Pleasures, or the Interests of Life: nor will he be slothful, or remiss,
but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord: Whatever Degrees of Affection he had
for any thing of that Nature, they will all vanish; he will have no Emulation,
but for good Works, no Ambition but for Glory: I mean, that which is Eternal.
In the pursuit of this will he lay out the Strength and Vigor of his Mind; for
this he will retrench his Profit; for this he will deny his Pleasure; for this
he will be content to be obscure, mean, and laborious: for if the World be once
crucified to him, he will the more easily bear the being crucified to it.

. 5. After all, there is an Infirmity in the Flesh, against which if we do not
guard our selves, if we do not struggle heartily, we shall miscarry. The Spirit
is willing, said our Savior, but the Flesh is weak. Without much Care, and
much Watchfulness, the Vigor of our Minds will be relaxed; the Exultation of
our Spirits will flag, and droop; and we shall soon loose the Relish there is
in Religion. The most effectual Remedies against this Frailty and Fickleness of
our Nature are two. First, Godly Fear; and this, the Purity and Presence of
God; the Strictness and the Impartiality of a Judgment to come; the Loss of an
Eternal Crown; the Terrors of Eternal Punishment; the Number and Strength of
Temptations; the deplorable Falls of the greatest Saints; and the Conscience of
our own Weakness, will not fail to work in us. Let us then, not only begin but
also perfect Holiness in the Fear of God. Blessed is he that fears always.
Secondly, The Steadfastness of Hope; of Hope that waits and longs for the
Coming of our Lord. This will invite us often to take a View of Canaan: this
will fill the Mind often with the Beauties and the Glories of Eternity: this
will often call to our Thoughts, and Security, the Rest, the Transports of
another World; the Love of God and of Jesus; incorruptible Crowns; the
Hallelujah's of Angels, the Shouts of Victory, the Fruit of the Tree of Life,
the Streams that water the Paradise of God. And every such Object will chide us
out of our Weakness and Cowardice: every such Thought will upbraid us out of
our Laziness and Negligence: We shall hear always Sounding in our Ears the
Words of Jesus to his Disciples, What, can ye not watch with me one hour, and
yet do you expect to reign with me for ever? Or those to the Church of
Laodicea, to him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me upon my Throne; as
I have overcome, and am sat down with my Father on his Throne.

And now, Reader, if you find I have done you any Service, if you think your
self under any Obligation to me, the Return I beg from you is, that you will
first, offer Praise and Thanks unto God; and next whenever you are in the
Vigor of the Spirit, in the Ardors of Faith and Love, before God in Prayer,
put up these, or the like Petitions for me, which I now offer up for my self.

O My God, and my Father, increase the Knowledge of thy Word, and the Grace of
thy Spirit in me. Enable me to Perfect Holiness in thy Fear; and to hold fast
the steadfastness of my Hope unto the End. Pardon all the Sins, and Errors of
my Life: and accept of my imperfect Services though Jesus Christ. And because,
though after all we can do, we are unprofitable Servants, thy Infinite Bounty
will yet certainly recompense our sincere Endeavor to promote thy Glory, let me
find my Reward from thee: or rather do thou thy self vouchsafe to be my Reward.
I should have ever thought my self unworthy to have put up this Petition to
thee, O thou glorious and incomprehensible Majesty, had not thine own Goodness,
thine own Spirit kindled this Ambition in me. Behold! what manner of Love is
this, that we should be called the Sons of GOD! these are the Words of thy
Servant St. John: And now therefore my Soul can never be at rest, till I awake
at the last Day after thy Likeness; I can never be satisfied till I behold thy
Glory: which vouchsafe me, I beseech thee, by thy Mercy, and thy Faithfulness;
by the Sufferings and Intercession of thy Dearly Beloved Son.

FINIS.
Several Books Published, by Dr. Lucas; Vicar of St. Steven's Coleman-street,
and Sold by Sam. Smith, and Benj. Walford, at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
PRactical Christianity; Or an Account of the Holiness which the Gospel
Enjoins, with the Motives to it, etc. Fourth Edition, 1693.

An Enquiry after Happiness, in several Parts, Vol. I. The Second Edition
Corrected and Enlarged, 1692.

Human Life, or a Second Part of the Enquiry after Happiness, Second Edition,
1696.

Religious Perfection; or, a Third Part of the Enquiry after Happiness, 1696.

The Duty of Apprentices and Servants, with some Prayers and Directions for the
worthy Receiving the Holy Sacrament, 1685. Price One Shilling Six Pence.

The Plain Man's Guide to Heaven, Containing, 1st. His Duty toward God. 2ly.
Toward his Neighbor, with proper Prayers, Meditations, and Ejaculations,
designed chiefly for the Countryman, Tradesman, Laborers, etc. 1691. Price
One Shilling.

Christian Thoughts for every day of the Month, 12. Price One Shilling.

Several Sermons Preached before the Queen, Lord Mayor, Assizes, etc.


