A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. Thomas Lamb July 23. 1686.

By RICHARD LUCAS M.A. Vicar of St. Stephen's Coleman-street.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1686.

IMPRIMATUR.

July 24. 1686. Hen. Maurice Rmo. Archiepiscopo Canl. a Sacris.

To the Reverend Mr. JOHN LAMB Rector of Wheathampsted in Hartfordshire, etc.
SIR,
THough I expect this Sermon should be encountered by two sorts of censures;
First, of those who Envy that goodness which they will not imitate; and for the
Vindication of their own worthlesness and barrenness, detract from the
Excellence and Fruitfulness of others: Next of those, who may be disgusted at
the courseness and heaviness of it: Yet this could not discourage me from the
publication of it: For as to the former, if they could deserve my
consideration, I am sufficiently fortified against 'em by being conscious to my
self, that I have impartially followed strict Truth, either personally known to
me, or abundantly attested; As to the latter I think verily, they do me no
great wrong, for I agree thus far with em, that the discourse is by no means
equal to the subject: But in this I have this comfort, that thought it can give
no Luster or Dignity to the subject, it may receive both in some measure from
it, and so may prove useful in despite of it is flatness. Besides, Examples of
this nature ought not to be stifled or suppressed, as being such excellent
Vindications of our Christian profession, such brisk reproaches and convincing
reproofs of the Coldness and Irreligion of evil men, and such excellent
Incentives of Emulation to the good. And yet after all this, I think verily, I
should never have suffered this discourse to have seen the Light (such was my
value for it!) had I not been overruled, as you know, by the importunity of
such, whose Friend^hip I have no ground to question, and to whose Judgment, I
have just ground to pay a deference: Now that it is published, it does of Right
belong to you; to whom I offer it, and entreat you to accept it,
notwithstanding it is imperfections; as a testimony of my Respect for you, and
of my kindness for the Memory of your dear Father, and my dear Friend departed,
I am

SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant RICHARD LUCAS.

JOHN 17.4, 5. I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have finished the works
which thou gave me to do.

And now O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I
had with thee before the World was.


NOthing can afford so much comfort and support, in the day of Calamity or
Death, as the Conscience of a wellspent Life; a faithful discharge of our Duty,
being the Sole-Rational proof of our sincerity, and our sincerity being the
only solid ground of Hope, and assurance toward God. If our heart ( i.e. our
Conscience) condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, 1 John 3.21.

This is a Lesson our Savior has taught us by his own Example here in my Text;
very well knowing that the time of his Death and Crucifixion was very near at
hand, that he might fortify himself against all the Terrors of it, by
confirming and strengthening, his Hope of that Joy that was set before him, he
enters up on a survey of his past Life, recollects all his performances,
reflects upon his Actions, and calls himself to an account concerning the
Discharge of that Trust which God had committed to him, of the great Work which
he had undertaken for the Salvation of man, and the Honor of God: And finding
upon a just and Impartial Reflection that he had through the whole course of
his Life, acquitted himself faithfully and vigorously, his Soul rejoices
within him, and he breaks out into expressions of holy Confidence and an
assured and earnest expectation of the Reward of his Obedience and
Faithfulness. I have glorified thee on the Earth, etc. And now O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self, etc.

Thus I have in part explained the words already, having given you an account
of the Occasion, Design and Tendency of them: As they belong properly and
peculiarly to our Savior, they imply two things.

First, His Faithful Discharge of his Prophetic Office; I have glorified thee,
etc. This consisted especially -- 1. In publishing the will of God to the
World, as he himself explains it more fully in the following part of the
Chapter. -- 2. In the proof and evidence he gave of his Commission from God,
and the Divinity of his Doctrine, which was, the Wonderfulness of his works,
and the unparalled Sanctity of his Life.

Secondly, His Expectation of Reward, consisting in the exaltation of his Human
Nature, and it is admission into a participation of that Glory, which he enjoyed
with the Father from all Eternity. And now O Father, Glorify thou me with
thine own self, with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was.

But if we consider that Christ is the Christian's great pattern, that his Life
is proposed to us, as an Example to our Obedience, that his peace and joy is in
some degree the Portion and Blessing of every faithful Disciple, and follower
of his, and that lastly his exaltation and Glory is the Original and Idaea, by
which our's shall in it is due proportion be formed and modelled, I may very
well be allowed to interpret the behavior of our Lord in my text as an Example
set us all in general, containing matter of Instruction and Advice to all
Christians, which may be resolved into these two Propositions,

1st. That there is a Work given every one of us to sinish, a Duty prescribed
each of us by the Conscientious performance of which, we may glorisie God on
the Earth.

2dly. That a Christian's Comfort and Assurance in Death, if rational, ought to
flow from the Conscience of a faithful discharge of this Duty.

1st. That there is a work, etc. The Duties of human Life are of two sorts --
First, such as are common to all as Men and Christians. -- Secondly, such as
are proper and peculiar to some men as engaged in distinct Callings and
Professions As Men and Christians, Sobriety, Purity, Truth, Justice, Charity,
Meekness, Long-Suffering, Devotion, Faith, Self-Resignation, Obedience, and
such like are the works which God has pre-ordain'd that we should walk in:
These are Reflections and Rays of the Divine glory, these are the Tracks and
Characters of the Divine Image, these are the Ornaments and true Excellencies
of a Christian, in comparison of which, the Celebrated Exploits of the
Heathen-Gods, Jupiter, Hercules, Bacchus, etc. are, as Lactantius speaks, but
childish braveries, the blind Sallies of an impotent passion, of an Unballasted
Impetus: By the constant and sincere practice of these, we exalt and perfect
our Natures, advancing them into a nearer participation of the Divine Image; by
the constant and sincere practice of these, we procure the peace, the security,
the Welfare and Prosperity of human Society; And finally, by the constant and
sincere practice of these, we adorn the Gospel of Christ, promote the Honor of
God, and show forth the praises of him who called us out of Darkness into his
Mavelous Light; for nothing does more convincingly manifest and publish to
the World the Honorable Notions we entertain of God, the Purity and Power of
our Christian Faith, than a Life employed and spent in these works; for by this
we openly proclaim to the World, that we do not believe that a Holy and good
God can be pleased with any thing but Holiness and Goodness, or that any
Sacrifice can be so acceptable to him as the Imitation (according to our power)
of his Divine Perfections.

Besides these Duties common to all Christians, there are others which flow
from our distinct Professions and Callings; Every man's Calling, whether he be
a Pastor in the Church, or a Ruler or Officer in the State, whether he be a
Trader, Physician, etc. does more peculiarly exact some distinct kind of
Virtue; As Watchfulness in Pastors, Integrity in Rulers, Justice in Traders,
Tenderness in Physicians, and such like, and in all, Industry and Diligence:
Nor does it a little import the Honor of our Religion, and the welfare of
human Society, that every man do faithfully discharge the particular and
distinct Duty of his Calling; nor can he neglect it without involving himself
in the guilt of trampling underfoot the most powerful obligations; for this,
the abilities God endow's him with, this, the trust God commits to him; this,
the Dependencies others have reasonably fixed upon him; this, the general
Covenant supposed entered into by every Member of a Community, that he will be
useful and helpful in his place; this, the Interest of the public, and the
glory of God loudly calls and presses every man to; it being impossible, that
Decency and Order in human Affairs should be preserved, that the Beauty and
Harmony of Divine Providence should be maintained, that the mutual wants and
necessities of Mankind should be ministered to, and supplied, or the Honor of
God supported and upheld in the World, unless men be faithful in the discharge
of the Duties of their several Callings and Professions: This is that the
Apostle exhorts to, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Having then gifts differing according to
the Grace that is given to us, whether Prophecy, let us Prophecy according to
the Proportion of Faith; or Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering; or he that
teaches, on teaching; or he that exhorts, on Exhortation: He that rules,
let him do it with diligence The same Faithfulness and Diligence men are
elsewhere in Scripture exhorted to, in their secular and Profane Callings.

You see then what the works are which God prescribes us to walk in, namely,
the works of our general Callings, as we are Men and Christians; and the works
of our distinct Professions, as we are dedicated to different employments in
Church or State. You discern in the next place the natural Bent and Tendency of
these works toward the glorifying God on the Earth. This, then is the Post
which you are to make good; this is the station you are to fill; this is the
Province you are to adorn; you cannot otherwise acquit your selves with a good
Conscience toward God or Man. And hence it follows --

2dly. That the Faithful discharge of our Duty is the only Rational ground of
our Assurance toward God. It Is true and confessed on all hands, that the Death
and Merits of Christ is the great cause of our Peace and Reconciliation with
God; that through him, through him alone, all Christians are to expect the
pardon of their sins, and the acceptance of their performances; That when we
have done all, we are unprofitable Servants: And that the most unblameable and
pious Life that ever was yet led upon Earth (except that of Christ's himself)
could never be able to undergo the Test, the Trial of God's strict Judgment:
And therefore our Deceased Friend, notwithstanding the nature and number of his
good works not easily to be paralleled (though I wish they were) by many
Instances in this Age, gave us this short account of his Faith and Hope the day
before his Death, I trust in the mercy of God.

But though all this be true, it is all nothing to the point in hand; for though
Christ dyed for all, yet all have not a like or equal ground of Hope: Tho the
Death of Jesus be sufficient to atone for the sins of all, yet all are not
actually pardoned: The Question therefore is, what gives men a good Claim and a
just Title to the Benefits of Christ's passion; and what is the clearest proof
of the goodness of our Claim? and then nothing is more evident than that this
is a faithful discharge of the Duties of Life, a finishing the works God gives
us to do. These are the proper effects of saving Knowledge, and a saving Faith;
These are the very Essentials of Repentance toward God; These are the kindly
Operations of Love unfeigned; These are the proper tokens of the Divine
presence, and the Residence of God's Spirit within us; These lastly are the
natural and genuine fruits of an enligthned understanding, and renewed mind:
These therefore are the best proofs and evidences of our claim to all the
Benefits of Christ's Death and Merits, and consequently the most Rational
Foundation of our Peace and Comfort in our Latter end. This is evident from the
Examples of all Righteous and good men, whose Comfort in Death is wont to be
proportiond to the Piety and Sincerity of their Lives; hence (not to multiply
Instances) that of Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth, there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me
at that day; and not to me only, but to them also that love his appearing. Here
we have the confident expectation of a Crown, but it is a Crown of
Righteousness; and if we examine the ground of this confidence of St Paul, it
is, that War which he prosperously waged, those conflicts which he had
successfully maintained against the World, the Flesh and the Devil; his
Indefatigable Perseverance in the Race of Virtue and Goodness set before him:
And finally, his steadfast and unshaken adherence to the Faith of Christ, in
despite of all the malice and fury, with which he was assaulted.

Thus have I briefly insisted on the words of my Text, as reserving room for
that which is a more fair and lively Comment on it, the Life of our deceased
Friend. And here in pursuance of my method, I should be obliged to begin with
an account of his behavior, in his particular profession; but having resolved
to say nothing, but what I either personally know, or have full and
unquestionable proof of, I will pass over this part of his Life, as that to
which, I am in a great measure a stranger; though I cannot forbear recommending
to you two Rules, which he thought necessary for the Christian Conduct of Trade
-- First, That Traders should carefully avoid the grasping at, and embracing so
much business, as should make their Trade encroach and entrench upon their
Religion, that they should not suffer their time and their hearts to be
engros'd by the love and pursuit of Worldly gain, to the neglect and ruin of
their Eternal Interest. -- Secondly, That they should propose and design an
Increase of their Charity in proportion to the Increase of their Wealth. And
now I proceed to the Life of our departed Friend, with regard to the general
Obligations he lay under as Man and Christian, wherein we meet with these two
things considerable, His Religion toward God, and his Charity toward Man.
These two divided and shared his whole Life between them, there being very few
Actions of it which might not be referred to the one or other, as the source
and Principle of them.

First, Of his Religion toward God. This was that to which he dedicated and
devoted himself betimes; He remembered his Creator in the days of his Youth; Nor
was he more early than constant in this, for he persisted steadfast in it to the
end; his Religion had no Interruption, no Intermission; I could never find that
there was any the least period of his Life, which he abandoned and gave up to
an Indulgence of sin and folly. It Is true, as you all know, he was sometime
misled in point of Judgment; but it is as true that under all the changes of
Times and Opinions, he retained his Sincerity and his Zeal: An Opinion of
greater strictness of Life, and a more lively relish and savor of spiritual
things amongst those of the separation first tempted him out of the bosom of
our Church: and a deep sense of the manifold Impieties and dreadful mischiefs
which attended separation first moved him to return to us; for this raised many
scruples and perplexities in him, and made him reasonably doubt that God could
not be the Author of that way. The method he afterward took for a full and
just Information of himself; namely, impartial Examination of our best
writings, conference with our Ablest men, together with incessant prayers to
God for the Illumination of his Spirit, the time and manner of his Return, his
open acknowledgment of his error, his public profession of Repentance, his
solemn and earnest Invitation of others to return to the paths of Truth and
Peace, and his successful Industry in recovering those whom he had been
Instrumental to pervert, sufficiently demonstrate the Sincerity and Integrity
of his heart: And those two excellent Treatises he has writ for the disabusing
those of the separation, have made an abundant Compensation for the Errors he
was betrayed into through frailty and weakness of Judgment.

But I come now to his Religion, such as it was since I knew him; and so I Will
say something of his own personal behavior toward God, and of his zeal to
propagate the fear of God among others.

As to his own behavior, the Character of the Godly man in the Psalmist was
truly his. Blessed is the man that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly,
nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.
But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day
and night, Psalm. 1.1, 2. He was a man that did abominate all Company wherein
any thing was either said or done to the disparagement of Virtue, or Dishonor
of Religion: He was so far from partaking in the guilt of any such thing, that
he never wanted the courage to reprove and rebuke it: And as all filthy and
sinful Communication was an Abomination, so all trifling and unprofitable
Communication was a burden to his Soul: And therefore it was, that his
Conversation was reduced within so narrow a compass, that he had very few
Confidents and Intimates, and very little Company besides that of his near
Relations and the Poor; this he was with regard to Negative Righteousness. As
to positive Righteousness, it may be truly said of him, that his delight was in
the Law of the Lord, whether this be to be inferred from meditation or
practice, this could not but appear to every one that conversed with him, for
he was richly furnished with Scripture Knowledge, he had treasured up the
richest Portions of Divine Writ, he had digested them into nourishment and
strength, and he was grown so familiarly acquainted with them, that there was
no Doctrine of Faith, or Duty of Practice, for which he could not readily urge
several the most pertinent Texts of Scripture, and not only cite the words, the
Chapter, the verse, but give a very Rational account of the Spirit and design
of them, and of their coherence with the Context. But his Religion, though it
was, as it ought, begun and founded in Knowledge, yet it did not, like that of
many men, terminate and end in it too, but was perfected and finished in
Practice He was wont to place all Religion in three things, Contemplation,
Adoration and Imitation.

As to the first, that of Contemplation, which is to the other two, like Oil to
Flame that nourishes and supports it: You may ghess by his Knowledge in Divine
things, that he was no stranger to it. However one thing there is which
deserves to be recommended to your Imitation, which is this; after long
experience, his Soul was grown weary of fruitless Speculations and Barren
Controversies, and his Meditations were of late wisely confined to these
Excellent Subjects, the purity and holiness of God, the riches of his Love and
goodness to mankind manifested in Jesus, and the blessedness of a future state,
into which last, he was very lately more particularly and Industriously
inquisitive, beginning several discourses with me on that Subject, and carrying
'em on with no little Pleasure and Satisfaction.

As to Adoration, he complained, I confess to me, that of late he could not put
up his Petitions with that Vigor and Importunity, with that close Application
and Intention of Spirit which he had formerly done; but withal he added, that
as to one part of Adoration that of Praise and Thanksgiving, his Soul did
abound in that, and he ever found himself exalted and lifted up in that
Exercise. This part of Adoration he was wont to account as a maintaining
Communion with the Heavenly Inhabitants, and a joining with the Church
triumphant in their Hallelujahs. Upon which ground, as also because the purpose
and devotion of his heart toward God in respect of his Faith, Love, and
Obedience continued steadfast and unmovable, I was inclined to impute the
Alteration he complained of, not to any abatement of his sincerity or zeal, but
to the heaviness of his Age, and the Decay of his Spirits.

As to Imitation of God, he conceived that to consist mainly in doing good, of
which I shall say something presently under the head of Charity, having first,
according to the Order I proposed, taken notice of his zeal in propagating the
fear of God amongst others, which was no less eminent in him than the Piety of
his own Demeanor toward God. He never let slip any opportunity either of
reproving and discountenancing vice, or of preaching up and recommending
virtue, and this he did with that gravity and authority, and with that Goodness
and Charity, with that Evidence of Scripture backed with strength of Reason and
Experience, that he seldom missed of doing some good by it. He was extremely
Solicitous to instruct Youth in the Principles of our Religion, for which
purpose he had a Catechism of his own composing containing the grounds of our
Christian Faith, which he did industriously imprint not only on the memories,
but judgments and hearts of young people he did often inculcate the necessity
and usefulness of Writing Sermons, and repeating em at home; he did often
bewail the Corruption of Conversation, and recommend the advantage of gracious
and good Discourses in our daily and familiar Intercourse with one another: he
was zealous for the observation of Family Duties, and in all this was eminently
exemplary himself: His Resolution was that of Joshua, Chap. 24.15. As for me, I
and my House will serve the Lord. Nor can it be unknown to many here how
successful he was in this, what a spirit of Religion and Goodness reigned in
his Family, and what lasting impressions of both, his endeavors made in his
Children; and were it not that I should oppress their Modesty, and incur (it
may be) an imputation of flattery which I detest and scorn, I would insist more
largely upon this Topic, as a Noble encouragement to the watchfulness and
Industry of Fathers and Masters over their Children and Families: from this his
Charity to the Soul, I proceed.

2ly. To that which relates to the External state of man; this was the second
thing proposed to be spoken to, after his Religion toward God, His Charity
toward man. This was that in which he conceived the Imitation of God most
properly to consist, he was always wont to have in his Mouth that of the
Prophet Jeremy, But let him that glories glory in this, that he understands
and knows me that I am the Lord which exercise Loving kindness, Judgment and
Righteousness in the Earth; for in these things I delight, says the Lord, Jer.
9.24. This therefore was the Virtue wherein he was Eminent and Exemplary; to
this he so wholly gave up his Heart and his Life, that I may safely say, he did
in some degree renounce his own business and his own Interest, that he might
with less distraction and better success attend the Concerns of the poor and
miserable. It Is true, (that I may her anticipate the Objection of some sort of
men) the Charities he undertook and engaged himself in, were too many and too
great to be carried on upon his own single stock or particular fund; he had
therefore assistance many ways; and much from many good men, I believe, here
present: but it is as true too, that he was not only a faithful Steward and
dispenser of other men's Bounty, but also bountiful himself even to the
diminution of his estate. To go on therefore to the point, several Hundreds of
Prisoners were by him, with great travail and expense set free; Nay, Prisons
themselves were set free from some oppressions and cheats that had obtained in
them, and rendered more hospitable and tolerable to the miserable Inhabitants
Fees being reduced to a Lower rate, and Maintenance and Provision for Prisoners
much better settled: several entangled estates were by his care, prudence and
labor cleared and preserved: Many desolate Orphans found in him the tenderness
and compassion of a Father, and many desolate Widows the Care and Protection of
a Husband: How tender and liberal he was to very many Relations that stood in
need of him, is well known to many here. Finally, such Numbers of Poor were
relieved by him, that he was continually thronged by flocks of his Clients, (as
he called them) and he could scarce pass any street where the Blessings of some
one or other succored by him, did not light upon him. Nor did his Charity
exert it self only in the Relief of the poor and needy, but also in ministering
to every sort of necessity and misery of mankind; he comforted the afflicted,
rescued the oppressed, advised and counseled the Ignorant, and subdued the
Obstinate by the sweetness of his address, by the meekness of Reason, and an
extraordinary Spirit of Religion, which discovered it self in all his
Discourses: In Sum, what Job said of himself, may be with truth applied to this
good man. I delivered the poor that cried, and the Fatherless and him that had
none to help him: the blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me;
and I caused the Widows heart to sing for joy. I put on Righteousness, and it
clothed me; My judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem: I was Eyes to the Blind,
and Feet was I to Lame; I was a Father to the poor, and the cause which I knew
not, I searched out, and I brake the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the Spoil
out of his Teeth, Job 29.11, 12, etc. Here I should have concluded with this
general account, were there not in his Charity three things so eminently and
peculiarly remarkable, that they deserve never to be forgot, his Meekness, his
Industry, and his Delight in doing good.

First. His Meekness. He had a Text to this purpose which he did often repeat,
Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine Ear to the Poor, and to give him a
friendly answer with Meekness, Ecclus. 4.8. And he lived up to this Rule; no
sourness or churlishness of Speech, no impatience or insolence of Behavior did
ever imbitter his Alms or Relief to the needy: Charity was not a greater
Ornament to Him, than his Sweetness and Meekness was to his Charity: He would
often hear not only tedious and impertinent, but also rude and passionate
discourses, with matchless Patience and Goodness, having regard to the
miseries, not the frailties of those who addressed themselves to him.

Secondly, His Industry. He had often in his Mouth that of the Psalmist,
Blessed is he that considers the Poor, and that of Job just now cited, The
cause that I knew not, I searched out: And accordingly he did with
indefatigable patience sound the depths, and fathom the bottom of every cause;
and when he did with great solicitude and earnestness of mind, study, contrive
and consult what method was most likely to prove effectual for the redress of
the miserable; and when he had fixed upon it, he set his heart so much upon the
accomplishment of his design, that there were seldom, if ever, any difficulties
so great, which he did not one way or other remove or surmount: And he never
thought much of the time or Travail which he bestowed thus: So intent was he
upon the excollent works of Charity, that he pursued them panting, and almost
breathless; and I have sometimes heard him regret the weakness and Infirmity of
his Age, and express his Fear, lest he should live to those years, wherein,
through defect of strength, he might be utterly useless. Indeed, his decayed
body was not at length able to undergo all the drudgery which so many and
considerable designs of Charity did require; and therefore, for several his
last years, he maintained a Servant on purpose to receive and execute his
Directions

One passage under this head I forgot in the Pulpit, and it deserves not to be
omitted in the Press, which is, that he was often advised and pressed to go
into the Country for his health sake; against this, he urged many scruples,
which though they appeared not to others of sufficient weight, yet he could
never bring his mind to it; What shall my Poor then do? said he, it is even best
for me to dye in my Station and in my Employment.

Such was his Vigor, such his Industry. And God was pleased to bless him with
suitable success; so that it is not easy to express his Felicity in mollifying
the most obdurate Creditors, in reducing them to terms of Moderation and
Charitable composition, in reconciling differences, and in sweetning the most
alienated and exasperated minds.

Thirdly, His Delight. It was one of his darling Propositions which he set a
high rate upon, That the Life of Man is to be estimated by the usefulness of
it; and accordingly that portion of his Life was always most delightful and
valuable to him, wherein he was most succefully active in some design of
Charity; his Spirit rejoiced within him, when God had blessed him in the
accomplishment of any good work; and I may confidently say, that never Soldier
entertained Victory, or Trader the increase of his Wealth with a truer
satisfaction than he did the successes of his Charitable Labors. I confess,
that taking notice, how much he was pleased with reflecting upon and repeating
himself several of his achievements, and with hearing the echoes and rebounds
of them from others, I grew sometimes jealous of him, lest Dead Flies should
corrupt this Ointment, and a silly affection of Praise and vain glory should
blast his Charity, and bereave him of the Fruit and Reward of it; but upon
narrower Inspection into the Root of this matter, I found that this sprung from
the pleasure he took in the Comfort and Happiness which he procured to others:
his pious Soul, as it did suffer in the misery, so did it exalt in the
Prosperity of his Brother, as he was ready to weep with those that wept, so
also to rejoice with those that rejoiced, and so much the more whenever God had
made him the Instrument of their Joy, so that it was not his own praise that
created his Satisfaction, but the good procured his Neighbor, and the honor
which did from thence redound to God.

Shall I now after all, add his Justice, Integrity and Diligence in all his
dealings and undertakings? His Simplicity and Candor, his Ingenuity, Meekness
and Humility in all his Conversation? His Plainess, Sincerity and Zeal toward
his Friend, showing it self especially in his tenderness for his Eternal
Interest? The sweetness and obligingness of his carriage, not toward his
Children only, but even toward the meanest that had any Relation to him? Shall
I add his Christian Moderation, and Comprehensive Charity, for all peaceful,
humble, and upright Christians of every persuasion? Shall I insist upon his
Purity and Heavenly mindedness, not only to an Indifference, but (I may almost
say) even Contempt for the things of this World, Wealth, Power, Honor, and the
Ostentation of Life? Shall I finally remember his Strictness and Sobriety,
which was such, that I had much ado to remove some Scruples out of his mind
about the use of such things, as I judged necessary to the support of his age,
and the maintenance of his health and strength? These and other Virtues of our
deceased Friend, I might insist upon, and in all this, I should have the
testimony and approbation of all that knew him: But the time would fail me, and
I have said enough, enough to do right in some measure to the memory of this
Excellent person, for the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance;
enough to administer unspeakable comfort and satisfaction to his Relations, and
enough, I hope, to excite and stir up all that hear me this day to the
Imitation of this good man's Virtues, especially when we shall add the
consideration in my text, that this will fortify us against all the Terrors
of Death; this will give us comfort and Assurance in the approaches of it. Then
shall we be able to assure our selves that we are the Children of God, when we
imitate his goodness, and rejoice, as he does, in the works of Mercy and
Charity: Then shall we be able to assure our selves that we are the true
followers of Jesus, when we are led by the same spirit, when we glorify God
upon Earth, and finish the works which he has given us to do: And then shall we
be able to lie down in the assured expectations of a blessed Resurrection. This
was the happy state of this excellent man; Death was his Meditation, Death his
Expectation; and when he met it, he met it with a cheerful and serene soul; the
Last words I had from him when I bid him my last farewell on Sunday, were, You
and I shall meet again in another World, I do not question it at all. Ah! that
we could all live so as to have no fears, no doubts about eternal Life when we
are come to dye! O think of the blessedness of such a state! and then remember
that this assurance arises from the conscience of a well spent Life, that
nothing but a faithful discharge of our stewardship can enable us to meet God
with comfort, and give us an Inheritance with Saints in Glory, and enrol us
amongst the Spirits of Just men made perfect.

FINIS.

