A brief ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS Against the Six Popish Priests, Condemned
for HIGH TREASON The 17th day of this instant January, 1679/80.
VIZ. Lionel Anderson, alias Munson. William Russel. George Parry. Henry
Starkey. Two Benedictine Monks, formerly tried with Wakeman. James Corker, and
Will. Marshal,


With whom was likewise tried Alexander Lumsdell, Who though he appeared to be
a Priest, yet being born in Scotland, he continues upon a Special Verdict.
The Heads of the Evidence against each of them, and their Defenses and
Behavior.
THere were Eight Priests in all brought down and Arraigned this day; but the
first, called David Joseph Kemish, being a very aged man, and appearing extreme
weak and ill, the Court upon his request was pleased; after he had pleaded Not
Guilty, to remit his Trial to another opportunity, when he might be better able
to make his defense.

The other Seven were Tried singly and successively one after the other, by one
Jury, consisting of persons of good worth, against whom none of them made any
Challenge or Exceptions. Corker and Marshal before they pleaded, insisted on
their former Trial, pretending they were then acquitted of all Treasons: but
the Court (many of the Judges, and particularly the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs
being present.) answered, That this was another sort of Treason, for which they
were not then questioned, so that this vain suggestion was overruled. They were
Indicted upon the Statute of 27 Eliz. to this effect: That being born in the
Kings Dominions, they had received Ordination from the Sea of Rome, and after
that came into and abided in the Kingdom, contrary to that Law which had made
that Offense High Treason.

The Kings Council opened the Indictments learnedly, and set forth the
necessity and just reason for making this Law, because of the many Treasons
practiced and promoted by Jesuits and Popish Priests against Queen Elizabeth;
and showed, that whoever does take Orders from Rome, does in effect renounce
his Allegiance to the King, for he thereby owns another Supreme Power, viz. the
Popes; which is such, according to the Doctrine of that damnable Church, that
he can excommunicate and depose the King, and absolve all Subjects from
Obedience to him.

The Evidence that appeared and were made use of, were Doctor Oats, Mr.
Bedloe, Mr. Dugdale, Mr. Prance, and Mr. Dangerfield.

The first that came upon his Trial, was Lionel Anderson, alias Munson, an
ancient man, and seeming to be sick; against him Three Witnesses swore, that
they had seen him officiate as a Priest, receive Confession, say Mass,
Consecrate and Administer the Eucharist, etc. and particularly Mr. Dangerfield
deposed, that while he was in the King's Bench for Debt, and this Anderson there
likewise a Prisoner, he told the Witness he had a Letter from the Lady Powis,
That the said Mr. Dangerfield should skower his Kettle, by which phrase; they
mean, Confess his sins; and that acordingly he did go to Confession with the
now Prisoner, and received the Sacrament, after which the Prisoner put him upon
Drinking hard with another person, to pump out some things for the invalidating
Mr. Bedloes Evidence; and Mr. Dangerfield being scrupulous so to do, lest he
should be drunk on the same day that he had received, this precious Father told
him, 'twas all one for that, he would give him leave to be drunk, since 'twas
for the good of the Cause.

Next Corker was brought on, against whom two of the Evidence testified, That
he had likewise officiated in the same manner at the Savoy, and seen him in his
Preaching Habit. 'Twas also proved that he had a Patent to be Bishop of London.

Against Mr. Marshal there was only Dr. Oats, that could swear that he had
heard him say Mass; yet Mr. Bedloe had seen him in his Habit, and when he put
it off, was told he was going abroad to receive Confessions: but to put the
matter out of doubt, it was proved by Two Witnesses, that when he was Tried for
the Plot, he owned himself in open Court to be a Priest; which though he now
denied, yet several of the Court well remembered it. This Gentleman as he had a
voluble Tongue, and affected Eloquence, took up much time with his Rhetorical
Harangues, and urged much his acquittal by the former Jury; whence he would
infer, that Dr. Oats and Mr. Bedloe were Perjured, in swearing they were
concerned in the Plot, when yet they were found Not Guilty; and that thence
they were never more to be counted credible Witnesses. But Mr. Justice
Pemberton took him up roundly for that saucy Reflection, telling him, A Witness
might give a just and true Evidence, and yet it might happen, a Jury not to
believe it; but God forbid thence the Witness should be censured as Perjured or
Invalid. The Prisoner likewise called their old Voucher Ellen Rigby, who said
she never saw Mr. Oats in the Savoy at the times he mentioned; which seemed
very little to the purpose, for he might be there and she not see him: besides,
they made a mighty stir, that Mr. Oats could not see them there at Mass,
because he was then but newly reconciled to their Church, and so it was not
likely they should trust him: but to that they were told, That in 1677. and
1678. they were not so very shy of saying Mass, or cautious who heard,
especially being a new Convert.

William Russel was used to harbor in Wildhouse, where 'twas proved that he
had said Mass, and at other places. His Vestments were likewise taken with him,
which at that time he owned to be his, as was sworn by the Honorable Sir
William Waller, though now his Fatherhood thought fit to tell a Lie, and disown
it.

George Parry was well known by several of the Witnesses to be a Priest, who
had been at Mass with him sundry times; and Mr. Prance was so well acquainted
with him, that he seized him long since the Discovery of the Plot in the
street; and he had indeed reason to remember him, for that he had dealt with
him in his Trade, bought silver boxes for Hallowed Oil, and other knacks of
him; and once sold him a Consecrated Chalice, by the same token he would not
let the Witness touch it, till he had broken off a piece of it, lest the Sacred
Vessel should be profaned whilst it was entire, by a Lay-mans handling.

Henry Starkey was a lusty ancient Gentleman, with but one Leg, the other being
lost, as he alleged, in the Kings service in the late Civil Wars. Though the
Witnesses named several places where they had heard him say Mass, he stiffly
denied it, and made solemn Imprecations that he was never at such places in his
life.

Alexander Lumsdell was a Friar, and Predicator-General of his Order. He was
proved as plain as the rest, to be a Priest; but by his voice and affirmation
it appearing probable that he was a Scotchman, and born, as he said, at
Aberdeen, it seemed a point of difficulty to the Court, whether he should come
within those words of the Statute, Born within the Queens Dominions, since at
that time Scotland was under another Monarch: and therefore it was thought fit
to direct the Jury to a Special Verdict. So that without Sentence, he must
remain so Convict till the Judges shall have determined the matter.

Their Defense in general appeared rather crafty than solid, allowing
themselves a liberty of denying the most apparent Truths; the main Plea of them
All being, That they were not proved Priests, because none of the Evidence were
by when they received Orders; but as to that the Court resolved them, that it
was enough that they had exercised those pretended sacred Offices, which none
but Priests in their Church are allowed to perform: For otherwise the Statute
were vain, and its Force wholly eluded; besides, some had confessed themselves
Priests, and the Orders of one had been seen by one of the Witnesses. Then they
all lay at catch about circumstances of time and place, wherein it was morally
impossible that the Evidence should be positive; or if they could have been so,
the Prisoners would have had some of their own Gang that, to serve their turns,
should have alleged they were then at other places. To this purpose one of
them produced two young Lads that affirmed very roundly, that the Prisoner was
from Christmas 1677, till Hollantide next, at such a place in the Country; that
they saw him every day, because he constantly dined at their house: Yet one of
these ill-tutor'd Youths that could name the year of our Lord so readily, being
asked how many years ago this was, could not tell; so that the Juggling was
apparent. Being further asked, whether they were sure they dined every day, and
particularly on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday, they answered affirmatively,
though it is well known no such thing is usual with Papists. They were very
frequent in Appeals to Heaven, and pawning their Salvation at random, on
trivial Circumstances, and things no way credible, their main design being to
scandalize the Evidence.

The Jury, after about a Quarter of an Hours Withdrawment, brought them in
Guilty: And thereupon the Six beforementioned being severally asked, What they
had to offer why Sentence should not pass; Anderson and Starkey pleaded their
former Loyalty and Services to the King, which Mr. Recorder promised to relate
to his Majesty. Marshal with a multitude of words cited the Lord Cook, to prove
Priesthood in itself no Crime; but was shown by the Court the Impertinency of
that Argument. He likewise insisted on the Kings Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience; but was answered, That of whatever force the same was, yet it was
never meant to extend to Popish Priests.

Thus after a full and fair hearing, Mr. Recorder in a grave and excellent
Discourse proceeded to pass the Sentence, usual in Cases of High Treason.

These were the Heads of this Days Transaction; which for the present may
satisfy people of the just and equal Proceedings of the Court. But for all
Particulars, we understand the whole Trials, exactly taken, will be made
Publicque by Authority, to which the more Curious are referred.

FINIS.

