AN ANSWER TO Mr. Hobbs HIS LEVIATHAN: WITH OBSERVATIONS, CENSURES, AND
CONFUTATIONS OF Diverse Errors, Beginning at the seventeenth Chapter of that
BOOK.

By William Lucy, Bishop of St. David's.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. and B. G. for Edward Man at the White Swan in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1673.

To the Reader.
READER,
BEfore you go further into this Treatise, I think it fit to premonish you of
three things. First, How it is writ. Secondly, Why by me. Thirdly, Why now put
out: Concerning the first, expect no other but to read the strongest Discourse
in Politiques, betwixt Mr. Hobbs and me, that ever was writ; for the Art of
Polity (being more properly signified by the name of Prudence) is always, by
those who writ of it, from Plato and Aristotle downward, until you come to the
very last, is naturally powdered with sentences, and interlarded with
Histories; for it being not a Science whose demonstrations come from necessary
causes, where posita causa most certainly follows the effect, or grant the
effect, you must own the cause from whence it came; but a prudence, which
disposes men to a wise conformity, not by the force of a necessary efficacy,
but by the persuasions which fear and love induce to, which are not necessary,
but arbitrary; men in the manage of such affairs, do most discreetly, when they
produce the sentences of wise men who have gone before, and by great
experience, found those sentences effectual in such occasions: and because
there is nothing new under the Sun, therefore Histories of our Forefathers, in
like conditions, are most excellent Guides for the prudent diposure of our
lives, who indeed do but repeat what they have done: but Mr. Hobbs, presuming
upon the greatness of his own wit, which indeed is great, (and it is a thousand
pities he bestowed it so ill) scorns to tread in beaten paths, and thinks by
the strength of his own fancies to make his feet leave such an impression, as
all others shall follow him, not he them. I must follow him, for whosoever is
to be confuted, must have it done out of his own Principles, and therefore I
fall upon him with only downright reasons; therefore if at any time my Pen has
dropped a sentence, or a story unawares, which was opposite to the business,
(which I believe is very seldom) I though it not worth the mending, but let it
pass: And so having showed the Reader why I writ so unpolitically of
Politiques, I pass to these and Advertisement.

The second Premonition is a question why I should write of this piece, and my
Answer is short, having spoke to the former part of his Leviathan, it was
proper for me not to step over this, but take him in order as he writes: But a
man may object, and some have objected that were acquainted with my
undertakings, that this is not so proper f^r a Bishop (whose time should be
taken up with his Profession, which is Divinity) to meddle with such State
affairs. I answer, that Mr. Hobbs his writings are so interlined with so much
Heterodox (shall I say) or Heretical and Atheistical Divinity, that it befits
none so well as a Divine t^ meddle with them. And again, I said, that although
there is a Generation that think we should be Fools in anything else, yet let
them know, that if so, we must be Fools in that likewise, as well as other
things: for Theologia Dininity, is not only Scientia, Knowledge, but as many of
the Schoolmen, Mr. Hobbs h^s good friends, speak, it is Sapientia, we may
render it in English Wisdom, which is the highest knowledge, whose principles
are the highest and first Rules which habitually are imprinted in man, and
whose conclusions are the premises of other inferior Sciences: And they say
moreover, that this which is called Scholastica Theologia, School Divinity,
differs from Natural only in this, that it adds one principle to the other,
which is the Faith in the revealed Will of God, which I am forced to fight for
in this Treatise with Mr Hobbs: And because this is the nature of this great
Wisdom of Divinity, it may prescribe the Rules to all Sciences and Prudencies,
and all conditions of men, from the King to the Cobbler, how they may live and
demean themselves virtuously: But besides this, let those men consider, that
there is one piece of a Divines study (without which he will be lame and very
deficient) which must needs teach him a great deal more of this Prudence, then
I have need to use in this Discourse, unless he be a very dull man, which is
Ecclesiastical Story, wherein he shall find such acts and subtilties practiced
b^ Heretics and Schismatics, (whom I have always observed to be more crafty,
though not wiser then the Orthodox part) such applications to Emperors, to
Emperesses, to Favorites at Court, such cloaking evil intentions with pious
pretenses, such artificial slandering the persons of their Adversaries, that he
cannot but know the polity, yea the base crafts of men, and knowing them to be
such, may the better learn to avoid those snares which have catched men
heretofore, and will (if not prevented) do so again; yea shall find that many
times the wisdom of learned and pious Bishops have been the prop and stay of
both the Empires, East and West; and which is more, even in the practick peace
of Polity, you shall find Bishops execute them in the most excellent manner for
wisdom and courage, that ever any men did: I write not this to invite men of
that condition to muddle themselves with the trivial affairs of this world, no,
as S. Paul to the Philippians 3. 20. Our conversation is in heaven. The word
which we render Conversation, is in the Original (...), which is excellently
noted by Beza, that it is that kind of Conversation, which agrees to the
Polity, of such as are Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem: So that although
the Apostle aff^rms this of all men who aspire to Christian perfection, that
such men should live and converse in that Polity, which conduces to the
establishment of that spiritual society, which are parts of that Kingdom, yet
in a more especial manner, it agrees to them who are exalted to that high
dignity in that society, that the Polity of their abilities should be applied
to the advance of that Kingdom; and in order to that, when the benefit or ill
of a sublunary King^om or Commonwealth shall conduce to that Kingdom in heaven,
it will become such men to interpose their counsels in a way most proper for
them to employ themselves in: But my intent in writing this is to show, that a
poor old man, sitting in his Study, and principally applying that study to
Divinity, may easily by that study give advice and admonition to greater doubts
then are in his Politiques, which indeed are gross mistakes, from the first
corner stone he laid in the Foundation, to the top-tile in the Roof.

A SECOND PART OF Observations, Censures, and Confutations OF DIVERSE ERRORS IN
Mr. Hobbs HIS LEVIATHAN. Beginning at the seventeenth Chapter of that Book.
CHAP. 1.
The Introduction to the whole Discourse.
I Have briefly touched the chief heads of his first Part. And am now arrived
at his second, part, which is entitled of Commonwealths, and this part begins
at the seventeenth Chapter of the whole Book superscribed of the causes,
generation and definition of a Commonwealth.

He begins with the final cause most rightly, which is causa causarum, and sets
the whole at work. And I find no fault with what he writes concerning that.

Secondly, I approve what he says at the bottom of the 85. page, That small
numbers joined together cannot give them security to live peaceably. Small is a
Relative, small in respect of their Neighbors, of whose injury they may justly
be afraid, unless they are supported with Natural, or Artificial
Fortifications, or their number may be equalled by the weight of the internal
virtue, or gallantry of the Inhabitants; some way or other it must be made up.

Thirdly, I approve what he says, page 86. That be the People never so
numerous (I may add or strong) yet if their actions are directed by their own
particular Judgments and particular appetites, they can expect thereby no
Defense, nor Protection. His Reasons likewise I approve.

Fourthly, I censure not his Conclusion in the same page; That the Government
of their Good, must not be for one Life or Battle, but Perpetual.

Fifthly, He makes a very Ingenious Discourse upon the difference betwixt those
sociable Creatures, as Bees, and Ants, (which Aristotle calls Political) and
has very handsome applications concerning them, to the middle of the 87. page;
but then I must begin to examine him with less approbation: In the Margent
there is noted, the generation of a Commonwealth, and it begins thus.

CHAP. II. SECT. I.
This Generation censured, first from that Word only, which cannot be true.
THE only way to Erect such a common Power, as may be able to defend them from
the Invasion of Foreigners, and the Injuries of one another; and thereby to
secure them in such sort, as that by their own Industry, and by the fruits of
the Earth they may nourish themselves and live contentedly, is to confer all
their Power and strength upon one man, or upon one Assembly of men, that may
reduce all their wills by plurality of voices unto one will, which is as much
as to say to appoint one man or Assembly of men to bear their person, and every
one to own and ackn^wledg himself to be Author of whatsoever he that so bears
their person, shall act or cause to be acted in these things, which concern the
common peace, and safety, and therein to submit their wills every one to his
will and their Judgment to his Judgment. Thus far he, A bold and strange
assertion in that severe Language; (the only way) what? (Mr. Hobbs) no other?
Certainly there have been many Commonwealths in the World which have lived
peaceably and quietly, and enjoyed the fruits of their Labors, and have
abounded with all the comforts of their association; And yet I dare speak it
with confidence there was never any thus generated, that is to appoint one man
or Assembly to bear their Person, and to allow themselves to be Authors of his
Actions, to submit their Wills to his Will, and their Judgments to his Judgment.

SECT. II.
A Supreme cannot receive his Auth^rity from the People.
1. COnsider here (for fear I may forget it hereafter) that the King or
Supreme, by him, is but the Person (as he most improperly styles him) and they
(the Multitude) the Authors of what he does; so that he acts only by their
Authority (as you may see those words expounded in the 16. Chap. page 8^. and
82.) so that by him the People give the Supreme Authority, which is a mighty
diminution to all Supreme Authority, and indeed an Incroachment upon the
Praerogative of God, by whom (and whom alone) Kings reign, and Princes bear
rule; so that as we rightly say, that all Authority in a Kingdom is derived
from the King, who is the Fountain of all Authority he makes a circle in it,
and says, the head of this Fountain is derived from the People.

SECT. III.
It is impossible they should do it.
BUT let us examine the possibilities of it, Nihil dat quod non habet, either
formaliter, eminenter or Virtualiter. Nothing can give what it has not
Formally, Eminent^y, or Virtually; Certainly neither of these can be affirmed
of the People, if they have it any of these ways it must be Conjunctim or
divisim, either as severed or conjoined; either as distinct, or united, but
neither of these: if severed, then either every man had this Power, or a few,
or one alone; the first branch of this Division will abide the chief Dispute
with him, because he has said before, That every man has right to every
thing, to all things, to all riches, persons, wives, lives, what you will
before they are covenanted into a body, this has been confuted heretofore, yet
this very occasion will be able to show the absurdity of it further.

SECT. IV.
The Multitude cannot make a Leviathan, because he had all their rights before.
FOr which let us lay a Foundation, suppose this Kingdom were unsettled, and yet
now endeavoring to be settled, and all the People being free and and without
Covenant, have right to all the things in the World, these are met together to
choose a Leviathan (as he terms him) for settling their beings most securely. In
this Election what did they give him? you will say the Authority over them all,
that is nothing; he had that before by the Law of Nature: I but he will say he
has upon this Election their Rights; Their Rights are no more than what he had
before; he had by nature right to slay, take, make use of any thing conducing
to his contentment; though they were a hundred Millions, they can give him no
more than what he has even by Nature. I but he will reply he had Right before,
but now he has Power; I answer, the Question here is not about Power, but
Right; Power may be in Rebels, Usurpers, but not Right, that is only in the
lawful Sovereign; but suppose we should examine his Power by these preceding
directions: I doubt we shall find it most weak and unconstant.

SECT. V.
Their Power is most uncertain.
FOR if from the People they will vary with their unsettled resolutions; for
they who made the first, being once taught that the Right of making Kings is in
them, will easily be persuaded that the unmaking is in their hands likewise,
and reassume that Power again: Take that most abundant instance which that
unhappy time, we lately lived in, affords us, when Mr. Hobbs was first
undertaken by me, when this Doctrine of his was infused into the Kingdom, they
altered and changed the Government four or five times in a moment. A very short
space of time, and none of those Leviathans lacked the assents of the People,
who at the least pretended with the highest protestations, that men could make,
that they would live and dye with them, in the maintenance of their Rights; and
yet in one six weeks they made likewise such another protestation to the next
Usurpers. Here you may discern how weak a Foundation this popular Covenant
yields to his Leviathan, nor need he b^ast more of the strength, than the Right
of his Authority, for certainly any buzze put into the Peoples head of
misgovernment (which no Government can be free from in the execution) will put
Seditious Spirits into them; and men who love to fish in troubled Waters may
with ease raise these Rumors: so that it seems to me, to appear that such a
tottering and unconstant foundation as the Peoples universal Covenant, should
not be the support of such a mighty structure, as is a Leviathan, which should
be perpetual. What I have said of the whole, may more abundantly be affirmed of
any part, because they will be as unconstant as the whole, or more.

SECT. VI.
The People cannot give Power conjunctim.
AND for what was interposed of the People Conjunctim, is impossible (according
to his Principles); for there can be no Conjunction before this Covenant, they
are according to his Doctrine at War one with another until that; And it is a
strange thing to imagine that so many several heads contending one with another
about Superiority, and the engrossing the World to their particular Interests,
should concenter with one mind, to the exaltation of the same Person or Persons
to whom they would submit themselves, and their conditions by a total desertion
of them both. Nay indeed a man cannot do it, for it being Jus natural a
natural Right, as he himself has expressed before, Chap. 14. page (65) and
(66) (to which I have spoke already something) he cannot lay down his Natural
Right, until he lay down his Nature: and therefore indeed he cannot, by this
Doctrine, give away his Right to be King, to any other: but if he can divest
himself of his Nature, yet he in express terms, says, That a man cannot give
over his Right to resist by force, wounds, and imprisonments with which he
cannot live contentedly: and may not the same be said of a Kingdom? perhaps
that man cannot live contentedly without being King; surely then it is not
probable to think that men will so put off their Jura naturalia; neither indeed
can they do it by his Polity.

SECT. VII.
The manner of the Resignation makes it impossible.
BUT then consider the Resignation it self; it is far more unreasonable to
think that reasonable men should do it. Consider the particulars; To own all
Leviathans actions as if every particular of the People were Author of it; To
submit their Judgments to his Judgment, their Wills to his Will. I thought it
had been obedience enough for Subjects to submit their persons to his
Government, but to own all his actions which may be wicked was not to be
exacted from any Subject; yea, if we will allow his Doctrine, delivered before,
it is worse; for then we must be Authors of his actions; he but our person
employed in them (as he speaks page (82) and therefore not his own. I but says
he, in order to their peace. I cannot assent to that, for many Supreams have
done horrid things in order to the public Peace, as Murders, Sacriledges,
oppressions, to which although my person may submit, yet neither shall my
Judgment approve, nor my will consent; for although when he does wickedly, I
will not do so too, and Rebel; yet neither will I by consent to them justify
his Acts by conspiring in his sin: his Virtues shall not save me, and, I am
confident, his vices cannot damn me, which yet they would, if I assented to
them. I go on with him; This is (says he) more than consent or Concord, it is
a real Union of them all in one and the same person, made by Covenant of every
man with every man in such manner, as if every man should say to every man, I
authorize and give up my Right of Governing my self to this man, or assembly of
men on that Condition, that thou give up thy Right to him, and Authorize all
his Actions in like manner:) If this be the only way to live in Peace, I choose
War, which is the hatefullest thing in the World, but Sin. But this last Phrase
of Authorizing all his Actions whom I cannot rule nor control, nay perhaps not
come at to Petition, is such a forsaking of Humanity, and contempt of the
glorious means of Salvation, as no man, with a face of Piety, dare affirm to be
fit, I shall handle these things more fully shortly.

CHAP. III. SECT. I.
This cannot be the only way to establish a Government.
THIS done (says he) the multitude so united in one Person is called a
Commonwealth, in Latin Civitas. (Thus he.)

But if this only make a Commonwealth, or Civitas, there was never any in the
World, nor ever will be, as shall be showed more largely hereafter. More true
is that which follows, This is the Generation of that great Leviathan: I mean
his Book; for to vent this extremly wicked folly he wrote this Book; and except
in this Book, a Commonwealth was never called Leviathan: a name from which
never man expected good, he proceeds; (or rather to speak more Reverently) of
that mortal God to which we owe, under the immortal God, our peace and safety.
I answer we owe him nothing; there was never such a Power Erected: I shall omit
what follows in that Chapter, and come to his 18. Chapter which is page 88.

CHAP. IV. SECT. I.
His definition of a Commonwealth disproved, first because not practicable.
HE begins with a definition of a Commonwealth by Institution thus, A
Commonwealth is then said to be instituted, when a multitude of men do agree,
and Covenant, eveevery one, with every one, that to whatsoever man or assembly
of men, shall be given by the greater part the Right to present the Person of
them all (That is to say, to be their Representative;) every one, as well he
that voted for it, as he that voted against it, shall Auth^rize all the Actions
and Judgments, of that man, or assembly of men in the same manner, as if they
were his own, to the end, to live peaceably amongst themselves, and be
protected against other men.

This is but a Dream of his, there was never such a thing, nor is it
practicable; this Book was writ in English, and therefore proper for English
men: suppose then we were in the first State, without a Sovereignty, we are
none of the greatest Commonwealths in the World, yet is it possible that here
in this Kingdom there should convene such Multitudes of men, such an
Universality as by him is required to make this Covenant, which he labors to
prove in his second part De Corp^re Politi. Cap. 3. Numb. 2. because says he,
there, Nor can an action be Attributed to the Multitude, unless every man's
hand, and every man's will (not so much as one excepted) have concurred thereto.
It seems he would have it in writing, that he requires every man's hand to be
put to it. And so likewise Number. 3. The first thing therefore they are to do is
expressly every man to consent to do something; by which something he
understands this project of Leviathan, so that it is evident he means every
particular, singula generum, which is an imposible fiction; the very meeting is
impossible. And then that all these who meet with so many self ends; and
particular Interests, and so many weak capacities should consent in any thing
is most incredible. I will give him all the Scope I can, he may say that they
may meet, as they do to elect Knights for the Parliament, they may meet in
Shires and choose Representatives which may act for them; I could ask who must
divide those Shires? that must be done by a Supreme. Then consider, if that
should be granted, they must choose little Leviathans first, which must
represent these their particular Shires, before the great one is chosen: And
then, consider this has a great unfitness, if not an impossibility with it,
which was foreseen by our State, and therefore only such men who had forty
shillings freehold were adjudged fit to have voices in these Elections: which
heretofore was a very considerable Estate; and yet I believe scarce ever half
of those met at any Election. But then let us look about and we shall find much
the greater company without the lists of that condition, besides Women and
Children, which have as great Interests in the Commonwealth as others. So that
this fancy of his, was not only not practiced, but not practicable in such a
Kingdom as this of ours; When men write Romances they should write things
possible to be, and then they are useful to the Reader, for they are of such
things which a man's life may meet with, at some time or other; but impossible
fictions are such as can be profitable to no man, and therefore it was a vain
thing for him to deliver such a conceit, and not vain only but ill, to deliver
it in such a peremptory Rule as to make it seem the only way of Instituting a
Sovereign.

SECT. II.
Mr. Hobbs his definition inconsistent with Reason*
BUT let us proceed, and we shall find it appear by every word more
inconsistent with reason. Can a man think that men, such numbers, would ever
consent so fully to forsake themselves and their own reason and wills, as to
submit themselves either to man or men in such an ample manner as to esteem his
Princes Judgment or his Will, for his own. In that great height of
Infallibillity to which the Pope in many men's Judgments is attained, they put
the Pope in Cathedra when they say he is Infallible, and afterward dispute
what that Cathedra is: But out of this Cathedra he may err in his Judgment, and
they must not approve of that, he may sin with his will and they must not
consent to that. But Mr. Hobbs confines his Leviathan to no Chair, but
absolutely pronounces him free from Error both in Judgment and Will. Nay that
is not all, but we must allow, yea authorize his Errors in both; and this is
the Foundation upon which all his Politiques are built; by which let a man
endeavor all virtue and Religion in his own person, yet he may perpetrate all
the horrid villainies in the World in another person, whose actions he is bound
to Authorize, and then, by them, and for them perish everlastingly, which I am
persuaded not only no Christian, but no Turk, Mahemetan, Indian, the most
barbarous persons in America, or any unknown Country can be induced to do, and
yet this by him is made the groundwork of all Politic Government.

SECT. III.
Right not derived by this supposed Institution from the Consent of the People.
HE proceeds (from this Institution of a Commonwealth are d^rived all the
rights and faculties of him or them on whom Sovereign Power is conferred by the
consent of the People Assembled).

To this I have answered that there was never any such thing, and therefore no
right, or faculty can be derived from hence, nor indeed ever will be: Ex nihilo
nihil fit, that which has no being, cannot cause any thing. Nay, I may say
further, that there was never any Power conferred by the People (of which I
expect an opportunity to speak more fully hereafter) for although we may find
Commonwealths altered and set up by the Rebellious force, and violence of
great numbers of the people, yet those who got the Sovereignty at such times,
had it not by any such Institution, as is here described by the peoples
authorizing that Person to these Actions he is exalted to; but from the Peoples
subserviency obtained by his wit or fraud to his great Ambition. Here I might
put an end to his Politiques with a little enlargement upon this Subject, for
the Foundation being destroyed the building must fall. But I will touch upon
his Inferences, which will make this Foundation appear more weak.

CHAP. V. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his first Inferrence affirmed, the Sovereign absurdly termed the
person of the People.
HE first infers that (because they Covenant, it is to be understood that they
are not bound by a former Covenant to any thing repugnant thereunto) This must
be most true, not of this Covenant only, but all other Covenants. No man can
alie^^te any Estate twice without his leave to whom he alienated it first; and
so where one has disposed his allegiance to one, he cannot take it away and
dispose it to another afterward. I like the conclusion that follows also thus.
(And consequently they that have already instituted a Commonwealth being
thereby bound by Covenant to own the Actions and Judgments of one, cannot
lawfully make a New Covenant amongst themselves, to be obedient to any other,
in any thing whatsoever, without his permission. And therefore they who are
Subject to a Monarchy, cannot without his leave cast off Monarchy, and return
to the confusion of a disunited multitude; nor transfer their Person from him,
that bears it, to another man, or Assembly of men. This has truth with it,
out of the grounds formerly spoke of. But this senseless name of calling their
Sovereign, their pers^n, or to found the Allegience to their Sovereign upon
their Covenant, which never was nor could be, is to make it extremely weak; and
his reason is most illogical and without force, (for says he) They are bound
every man to every man, to own, and be reputed Auth^r of all, that he that
already is their Sovereign, shall do, and judge fit to be done: so that one man
dissenting, all the rest should break their Covenant made to that one man which
is injustice) I do not understand the consequence of this Argument, That if one
man dissent all the rest should break the Covenant made to that man, for his
dissenting may break his Covenant, but why it should make them break their
Covenant is not vissible to me.

SECT. II.
His expression, of giving the Sovereignty to him that bears their person,
further censured.
HIS following discourse is not more reasonable than this (And they have also
every man given the Sovereignty to him that hears their person; And therefore
if they desp^se him, they take from him that which is his own, and so again it
is Injustice.) That phrase, (Given him the Sovereignty who bears their person)
is not rational, for according to his own Doctrine, it is the same thing to be
Soveraigh, and bear their person; if he had spoke logically according to his
doctrine, his phrase should be who is their person, for so he makes the
Sovereign to be the person of the Commonwealth, not to bear it, which is
another thing. But then mark you what a slight thing he makes Rebellion only a
little Injustice, for so that word. Injustice may extend it self, to any the
least Injustice, He takes that from him that was his; a poor piece of business
every little Theft does so.

SECT. III.
The irrationality of Mr. Hobbs his arguing further discovered. Covenants may
be made immediately with God.
HE adds another reason very weakly; Besides says he, If he that attempteth to
depose his Sovereign be killed or punished by him for such attempts, he is
author of his own punishment, as being by the Institution, Author of all his
Sovereign shall do. And because it is Injustice for a man to do any thing for
which he may be punished by his own Authority, he is also upon that title
unjust). Certainly (Reader) you may wonder at the strange unreasonableness of
this Arguing. This proves by his supposed Institution no faultiness in this
Treason; for suppose a Sovereign shall punish a Subject for speaking truth, he
does it according to his institution by the Authority given by that Subject,
and that Subject is Author (according to his Doctrine) of killing himself for
Truth, as well as for Treason, because he is Author of all his Actions, and
there is as much injustice in the one as in the other; especially considering
another Inference, which he makes, and will be discoursed on hereafter; That a
Supreme can do no Injustice. But he adds not another argument, but an answer to
another Objection. I will speak to that, his words ^re (And whereas some men
have pretended for their disobedience to their Sovereign, a new Covenant, not
made with men, but God, this is also unjust: for there is no Covenant with God,
but by mediation of some body that represents God's Person, which none does,
but God's Lieutenant, who has the Sovereignty under God. But this pretense of
Covenant with God, is so evident a lie, even in the pretenders own Consciences,
that it is not only an act of an unjust, but also of a vile, and unmanly
disposition) Thus He. This I yield unto so far, that it is sinful and wicked to
engage in any Covenant with God against his Sovereign, but his means of
obtaining it, I deny. He scarce ever speaks or names God, but with an Error: in
particular here; what a false affirmation is this to say, That there is no
Covenant with God, but by mediation of some body who represents Gods person,
which none does but Gods Lieutenant who has the Sovereignty under God.
Certainly a man may make Covenant with God, betwixt God and his own Soul, in
private, in his Chamber; before men, in Company; diverse are recorded in
Scripture, and pious men often use it, and practice it accordingly, and when
these Covenants are holy and devout God blesses them, and those persons are
obliged to those duties. But it is true in the case in which he instanceth all
such Covenants are wicked in the making, and most abominable in the
performance; for it is a Covenant with God in himself, to destroy him in his
deputy; a Covenant with God in Heaven, to oppose him on Earth; the iniquity
lies not in this, That the Sovereign is the peoples Person: for then the
height of the sin lies in this, that the people are affronted; but in this
other way, God; iu his way it is but an injury to such as themselves; but in
this it is to our politic Father, to whom under God we owe all our obedience;
and is the first command of the Second Table with promise in this World. Of
this Nature are those contracts betwixt man and woman, concerning Marriage,
those promising Oaths which men make one with another, which oblige the
contractors in a strong tie; for breach of which they shall answer at the last
day. And now, I go on with him; this which follows, and much of that which
immediately preceded is page (89).

SECT. IV.
Mr. Hobbs his Second Inference examined, and censured. The Sovereign obliged
to protect the People from Injuries, and Invasions. His reasons, to attest this
Inferrence, refuted.
HIS Second Inference is because the right of bearing the person of them all,
is given to him they make their Sovereign, by Covenant, only of one to another,
and not of him to any of them; There can happen no breach of Covenant on the
part of the Sovereign, and consequently none of his Subjects, by any pretense
of forfeiture is freed from his Subjection. His conclusion i^again true in the
material part, but his inference is faulty; for his conclusion I am persuaded,
that none of his Subjects can be freed from their Allegiance to him by any act
of his, unless dereliction of his Government, and that may abide a Dispute too.
But to raise this conclusion out of that Ground, because he made no Covenant
with them is exceeding weak. First, There is the same reason, by his Doctrine,
betwixt him and the Subject; for the Subjects (in the very Paragraph which was
but now transcribed,) make their Covenant one to another, and not to the
Sovereign, so that there must be the same reason out of the Nature of the
Covenant, that the Subject should not forfeit his Right to him, as he to the
Subject, for the Covenant being only made one to another, the breach of that
Covenant is only one with another: but I am bold to affirm it an impossible
case, as he imagines it, that there must be mutual approbations betwixt both,
and all. For, certainly it cannot be imagined, that such a generality of men,
as must convene to do such an Act, should submit to such a total dereliction of
themselves, without some promise, or Covenant on his part; that he will protect
them from injuries at home, and Invasions from abroad; but he being exalted
above all other Earthly Powers is subject only to the King of Kings, which is
God, who will Judge him: but the Subjects are examinable, responsible, and
condemnable by him. But he labors to infringe this reason in his following
discourse thus, That he who is made Sovereign makes no Covenant with his
Subjects before hand, is manifest; because either he must make it with the
whole Multitude as one party to the Covenant, or he must make a several
Covenant with every man; with the whole as one party, it is impossible; because
as yet they are not one person). I will not put down his reason against his
second branch, because I shall not need to dispute against that, having showed
the possibility of the first. But I will begin with his division, and deny that
it is necessary that the Covenant should be made with the whole as one party,
or with every particular severally; for there is a Medium participationis,
which is more reasonable than either; for without doubt the Fathers of Families
were Natural Governors from the beginning of the World, and they had by the
Law of Nature Absolute Government over their Families, these when they find
themselves not able in little distinct bodies to defend themselves, may treat
amongst themselves how by an Union they may make themselves strong, against
foreign and domestique dangers, and to that end erect a Supreme over
themselves; and this certainly has a greater show of Reason, then any of his
thoughts, that every person who has no Judgment nor Authority should be
introduced to make a Covenant for so high concernments. Therefore that division
was not good which did not comprehend the totum divisum. Then for his Argument
that he could not Covenant with the whole as one person, because as yet they
were not a person. I answer, first that they neither are, nor in truth will
ever be one person, but because by his unimaginable conceit they are after
their Covenant represented so by him, I will answer to himself; That first this
Company meet together, then they consult upon that great work of choosing a
Sovereign, the business is concluded upon by both parties, Sovereign and
People, first they engage for their Patrs; then he may Covenant for his, and
this is no otherwise then is apparent in all contracts, one must speak first,
and after another, so in marriage first one speaks and then the other; and in
all bargains, which yet are conditional until the second word confirms the
contract. Nor is it possible, as I have said, to think that men would so
deliver themselves to another will, from whom they have no promise or the
least verbal engagement to govern them justly and prudently. What he speaks
against this Covenant with the several persons, I let go, thinking it impossible

CHAP. VI. SECT. I.
The difference between the Sovereign's making a Covenant, and taking his
Authority upon a Covenant; A Sovereign may Covenant to Govern justly, and yet
not forfeit his Sovereignty, if he breaks that Covenant
AND I pass to another Argument by which he would prove, That a Sovereign can
make no Covenant, which begins toward the bottom of his 89. page thus (besides
if any one or more of them pretend a breach of the Covenant made by the
Sovereign at his Institution, and others or one other of his Subjects or
himself alone pretend there was no such breach, there is in this case no Judge
to decide the Controversy.) First, I blame him here for putting no difference
betwixt Covenanting in raking his Authority, and taking it upon Covenant. The
first may be, and, without question, must be, in any Institution of Government:
the second cannot be discreetly done by any; for it would leave a mighty gap to
let in Treasons. Observe it in all contracts, Titius lets Land to Sempr^nius,
he has diverse Covenants for to observe, which he may implead Sempr^nius for,
and yet never a one to forfeit his Estate; come more closly. The Subject in
this Institution of his Contracts is to perform all obedience, yet although he
offend in many things, there be few such as exempt him from the just protection
of the King, from further injuries then that Legally exacts, how much more must
it needs be that the King should lose the total obedience of the Subject;
though he should break his Covenant, and unless such a Clause were put into his
Covenant, there was no pretense of reason for it; and it were as much against
Reason, to put such a Clause into his Covenant. I have delivered my opinion of
this before. The King of Heaven will Judge him severely for his breach of
Covenant, to whom he must be left. That which follows is true, If there should
be such a Covenant, and no Judge to determine, it would return to the Sword
again, and every man recovereth the right of Protecting himself by his own
shrength contrary to the design of the Institution] This is true, but I do not
approve what follows, It is therefore in vain to grant Sovereignty by precedent
Covenant] to grant a Covenant in the Institution of Sovereignty is most right,
to wit, that he will Govern his People Legally and Justly or the like, without
doing of which no person is fit to be Sovereign; but to Covenant, to lose his
Sovereignty if he do otherwise, which he seems to understand generally by this
word Covenant, is absolutely naught and unfit, because it must needs produce
Confusions and Distractions in the Government, for the People upon any hardship
they suffer, though never so just, will repine against their Superiors, and
blame them, and upon any surmise of faultiness in them, would be ready upon
such pretense to desire, and endeavor a Change of Government be it Monarchical
or Aristocratical.

SECT. II
The Impiety of Mr. Hobbs his assertion, that Covenants have no force but from
the Vindicative Power of the Sword, Discovered.
THen what follows is wicked, in my Judgment [The opinion that any Monarch
receives his Power by Covenant, that is, upon Condition, proceeds from want
of understanding this easy truth, That Covenants being but words and breath
have no force to oblige, contain or protect any man, but what it has from the
Public Sword, that is from the united hands of that man or assembly of men
that has the Sovereignty and whose actions are avowed by them all, and
performed by the strength of them all, in him united,] This speech has some
semblance of truth with i^, if he had confuted the World into Atheism, who
think there is no God, noe reward or punishment hereafter; and perhaps it might
find some entertainment amongst men given over to base sensuality, sordid
worldly people, who have no sense of honor or virtue, because such men value
no contract, which consists not with their unhappy Condition, but with men
which believe there is a God, who governs heaven and earth, and will judge all
one day (which sure the generality of men do) with men that have felt any sting
of Conscience, and have felt the happiness of nil conscire tibi, this breath of
theirs has such power with God, that in things of such high nature as this is,
what they covenant on earth is confirmed in heaven, and is so esteemed by them;
and because it is so esteemed, millions of men do and have thought it better
for them to forsake all worldly felicity, then to violate such Covenants, and
by preserving them, Kings and their Kingdoms have lived in peace and
pro^perity, but by the breach of them came to ruin and destruction: so that
this which he calls but breath, at the same instant that it comes out of the
mouth of man, it is engraved in their hearts, and recorded in Gods Eternal
Registry in heaven.

CHAP. VI. SECT. III.
The Sword has no power but from the Covenant (according to Mr. Hobbs his
Doctrine) it may compel, lut is not properly the obliging cause of obedience.
What is added, That the breath of the Covenant is an ill foundation of
Monarchy, and has no power of obliging but from the public Sword.] I did
wonder why he did use such various and such emphatical expressions against the
Authority, which is derived from a Covenant; for this united force of the
public Sword, according to his Doctrine, must be derived from that Covenant,
which by him is made the sole foundation of Government: And if a Covenant
(which by him is but breath) has no obliging power, neither can the public
Sword which is derived from that Covenant have any; it he instead of other
Verbs which he used there, had interpreted this one of Compel, that this
Covenant without the public Sword had no power to compel any man to obedience,
it might have received some credit; because when we lose these virtues of
fidelity, and obedience, it is only the public Sword which by force can make
them submit, but yet that which the Sword can justly compel any unto, must be
by the obliging virtue of the Covenant. But whereas he places the obliging
power in the Sword, he gives all right of interest to it, then which nothing
can be more destructive to Monarchy: Let Kings know that their Swords may rust,
or loose their edge, and then he who has the keenest Sword may plead the best
right. This encouraged the late Rebels, who having got a longer Sword then the
King, upon that Title, preserved their Usurpation to the utmost they could. And
the wickedness is very apparent, for by his Doctrine whosoever can force his
Superiority, may justify his exercise in it, which is the greatest
encouragement Rebellion can desire: But perhaps that phrase (The Public Sword)
may bear him out in it, for by this he understands the National Power in that
Man, or Assembly of men, which has the Sovereignty, all whose actions are
acknowledged by them all. What a foolcry is this? Was there ever any Rebellion
in which the Rebels did not deny to approve the actions of the Supreme they
rebel against? And suppose that impossible Fiction of the universal meeting and
assent to that Covenant, yet when the same persons renounce, who made that
Covenant, how can the Sword authorize his actions, which pretend his power from
the breath of this Covenant? which yet being but a Breath (as Mr. H^bbs terms
it) is long since gone and perished, and a new Breach started up in its place:
The right of the Sword is given by the breath of the Covenant, with promise to
own his actions; that Breath is gone; they breath contrarily and revoke it, if
any man can get the Sword, he will make them blow such an other Breath upon his
Sword, as they did upon the first Supreme. The truth is, Mr. Hobbs makes the
power of Government to consist immediately in the Sword; but that founded upon
a Breath, which i^ blown away with any little cross wind; and certainly this
makes a most unhappy institution and settlement of any right. That which
follows in the top of the ninetieth page, I let pass, as not material to any
thing preceding or following after, and I pass to his third Inference, which
begins thus.

CHAP. VII. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his third Inference examined; No man to be destroyed for his dissent
to the unjust actions of others. Mr. Hobbs his Political Inquisition more
severe then that for Religion.
THirdly, because the major part has by consenting voices declared a
Sovereign, he that dissented must now consent with the rest, that is, be
contented to own all the actions he shall do, or else justly be destroyed by
the rest. This is a very sad condition, either he must own all the actions his
Sovereign does, or justly be destroyed; I believe never Murder was so justified
upon such terms before; own all his actions? No Christian, no honest man will
do it; his Sovereign may be Antichristian, a Hobbist, whose actions no
Christian man can avouch; he may act foolishly, which no wise man can
authorize, he may act wickedly, which no honest man can consent unto, (or else
justly be destroyed by his fellow Subjects) which he understands by that word
(the rest) destruction is the greatest mischief can come to a man, and is never
inflicted but for some mighty crime, which I do not find this man charged with,
but only a dissenting or protesting against the general Vote; a thing often
done in Parliaments, and yet no such Sentence passes upon the Dissenter, nor
were it just to do it; men are not bound to be all of one mind: Mr. Hobbs would
make his Inquisition for Politiques more severe then any Inquisition for
Religion: But he has reason for what he writes (for, says he) If he
voluntarily entered into the Congregation of them that were assembled, he
sufficiently thereby declared his will (and therefore tacitly covenanted to
stand to what the major part should ordain.) I thought by what went before he
must have declared his assent, but now it seems it is enough if he be amongst
them; but what if he be not amongst them, (as I have showed it is impossible
all should) what condition is that man in? He proceeds with his proofs, And
therefore if he refuse to stand thereto, or make protestation against any their
Decrees, he does contrary to his Covenant, and therefore unjustly.) Suppose all
this, Shall a man be destroyed for every breach of Covenant, or every
unjustice? Certainly Mr. Hobbs, if he were a Lawmakers would outdo Draco, or
the bloudiest that ever acted in that kind: This is a foolish consequence, that
because he did unjustly he should justly be destroyed. He goes on (And whether
he be of the Congregation or not, and whether his consent be asked or not, he
must either submit to their Decrees, or be left to the condition of war he was
in before, wherein he might without injustice be destroyed by any man
whatsoever.) The madness of this condition of war before this Covenant I have
spoke to heretofore, but that he may justly be destroyed by any with whom he
will not join in the Covenant is wicked: We have in England I believe,
abundance of strangers of Foreign Nations, which neither have nor will enter
into such a Covenant, may they be justly killed? Nay, amongst those millions
which are the Kings Subjects; there was never man entered this or the like
Covenant; may we justly kill one another? Nay, I think, few would make such a
Covenant; may all these be knocked on the head thus? This has such a force of
injustice, that men with humanity about them cannot consent unto. I leave this
therefore and come to his 4th Inference.

CHAP. VIII. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his fourth Inference censured and refuted from his own conclusions.
He that impowers another to do justly, though he make him Pleni-potentiary, is
not guilty of his unjust actions; his first reason refuted.
FOurthly (Because every Subject is by this Institution Author of all the
actions and judgments of the Sovereign instituted: it follows that whatsoever
he does, it can be no injury to any of his Subjects, nor ought he by any of
them be accused of injustice.) Accused, What does he mean by that? to be
convicted, arraigned, condemned? This certainly he cannot, because the power of
Judgment supposes Superiority, which cannot be over the Sovereign in his own
Kingdom: But let us observe the consequence of this Argument out of these
impossible premises, that because by his fancy of the Institution every subject
is Author of all his actions, he can do no injury to any of them; certainly
this does not follow by his own Doctrine; for put the case, that the Supreme
does authorize a Judge to hear and determine such causes, does the Supreme only
do injustice in it, when the Royal Authority gives power to the Judge, who acts
unjustly by that Authority, which was given him by the Supreme, or the Judge
likewise who abuses that Authority? I believe no man will affirm it; or if he
do, he must destroy Mr. H^bbs his conclusion, which makes the Kings acting by
the Authority of the peoples grant, not to offend in himself; for (which is his
reason before spoke to) if the Author do solely perform, not the Actor or the
person who immediately operates, which he delivered before, the King not the
Judge does unjustly, when by his Authority the Judge decrees wickedly: But he
proceeds with another reason, (for says he) He that does any thing by
Authority from another, does therein no injury to him by whose Authority he
acts. This is not true generally, a Judge judges by the Authority of the
Supreme, but if he Judge unjustly (yea, judges a cause against the King
perhaps unjustly) he then does the King an injury by his own Authority. Again,
a General with Plenipotency to kill, slay, etc. from the King, he turns now his
Army to the Kings destruction perhaps, does not he then do the King an injury
by his own power?

SECT. II.
Mr. Hobbs his second reason invalid from the falsity of his supposition.
Consent or dissent gives not the stamp of Justice or Injustice. He that gives
power to do any act, may complain of ill Execution of that power.
HE goes on. (But by this Institution of a Commonwealth, every particular man
is Author of what the Sovereign does, and consequently he that complains of
injury from his Sovereign, complains of that whereof he himself is Author,
and therefore ought not accuse any man but himself, nor himself of injury,
because to do an injury to himself is impossible.) It is first observeab^e
here, (which runs throughout the whole Politiques) that it is built totally
upon that foundation which neither is, nor is probable to be in any, but is
impossible to be in a great Commonwealth, and therefore must needs fall of it
self: But supposing that impossibility, let us consider his inference, every
man is Author of what the Sovereign does; the reason of that is before
expressed, because he covenants to avow his actions: Now if he do avow them, it
follows not, that therefore they shall be just; many a man owns that act which
is unjust, his owning of it makes it neither just, nor unjust: These are
qualiti^s inherent in the act, not adherent to others Opinions, or acceptance,
or disacceptance of them: I but (says he) Consequently he that complains of
injury from his Sovereign, complains of that whereof he himself is Author.] I
return, that he may do that, and complain that he himself has done amiss, men
do, and it is virtuously done of him who does it, but much rather of that which
he acts by another hand; that which may be good in the Institution, may be
spoiled and hurt in the Execution; and although they did institute him with
such a power, yet his mannagement of it may be ill and unjust, and that they
may complain of.

SECT. III.
A man may do an injury to himself. Mr. Hobbs his distinction between Iniquity,
and Injustice, or Injury, disproved and censured.
UPon this ground will appear the faultiness of what follows, which is [And
therefore ought not to accuse, any man but himself, no nor himself of injury,
because to do injury to a man's self is impossible.] To the first pi^ce I have
showed, that though he were Author of Leviathans Power, yet his evil usage of
that power may be complained of. To the second, I think a man may injure
himself, when a rich man through niggardliness shall deny his belly or his back
those expenses which were necessary for the support of his health, he deals
unjustly with himself; when another foolishly desperate shall adventure his
life upon idle and frivolous occasions, he deals unjustly with himself, by
hazarding so Noble a Creature upon so base and unworthy a prize: These things,
and multitudes of more, are unjust dealing toward a man's self: But he has a
nice distinction at the bottom of this Paragraph; It is true, that they that
have Sovereign Power may commit Iniquity, but not injustice or injury in the
proper signification. I would he had expounded the proper signification: At the
first I was amazed at this distinction, and did doubt there was some great and
excellent Notion in it, but duly considering the words, I find they were airy,
and do signify no more difference, then if I had affirmed Mr. Hobbs, or the
Writer of Leviathan, said this, or that, merely nominal: For what is iniquity
but unequal dealings? which in him who is bound to deal equally in
distribution, or commutation, is injustice; and indeed injustice is nothing
else; and injury, what is that? but not just, or right; and I am sure injustice
is nothing else: But where some Law directs this or that, he does otherwise:
This is the proper and genuine sense of the words, and unless he had showed us
some more proper use of them, there is no reason why we should be forced from
this common acceptance. Here now I might justly break off from further
discourse of this business, having answered what he objects; but because I
would give some satisfaction to the Reader in this Conclusion, I shall a little
insist further, and show, that Leriathans, or Suprem^s, may do unjustly.

SECT. IV.
A Sovereign may do injustice by himself, and by his Ministers empowered, and
not punished by him.
IT will be a strong foundation for this discourse to produce the Actions of
the King of Kings, God himself, which I may do in the eighteenth of Genesis; ye
may observe there, that God was pleased to reveal to Abraham his intended
destruction of Sodom; Abraham after he had undertaken to plead for them, in the
twenty fourth verse, puts the Question, Peradventure there will be fifty
righteous within the City, will thou also destroy, and not spare the City for
the fifty righteous that are therein? Then in the twenty fifth verse, That be
far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked,
and that the righteous shall be as the wicked, that be far from thee; shall not
the Judge of all the Earth do right? In which you may observe, that Abraham in
a bold manner did dare to intimate, that God himself should have done amiss,
not right, but unjustly, in punishing the righteous with the wicked; and shall
we be afraid to say that Leviathan can do unjustly, when they shall slay the
righteous as the wicked, which many of them have done? If we consider all the
Species, and several sorts of injustice, we shall find that they may, and have
prepetrated them: They have broke the equity of distributive Justice, in
preferring base and unworthy people, and neglecting, yea punishing virtuous
men; for Commutative Justice, they have taken against Law and Equity other men's
Estates, they have neglected to pay their due debts, and what can be more
unjust then those? they may therefore do unjustly, nay what is more, by how
much their power is greater, by so much they are enabled to do more injustice;
and I may add, other men's injustice may prove theirs, not only out of his vain
principles, because all Judges in his Dominion act by his Authority, even in
those Causes where they judge wickedly: But because he is the Supreme, and
should take care for his inferior Officers that they do their duties, which if
he knows they do not, and yet neglect to correct them for amendment, they will
prove his wickedness. We know the Judgment upon old Eli, who was a virtuous and
good man in himself, and the Leviathan of that Nation then, yet the Judgment of
God was upon him for not using severe Justice to his Sons, when he knew their
faults; as you may observe in 1 Samuel 2. 27. So that it is apparent, that they
may do injustice more then others; and indeed if he cannot be unjust, neither
can he be just, for contraries are belonging to the same subject; he who cannot
be vicious, cannot be virtuous, and contrary acts in any man will by degrees
eat out any vice or virtue, nor can men call it virtue in any who cannot do
ill. But I think there is now enough said to this, I will pass to his fifth
Inference, which is this.

CHAP. IX. SECT. 1.
Mr. Hobbs his fifth Inference. The Proposition asserted. The reason of this
Inference weak, and invalid.
FIfthly, and conse^uently to that which was said last, No man that has
Sovereign Power can justly be put to death, or otherwise in any manner by his
Subjects be punished.^ This conclusion is most true, because he is Supreme; and
to put to death, or punish, are acts only of Supremacy: But his reason, and the
only means which he uses to obtain this excellent conclusion, is so false,
that unless it should be confuted, we may think so excellent a truth had a weak
support; his reason follows [For seeing every Subject is Author of the actions
of his Sovereign, he punishes another for the actions committed by himself.] I
have often spoke of this; by this consequence a King cannot punish a wicked
Judge, a rebellious General, and the like, as I have often said before: And if
the Supreme should urge to these instances, that this Judge, or this General,
acted implicitly against the Authority granted by the Supreme, the same answer
may be returned to him from his Subjects when he does that which is contrary to
their good or peace; so that although this conclusion is most necessary to the
establishment of peace and happiness in any Kingdom, yet when it is urged only
by such fallacious Inferences, it makes the Readers imagine, that the greatest
and most weighty things in Polity are dubious.

SECT. II.
He that has right to the end, has not right to all the means to attain that
end, but only to such mediums as are just and legal.
HE infers presently upon the bottom of this conclusion, And because the end of
this Institution is the peace and defense of them all; and wh^soever has right
to the end, has right to the means, it belongs of right to him. Whatsoever
man, or Assembly, that has the S^veraignty to be Judge of the means of peace,
and defense, to do whatsoever he shall think necessary to be^d ne.^ I spare
putting down every word: For answer hereunto, know, That as I have often observed
he exceedingly often abuses this general Rule; he who has right to the end,
has right to some means, but not to all: A man has right to his house, in
another possession, right to get it peaceably by Law, and not by force: A
Supreme, or under him his Judge, has right to punish Felons, but he has no
right to butcher any man without a legal Trial, no though the fact were seen by
him; so that he has right to all legal means to obtain this end, but not any
other: Let us change the person, and this will appear most manifestly, every
man has right to the peace and good of the whole Kingdom, without which he
cannot live contentedly, and happily, and he ought to use his endeavor for the
obtaining and preserving it, but it must have this little addition of lawful
means; if he have right to pr^cure it by illegal means, it will open a gap, and
give countenance to all Rebellion; for there was never any Rebellion which had
not that specious pretense of the peace and good of the Public, which
otherwise could not be obtained; and therefore although he who has right to
the end, has right to some means of obtaining it, yet not to all: And this I
am confident may fully satisfy the following part of that Paragraph.

CHAP. X. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his sixth Inference examined and censured. The Sovereigns Commands,
in point of Religion, submitted to the Commands of God.
NOw I am come to the 91 page, where he proceeds: [Sixthly, it is annexed to
the Sovereignty to be Judge of what Opinions and Doctrines are averse, and what
are conducing to peace, and consequently on what occasions, how far, and what
men are to be trusted withal in speaking to multitudes of people, and who
shall examine the Doctrines of all Books before they be published.] The drift
of all this Inference is to place the Government of Religious Doctrine in
establishment of Doctrine in Religion, whether by preaching, or printing, to be
in the Sovereign* I shall have opportunity to enlarge upon this conclusion
hereafter, when I shall meddle with his Divinity, but will not let it pass now,
but speak a little to make way for that. Consider then first, that a hundred
thousand men meet together to institute a Sovereign (for out of his former
Institution of a Commonwealth he deduceth these Inferences) these men are
either of one Religion, or diverse; (for Religion all people have) if of one
Religion, it is not possible for men to think, that they should be so careless
of the greatest and dearest concernment in the world, as to throw it away to
another dispose, without any Covenant or promise to preserve it for them. Let
us in our thoughts run over the universal world, and consider the various
judgments in Religion, Christians, Jews, Mahumetans, and the several sorts of
Gentilismes, with their several Subdivisions, we shall find none that hold so
mean a price upon their Worship of God, as to part with it upon such ridiculous
terms, as to subject themselves so totally to a Levi^than, as not to have any
engagement for their duty toward their God; and most of them would rather put
themselves upon their protection by his Providence, then to offer up his good
pleasure a Sacrifice to their worldly preservation, by an arm of flesh. But if
they are of diverse Religions (which is a most dangerous Enemy to the peace of
any Kingdom) they certainly will either agree for an absolute tolleration, or
else one being countenanced (which most surely must be the Supreme Religion)
the rest may enjoy their own upon certain conditions, and then he deals
unjustly when he violates that condition, when he shall command other Opinions
to be br^ached, or them to be punished otherw^ys then was agreed upon before.
But let the Reader consider here are diverse actions intermixed, some of which
the Sovereign may act in his own person, and some which he must act by
Commissions: Of the first sort are limitation of popular Orators; his meaning
is our Preachers, who are the Public Speakers to the People, of whom it is
affirmed, that (...) must j^dge on what occasions, how far, and what men are to
be trusted withal in speaking to multitudes of people, that this cannot exact
an absolute obedience, and that the Sovereign may offend in all these, will be
evident, if we lay the Seen among Turks, and the Moguls, commanding not to
preach Christ; and it be granted, that they punish all them who do so, will Mr.
Hobbs say this is just? It may be he will; but I am sure the Apostles were of
another mind, when (Acts 4. 18.) they were commanded not to preach in the Name
of the Lord Jesus; they answered (in the nineteenth verse) Whether it be right
in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye. The
answer was of invincible force, implying thus much, That ye, be ye what you
will, Leviatha^, or what can be imagined to have Commanding Authority, ye are
Gods Deputies; if when God Commands any thing, you give a cross Command, judge
which should be obeyed? If when the King in express terms commands one thing,
and his Lieutenant commands another, which should be obeyed? The case is so
betwixt the greatest King, Sovereign, or Leviathan in this world, and God;
judge ye then: They could reply nothing to this answer of the Apostles, none
did endeavor to do it, but immediately went to Club-Law, Threats and Menaces,
and let them go; so that it is clearly evident, that Sovereigns in such
Commands may do unjustly, and are not to be obeyed in their unjust Commands by
virtuous men, who may, and must suffer obediently, though they ought not to act
obediently. I must add no more at this time, hereafter will be a greater
opportunity.

SECT. II.
Books justly examined before published. Such a Commission wanting when Mr.
Hobbs his Book was printed. His reason of this Proposition asserted.
IN the second sort of Acts, he is in the right; they ought and have Authority
to grant Commissions to some who shall ^x^^ine the Doctrine in all Books before
they are published.] This is most reasonable, for else Libels, scandalous to
the Religion, and present Government, would fly abroad, to the disturbance of
the Kingdom; and it is impossible for the Supreme to do it himself; and
certainly had there been such a Commission here in England when this Book was
to be printed, it would never have been allowed, no not in any well-governed
Nation in the World. His reason for this is very strong likewise, for the
actions of men proc^ed from their Opinions: And surely, although he has only
enforced this in order to peace, yet it is evident, that the practicks of any
virtue are best regulated by the Opinions of wise men, as all the actions of a
man's life.

SECT. III.
Bishops the most competent Judges of Books (especially in Divinity) so also of
Doctrines and Public Orators, or Preachers to the people.
THis therefore has usually been allotted to such men, whose Function requires
the Study of such things from them, I mean Bishops, the Reverence of whose
judgments, and the honor of whose persons, may gain a submission to their
determinations. This I speak for Preaching, for Books in Divinity; others have
their proper spheres to move in according to their Professions. He proceeds*

SECT. IV.
Mr. Hobbs his Assertion affirmed; his expressions of regulating Doctrines by
Peace censured; some kind of Peace among Devils.
ANd although in matter of Doctrine nothing ought to be regarded but the truth,
yet this is not repugnant to the regulating the same by peace; for Doctrine
repugnant to peace, can be no more true, then Peace and Concord can be against
the Law of Nature.] I am of his mind, that in matter of Doctrine, the truth,
and only truth is to be considered; and I am confident, that truth and peace
will certainly meet together. But methinks that is not handsomely spoke, when
he says, that Doctrine should be regulated by peace, without doubt peace is an
excellent Box to preserve truth when it is settled, it is a Child, a Daughter,
and fruit of truth, for true Doctrine brings peace wheresoever it is; but it
cannot so regulate a Doctrine, as to enforce this conclusion, That because
these men live in peace amongst one another, theref^re they have the truth of
Doctrine preserved amongst them: For there may be a peace amongst men who are
Rebels, nay amongst the Devils themselves (for ought I know) I am sure it
appears to be the force of our Saviors argument, when they said, He casts
out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, that a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand: Therefore their Kingdom, being a lasting Kingdom,
must have peace in it. But yet it is a more probable argument, that because
truth naturally tends to peace, therefore where is peace and quiet, it is
reasonable to think there is truth.

SECT. V.
The former conclusions repugnant to Mr. Hobbs his Doctrine; Peace not
consonant to the Law of Nature, according to his assertion; the true reason of
the former conclusion.
BUt the Argument by which he proves it did not become his mouth or pen; for
says he [Doctrine repugnant to peace can be no more true, then peace and
concord can be against the Law of Nature.] This I say did not become him, for
he has delivered it for a Maxim in Politics, That by the Law of Nature every
man only considers himself, and is at war with all the world besides, and has
right to do what he will with it.] But peace and concord are artificial things
introduced by the wit of man for his greater security: So that if truth and
peace agree no better, then peace, and the Law of Nature, as he has stated it,
it is little or not at all. But the truth is, that truth of Doctrine bring all
peace, peace with God, by subjecting our wills to his Sacred Revelations in the
regulation of our actions; peace with men by that blessed Doctrine of Charity,
by which we are commanded, as much as in us lies, to have peace with all men,
peace in our own souls, by subduing those carnal, sensual, rebellious
affections which are in man, to the obedience to reason. So that without doubt
truth does naturally produce peace, but is not therefore regulated by it.

SECT. VI.
The former expression of regulating all Doctrines by peace further examined
and censured: Divine Truths and Doctrines not regulated by peace. In Politics
this expression not improper.
THat properly regulates another, which directs and shows the way by which that
other should walk, or else is the Rule by which it should be drawn: So we say,
he is regulated by this Law, who is directed and commanded by it, to do this or
that: And this has the same signification in moral as in natural things. A
Square which the Carpenter uses for the direction of his work, regulates that
work, and the same does a Law; but that in the indagation of any Divine Truth,
as of Divine Attributes, the nature of Faith, of Prayer, and the like, that a
man should square it out by peace, or that he should regulate them by it, is a
strange assertion: Nay it is so in Mathematical truths, and Physical also. If a
man should enquire, whether the Sun be bigger than the earth, must he regulate
his examination by the rule of peace? Or if he enquire in Nature, whether a
first matter or Atoms be the foundation, the principle of the World, out of
which it is made? must this be compared and guided by the consent it has with
peace? It is true, had he confined his truths to politic truths, it might have
good acceptance, because the end of Politics is the governing man in peace and
happiness; but he is so far from that, as he points principally at Divine
truths (as will appear) in the pros^cution, of which it cannot be a rule, much
less a sole and only rule, as he seems to make it.

SECT. VII.
Mr. Hobbs his expression of new truths censured: Truth always the same; the
object of Truth sometimes obscure: New Truths, and new Lights, phrases equally
affected.
IT is true, that in a Commonwealth whereby the negligence and unskilfulness of
Governors and Teachers, false Doctrines are by time generally received, the
contrary truths may be generally offensive; yet the most sudden and rough
busling in of a truth that can be, do^s never break the peace, but only
sometimes awake the war.] I think with him, that it is through the negligence
and unskilfulness of Governors and Teachers, that false Doctrines are received:
But I do not approve that phrase of a New Truth, there is no such thing, but of
particulars, that this fire burns is new, but that fire will burn combustib^e
matter, when applied to it, is an eternal truth, of which sorts of truth he
seems to write. This kind of speech seems to concur with that lately affected
language of new lights, when there is no new light, but always Divine Graces
lighted Spiritual, and Humane Intellect Natural Truths: The truths are the
same, and the lights the same by which we discern them, but the objects may lie
in darkness, and not be discerned, till their proper light be brought to them.

SECT. VIII.
His Assertion of the busling in of truth awakes the War, examined, and showed
to be repugnant to his former Conclusions.
THe next phrase to be considered is, This busling in of Truth does not break
the Peace, but awake the War* ^It seems then when men live in peace, they are
at war, but only lie asleep, when I should think that the unquiet disposition
of war could never let it sleep, and the quiet sweet disposition of peace makes
it look like sleep: But he gives reason for it (for says he) Those men who are
so remisly governed, that they dare take up Arms to defend or introduce an
Opinion, are still in War, and their condition not Peace, but a cessation of
Arms for fear of one another, and they live as it were in the Precincts of
Battle continually.] This was wittily expressed by him; but he did not
remember, that the Covenant in the institution put them in a state of peace,
when now he places peace only in the mannagement of that Government, which if
it be, there is another reason from hence to be added to what went before, that
the Supreme ought to Covenant with his Subjects concerning his Government,
which is obstinately denied by him.

SECT. IX.
Doctrines among Christians not to be introduced by force. Cessation of Arms
not the height of Peace. Remisness, in matter of Opinion, not the only cause of
Mutiny or Rebellion.
COnsider those that are so remisly governed, as they dare take up Arms to
defend or introduce an Opinion.] This should not concern Christians, whose
Opinions and Doctrines must not be introduced by Arms of Steel and force, but
of reason and sufferings; and as our Great Master, our blessed Savior, planted
it with his death, so must we cherish and water it with our own, not others
blood: It is not to be sowed or reaped by Swords, but sufferings, and the
reason of those sufferings. But be it of what opinion it will, this Argument
does not become him, because he makes war to be the natural state of all
mankind, which if it be, it will return, unless you take the very nature away
in which it is rooted, otherwise it only suppresses the outward acts of
violence or war, but not extinguisheth the being of it. Again, he makes his
peace obtained by the Covenant in the Sovereigns Institution, to be nothing
else but a cessation of Arms, for fear men should not else enjoy their
conveniences or well being. Now then, if this be the height of any peace, they
who are governed thus remisly, as he speaks, are in as good a state of peace as
any others are. I grant that remisness of Government, is an occasion that loose
people are incited to foster discontents, and malicious people encouraged to
take up Arms. But this may be imputed to all remisness, as well as that of
Opinions, and ought not to be bounded by it.

SECT. X.
Mr. Hobbs his fallacies in arguing discovered. To be Judge, and to constitute
Judges, are distinct; the latter more advantageous to the Commonwealth, in
point of Doctrines.
HE thinking that this is clear, deduceth further thus; It belongs therefore to
him that has the Sovereign Power to be Judge, or constitute Judges of Opinions
and Doctrines, as a thing necessary to peace, thereby to prevent discord and
civil wars.] Observe here; Reader, is a fallacy that runs throughout his whole
Book, which I have often marked before, and now must again, which is, that he
makes his conclusion deduced out of his discourse, another from that which he
proposed. His Conclusion proposed is this; Sixthly, it is annexed to the
Soveraignly to be Judge of what Opinions are averse, and what conduce to
peace.] Observe it is in his own person, now it is to be Judge, or constitute
Judges. There is a great difference betwixt the performance of this act in his
own person, and by Officers. It is not probable, that a man or men taken up
with so many and great thoughts of politic affairs, can have leisure to get
abilities for such a purpose, or if he had, can he attend them? Therefore as I
said before, so I say again, he ought to employ in that great business, men
fitted by their proper Studies and endeavors to such a design. We will go on.

CHAP. XI. SECT. 1.
The impossibility of the former imagined Institution of a Leviathan further
discovered, from the power given him by Mr. Hobbs in the propriety of Estates,
attained before the Institution.
SEventhly, (says he) To the Sovereignty is annexed the whole power of
prescribing the Rules, whereby every man knows what good he may enjoy, and what
actions he may do without being molested by his fellow Subjects; and this is it
men call Propriety.] To understand this we must return back, and consider, that
this is spoke of a Commonwealth constituted, after his impossible imagination,
by a multitude of people of which there was never any president, nor is ever
likely to be: The impossibility of which will yet appear more manifest, by the
examination of this Paragraph. To that purpose let us conceive a multitude of
people met together upon such a design, as he proposes, of choosing a
Leviathan; all these people either had estates, or had none, but only their
beings in the world; or else some had estates, some had none. To think that in
such a multitude no man should have any thing of his own, were most
unreasonable. And again, to imagine that there were no necessitous men amongst
such a number of men, were ridiculous, it must needs therefore be, that some
had estates, and some none. Let us then proceed according to his own Rule, that
the prime and principal Law of Nature is for every man to look to himself, and
his own accommodations; and for that reason it is (and the sole reason by him
alleged) why men incorporate into a Body Politic. This being supposed (as it
is by him) can any man think that such men who had estates, would make
themselves in an equal condition with those who had none, and leave them at the
disposal of a Leviathan when he is constituted, whereby they should be levelled
with them who had no estate; or rather in the constitution of their
Commonwealth, provide to have them secured by some Covenant or other, that they
might not be worse afterward, then they were when they covenanted for it, yea
loose that which perhaps with great pains and industry they had acquired, which
if they do in their constituting a Commonwealth, the Sovereign has not right
to dispose, and give cross Rules to that Covenant afterward, he having
formerly assented to that Covenant. For if we consider his Politics, we shall
find the only end, why men imbody themselves into a Commonwealth, to be the
securing themselves to live comfortably, enjoying their own without
molestation, or to that purpose. Think then how it is possible for a man with
such thoughts about him, in that way to throw himself, and all he has, clearly
to another disposal, without any condition or Covenant. For although all
things under the Sun are subject to change, and the strongest Entails find
means to be frustrated, yet providence, and careful men, in such a constitution
of so high a Nature, would foresee that possibility, and have some forecast,
how and by what ways that should be done, which indeed must needs make the
multitude of the people unfit men for such a work, who have not wisdom to
foresee or provide for such accidents.

SECT. II.
Mr. Hobbs his supposition of men met together without a propriety, examined.
The impossibility of this Fiction, ac^ording to his own grounds, from the
contradictions which follow upon it.
BUt he seems to go another way, and settles this building of his Commonwealth
upon the foundation of a sort of men which have no propriety in any thing, or
suppose a hundred thousand (a less number will scarce make a good City) all
these having no interest in the world, besides their being (which is as
unimaginable as any of the rest) which yet is affirmed by him in the following
words [For before Constitution of Sovereign Power, as has already been showed,
all men had right to all things, which necessarily causes war, and therefore
this propriety being necessary to peace, and depending on S^veraign Power, is
the act of that Power in order to peace.] This is a strange core it, that men
in war have right to their Enemies Country before they have c^nquered it, and
when they have conquered it, shall have right to very little: both which by him
are most true. For before the choosing a Sovereign they are at war with all the
wo^ld, and have a right to all the world, yet when they have conquered any
piece, it must be in the Sovereigns power to give them propriety only in what
he pleases. I know he may object to this, that he says, the Supreme may give
Rules, that is, make such Laws by which men may know what is their propriety,
but not that he shall give the propriety. But for answer to this, let him know,
that the Legistlative Power can take away, and alter them, as well as make
them; and then it amounts to as much, as if he had given the propriety its
self, for he can do it when he will. And let us consider, that those men who by
nature have right to all the world, yet by this industriously uniting
themselves into a Commonwealth, gain but this, that whereas before they had
right to every thing, now they have right only to this little pitta^ce which is
allotted them.

SECT. III.
Mr. Hobbs his illogical deductions. Propriety in the state of War. What
propriety is; it may be without peace, as peace may be without propriety.
HE proceeds ^And therefore this Propriety being necessary to Peace, and
depending on Sovereign Power, is an act of that Power in order to the Public
Peace.^ Surely there is no manner of Logical consequences in this, therefore of
his; for let us consider to what this therefore relates, can it look forwards
to all men's rights to come? and because of that, therefore propriety should be
an act of the Sovereign? These have no conjunction one with another, no, nor
because they are in war one with another; for Nations that are in war one with
another, have right of some; and people that have right to many things, may
have right likewise to what they have of some: So that this theref^re has
nothing before to build it self upon; and indeed, in Logic, it should have
been deduced out of the pr^mises. But let us see if there be any thing in this
new sentence that can countenance this Proposition, That propriety is an act of
the Sovereign. The first words that may seem to make for it, will be these
(That Propriety being necessary to peace) therefore Propriety is an act of
Sovereignty.] This follows not. First, because Propriety may be where there is
war, therefore it cannot be necessary to peace, I take Propriety for a peculiar
right and title which a man has to any goods.) This a man may have at that
instant when he has war with another. And again, he may live in peace in this
Kingdom, both with his Neighbor, and all the rest of the Nation, and have
propriety in nothing, but his b^ing in the world: So that if peace can be
without propriety, and propriety without peace, it cannot truly be said that
pr^priety is necessary to peace. And then that Proposition which is the
foundation of an argument failing, the Argument likewise falls to the ground.

SECT. IV.
Propriety not depending only upon Sovereign power. The propriety of the
Sovereign independent. His consequence again redargued. Propriety the Act of
Law.
THe second words which may give any semblance of an Argument (if any) are
depending upon Sovereign power] and such a Sovereign power as he makes his to
be, there is none in the world but men have propriety without it, therefore no
necessary dependence upon this, without which it can be, and is. Again
consider, the Sovereign himself has a propriety of his own, and his propriety
has no dependence upon any: but then consider that if it be so, and he will
have it understood of Subjects only, or that the Sovereign has his propriety
by right of his Sovereignty, because there is a Sovereign constituted; and that
the propriety of all others has a dependence upon this Sovereign power; yet it
does not follow, that that propriety is an act of Sovereignty. It may well be
supposed, that propriety may be settled by Contract before the constitution of
the Commonwealth, and then the Sovereign only looks and takes care for the
right observation of those Laws, which were consented unto concerning
propriety; and propriety is the Act of those Laws, and he the Protector and
preserver of them: So that this consequence is not deduced out of any thing
which is set down by him. And these few words which are added are of no force
(in order to the public peace) for although he may direct, yea enforce them to
the public peace, yet propriety it self is an act of those Laws which settles
it, not of him which governs.

SECT. V.
Many things good or evil in their own Nature, and therefore not alterable by
Humane Laws.
HE goes on; These Rules of Propriety (or meum and tuum) and of good, evil,
lawful, and unlawful, in the actions of Subjects, are the Civil Laws, that is
to say, the Law of each Commonwealth in particular.] The Rules of Propriety,
that is, of the particular estate, are without question the Laws of each
particular Commonwealth; but for good or evil, there are many things so framed
in their own Nature, that it lies not in the power of Humane Laws to make such
things good or evil, contrary to their beings, as to love, fear, and worship
God, no Humane Law can make it evil; or to hate or despise him, no Humane Law
can make it good. And so for lawful and unlawful things, which either by the
Law of God in our hearts, or that communicated to us in his holy Book; these
are Laws besides the Civil Law of the Nation, which the Civil Law cannot alter,
or make good or evil, otherwise then that goodness or illness which they
received from the Law Divine. That which follows in that Paragraph, is nothing
but an Exposition of Civil Law; how it is understood by him, which I conceive
not to be material to his design, or mine, and therefore I let it alone, and
come to a new Inference.

CHAP. XII. SECT. 1.
The Sovereign obliged to take care for the decision of Controversies, and
accomptable to God as for his own, so also for his Officers neglect.
EIghthly (says he) ^s annexed to the S^veraign the Rights of Controversies,
which may arise ^^^erning Law, either Civil or Natural, or concerning Fact; for
without the decision of Controversies, there is no protection of one Subject
from the injuries of another.] That is true which he speaks, so that he
understands by it not a natural immediate Agent, but a moral political act by
his Deputies and inferior Officers, as Judges; and then it is not only a right
which he may, but a duty which he ought to do. And I may go further then Mr.
H^bbs, here, and say, that he shall be responsible to the great King of Kings,
for not taking care that those his Officers do his duty of Justice in deciding
causes. Jethro, M^ses Father-in-law gave him good counsel, not to take that
burden (impossible for his shoulders to bear) upon himself alone, but divide
it to others, and keep weighty causes only to himself.

SECT. II.
Mr. Hobbs ninth Inference affirmed, Sovereigns in ordinary emergencies to use
ordinary means. Salus Populi Suprema Lex.
NInthly, etc. (says he) (truly Reader I am tired with transcribing his words
distinctly.) The drift of this ninth Inference is to say, That the Sovereign
has right to the Militia of his Kingdom, and so of all means to maintain his
Army: and he says right, without this, all others are nothing. The Subjects
cannot be protected either from foreign or domestic injuries. This is true,
but yet he has right only to use right means for this. I speak not of cases of
necessity, Salus Reipublicae est summa Lex, but in the ordinary manage of
affairs, he must reserve himself questionless to the ordinary ways.

SECT. III.
The choice of Counselors, etc. in the Sovereign* Mr. Hobbs his reason of this
Conclusion refuted.
FOr his tenth Inference, which is his right of choosing Counselors, Officers
of his Army, and the like, I agree with him; but not for his often confuted
reason, because he has right to the end, he must have right to the means; for
he cannot have right to get his right ends by crooked means, but because he is
Supreme, and is the Fountain of all Power in his Realm. But yet there are in
many Kingdoms great Offices belonging to Families, as Generals, Chamberlains,
and the like; and those cannot justly be laid aside out of those places that
they are born to, and have by Inheritances, without great and just cause of
disinheriting be produced.

SECT. IV.
The eleventh Inference affirmed, where there is no Law, there is no
transgression, and consequently no punishment.
HIs eleventh is most true, That to the S^veraign is committed the power of
punishing, and rewarding according to Law, or if there be no Law (I fear to
join with him here) to punish where is no Law, according as he shall judge meet
to conduce to the deterring of men from doing disservice to the Commonwealth.]
This I like not, sin is the transgression of a Law; where no Law, no sin,
therefore no punishment.

His last Inference is after a long preamble, That it belongs to the Sovereign
Power to give Titles of Honor.] I agree with him in this clause; but observe
that his twelfth, eleventh, tenth, ninth Inferences, are all page 92.

SECT. V.
Mr. Hobbs his Objection and Answer approved. Kings more incommodated then
Subjects from the burden of their Crimes, and their account to the King of
Kings.
I Have thus briefly touched upon these particular Inferences, which he calls
the right of a Sovereign; and having c^ns^red them, any man may easily look
through that which follows in that Cap. but in the latter end of that Cap. page
94. he seems to answer an Objection: ^ A man may here object, that the
condition of Subjects is very miserable, as being obnoxious to the lusts, or
other irregular passions of him o^ them who have so unlimited a power in their
hands; and commonly they who live under a Monarch, think it the fault of
Monarchy, etc. not considering (says he) that the estate of man can never be
without some incommodity or other.] I think he speaks truth in almost all this
whole Paragraph; but as a Christian man who is assured there is a God, a
Heaven, and Hell; I may say that as all Subjects must, whilst they are in this
world, have incommodities; so Kings have many more, their Crowns are made of
Thorns, and their Scepters too heavy almost for men to bear, because they have
a mighty account to make up to their King, the King of Kings, of the good or
evil in their Government, with which words I end this Cap. and come to his
next, which is Cap. 19. entitled thus, Of the several kinds of Commonwealth by
Institution, and of Su^cession to the Sovereign Power.

CHAP. XIII. SECT. 1.
Mr. Hobbs his expression of Representative not proper, and diminutive of
Sovereignty. Two Questions raised about the divisions of Commonwealths, left to
the judgment of others.
HE begins this Cap. with an Exposition of that ancient division of a
Commonwealth into Monarchical, Aristocratical, and Democratical, which he
affirms to be the only forms by which any Commonwealth is governed; and in the
hottom of this 94 page, he proves it thus [For the Repr^se^itative must needs
be one man, or more; and if more, then it is ^ither the Assembly of all, or but
of a part. When the Representative is one man, then it is a Monarchy; when an
Assembly of all that will come together, then it is a Democracy, or popular
Commonwealth; when an Assembly of a part only, then it is Aristocracy: Other
kinds of Commonwealths there can be none, for either one, or more, or all must
have the Sovereign Power, which I have showed to be indivisible.] I will not
here contend against that word Representative, which I have often already spoke
against, and cannot be a fit word to express a Sovereign, for it makes him to
be but an Image or Creature of the people, whose Supreme he is. But for that
division of a Commonwealth, which he propo^eth, although it is so honored by
the universality of Writers in Politics, that it were not modesty in any
particular man to deny it, yet give me leave to put a Question (I will not be
peremptory in it) Why, since a Commonwealth is the whole Body Politic, and
consists in the wh^le Regiment, from the King to the Cottager, why there may
not be thought of some division in respect of subordination, as well as in
respect of the Supreme. But I will leave the answer to some younger head, who
may have leisure to examine it, and raise another Question: Since the division
is made only out of the quantity or number which consti^ute a Supreme, why may
not some things be thought upon concerning the quality of it, which may give a
new and another illustration to that condition of a Supreme? For although this
term of the quality of a Supreme is not usually expressed in the notion of the
thing, yet the matter and sense of that word is often delivered by them, as
Tyranny for Monarchy; by the first of which, they understand a Monarch
governing without Law, so Oligarchy for Aristocracy, as Mr. H^bbs expresses in
the following words, page 95.

SECT. II.
Tyranny and Monarchy different forms of Government. Miscalling alters not the
nature of the thing. Oeconomical Government consiste^t with Anarchy.
TH^re be other names of G^vernme^t in the H^st^ries and B^oks of P^licy, as
Tyranny; and Oligarchy; but they are not the names of other forms of
Government, but of the same forms misliked.] Indeed in the first, they are
diverse forms to govern by Laws, or without Laws, differing* forms, differing in
the very essential acts of Government. In the second you may find a great
difference in the persons, the one being enabled to his place by his virtue,
the other by riches only, or such like accommodations. But let us consider what
he adds (for says he) They who are discontented under Monarchy, call it
Tyranny, and they who are displeased with Aristocracy, call it Oligarchy; they
who find themselves grieved under a Democracy, cal^ it Anarchy (which signifies
a want of Government) and yet I th^nk no man believes a want of Government to
be any new kind of Government.] I believe what he says has truth, they will
miscall them so; but yet this proves not, that these miscallings are not
founded upon a truth, A virtuous man is branded with calumny, and yet for all
that a virtuous man and a vicious man differ, although the virtuous man be
abused; so differ these Governments one from another. What he speaks of
D^mocracy and Anarchy was ingenious, but unapplicable to any the other. And
although in the strictness of that word Anarchy, it is not possible to allow
any Government, yet if it be appli^d to Political Government, it may
notwithstanding (granting it there) consist with Oeconomical Government. And
when a Democracy is grown loose, that the Authority in relation to the whole
Commonwealth is lost, yet Government may be found in Families. What he adds is
not of great moment, when he says, Nor by the same reason ought they to
believe, that the Government is of one kind when they like it, and another when
they dislike it, or are oppressed by the Governors.] Where is the parity of
reason betwixt any thing that went before, and this, to produce that saying of
this (for the same reason?) and there is no reason for this, that the liking,
or disliking, which are extremely outward things, to the essence of any thing,
should produce a difference in the thing it self.

SECT. III.
The Authors Opinion of this division. The denomination of mixed bodies (as in
natural, so in political) a principalion. The strange mixture of the Government
of Lacedaemon. The Monarchy of Darius mixed with Aristocra^y.
ANd now Reader, having passed some Notes, I will proceed to set down my own
judgment and Opinion of this so much honored division, which although out of
the Reverence I bear to the consent of so many learned men in it, I dare not
deny that it is a good division; yet methinks in political stories I can
observe, that take these in their pure and simple natures, there is scarce one
of them purely such, in any one Country of the whole world; and therefore I may
say of them, as Philosophers say of the Elements, they are the matter of which
this great Globe of this sublunary world is composed; and yet not found
distinct in their pure nature, in any creature in the world, but are
denominated such ^ principalion; as when heat is in any great degree, then it
is called fire; when cold and moisture are intense, it is then water; or else
(as the Mathematicians speak) Saturn is Lord of this House, because he is
predominant; yet the power of his influence is more or less, according to the
assist^nce or detriment he receives from other Planets. So when one is chief or
Lord of the House, either a Monarchical chief, or Aristocratical, yea I may add
a Democratical or popular Government, it is denominated from that which is
principle, although one or both the other may be joined in the influence, and
concur in the Government over the whole. I think this appears most true to any
man who has perused stories; nay they are so conjoined and mixed one with the
other sometimes, that it is exceeding hard to say which is the predominant, and
disputes amongst learned men are raised, what name to give some Supremes. You
may find a common instance in Lac^daem^^, where there was a King, a Senate, and
in many things the people came in for their shar^s, learned men know not which
to call it. Look if you please upon Monarchy; there is none I think so absolute
in the world, to which all he speaks may be applied; (I mean all those marks of
Sovereignty which have been before touched upon) I will give the Reader one
instance in one of the greatest Monarchs that ever was, or is in the world, I
mean Darius in the sixth of Dani^l, you shall find at the seventh verse, that
all the Presidents of the Kingdom, the Governors, and the Princes, the
Counselors, and the Captains, consulted together to establish a Royal Statute,
and to make a firm Decree, that whosoever shall ask a Petition of any God or
man for thirty dai^s, save of Darius himself, should be cast into the Lions
Den. I will not descant upon the D^cree, being the most abominably wicked that
possibly could be made by a m^n who did acknowledge a God as Darius did: For
how could he think that God would bless him, acting so cro^^y against his
Hono^r, as to forbid prayers to him? Mr. Hobbs indeed might have concurred with
him, that thinks no prayers have prevalence with God, but that all things are
governed by immutable necessity. But Darius could not be of that mind, who for^
thought that God could, and would deliver him: Neither could Daniel be of that
mind, who would not leave praying for all the terrors of the world. Well, the
Decree is out, according to the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which is
unalterable; when the Law was out, and Daniel found to be a transgressor
against it, we shall find in the thirteenth verse, that these Princes presented
the crime to the King, and required Justice against him; in the fourteenth
verse the King is said to labor until night to deliver Daniel, and was
displeased with himself. Surely before he was aware he had consented to such a
Law as was mischievous to a person of that great integrity and excellency, as
Daniel was; and this Law which he had made, must be Author of so great a Crime,
as to shed not only Innocent, but virtuous blood; and therefore he labored
until Sunset with those men who joined with him in the making that Law to
deliver Daniel: But they, in the ^^fteenth verse, being fierce against Daniel,
urged the immutability of the Decree, that it was a Law confirmed by him
according to the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which may not be altered; and
indeed the argument is of great force: For if Laws made by any Supreme may be
violated before they are repealed, what security can any Subject have of any
thing he enjoys? And surely in keeping and preserving the Laws they have made,
they do imitate their great Master the King of Kings, and Supreme of Supremes,
from whom they have all their Authority, and by whom they reign, who although
by his infinite power he can do what he pleases, yet out of his infinite
goodness he cannot deny himself, or alter the word which is gone out of his
mouth, falli non potest, mentiri non potest; so that all his Words, and
Covenants, and Promises, are Yea and Amen. Such should Supremes be; such was
Darius that just King; no doubt but he could have sent a party of Soldiers,
and have taken Daniel out of their power; but having made the Law, which bound
him to the execution, he would perform it, although it were never so contrary
and averse to his disposition. From all which you may discern, that this great
Potentate had his power limited by a Law which he could not justly violate. Now
look upon him, and see him in the following part of his story, of a most
absolute and unlimited power, where it was not restrained by Law. In the latter
end of that Cap. you may observe, that when the King had perceived that God had
delivered Daniel from the Lions, and he had taken him out of the D^n. At the 24
verse the King commanded, and they brought those men who had accused Daniel,
and cast them, and their Wives, and Children, into the Lions Den, that is, the
Presidents and the Princes, which was the greatest act of power exercised upon
the greatest persons which were in that greatest Kingdom, and all this merely
arbitrary.

SECT. IV.
The result of the former example. No Government de facto purely Monarchical;
and therefore not susceptible of all the properties of Monarchical Government
required by Mr. Hobbs. Darius bound to the execution of those Laws which
himself had made.
MY Collection here is, That there is no Supreme upon earth, which has no
commixion of any the other principles in all those particular rights, which Mr.
H^bbs requires as properties of Supremacy; for the Legislative is one, and the
control of the Execution is another. Here you see at the making of this
Decree, there was Aristocracy mixed with Monarchy by the Princes, for they
petitioned the King to make this Law, but the King gave life to it with his
Fiat. That this was so appears, because if D^rius alone had done, and they had
had no interest in this Legislation, he who had mad^ it, might have recalled it
of himself, when he discovered the mischief which it produced; but it is said
that he ^trove and labored to have saved him, but those Princes (who it (...)
had some influence in making the Law) resisted, and would not give way to it:
Then mark the second particle, which is next of moment in the Law it self; that
is the execution, he could not be spared from that. And although in many
polities, the Supreme may, and has power to dispense with the execution of
severe Justice, yet it s^^ms this great King had his hand tied in respect of
that, and could not justly do it, when upon their Petition he had established
that Law. Let no man censure this conclusion until he has read the whole, for
it is not proper for me to prevent my method in any following discourse, to
satisfy every doubt which may interpose in the mean time, but to preserve
every particular until I come to its proper place.

SECT. V.
The general reasons of the precedent conclusions. That Government best which
is suited to the disposition of the people. Some people fit only for subjection.
BUt to conceive a general reason for what I speak, consid^r with me, that the
people must be governed as best (...) with their condition; for the multitude
without doubt would be too hard for any Supreme, if they knew how
advantagiously to dispose of themselves: And it is an easy thing with
ambiguous language to sow discontents amongst the multitude against any present
Government; and therefore all Politicians, besides Mr. Hobbs, do show that some
Nations are fit to be ruled with a severe hand, some with a more remiss one,
some fit for Monarchy, some for D^mocracy. The Eastern Nations best agree with
those Monarchies under which they live, which are the most absolute in the
world, but other Countries would not endure that Yo^k. It is a most ancient
observation in this difference of Countries, that some are so dull (I dare not
name them for fear of offending, though others have done it) as they are only
fit to obey, not to govern.

SECT. VI.
The former conclusion further asserted. The Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians
first introduced by Theopompus.
BUt for this conclusion let it suffice what Arist^tle writes of The^pompus,
and out of him other later Writers, that he being King of the Lacedaemonians
first set up the Eph^ri there; his Wife upbraided him with it, that he should
leave his Kingdom with less power to his Successors, then he had received it
from his Ancestors, he answered, that he should leave it more lasting. Perhaps
he was deceived in it; but yet it meant this truth, that the people being
sweetened with the imagination that they have some interest in the Government,
they will put their necks more willingly under the Yoke. The story is told in
the fifth of his Politics, Cap. 11. which show that it may be, and may be
profitable to receive this commixion,

SECT. VII.
No Government absolutely pure. Mr. Hobbs his Politics calculated for Utopia.
BUt then go further and examine the flourishing Commonwealths of the whole
world, and you shall find them so mixed, nay that mixture so equally poised,
that it will be hard to find the predominant from which it may receive its
name, as was the cause of the Lacedem^nians disputed amongst diverse Authors,
whether Monarchical, Aristocratical, or Democratical, and none so absolutely
pure, as that we may say this Element is without commixion, that Planet has
alone influence; and this he seems himself to grant in his 98. page, concerning
the practices in the world, although he writes now an Vtopia, a pattern which
he would have all to follow. He goes on, page 95.

CHAP. XIV. SECT. 1.
Mr. Hobbs his conclusions deduced from Principles founded in the Air. Absolute
liberty not actually to be found in any people. Several petite Commonwealths
raised out of the Ruins of the Roman Empire. None of these without mixture,
nor durable. His exposition of Representative again redargued, as an ill
foundation of Government, Religion, and Propriety. The formerly mentioned
Commonwealths preserved by Laws.
IT is manifest (says he) that men who are in absolute liberty, may, if they
please, give Authority to one man to represent them everyone, as well, etc. The
first observation which I make here, is an unhappy practice which he uses in
this place, and often in this Book, which is to suppose things hard to be found
in practicks, and by that fallacy to lay a foundation in the Air, and then
raise an imaginary structure upon it. This supposal of his, that men are in an
absolute liberty, is very rarely to be found; for all men that are in the
world, as soon as they are born, are Subjects, unless we may conceive a man
born King of that Country he is in. I would fain find out such a possibility,
where such a number of men fit to make a Commonwealth may be at liberty; and I
have found out one where it has been practiced, I mean that of the Roman
Empire, when it was broken and ruined, many people for fear were driven away to
shift for themselves, or perhaps overs^en, or neglected by the Conquerors.
These men, one or other, being thus left to themselves, their lawful Emperor,
and his Posterity, to whom they should obey, being destroyed, or altogether
unable to give them any support, these men are left to shift for themselves: A
Government they must have, or grow wild; they conspire in that, and then set up
many Commonwealths in Italy, and those adjacent parts. But give me leave to
tell Mr. Hobbs, that he shall hardly find in any of them existing any pure
element of Polity without commixion. And I shall tell him more, that these
Commonwealths having no support, but that weak foundation of the peoples
Constitution, were upon all o^casions of tumults (which were very often)
diverted from their first settlement, and had new ways of Government established
in their place. I will tell him further, that no Supreme in all these was ever
called a Representative, or a Leviathan: And therefore Mr. Hobbs did much amiss
to lay this as a foundation for all that light stuff which follows, yea of his
whole Book, and of all Commonwealths, which can only be founded upon such an
extraordinary occasion, neither then in such an absolute manner as he
supposes: For never did any of these submit their Religion, their Estates or
Lives, as he would enjoin, but had them preserved by Laws.

SECT. II.
The Barbarous Murder of King Charles the First, the direct issue of this
Doctrine of Mr. Hobbs, viz. That the Sovereign is but the Representative of the
People.
THat which follows immediately about our Representative in the House of
Commons, I let pass, until I come to the middle of that page and paragraph,
toward the latter end, which he begins thus: [I know not how this so manifest a
truth should of late be so little observed, that in a Monarchy, he that had the
Sovereignty from a descent of 600 years, was alone called Sovereign, had the
title of Majes^y from every one of his Subjects, and was unquestionably taken
by them for their King (I can add to him, was acknowledged so by all the World)
was notwithstanding never considered as their Representative.] He says, he
knows not how; I will tell him, because a King in no Language, nor in any
Country, is taken for a Representative: And further, that all those injuries
which are done to him (for he means ^ing Charles the First) had their pretense
from this horrid Doctrine of his, that Kings had their power from the people:
And if he will, that they made him their Representative, and not liking his
Representation, they deposed him, and would be represented by one more like
themselves. In the latter end of that paragraph, he gives most dangerous
counsel to him who had the present Government in his power (to instruct him in
the nature of that Office.) But God be praised the danger of that intendment is
over, and I let it pass. In the following part of that Cap. he very excellently
well discourses of those three Elements ^f Government, and most rationally
gives the superiority to Monarchy. Then he enters into a discourse of electing
Kings, and Temporary Powers, as D^ctators in Aristocracy, and both Aristocracy
and D^mocracy, which I let pass as not so mischievous as other things. And now
I come to his 20. Cap. page 101. at the bottom, which is thus entitled, Of
Dominion Paternal and Despotical.

CHAP. XV. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his digression censured. His first Proposition untrue. His
supposition of a General Assembly to consent to the Sovereignty of the
Conqueror unpracticable.
A Commonwealth by acquisition is that, where the S^veraign Power is acquired
by force; as it is acquired by force, when men singly, or many together, by
plurality of voices, for fear of death or b^nds, do auth^rize all the actions
of that man; or Assembly, that has their lives and liberty in his power.] Now
I am in the 102. page. This is a strange digression from his Title; What has
this acquisition to do with Dominions Paternal or Despotical? but let it pass,
I will examine his defi^ition It is not true, that all acquisition of a Kingdom
is by force, sometimes it is got by craft and knavery, we know how Absalom got
the Kingdom. There may be other instances, but let that go, acquisition by
force is but one species of acquiring Kingdoms. But then see what follows, [It
is then acquired by force, when men singly, etc.] as before expressed. I dare
boldly say he can show me no considerable Kingdom that either is or was so
acquired. I have confuted this in my former discourse, concerning the
Institution of a Commonwealth, and those arguments will be of more force
against this manner of acquiring. Suppose an Enemy should conquer France or
Spain, do you think he could or would assemble all the Nation together to
subscribe, or any way express their intentions of this his most unjust request
to own all his actions, and make him their person? it is beyond possibility to
imagine any such thing. Look upon David, Alexander, Pompey, any of those
Concquerors in the world, did they ever act any such thing? I am confident we
read of none, and yet they attained Kingdoms, and get Dominions. But let us
proceed to the next Paragraph.

SECT. II.
Fear not the only motive to consent to obedience in the Institution of
Commonwealths. No obligation from fear, when that fear is removed. The fear of
God the greatest security of obedience.
ANd this kind of Dominion or Sovereignty, differs from Sovereignty by
Institution, only in this, that men who chus^ their Sovereign do it for fear of
one another, and not of him whom they institute: But in this ease they subject
themselves to him they are afraid of.] Mr. Hobbs does attribute very much to
fear; however, in the last case, I think it not amiss: A vanquished Nation
seldom subjects themselves to an Enemy, but out of fear of the Conqueror. But
concerning the former, the motive is as much the love of their own happy and
quiet condition, together with the hope and expectation of many other
conveniences which will accrue to them and their Families by it: But (says he)
in both cases they do it for fear; which is to be noted by them that hold all
such Covenants as proceed from fear of death, or violence, void; which if it
were true, no man in any kind of Commonwealth could be obliged to obedience.]
Thus far he, and indeed if there were no other obligation but these fears he
speaks of, there were no obligation to bind any man when he may secure himself:
For let the Reader observe, that the fear he speaks of are fears of men, one of
another in an instituted, and in his acquired Kingdom for fear of the
Conqueror. Here is put down no fear of God, which is the obliging fear; for the
rest men may have worldly plots to escape, and rid themselves of the dangers of
War, but he can have none to acquit himself of Gods anger, which is the great
weight, and the only one which presses man to obedience.

SECT. III.
Mr. Hobbs his Proposition asserted. His reason of this Proposition censured.
Contracts against the moral Law ipso facto void.
HE proceeds [It is true, that in a Commonwealth once instituted or acquired,
promises proceeding either from fear of death, or violence, are no Covenants,
nor obliging, when the thing promised is contrary to the Laws: But the reason
is not, because it was made upon fear, but because he that promises, has no
right to the thing promised.] Here is a Proposition, and the reason of it. The
Proposition I speak to first, and allow it to be true, not only in a
Commonwealth instituted or acquired, but in any estate of mankind: Whosoever
promises an unlawful thing is not obliged to the performance; and the reason
is, that the Moral Law of Nature being written in men's hearts, whatsoever
engagement is made against it, is ipso facto invalid, whether he did it by fear
or no, being (as he rightly speaks) an act without his ability to perform, and
of that which was otherwise disposed of by the Moral Law. But consider, Reader,
what this is to his purpose, the sense preceding was, That all Commonwealths
were founded upon fear, whether instituted or acquired: From thence he spoke
against such as hold Covenants m^de for fear of death, or vi^lence, void.

SECT. IV.
Of Covenants arising from fear in things lawful, but against Equity. Of mixed
Contracts and Actions, of just, and lighter, or unwarrantable fears in
avoidance of Contracts.
I Looked to have him prove they were not; but instead of that he affirms, they
are v^id in an i^stituted Commonwealth, when they Covenant for an unlawful
thing.] But suppose they covenant to do a thing that is lawful? when it is in
its self lawful, although full of many inconveniences, as that Thieves should
with oaths and imprecations make a man swear to alienate his estate from his
Wife and Children, it is lawful for him to do it, but it would be a most wicked
act to keep such a Covenant; not because (as his reason is) that he had no
power to do it; for he had by all those Laws which he seems to acknowledge,
which are the Laws of the Kingdoms wherein he lives; but the reason is that
which he will not acknowledge, that Covenants made upon such terms are not
free, but mixed actions, which are done with a reluctance, and not plen^
consensu. For although he that throws his goods into the Sea, to save his Ship
and his life, does that act willingly, that is principally so, yet because it
is with a reluctance, and against his love of his riches, which weighs the
balance heavier on the other side, it is neither violent, nor willing, but a
mixed action, yet willing principally, because it is chosen; and upon this
reason it is, that this act done by such considerable fear, is expounded not
obligatory: As if a Maid surprised by such means should promise Marriage upon
terrors of death if she did not so Covenant; if she finds she should be unhappy
in such a Match, without doubt she is not bound to perform it, because it was
not fully a willing or rational act, but mixed; but yet if it had been a
voluntary act, and with full consent, she ought to keep her Covenant: Which
shows, that many times forced acts or obligations made by terror of death, or
with strong probabilities of great mischief, if refused, may when that fear or
terror is removed, and upon repentance of such Covenant, be lawfully denied,
and are not obligatory: But if it be for fear of some little danger, such as
may not cadere in c^nstantem virum, it does excuse no body. And now I let pass
the latter end of that Paragraph, and proceed to the next, in the margin of
which I find.

SECT. V.
The case of a conquered and instituted Kingdom not the same. The best art of a
Conqueror is to secure his Victory. By what means such a security may be
obtained.
THe rights and co^secuencies of So^eraignty the same in both. That is, both in
an instituted and an acquired Sovereignty, in which his marginal note is the
whole pith of that Paragraph; for he only sets down the particulars formerly
treated of, and discoursed upon before by me, and offers at no one argument,
but at the latter end he says, [The reas^ns whereof are the same which are
alleged in the precede^t Cap.] He says they are the same, and I say they
cannot be the some: For if there were such a t^ing as his institution of a
Sovereignty, yet the case of a conquered Nation must needs differ from it, for
either the Conquest is fully and complete, (which seldom happens) or else the
well^igh-conquered Nation comes to a Treaty for their conditions, which may be
to enjoy their ancient Laws sometimes, sometimes accept of new, sometimes pay a
tribute to the Conqueror, who gives them leave to live under their former Race
of Kings; sometimes have Deputies and Viceroys set over them, empowered by the
Conqueror; sometimes they accept of Garrisons to bridle them; sometimes their
words are taken; and then if there be an absolute Victory, they must be ruled
solely by the will of the Conqueror. And in none of these is the condition of
a conquered Kingdom the some with an Instituted: And surely the more conform
their conquered condition is to their former state, the more lasting it will
be, and otherwise it is in danger to decay quickly; for there is no discretion
more becoming a Conqueror, then to make his Victory certain and durable: Nor is
that any way to be achieved so easily, as by discerning the temper of those
men which he is to deal with, nor can their temper be so well understood by any
thing, as by their customs; for the commonalty of men not being able to choose
for themselves, must and will be contented with that Government which they are
used to, though perhaps another may be easier in its self. So that it is
evident (I think) to be apprehended, that the same rights and consequencies of
Sovereignty which belongs to a Supreme by Institution, do not belong to one by
Conquest.

CHAP. XVI. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his method censured, his contradictions noted. Of the right of
Dominion from Generation. Paternal Dominion not flowing from the consent of
children. Infants cannot consent. Paternal Dominion flowing from the Laws of
God and Nature. Scripture vilified by Mr. Hobbs.
IN the next Paragraph he comes to treat of Dominion Paternal how attained, as
the Margin directs. My first note shall be upon his method. He had treated in
the precedent Cap. of Dominion by Institution, then the Title of this Cap. was
of Dominion Paternal and Despotical. In all the preceding part of this Cap. he
has handled only Dominion by acquisition, and that (without consideration of
what he had writ before) he defined to be such at is got by force. Now he
confutes himself in the first words of this Paragraph; which are [Dominion is
acquired two ways, either by Generation, or by Conquest.] That by Generation, I
am sure, cannot be called by force; therefore either his definition of acquired
Dominion is not good, or that Dominion by Generation is not an acquired
Dominion. He proceeds [The right of Dominion by Generation, is that which the
Parent has over his Children, and is called Paternal.] A high Mystery
expounded; that the Government of Parents should be called Paternal: But his
next words confute this immediately, which are [And is not so derived from the
Generati^n, as if therefore the Parent had Dominion over his Child, because he
begot him.] How then can Paternal Dominion be acquired by Generation? which he
immediately before affirmed, when he said, Dominion is acquired two ways, by
Generation, and by Conquest: (but, says he) from the Child's consent, either
express, or by other sufficient Arguments declared. Let us consider this, and
examine what consent a Child can give in his Infancy, certainly no otherwise
then a Pig, or any Infant Beast; he can wish for a Teat, and cry for it when he
lacks it, and be satisfied with any that is offered. If^ this Doctrine of his
were true, the Child did choose his Nurse who give him suck, not the Mother who
gave him being. At the first in his Infancy he cannot distinguish betwixt his
Parents, and therefore can have no election nor consent (I mean rational
consent) to one more then another to be his Guardian, yet the Parent has
Dominion over that Child, and like other Governors, shall give an account one
day of that Stewardship, and of his behavior toward him. Let us go on, and
observe the Child grown up with a smattering of Reason; Can any man think that
the Parent should not govern that Child, who has not prudence enough to govern
himself, but much passion to make him, unruly, and therefore needs to have a
Governor? Well, let us go further, and bring the Child to one and twenty years
of age, when he is generally thought fit to govern his estate, if he have any,
yet even then, until his death, he owes obedience to his Parents, and they have
Dominion over him, whether he consent or not: And whosoever denies this, denies
not only Scripture (which is nothing with Mr. Hobbs) but even Humanity, which
has expressed her tenderness of this duty in all Ages, as will appear ^^ore
fully hereafter.

SECT. II.
Mr. Hobbs his Chain of contradictions discovered.
BUt good Reader observe with me how many contradictions are crowded together
in one page. First an acquired Dominion is by force, and that contradicted;
because that a Dominion is acquired by Generation, which is not a forced, but a
most natural act; and that is again contradicted, because not Generation, but
consent gives the Dominion; and this which he calls consent, is not such a
thing as belonged to an acquired Dominion, for that consent is only a consent
to that Government for fear of the Conqueror; but this consent is for love of
his own accommodation, or out of that reverential awe which Children have to
their Parents; and this is in nothing like the other. And surely if it
participated of either, it most resembled the consent which he imagines to be
in an instituted Commonwealth, and therefore not to be ranked under the
Acquisite.

SECT. III.
Mr. Hobbs his constant abuse of Scripture noted. The command of the Mother to
be obeyed in subordination to the Father, in whom the obedience of children is
terminated. His iterated quarrelling with Scripture. Rules of Government to be
proportionable to general emergencies.
BUt let us go on with him (for says he) As to the Generation, God has
ordained to man a helper, and there be always two that are equally Parents: The
Dominion therefore over the Child, should belong equally to them both, and he
be equally subject to both, which is impossible, for no man can obey two
Masters.] To begin where he ends. He does abuse Sc^ipture wheresoever it
crosses his way, as it does very often: No man can serve two Masters, but in
every Family a man serv^s a Master and a Mistress: There cannot be two
Supremes.] But in an Occonomical Dominion the Man is above the Woman, and if
the Woman command contrary to the Man, the Man's command is to be obeyed, and
the Woman her self is to be obedient to the Man, the Mother to the Father: I
but, says he, they are equally principles of Generation; therefore if the
right of Dominion be an appendant to Generation, it must equally belong to them
both. I will not dispute the nature of Generation, which Philosophers and
Physicians have abundantly done; but suppose that in the case it exacts an
obedience to them both, yet with a subordination to the Father, which must
clearly appear in this, because the Woman her self must be obedient to the
Father, as will appear in the two first principles of Generation, Adam and
Evah, God gave them that Law, Thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he shall
rule over thee, Genesis 3. 16. Now then if the man rules the woman, then in the
subordination of Government, she cannot equally share in that Dominion with
him, who is Governor of her: So that although the Child has from his
Generation two persons to obey; yet this obedience is terminated in one, the
Father who is Supreme, to whom the Mother also is subject: He proceeds [And
whereas some have attributed the Dominion to the man only, as being of the m^re
excellent Sex, they misreckon it; for there is not always that difference of
strength and prudence between the man and the woman, as that the right can be
determined without war.] Thus this Author has a spite to Scripture, and hopes
with a flash of wicked wit to divert men from that due observance which they
ought to have of those duties which are there required, or at the least to
diminish that rational obedience which men should give to it. It may be some do
attribute the obedience to the man only, out of this regard, that he is the
Nobler Sex, and why not? He is so undoubtedly; for although it may happen out
in particulars, that the Woman may be more prudent or strong then her Husband,
yet certainly the generality is not so; and the rules of governing and obeying
are not to be taken from a few particular instances, but the common condition
of the Sexes. Servants may be wiser or stronger then their Masters, Subjects
then their Kings, children then their Parents, yet these sacred Laws of
governing and obeying must not be varied for such few particular instances.

SECT. IV.
The brawling of Man and Wife improperly called war. War only between Nations.
Wisdom, not strength, enable to Government. Wives submit to their Husbands,
by the Law of God, under the first and second Adam. St. Paul's Argument from the
Law of Nature explained.
WHat he says that this cause must be determined by war, is ill expressed. For
first the contention betwixt man and wife, cannot properly be called war, but
brawling or fighting at the worst. War is betwixt Nations in the genuine
signification. I remember Aelian tells a story of the Sacae, that when a Man
and a Maid married, they were to fight at the first, and he or she that
conquered, was afterward served by the other for the term of their lives. This
was a pretty gambal, whether true or false it is not much material; I read it
only in him; but surely a most unreasonable practice. Is the power of
Government proper to strength or wisdom? Can any man think that a Bull or a
Horse is fitter to govern a man, then he them, because they are of more
strength, though he have more wisdom? But surely for us that are Christians,
there is no need to fly to such poor little instances, or customs, or the
accidental prudence or strength of the woman; if she have more wit, let her use
it to the gaining and winning him to virtue; if she have more strength, let her
use it to the assistance of her Husbands weakness: by that means her
excellencies will be employed to their right uses; she shall be a helper to
him, not a Ruler over him. I need not here repeat what of late I delivered
concerning this Doctrine out of Genesis 3. But that Gods Command is clear to this
purpose, not only in Adam, but those that are descended from the second Adam,
consider what S. Paul writes in the fifth to the Eph^sians, v. 22. Wives submit
your selves to your own Husbands, as unto the Lord. But methinks Mr. Hobbs
should answer to this, that this is only a positive Law; yet I can reply to
that, that it is universal, or what is equivalent, indefinite, and comprehends
all wives. But then go further, and read the Apostles Argument in the following
verse; For the Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of
the Church. Thus the Apostle argues from the Law of Nature: First, that by the
Law of Nature the rest of the body submits to the Head; so must Wives do to
their own Husbands. Then this is exemplified from Christianity in the manner of
his Headship, such a Head as Christ is over his Church; which I hope no
Christian will say, but that it must submit to, and be governed by him. And I
hope, both Nature, Gods Law, and Christian duty, may be sufficient to determine
this controversy without war: And I may add, that since all Nations have
consented to it, sure we ought not now to demur upon the case, because Mr.
Hobbs interposeth his Authority with little or no reason.

SECT. V.
This Paragraph coutrary to Mr. Hobbs his principles, and the supposed
institution of a Commonwealth; but yet most true, not from Mr. Hobbs his
reason, but the Law of God. Fathers of Families have the disposition of their
Families. The invalidity of Mr. Hobbs his reasons. His example of the Amazons
inconcludent.
HE proceeds: In Commonwealths this controversy is decided by the Civil Law;
and for the most part (but not always) the sentence is in favor of the Father,
because for the m^st part Commonwealths have been erected by the Fathers, not
by the Mothers of Families.] Now I am come to page 03. but I would fain know
how the Fathers, rather then the Mothers, should come to be Erectors of
Commonwealths? Certainly if Commonwealths were instituted (as he feigns) by the
general suffrage of all who had interest in the Government, then women as well
as men, Mothers as well as Fathers, had the management of that business, for
they have their interest in the public constitution as well as men. But he
has let fall an excellent truth which is clear against the whole Body of his
Politics, which is, that the Fathers of Families, not the Rabble, were the
Erectors of Commonwealths: For if they did (as I am confident with him here
they did) then his former discourse which is built upon the institution of a
Commonwealth by the universal consent of all who have interest in it must fail,
for not the Fathers and Mothers only, but even the meanest child or servant,
may challenge their shares in it. And certainly the Fathers of Families could
not be the Erectors of Commonwealths, but only out of this regard, that they
were the chief in their Families, and by that reason had right to dispose of
himself and them. And here let the Reader consider, that Mr. Hobbs never
remembers that great Authority given by God to Moses, which regulated him and
his Posterity many Generations; nor the confirmation that Law laid from our
Savior in the New Testament, which are obligatory to us in all Ages. He only
clouds the truth with this pitiful poor reason, or rather show of reason, only
that men were the Lawmakers, and they were partial to their own Sex; No,
Master Hobbs, God was the Lawmakers, who is no accepter of persons, or Sexes,
but in an infinitely wise manner disposes all things in the best and surest
method that may be, according to his most just Laws, But because he said (but
not always) that is, that the Fathers of Families were not always the Erectors
of Commonwealths, intimating that some Commonwealths were erected by the
Mothers of Families, I should thank him, or any man else, who can show me any
such in the world. It may be he will fly to that beggarly instance which he
gives presently of the Amazons; but let it suffice for them (if there were any
such) that they were Widows, or single Women, not united in Marriage, and so
not subject to Husbands, and therefore were free to dispose of themselves as
they pleased, and might have made what just Laws they thought fit for their
condition; but if they were joined in marriage to Husbands, they must then
subm^t to that yoke, and be governed in their domestic affairs according to
his discipline. The dispute is here betwixt Husband and Wife, not betwixt man
and woman, Wives must submit to their own Husbands, not every woman to every
man.

SECT. VI.
Mr. Hobbs his contradiction again censured. Antipodial Government introduced.
His conclusions not consistent one with another. Contracts (with Mr. Hobbs) but
words, and advantaged by power, may lawfully be broken. Lawful Contracts sealed
in Heaven.
HE goes on: But the Question lies now in the state of mere Nature, where
there are supposed no Laws of Matrimony, no Laws for the education of children,
but the Law of Nature, and the natural inclination of the Sexes one to another,
and to their children.] This is inconsistent with what he has formerly taught,
and I have confuted; viz. That naturally men are at war, every man with ev^^y
man: Well then, in this state before they are covenanted into a Commonwealth,
all things, all rights are tried by force, and it may happen that the man who
conquers this day may fall sick and grow weak, and then the Woman may be
Victor, and so the case may be altered; or both may grow old or sick, and their
children master them both, and so bring in an Antipodial Government: And then
let any man think, whether the wise constitution of Nature can agree with such
abominable follies? and how weak, according to his Doctrine, this conclusion
is: In this condition of mere nature (says he) either the Parents between
themselves dispose of the dominion over the child by contract, or do not
dispose thereof at all: If they do dispose thereof, the right passes according
to the contract. This distinction cannot be denied, either they must, or they
must not contract: If they dispose (says he) the right passes according to
the contract. But let him remember the state and condition he speaks of, is in
man's nature, before any imbodying themselves into a Commonwealth. Then let him
look back to what he has writ, Cap. 17. page 85. Covenants without the Sword
are but words, and of no strength to secure a man at all. And again in the same
page; Theref^re notwithstanding the Law of Nature, if there be no power
erected, or not great enough for our security, every man will and may lawfully
rely upon his own strength, and art for caution against all other men.^ Let us
put these together; the right passes by contract, says he, in this 20. Cap.
Contracts are but words, and have no force to bind, says he, in his ^7. Cap.
unless a Commonwealth be erected; therefore no Covenant gives an active right
to any thing, without the Sword in a Magistrates hand to make it good: So then
the Sword rules every man in that state, before a Commonwealth is instituted,
may lawfully rely upon his own strength or art for caution. So that although
the word be out in that state, and the Contract made, yet if the Husband or the
Wife can find strength or art to avoid it, they may lawfully use it, and to
defraud and force each other to the breach of this Covenant is lawful. So that
according to his principles, there is no considerable strength in the state of
Nature to keep a^y to their promises; but according to min^ it is not so, who
am assured that th^se lawful Contracts made on earth are sealed in heaven; and
the God of truth so loves truth, that he approves it in all conditions of men;
and therefore these bargains ought to be observed unless it may happen out,
that they are contrary to the Divine Law, as that a man should divest himself
of all his Oeconomical right which God has placed in him, and the woman by
such power should usurp a Superiority, when God has commanded her to be
subject: So that a man may, as I think, absolutely conclude, where there is no
Commonwealth, a veracity is exacted by God in such contracts, which are not
against some Divine Law; where there is a Commonwealth these bargains are
confirmed as are not contrary to their Civil Laws.

SECT. VII.
Mr. Hobbs his example of the Amazons, further showed to be impertinent.
HE proceeds, and gives an instance; We find (says he) in History, that the
Amazons contracted with the men of Neighboring Countries, to whom they had
recourse for Issues, that the Issue Male should be sent back, but the Female
remain with themselves; so that the Dominion of the Females was in the Mother.]
Here is an instance from a Lawless Conjunction, where man and woman meet
together, like beasts, to enjoy that carnal familiarity, but not like rational
creatures to cohabit together in an Oeconomical Discipline. Amongst them there
were only the first names, Man and Woman, not Husband and Wife, which began our
discourse. It is of Women renouncing men's society, who neither themselves, nor
their children, lived in the same Nation, nor under the same Government with
these whom they did converse with; and so if they had kept the Male-child, the
father could no ways come to lay claim to it, or any thing in the Amazonian
Country. And yet consider once more how weak and inconsistent his discourse is,
which contradicts it self in almost every page. He discoursed of men in mere
nature just before, and presently after, as his words are, which men which are
without all union in a Commonwealth; and here in the middle of his discourse he
gives his instance for proof of his Conclusion from the conversation of the
Amazonians with their Neighboring Countries, both which were incorporated into
several Commonwealths: For it is evident from what is written of the Amazonians
in Histories, that their Commonwealth had many distinct Laws and Customs from
other Nations (if there were any such.) But let us go on with him.

SECT. VIII.
His supposition of the state of Nature without Matrimony censured. His reasons
refuted. The Father of the Family has dominion of the Child born out of
Matrimony.
HE enters now upon the second part of his distinction: If there be no Contract
(says he) the dominion is in the Mother: For in the condition of mere nature,
where there are no Matrimonial Laws, it cannot be known who is the Father,
unless it be declared by the Mother; and therefore the right of dominion over
the child depends upon the will of the Mother, and is consequently hers.]
Here you find the state of nature again, where are no Matrimonial Laws: But
stay, there was never such a time or place, for God gave the Law of the Wives
subjection to her Husband in Paradise, Genesis ^. 16. of which I have formerly
treated. It was the first Law he gave after their eating the forbidden fruit;
therefore there was no such time or state of men, in which there was no Law
concerning Matrimony. But if he understand by this word Law, only Humane
Politic Laws, he receives his answer, that where no Politic Laws restrain it,
there most abundantly Divine Laws are without control. But he has reason for
what he writes (Because no man can tell who is Father of the child, but the
Mother on^y; therefore he is at her dispose) I would ask whether the child was
born in Marriage or no? if so, then the child is his fathers, and he is bound
to maintain him; but if not, he is Filius Populi (unless the Woman produce the
Father) and the people must father it, and provide for it. But he will answer
in the mere s^ate of nature, without Politic Sanctions, there is no Marriage.
I reply there was never such a state, but there were some forms by which men
accepted their Wives into that union; or if no Laws, yet custom and constant
usage grew into a Law, and they were thus appropriated one to the other. But
suppose the Infant (he speaks of) were born without any such conjunction, the
Woman either lived in her Fathers house, or was her self alone Mistress of a
family. If the first, she and the Child were at the Fathers dispose; if the
second, and the Father unknown, he is hers only. But he and I might have spared
the troubling a Reader with this discourse in this question; for the question
was raised about man and wife in the same family, who should govern the child,
not about such spurious Generations, where the man and woman live in distinct
families. He urges further; Again (says he) seeing the Infant is first in the
Mothers power, so as she may either nourish ^r expose it; if she nourish it, it
owes its life to the Mother, and is therefore obliged to obey her rather then
any other, and by consequence the dominion over it is hers.] Let us first
examine this little Particle (First) that must be understood of the first
instant of the child's birth, because that gives him his first being in the
world: But then is not the same power in the Midwife, who may either stif^e the
child, or preserve it? And then an equal share of duty from this reason will be
owing to her as well as the Mother. Then consider that phrase (if she nourish
it) what is that? give it suck? But suppose she does neither expose it, nor
give it suck, by reason of some infirmity or weakness which she has, but put
it out to Nurse, shall the Nurse have any interest in the dominion over the
child? I, but (he may answer) that this must be by the Mothers providence, and
then she is Author of that child's preservation: No (say I) but the Father who
must either direct, or at the least willingly permit the Mother to do it; for
the Mother being under the Fathers dominion, she cannot act any considerable
matter either to her self, or for her child, without the Fathers leave.

SECT. IX.
No Law impowring the woman to expose her child. The Law of Nature favorable
to Infants. Power or ability cannot give the character of Justice to unjust
actions. The consequences of Mr. Hobbs his conclusions discovered, and the
contrary asserted. The Mother gets no dominion over the Child by not exposing
it.
NExt let us consider what power the Mother has to expose her child; Id
potest, quod jure potest; she has no power, but by some Law which gives her
that power. I am confident he cannot find any National Law which gives the
Woman authority to act any such thing, or if he could, what would it avail him?
because he disputes of such who are not imbodied into a Commonwealth, much less
can he pretend to the Law of Nature, which dictates nothing more clearly then
the Love of Parents to their children. I but he will say, she has power, that
is, she is able to do it: If such a malicious disposition were discovered, the
Husband has power to restrain it: But suppose such a horrid wickedness may be
in the Woman, and a power, yea an opportunity of acting it, does she gain
dominion, because she does it not? by that reason Wives may have dominion over
their Husbands, Children over their Parents, Servants over their Masters,
Subjects over their Kings, for all these have or may have power, though no
right to murder or slay the other, which is very odious to the consideration of
any man who thinks upon either Oeconomicks or Politics; nay there is none of
those more abhorring to nature, then the Mothers exposing her child. I
therefore conclude against that member of his distinction, that although a
Mother may be so impious as to expose her child, yet because she has no right
to do it, she gains no right of dominion by not doing it.

SECT. X.
Mr. Hobbs his deviation from the matter proposed. Children exposed and
nourished by others, owe not filial duties to them that nourish them;
preservation not so great a benefit as being. Romulus his respect to them that
nourished him, not filial duty, but gratitude and kindness.
HE proceeds upon that supposal: [But if she expose it* and another find and
nourish it, the dominion is in him that nourishes it.] First (good Reader)
consider with me what this is to his purpose? The question raised was betwixt
the Father and Mother of a Family, who should have the dominion over their
child; now it is betwixt the Mother who brought a child into the world, and a
stranger who nourishes it: If the Wife have it (as I have showed) the Husband
has it, because he has dominion over the Wife, therefore of whatsoever
likewise is subject to her dominion. Now he produces an instance where neither
has it: Then (says he) the dominion is in him that nourishes it. I shall
answer it: If there be such Monsters who for fear, or for that Tyrant daughter
of fear, shame, shall expose their child, as (sure there are) without doubt
they do as much as in them lies put off all their Parental interest, and divest
themselves of all filial duties belonging to them, and it is as undoubted a
truth, that for that time which they are so nourished and relieved (yea indeed
all the days of their life) they owe and ought to pay great kindness and
respect to such deliverers (though not filial) because the benefit is exceeding
great which they have received from the^ Patrons, but not so great as from
their Fathers; for the Parent gives him his very being, the other but his
preservation. Now as the being of man, or any thing, is the fountain of all the
good which can come to that man, so must the gift of that exceed all other,
else his Physician may be his Father, his Cook, or his Apothecary, which
conduce to his preservation. But suppose he should be exposed not by his
Parents, but by any other means, as Romulus, although preserved and educated by
Faustulus and Lupa, and owed them a mighty kindness for that preservation, yet
this kindness when he came to be a man, ceased to be filial duty toward them,
such as was due if proceeding from a Paternal dominion over him, and rather
became a great kindness and benignity toward them.

SECT. XI.
Mr. Hobbs his reasons of the former assertions weighed, and refuted.
Obedience, where it crosses, first due to the Parent. The weaknese of Mr.
Hobbs's inferences noted. H^s conclusion censured. Oecominical Laws must be
submitted to National.
HE adds [For it ought to obey him by whom it is preserved, because
preservation of life being the end for which one becomes subject to another,
every man is supposed to promise obedience to him in whose power it is to save
or destroy him.] I answer, preservation (as the Philosopher speaks) is
continu^t^^ creati^^r generatio; so that the very being of any thing is the
substance which is preserved, and that must needs be more excellent then such
an acci^ent as preservation It is true, a ch^ld ought to obey him who has
nourished him, but not in such a degree as to a Parental relation, when that
obedience shall cross the obedience to the Parents: [Preservation of life is
the end (says he) for which one man becomes subject unto another.] But
consider what preservation that is, with that which is to come; upon this
ground the unvanquished man submits himself to the Conqueror, that he may
protect his future being, and preserve him from future danger; but this
subjection is not to him who has preserved him, but to him who will preserve
him; or if this subjection be due, yet not such, nor contrary to that of his
Parents. But I must not tire my self nor my Reader with such needless
discourses upon errors which fall of themselves without any dispute, only
entreat the Reader in perusing them to consider his inferences how they depend
one upon another, and that will be light enough to show him the weakness of
them. He goes on; If the M^ther be the Fathers subject, the Child is in the
Fathers power, etc.] It is not worth the transcribing; he now runs from Parents
barely under the Law of Nature, to such as are in settled Commonwealths; to all
which one answer will serve, that they must be according to the National and
peculiar Laws belonging to that Commonwealth; for Oeconomical Laws must submit
to National. The next learned note of his is, [He that has dominion over the
Child, has dominion also over the children of that Chi^d.] I must confess a
most true and excellent observation, and such as he will hear of hereafter, and
so I let it pass for this present. The next conclusion he enters upon, is the
right of succession to Paternal dominion, which (he says) proceeds in the
same manner as does the right of succession to Monarchy, of which he had spoke
in the precedent Chapter.] I will dispute nothing about this. The Customs and
Laws of every Nation direct the Inhabitants to what they must obey; every
condition fits not every place, yea though they may be better in themselves,
yet not to such people which are accustomed to other.

SECT. XII.
Mr. Hobbs his immethodical procedure censured. Mancipia quasi manu capta.
Servitude introduced by Conquest. The rigbt of servitude abolished amongst
Christians. After the heat of war, and a settlement made, commonly meliorated
and erected into Tenures. Mr. Hobbs his conclusions contrary to Aristotle's
Politiques. The horrid consequence of this Doctrine discovered.
AT the bottom of this page, and the beginning of pag^ 10^. he enters into a
discourse of Dominion by Conquest: In this he seems very erroneous in his
method, as well as his substance: He entitled this Chapter of Dominion Paternal
and Despotical. In the first part of this Chap. he disputed ab^ut Dominion by
acquisition, which he defined to be such as is got by force or conquest, and he
showed then that there is no difference betwixt Dominion by institution, and
that by acquisition, but only the difference of their fears Then he treated of
Dominion Paternal, (I wonder he did not call it Maternal, for that he
endeavored to make it) now again he comes to Dominion acquired by War, which
must needs appear to any man an immethodi^al method. But let us pass on, and
come to censure diverse passages in his Discourse: [Dominion (says he) ac^uired
by Conquest or Victory in War, is that here which some Writers call. Despotical,
from (...), which signifies a Lord or M^^er, and is the d^minion of the Master
over his servants.] He speaks truth when he says, that dominion acquired by
Conquest is such, if it be understood of one that is (Mancipium) taken in War;
Mancipium as it were manu captum taken by your hand in War, surely such a
person is a servant, or if you will use a more unworthy term, a Slave; the
Conqueror may (...) him, or do what else he will with him, which is the
condition of th^se despotical servants (though this right all Civilians agree
(...) amongst Christians.) But then if after a while (...) conquered men are
left to themselves to Till the (...), and live peaceably upon it, and perhaps
are governed by Viceroys, or such other means as Politiques prescribe, they
then ^ease to be servants or slaves, and come to be Colonies, and live under a
Civil Government. We may observe this in the Conquest that David, Alexander,
Pompey, Caesar, all the great Monarchs of the World; so that they shall not for
ever be under a despotical, but at the last grow into a Civil Government; as
Arist. and from him all learned Politicians termed it, until Mr. Hobbs
appeared. But Reader, I must here beg leave to look back again upon what he
writ at the beginning of this Chap. for the confusedness of his method must
needs make my discourse somewhat such, who follow him closely foot by foot. He
there affirms, that these two Governments by Institution and Acquisition,
differ not but in the manner of fear; that by Institution is obeyed for fear of
one another; that by Acquisition is obeyed for fear of the Conqueror; then the
condition of all Subjects in the most civil estate is slavery: The Supreme may
kill, ruin, destroy, beggar any of them, without Law, other then his own will,
nay he may do it rightly, then which never was there a more horrid Proposition
uttered in Politiques, and if these two Dominions be the same which he affirms
there, and Dominion by Acquisition have the power to do so as he affirms here,
it must needs be so with all Subjects according to his Doctrine.

CHAP. XVII. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his fictitious contracts with the Conqueror censured. Women by his
conclusion obliged to prostitute themselves to the Conqueror. The horror of
this Doctrine, and improbability of this contract.
I Return now to the place where I left: [And this Dominion (says he) is then
acquired to the Victor, when the vanquished to avoid the present stroke of
death, covenanteth either in express words, or by other sufficient signs of the
Will, that so long as his life, and the liberty of his body is allowed him, the
Victor shall have the use thereof at his pleasure.] It was well he added (or by
sufficient signs) for I think few men in any Conquered Nation did ever express
such words, nor indeed would half the people in any conquered Nation do it. But
consider, Reader, that in a conquered Nation, women must do it as well as men,
and then all those women must prostitute their bodies to the lust of the
Conqueror by contract, which is most abominable; and indeed that is almost
expressed in that sentence, where it is said, That he shall have the use of
their bodies at his pleasure. Let us once again look back and consider that
formerly repeated conclusion, That the same must be the state of an instituted
Commonwealth: Then all their bodies, their Wives (their lives excepted) are at
his dispose, yea at the dispose of his pleasure, and that justly, which is most
abominable. He proceeds: And after such Covenant made, the vanquished is a
servant, and not before.] If he is no servant before he make such expression, I
think a conquered Nation will never generally be subdued to that servitude. It
is true, some particular persons may stoop so low for fear of death, but the
generality of any considerable Nation can never subscribe to it, or surely if
they could, would they, for death is more eligible then many accidents which
may happen to a man under such a Covenant.

SECT. II.
Sense desired in this Paragraph. A Slave more a slave in Fetters then upon his
Parol. Mr. Hobbs his inconsistencies censured. Conquest gives no right where
the War is not just.
BUt he offers at reason to prove this assertion: For (says he) by this word
Servant, whether it be derived from servire, to serve, or from the word
servare, to save (which I leave to Grammarians to dispute) is not meant a
Captive which is kept in prison or bonds till the owner of him that took him,
or bought him of one that did, shall consider what to do with him.] I shall
censure this first for apparent nonsense; (an any man tell who he is that is
called here the owner of him that took him? Every man knows that he who takes a
Captive is owner of the Captive, but who is owner of that owner no man can
tell. At the first I thought it false printed, and (of) put for (or) so that
then it should have been read, the owner or him that took him; and that (or)
might have been an explication or that word owner; but this cannot be so,
because he adds this (or) immediately after, or he that bought him ^f him that
took him; so that it seems to me a mere irrational Proposition, to say, the
owner of him that took him, etc. This I observed, because the Reader should
consider how much care is to be used in reading such Paradoxes as this
Gentleman writes. But mark this, although this was introduced with a (for) yet
it proves nothing; his Proposition he was to prove was, That the Captive was a
servant or slave when he was set at liberty, and not before.] How is that
enforced from this discourse? he may say that clause is not before: No, say I;
for (whether it be derived from servire or servare) he is more a slave to his
owner, when he is compelled to work in fetters, or bonds, then when he is left
to his Parol; for I am sure he serves more slavishly, and is saved more
securely in that condition than the other. He proceeds; For such men (commonly
called slaves) have no obligation at all; (I believe, they are slaves not bound
with any thing but fetters) and may break their bonds or prison, and kill or
carry away captive their Master justly.] It Is true, because he is trusted with
nothing by him, not with himself; but one (says he) that being taken has
corporal liberty allowed him, and upon promise not to run away, nor to do
violence to his Master, is trusted by him.] This man, if secure, is a Captive
by Mr. Hobbs, and a servant, but not the other. I am opposite to him, and put
him in mind how little this agrees with his former discourse about the Covenant
of him who is vanquished: In this last, it is one that covenants not to run
away, and to do no violence; but in the first it was to resign his whole body
and being to his pleasure. These are very thwarting discourses to happen in so
little distance, and this last has much more easy terms then the other. He
next enters into another Paragraph, It is not therefore the victory that gives
the right of dominion over the vanquished, but his own covenant.] That covenant
gives no right, when the justness of the cause did not warrant the War; for
(as he elsewhere) No man when he has covenanted to one before, has right to
make the same covenant to another; no man can give that again which he has
first given to another.] Covenant upon Conquest may gain possession, but not
right, when the cause of War was not just, Reader, you and I may think our
selves tired with these dull discourses, and therefore I let pass all the rest
of that Paragraph, and that which follows, and will only drive at the
fundamental, which being shaken, the building will fall of its self. At the
bottom of this page he begins a new old business. [In sum, the rights and
consequences to both paternal and despotical dominion, are the very same with
those of a Sovereign by Institution, and for the same reasons, which reasons
ore set down in the precedent Cap.] which Chapter and reasons have been
examined heretofore, and therefore I will not trouble the Reader with
unnecessary repetitions.

CHAP XVIII. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his harsh conditions imposed on the Conquerors subjects assistants
in the war. Subjects newly conquered to be restrained with more severity, then
those to whom custom has made their yoke more pleasant and easy. A difference
to be made between those that are of a doubtful, and others who are of a known
and certain obedience. The difference between Civil and Despotical Government.
HE proceeds: [So that for a man that is a Monarch of diverse Nations, whereof
he has in one the Sovereignty by institution of the people assembled, and in
another by Conquest that is by the submission of each particular, to avoid
death or bonds.] I am confident (as I have formerly writ) there was never such
a Sovereign, either by Institution or Conquest, as he sets down; he has showed
none, nor I believe can show any example of either, or a possibility how either
should be composed. But suppose those now (as in his Vtopia is imagined) why
then (says he) for such a Monarch who is Monarch of these two Nations, to
demand of one more then of another by the title of Conquests, as being a
conquered Nation, is an act of ignorance in the rights of Sovereignty.] Now I
am at the 105 page, he has passed a free and liberal censure upon such
Sovereigns; but let him know (that if it were possible that there were two such
Kingdoms) it were very hard if such as adventured their lives and fortunes
with their King, and had a subordinate share in the Conquest, should after the
Conquest be no better but in the same condition with those whom they conquered,
and by them were conquered. It is true, an easy yoke, and time (the Mother of
Experience) may reduce them into one condition, when it shall be observed that
they who are conquered, are gained to a liking of the customs and manners of
their Conquerors, and that mutually their good is beneficial one to the other;
then it is wisdom in a Conqueror to put them in a parity of condition, but at
the first subduing any Nation Regni novitas, will enforce some severity, though
perhaps afterwards-Tros, Ty^iusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur, they are grown
one, and ought to be so governed: I but says he, that were ignorance of
government; I say no, but great wisdom to put a difference betwixt a forced
obedience, and that out of duty betwixt them who are of a known, and others of
a doubtful fidelity. But he gives a reason for what he writes; for (says he)
he is absolutely over both alike: Let that be granted, yet amongst his true and
natural subjects, he may justly and prudently dispense his favors and
displeasures variously, according to their differing merits and demerits, or
other prudential rules, amougst which this is one, not too far to trust a newly
reconciled Enemy, and much less an Enemy newly conquered.

SECT. II.
Servitude not equally absolute in a civil or settled Government, as in
despotical. The right of servitude antiquated among Christians.
SEcondly, that supposal may be denied, that he is equally absolute over both;
he governs one despotically as servants or captives which are taken in the War,
and the other civilly; and this is Aristotle's distinction, and received with
applause by all latter Writers, till we come to Mr. Hobbs, the one are governed
like slaves, the other like subjects; or else (says he) there is no
Sovereignty at all. Away with such a hateful speech, odious to all Nations; No
Sovereignty but arbitrary? No subjection but slavish or servile? Certainly no
society of men can abide such language: Look amongst Chri^^ian Kingdoms, and we
shall find servitude (I think) banished every where by the universal consent of
all Nations, who have received the Doctrine of Christianity: Those we call
servants, indeed are free, at least not such servants as he and I have
discoursed of; yet they are subjects to their Masters, and they have dominion
over them, but not such as a Conqueror has over a vanquished man; nay Kings
themselves, nor can any other Supreme, take away by right an innocent man's
life, and yet they are Sovereigns, and have not absolute power over them,

SECT. III.
Mr. Hobbs his inconsequences further censured. The absurdity and iniquity of
his conclusion in this Paragraph, which is yet showed to be other where
asserted by him.
I But (says he) And every man may lawfully protect himself, if he can, with
his own Sword, which is the condition of war] There was never man writ such
disjoynted things. How can this follow, if a King cannot kill an honest man
lawfully, then he may protect himself lawfully with his own Sword? as if it
should be, because a Supreme may do ill unlawfully, therefore I may do ill
lawfully? But I am sure he has said more then once, That no mon can so divest
himself of his own power and right to defend his own life and happy being in
it, as that he may not deliver himself, if he can, by killing or doing any
thing to any man.] Against which Propositions I have already spoke heretofore,
and showed how men may and have done it; so that that wicked conclusion, which
for the absurdity of it, he would have to discountenance the difference betwixt
the Government of a conquered and an instituted Nation, though not allowed by
me, is yet approved by him elsewhere, which was a main fault in him.

SECT. IV.
This Paragraph reserved to its proper place. Scripture honored even by those
who approve it not. Master Hobbs his inconcludent deductions from the 20th of
Exodus censured.
HE begins the next Paragraph, By this i^ appears that a great family, if it be
not part of so^e Commonwealth, is of its self, as to the rights of Sovereignty,
a little Monarchy. ^ I will question nothing in this Paragraph at this time,
but let the Reader bear in mind, that there is such a thing for which I shall
call Mr. Hobbs to an account hereafter. In the following Paragraph he labors
to bring Scripture for what he has taught: It is an honor to Scripture, that
it is like Virtue, commended even of those that will not follow it. But it may
be Mr. Hobbs objects it against us who do confide in it, and not produces it
to satisfy himself, that his Doctrine is consonant to Scripture, I will
examine this therefore; for surely if the Scripture be for him, I am also,
although to me it appears never so erroneous, according to mine own reason: He
begins; Let us now consider what the Scripture teaches in the same point: To
Moses, the Children of Israel, say thus, Exodus 20. 19. Speak thou to us, and we
will hear thee; but let not God speak to us, least we die. This is absolute
obedience to Moses] thus he. A strange deduction out of this Text, where is no
one word of obedience, much less of absolute obedience as to a Supreme. But I
will help what I can, Deuteronomy. 5. 27. there this self-same business being
repeated, it is added, We will hear it, and do it. There obedience is mentioned
implicitly: To understand this therefore consider with me, that the Children of
Israel having the Law delivered to them by God in such a terrible manner in
Mount Sinai, with Thunder, Lightning, Trumpets, and the like, they were
terrified and afraid to have such an immediate converse with God, they thought
it mortal, it being never before seen in the world; and therefore they
entreated Moses to go betwixt God and them, and receive Gods Will from him, and
deliver it them, and they would obey. Here is nothing of obedience to Moses,
but to God only; they trusted that Moses would relate Gods Laws to them truly,
which indeed they had great reason to do. If the rest be like this, I shall
have little trouble with it.

SECT. V.
The first of Sam. the 8. 11, 12. explained. The difference between the right
of the King, and the right of a King. Kings of several Kingdoms may have
several rights in the same Country. Diverse Kings may have different rights, as
the same Kings may also at several times. The genuine signification of these
words cited by Mr. Hobbs.
FOr the right of Kings, says God himself, by the mouth of Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.
11, 12. This shall be the right of the King you will have to reign over you.] I
stop here, because I have some things to examine in this particle before I go
fur^her. First then consider, that it is not said, this shall be the right of a
King, that would have made it Jus Regale; and being indeffinite would have
constituted it to belong to every King; but it shall be the right of your King.
Many things may be the rights of one Countries King, which are not of another;
yea many things may belong to one King of a Country, which did not belong to
another King of the same Country, yea to the same King at another time. I urge
this only against him, because he urges this place to prove the right of Kings,
which it does not do (if truly quoted) but only the right of a King of Israel,
and it may be not that neither, but only the right of the next King; for it is
said, of the King that shall reign over you, in the singular number, not in the
plural. Nay it is most certain, that God, by whom Kings reign, and from whom
they have their Authority, may give what Authority he pleases to one, and not
to another, the Plenipotency of which Commission I shall more fully show
hereafter. Well then, let it however be granted, that this Text is truly
produced, yet it proves not his conclusion, that this is the right of all Kings
And now I must blame Mr. Hobbs, who professes obedience to the Supreme
Magistrate, and the Laws and Customs of this Country; and yet here against the
Declaration of the Supreme Magistrate, the Laws and Customs of this same
Country, in the urging of this Text, which (as he interprets it) varies from
that translation which is approved by the Supreme Magistrate, the Laws and
Customs of this Nation, and is only read in the vulgar Latin; our Translation
reads it, This will be the manner of the King that shall reign over you. There
is a great difference betwixt this shall be the right, and this will be the
manner.

SECT. VI.
The former Text further illustrated. The force of the Hebrew word compared
with other places of Scripture. Cajetans interpretation censured. The
distinction of ordinary and extraordinary right improperly used for the
clearing of this Text. The word right taken for practice. The 17 of Deuteron.
14. 16, 17, 18. verse explained. The King to have two Copies of the Law, and
obliged to keep it. Ezekiel. the 46. 18. explained. The former conclusion asserted
from the whole Discourse.
THere is a great dispute amongst Critics in the Hebrew Tongue, what is the
true sense of the word Mishpot, which is rendered by Mr. Hobbs* (Right,) and by
our Translators (manner, or custom;) but certainly it cannot but be yielded,
that it is used in both senses. But our Translators do very often render it as
here, so Psalm 19. 132. as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name: But
it is not material to allege more Quotations; this Text will enforce this
interpretation, for in the 18 verse it is said, Ye shall cry out in the day
because of your King which ye shall have chosen you, and the Lord will not hear
you in that day. Consider here, that men do not clamor and cry out upon
Justice, when it is executed but upon injustice. I know there are other
Expositions given besides his or mine, as that of Cajetan, that it is not said,
the right of the Kingdom, which is a Law, but of the King; as if Kings would
esteem this right. But this is scandalous to Kings, to many of whom, I doubt
not, but Justice and Mercy are as dear as to any men in the world. There is
another Exposition with a distinction, that there is an ordinary and
extraordinary right: This Text sets down the extraordinary right; to which I
say I allow the distinction; many things may be right and lawful for Kings to
do upon extraordinary occasions, which would not be just in his ordinary
Government. But how can a man conceive that these things should relate to
extraordinary occasions, to make Perfumes, or to run before his Chariot, to
gather in his Harvest? as if there should be exigencies of these poor trifles,
or the honor of a Kings Revenue could not yield such a return as might make
every man fit for such an employment, ambitious of his entertainment. I think
this may suffice for the exposition of this Text, to show that it was spoke of
the practice, not the right of their Kings: but if not, look the seventeenth of
Deuteronomy. at the fourteenth verse, where you may see the passage foretold, When
thou art come into the Land, etc. and shall say, I will set a King over me like
as all the Nations that are about me. The very language which these men used,
ver. 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God
shall choose; and so goes on to describe the Laws for their Kings in the
following part of that verse, and the 16, 17, and 18. verses: But there is none
of these things reckoned there; and in the 18 and 19 verses, he is commanded to
get him a Copy, or a double Copy (as some would have it) of this Book, which is
Deuteronomy; one Copy to lie by him, and another to carry about with him, as
our marginal has it, and is most consonant (methinks) to the Text, which
says, He shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these statutes to
do them. So that a King ought to take care to keep the Law of the Land, which
to them was Deuteronomy. And from thence the madness of their Exposition will
appear, who think that the Law which was spoken of, was this Law afterward
spoken of by Samuel: But alas! that needs no great study either to know or
practice; this therefore must needs be the sense of it. But if this will not
serve the turn, you may read in the 46 of Ezekiel. ver. 18. some part of the Kings
Law delivered clear opposite, to one clause delivered here; that is, That the
Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance by oppression, to thrust them
out of their possession, but he shall give his sons inheritance of his own
possession, that my people be not scattered every man out of his possession.
Now this is clean contrary to that which is said, He will take your fields, and
your vineyards, and your Olive-yards, even the best of them, and give them to
his servants. This certainly is unjust for a Prince to do by Ezekiel; and
therefore these places must be reconciled, which may easily be done by our
Translation, understanding the word (Mishpot) for a custom or usage, for so
Sam. describes what will be done; but the Prophet Ezekiel, from God commands,
what is right and just to be done. And thus I think Mr. Hobbs has got little
advantage for his conclusion out of the Scripture.

SECT. VII.
The History of Saul quoted by Mr. Hobbs, improved against his Novel
Institution, and that other conclusion of his, That a man may kill any man in
right of himself. Prayers and tears the weapons of Christians.
BUt I will try how I can advance this History against diverse desperate and
horrid Opinions of his. First of his electing a King by the people, which he
makes to be the only way by which he is established in his Throne; a thing (as
I have said before) never done nor practicable; and here we find it otherwise,
for God chose that King Saul; and indeed it was the Law it should be so, Deuteronomy.
1^. 15. Nay, to come closer, (as I shall show hereafter) it is impossible, that
the people who had no power given them from God, should give it to a King; none
sure but the All-powerful God can give men power one over another. And as this
story confutes his abominable principles which destroy the foundation of
Government, so it does that horrid and treasonable conclusion of his which
plucks down all Government, and has been the Author of almost all Treasons
that ever were; that is, that in defense of a man's life, or himself, from such
hardship as may render his life irksome to him, a man may take arms, or kill
any man, or do any thing which may rescue him from it. I have spoke to this
before, how unchristian a speech it is; but now consider how destructive of
peace it is in a settled Commonwealth. There are no Traitors but pretend their
Liberties are invaded, they have no safety in their condition: The Tyrant (for
so they will term any against whom they rebel) takes away their fields, their
children illegally, and the like, he does without Law. The next (they tell us)
is their life, they will provide therefore against that, and kill him: No,
says this His^ory, when your King abuses you with such oppression, there is
no such consequence to be drawn from the whole context, that men should whet
their Swords, and be avenged. There is no power above that of the Kings, much
less is there any such in his own Subjects: But men in such a case must fly to
the King of Kings, who according to his infinite Wisdom, Justice and Mercy,
will consider and help them when he thinks fit. There is no appeal from a King,
but to his King; and then when your own sins call for his judgments (as it was
here) he will not hear your cries; which strongly intimates, we must not fight,
but cry in that day when such things are done unto us; prayers and tears are
the only weapons allowed Christians in that case: Righteous men must not think
to go to heaven with pleasure and delight, by pride and struggling against their
S^periours, but with patience, suffering quietly; by Faith, believing Gods
mercies and promises; by hope, that in his good time he will deliver them when
he thinks fit, gently submitting our selves under the mighty hand of God, who
out of his infinite wisdom suffers us justly to be so punished, that in his
good time he may exalt us.

SECT. VIII.
The former conclusions illustrated from the fact of Ahab. The condition of
Subjects, according to Master Hobbs his Doctrine, the same with Slaves taken in
War. The people transfer no power to the King besides that which God had given
him. Samuels words not positive, but menacing. God himself concerned in the
Election of Samuels Government. Exorbitant power, or absolute dominion, not
deduceable from this Text. Mr. Hobbs his conclusions fitted to the Rapine of
the late Rebels in England, whose actions he seems to approve.
YEt consider once more, if this had been the right of Kings, what a foolish as
well as a wicked King had Ahab been, who when by right he might have taken
Naboths Vineyard, would mourn and afflict himself, because Naboth wou^d not let
him have it. And indeed you may observe there, that Naboth conceived no such
right; for else he would not have denied to yield that upon a good valuable
consideration, which was due by Law. Well, this Text being thus examined, and
some inferences made upon it, let us now consider his collections out of it:
[This (says he) is absolute power, and summed up in the last words, you shall
be his servants] which is the last clause of the seventeenth verse. Let a man
consider here what Mr. Hobbs has writ of servants in the former page, (where
he sets down, that men vanquished in war are servants, and what their servitude
is) and he shall find all Subjects to be in a miserable condition, such as will
little differ from being in war; for what can war do? it can but subject men's
estates, their wives, children, and their lives, to a Conquerors will; and
that, by this Gentleman, they are in always, even in peace; yea by that very
reason, that they are imbodied into a Commonwealth. But he proceeds further: ^
Again; when the people heard what power their King was to have, yet they
consented thereto, and say thus, We will be as all other Nations, and our King
shall judge our causes, and go before us, to conduct our wars.] I looked for
these words, but ^^nd them not either in ours or other Translations; but indeed
the sense is in the nineteenth and twentieth verses: And so I let it pass: His
collection is [Here is confirmed the right that Sovereigns have, both to the
Militia, and to all Judicature, in which is contained as abs^lute power as one
man can possibly transfer to another.] But hark you Mr. Hobbs, what is the
meaning of that phrase transfer? can it be thought, that the peoples assent
transferred any Authority which God did not give? Certainly that is a greater
Exaltation then ever man dreamt of until now. But I am confident that the
people took this as a menace of Samuel, to deter them from having a King,
agreeing to the language used in the ninth verse by God to Samuel, Protest
solemnly to them, or against t^em (as it is in the margent of our Translations)
so they thought it a menace or threat; and that you may conceive from the
nineteenth verse, which begins -- Nevertheless, that is, for all that menace,
or nequaquam, as the vulgar Latin, by no means will we be terrified, but will
have a King like other Nations; they would be in this fashion; but where can
they find that fashion used in the world? they had lived in Egypt, and Pharaoh
oppressed them mightily, mistrusting them to be a dangerous people, and a
people that lived apart from the Egyptians, and had no communication with
them. But I do not read, that they took the Land of Goshen from them, which had
formerly been given them by the King of Egypt; and those horrid oppressions
were most wonderfully revenged by God upon Pharaoh and his Egyptians, when the
Israelites cried to him for help, because they were undeserved: But says
Samuel; You in this case shall cry, and not be saved, because you provoke these
mischiefs, being under a most excellent Government, the immediate protection of
God himself; in which regard he says in the seventh verse to Samuel, They have
not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over
them. And although there were some miscarriages by Samuels Government, that his
Sons did not behave themselves well under him; yet you may find in the twelfth
Cap. third ver. when Samuel resigned up his Government to Saul, he could call
them to witness, whether he had taken any man's Ox or Ass from him, or
defrauded or oppressed any man; and at the fourth verse they acquit him. So
that for men thus to reject the Government of God, by such a pious and
excellent person as was Samuel, for some discontents and rebellious humors
which were in their fancies, and exchange him for they knew not whom, was such
an unpardonable fault, that God threatened by Samuel, that he would not hear
their cries when they clamoured out for these evils; which not their folly
only, but impiety had brought upon them: So that methinks there can be no
inference deduced here to show the justness or right of this exorbitant power,
which he pretends to in this word absolute. He has the power of Judicature,
but that power is to determine what is right, and to whom the Vineyard belongs,
but not to take it to himself. He has the power of the Militia to fight with
the Enemy; nay, he may by it force (and rightly ought to use that power to
force) men to render to every man their own; but he cannot rightly take away
any man's estate from him, otherwise then the Law directs; and he who says he
can do it to others, if he felt such unjustness done to himself, would quickly
learn that Lesson, that it is excellent Justice, that Artifex necis art
periret sua; then he would abhor his own Doctrine. This was well fitted for the
sequestrations and seisures which were made of men's estates when he wrote this
Book for them.

SECT. IX.
Solomon's Prayer (1 Kings 3. 9.) explained. Master Hobbs his Logic desired in
his deductions from this Text. Judges must govern or determine according to Law.
BUt Mr Hobbs has Scripture out of Solomon's Prayer, (1 Kings 3. 9.) Give to
thy Servant understanding to judge thy people, and to discern betwixt good and
evil; (says he) therefore it belongs to the Sovereign to be Judge, and to
p^^scribe the rules of discerning good and evil, which Rules are Laws; and
therefore in him is the Legislative Power.] I could question his place of
Scripture if I were given to wrangle, for in terminis he cannot show it there,
but there is the sense. I let it therefore alone, but consider his Logic: He
says, Because he is to be Judge, and to prescribe the Rules of discerning
betwixt good and evil, which Rules are Laws.] For my part I think this
consequence is so far from a necessary deduction out of the premises, as I
conceive the contrary is absolutely true; because he is Judge, he must take
those rules which are prescribed him, but not make his rule. Consider with me,
I beseech you Reader, that every Judge must be a Judge either in a constituted
Commonwealth, betwixt men who live in that Polity, or else where there is no
Commonwealth, and where men live only according to the dictates of Nature: In
the first every Judge has the National Laws of the Country to be his guide,
and he must judge according to them, and not make Laws of his own head to judge
the cause is committed to him. For the second, he has the Law of Nature to
guide him to that which shall appear most equal, according to that rule. He who
draws a line by a rule, does not make the rule, the Judge is such, his Decrees
are regulated by the Laws according to which he decrees, but does not make
those Laws: So that although I think it true, that a Sovereign is the Supreme
Judge, and that he has likewise the Legislative power, yet not because he is
Judge: for these two are distinct faculties appertaining to the same person, as
will appear more fully hereafter.

SECT. X.
The impertinencies of the remaining part of this Paragraph censured. Matthew.
21. 2, 3. not truly cited by Mr. Hobbs. His inferences upon this Text retorted
upon him. The true intention of these words mistaken by Mr. Hobbs, and his
argument thence invalid.
THe rest in that Paragraph is such trash as never was read; not fit to foul
paper with, it is so impertinent. In the latter end of it he comes close to his
business thus; -- And that the Kings word is sufficient to take any thing from
any Subject when there is need; and that the King is Judge of that need: for he
himself, as King of the Jews, commanded his Disciples to take the Ass, and the
Asses Colt, to carry him into Jerusalem: Read the Text, Mat. 21. 2, 3. The
words as he writes them are, Go into the Village over against you, and you
shall find a She-Ass tied, and her Colt with her, untye them, and bring them to
me: And if any man ask you what you mean by it, say the Lord has need of them,
and straightway they will let them go.) Thus he writes that Text most false in
many places. But I will consider the matter in hand, and stick to his
Inferences. (They will not ask whether his necessity be a sufficient title, nor
whether he be Judge of that necessity, but acquiesce in the will of the Lord.)
Thus he. And I could wish he would acquiesce in the will of the Lord, for then
he would never have vented so many abominable falsehoods as he has. But to my
business; I first retort this ad hominem, be it true or false; This argument is
not proper from his mouth, who (page 262.) denies that our Savior had any
Kingdom in this world whilst he was in it) therefore he did not now send for
this Ass by a Kingly right; (I mean to speak to that in its proper place:) but
now he who denies his Kingdom, cannot here justly urge this for a president to
Kings: I (but he will say) he spoke that of our Saviors Manhood; I reply, if
he spoke this of him as God, it is no president for Kings; for undoubtedly God
has reserved cases to himself, by which he can and does dispose of all things
in this world how he pleases, (as will be showed hereafter) and not only of
things in Kingdoms, but of Kingdoms themselves; and therefore this instance is
no president. But then let us consider the fact: Our Savior sent for an Ass
and her Colt, they were goods belonging to another man; and the up-shot of all
was, when the right owner questioned why they loosed them, and they told him it
was for the use of the Lord, which was the Apostles language concerning Christ,
he being a person famous for many Miracles, and much Piety, as that Story will
show, the right owner let them go, and let them use them; and it is most
reasonably thought, that our Savior having made use of them in that great
Solemnity he was then going about, restored them afterward, when it was
finished. But mark, the owner gave way to his use of them; he did not take
Naboths Vineyard from him without his consent: This is a weak way of arguing,
from an act by the owners consent, to prove it lawful against his will; if the
right owner gives way to another to use his goods, there is no fault in it, and
this proves no more.

SECT. XI.
Mr. Hobbs his fallacious arguing from Genesis 3. 5. discovered: The difference of
the case stated in respect of Divine and Humane Power. Act. 4. 19. explained.
Obedience to Humane Power commanded in licitis and honestis. Mat. 23. verse the
23. illustrated from the former case of S. Peter, and S. John. Mr. Hobbs his
argument from Adams discourse in Paradise not conclusive.
WE will proceed with him. To these places (says he) may be added Genesis 3. 5.
You shall be like Gods, knowing good and evil.) Let the Reader consider this
was the Devils language: Then ver. 11. Who told thee that thou wast naked? Have
thou eaten of the Tree of which I commanded thee thou should not eat?) A man
may justly wonder what he could collect from hence: His discourse is
unnecessary, but the sense is this, that our first Parents, by an ill gloss of
the Devil, misinterpreted the command of God, which caused Gods displeasure;
whereby (says he at the bottom of that page) it is clearly (though
Allegorically) signified, that the commands of them that have the right to
command, are not by their Subjects to be censured or disputed.) See the fallacy
of this arguing, from the infinite power of Gods Wisdom, Justice and Equity, to
the finite power of man; betwixt which the difference is evident, and so
decided in the case of S. Peter, and S. John, Acts 4. 19. Whether it be right
in the sight of God to hearken unto you, more then unto God, judge ye.) The
story is this, (as you may read in the former part of that Chap. ver. the 5.)
their Rulers and Elders, Annas and Caiphas, convented the Apostles before them,
and after consultation about the business, commanded them in the 18. ver. not
to speak at all, nor teach in the name of the Lord Jesus) nay, say the
Apostles) whether it be fitter to obey God or you, judge ye.) It is so clear a
case, that God who is your Governor more absolutely, then you are ours, must
be obeyed before you, that you cannot deny it. This will be opposed to his
case; the difference betwixt obedience to Gods Commands, and men's, is mighty;
the one from an infinite Justice, and known to be so, the other from a finite,
and known also to be so; that of Gods from an infinite power, and known to be
such; that of man's from a finite, and known to be such. It must not therefore
follow, that because Gods Commands are obeyed without examining, man's must.
This may likewise give the true sense of that place urged by him out of the 23.
of S. Mat. 2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair; and therefore
all that they shall bid you observe, that observe, and do.) This he urged for
unquestioned obedience to Superiors, and receives its answer from the passage
of the Apostles, who denied their obedience in this point: it must be therefore
in li^itis and honestis, not in things crossing with Gods Commands in his
written word, or his Commands by the Law of Nature: A servant must not obey his
Masters Oeconomical Laws, where they are contrary to the National: A Child must
not obey his Natural Parents, commanding contrary to his Political: A man is
not to obey a Constable commanding against his King, nor a King against God;
his argument therefore drawn from this instance of Adams misconstruction of
Gods Commands, is not of force: That therefore we may not expound or discourse
upon man's commands, is not well collected out of his premises.

SECT. XII.
Mr. Hobbs his conclusion not deducible from the premises. The former place of
the 23. of S. Mat. further explained out of Petrus Gallatinus. Aristocratical
Power not vested in the Scribes and Pharisees.
HE concludes that page; So that it appears plainly to my understanding, both
from Reason and Scripture, that the Sovereign Power, whether placed in one man
(that which follows is page 107.) as in Monarchy, or in one Assembly of men, as
in popular and Aristocratical Commonwealths, is as great as possibly men can be
imagined to make it.) My first observation is, that he has no one place of
Scripture, but only from that place of S. Mat. where obedience to the Scribes
and Pharisees is mentioned, which can look toward Aristocraty or Democraty, of
which I spoke just now: And surely he does not think that the Scribes and
Pharisees had an Aristocratical Government over the Jews, for they were under
the Roman Monarchy at that time, and could not put a man to death by their own
Law (as they protested at our Saviors Trial,) in that then there was no
Juridical Power amongst them, no Sovereign Authority: Nay, Petrus Gallatinus de
arcanis Catholicae veritatis, Lib. 4. Cap. 6. shows at large, how not only the
Jews were captivated by the Romans, the Kingdom translated, given from one of
their onw Nation to Herod who was an Alien, but likewise their Sanhedrim (which
was until then continued from Moses his time) taken away; and when he had slain
them all but one Baba, he was not of Authority to erect one more rightly
constituted by the Law of Moses, and the Jewish Tradition. At the last he cites
this place, Mat. 23. 2. and says it ought to be read, The Scribes and
Pharisees have sat in Moses's Chair. The word in the Original is (...), which
being in the first Aorist, is often (I confess) used in the present tense, but
the story (being a matter of fact) seems to oppose it: I know therefore no
reason why it should be forced from its genuine sense; yet howsoever let it go,
it shall be taken in the present tense, and I will make all agree. He further
shows, that after Herod had slain all but this Baba, and put out his eyes, he
erected another Sanhedrim of his own, in which it was likely those who were
members of it, were allowed to meddle with some matters of small consequence:
Amongst these the Scribes and Pharisees were mixed, and by that Authority
might, according to their proud nature, possibly usurp the dignity of sitting
in Moses his Chair; and yet (he shows) that forty years before the last
destruction of the Temple, these also were taken away. Well then, it appears
clearly, that here was no Aristocratical Government amongst them, they were
governed Monarchically by Caesar, and under him by Herod. This inferior
Council had no part of Moses his judicature of life and death; nay, that power
which they had was variable, according to the will of the Monarch. But because
I am in now, I will add a word or two against his urging this place, for the
absoluteness of their Dominion, out of the following words, -- Whatsoever they
shall bid you observe, that observe, and do it. Now this word whatsoever, must
have relation to the former words, whatsoever they teach you out of Moses; let
not their vicious lives or hypocrisy make you refuse the wholesome Doctrine
which they teach; but if they teach you false Doctrine (as they will) that
comes not out of Moses his Chair, but ex Cathedra pestilentiae, as the Psalmist
phraseth it, Psalm. 1. 2. and therefore our Savior often forewarns them, not
only of the life, but doctrine of the Pharisees, in the 16. of Mat. 6. take
heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, which in the 12. verse is expounded the
doctrine; and in this very Chap. verse 4. They bind heavy burdens, and
grievous to be born, and lay them upon men's shoulders; and in the 13. verse,
they were said to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; which must be by
their doctrine: In the 16th verse, They are called blind guides, which must
also be by their ignorance in doctrine or teaching; and if the blind lead the
blind, they will both fall into the ditch: So likewise in the same verse he
reproves their false doctrine about Oaths; wherefore this (whatsoever) must be
understood of whatsoever according to that they pretend: So out of Moses his
Chair, what they from his Authority shall appoint to be observed, must be
observed; but when they produce doctrine contrary to that, they must be
disobeyed; their wicked lives shall not prejudice their godly doctrine, nor
shall Moses his Chair countenance their wicked doctrine or commands; for if so,
S. Peter, and S. Paul (before spoken of) were to blame, who disobeyed their
commands; and the inhumane Murder of our Savior might be justified, which was
acted by their direction. Well, I need speak no more to this, it is apparent,
that this neither can prove Aristocraty, nor deliver an infallible unerring
rule for them to be regulated by. And as he was to blame to found Aristocraty
upon any of these places of Scripture, so surely upon this hyperbolical
expression, That the power of every one of these Supremes is as great as
possibly men can be imagined to make it.) For then all Supremes have a like
power, (which certainly is not apparent) and at all times; for if such a
greatness belong to a Sovereign as a Sovereign, then in no Sovereign, or at any
time, can it be missing: Then the Subject cannot have right to rescue himself
from bonds, or such hardship which may render his life odi^us to him, as he
often persuades; for such absolute power may be imagined to be made.

SECT. XIII.
Mr. Hobbs his Hyperbolical Power scarce any where to be found, and yet no such
state of War, as he imagines, has followed de facto. His subsequent question
answered by another. Mr. Hobbs his Doctrine the foundation of Sedition.
Disputes concerning Governments dangerous, but not to be prevented.
HE proceeds; (And though of so unlimited a power men may fancy many evil
consequences, yet the consequences of the want of it (which is perpetual war of
every man against his Neighbor) are much worse.) Thus far he: What a strange
wild asseveration is this? Mr. Hobbs (I am persuaded) has lived in diverse
Commonwealths, yet did he never find in any this absolute Hyperbolical Power of
a Sovereign; nor did he see any where, that every man was at war with his
Neighbor. That which follows in that Paragraph I let pass, because confuted by
what has been writ heretofore, there being no new matter in it, and pass to
the next, which he thus begins: (The greatest objection is that of the
practice, when men ask where and when such power has by Subjects been
acknowledged.) Truly a wise question, and shrewdly proposed, and to which he
makes an unsatisfactory answer, which (...); (But one may ask them again, when
and where has there been a Kingdom long free from Sedition and Civil Wars?)
That word long is a word of so large a capacity, a man can hardly find any time
which he cannot say is short: But let that pass; he may consider, that Civil
War and Tumults arise from diverse occasions; sometimes from diverse Titles,
sometimes from private injuries, sometimes when people are taught, that they
may vindicate themselves from oppression by their own private f^rce and
strength; sometimes when they shall be taught, that they are the Fountain of
all Power; and therefore they may take away, as well as give: which two last
are the Fundamental Props of his whole Leviathan, and naturally produce
Rebellion toward Superiors. He goes on -- And in those Nations, whose
Commonwealths have been long-lived, and not been destroyed but by Foreign War,
the Subjects never did dispute of Sovereign Power.) He should have done a great
work if he had instanced in those Nations, and had proved they never disputed
that point. In answer to this; The less dispute there is about it, it is by so
much the safer: But who can hold men that have reason, from disputing the
reason of these great affairs which so nearly concern them?

SECT. XIV.
Mr. Hobbs his bold censure of those who have written before him. His
Principles destructive to Humane Society.
But (says he) howsoever an argument from the practice of men, that have not
sifted to the bottom, and with exact reason weighed the Causes and Nature of
Commonwealths, and suffer daily those miseries that proceed from the ignorance
thereof, are invalid.) A bold assertion, and censorious of all the world, in a
Subject of which hundreds of learned men have discoursed much more safely and
rationally then himself, and declared those things which he calls the Causes
and Nature of Commonwealths, much more excellently then he, (as may appear to
any man who will peruse them.) Which Writers, although they may have
infirmities and errors, yet I never read one man, who maintained in
Politiques, Principles so destructive to Humane Society as himself: But he
gives an instance to confirm his answer to that argument; For (says he) though
in all places in the world men should lay the foundation of their houses on the
sand, it could not thence be inferred, that so it ought to be.) He says truth;
but his instance is like his conclusion which he would illustrate by it: and
when he can show me that all men have built their houses upon the Sand, I will
yield, that all Nations in the world have founded themselves upon weak
supports; but until then, he shall excuse me from thinking one or the other.

SECT. XV.
The Rules in Politiques not founded upon Demonstrations. The judgments and
humors of men equally various. The Rule of Government must follow the present
occurrences.
HE again: The skill of making and maintaining Commonwealths, consists in
certain Rules, as does Arithmetic and Geometry, not (as Tennis- play) upon
practice only; which Rules neither poor men have the leisure, nor men that have
had the leisure, have hitherto had the curi^si^y or the meth^d to find out.)
The first clause of this affirmation must be examined; first, where he says,
the skill of making and ruling Commonwealths, consists in certain Rules, as
does Arithmetic and Geometry;) Rules, without doubt, all prudential actions
are governed by; but to say like Arithmetic and Geometry, is more then can be
justificd, for their Rules are most certain, the demonstrations out of them
most undeniable; but the affairs of Politic Government most weak, the
subjects (which it treats about) most unconstant, which is men united: and
because the judgments of men, their humors, their passions, are all obnoxious
to variation, there can be no certain Rules which can meet with all accidents
at home, or abroad with other Nations, which are variable one as the other; but
much and many designs must be daily changed, according to diverse occasions; and
indeed they are so many, that no wit of man can foresee all: Let Achitophel
himself advise never so cunningly, yet if Absolon do not follow it (which no
man can foreknow, but by guesses) his directions can effect nothing; and
therefore there is no conformity in the Rules of the Mathematics, and these of
Politiques; the one like the subject most immutable; the other like its subject
most uncertain. The last clause of that Paragraph and Chap. is nothing but a
great Rant, and express contempt of all other Writers, and an implicit
magnifying his own Politiques: To which I may justly say, it would have become
other men's mouths or pens better than his own; and what I think of it is this;
that if his former expression be true of them, that they have built upon Sand,
I may say, his building is upon Quagmire: building upon Sand will support a
building until storms fall, but his will not support an Edifice, but fall of
its self; the very Foundation sinks, without any other weight upon it, or
violence to it. And so I have run over this Chap. and thought to have gone no
further in his Politiques, but the Title of the next Chap. enticeth me on,
which is, Of the Liberty of Subjects.

CHAP. XIX. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his Comment upon his own Text censured. Libertas coactionis, and
necessitatis: the second proper only to men.
HE begins this Treatise thus: (Liberty, or freedom, signifies (properly) the
absence of opposition (by opposition I mean external impediments of motion;)
and may be applied no less to irrational and inanimate Creatures, than to
rational.) Consider, Reader, what a strange perplexed kind of writing this is,
where he is forced to write a Comment upon his own Text. To begin with him:
(Liberty, or freedom) What need of freedom here, when the subject he treats of
is Liberty? Secondly, What need of that Parenthesis to expound opposition? If
he had not affected a deceitful way of writing, he might in fewer words, and
much more clearly, have said, Liberty signifies (properly) the absence of
external impediments of motion: But if his contempt of such Learning had not
made him neglect to read it, he might easily have known there is a liberty a
Coactione, from constraint, and a liberty from necessity. The first is that,
and that only which he defines; but the second, which is the more noble part of
liberty, is left out by him, and that is peculiar to men alone amongst all
sublunary Creatures. He proceeds to illustrate his conclusions; (For whatsoever
is so tied, or environed, as it cannot move but within a certain space, which
space is determined by the opposition of some external body, we say it has not
liberty to go further.) This I agree to, this is liberty from constraint; and
so I agree to his whole discourse, in exemplifying that, which I would say is
ingenious, but that it explains what no man denies; therefore I let alone what
follows to the bottom of this page, and so come to page 108, which begins thus.

SECT. II.
M. Hobbs his Freeman not actually to be found in the whole world. His
unhandsom censures of those who have used the word Liberty or Freedom, in a
sense different from himself. The activity of heat hindered by cold; neither of
them bodies. Spirits hindered in their motion. Freedom used in a passive
acception.
ANd according to this proper and generally received meaning of the word, A
Freeman, is he, that in those things which by his strength and wit he is able
to do, is not hindered to do what he has a will to do.] This is freedom and
great liberty; but I doubt he will not find any Subject in the world having
this liberty. He might have given this Chap. another title, for there are no
subjects which are not confined from this liberty. Well, he goes on, and I wait
upon him: But (says he) when the words Freedom and Liberty are applied to any
thing but bodies, they are abused.) It was unkindly and unhandsomly said, to
affirm it abused, since it has been the language of all men who have written
of any spiritual things; which certainly, having no bodies to hinder them, must
needs be free, according to his own conceit. I hope in a fuller manner to
handle the nature of Spirits; therefore I will not meddle now with it, only I
will mind him of that common Proverb amongst us, denoting a spiritual freedom
in that which is no body, and that is, Thought is free; and yet this thought is
a spiritual thing, having no dimensions; but because no Humane Laws can
restrain, confine, or judge of men's thoughts, they are free. But he produces a
reason for what he had writ (for that which is not subject to motion, is not
subject to impediment;) What he means by motion, I know not; but if he means
that, which according to the common acceptance of Philosophers it imports,
that is, not only lation or changing of place, but that which makes any change
in any thing, which (he knows) are commonly reduced to six species: then he
might have observed, that that heat which warms a man's hand is not a body, and
yet may be impeded and hindered by cold from its activity, or that motion of
calefaction. Well then, some things besides bodies have motion, and may have
that liberty (which he speaks of) confined by external things. But because his
Philosophy points at a contempt of Spirits, whose motion is not so clearly
discerned as that of bodies, especially in that succession in which bodies
move; and I think he means only local motion; I dare affirm that Spitits move,
in their way, from one place to another, in a spiritual manner, and are at one
time in a place, in which they were not before; and many times have spiritual
impediments; of which I reserve a fuller discourse hereafter. But at this
present, my affirmation is as good as his negation, especially countenanced
with such a general consent of Philosophers, as cannot be counterpoised by any
thing that can be produced for the contrary opinion. Well then, let us examine
that which follows -- Therefore (says he) when it is said (for example) the way
is free, no liberty of the way is signified, but of those who walk in it
without stop.) This expression will not serve his turn; that phrase, The way is
free, does not mean a liberty of the men who walk in it without stop; for
prisoners in bonds may walk in it without stop, who are far from freedom; nor
is it yet used abusively, but passively, which that word freedom does bear,
(though hardly that word liberty, which he applies to it.) So that the meaning
is, the way is of an open condition, not appropriated to any particular owner,
so as to forbid you legally to pass there; nor is this an abusive speech, but
this word liberty is seldom used but (with such addition as may expound it) in
a passive sense, for some power to act, although freedom in others.

SECT. III.
The instance of a Gift, not at all to Mr. Hobbs his purpose. A double
acceptance of the word Gift. The vulgar phrase, of Gift is free, abused in
either sense. Metonymies the Elegancies of common Language.
ANd (says he) when we say a Gift is free, there is not meant any liberty of
the Gift, but of the Giver, that was not bound by any Law or Covenant to give
it.) Consider, good Reader, how this instance disagrees with his undertaking;
which is, first, that freedom applied to any thing but bodies is abused;
Secondly, his medium by which he proves that it is, for tha^ which is without
motion is without impediment. Now his second instance is, because a gift is
called a free gift. Let us consider that a gift, is either the thing given
(which is often called the gift of such a man) or else the very act of giving
it. In the first acceptance he cannot say, it was bodies, nor a body, that
has no motion, like to a high way; (of which before) it may be a horse, a dog,
or any living creature. Then secondly, take it for the act of giving, that is,
a motion of the mouth, or hand by writing, it is a motion of a man, that
therefore cannot be pertinent. But then he expounds right, when he says it
signifies the liberty of the giver, who was not bound by any Law or Covenant to
give it.) It is true Mr. Hobbs; but yet this is no abusive speech but a
Metonymie, the effect for the cause; which figures are so far from being an
abuse, as they are the Elegancy of common Language; and indeed have so
prevailed upon every man's tongue and pen, that a man can hardly speak or write
significantly without them, unless he would tie himself to strict Logical and
Metaphysical notions and expressions.

SECT. IV.
Mr. Hobbs his third instance censured. Freedom of Speech diversely accepted.
His illustrations most uncertain, and deviating from his matter.
HIs third instance: (So when we speak freely, it is not the liberty of voice
or pronuntiation, but of the man whom no Law had obliged to speak otherwise
then he did.) First, I think he is mistaken much in the sense of this phrase
(free speech) for we shall find it two ways used in our common conversation of
men with men; sometimes in a virtuous sense, as, he did preach freely, deliver
the truth without fear of men, for that bondage of fear is a great captivity;
sometimes in a worse sense, when we use to say, such a man is one of a free
conversation, he speaks freely; not that he speaks things as no Law has forbid
to speak otherwise, but without consideration; he gives no Law to his own
tongue, one (as we otherwise phrase him sometimes) without fear or wit, and it
is within an inch of sauciness. Now freedom of spe^ch does not relate only to
the outward Laws, but to the ability sometimes of Language; and yet I may add,
he was to blame when he denied the use of it concerning the bodily
pronuntiation, for we use to say, he is free from stammering; and for
stammering, he has an impediment in his speech. Let the Reader forgive me for
meddling with such trifles as these are, which in this place I do, because he
may observe how crude and indigested his discourse is, and how uncertain even
his illustrations are, which ought to be of a clearer evidence. But now I come
to his Lastly; which indeed I guess to be the work he aimed at, and this only a
Preamble to the Liberty of Subjects, which indeed it concerns not.

SECT. V.
Of freedom and liberty again; These two contrary to his former acception of
the words, now distinguished by Mr. Hobbs. The word will taken in a double
sense, equally with understanding, by the Philosophers. The common notion
justified against Mr. Hobbs. The subjectum quod, and the subjectum quo of
liberty in the will. A twofold act of the will (confounded by Mr. Hobbs)
explained and asserted. God only can do what ever he has inclination to.
LAstly, (says he) from the use of the word Free Will, no liberty can be
enforced of the will, desire, or inclination, but the liberty of the man; which
consists in this, that he finds no stop in doing what he has the will,
desire, or inclination to do.) What? from the use of this word Free Will, no
liberty can be inferred of the will, desire, or inclination! I wonder why by
his discourse, because it is no body, which he conceives to be the only free
thing; but that has been refuted: other things are as free as bodies,
according to his conceit of freedom, because other things produce alteration,
and may be impeded in their operations. But perhaps he puts a difference here
betwixt freedom and liberty, which before he conjoined; and conceives that the
freedom of the will, which may not be stopped or hindered in its operations, is a
distinct thing from its liberty of doing, or not doing, of electing this, or
refusing that: And although he allows the first, that it is free, without stop
to operate; but has no liberty to operate, or not operate, or to refuse one,
and choose another; this I apprehend to be his meaning, as will appear
presently, his whole discourse pointing at it. To understand which, let the
Reader consider with me, that this word will is taken two ways; for a faculty
in the Soul, by which it produces diverse acts, as to will, or nill, choose, or
refuse. And secondly, for the prime act of this faculty, which is to will, for
so Philosophers do with the understanding. Intellectus is the faculty by which
a man understands any thing, and the prime act of the understanding, or indeed
the chief habit by which it understands any thing. The habitus principiorum, is
called Intellectus: Thus sometimes the same name is applied to the faculty, and
the chief operation of the faculty: I speak this, because he more then once
abuses this notion with some derision; but however, until we can learn more
significant terms to express our notions by, we must be content with such as
are in use. Now consider, here he takes will for the act, or the operation of
the faculty, not the faculty it self: that is evident, because he expounds it,
as if they were one by desire and inclination. Now those two, desire, and
inclination, are actual motions, or at the least, tendencies to motions: Now
(says he) of these there is no liberty, but the liberty of the man. It is
true, the man is the subjectum quod, or the Soul of man in which the faculty of
the will is, but the will is the faculty which is the subjectum quo, the
immediate subject by which the man is free; and by this faculty the man is
enabled to work this act of willing freely. But yet consider with me a little,
that the will being the instrument which man uses to obtain his happiness,
has a twofold act; one respects the end, which is happiness, the other the
means, by which this happiness is to be obtained: The first is natural, and
necessary; as natural, as for the eye to see colors, for the fire to burn.
There cannot be a man who would not be happy, he may be mistaken in the thing
so as to count this or that to be happiness, which is not, but he would be
happy. The second, which is conversant about the means, is Election, and that
act is free for a man to choose, or not choose, to choose one, and refuse another.
Now concerning the second there is abundance of liberty; concerning the first,
he might confound will, desire, and inclination; but concerning the second, he
may will, or rationally desire that which he has no inclination to, yea is
averse to in his natural inclination; and therefore in that regard they were
very ill joined together; and it was a Gambal of him, and what follows is most
odious to all reason and experience; for explaining himself, what he meant by
the liberty of man, which (says he) consists in this, that he finds no stop
in doing what he has the will, desire, or inclination to do. Consider this
strange proposition; Was there ever any man of such a liberty, such a power,
that he finds no stop in doing what he has a will to do. The greatest Emperor
that ever was, could never say so; they have stops in themselves, their own
reasons and consciences forbid them to do many things they would do, their
short and weak arms stop them from doing many things they are inclined to do,
only God is capable of this liberty, whose infinite wisdom can find out all
things, and infinite goodness desires nothing but what is most excellent, and
infinite power can do all what he has an inclination to: It was therefore a
most strange speech, and I cannot but wonder how such things can pass amongst
reasonable men for Philosophy; and being in, I think it my duty to show such a
thing to a heedless Reader.

SECT. VI.
Of mixed actions, will, desire, and inclination, distinguished; confounded by
Mr. Hobbs. Of goods cast into the Sea, for the preservation of the Ship and
Passengers. The dictate of Reason often disobeyed, and the will violently
carried by the sensual appetite. Denominations are a principaliori.
SO now we will pass on to the next Paragraph; I expect more of this stuff: It
begins (Fear and Liberty are consisting) (I believe they are in a mixture) as
(says he) when a man throws his goods into the Sea for fear the Ship should
sink.) This instance is commonly given to mixed actions, which are compounded
of voluntary and involuntary; here is a part of both; he does throw his goods
into the Sea, this makes it voluntary; he does it grudging, that makes it
involuntary, yet it seems the predominancy is in the will. But now consider
with me, that these terms (which he handled before, and confounded together)
you may now find distinguished, they are will, desire, and inclination: these
three (to speak properly) differ, according to a threefold estate in man,
Natural, Animal, and Rational: According to the first, he has inclination to
tarry and remain in the world, with the like; agreeing to the second, he
desires meat, drink, to walk, to talk, and do all things which are pleasant to
him: According to the last, to act such things as reason shall dictate: Nay he
may have an inclination to many things which Reason can say are not fit; take
the highest instance which can be given, that is, to live; when Reason shall
show him, that it is not fit to live upon such dishonest terms as are offered.
So likewise he may have an animal desire of pleasure, which being found not fit
by Reason, the rational will controuls it. Thus we see those three Appetites;
and to keep close to his instance, man has an inclination and a natural
appetite to live, and has a sensual desire of his riches, by which he hopes to
live to the satisfaction of his sensual appetite; but Reason prescribes, that
life is to be preferred before all the pleasures in the world. So that here he
says right, one may have a will to throw his riches into the Sea, but his
sensual desire is against it, and that makes it have a degree of unwillingness.
Consider again, that this act of throwing his goods into the Sea, is in its own
nature an unwilling act; for no man would desire to cast that away, which with
so much hazard and pains he had got; but in the particular, when it comes to be
yoked with that greater mischief of loosing his life, then it is chosen before
the other, and yet it is often grieved for when it is passed and gone, which is a
shrewd objection against the willingness of it; for no man is rationally
grieved for doing what he will; but be it as he will, yet the rational will,
the sensual desire, and the natural inclination, are not the same; and although
the rational will in that act does command, yet in many it does not, being
violently carried away with the other; So that he says truth, when he says,
-- casting his goods into the Sea was a willing action, although there was an
earnest desire to the contrary; and there was, by reason of that, some mixture
of unwillingness in it; yet denominatio a principaliori, the predominant part
gives the denomination invincibly: So likewise what follows in another
instance, of him who pays his debts only to avoid imprisonment:) And what in
the conclusion of that Paragraph, he says, That generally all actions which
men do in Commonwealths for fear of the Law, are actions which the doers had
liberty to omit) therefore certainly they had liberty in themselves, they might
do, or not do them.

SECT. VII.
The deficiency of Mr. Hobbs his instance of water passing in its channel.
Libertas coactionis, and necessitatis, further explained. Liberty properly ad
opposita.
NOw I come to a new business: Liberty (says he) and necessity are consistent;
as in the water, that has not only liberty, but a necessity of descending by
the channel.) This instance is not full; for although there is a freedom to run
in the channel, yet the banks of the channel so confine it, that the water can
run no where else; like a man who has his shackles knocked off, yet is
confined to his chamber still, and is a prisoner there. But to understand this,
consider with me, that this liberty which he speaks of concerning the water, is
a true liberty, so far as I explained it, according to his definition, which is
a liberty to run in the channel without external impediments; but absolute
liberty it is not, because both it is impeded from overflowing the channel by
the banks, and likewise because it is restrained by its nature, so that it is
not absolutely liberty. There is libertas a coactione, a liberty from
constraint of outward causes, but there is no liberty a necessitate, from the
necessity of its nature, without which there is no proper liberty any otherwise
then a prisoner has to live in Gaol: But liberty is ad opposita, to things of
diverse nature, where the Internal Principle has power to do this, or that; or
at the least, to do, or not to do, as he speaks at the end of the last
Paragraph; -- The doer had libert^ to omit. Now the water has freedom to do,
it is not hindered from running in the channel; but not so much liberty as
School boys take one toward another, when the weaker Boy should choose the
b^st, the stronger would give him the worst, and bid him choose that or none;
for the water has not liberty to run, or not to run, but only liberty to run.

SECT. VIII.
Mr. Hobbs his former instance to voluntary actions. His liberty to have, or
not to have written and dispersed, these impious Doctrines.
HE procceds: (So likewise in the actions which men voluntarily do.) It is not
so in the actions which men voluntarily do; there is no necessity for them to
do their voluntary actions; they can choose whether they will do them or not;
that man who does virtuously, can choose, and do vitiously: And so contrarily,
he could have chosen whether he would have writ these wicked Doctrines which he
has taught: If not, let him confess it, and I will prove him not to be a Man,
but a Beast, and fit to be used as a Beast, yea worse then a Beast, to be like
a stone which naturally descends, or water which necessarily runs down its
Channel, and so ought to be used like it; for indeed there is no one thing more
peculiar to man then this liberty.

SECT. IX.
Mr. Hobbs his Reason of the former Assertion invalid. Of the first and second
causes. Men actively, other creatures passively, capable of commands, Fools and
Madmen incapable of commands.
BUt he gives a reason for what he speaks: (And yet, because every act of man's
will, and every desire and inclination proceeds from some causes, and that
from another cause, in a continual chain (whose first link is in the hand of
God, the first of all causes) proceed from necessity.) The force of this
Argument is invisible; for though this will does proceed from a cause, as he
expresses it, yet if that immediate cause from which it proceeds be not
necessary, yea, if any one Link in the Chain of Causes be free, and not
necessary, the effect is not necessary; for the arbitrariness of any one will
make the effect such: But this liberty of the Agent (he speaks of) looks only
upon the immediate cause, which in humane actions is free, and may not be done;
yea, very often the Agent may choose the contrary: That the first cause works
with all second causes, is as certain as any thing in the Mathematics; for
there cannot be a second, or a third, or any number, but it proceeds from a
first: And yet because the first has an influence upon the rest, it follows
not that they are Ciphers, but each out of that foundation has its several
operations: So in this, the first cause is Causa generalis, and works with
second causes which are derived from it: But they have their several ways and
powers of working; Natural, according to their natural inclination; Animal,
according to the peculiar disposition of those Souls which inhabit them; only
man has a free nature amongst bodily things, in that resembling the Great
Cause of Causes, he is the Principle of those actions which he does as a man
voluntarily; and therefore is capable of Commands actively to do, and the other
Creatures passively to be done, or used, and Man is used as a Master, or Owner
under God, of them, a Steward who must give an account of such of them as come
within the sphere of his Dominion. Let any man tell me, how a man can be
capable of commands, if he were like them necessitated: No man commands Fools,
Madmen, or Infants; we might account them Fools, or Mad, who should do it; but,
if he would have them act any thing, he must work upon their predominant
passion, as we would do with Beasts, because there is in them a deficiency of
this high Power, to be Master of their own actions. It cannot be then, that all
those Precepts, Councels, Commands of God, should be given to him who has no
power to obey: And from thence we must needs conclude, that they have a liberty
to do, or not to do. But let us follow him.

SECT. X.
Mr. Hobbs his Supposition impossible, without a Revelation. The force of the
word-See.-His Hypothesis granted. His Inference would not follow. Causes not
otherwise to seem, then as they are in their own Nature.
SO that (says he) to him who could see the connection of th^se Causes, the
necessity of all men's voluntary actions would appear manifest.) This conclusion
is founded upon an impossible supposal; there is no possibility that a man in
this world should see that Chain of Causes, in Heaven hereafter he may, but
here he cannot without a mighty strange Revelation. But suppose he could? This
word See denotes a clear apprehension; What would follow then, but that he
should see such causes necessary which are necessary, and such free which are
free; he would see them as they are, not see them in a representation false,
and so not agreeing to their condition.

SECT. XI.
Of Gods concurrence with humane actions. No man a sinner if necessitated to
sin. Divine disposure necessitates not to Evil. God not the Author of those
actions which are contrary to his commands. He is truly the Author of those
actions he advises. Gods concurrence further illustrated, from the influx of
the Sun. Liberal Agents not necessitated by the ordinary concurrence of God.
HE proceeds: (And therefore God that sees and disposes all things, sees
also, that the liberty of man in doing what he will, is accompanied with the
necessity of d^ing that which God will, and no more, nor less.) Certainly,
although I think very many men are too bold to discourse of both Gods Knowledge
and Will, as they do, which are things too high for the weak sight of man to
look clearly into, yet men may confidently say, as his Knowledge cannot be
deceived, to judge falsely, so his Will cannot be deceived, in willing that
which is not good; and therefore because men are free Agents in what they do,
and must give an account of their actions to him, and be judged according to
them by him, it is not possible to conceive, that he should know them other
then free, which liberty was his own gift. And for his will, since it^ has
pleased God in his holy Word to reveal to us Rules by which we may know what is
his will for us to do, in doing which we please him, and that he likes us; as
also what is against his will, in doing which we shall anger and offend him,
and he will punish us, although God be not only a general, but the first cause
which works with and in us* yet it is not possible for man to think, that God
does in that concurrence determine man's actions to such things which he himself
has declared evil, and against his will, and which he will punish; and
therefore it was too bold an Ass^rtion to say, That man does no more or less,
then he is necessitated by Gods will, which is to make no man a sinner; for
although (as he spoke) God disposes all things, and that disposure must needs
be to infinitely good and wise ends, even the evils and things against his
Rules of goodness, yet his disposure orders such men, according to their evil
actions, to suffer, not makes them do evil that they may suffer. But perhaps he
explains this (For though men may do many things which God does not command,
nor is therefore Author of them.) Nay, I will tell him more, men may do, and
many men do many things, not only which God has not commanded, but which God
has forbidden, and has commanded they shall not do; and surely then he is
less Author of them: But if a man do an act of advise or counsel of Gods
without a Command, yet that Gods Counsel is Author of. Now these actions which
are against Gods Command, without doubt he is not Author of; if he were, he
could not justly punish them: But I would fain make out his sense, which is
this, he does not do it by Authority given by God, but against it; Well then.
Gods Authority is against evil, but his power works this evil. So he seems to
affirm in his following words; (Yet they can have no passion nor appetite to
any thing, of which appetite Gods will is not the cause.) True indeed, God is
the first general cause, but not the second and particular. The Sun is an
universal cause, it shines upon the Earth, Trees, Plants, and is the cause of
their fertility, but diversely, according to the diversity of Constitutions it
concurs with; so does God, as he is the first and general cause (meeting with
several conditions) operate severally, to the production of those several
effects which are produced by them, with things necessary, before he produces
necessary effects. But, as the Suns concourse does not determine this thing to
this, and that to that effect; so does not the general concourse of God
determine this or that appetite to this or that object, in this or that manner;
but when it meets with things so disposed, it concurs in the production of that
effect to which it was so disposed; so that God concurring with free Agents,
makes them no more necessary, then his concurring with necessary Agents makes
them free: It is the same infinite Power of God which constituted both, and his
concurrence destroys neither in its ordinate working: (I speak not of his
extraordinary operation, whereby he can and does control all the frame of
Nature, when and how he pleases, nor does Mr. Hobbs): Nay, I may say, that God
himself being absolutely free, bounded with no limits, having nothing above, or
about him, which can stop or hinder his Almighty hand from working, it is much
more reasonable to think, that his concourse should make even necessary Agents
free, and not to be bounded by their natures which he had given them, rather
then that this most free Agent should against himself make those which he had
constituted in a free nature to be necessary, because they are by that more
like himself, which every Agent endeavors: Nay, in his extraordinary works, he
does often, for the present, shake off those bonds which his former Donation
had confined them to; so that by his extraordinary concourse, he makes them
cease from their former operations, which by their natures they were
necessitated to do; as the fire not to burn, the water not to run down its
channel, and the like, which are apparent to every man. So then, though Gods
will and concurrence is a cause of those actions, yet not being a terminating
cause, but concurring with that nature which he had given them, that
concurrence does not necessitate that operation which he had given to man, viz.
freedom to do, or not to do. But he proves the contrary in his following words,
which are these.

SECT. XII.
The consequence of this Paragraph examined. His meaning conjectured and
refuted. Every deviation contradicts not the Power and Omnipotency of God.
Voluntas facere and fieri distinguished in God. Men not justly punished with
Damnation, if necessitated to sin. Mr. Hobbs censured for obtruding those
Doctrines in Divinity amongst his Political Discourses. The actions of the King
and Subject alike necessitated by Mr. Hobbs his Chain of Causes.
ANd did not his will assure the necessity of man's will, and consequently of
all that on man's will depends, the liberty of men would be a contradiction
and impediment to the Omnipotency and liberty of God.) I do not observe how
this consequence can be deduced out of the premises; for if God endowed man
with liberty and free power in his nature, why should it follow, if God do not
necessitate his actions, that man's will would cross and impede the power and
liberty of God? For the will of God is, that man should act freely: the free
actions therefore are according to his will, and the necessitation would be
contrary to his will. But, I think, he means, that if man's free power could sin
against the will of God, then man should be able to contradict and stop his
Omnipotency and Liberty. To understand this therefore, consider with me, that
Gods Dominion over this World, is like that of a King in a Kingdom; he gives
Laws and Rules to the Su^^^cts, which if they observe, they shall live happily
under him; but if not, he will punish and afflict, yea perhaps destroy the
offending parties: It is an opposition to the Kings power, that when men break
his Laws, and he shall go about to punish them, they shall then rebel against
him, and oppose the power of the County, or of the Kingdom, or that power which
he musters up to do Justice upon them* then indeed his power is contradicted
and impeded. God, whilst men live here with these natures, has given Rules,
and governs them by such Laws as he has appointed them for their good; if they
observe those Laws, happy are they, but he seldom puts in his Omnipotency to
make men do the one or the other, never to make men break his Laws; he
ordinarily does not vary the nature of man, or any thing. Men may and may not
keep his Commandments, (I do not now dispute of the nature of Grace, or any
thing of that kind) they that do not, shall be punished, as the other blessed;
and then comes in his Omnipotency; if man could resist or impede that, that
were contradicting his power; but these sins only oppose his concourse which
inclines, but not necessitates a man's nature; so that there is Gods voluntas
facere and fieri, his will which we should do; which it is impossible for God
to oppose; and there is his voluntas facere, to do himself, which it is not
possible for man to oppose: The first appears in this life, the second in the
other; nor is it any contradiction to the Divine Power which has so
established it, and without which it were impossible for his Power to join with
his Justice in punishing Offenders at the last day; for how can a man justly be
punished for what was not in his power to do otherwise, yea much less can he
punish him in Justice, who makes him commit that fault which he punishes,
which God must do, if he (with his cooperation in the act) determines man's
power to that evil which he punishes, and for which condemns him to Hell.
Certainly, this is the most abominable impudent Doctrine for sinning that ever
was read in any Author that ever writ of this Subject, and the most derogative
from that infinite Essential Goodness that should cause, or make men do evil;
for no more then fire can cool or act against its nature, no more can God, who
is essentially good (goodness it self) act that which is evil. It is in vain
for a man to say, it is not evil, God doing it; for it is an evil which God
hates and punishes, and therefore must be evil in his esteem. I do not now
speak of that Language used by some, Of Gods afflictions working with some men,
which comes not in this discourse to be disputed of; but that God does work
these sins which he punishes, this is abhorrent to the thought of a Religious
man. And now, I must censure Mr. Hobbs, not only for ill and false Doctrine,
but for having such a delight in it, as in this place unnecessarily to obtrude
it, where there was no reason for, nor use of it; for let any man consider what
this has to do with liberty of the Subject, which is the Head he undertook to
treat of; the liberty of the Subject is neither more or less for his linking of
his actions to God Almighty; nay, if his discourse be true, Subjects have as
great liberty as Kings, for all their actions are alike necessitated by this
Chain.

Here Reader, I thought to have ended with his Politics, having, as I think,
dug up his Foundation, and then the Building must fall; but meeting so many
wicked interpretations of Scripture, and so many abominable conclusions in
Divinity intermixed with his Political discourses, I am forced to proceed with
some of them, lest the Reader should be unhappily seduced, but not prosecute
them word by word, as I have done; but skipping from one hill to another,
leaving the lesser work, and Mole-hills, to be censured by any man who has
more leisure and spare time; and to that purpose remove with me to the next
page 109. about the middle, where he begins thus.

CHAP. XX. SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his impious Proposition in this Paragraph, discovered and censured.
Injustice and iniquity the same. The Subject not Author of the actions of his
Sovereign. The Sovereign, granting the former Proposition, cannot kill an
Innocent justly. No man has power to take away his own life justly. Neither
Subjects nor Kings have right to any thing but from God, who gives not power to
either to shed Innocent Blood. The Law of Nature, deserted by Mr. Hobbs, to the
murder of an Innocent. His disapprobation of Scripture censured.
NEvertheless we are not to understand, that by such liberty, the Sovereign
Power of Life and Death is either abolished or limited.) I conceive, by
Sovereign Power, he means the power of the Sovereign, and that Authority not
limited by any Law, which being violated, he should do unjustly: (for this
sense the sequel of this discourse will apparently justify) and then I say it
is a wicked Proposition, as will appear by the examination of his reasons,
which he enters upon in the following words: (For it has been already shown,
that nothing the Sovereign Representative can do to a Subject, on what pretense
soever, can properly be called injustice, or injury): Yes, he has shown it
with a nice and learned distinction, betwixt Injustice and Iniquity; concerning
which, I may justly say they are hardly two words, but not two things, as I
have showed. But what does he mean by a Sovereign Representative here? I think
he has delivered, that all Sovereigns are Representatives of the people; What
he can mean by this addition of Representative, I know not; but he explains
himself in the words following; Because (says he) every Subject is Auth^r of
every act the Sovereign does; so that he never wants right to anything,
otherwise then as he himself is a Subject of God, and bound thereby to observe
the Laws of Nature.) The first part I have spoken to heretofore, and showed,
that every Subject is not Author of the Sovereigns acts; where, he says, he
has shown it: But now I shall go further, and prove, that if they were Authors
of his acts, yet by their Authority he cannot kill an Innocent justly; which I
do thus, -- The people cannot authorize him to act any thing, which they
themselves have not just power to do; but the people conjunctim, or divisim,
have no just power to take away an innocent man's life; therefore they cannot
authorize him. The major is grounded upon that invincible Axiom, No man gives
what he has not; therefore if they have not that power, they cannot give it.
The minor will be proved thus; -- Before a Commonwealth be instituted, no man
has just power to take away another life, as is most evident. I, but they may
answer, every man has power over his own, which every man may yield to the
Sovereign (...) rejoyn; No man has just power to take away his ow^ life, he
may give his goods, but not his life; God is the God of life, and has given no
private man Authority to cut off his own life, and therefore undoubtedly he
cannot give power to another, which he has not himself. And if there were no
other argument against his popular Constitution of a Supreme, this were enough
for confutation of it; for there must be a power of life and death in a
Commonwealth upon the emergency of great iniquities, it cannot subsist else.
And so I pass to the second part of that conclusion, which is, (Otherwise then
as he himself is the Subject of God, and bound thereby to observe the Laws of
Nature:) There is much folly (if not wickedness) in these few words. First, I
say, neither Kings, nor any man, has right to any thing, but as they are Gods
Subjects: The earth is the Lords, and all that is in it; and to whom he gives
it, they have right to such pieces, and none else: He is King of Kings, with a
much greater Prerogative then they can have over their Subjects: They can have
no power therefore or right to act any thing which is not a power delegated
from him; and certainly he can never show me any power given to Kings by God to
shed innocent blood. Secondly, it is a strange phrase used by him (and bound
thereby to observe the Laws of Nature:) First, because the Law of Nature, in
particulars, is to preserve, not to take away life in general; and concerning
Commonwealths, to reward Virtue, and punish Vice; when this wicked book would
have it the Law of Nature, to kill an Innocent, yea a virtuous person.
Secondly, consider (that being bound, because he is Gods Subject, to the Law of
Nature) and only that he should not be bound to Gods positive Laws in
Scripture, a distinction which he himself makes use of, and therefore may more
powerfully be retorted to him; but he loves not Scripture, and this odious
expression of his is most abominable.

SECT. II.
Mr. Hobbs his Proposition in this Paragraph examined and censured. His dubious
expressions discovered from his former Assertions, and refuted. Scripture
seldom cited by Mr. Hobbs, but to give a celour and Authority to Impiety.
Jephta's rash Vow examined. The execution of that Vow impious. Jephta's
Sacrifice no President for others.
HE goes on: (And therefore it may, and does often happen in Commonwealths,
that a Subject may be put to death by the Command of the Sovereign Power, and
yet neither to the other wrong.) There is one shift in this Proposition by
which it may be justified, as thus; That a Sovereign may punish a Delinquent,
who formally did him no wrong, or an inconsiderable one, that is, to the Prince
himself; but for an injury to another of his Fellow Subjects, as for robbing,
or burning his Neighbors house. But (as it seems) by that argumentative word
therefore, which must relate to the precedent matter, he may do it, when the
murdered Party has done no wrong to any body, and then it is wickedly false,
he gives instances two or three. We will examine them next [As (says he) when
Jeptha caused his daughter to be sacrificed in which and the like cases, he
that ^o dies, had liberty to do the action, for which he is nevertheless put
to death without injury] I could wish he would let Scripture alone, for he
loving it not with a due reverence, seldom na^es it, but to countenance some
wickedness, as here. This story is recorded Judges the 11. And Mr. Hobbs I am
persuaded did know how it is with sharpness disputed by Divines whether he
sacrificed her, or made a Votary of her. I will embroile my self in no
unnecessary controversies, but will grant all he requires in that dispute, that
he did sacrifice her; what follows then? that he did i^ justly? certainly no,
the actions of bad Kings, yea the bad actions of good Princes cannot be
justifiable precedents for following ages. The world and the particular men in
it are compounded of good and evil; there is not any man so bad as has no
good, but that he may be worse; nor any man so good, but he may be better; he
has some ill actions falling from him. That is it which I speak of this very
gallant person, Jephta, he might have such an ill action out of a foolish
mistaken Zeal, that that rash vow of his was to be kept; it was a foolish and a
rash vow; for (for my part) I cannot guess what he could imagine, what he
could conceive, should come out of his doors which should be fit for a
sacrifice to God; Domestic creatures, as dogs, servants or children, are all
of them hated by God for sacrifices. Calves, Rams, Cows, Goats etc. which are
the proper things for sacrifices, are not domestic inhabitants; but to shed
innocent blood in offering his daughter for a sacrifice was without doubt most
impious; and this is reckoned by David in Psalm 106. verse 38. amongst the
abominations of the Israelites that they shed blood, in their offering up their
Sons and Daughters to Devils. I, but it may be objected, that he had vowed it
to God. A vow made to do evil is ipso facto void; God never confirmed it; he
ought not to keep it, but to repent for making it; this was to shed innocent
blood which was a sacrifice fit for none but the Devil, from whom the
instigation to it proceeded; so that if Jephta did kill her for a sacrifice, he
did wickedly. There is a certain humor in many men, who will be peremptory in
some point of religion that they may seem godly, who value not much the reality
of it: they will keep a rash, or (which amounts to the same) a not well advised
oath, although to sin, when they will neglect obedience to do righteously; this
was evident in King Saul, you may find 1 Samuel 14. 24. Saul curses any man who
should eat any food until eventide; here was a most rash curse, and the 27.
verse, Johnathan who knew nothing of this curse of his Fathers eats a little
honey; in the 44. verse, Saul swears again, that he shall surely dye: what a
horrid injustice had this been in Saul to slay that gallant person, a man of so
much honor and worth, for the satisfaction of his rash oath? You shall find in
the next Chap. that Samuel gave Saul a commandment from God to do execution
upon Amalek, and then he can in the 9. verse spare Agag and the best of their
cattle; see the same humor in both, that which God had prohibited, murder,
even upon his own son, he would have committed, although against Gods law,
because it was agreeing with that religion which he had instituted for God, to
wit his oath; but then upon the same reason he spared Agag when God commanded
his destruction, because it suited better with his phancie that they should
make a glorious sacrifice to God of what they had taken: and therefore in the
22. v. Sam. gives him this heavy reproof, Has the Lord as great delight in
burnt-offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord? behold to
obey is better than sacrifice. When God has given laws for men's actions it is
a disobedience to invent witty ways of our own which cross them, to spare what
God would have us destroy, and destroy that which God would have us save. This
was the humor of Saul's religion. I dare not censure Jephta, he was a person of
as spotless integrity as any I find amongst the Judges, unless Samuel; but if
he did kill his daughter, I may justly say it was a most unjust act, and a
satisfaction of his fancy in religion (which imagined what he had sworn in re
illicita, must be performed although against Gods law, which forbids killing
which in sacrifice required no such thing) but not a religious act; nor can
this be a precedent for others, nor a justification of others in doing the
like, although a better man than he be joined with him, which is David; and so
I come to his second instance.

CHAP. XX. SECT. III.
The murder of Uriah discussed. Mr Hobbs his distinction censured. Killing of
an innocent contrary not only to the equitable part, but the very letter of the
law of nature. The law not the executioner kills a Criminal. No power given by
Uriah to David to kill him being an innocent. Mr. Hobbs his errors multiplied
from his fictitious institution of Sovereigns by popular election. Uriah not
empowered to dispose of his own life.
HIs words are, [In which and the like cases he that so dies, had liberty to
do the action, for which he is nevertheless, without injury put to death.] I
have showed the contrary: it is an injury to put any man to death for that
which he had liberty (that is) was not bound by law, not to do, and such a law
which enjoined such a penalty for the breach of it. Again he [And the same
holds also in a Sovereign Prince, that puts to death an innocent Subject.]
What a Tautologie is this? I thought he had discoursed of a Sovereign Prince
all this while; if not, it is more abominable. I, but he has reason for what
he has delivered, for (sath he) Though the action be against the law of nature
as being contrary to equity (as was the killing of Uriah by David) yet it was
not an injury to Uriah; but to God. A very fine and delicate distinction, of
which I have spoke before. But now concerning this language, as it is used
here, though the action (says he) be against the law of nature, as being
contrary to equity.] First, Reader, consider, if he take equity (as many times
it is) for a mitigation or a gentle exposition which moderates the extreme
rigor of the law, this surely may be deduced out of the law of nature, then
(says he) it is against the law of nature, because against the kind and
charitable exposition of the law of nature only; but without question killing
an innocent is most directly contrary to the very letter of the law of nature
and the full sense of it, for although he makes nothing of the positive law of
God in this discourse, yet the ten commandments being by all understood to be
an illustration or explication of that law writ in our hearts (as he himself
seems to allow hereafter) therefore that law being clear, Thou shall not kill,
and this killing an innocent being the most detestable of all other, it is most
clearly not only against the equity but the letter, that is that sense which
the law intends; for the law of nature directs and commands that virtue and
virtuous men should be rewarded and encouraged, and vice punished. Thou shall
not kill for the satisfaction of thy passion, whom the law does not direct; but
if the law command killing, lest the Commonwealth be hurt by so wicked a
person, lest vice may be nourished, then the law kills, not thou who art an
executioner of the law. And therefore to kill an innocent is a monstrous crime,
whom no law kills; he gives an instance again, as was the killing of Uriah by
David, yet it was not an injury to Uriah, but to God: yes, the greatest injury
could be done to him. No says he, not to Uriah, because the right to do what
he pleased was given him by Uriah himself. Show that concession or gift from
Vriah and it will go a great way to my satisfaction, nay certainly there was
never such a concession from Uriah or any Subject, that the King shall kill him
being an innocent. It is not good for the Commonwealth that any have such a
power, because by such a wicked act the Commonwealth loses a worthy member as
was vriah; but that abominable false foundation of the only way of instituting
a Commonwealth by the popular election, that impossible error leads him into
many more; but suppose vriah yielded such a power, yea if it had been done by
such a consent as he expressed, yet they had no power over their own lives; and
therefore could not empower him over them; especially when embodied into a
Commonwealth; for his country has a share in every Subjects life, and good
subjects well-being, by which it is amended and bettered; so that he must needs
do an injury to others by such an act; for it is wrong and again all justice,
that man should suffer by weldoing. This may suffice for the first piece of
that sentence, now we will examine the second.

CHAP. XX. SECT. IV.
David's sin in murdering Uriah, a sin against God, because an injury to man.
St. Ambrose explained. David his sovereignty freed from the punishment of sin,
but not from the guilt of it. Romans 13. 4. the first epistle of St. Peter 2. 14.
explained. The former assertions proved against Mr. Hobbs, by the authority of
St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, St. Hierom, and St. Augustine* The authors sense of
these words, tibi soli peccavi. Mr. Hobbs his variation from the authority and
reading of England. The former conclusions recapitulated and asserted against
Mr. Hobbs from the meaning of this text.
A And yet to God; because David was Gods Subject, and prohibited all iniquity
by the law of nature.] Well, now let us consider, why this was iniqui^y; for no
other reason certainly but because it was injustice done to another man. The
law of nature prescribes all, (and nothing but) in justice: if it be toward
God it is called religion, which pays to God the duty which we owe him, and is
set down in the four first commandments of the Decalogue; but all the justice
which is due to man, is set down in the six latter. I must then tell him, that
that act of Murder in David was not a sin against God, but only out of regard
that it was an injury to man; for, therefore the law of nature written in men's
hearts, and the positive law of God was against it, because it was unjust for
man to do it; so that the reason why it was an offense against God, being only,
because it was an injury to man, it must follow that it cannot be an injury to
God, but it must likewise be an injury to man. I, but (says he) it was against
God, because King David was Gods subject. Yet give me leave, although King
David was Gods subject, yet it does not follow that in murdering his fellow
subjects he did no injury to them, no more than the Kings subjects, officers or
Judges under him may be said in condemning innocent blood to injure only the
King, and not the person whom he so murdered: it is most evident therefore,
that that sin was against both God and man. But he brings scripture for what he
writes: which distinction, David himself when he repented the fact, evidently
confirmed, saying, To thee only have I sinned. Which text you may read Psalm.
51. 4. and to ^nderstand the sense of it, let us reflect upon the story of this
Psalm, as it is recorded, with 2 Samuel 12. where we may observe, that after he
had committed these heinous sins of adultery and murder, God sent Nathan the
Prophet to him, and he told David his own story, under a Parable of a Rich man,
who took a poor man's lamb from him to entertain his friend with it. This was a
picture of David's crime; was not this injustice? Consider then in the 9. verse,
where he acquaints the King with Gods sentence against him, he does not lay to
his charge only that he had offended God, but that he had killed vriah the
Hittite with the sword, and had taken his wife to be his wife, and had slain
him with the sword of the Children of Ammon: so that the sins of David were
against men; for though all sin is against God, even the trespass against men
is therefore a sin, because against Gods law; yet it is a sin against men, and
therefore prohibited by Gods law because unjust to men. I speak of all such
sins, which are sua natura in their own nature sins, of which kind murder is;
then let us look to the 14. verse of this Psalm. Deliver me from
blood-guiltiness O God. Blood-guiltiness, what is that? Nothing but the guilt
of that sin which he had committed by that murtherous act of killing Vriah, and
therefore as a murderer is guilty of the crime, until he is absolved of his
Judge, and his only Judge God Almighty had acquitted him; he until then was
guilty of blood, of murdering Vriah. Well then undoubtedly that was an unjust
act, let Mr. Hobbs say what he will or can. But I will do him right, he goes
not alone in this opinion; but has St. Ambrose, a person of great honor both
for judgment and integrity, along with him; and because I will urge this
argument to the full, I will say he was no Court parasite; one who would
flatter Kings into sin, as was evident in that contest he had with the Emperor
Theodosius, in which was apparent both an incomparable Emperor, and a pious
and zealous Prelate. This St. Ambrose utters some things in his book called
Apologia David like Mr. Hobbs, where in his tenth Chap. at the beginning he
expounds these words [tibi soli peccavi] Rex utique erat, nullis ipse legibus
tenebatur, I have sinned only to thee, for he was a King, he was held or
confined by no laws; because (says he) Kings are free from the bonds of laws,
neither by any laws are they called to punishment, being safe by the power of
Empire. This a man would think abundantly full, but yet he never used Mr. Hobbs
his Phrase, to say he did not unjustly. But his first speech must be understood
that he was not with held by any humane laws: for Mr. Hobbs confesses that he
is responsable for the breach of divine laws, by the law of nature. Secondly,
that speech of his, that Kings are freed from the bonds of their faults; that
must be understood of such bonds, as imprisonments, or such punishments which
by humane laws are enjoined offenders; and that is clearly expounded by his
last sentence, that they are by no laws called to punishment, being safe in the
power of Empire, that i^, safe from the questioning of their subjects; so that
his wh^le sense is this, That David as a King was not responsable for his
subjects to any man, nor liable to any punishment for them. I could speak more
to this, and show how that S^. Ambrose prod^ced another exposition presently
after: but certainly neither he nor any man but Mr. Hobbs will say it was not
injustice; it is sua natura ^^just, to punish with the greatest punishment,
death, an innocent person. Nor does his being a King, make it less injustice,
^ut rather aggravate it; because his chief office under God, and for which he
is constituted by God, is, to distribu^e justice equally, and reward the
virtuous, and punish the evil, as St. Paul excellently and clearly speaks, Romans
13. 4. He is the minister of God to thee for Good (that is, to thee who do
that which is good, as he speaks in the 3. verse) but if thou do evil be
afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the minister of God; a
Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. So likewise St. Peter 1.
Epist. 2. 14. makes it their business to punish evil doers, and the praise of
them who do well. Now if these be the contents of the commission from God to
these his D^puties, they must needs be guilty of injust^ce who punish citra
condignum, where there was no desert of it; and they who a^e Kings, so much the
more, by how much it is their particular duty to take care of the contrary. I
have now cleared the sense of S^. Ambrose as I guess, but lest any scruple
might remain from his authority, with any man, who might mistake his sense, I
will therefore weigh* down the Scales with the weights of others, his near
contemporaries, of no less honor in Christendom than himself. And the first I
shall present you with, is St. Basil, the great, (so he is called) in his
scholia upon this verse of this Psalm: Tibi soli peccavi cum multis and magnis
donis tuis sum positus: Since I enjoy many and great gifts of thine, but have
returned contrary things: he does not say here that he had not sinned against
Uriah; he had indeed offended against him, and against his wife, but the
greatest prevarication was committed against God himself, who had c^o^en him,
and constituted him King, and therefore he rightly added, and done this evil in
thy sight; thus far St. Basil. The next which I shall produce, shall be S^.
Chrysostom upon this Psalm, and this verse, and he agrees very much with St.
Basil. To thee only have I sinned, Many (says he) and great benefits have I
received from thee, but I have returned them with contrary things, for these
things which by thy law are interdicted, I have not doubted to commit: neither
does he say, that I have not hurt Uriah, for he had both hurt him and his wife,
but the greatest iniquity was against God. Thus far St. Chrysostum. Next
consider St. Hierom; Tibi solum peccavi, to thee only have I sinned, for to
thee every man sins when he sins, because thou art only without sin, as the
Apostle speaks. Romans 3. 4. God is true but every man a liar; or else David
says, I have sinned and thou only art without sin, as says the Prophet Isaiah
53. Who did no sin nor was guile found in his mouth. St. Augustine likewise
harps upon the same string. To thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight, what is this, says that heavenly man? Had not he adulterated
another wife and slain her husband? Did not all men know what David had done?
What is that he says then, to thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight? (He answers) because thou only art without sin; he is a just
punisher who h^th nothing in himself to be punished; he is a just reprehender
who has nothing in himself to be reprehended. Here you may see how holy and
learned men (living near together about one time with St. Ambrose, men famous
in their generations, and to whom the Church of Christ owes exceeding much for
the propagation of the Gospel) gave their sense of this text of scripture as
well as he; and St. Augustine was one who honored St. Ambrose living and dead:
yet you see varies from him in his judgment in this point. Give me leave to
show my sense of these words and then conclude. And first I will allow Mr.
Hobbs his reading, to thee, which is not according to our translation, which is
against thee; and certainly by men learned in the Hebrew both amongst the
ancient and modern writers, with a great con^ent (...) is acknowledged to be
true; yet it profits his cause nothing to read it as he does; insomuch that
Bellarmine in his Comment upon this Psalm, says, To thee only have I sinned,
he does not say, against thee only; he had offended against vriah, against
Bathsheba, he had scandalized the people; but to thee only, as Judge, and none
else can judge and condemn me, as he illustrates it. So that although Mr. Hobbs
varies from his own rule of scripture, yet he gets nothing to his cause by it.
But to proceed in expounding; I ask leave and beg pardon of such eminent men
from whom I may seem to differ; for my part, I do not think that David here
acts the part of a King, or so much as thinks of his great Regality (if he did,
it was to aggravate not to extenuate his sin) but of a penitent; and in his
penitence is a pattern to other men, as well as Kings, how they should demean
themselves; even Kings in those duties are reconciling themselves to their
King, in respect of whom they are poor and mean people; and if they should
consider themselves Kings, they should by this increase their humility,
considering that he who o^es so much to God should be so ungrateful and
unmindful of him, The Prophet therefore now considering his offense to God
cries out. To thee only have I sinned; before, Nathan the Prophet had visited
him, and told him of his ^aults, he thought he had sinned only to man, and
therefore to hide his first sin with Bathsheba, he added another of murder, by
which he thought his shame of the other might be hid from men, which was
possible; but now clean contrary when he is acquainted with the wrath of God
for his sin, now he cares not for his sin to men, so he may be right with God,
and to that end penned this Psalm, to be sung in Churches; and to God utters
those lamentable complaints; that he is besmeared with blood; that his bones
are broken; that he has need of Gods great and many mercies; that his heart is
broke, yea contrite; that he is all unclean and must be washed, and washed
again; that he begs God to purge and make him clean, although with hysop and
sharp medicines. Here is the perfect character of a true penitent; many a ^^an
is sorry for his sin, because it breeds him shame and wordly evil; but this
does him no good: ^ut King David is grieved for sin because sin; because
against Gods law which he has transgressed; he car^s not what this world
thinks of him, so God be appeased and reconciled to him; and therefore that
this may be done, he only begs his pardon and thinks only of him, To thee only
etc. do ^hou acquit me, I care for nothing else. And surely, this is the most
certain test of a true repentance, when a man grieves that he has offended
God, and values nothing but that offense; not that Bathsheba was a woman which
he injured, but that he took the members of God and made them the members of an
^arlot; not that vriah was a man, and that a gallant person, but that he was
the I^age of God, which he destroyed: those and the like meditations are the
issues of true and hearty repentance; but yet consider, (as I have said before)
the^e things were sins to God, and God is therefore offended with them because
they are breaches of his laws concerning men with man in particular^; you may
find this most empha^ically expressed by Nathan in the pronouncing Gods
sentence against David, where the punishment is proportioned to the offense, 2 Samuel 12. 10. Now therefore because thou have killed Vriah the Hittite with the
sword of the Ammonites, as it was expressed in the 9. verse, therefore the
sword shall never depart from thy house: then for his sin with Bathsheba, verse
11. and 12. I will take thy wives before thine eyes and give them to thy
neighbor, and he shall lie with them in the sight of the sun, for thou did
it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.
Then, because by this deed he had given great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme, his child by her was adjudged to death, as it is in the 14.
verse. So that it is evident by his punishments that he sinned against men; and
it is a most vain thing to collect from hence that a King can do no injustice
to his subjects, for certainly it is injustice in a King to butcher barbarously
any man, which without danger he may save, how much more his own subjects which
he is bound to preserve, and his virtuous subjects whom he ought to reward. I
have been long in this: Mr. Hobbs has another instance for the ^aw^ulness or
supremes to do any thing without injustice.

CHAP. XX. SECT. V.
Mr. Hobbs his instance of the Commonwealth of Athens examined.
IN the same manner the people of Athens, when they banished the most potent of
their Commonwealth for ten years, thought they committed no injustice. The
Athenians thought so; but does Mr. Hobbs think so? For although he brings this
for an argument to prove the arbitrary power which Supremes have over their
Subjects lives, yet the scorn he puts upon i^ within few lines (which I shall
speedily mention) shows his contempt of it; and no doubt, but the Athenians
themselves, al^h^ugh in the doing of it were delighted with such acts of power,
yet when it was done, and the lack of such a worthy person to assist at the
helm of the State, did make them sensible of the unhappiness of that act; they
would repent of it and detest it, and find it is most unjust and imprudent;
unj^st, because distributive justice ought with all caresses and politic
blessings to reward virtuous men; but to banish them is a heavy punishment due
to evil doers; and it is imprudent to b^nish such, for by that means the
Commonwealth loses his assistance and perhaps finds that man an unhappy
enemy, who would have been a steadfast friend. He goes on. And yet they never
questioned what crime he had done, but what hurt he would do, No, they never
questioned what he had done, or what he would do; for how could Aristides
(whose glory consisted in justice not in arms) be mist^^sted to endeavor hurt
to the state? for that virtue (which he was so honored for,) is so far from
destroying, that it is the very soul and life of a Commonwealth, or rather I
may term it, the spirits, which under the soul act with every part in the
performance of their several duties, and where that is lacking, the inhabitants
of a Commonwealth will be like wal^s built with loose stones without mortar,
which with ordinary storms will fall asunder and perish. I will not trouble my
self with the words which follow; briefly he instanceth in Ostracism which was
used there, by which sometimes an Aristides was banished for his virtue and
justice; sometimes a scurrilous Jester as Hyperbotus. Let us consider this
Ostracism, that is a legal act proper to that government, not a mere arbitrary,
but a legal privilege granted the people, that when there was an occasion of
any such danger, they had their votes in it. Now the proposition by him to be
proved was tha^ such an act as this might justly be done by the supreme only by
his will, which can never by any Logic be enforced hence; and yet I can say
further, that even the laws of foreign nations may be censured by such as are
not subject to them, and have been in all ages without breach of duty or
civility. I join this therefore with that other Grecian city famous for its
polity, that of Lacedaemon, in which it was one of the arcana imperii, that
when their country Tenants grew too numerous, that they feared they might
endanger the City, they would in a night go out, and slay thousands of them;
this was a most barbarous thing, for subjects lives should be tender to
M^gistrates, and the lives of virtuous subjects precious; and therefore I fear
this Ath^nian custom of Ostracism is the worse, because an Aristides was worth
thousands of common people, and therefore think such a law was most unworthy a
wise state, and not fit to be acted in any, where there is no law for i^.

CHAP. XX. SECT. VI.
This paragraph, giving liberty to a person justly condemned, to resist the
execution of the sentence given against him, the grand incitement to rebellion;
contrary to the dictate of St. Paul, and practice of eminent Martyrs.
I Pass from this to page (11^.) In the midst of that page having discou^sed of
the liberty of subjects, how that they have right to any such thing which they
have not passed away by covenant, he at the end of that page seems to give
instances thus. If the Sovereign command a man (though justly condemned) to
^ill, ^wound, or maim himself* or not to resist those that assault him; or to
abstain from the use of food, air, medicine, or any other thing, without which
he cannot live; yet has that man the liberty to disobey. Truly in my judgment
some pieces of this are great encouragements to Treason; as that particle, to
resist them who assault him. Certainly if a man may do it for his own defense,
he may do it for others, who are men of a like condition in their humanity,
and it may be, in their sin; and then it must follow where are many guilty
persons they may lawfully combine and stand to each other in their defense; and
in order to that, do what mischief they can for their safety. Now St. Paul
seemed to be of another mind when Act. 25. 11. he told Festus, if I have
committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to dye; it is a sign of a
rebellious spirit to resist authority, to which he should be subject; and for
ought I know, the pretense of most rebelli^^s in the world, is their own
defense, against imagined personal dangers. Had his doctrine be true, the Cro^n
of Martyrdom had lost those thousands who filled the Roman Army, and could by
this pretense have defended themselves; they chose rather to water and
fructi^ie the ^eed of Gods word by their blood; they thought it an injust war,
to defend their just lives; how much more in an unjust cause should men less
dare to do it?

CHAP. XX. SECT. VII.
Mr. Hobbs his institution of a Commonwealth again examined and censured. The
absurdity and evil consequences of his doctrine.
WE pass now to his page 112. in the 7. line. Again, the consent of a Subject
to Sovereign power, is contained in these words, I authorize, or take upon me,
all his actions. I have already and I think fully treated of the follies,
weakness and wickedness of this imagination of his heretofore, which he makes
the foundation of his whole Politiques. He proceeds; in which there is no
restriction at all of his own former na^ural liberty. What an impious
proposition is this? that he who had before affirmed, that man by nature had
right to any goods, any life, any thing which conduced to his own contented
life before a Commonwealth was instituted, has now, by these words which
institute and give form and being to his doctrine of a Commonwealth; these,
not liberties only, but licenses, but abominations must not be abridged or
restrained. But mark his reason -- for (says he) by allowing him to kill me, I
am not bound to kill my self when he commands me. So that it seems, the
authorizing he speaks of is of the supremes actions, not his commands; and then
surely his former proposition is not good, men are restrained by nothing of the
Sovereign commands, where his own interest is personally opposed to it. If this
be not insufferable doctrine in any well governed Commonwealth, I know not
what is: for by this any man may act any thing which may conduce to his
contented living; nay, what is more, he has right to do it: and if so, what a
condition would a Commonwealth be in? a King according to his doctrine may
without injustice kill any man which he thinks fit, and a subject has right to
kill him when he thinks it conduces to his good; for naturally every man has
this right by his doctrine, and so cannot be supposed by any contract to part
from his natural right; all this is evident out of the beginning of the 14.
Chap. where he defines the right of nature thus, The right of nature, which
writers commonly call jus natural, is the liberty each man has to use his own
power, as he will himself, for the preservation of his own nature; that is to
say of his own life; and consequently of doing any thing which in his own
judgment, and reason, he shall conceive to be the aptest means to conduce
thereto. And there is much more to this purpose, of which I have already
treated in my notes upon that Chap. So that it is clear by his doctrine, That
the constitution of a Commonwealth enables the Sovereign to act nothing by
right, more than another man, because that constitution does not restrain the
right of nature, and the right of nature impowers every man to act any thing
which shall appear to him for his particular advantage, by his Book. I shall
treat no more of this now.

CHAP. XX. SECT. VIII.
Mr. Hobbs his contradictions discovered and censured. His conclusions tending
to disloyalty.
I Will step to the next paragraph; but first consider that in the beginning of
this I last discoursed about, he says, The consent of a subject to sovereign
power is contained in these words, [I authorize, and take upon me all his
actions. Now in this he says, No man is bound by the words themselves either
to kill himself, or any other man; and consequently the obligation a man may
sometimes have, (upon the command of the Sovereign) to execute any dangerous or
dishonorable affair, depends not upon the words of our submission, but on
the intention, which is to be understood by the end thereof. Mark, Reader, how
immediately he contradicts himself, first his consent is contained in these
words etc. Secondly it is not contained in the words but in the intention which
is to be understood by the end thereof. He indeed put them both together in the
preceding page toward the bottom of that page, and there you may find him
telling what the end is, Namely the peace of the subjects within themselves and
their defense against a common enemy. Now then since he gives the subject this
latitude of interpreting the commands of his sovereign, it is not credible that
he will judge his own ruin or hurt, or that of his Father, Wife, Children,
dear Friends shall conduce to the peace of the subjects within themselves; so
that there then he has safe refuge for mischief by right, and he may refuse
to obey upon such grounds as he speaks, and do it rightly.

CHAP. XXI.
Liberty given to criminals to assist one another against the sword of justice,
the greatest incentive to the late rebellion. The murder of Charles the first
legitimated by Mr. Hobbs his conclusions.
I Wish my self at an end of this, but his gross errors make me stop at more
particulars than I intended. Look down toward the conclusion of this page you
shall find that at the beginning of that paragraph he concluded it unjust in
the defense of another man to resist the sword of the Commonwealth. But (says
he) in case a great many men together have already resisted the sovereign power
unjustly, or committed some capital crime, for which every one of them
expects death, whether have they not the liberty then to join together and
assist and defend one another? Certainly they have; for they but defend their
lives, which the guilty may as well do, as the innocent. Let the Reader
consider here what a justification this was of those men who bore unjust arms
at that time when he writ this book in English. It is true he allows the first
rising to be unjust, but all that damnable prosecution of that war, even that
act which I never think upon but with horror, the murder of king Charles the
first was lawful by him, for when they had drawn their swords in rebellion,
their lives were forfeited, and then all the future prosecution was just
because in defense of their lives. I but page. 113. (where I am at the bottom
of that paragraph) he gives a fair pretense for what he speaks: which is, The
offer of pardon takes from them to whom it is offered, the plea of felf
defense, and makes their perseverance in assisting, or defending the rest,
unlawful. A goodly piece of nicetie! I if a sovereign do not give his subjects
pardon for their rebell^on, they may continue on; and only the first act is
unjust; all other murders, rapines, iniquities of men are not to be reckoned
in the catalogue of unjust actions; as if one sin preceding, which causes the
following, might also justify them: and for offering pardon, he knows they
have answered, that that cannot serve them, as long as there is power in the
offended party to make his revenge, and justify his proceeding against them;
and unless they take away that, there is no security for them. These things I
thought to have passed by; but being so abominable, it was necessary to lay
hold upon them, at the least with this animadversion. And now I pass over
twenty more, and leap to his 26. Chap. 148.

CHAP. XXII.
SECT. I.
Mr. Hobs his endeavor to render the Christian religion suspected. Of the
assurance we have of revelations. The difference of assurance from the object,
from the acts. Assurance from science, from opinion, from faith. The assurance
of faith greater than that of science. The assurance we have of the truth of
Christian religion by divine revelation, from the things themselves revealed,
from the manner of their delivery, and the persons who delivered them to us.
The particulars of the creation described by Moses, not possible to be known
without divine revelation. An argument from reason to confirm the former
assertion.
WHich Chap. is entitled of Civil laws, but treats of all laws, and diverse
distinctions of them, but in this page about the middle of the page he enters
into a discourse of divine positive laws, which he distinguishes from natural
laws, that the one are eternal (I will cavil at nothing) that is, he means,
always consisting with men to whom they are given; the other had a beginning;
the one are universal to all men that have humane nature; but (he says) the
positive are instituted in time, and to particular persons or nations, and
declared for such by those, whom God h^th authorized to declare them. But
(says he) this authority of man to declare what be these positive laws of God
how can it be known? God may command a man by a supernatural way, to deliver
laws to other men. But because it is of the essence of laws, that he who is to
be obliged, be assured of the authority of him that declares it, which we
cannot naturally take notice to be from God. I transcribe all this, because the
reader* by it should understand from what ground he raises two questions,
which he answering unchristianly, will require a better satisfaction from my
pen. The questions are these. How can a man without supernatural revelation be
assured of the revelation received by the declarer? and how can he be bound to
obey them? Two noble questions to be disputed against heathens, and because
upon all occasions he takes advantage to make himself seem such, (whether he be
or no, God knows) I shall endeavor to refute him; But withal give the reader
this caution that throughout his Book he violently forces himself to such
disputes as may render Christian religion suspected, as if he had an ambition
to make this, Babble shall I say, or impious treatise of his, to be authentic;
for what necessity had he here to raise those doubts? It had been enough for
him and his whole design to show that the holy Bible had manifested those
positive laws to us, and never to have raised such scruples whereby a man may
doubt (as it seems he does) whether these laws are divine or not. Consider
therefore his answer for the first question, how a man can be assured of the
revelation of another, without a revelation particularly to himself, it is
evidently impossible; and I answer it is possiible; we will try it out; and
first let us consider this leading term for this discourse, which is [assuted]
how a man can be assured; the power of that word must be explained. There is a
diversity of assurances, Mathematical, physical, moral, all which have their
several force, and differ only by degrees. In the first kind we are assured
that two and two make four; and the like; in the second that fire will burn,
whose nature does (if not hindered) break out into the act; in the third that
when I see a debauched man stay with a company of drunkards along time at a
Tavern I can be assured that they will be inflamed with drink; so likewise when
a pious man hears the bell tole to prayers, he will go to Church. Thus our
assurance is va^ied, according to the object which it is busied about. But
there is another diversity drawn from the difference of this act, which
produces assurance; as thus, there is an assurance from science, from opinion,
from faith. The certainty of science is drawn from the certainty of the medium
by which it is proved, and is exceeding great; by some esteemed greater than
that of faith; at the least of a greater evidence; although for my part I am
not of that mind; for it being a most clear and absolute truth that God is
infinitely verax as well as verus, true speaking, as well as true being, and
faith (I mean divine faith) being an adhesion to what God speaks, it is not
possible to be a falsehood, and then there is the greatest argumentative
evidence that can be of the truth of such a proposition which God has
delivered: but I will not involve my self in niceties. That which is proper to
my immediate discourse is, that science is, from natural opperations, of nature
I causes; faith (divine faith) from supernatural, from God; which must be more
certain in it self, and ^y faith made more certain to us; opinion is only
probable, which may be other; and this probability either relates to science,
as it is probable such causes will produce such effects, or such effects
proceed; from such causes or else it relates to faith, and it is then, when a
good honest man speaks any thing, it is by faith probable to be true; but yet
it may be otherwise; only divine faith admitts of no falsehood in its self, and
requires no doubting or hesitation in us. Now although this assurance of
opinion and probability be the least, yet it yields us such an assurance, as we
build the greatest moral and politic actions (which are practiced amongst us)
upon it. As when a man is dead, his hand and seal p^sseth away his estate;
witnesses are dead likewise; these are probable arguments only; but being the
greatest that the subject question can (...), the greatest matters must be
regulated by such probable arguments. I can say the like of oaths, they have
neither a Physical certainty, nor do they produce a divine faith; but yet when
we have hand and seal, and Oath, Mr. Hobbs will not say I think, that we have
no assurance. How then can he say that we have no assurance that these are
divine revelations, which are delivered in the Bible? (for that is the sense of
the question which he proposes) but that we have great assurance is that which
I affirm. I shall not here meddle with School nicetyes, nor with any thing
about infused faith, but only the acquired faith, which we have of these
truths. Many learned men have debated this question with great variety of
Learning, which may be perused in their Comments upon the 3. of the sentences
Did. 24. as likewise many times in Prolog. and 22. of Aquinas, question, 1. as
also in Imas^^undae, with many particular treatises to that purpose. I turn the
reader to these places which with ease he may peruse, and find amongst them,
what he reads not with me, who intend to deliver such things here, as they have
scarce touched upon. My arguments shall be drawn, first from the things
delivered in this book; Then from the manner of the delivery, and Thirdly from
the persons who delivered these things; in all which I shall not meddle with
those particular Books, or Chapters of Books which are controverted betwixt us
and the Church of Rome; I think it incomparably handled by my much honored and
truly Reverend Brother John Lord Bishop of Durham; but my design is to show
that the bulk of Christianity and our faith is delivered in such a manner, in
respect of the things delivered, of the manner of the delivery, and of the
persons who delivered them, that it is most rational for a man to assure
himself that these were divine revelations, if it be not absolutely impossible
that they should be other. I will begin with the things delivered; and first
with the beginning of the Bible, the first book of Moses, the 1. Chap. of
Genesis, where we find the Creation so delivered, as it was not possible for
man to do it without revelation. Men might, and men have by reason (even
Philosophers) guessed and proved that the world was created; but to say when,
and set it down in such a method, as that a man may find the year in which it
was done, this was never undertaken by any, nor could any man do it, but by
divine revelation. Yet you may think, that Adam being made a perfect man, might
know the instant when he first appeared in the world, and communicate that to
Seth, and he downward: but could Adam, without revelation, know, that he was
made of earth? Nay could Adam, without revelation, know, how Evah was taken out
of him, or all the works of God which were wrought in the 6. days before he
was made? this could not be, this story of the Creation must need be a
revelation, no man of himself could search it out. But I am afraid Mr. Hobbs
will say, it is false; no Christian ever said it was so, but I suppose my self
to have to do with an heathen, not an Atheist but a Theist at the best. Well
then, it is most reasonable for any man to think, this story to be true;
because it is rational for a man to think, that since God will and must be
worshipped by men, and it is impossible for men to know, what worship is proper
to be given him, unless he tells them; It is then most reasonable for a man to
think, that God will prescribe how that worship is to be performed, and
therefore caused this whole book to be writ for men's instruction; and in it
sets down this work of his creation, to show man the foundation of all his
duty, from whence it is derived, that he owes God his being, soul, and Body;
that he should be humble, who was taken out of the dust, and to dust he must
return, that he that made him can destroy him, and the like; which God being
pretended to do no where else, it is most reasonable to think it is done here.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. II.
The doctrine of the new Testament, and particularly the incarnation of our
blessed Savior, and the manner of it not possible to be known without a
revelation. The truth of the incarnation evicted from the miraculous Life and
Actions of our blessed Savior, and the prophecies of the Old Testament, and
especially of Isaias. The Jews witnesses of the truth of the Books of the Old
Testament.
SO then this being a truth fit for a man to know, it being impossible for man
to know it without a revelati^n, a man may justly be assured that it was
revealed by God, and so I will pass to the New Testament where we will consider
the conception of the blessed Virgin as related there, and so not p^ssible to
be recorded, but from a divine revelation. Men might be assured from the
Prophets who writ before of it, that there should be such a thing, and that it
should be about that time; but that it should happen now, and that this should
be the Virgin which should be the mother of our Savior, that none could tell
but by revelation, no not she her self, It is true, when she found her self
with child, she might wonder how that should come about, since she knew not
man; as she answered the Angel who foretold it to her Luke the 1. and the 24.
but that it should be so contrived and perfected as it was by the overshadowing
of the Highest, this she could not have known, but by a revelation. But I doubt
Mr. Hobbs will answer this was not so, his wicked wit seems to imagine such a
thing, I will prove it therefore by the glorious fruit of her womb, which
showed it self to arise from such a stock, and living and dying as he did, he
could ^ot be less than descended from such a supernatural generation. Well
then, he was so conceived as is taught; and this could not be taught but by
divine revelation, therefore he who taught it had divine revelation. I must not
spend time in particulars; look upon all the Prophecies in the whole Book of
God, so many, as their time is expired, we find them all fufilled; the
Prophecies made to Abraham, of the children of Isreal's long captivity in
Egypt, and their extraction thence, and plantation in the land of Canaan, of
all the great transactions of the highest affairs of the world; The erection
and destruction of all the great Monarchies which were punctually foretold and
accomplished, and foretold long before; could these be foretold by any other
way than by divine revelation? Certainly it could not be; nor can the wit of
man think how it should be done. Jaddus the high Priest showed Alexander his
own story foretold by Daniel. Let us consider how the Prophets long before
prophesied of Christ, how the Prophet Isaiah writ like an antedated Evangelist,
differing only in these words [shall and did] only in the time. Let us
consider, how not only those great and remarkable passges, of his birth, his
miracles, his death, his resurrection, (but even such little things as the
piercing of his side, the parting of his garment, and casting lots for his
vesture, his burial, were foretold hundreds of years before. Let Mr. Hobbs or
any other heathen tell me how these could be foretold without divine
revelation. But perhaps he will say, as before, these were not true books nor
prophecies, but fained since Christianity. No, even the Jews themselves yet
remaining in the world do consent unto them, and are preserved by God, a
glorious witness of these truths, who are the greatest enemies of Christianity.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. III.
The former assertion further proved from the piety of the doctrines taught in
the scriptur^s, and excellency of the matter contained in them. The power of
the word of God, and efficacy of Scripture above the reach of Philoophie.
BUt then consider the doctrines taught here, they are so full of religious
piety to God, so full of such excellent moral conversation betwixt men, that
the wit of man could not invent them, there must needs be divine revelation in
them; there was never any thing delivered by men, mere men, without divine
revelation, that had not imperfections in it; he who reads the Philosophers may
find it. I do not love to rake their Dunghills, and show their filth; but the
duties taught in this book are so divine, and so like God, from whence they
came, that they are able to make a man absolutely good if practiced. Wherefore
as a tree may be known by its fruits, as the heart of man by his language; so
these Books may be known to be Gods by the heavenliness of the matters
delivered in them; which have such a power of sanctity in them, as is able to
make such as receive them of a more Godly disposition than other men; yea than
themselves, at other times, before they received these doctrines. I could treat
of a strange Metamorphosis in Saul to Paul, who was a persecutor, a destroyer,
and when converted with this doctrine accounted it joy to suffer and be
persecuted for this cause. As also of King David, who to hide the shame of his
adultery, committed Murder, and slept securely in his sin; yet when awakened
from that stupidity he was in, and taught his state by the Prophet Nathan, he
cares for no shame of this world, so God be pleased, cares for nothing but the
shame of his sin, and made his penitence for it to be chaunted out in all ages,
for all Churches in the 51. Psalm. Se that there is a strange power and force
in the word of God to turn men to godliness, which no other has; And the great
and mighty effects wrought by this scripture, do fully evince it to be divine,
having divine power annexed to them. Thus having showed that the doctrines
contained in scripture are fit for a man to believe they are divine, and by
divine revelation, yea that they could not proceed from a pen which was not
guided and assisted by the holy spirit, we therefore may have assurance that
they were such. I shall come next to show how we may be further assured from
the manner of their delivery.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. IV.
The second Argument from the difference of the Style of the Scriptures from
the books of Philosophers. The propositions and conclusions in Scripture not so
much deduced from reason, as asserted from the Majesty of God, not disputing or
endeavoring to persuade, but commanding to do. The rewards and punishments
proposed in scripture of eternal truth, impossible to be propounded, or given
but by God himself.
LEt a man look upon all the doctrines of the Philosophers concerning God, his
essence, his attributes, concerning the Creation, we shall find that they
labored still to prove what they spoke, and by reason to convince man's
understanding. Only I must confess, Trismegistus in his Pomander makes his
discourse which is most divine to be revelation (and four ought I know it may
be so, much of it) but otherwise they all go upon ratiocination; and the reason
is, because such things ought not to be assented to which are not either proved
or revealed by God, which is the most invincible evidence that any truth can
have. But now Moses and those holy writers inspired by God in their compiling
those holy Books only affirm this, and this without arguing the reasons of it,
because they were divine, not humane words; likewise in all those moral duties,
which concern men, they are writ with the majesty of the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, Do this or this, not disputing, as Plato and Aristotle, how it
conduces to the present happiness, but exacting obedience. It is true when the
Prophets disputed with the Gentiles, or Apostles with Jews or Gentiles who
believed not their report, they confuted the one by reason, or out of their own
authors, and the other out of the former Scriptures; because all proofs must be
made ex concessis, and out of such premises they would confirm these
Conclusions. God exacted a belief, and this he does with the greatest arguments
and most forcing that are possible, by Praemium and Poena reward and
punishment; but such as never King or Emperor either did or was able to
propose, by eternal happiness or misery; which nothing can do but God alone.
And this is done to those who will receive, or not receive his word. Well, the
words contained here are delivered with such an exaction as never man proposed
the same truths in; and required with such promises, as never man did meet with
nor could perform; we must needs therefore be assured they are divine.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. V.
The third Argument from the sanctity and integrity of the persons who
delivered these truths. The miraculous conduct of the Children of Israel by
Moses. The objection of his assertation, of dominion, answered. The predictions
of the Prophets not possible without a divine revelation. The truth and
certainty of their predictions objected.
ANd so I come to the persons who delivered these truths to us, who will give
us as full assurance as any thing else of the certainty. The persons were of
most eminent integrity, and affirmed that these writings were delivered them
from God. I will begin with the first Moses a man who approved his conversation
with God, and Gods approbation of him by most certain signs; first by those
mighty wonders which he wrought in Egypt before Pharaoh, and upon him and his
in their journey; afterward by his wonderful conduct of the Children of Israel
through the wilderness, the like of which was never known; The bringing water
out of the rock, feeding that mighty Host with bread and flesh; the miraculous
stopping the mouths of Korah, etc. why should we imagine that this man should
lie, and say, he received this law from God, when he did not? Yes, to make
himself King among them. Indeed the rebels (last spoke of) did object that,
but God confuted it by a miraculous destroying them, and we see although whilst
he lived he went betwixt God and them, delivering prayers to God for them, and
bringing Gods will to them, yet we find not that he acquired any high matters
for himself; the Priesthood which was to be a perpetual dignity he put Aaron
into; the Politic government he bequeath^d to Josuah; and we do not find him
contriving more than an ordinary proportion for his Children, which shows that
he had no self end in any thing he did. Nay we may read in the 32. of Exodus,
10. when Moses interceded with God for favor to the Children of Israel, God
made him answer, let me alone that my wr^th may wax hot against them, and that
I may consume them, and I will make of thee a great Nation; Nevertheless Moses
was not bribed with this for his own interest to forsake Gods glory: but
presently after presses God for his own honor to have pity upon the
Israelites, as you may read verse. 11. etc. where methinks he did like Abraham
offer his whole posterity to Gods glory and honor; which shows that Moses
had no sinister ends in his actions, but only the glory of God; which certainly
could not rise out of such a proud lie, as to take upon him divine revelations,
where there were none.

N^xt let us consider the Prophets, they were men that adventured their lives
and suffered miseries for those truths they foretold and ^aught; yea they were
sure of it; and they who followed their counsels according to these revelations
which God made to them, it was well with them; and mischief followed them who
did otherwise. Those things which they foretold did come to pass accordingly,
both concerning the Jews and all other nations, yea the whole world; why
should not we be assured that these things came from God, which they say were
revealed by him, since we see them true in all those works which they forespoke
of?

CHAP. XXII. SECT. VI.
Of the doctrine of the Apostles, the efficacy of their preaching; The power of
^ongues, their sufferings and patience, not possible but from divine
inspiration. A further assertion of the same argument a posteriori, such effect
not producible but from a divine law.
IF we descend to the Apostles we shall find they were a sort of men of mean
extraction and education; how could it be possible that they unless by
revelation, should attain to such an efficacy of preaching, as to be able to
convince the whole world, and preach this divine Philosophy? How came they by
the power of Tongues to be able to travel through the world, and preach to
every man in his own language, but by the supernatural assistance of the Holy
Ghost? Why would they undertake the work through such cruel persecutions
foretold them, that they should be as sheep amongst wolves, but that it was a
duty enjoined them from the Holy Ghost? and they were sure that he who promised
it, would make good their reward in heaven hereafter, for here they were to
have miseries. Truly I know not what can be opposed against this, but that both
from the matters delivered, rom the manner that they are delivered by, and from
the persons who delivered them, we have as great an assurance that these truths
were revealed to them by God, as can be wrought by humane faith* Yea but let us
consider further, and it is scientifical a posteri^ri, from the effect to the
cause; for if it be not possible that these effects should come from any cause
but God, as indeed I think it not possible, then it is demonstrated that these
must be revelations, and we have a mighty assurance of them.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. VII.
Another argument, ad hominem, Mr. Hobbs his assurance of his being born at
Malmsbury, not comparable to this of the verity of the holy scriptures. Some
doubts of the place of Mr. Hobbs his birth, from the erring of his doctrines
from Christianity. The attestation of the Gospel from the sufferings of the
Saints and Martyrs. The increase and continuance of it in despite of
persecution. The Scriptures not possible to be written by bad men, in regard
their design is to destroy the Kingdom of Satan. Good men would not obtrude a
Lie upon the world. Faith resolved into divine revelation. The rest is a
preparation to this faith, and conclusion of this point.
LEt Mr. Hobbs tell me, what assurance he has of any thing? He says in the
beginning of this Book that he is Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury; I think he is as
sure of this as of any thing; but I am much surer, and so may any man be, that
this Scripture was writ by divine revelation, than he can be of that; first for
his place, that he was of Malmsbury which is a town in Wiltshire, where
Christianity is professed, where men are assured of the Scriptures that they
are by divine revelation, How should it breed such a monster, who would bring
all their hopes of heaven, their faith in Gods promises to be dubious? as if
they were not promised. But he is Thomas Hobbs, how knows he that? perhaps his
mother told him so, and the midwife; I know not whether after he came to the
years of discretion, he ever talked with them; but if he did, it is but a weak
Testimony in respect of ours which was and is affirmed by such divine and
incomparable persons as the Apostles and Prophets were. His Mother, and the
Midwife, although true persons, yet were apt to be deceived, and it may be he
was a supposititious Child; how often have such things been done? when
contrariwise these men who have delivered infalible truths many ages before
they came to pass, cannot be conceived to have any Error. I, but perhaps, he
will say, he is like his father in his countenance, in his speech; certainly
not so like, as these truths are to that incomparable essence, which we call
God; than which nothing more fully expressed these divine perfections, unless
it was his personal word. I, but his Christening is registered in the Church
Book of Malmsbury, a good legal evidence; and perhaps he enjoyed his fathers
estate by this; I know not, but certainly there is a possibility of Error in
it, because the Church Book may be counte^feited, and many a man has intruded
into other men's estates by unjust means; but our evidence is recorded (may I
say) or engraven in these volumes which have been attested in every age since
the first writing with the Blood of many martyrs; which can be affirmed of no
Church Book in the world; worms and Cankers may eat them, and thieves may break
through and steal them and counterfeit them, but these are subject to no
corruption, but by the providence of God have been, and will be preserved so
long as the world stands, and endures. So I think evidently that it appears
that we have as full an assurance that these Scriptures are Divine, as men can
have of any thing in this world which they receive by hearsay. Nay let us go
further, and examine whether we have not a Demonstration from the effect to the
cause, we know such a man was our friend by his voice when he speaks, another
by his style, as the report is of Sr. Thomas Moore with Erasmus, aut Erasmus
aut Diabolus. Yea Critiques every where discern Authors by their Styles; may
not we, think you, discern God by these heavenly writings, which are more than
humane? When we hear a man discoursing of high points in Philosophy learnedly,
we know such an effect cannot proceed from a Country-education at the Cart and
Plough, it requires another study and industry. When the Scripture teaches us
things higher than the natural wit of man (...) reach to, as I have showed it
must needs come from a higher strain than our natural Condition could deliver
to us. I will conclude with one word; The Scriptures must be writ by good or
ill men; ill men could not do it, it reaches those doctrines which destroy the
Devil, and his Kingdom, all evil; if good men writ it, they would not (...) to
say they were in^pired by God when they were not; they would not deliver such
things for ass^^^d ^ruths which none could know but God, if God did not teach
it them. Upon these invincible Grounds I think I may say that we have a mighty
assurance that these are divine revelations, which he wickedly a^^irms we have
no assurance of. But it may be obj^cted, if the demonstration be so ev^dent,
why do not all men receive it? for the understanding is made after such a
manner, as the Eye, when you show it colors, the Eye must see them; so show by
demonstration a truth to the understanding, it must needs assent. For my part I
do not apprehend that man has liberty in his understanding to accept or refuse
truths which are laid open to i^, neither do I think that which is called
liberum arbitrium is only a freedom of the will but a result out of them both;
however it is not in the understanding alone, nor is this belief of our that
these things are revealed only an act of the understanding, but of the will
which refuses to hear the voice of the Charmer charm he never so wisely.
Sometimes a malicious Will w^ll not permit a man to study, and think of these
arguments, which the more he studyeth, the more he will approve* sometimes when
he has studied them it will make him seek further, and being not delighted
with that reason which is proposed, it will not be satisfied with it; so that
there is a submission to these reasons offered, which is necessary to our
assent to them. And certainly that is much by such arguments as show the
happiness-men have in being under Gods Government; for then men will seek what
and wherein ^e will bless them, and when he finds that these Scriptures, and
these only, are rational for a man to think are his own dictates, he will
willingly submit to them. (...) when a proud man^^all think, that he and he
only is faber not fortuna only but of his own happiness, and that he need not
seck to God for assistance, then he sligh^s all these discourses and listens
not to them. But still a man may say, it seems that resolution of our faith is
into this way of arguing. I answer no^, our faith is resolved into the divine
revelations, that God has said this, or that; this is but a preparation for
that foundation; when a wise and virtuous man tells me any thing, I believe it
for the esteem of him, and that is my last resolution of that faith because
such a man speaks it: but before this I must be prepared for this, with an
acquaintance that this is such a man and I must know he speaks it. These
preparatory Acts are nece^^ary for the introduction of that Act of faith in
him; but faith in him is the foundation of my belief in that sentence, it is
evidently so in this Case, we believe these divine truths absolutely, and the
last resolution of them is into this, that God has revealed them; but yet it
may be enquired, whether these Arguments be necessary to our assent to these
divine principles, or not. Certainly to a man who should be converted from
Paganism, Vt prudenter credat, that he be not carried about with winds of
Doctrine, it is fit, he should have these or some other equivalent Arguments to
induce him to them: But to a man born in the Church, and bred up in the
Christian religion, it is comfortable to his faith when he finds it attended
with such invincible reasons, and he is able to understand them; But if not,
simplicity of faith and obedience to God will be blessed by him* It will not be
expected that I should engage in more niceties of this kind. I hope it appears
that we have assurance of these divine revelations. It was therefore not only a
bold, but impious and wicked affirmation of him to say it is evidently
impossible for a man to be assured of the revelation to another without a
revelation particularly made to himself. But he proceeds to answer some seeming
proofs brought to affirm the assurance of these revelations, I will put them
down in order and examine his answer. The first is drawn from miracles and is
thus set down in the place last cited.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. VIII.
Mr. Hobbs his answer to the first proof retorted: Miracies defined.
FOR though a man may be induced to believe such revelation, from the Miracles
they see him do,] that is the first Objection) he answers [Miracles are
mavelous works: but that which is mavelous to one, may not be so to
another] This answer of his (to speak ad hominem) does not become him, as I
showed in my first piece page 1^9. He had said that Concerning the worlds
magnitude and b^ginning he was content with that doctrine which the Scripture
persuaded and the fame of these miracles which confirm them, the Countries
custom and the due reverence to the Laws. There you will allow Miracles to
confirm them, that is the Scriptures, why now should you not be content with
them? They are now, when you writ this, as good, as famous as evident, as they
were then, when you writ the other. Well, we will examine the force of
Miracles, and see what content they can give a arational man; and before I go
further* we will consider what we understand by this word Miracle. We do
conceive a Miracle to be a work above the reach and power of nature, and
extraordinary; not only a strange and wonderful thing to the common observation
of men, but above the power of all those things which God has made produceable
by natural causes, so that it is not only strange that nature should do it, but
impossible it should produce this effect, which is miraculous. And when I say
This miraculous effect, I mean by it, not the work only, as to cure a same man;
(such a man perhaps may be cured by natural means physically applied) but to
cure him at a distance, with a word speaking, is miraculous; and is a work
beyond natures power: So that then we understand by a Miracle, what is either
in its self or in the manner of doing beyond Nature. The la ^ term is
extraordinary, there are many works beyond the power of Nature, which are
ordinarily wrought by God in a most ordinate way, in an infallibly settled
course, as they relate to Heaven; which are the giving his Graces to such as
are penitent, or pray, or which observe their duties in the use of the
Sacraments, with the like, which being ordinate by his sacred Covenants are
most certain; and being so, although above Nature, yet are no Miracles because
certain and ordinate.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. IX.
Miracles produced to confirm an untruth are a Lie, and blasphemy against God:
This Proposition confirmed. Mr. Hobbs his confederacy with the Devil. Matthew. 4.
3. explained. Our blessed Saviors use of Miracles, for the confirmation of his
Gospel. Mr. Hobbs his Logic desired. The apprehensions of men after not the
nature of Miracles.
THus the Nature of Miracles being explained, I think it appears clearly, that
because nothing but the God of N^^ure who made this nature, and could have made
another, can act beyond or beside that order which he has settled things in:
therefore he must needs be the Author of these effect which are above the reach
of Nature, of which ^ind Miracles are. And thus if he should produce them for
the confirmation of fal^hood, it would be as apparent a Lie, as any f^lse
Proposition delivered by words; which certainly, were abominable blasphemy in
any man to affirm.

The force of this Argument will appear from the Devil, who was and is as able
a Logician as Mr Hobbs* and although he dissemble and labors to make men
believe there is no such thing: yet I doubt they two do underhand confederate
too much together. Howsoever let us consider an Argument of the Devils, by
which he required an assurance of our Savior's being the Son of God, and
consequently God, Matthew. 4. 3. where the Devil tempting him, said, If thou be
the Son of God command that these stones be made bread. A man might have
objected, suppose he should command, and the effect follow, how would this
prove him the Son of God? An Angel, or a mere man assisted by God might have
done this. But consider now if he had done it upon the Question, and had not
been the Son of God, because it must be done by the extraordinary power of God,
not by his ordinary power, therefore God in doing it must have confirmed a lie,
which it is not possible for God to do, and upon the strength of this Argument
of the Devils, we may be assured, that Miracles used to prove any Conclusion
are an invincible Argument; for the Devil is abundantly able to dispute* And
therefore in the last verse of ^aint M^r's Gospel, it is reported that after
Christ had given Commission to the Eleven, they went forth and preached every
where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs
following; where we may observe as the Devi^ urged i^ for an Argument, so our
Savior used it for an Argument in the planting of the Church; which is enough
for proof of this Conclusion, that the Miracles wrought by our Savior and his
Apostles here, were such Arguments as did enforce belief of what they spoke. I
could expatiate in this noble Theme of Miracles, and fall upon diverse most
Scholastic discourses; but I rather choose to apply my self close to him who
answers, [That what is wonderful to one may not be so to another.] The force of
which answer lies in this, (That there may be many counterfeit Miracles, which
may appear true to one and may be found false by another; and therefore because
men may be deceived they have no assurance from them. To this I can say that
Mr. Hobbs is not so good a Logician here as the Devil; for the Devil disputed
from the real force of the Argument, but Mr. Hobbs draws his Answer from the
apprehension of the Heater or Spectator; when it thunders man a man is busy
and hears it not, Does it not therefore thunder, because he does not hear it?
The Sun arises and shines out in the morning when I am in bed and see it not,
Does it therefore not shine because I discern it not? When a man who has weak
Eyes or troubled with the Jaundice comes into a Room, many colors are there
which he perceives not; or if he do, they appear yellow to his Eyes, Are they
therefore yellow? But this and no other is his consequence against Miracles,
because some apprehend them not, therefore they are not, or do not send out
that proof which naturally flows from them. Many fallacious Arguments are used*
(He has used many,) and because they are fallacies, Are therefore perfect
Demonstrations not good? His Answer therefore is not Logical in saying that
these things appear mavelous to one, which do not to another. Let a man
consider the possibility, or rather impossibility which Nature has to do such
a work, and if he be not learned enough to discuss with a Cause, let him
consult with Learned men who are able to judge of it, and he shall by that find
whether God has in an extraordinary manner any hand in it or no; but the
Answer* which he makes may be returned to all Arguments, whatsoever one
understands another does not* therefore they are not good, nor give assurance.
And ^o I have finished the first Argument which he framed against himself and
answered weakly.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. X.
Mr. Hobbs his second Argument examined; The truth of Divine revelation to the
Apostles, asserted from the gift of Tongues.
AND I pass to his second Argument and Answer, which is at the bottom of that
page; and the Argument is drawn to prove that these were Divine revelations
from the Sanctity of the Persons who delivered it. H^ answers that [that may be
feigned.] I reply, It is improbable, which were enough: but I think I may go
further and say it is impossible: for the first clause, that it is improbable,
we may discern Reason for it. First, in the Persons the Apostles who delivered
these Revelations, and affirmed they were such, it is not probable they should
be counterfeited; all counterfeiting is for some end, some wordly end* (for a
man cannot think to get Heaven by counterfeiting and l^ing) but the Apostles
could have no worldl^ end in what they did, the asserting of these Revelations
being the ready way to miseries and unhappiness, which was foretold by their
great Master, our most blessed Savior. We have seen in this distracted world
in which we have lived, now and then a man proud with an imagined Enthusiasme,
persevere in an abominable lie even to death: but for so many to do it, and
suffer for the relation of the same story, it cannot be imagined. And then
consider that they were men blessed by God, in having these Revelations, and
the relating them: I say relating them: for because the Doctrine was to be
divulged to all Nations by them, God assisted them with the gift of Tongues, by
which they were able suddenly to relate in their own Language to every Nation
the wonderful things which concerned their salvation; And from hence I will
draw the impossibility of their feigning their sanctity in the delivery of
these Revelations; for as the Revelation was from God, so the very delivery of
them by the power of Tongues, was from God, who cannot countenance and make
good a lie; But yet certainly although their might be a possibility of being
other, (I grant that for Arguments sake which I allow not) yet when there is no
probability of the contrary, we have great assurance of that truth, and his
answer is most wicked, as well as weak drawn from a possibility of feigning and
counterfeiting in the Apostles.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. XI.
Mr. Hobbs his third Argument from the wisdom of the Apostles confirmed: The
miraculous consent of men to the revelations published by them; An Argument
from the propagation of Christianity against the opposition of the whole world:
A serious application and vow for Mr. Hobbs his conversion.
A Third Argument which he endeavors to put off, is drawn, from the
extraordinary wisdom, or extraordinary felicity of his actions, all which
(says he) are marks of Gods extraordinary favor. His answer to this is at the
bottom of that page thus, The visible felicities of this world are most often
the work of God by natural and ordinary causes. And therefore no man can
infallibly know by natural reason, that another has had a supernatural
revelation of Gods will* but only a belief, everyone (as the signs thereof
shall appear greater or lesser) a firmer or weaker belief. Thus far he. I no
^answer to the first, which concerns their wisdom; I do not remember that I
have read the wisdom of these men to be produced for proof of their
revelations; yet because he has put it down and given one answer to it, I will
urge something for it, that it was and is a great convincing argument, that
such poor ignorant illiterate fishermen should attain, or rather be endued from
above with such wisdom, as to be able to confute the greatest and best studied
Philosophers, and reduce them to consent to their revelations; this must need
prove that these men were assisted by some knowledge above Nature. But let that
pass since he makes no answer: but for the other, the success of Christianity,
that is a most rational argument; and his answer confutes himself, for whereas
he says [the visible felicities of this World are most often the work of God
by natural and ordinate causes. I retor: it to him, that the felicities of this
world happening to these men were nothing but that general propagation of the
Gospel, which was wrought against the force and power of all natural causes;
all the Emperors, Kings, and Princes of this World fighting against, and
suppressing it, with all the force and tyranny which they were able to use, so
that their strength grew by oppression, and Sanguis Martyrum was ^emen
Ecclesiae. And M. Hobbs cannot think, that that was a natural seed. And so I
will conclude this discourse for this time, hoping that God will so assist him
that he may see his own error, and with his own hand blot out all these
unworthy doubts which he has cast upon Christianity.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. XII.
Mr. Hobbs his second Question propounded, and discussed; his assumption not
clear; the Argument changed and the Reader eluded by him. His manifest
declension of the divine positive Law, and imposure of humane Laws in
opposition to them, censured. The Law of Nature commands obedience to the
positive law of God. The pretensions of all Nations to divine institution,
observed.
ANd here I thought to have knocked off with the satisfaction of the first
Quaerie; but as I said before he made two enquiries, the first concerning the
assurance of these revelations; I have spoke to that. The second is [how a man
can be bound to obey the Laws so revealed] This (he says,) is not so hard, for
if the Laws declared be not against the Law of Nature, which is undoubtedly
Gods Law, and he undertake to obey it, he is bound by his own act. Thus far Mr.
Hobbs: but indeed he utters (in my judgment) a most obscure doctrine, ^r if
clear, he speaks very weakly. It Is obscure, for although the Law of Nature do
oblige, yet it is not apparent to every man, what this Law of Nature is; no not
to learned men; for in many cases it is disputed, whether such or such actions
are according to the Law of Nature or no; And therefore although the major
proposition be unquestionably true, that the Law of Nature is instituted by
God, yet the assuming of a Minor to it, [this is the Law of Nature] may be
full of dispute, and from thence it will be hard to conclude. Again consider,
that when the question was put in the former page, it was concerning the
obedience to the revealed laws of God, how a man may ^e bound to obey them,
of which he affirmed that we could have no assurance, and that I have
immediately before refuted: but now his whole discourse runs upon man's
obedience to humane Laws. Thus the Notion and Conceit shuffled and changed, a
Reader is distracted, and whilst he finds something seemingly proved, he
thinks the undertaken proposition is clear: for where has he satisfied, yea
but seemingly, this Question, How a man can be bound to obey the Revelations?
But (says he) if he undertake to obey a Law which is not against the Law of
Nature, he is bound by his own Act. That is, that Act by which (he says
rather than thinks) he instituted a supreme, and that Act only reflects upon
humane Laws established by the supreme which he instituted. But I do not
find this expressed there in that latitude he now forms it, but rather I
thought that he would have supposed that the supreme should be obeyed in such
things cross not the Law of God whatsoever, either natural or positive, but
it seems now he must be obeyed in all which is not against the Law of Nature
only; he would have the Scriptures and positive Laws laid aside. By this if
a King shall command us not to be baptized, not to receive the Communion, or,
like Darius not to pray to God, for a certain time, not to repent etc. (which
are not acts of the Law of Nature, but positive Laws) we should not do
them, which must needs be most odious to any Christian man. But indeed had not
Mr. Hobbs distinguished these two the positive, and natural Laws of God
before in the former page, and raised these doubts, to disgrace the positive
laws of God, I could have answered that there is no Law more Natural, than that
we should obey the positive Laws of God; for he being the supreme power, must
needs have that authority to make Laws for the government of men; and this is
universally received. All Nations in the World pretend to have divine Laws for
their direction, I mean, positive divine Laws; only Mr. Hobbs denies it
clearly in this place. Let us examine what follows.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. XIII.
Obedience founded upon the belief, or acknowledgment of his power that
commands. Mr. Hobbs his complacency in quarrelling with Religion. The want of
reason in his proofs discovered, and censured. Faith commanded by God, urged by
promissory and penal Laws. The dreadful punishment of such as believe not, or
disturb other men's belief with frivolous arguments. God the searcher of hearts
and punisher of evil thoughts contrary to Mr. Hobbs his Doctrine.
HE is bound, says he, to obey it but not bound to believe it. A strange
proposition: for take his particle [ i] how you please, for obedience to divine
or humane Laws, he can be bound to obey none, when he has no belief: for he
cannot have an obligation to divine Laws, unless he believe they are given by
God, nor can he perform obedience to humane Laws, unless he have a belief that
they are made by the supreme power. So that obedience in all kinds supposes a
belief of that authority which commands. But again consider, what he means by
this word, belief, He is bound to obey, but not to believe. Certainly (as I
said,) he must believe the authority that commands, and it is as true, that he
must believe that that a^thority commands this Act, or else he can have no
ground for his obedience. This man had a mind to be quarrelling at Religion,
but could not find expressions to do it. But he proves his conclusion, for
(says he) Men's belief, and interior cogitations, are not subject to the
commands, but only to the operation of God, ordinary, or extraordinary. The
vainest and weakest Argument that ever was urged. First, in Logic it cannot
follow; because they are subject to the operations of God, they therefore are
not subject to commands, as Charity, and all the restraint of exorbitant lusts
are subject to his operations, are they not therefore subject to commands? This
is a pitiful inference, but then consider further; that faith, and the
cogitations of men are commanded by God, that faith is commanded first, Heb.
11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that comes to God
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them who diligently seek
him. Now it is necessary that he who requires us to come, must in that exaction
require such things as are necessary to obtain it; and therefore faith without
which Heaven cannot be attained. And God has given a blessed promissory Law
that he will bless such as do believe; and penal also, that he will punish such
as do not believe. For the first, John 3. 15, 16. Whosoever believes in him,
(that is in Christ) should not perish but have eternal life. The same is added
in the 16 verse. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes on him should not perish but have everlasting life.
Here is a Law made concerning happiness, an eternal Law concerning an eternal
life, all terms indefinite. The same is repeated in the 18 verse of the same
Chap. but with the addition of the penal Law, He that believes not is
condemned already. As likewse our Savior, Mark 16. 16. He that believes and
is baptized shall be saved: but he that believes not, shall be damned; and
this is no more but a pr^mise performed by God, which was made Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
urged by St. Peter Acts 3. 22. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto
you of your Brethren, like unto me, him s^all you hear in all things whatsoever
he shall say unto you. (v* 23.) And it shall come to pass that every Soul which
will not hear that Prophet shall be d^stroyed from among the People. Let Mr.
Hobbs and his Followers read these thr^e words and tremble, Condemned, Damned,
Destroyed who believes not, etc. What shall such be who have not only this
privative infidelity, but a positive, which opposes and disturbs the faith of
such as do believe, with foolish and unnecessary Arguments? Faith is commanded
and exacted by God, upon a dreadful penalty. So likewise John 3* 23. This is
his commandment that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ.
There in express terms, this belief is commanded: and as I have showed,
obedience could not be given to other Laws, if faith did not preceed, which is
the first step toward Heaven. I need not speak of other cogitations of the
Heart, as Pride, Self-conceitedness, Covetous, desiring others goods, etc. are
all prohibited by God, and he will punish them. Mr. Hobbs was therefore to
blame very much in saying that faith and the interior cogitations are not
subject to Gods commands; had they been humane Laws of which he spoke it had
been somewhat to the purpose: men cannot know, and therefore cannot punish the
interior cogitations, and so not make Laws for them; but God knows and
searches the heart and reins, and will punish them, and therefore it is fit
for him to give commands concerning them.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. X^V.
External and inferior Acts subject to divine regulation* Faith, the
fu^filling of that Law which commanded it. Vainglory and fear equally impeding
practical Faith.
BUt it seems there is more in this argument of his, where he says, but only
to the operation of God, ordinary, or extraordinary. I have spoken somewhat to
this a little before, where I showed that other virtues which cannot be denied
to be commanded, are subject to the operations of God, who works both to will
and to do; who creates and preserves: and although he gives the will, yet if
he go not on in the operation, it will never come to perfection; so that by
this consequence God can command not^ing because he cooperates in the
performance. He proceeds with the same proposition, in other terms, and I will
follow him. Faith of supernatural Law (says he) is not a fulfilling, but only
an assenting to the same. Faith of that supernatural Law (which concerns Faith)
must needs be a fulfilling of it, (if it be such as is according to the Law of
Faith, as St. Paul phraseth it Romans 3. 27) But only (says he) an assenting to
it. What if it be but only an assenting to it, (yet I can show other operations
of faith besides that) yet if that assenting be the act which God requires in
his command of faith, faith is the fulfilling of that Law which exacts it. And
yet give me leave to add one note more, Although faith were a mere act of the
understanding, an assent as he terms it) yet because this assent is impeded by
many vices in the Soul, which until they are mastered, the Soul cannot break
out into a full and complete assent unto the divine propositions, it comes in
regard of them under this notion of a command. You may observe, John 12. 4^,
43. Nevertheless among the chief Rulers many believed, but because of the
Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue; for they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God. Mark,
in this they are said to believe, being convinced in their understandings of
the truth of the doctrine, they had a credulity of the things, but vainglory
hindered them from practicing accordingly, the praise of men; as likewise a
wicked love of it, and I may add another passion, fear, out of that Phrase
because of the Pharisees, i. e. because they feared them; and it is the same
which he speaks of the Patents to him who was cured of the blindness, John 9.
22. These words spoke his Parents because they feared the Jews. These words,
that is, that shifting of the confession of Christ; so that unworthy fear,
love, pride, are impediments to faith. I know it may be objected here, that it
is spoke of the confession of faith, not the act or habit of faith; and these
other things may hinder these outward acts of faith which do not choke its
being, and nature. I answer, it is true; but withal it cannot be a^ true and
right faith which is ashamed, or afraid to express it self; for a true faith of
divine perfections, is such as must believe the divine perfections infinitely
excellent, and his veracity so likewise; and therefore he must needs be
confident that when he honors him, God will bless him, and so cannot fear any
thing in this world. This I hope may suffice for the satisfaction of the Reader
in this.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. XV.
Faith a duty to God against Mr. Hobbs his assertion; his constant endeavors
to asperse the duties of Christianity. Miracles the ordinate means of faith.
The use of the means necessary to the attaining of the end.
HE goes on, and says, And not a duty that we exhibit to God, but a gift
which God freely gives to whom he pleases. Faith is not a duty which we
exhibit to God! such a language as was never heard from a Christian, no not
from a Jew, a Turk, or an Heathen if he were not an Atheist. If he thought
there were a God, he must needs think that faith is due to him. Who would fear
him, trust in him, if he does not believe his promi^es and threats? If he think
he is the chief good, he must think him true in all his sayings; that they are
according to his intentions; and that he is able to make good what he intends.
Who can honor him, but he that believes he is, or would honor him but he that
believes he is a rewarder of them who seek him? It is the duty which he who
has, cannot lack the rest; and he who has not, does nothing upright. But it
seems he utters his mind clearly in this sentence which he did more obscurely
otherwhere, laboring throughout this discourse to weaken our faith. Well let
us go on, but, says he, it is a gift which God freely gives to whom he
pleases: what therefore no command concerning it? he may say the same of Hope
and Charity; and indeed of all the things of this World; the Earth is the
Lords, and all that is in it, and to whom he pleases he gives it, but is
there therefore no command concerning these things? Consider, Reader, that
although faith be Gods gift, yet God gives it according to those rules which he
has set down: faith is introduced by hearing, by such settled ways as God has
appointed to produce it: and therefore I do think that no man living can show
me faith, where that faith was not wrought by God in his ordinary way of
working: and therefore one part of his distinction which he used before, either
by Gods operation ordinary or extraordinary, might have been spared, if applied
to the immediate operation. I know the conversion of St. Paul may be objected,
and the like, where God wrought his faith by a miraculous manifestation of
himself to him: yet consider that the conversion of St. Paul was produced
immediately by that miracle which was in a most settled course of Gods working b^
hearing and seeing; for hearing the word, or reading it, seeing some vision, or
miracle, are most ordinate means by which God bestows that blessing upon his
servants, by preaching, by visions, by miracles. And I do not believe that any
man in the world can persuade me that he has a right and religious faith, who
never heard or saw any thing which did persuade him to it. Again, consider that
there are three things, which make a gift profitable besides; the giving, the
receiving and the right use of it: the first only concerns God, the two latter
men. Now suppose that the Sun (which alone can do it) should shine, if men will
remain in their prison, keeping the doors and windows shut, they shall not be
able to see by that gift of light; yea if he open the windows of his house, and
shut those of his body, he shall not see. Out of these arises the faultiness
of infidelity, that men shut out that means which God gives them to believe;
they will not hear or read the word of God, they scorn his miracles, and all
those glorious revelations which have been made to his servants* When the hands
of God are open to give, and the hands of men not so to receive, and when he
sows his seed of righteousness, and the pleasures and the cares of the World
choke it, then the duty of faith is subject to a command although given by God.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. XVI.
Unbelief the greatest breach of Gods Law. St. John 3. 18, and 19. explained.
The justice of God in the condemnation of men for want of faith. The case of
Abraham, Genesis 17. 10. elucidated. The power of Parents asserted.
HE proceeds, As also unbelief is not a breach of any of his Laws, but a
rejection of them all. This was witty, and a good way of arguing; contrariorum
eadem est ratio, contraries do illustrate one the other. But consider Reader,
is not the rejection of a Law, a breach of a Law? Suppose a man should think
(as some have) that no supreme has power ^o make Laws for life and death; he
steals, and by the Law concerning Thievery, is to be executed; does his
rejection of that Law make his felony no breach of that law, which is against
it? Certainly it is the greatest breach, it tears the Law in pieces; and is the
greatest violation of it that may be. To this purpose our Savior most clearly,
John 3. 18. He who believes not, is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. So that according to Mr.
Hobbs his Tenent here is a condemnation, but no just one, because, not for the
breach of some Law. There mu^^ be therefore some divine Law exacting faith*
which this infidelity does break. But then Mr. Hobbs would reply to our
Savior, that faith is a gift, and why do thou puni^h me for the want of that
which is only a gift? Read the 19 verse, and our Savior does answer him, And
this is the condemnation that light is come into the World, and men love
darkness rather than light; the light is the light of faith, and Gods graces
which he gives to men, by which they may apprehend divine truths: which yet
they do not, because they love darkness rather than light; love not this light
of faith, which discovers to them the obliquity of their sinful worldly
desires. So that it is apparent that although God gives this light, his grace;
yet men preferring the world before it, it is unprofitable. This was the case
of these Jews which our Savior spoke to, John 5* 44 How can ye believe which
reci^ve honor from one another, and seek not the honor which comes from God*
So that men's preferring worldly things before the things of God, causes them
not to receive or make use of Gods revelations. But Mr. Hobbs has Scripture
for what he writes, Genesis 17. 10. This is the Covenant which thou shall observe
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee Now (says he) Abraham's seed had
not this revelation, nor were yet in being; yet they are a party to the
covenant, and bound to obey what Abraham should declare to them for Gods Law.
It is true (what he says) that Abraham's seed had not the revelation, nor were
yet in being; yet they are a party in this Covenant. But what can be deduced
further from this, than that which is the ordinary condition of contracts? A
man gives his estate to another, and to his posterits for ever, upon a
condition that they shall pay such and such acknowledgments, which if they
perform that estate shall be theirs; but if not, the contract shall be void.
Yes, says Mr. Hobbs, there is more, they are bound to obey whatsoever Abraham
should declare for Gods Law* I see nothing in these words which enforce any
such thing: but only the observation of circumcision: thi^ God calls his
Covenant, being a sign thereof, and this Covenant consists in this, that God
would be Abraham's God, and his seeds after him, and that he would give them the
Land of Canaan for an everlasting possession. The meaning of all which, was,
that he would in near and dear respects favor and protect them, as you may
read in the 7 and 8 verses of that Chapter. So that here in this is no more
employed, but that if they observe circumcision God would bless them; there is
no mention of accepting for Gods Laws whatsoever Abraham should deliver; and
therefore he might have spared his following discourse [which (says he) they
could not be but in virtue of the obedience they owed to their Parents; who (if
they be subject to no other earthly power, as here in the case of Abraham) have
sovereign power over their Children and servants* This I say might have been
spared, for if the Covenant went no further than I have expre^^ed, (as without
doubt it did not) there needs no sovereign power to be forced to it. But I am
of his mind that they who are Parents, (where is no other established
sovereignty) have that supreme power over their children and servants: which
one conclusion will confute the whole body of his Politiques, as I intend to
show hereafter.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. XVII.
The obedience of Abraham's Family to Gods Laws, depended upon that to him, as
Father of the Family. Mr. Hobbs his consequences drawn from this proposition
not rightly deduced. His constant varying from the English translation
observed, and censured. Reason against former deductions. The entire obedience
of the Israelites to the dictates of Moses, rather from the conference of his
divine inspiration, as a Prophet, than his sovereign power. The Authority of
scripture depends not upon the declaration of the sovereign. The worshippers of
Baal not excused from the command of the King of Israel. The reasons of Mr.
Hobbs his former assertion disproved. The commands of the sovereign justly
opposed, when contrary to the Christian faith. Mr. Hobbs his Atheistical
conclusions censured.
BUt he has another piece of Scripture which you may read, Gen 18. 18, 19.
Again where God says to Abraham, In thee shall all Nations of the Earth be
blessed: for I know thou will command thy Children, and thy house after thee to
keep the way of the Lord, and to observe righteousness and judgment; It is
manifest the obedience of his family, who had no revelation, depended on their
former obligation to obey their Sovereign. Thus far Mr. Hobbs. I answer, it is
true that this obedience of Abraham's family to himself, depends upon their
filial obedience to him as their Father, and his commanding them depends upon
his sovereign power over them as their Father But what? can it be collected
hence, that if Abraham had commanded dishonest things, i. e. such actions as
were against any will of God, revealed any other way to them, that they should
have obeyed him? Certainly no; nay, the contrary is here intimated, for
therefore God promised to bless him and his posterity, because he did know that
Abraham would command them virtuous things, to keep the way of the Lord. But
mark here, Mr. Hobbs still varyes from the English lection, and that to the
worse; for it is not what he writes, to keep, but, he will command them, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord. So that the sense is; because God foresaw
his fatherly care, and their filial duty in these righteous actions, he would
bless them. He prosecutes this conclusion with another Scripture thus; At mount
Sinai, Moses only went up to God, the people were forbidden to approach on pain
of death; yet were they bound to obey all that Moses declared unto them for
Gods Law. Upon what ground, but on this submission of their own, Exodus 20.
Speak thou to us, and we will hear thee; but let not God speak to us lest we
die? By which two places, (says he) it sufficiently appears that in a
Commonwealth a Subject that has no certain and assured revelation,
particularly to himself concerning the will of God, is to obey for such the
command of the Commonwealth. (That is, by his Logic, the sovereign of the
Commonwealth.) How this conclusion can be drawn out of these two places of
Scripture, I cannot imagine. Why it should not, I shall give these reasons.
First, that although these two particular cases were to be understood, as he
conceits; yet they are but particular cases, which concerned those only affairs
which were under their proper management; and there is no one word which points
at them, to make them presidents for others, or to give an universal rule for
all others* Secondly, whereas he says that in a Commonwealth a Subject should
do thus (as he sets down in one of his instances,) to wit, that of Abraham,
there was no Commonwealth; settled, but only a noble family; many things may be
proper to a family, which are not for a Commonwealth nay indeed the government
of the Israelites under Moses was, as yet, not a pefect established
Commonwealth, but only in fieri, the Commonwealth was in moulding, the Laws
for the government were in making. Then consider, in Moses his case (for I have
writ enough concerning the other the People said they would hear Moses; and
good reason for it because they discerned that he had conversation with God;
that Gods terror was so great that no man durst injure him by doubting his
Laws, who had such near converse with God, as he had, when called up to the top
of the Mount: and therefore might be trusted on his relation. And therefore it
seems their promise of harkening to whatsoever Moses should deliver for Gods
Law, was to him, as a Prophet, rather than as a King; which indeed was (in that
regard) more to be considered. And certainly those dictates of the holy
Scripture for our practices which are delivered by King David or Solomon, have
not that great obligation upon us as they were Kings, but Prophets; nor are the
books which are Scripture and commanded to be so received amongst us, therefore
of divine authourity, because Kings declare them to be such; but contrariwise,
Kings declare them to be such, because they are such. And, (good Reader)
consider further, that this reason of Mr. Hobbs might have excused all the
worshippers of Baal: all the idolatries and abominations committed in the reign
of Jeroboam, and the rest of those wicked Kings over Israel. For if the people
were to receive that, and that only for the word of God, which their supremes
authorized, then they authorizing those, and only those commands which were
directed to those impieties, were so to be accepted and obeyed, unless they had
particular revelation; (which in general, the common people never had) and then
how could God justly punish them for violating those Laws which he had given
them (as he did often) when their Kings exacted otherwise? But he gives reason
for what he has delivered; for (says he) if men were at liberty, to take for
Gods commandments, their own dreams, and fancies, or the dreams, and fancies
of private men; scarce two men would agree upon what is Gods commandments; and
yet in respect of them, every man would despise the commandment of the Common
wealth. Alas poor man, what a dream and fancy has he vainly uttered! this is
like to what he affirmed before, that we have no assurance of revelations,
unless we had particular revelations our selves. And what I opposed to that
will serve for this; Were all those Councils, all those Fathers, all the
consent of the Christian Church, nothing but dreams? all the blood of holy
Martyrs nothing but fancies? yea the blood of Christ whereby he has subdued
all the Kings of this Christian World, nothing but dreams and fancyes^? which
yet are those Medium's by which men oppose Kings, (and ought to do it) when
they command contrary to our Christian Faith. Certainly Mr. Hobos said right
when he affirmed, That private men must not oppose their dreams or fancies to
the Laws of the Land wherein they live. But under that Notion, he does amiss,
when he terms our assent to the revealed will of God ^ clearly and
intelligently apprehended) a dream or fancy. But because he terms it the Law
of the Commonwealth, which has some sense according to his impossible
principles, viz. That the supreme represents the whole, I will tell him it is
a phrase of speech never used by any Author before: for a Commonwealth
consists in the ordination of all the members of it, supreme and inferior; the
supreme is sovereign, the inferior are subjects; but by a common wealth here
he only understands the sovereign. But let us proceed with him; out of the
former confuted premises he draws this conclusion: I conclude therefore, that
in all things not contrary to the Moral Law, (that is to say, to the Law of
Nature) all subjects are bound to obey that for divine Law, which is declared
to be so, by the Laws of the Commonwealth. Certainly the Moral Law, or the
Law of Nature, does not bid us be baptized, or receive the holy Communion, nay
it does not command us to make a profession of our faith in Jesus Christ. The
Law of Nature did not command Daniel, Shedrack, Meshack, and Abednego, to
refuse the voluptuous meat which Nebuchadnezar allowed them, and fed upon pulse
and water; but the fear that they should break the Law of God by obeying the
King; I mean, the positive Law which God had not writ in their Natures, but in
Tables; so that this conclusion of his was most Heathnish.

CHAP. XXII. SECT. XVIII.
Mr. Hobbs his further reasons to prove the former assertions examined and
censured. His diminution of the authority of the divine positive Law, and
constant vilifying of scripture censured. The Law of Nature restrained by the
divine positive Law. Obedience in Religious duties not founded in the command
of the sovereign, but of God. The persuasion of the Turks, that the Alcoran
contains the Law of God, not the command of the Grand Signiour causes their
conformity to it. The difference between the commands and acts of Christian
Princes, and their subjects, from those of other Religions. All other
Societies, as that of Thieves, illegitimate combinations. Mr. Hobbs his
doctrine abhorrent to Christianity.
BUT he labors further to prove it. Which also (says he) is evident to any
man's reason; for whatsoever is not against the Law of Nature, may be made Law
in the Name of them that have the Sovereign power; and there is no reason men
should be the less obliged by it, when it is propounded in the Name of God. I
answer, that whatsoever is not against the Law of Nature, may be made Law by
God, i. e. his positive Law; but many Laws are limited, not only by Gods Laws
of Nature, but his positive Laws likewise, which have as great force as the
other to whomsoever they are revealed. (Now I am in the 150 page^ let the
Reader consider again, how he takes occasion to lessen the authority of
Scripture. I am persuaded he can produce no Christian writer from our Saviors
time downward, that ever delivered so unworthy a conceit of the positive Law
of God: it is as if he should say, we should obey a Constables command against
the Kings command by Statute; for the difference is much less betwixt the King
and a Constable, than betwixt the greatest King in the World and God. The
common Law which I conceive to be an unwritten tradition, is like the Law of
Nature, the Statute Law like the positive Laws: It is lawful (not considering a
statute) for a man to act any thing not against the common Law, but if a
positive, i e. a statute Law intervene, it is no longer lawful by any private
power to act that, which otherwise had been lawful. Thus until a positive Law
of God interpose, whatsoever is not against the Law of Nature is lawful; but
when that positive Law is manifest, it is necessary that that likewise be
obeyed; and no humane Law of man's making can have right to dispense with it. He
proceeds [besides, there is no place in the world, where men are permitted to
pretend other commandments of God, than are declared for such by the
Commonwealth. Christian States punish those that revolt from Christian
Religion, and all other States, those that set up any religion by them
forbidden. For in whatsoever is not regulated by the Commonwealth it is equity
(which is the Law of Nature, and therefore an eternal Law of God that every man
equally enjoy his Liberty.] Here is an Argument drawn a facto ad jus; Because
this is done, therefore it is rightly done; and an equal weight put upon the
acts of Heathens, and worshippers of the Sun, Moon, etc. with that of
Christians who only worship the true God. As if because Kings justly punish
those who violate the Laws of those Kingdoms which they are entrusted with,
therefore Thieves justly may destroy such as break the Laws of their
Combination, when indeed the first are just, but the other most unjust* The
case seems to be the same here: for all those are combinations of Thieves, who
rob God of his due honor required by him and the Christians only act by the
Law of God. So that here we may discern a great difference in the right of the
two a^tings of the Christian and the Heathen; but then consider what is the
ground of them both, we shall find it different from what Mr. Hobbs delivers.
He conceives the reason to be this, why delinquents are punished, because they
swerve from the Law of the supreme: but it is clearly otherwise; The Christian
does not therefore receive the holy Communion, or repent of his sin, or do such
like heavenly duties, because the supreme Magistrate requires them, but because
he finds those duties exacted by God in his positive Laws; and if the
Magistrate shall controulit, he knows God must be obeyed before man, when he
requires contrary to God. And the same reason persvvades the Turk concerning
his Alcoran, which he vainly imagines to be the divine Law; and if the Grand
Signior himself do contradict that Law they will not obey him, upon that
reason. And surely the same Argument prevails with all other Nations who have
their Religion by tradition; it is not the Law of man, but the imagined Law
of God which they subject themselves unto in divine performances. And
therefore though sovereigns punish such transgressions which are against those
Laws which they have established for divine; yet it is therefore because they
are esteemed divine. Therefore they made such Laws, not that they could think
that they ought to be esteemed divine because they established them. I will
add but one observation more, which is this; That although he says, that all
Nations practice this, that is, that they allow only such divine Laws, which
they have established to be such; yet I believe no Nation in the World, (no
Christian I am assured) would have allowed this doctrine to be published, but
only such as were in that distracted condition as our poor Nation was when he
published it. For since every Christian Kingdom professes a conformity to
divine Law, it cannot be imagined that they durst obtrude such an impossible
thing to be credited as that they could make divine Laws, but only confirm and
exact an obedience to them. Nay, I can think the same of all, even Heathen
Nations. So that it is a conclusion abhorring to Christianity, yea humane
Nature wheresoever it is planted with any Religion. For since all do conceive
God to be an infinite able and wise Governor even of Kings, supremes, and
kingdoms, how can they think it afe for them out of humane obedience to
subject his rules to the control of his Subjects, which all Kings and
Potentates are? I have handled this Paragraph verbatim, and although there are
many more expressions (in this case) which may deserve censure, yet I pass them
over, and indeed did think here to have concluded his Politiques, and so not to
have passed any further censure upon them in this place. But there are some
egregious errors hereafter which must not be passed over with silence. I will
also skip over his twenty seventh and twenty eight Chapters, as containing
things in general less malicious, and I will enter upon his twenty ninth
Chapter which he intitles

Of those things which weaken or tend to the dissolution of a Commonwealth.
CHAP. XXIII.
SECT. I.
Mr. Hobbs his second Paragraph purged. The signification of the word, Judge.
Inferior Judges apply the determinations of Laws concerning good and evil to
particular persons and facts. Private men have judicium rationis, and therefore
may determine upon their own ratiocination. No man to intrude upon the office
of a judge, but by deputation from the Sovereign.
THe first of these I let pass, as having spoken something of it already
materially, and begin with his second which he enters upon page 168. toward
the bottom of that Page which begins thus. In the second place, I observe the
diseases of a Commonwealth, that proceed from the poison of seditious
doctrines; whereof one is, that every private man is Judge of good and evil
actions. To purge this doctrine from all poison, observe first; that this word,
Judge, sounds like a legal Officer, and truly (to speak properly) I think the
supreme legislative power is the Judge of politic good and evil; the other
subordinate Judges are only Judges of the application of the supreme to
particular cases; for instance thus. The legislative power commands that no man
shall steal; if he do he shall be thus and thus punished; the Judge applies
this sentence of this evil to ^itius, who is brought before him, and accused of
this crime; the legislative determins and judges, that it is evil in general;
but the Judge upon his Bench determines, that this person is guilty of this
evil; in neither of which a private man has right to pass a conclusive
sentence concerning other men. But yet give me leave to tell the Reader, that
in both these he has judicium rationis, a rational sentence in his own
thoughts, as thus; before a Law is made, he judges that this would be fit to
be made, and so may discretely interpose with the legislative power to advise
them to act according to those reasons which appear to him as persuasive, for
else the Legislator will lack that great assistance which he may receive from
the premonitions of prudent men, who, many times, (although they are not lifted
up to the dignity of such as sit at the Helm) v^t have either by study or
experience equal abilities with them.

And in the second (viz.) the application, when a private man shall stand by at
the pleading or hearing a cause, he perceiving that the Judge carries himself
partially to one side, and does pass his sentence accordingly, this private man
cannot choose but judge in his Soul, that this was a wicked sentence; As
contrarily when it is justly carried with indifference, he may judge with
himself that this was a righteous judgment. But the intruding into the Office
of a Judge is altogether unfit without a special deputation to it But since God
has pleased to give man that most excellent faculty of ratiocination both in
Natural and Political affairs, he shall desert humanity who should deny himself
the exercise of that ability. Nay he may endeavor (if he can) to avert that
execution of that sentence, when it is wickedly pronounced; as was the case of
Daniel, in the unrighteous sentence decreed upon Susanna; but still not to
usurp a judicatory power without lawful authority. But, even in these cases,
there must be left judicium rationis and discretionis, a power of reason and
judicial discretion to think upon and consider, what is right: but he seems to
deny that truth concerning the private actions of that particular man whether
it shall be good to do this or that; for so he proceeds.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. II.
The former assertion of private ratiocination further cleared in Acts
commanded against the Law of Nature, or the positive Laws of God. Mr. Hobbs his
argument retorted against himself.
THis is true, says he, in the condition of mere Nature, where there are no
civil Laws; and also under civil government, in such cases as are not
determined by the Law. Consider now, Reader, that by the Law, he understands
here the civil Law. Consider then that the Laws of any Nation may be against
the Law of Nature; in which case he himself has limited the power of civil
Laws. A man is commanded by the National Law to act against the Law of Nature,
shall not this private man judge it unfit for him to do that? And without
question, in many particulars, the positive Law of God in Scripture is as clear
to many men, as that Law written in men's hearts; and therefore in such cases
there is no doubt but as God has imparted to men the power of reasoning, so he
has given men Laws by which they should regulate themselves according to his
directions, and they must and ought to use that reason in the guidance of their
actions by his rules. But then, concerning the civil Laws themselves, a man may
judge in private of them, whether they are prudential or no; yea, every man who
is versed in Politics, will judge and think so of them, and sometimes judge
they are not prudent, and yet give no disturbance to the peace of the Kingdom:
but think it more prudent to be subject to an imprudent Law, than for it to
hinder the end of all Laws, which is the peace and quiet of the Kingdom. But
now consider further, Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. He has writ
a book of Polity, he has censured all the civil Laws in the World, he is a
private man, and has (I believe) no legislative power; why should he take upon
him to forbid others to act that which he himself does in that very place where
he forbids them? And yet give me leave to add one Note more; this judging he
speaks of must be about his Actions in the future, whether, what he is about to
do will be a good or an evil action. Is it possible for a man to live honestly
and not to judge of such actions wherein there is any scruple whether they are
good or evil? Suppose the civil law (as he would have it) were the only rule to
walk by; yet every private man must judge whether this or that act which he is
about to undertake, be according to that rule or no. And perhaps he may, in
many cases, find work enough for all the wit he has to regulate himself
according to that rule: and although he calls this the poison of a
Commonwealth; yet I dare boldly say it is that bread which does most
wholesomly nourish, support and maintain a Commonwealth, (viz.) that every man
should consider and judge what is legal, and fit for him to do. Let us go on
with him.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. III.
Of the rule of Actions. The Law of Nature, the measure of humane Actions, in
opposition to the Civil Laws, where the case is contradistinct. Instances of
Civil Laws commanding unjust things; If the Civil Law command any thing against
the Divine Law, or the principles of Faith and Reason. Mr. Hobbs his arrogance
in venting principles contrary to the received opinion of the whole World noted
and censured. The case stated and determined. Good Men obedient to bad Laws,
not in acting according to them, but by suffering the penalties inflicted by
them.
But (says he) otherwise, it is manifest, that, the measure of good and evil
actions, is the Civil Law; and the Judge the Legislat^r, who is always
representative of the Commonwealth* Here are two Propositions, I shall handle
them apart, they are both indiscreet, and very impertinent to the Question. The
first is, that the Civil Law is the measure of our Actions the measure is in
definite without any limitation what not the Law of Nature? shall not that be a
measure? How shall a man be able to commit Treason then se defendendo against
the Civil Law? (which is one of his popular Aphorisms delivered in many places
of this Book:) for if the Civil Law be the measure of his actions, he must not
violate that for the pretense of the Law of Nature. I urge this ad hominem* as
a^^nvincible argument against his wicked doctrine, but see it overthrown out of
most received principles; It is possible that the Civil Laws may be wicked and
dishonest, and so against the Law of God; as even in this Nation, they have
made s^^rilegious Laws; shall not I judge in my self whether it be fit for me
to act according to these Laws? The Law made in Queen Mary's days which shed so
much innocent blood, it was fit for every man in that time to suffer rather
than to conspire with them. And therefore he must be judge himself what is
virtuous for him to do; and that Law is not a rule to guide him sa^ely by. Let
this suffice for the first proposition. The second is, And the Judge is the
legislator, who is alwai^s representative of the Commonwealth. What an
impossible Judge for such doubts is here delivered Make the legislator what you
will, King, or Senate or what you please; ^he que^ion to be determined may be
whether it is fit for Titius, at this hour or instant, to act according to this
Civil law concerning which the scruple arises? whether it be not against the
Divine law? the duty is instant, now required; It is not possible for this man
to obtain leave to enquire of the legislator; or if he could, is it not
probable that the legislator may not be at leisure to answer such doubts? It
cannot be therefore that the legislator can be a proper Judge of such
questions; Titius alone must do it himself: neither indeed is it possible for
any legislator to foresee all such particular scruples which may arise out of
general rules; and therefore there is a necessity for every man to be judge of
good and evil, concerning his own particular actions what he should do. But he
reduces great mishaps and ill consequences which follow upon this doctrine,
which must be examined. From this false doctrine (says he) men are disposed to
debate with themselves, and dispute the commands of the Common wealth. And why
not, good Reader? There is no man that has reason with him when he studyeth a
Law-book, or indeed any other (besides the holy Scripture) but he considers
whether that law or discourse be agreeing to the principles of Faith and
Reason, whether it be consonant with equity: if a man have not his judgment
free to himself, how comes it about that Mr. Hobbs hopes to prevail with his
discourse against all the laws in the Christian World, but that he himself
thinks there is a freedom of judgment left amongst men to determine by their
reason what is good or evil* But then he adds, [And afterward to obey, or
disobey them as in their private judgment they shall think fit, whereby the
Commonwealth is distracted and weakened.] Certainly every man living will obey
or disobey as he thinks fit; and this is done by virtuous and good men without
distracting or weakening the Commonwealth. For if a virtuous man find the Civil
law contradicting Gods law either in Nature or Scripture, he cannot think it
good moraliter for him to act according to its direction. But his opposing of
an established law shall be with submission to the penalty, not contending
martially against it, for the accommodation of this present contented being,
which is his doctrine; and by this means the Commonwealth will suffer no
distraction, but rather confirmation and establishment; when a man's private
evil shall be patiently endured, rather than the peace of a kingdom shall be
disquieted. I speak no more of this because the sense is much the same with
that doctrine which he censured next and condemns.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. IV.
Mr. Hobbs his proposition everted. Conscience defined and distinguished. Of
conclusions secondarily or remotely deduced from the first principles. No
conscience properly and strictly erroneous, but being such (according to the
vulgar acception of the phrase) however obliges. The case put upon the
misinterpretation of Scripture, supposed to prohibit swearing, though for the
confirmation of a truth, and the error asserted to be obliging. Two objections
answered and the proposition fully cleared; our Saviors command of not
swearing at all examined, and elucidated. Of promissory or assertory Oaths. The
paragraph and question concluded.
ANother Doctrine repugnant to Civil Society, is, That whatsoever a man does
against his Conscience is sin, and it depends on the presumption of making
himself Judge of good and evil. Certainly the proposition is true, whatsoever a
man does against his Conscience is sin; for Conscience includes in its Name and
Nature Science, so that there can be no Conscience, without there be a knowledge
of the condition and circumstances to which his Conscience is applied. I would
be loath to involve my self into many intricate Questions. But entreat the
Reader to consider, that Conscience is the conclusion of a practical
Syllogism, in which the Major is either the Act of a principal law of Nature,
or some general rule equivalent to it. To understand this, observe, that there
are two innate qualities in man, which the Philosophers call, Habitus
Principiorum, habits of principles which do so evidence themselves that no
rational man does hear such truths clearly delivered, but he presently assents
to them* that which is about speculative things they term intellectus, because
it is in the prime operation of the understanding; of which Nature are these,
That the whole is greater than a part; two and two make four: There is no man
that hears such propositions clearly delivered who does not presently assent
to them. There is another quality which is called by them Synteresis, which is
the habit by which we readily assent to practical things, as in the other to
speculative, of which Nature are these; That good is desirable, evil to be
eschewed; God is to be obeyed in his commands, and the like. Now there is no
man, ho, as soon as he hears these Axioms clearly delivered, but does without
ambiguity presently yield an assent to them. Out of these principles when a man
makes true collections and deductions, that conclusion is Conscience, as thus:

All evil is to be eschewed;

Adultery is evil;

Therefore Adultery is to be eschewed.

Such a man who thus argues, acts against his Conscience when he commits
Adultery. But not only so when a conclusion is immediately deduced out of
Synteresis but that which is more remotely deduced out of it; as take the
conclusion of the former syllogism;

^ Adultery is to be eschewed:

This particular Act, with this forbidden Woman, is Adultery.

Therefore this is to be eschewed.

Sure he who commits that sin acts against his Conscience, and so as far as any
man can go, with right arguing, so far his Conscience obliges him* Now if we
would argue from strong reason, a man may say, there is no such thing as an
erroneous Conscience, because if it be not Science, it cannot be Conscience,
which upposeth Science and a right drawing out the Conclusion, which proceeds
from these evident principles; and then most certainly Mr. Hobbs must be in the
wrong, who affirms that it is not sin to act against his Conscience. But let us
take Conscience as in the usual way it is taken, not for the conclusion of a
direct and certain arguing, from these known and evident principles, (of which
before:) but for that conclusion which any man, according to his ability, draws
out of these principles although mistaken, and not logically or truly done. (I
understand not b^ this word [logically] the art of logic, but that natural
ratiocination, of which the artificial is an assistant only.) Well then, the
question is, whether that a man who acts against that light which he has, that
shows him this particular is unlawful, is sin in him who so acts, although this
light be not a true but a bare show of Conscience; and not true Science, or
deduction which must be drawn from the principles of Synteresis by true
ratiocination? And certainly the opinion is most right and true, and founded
upon the strongest principles of reason that can be. For it is a mo^ undoubted
Axiom which he has delivered, that laws bind only by the force of their
sufficient promulgation. So that if they are made only, they exact no obedience
until they be proclaimed; nor then, unless the Proclamation be such as the
obliged party may take notice of it; for no man can be bound to that which he
cannot know; he cannot obey, unless he know what to obey; nor can he know,
unless he have a Revelation to show it him; so that, without question, the very
law of Nature could not bind, but that there is a Synteresis that enlightens
man's Soul, and makes the goodness of that law manifest. Well then, this man
must needs sin who acts against that light he has: put that case which is
common amongst us, A man by misunderstanding the Scriptures thinks that they
command him, not to swear: therefore when he is convented before a Judge to
attest a truth by that most religious act, of calling God to witness what he
says to be true, or to punish him, if it be false; if this man so conceive
these places of Scripture, as if they should render his swearing in any case
unlawful, if he do swear, he sins against that light he has, and it may most
justly be imputed to him for sin: for he who thinks, and believes it is the law
of God which prohibits it, and yet will do otherwise, prefers men before God,
this world before the other, which is the fountain from whence all iniquity
proceeds.

I know but two objections of any moment, which can be made against this
conclusion, which I shall satisfy presently. The first is, if a man does sin
in acting against his erroneous Conscience, then a man may sin in acting
according to Gods commandments; because that he may mistake Gods command, and
in doing so when he acts according to the true meaning of Gods command he must
sin: which may seem most strange at the first view.

For answer I will consider this Phrase, Act according to Gods command. To
understand this know that he who obeys Gods commands, must do it as a man
scienter knowingly. A man cannot pretend to obedience in any act which is done
by chance, or ignorantly. Such acts therefore which are done when a man thinks
otherwise of the Law of God or the principles of the Law of Nature, than the
truth is, though he do the Acts materially directed by them; yet ^^ring in the
principles which God has given him for his guide (I mean the light of his
understanding which should show him the way) he does not act them formally
well; he does bonum, but not been, a good act but not well, according to Gods
law formally. As for a man to do a good act well, requires a completion of all
circumstances, he must do it for a right end. In which first qualification the
erroneous man who acts against the light of his Synteresis, must needs
miscarry, because he cannot think he acts for the glory of God, when he thinks
contrary to the revealed will of God: and indeed it might be shevved how he
erres in every circumstance* Quis, Quid, C^i, Cur, Quomodo, Quando, (Quis.)
What? the Creature go against the revealed will of the Creator? etc. But I
desist, the restare obvious. Well then, I answer this objection, that he who
acts the thing commanded against his erroneous Conscience, although he do that
which is materially good, yet in not doing it well he sins.

The second objection is, that if he who has an erroneous Conscience must not
act against it, such a man is necessitated to (...); for he must either act
according to his Conscience or against it; in either of which he sins, as in
the instance before given; A man whose Conscience tells him that he may not
swear, this man is brought before a Judge to give evidence in a Cause of
moment, if he do it, or not do it, he sins: but surely the Nature of sin is
such, that it is impossible to sin in any act which he cannot choose but do;
for sin supposes a possibility not to sin.

For answer to this I shall say, that there is no impossibility in the case
proposed, for that man may lay aside his error and consider that God has
given a command to swear by his Name, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and elsewhere; the words
there are, thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve ^im and swear by his
Name. Not that he commands us to swear, but supposing swearing to be necessary
in all politiques for the deciding controversies, he commands that when we
swear, we should swear by his Name, because it is a religious act, and ought to
be referred to none but himself only; yea God himself has sworn, Genesis 22. 16.
By my self I have sworn, says the Lord, so like wise Psalm 100. 4. The Lord
has sworn, and many like places. It cannot therefore be ill in it self to
swear, nor can we think it a privilege or prerogative of Gods to swear: Holy
men in all ages have done it: for you may find Abraham diverse times, as Genesis
21. 22. He swear in the Covenant with Abimelech. So likewise Isaac, either the
same or another Abimelech, Genesis 26. 31. I need not name more places of the same
Nature. But to whatsoever may* be objected of this kind out of the Old
Testament, these may reply, that our Savior has instituted a New Law (Mat. 5.
33.) where in the 34 verse he says, But I say unto you, swear not at all; It
is true he so requires them. But let us consider that St. Paul (whose life and
actions after his conversion are so eminently excellent, and without blame)
diverse time swears, yea in his Epistles, which were a greater fault than in
ordinary discourse, because 'twas done upon consideration. Nay, in those
Epistles which he was directed by the Holy Ghost to write, for the good of the
Church of Christ. So you may observe Rom 1. 9. God is my witness: so likewise,
2 Cor. 1. 23. I call God for record upon my Soul. Phil 1. 8. God is my record.
And now it is not possible for any man to think, that so virtuous a man in a
premeditated act, as an Epistle writ for a public good, and in that act,
guided by the holy Ghost, should commit a sin against that Christ, whose Gospel
and Laws he preached and taught every where, with hazard of his life, if that
Law were to be understood in that latitude and extent in which it is taken. Any
man who considers this, must needs cast about to see, if learned men, (who
throughout the whole Christian World have practiced with St. Paul) have given
any such exposition upon these words of our Savior as may consist with the
universal practice of mankind, and doing that he may find this fully explained
so, as fit to show our Saviors design, which was not in this to control the
practice of his servants. The difficulty will lie in these two Phrase, the
Negative in the (34) verse, and the Affirmative in the (37) verse. First for
the Negative, swear not at all; to apprehend this consider, that these
universal, as also indefinite terms are with much caution to be extended, and
to be expounded in Scripture according to that consent they have with other
places, and the Analogy of Faith. In the 21 verse of this 5 Chap. of St.
Matthew, it is said, thou shall not kill, and lest some should say, there is no
universal sign preceding as in my Text, consider the following words which make
it as large as this in my Text, whosoever kills shall be in danger of the
judgment. And yet surely it is lawful for an Executioner to hang according to
the Law of the Land, and so to kill any man who is condemned, when he has
received a command to do it. So likewise it is lawful for a Soldier in defense
of his Country, and for any private man to kill any private man in defense of
himself. So likewise the same we may say of our Saviors words, John 10. and
the 8. All that ever came before me, were Thieves and Robbers. Here are as full
and large words as possibly can be; but a man say, what were the Patriarchs,
the Prophets, and St. John the Baptist Thieves and Robbers? Certainly no; it is
easy to observe many more of the like Nature, and I think one answer will
serve them all; thou shall not kill voluntarily, but upon necessity, or
command, (that is) a Natural or Moral necessity, for a command from lawful
Superiors introduces a Moral necessity of obeying. And so for that in St.
John, all that came of themselves, unsent by God, were Thieves and Robbers. But
John the Baptist, the Patriarchs, and the Prophets were men sent from God. And
so for those Swearers, swear not all, that is, of your selves, unless you are
commanded by Superior Powers, unless to confirm some great and considerable
truth; which way all virtuous and holy men have ever understood this Text, as
their practice assures us; and so that place in St James the 5. must abide the
same exposition. And although much more may be said for the exposition of thy
N^gative command of our Saviors; yet I conceive that this is sufficient, and
so pass to the Affirmative precept in the 37) verse, But let your communication
be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil. Here
it ^eems that as our Savior before forbad swearing by his Negative, swear not
at all, so here he insinuates the same by his Affirmative, but let your
communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay; and he gives a reason for it, for what
is more than these comes of evil. Thus the Argument being enforced, I answer
clearly, that in the Translation of the English there is a full gloss upon the
Text which expounds it clearly; for so it is read [let your communication]
which intimates that their common conversation should not be powdered with
Oaths, which is far distant from those just occasions where oaths are exacted
by the commands of Superiors, or the urgency of some great and weighty
business which needs a strong affirmation to assure the credulity of it; and
the Original which is ((...)) enforces no more but let your Speech be yea,
etc. And the reason which is added in the Text makes this interpretation good
(for what is more than these comes of evil;) it is not sin, it is not Evil,
but comes of Evil; which is evident, for no man swears in conversation, but
either because he doubts his own reputation* if he do not swear, or because
other men are distrustful, both which arise out of the evil of humane falsehood,
which makes him apt to lie. This Text being thu opened let us consider what
will result out of it, in the Negative first, and then out of the Affirmative
precept; In the Negative we may find that it is opposed to a practice of the
Jews, who (by some tradition or other) imagined that it was no sin to swear,
but to swear falsely only. So that if a man performed his promise which he swore
he would do, it was no sin* and it seems therefore to be spoken only of
promissory Oaths, not of such which were made to give Testimony of matters of
fact; if so, then there is no prohibition of such Oaths which are for the
decision of controversies, commonly called Assertory Oaths; and then again, it
may justly be conceived, that they (that is the Jews) thought (out of some
tradition or other) that it was only unlawful to swear by God, but not by the
Creature, for our Saviors instances are only in them, Thou shall not swear by
Heaven, by Earth, by Jerusalem, by the Gold of the Altar, or thy Head. Which he
shows relatively to reach even the Creator himself: so that for these
considerations it must be understood that it excludes not assertory Oath which
decide controversies, that it extends not to such Oaths where God is
religiously called to witness any thing. And then for the second the
affirmative precept, it reaches to our Communication and common conference one
with another, that Gods most Sacred Name be not slightly or in vain taken by
us; but that either some great business more than ordinary, or else some
supreme power must exact it from us. So then this being thus expounded, it must
needs appear that in this case, a man may justly depose his error, and he
cannot be necessitated to sin, when he has an error in his Conscience. And
truly it is an excellent rule for the practice of a man's life, when he shall
find a general practice of good and holy men in all Ages to practice any thing
which he is offended at, to suppress that averseness in himself, and with study
and pains to cast about which way he may reconcile himself to that common
practice, and not without strong and evident grounds (which will hardly be
possible) oppose that which the universal practice makes us know, that the
universal Church understood as they practiced; for if there be an Error in such
a practice, a man may find something to excuse himself with erravimum cum
patribus; but in the other, nothing but pride and self conceit, which makes
him oppose these practices: and surely in these cases it is a safe rule for any
man when he finds a place of Scripture which seemingly opposes the universal
doctrine of the Church, which is and has been so heretofore, to look about how
that Scripture may be expounded according to the Analogy of faith and good
manners or usage of the Catholic Church, which then must be the sense, and the
other (though more apparent at the first) not the true meaning; and by this
means he shall not act contrary to his Conscience, but if he do, he must sin.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. V.
Every man Judge of his own Actions, whether according to the positive Divine
Laws, or the Law of Nature. Mr. Hobbs his consequencies observed and censured.
His absurd expression of a public Conscience rejected. Opinion and Conscience
distinguished. Thoughts not possibly to be regulated by humane Laws. The
external manage of Opinion. The proper subject of Regulation. The necessity of
distraction from diversity of Opinions unless obtruded upon others. This
Argument retorted ad hominem.
HE proceeds, And it depends on the presumption of making himself Judge of
good and evil. It does (say I) for so every man will be, in what concerns his
own practice; and must needs be so, for else how can he judge that he does
right or no unless he may judge it? and if there were no Law but what he speaks
of, the Civil, he must judge whether his actions be according to that or no
when he acts: But Mr. Hobbs acknowledges a superior Law to that, to wit, the
Law of Nature, and I have showed another the positive Law of God, and he must
in both these use judicium privatum, his private judgment, whether his actions
accord or no with these superior Laws. Now in all these he must judge and be
responsible for that judgment, whether he judge by such rules as ought to
guide a prudent man: but he gives a reason for what he speaks, for a man's
Conscience and his Judgment is the same thing: and as the judgment, so also
the Conscience may be erroneous. This does not follow, because he may err
therefore he should not be guided by it. A man may have a false light showed,
or his eyes may be weak, as our eyes, who are old men, are; must he therefore
not make use of that light and sight which he has* Nay rather he must be more
careful in the diligent using of his eyes, and more seriously examining the
light which is offered to them. But in all these offers of reason which he
makes in this Case, they may be applied to that judgment which he must make
concerning the Law of Nature, or the Civil Law (which he allows a man must
judge) whether his actions be according to them, and what ^s the meaning of
them as well as what is the meaning of the positive Law of God, and he must and
will, if he be a virtuous man, act accordingly. Therefore (says he) though he
that is subject to no Civil Law, sins in all he does against his Conscience,
because he has no other rule to follow but his own reason; yet it is not so
with him that lives in a Commonwealth, because the Law is the public
Conscience, by which he has already undertaken to be guided. I cannot find how
to apply this discourse closely to the question, for he who is not imbodied in
a Commonwealth (says he) is ruled by his reason, (but hark you) that reason
ought to be ruled by the Law of Nature, according to his own doctrine; and
according to mine, by whatsoever is a known positive Law of God. Likewise,
although there is no Civil Law. And I will tell him farther that no Civil or
Politic Law can have power to bind him to the breach of any of these, and
therefore what he speaks of a public Conscience is an unheard of Language, and
not proper to be applied to Conscience, and most undoubtedly only educeable out
of that before unheard of, and most impossible principle of constituting a
supreme, which has been abundantly confuted in my former discourses. Let the
Reader take notice that I am now in page the* (169) (Otherwise in such
diversity as there is of private Consciences, which are but private Opinions,
the Commonwealth must needs be distracted, and no man dare to obey the
sovereign power farther than it shall seem good in his own eyes.) In this
clause he sets down the mischiefs (as he thinks) which may happen to a
Commonwealth by diversities of Consciences, or Opinions. But before I proceed
I will take notice of a mistake whereof he is guilty, when he says, That
private Consciences are but private Opinions. To this I say there may be such
Consciences which arise only out of private Opinions, which ought to be
overswayed with the greater weight of public Authority: but there are other
Consciences which are drawn out of the evident Law of Nature, or clear text of
Scripture; these are so strong foundations to build Conscience upon, that a
Conscience erected upon one or both of them cannot be shaken by that which he
calls a public Conscience* howsoever, it is an improper Phrase used by ^im to
call Conscience, Opinion, or Science; for it is rather a Conclusion deduced out
of either, as I have showed. But then when he is angry in these Politics with
diversities of Consciences or Opinions (as he terms them) I would fain have him
consider, how any Commonwealth should be able to make a Law to regulate men's
thoughts, for they can judge of them only by outward acts, it is only God who
can search the hearts and reins, and therefore he only can make ^aws for them.
Men may consine the external manage of Opinions and Consciences, which is fit
the legislative should do, in all such things which might impede or trouble the
well government of a Commonwealth, and punish the expression of them: but let
all the power in the World make what Laws they can, men will think what appears
most reasonable to their understandings: thoughts are far from the control of
any Leviathan whatsoever. And although it is true in some part, that
distractions in Commonwealths arise from diversity of Opinions; yet it is not
true what he says, the Common wealth must needs be distracted by them; for so
long as they are but Opinions, they do no harm but to those Persons who have
them; but if they justify their Opinions to the withdrawing others or
themselves from obedience than they are dangerous. And therefore the Leviathan
although he cannot know men's Consciences, and therefore not judge of them, must
not make Laws for them; yet because he can know and judge of the outward act,
which may distrub the peace, he must be severe both in making Laws against, and
punishing those faults: yet I cannot choose but wonder, how he who dares publish
so many doctrines against all the Leviathans in the World, should not allow
others the liberty of thinking against them.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. VI.
Faith and sanctity both inspired and acquired. Freewill and grace cooperating
to the salvation of Men. Mr. Hobbs his Arguments against this Opinion refuted.
Faith and sanctity entitle not any man to government. The means of salvation
most certain. Mr. Hobbs his Arguments against the former assertion retorted.
HE proceeds in another Paragraph, It has been also commonly taught, that
faith and sanctity are* not to be attained by study and reason, but by
supernatural inspiration or infusion. I will not trouble my self to turn
Authors where to find a defender of this proposition, but set down my
judgment and then answer his cavil at it: my judgment is, that faith and
sanctity are both inspired and acquired; faith is the Gift of God, as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 8. so likewise sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and yet
they are acquired; and in the Parable of the Talents Mat. 25. we may observe,
that the use of Gods gifts is blessed by Almighty God with a further
enlargement; multitudes of Scriptures might be produced, which would but dull
the Reader. So that in this case it is no other wise than it is with almost all
the affairs in the World; neither the grass, nor the plants grow without light
and influence from the Heavens; nor can the Heavens make them grow unless there
be a specifical virtue in the Plant to adapt that influence to that particular
operation which is in it. Neither can the Heavens without the Earth; nor the
Earth without the Heavens, bring forth the least fruit, according to that
Heavenly speech of St. Bernard, Toll liberum arbitrium, non erit quod
salvetur; Toll gratiam, non erit unde. Take away free choice, and there will
be nothing which can be saved for no inferior thing without that faculty is
capable of Heaven, that being like the specifical virtue of Plants which
co-operates with the general influence from above:) but take away grace there
is no means by which these supernatural acts should be performed; that being
the influence by which it is enabled to produce these blessed acts of faith and
sanctity. So that I say, faith and sanctity are both infused and acquired. Now
we will inquire into his exceptions against the absurdity of this opinion (as
he conceives,) [which granted, (says he) I see not why any man should render a
reason of his faith.] If the Opinion were, as he sets it down, I can tell him
why? that is for the satisfaction of others: but he goes on, Or why, every
Christian should not be also a Prophet. I will tell him, because faith and
sanctity, and prophecy are diverse things, which may and do often exist apart; and
therefore one of them may be, and is often without the other. Again he says, Or
why any man should take the Law of his Country rather than his own inspiration,
for the rule of his actions. I answer, because there are many vain suggestions
into the Soul of Man, which are often apt to persuade a man that they are
inspirations by God; and therefore we are commanded to try the Spirits, and
examine those suggestions whether they agree with such standing rules which
ought to guide our actions, amongst which the National law is one. He goes on,
And thus (says he) we fall again into the fault of taking upon us to judge of
good and evil. I answer as before, there is no man but will judge of good and
evil, if he be an honest man and guide his actions by that judgment, but yet
as a private man, if he be such* He again, [Or to make Judges of it, such
private men as pretend to be supernaturally inspired, to the dissolution of all
Civil Government.] I see no consequence in this, for although a man may be
inspired, and can know he is so; yet that inspiration can only serve his own
turn, unless he can produce arguments to make me assured of it likewise; and
then although a man may be inspired with faith and sanctity, which is the
matter in dispute; yet that has nothing to do with the direction of any other
man's actions, unless he can produce some urging argument to assure us that he
is inspired, with authority to direct us, which another faith and sanctity
cannot do; for men may be faithful and holy, and yet have no Authority to
govern. He goes on thus, to show by discourse that faith and sanctity are not
infused thus [Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by those accidents which
guides us, into the presence of them who speak to us.] Faith comes by hearing,
but it is by hearing the word of God, which is Vehiculum Spiritus, and brings
the Spirit with it; for certainly as Heaven is more necessary to us, and of
greater consequence than all the things of this world; so the means of
obtaining it are, without doubt, more certain than any thing in the world. And
therefore faith, and the means of getting faith which is most ordinately by
hearing, and no doubt but reading likewise, which are the means by which men
may be acquainted with the will of God, so likewise [hearing comes by those
accidents (as he speaks rightly) which guide us into the presence of them that
speak to us.] What can be deduced out of this, but that a man using such means
as hearing, and such accidents as bring him into that presence, God blesses
them and pours into them those graces which enable them with faith and
sactification. I but (says he) which accidents are all contrived by
God-Almighty; and yet are not supernatural, but only, for the great number of
them that concur to every effect, unobservable.] All this is nothing to the
purpose, that is, to prove that faith and sacntity are not infused: for whether
God contrives those means, or man, which beget faith, or whether those means
which bring us to hearing be natural, or supernatural* yet God blesses them;
our eyes are natural which see it; our ears are natural which hear those
things, which bring us to faith and sanctity; yea our understanding is natural
which apprehends them, but God blesses both the one and the other (as his holy
will has appointed) with supernatural graces. He goes on. [Faith, and
Sanctity, are indeed not very frequent.] Let that be granted; [but yet they are
not Miracles.] And that is true likewise, for Miracles, as they are
supernatural, so they are things beyond the ordinate and set way of Gods
working; which these holy operations of his are not, but most congruous to his
set and prescribed way of acting them, upon such productions according to his
Covenants. He proceeds [but are brought to pass by education, discipline,
correction, and other natural ways, by which God works them in his elect, at
such time as he thinks fit] It is true; and yet these are ways of Gods
prescribing, and which he blesses; therefore he adds [And these three
Opinions, pernicious to Peace and Government, have in this part of the World
proceeded chiefly from the Tongues and Pens of unlearned divines; who joining
the words of holy Scripture together otherwise than is agreeable to reason, do
what they can, to make men think, that sanctity, and natural reason cannot
stand together.] Give me leave, Reader, to retort this discourse to his Person,
who not long since in the 26 Chap. page 149. makes faith not a duty, but a
gift of God, and says it is barely an operation of God's, as likewise internal
sanctity. And there put me to the trouble of proving man's concurrence in these
acts; and I may assuredly affirm, that he is there exceeding guilty of what he
charge ignorant Divines with here, (viz.) incongruous putting places of
Scripture together, and as much as in him lies to make men believe that
sanctity and natural reason cannot stand together; for if faith be only a gift
and no act in the receiver, or use of it, insomuch as no command can be given
concerning that or sanctity, as he speaks there, certainly natural reason has
nothing to do with it; and as there I was forced to prove the concurrence of
man in these Heavenly duties, so here to justify his former doctrine, I must
prove the cooperation of God which he seems to deny. Let the Reader put that
with this, and he shall find the affirmative part true, and the negative false
in both.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. VII.
Sovereigns obliged by the positive Laws of God. The Laws of Nations, The Law
Naturals, The Royal Laws, or Laws of government obligatory to the sovereign.
The sovereign free from penal Laws.
A Fourth opinion, repugnant to the Nature of a Commonwealth, is this, That he
that has the sovereign power is subject to the Civil Laws. Truly I conceive by
this Gentleman that he imagines Sovereigns to be strange things, which must be
subject to none, but the Law of Nature, for so he expounds it presently, not to
the positive Law of God, which having (by him) no assurance that it is such,
but from the supreme, he can no further be obliged by it, than he pleases. And
so that Devilish speech of that wicked woman to her imperial Son, would be made
good, Quod libet, licet. But this term [Subject] troubles me to find out what
he means thereby, if he mean not, to be guided by it, or else he offends;
without all doubt he ought to be ruled by the positive Law of God, and not only
by the Natural Law, he ought to be ruled, that is, guided by his own Civil
Laws, which he has made, or given life unto. For how can he expect an
observance from others, who will not keep his Laws himself? But if he means by
Subject, subject to penalty; that cannot be, I am confident, in a well
contrived Commonwealth; because all penalty for breach intimates an
inferiority, and as he rightly speaks aftewards, He who punishes, either
bodily, or with shame, or with whatsoever, is in that act superior to him who
is punished. But his dispute is out of his own principles, which have been
twenty times confuted, that is, He that is subject to the Law, is subject to
the Commonwealth, that is, to the Sovereign representative, that is, to
himself. This is a weak argument because he is not the representative of the
Commonwealth, but the head, and rules it. One word more, there may be Laws in
a Commonwealth for Kings, and for Subjects, he must be guided by these which
are the Royal Laws, the Laws of governing, although not by these which are
inferior, and Laws for Subjects: he must be allowed those prerogatives which
are not fit for Subjects to have: But yet he ought to observe the rules of
governing. This, I conceive, is enough for what he has delivered in that
Paragraph. He begins another thus.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. VIII.
Propriety derived from the sovereign of sovereigns. The quiet enjoyment of
Estates. The reason according to Mr. Hobbs of the imbodying of men. The
propriety of the Subjects. The foundation of the public interest. It excludes
not the prerogative of the sovereign. The title of the King of England in many
cases decided by the Judges. Mr. Hobbs his indulgence to the late usurped power
observed.
AFifth doctrine, which tends to the dissolution of a Commonwealth, is that
every private man has an absolute propriety in his goods; such as excludes the
right of the sovereign. I do not know what he means by this term [absolute.]
Certainly both private and public men have their rights depending upon the
Sovereign of Sovereigns; and all they have is at his dispose. But otherwise
certainly it tends to the dissolution of a Commonwealth, to deny an absolute
propriety in private men, and to affirm that in no Commonwealth a Subject can
have such propriety, for it being the reason, (according to his own Philosophy)
why they imbodied themselves into a Commonwealth, that so they might enjoy the
fruits of their labors peaceably, not only plough and sow peaceably, but reap
the fruits of that pains they take, and call it there own: It cannot be denied,
that that justly can be denied them; and if it be they are in such a state as
they were without the fruits of their virtuous labors. It is true in the
Eastern Monarchies, I read they have not inheritances as they have here, but
pro termino vitae, and then all return to that sea out of which they came; but
it is otherwise in our European Countries throught, and the Laws of every
Nation are justly to be observed; but still according to that right which each
person has: and this propriety is so naturally dear unto every man, as there
can be no wiser Laws made for the public than such, as private men shall be
bettered by them, for then every man will more industriously endeavor the
public good, when his private benefit results out of it. I but (says he) such
as excludes the right of the Sovereign. Indeed I think in that he said more
rightly than he meant; for certainly the Sovereign has a right of a Sovereign,
over all his kingdom, or dominion; nay, the propriety of a Sovereign (that is
his legal propriety) over his Subjects is over their estates, to determine
their Controversies, to have dominion over their Persons, legally to punish,
according to his just prerogative. But the title of propriety in his estate, is
belonging to the subject in all such things as are not included in the supremes
legal prerogative. So that when he has granted Laws which do limit the extent
of his power, and indulge the virtuous industry of his subjects, he cannot
justly infringe them and call that his right, which he has condescended not to
use. And upon this reason, with us, the Title of the King in many occasions is
decided by the Judges in point of Propriety And therefore he did ill in
publishing this book in Engli^h, (so that it principally concerns us,) and at
that time when the liberties and proprieties of the Subject were so abominably
invaded by the usurped powers, as if he would provoke them to outdo
themselves, and oppress more, and more lawfully, than was pretended. He
proceeds.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. IX.
The sovereign protects the subject in the enjoyment of that right and
Propriety which the Law gives him. The rights of sovereignty, not of propriety
necessary for the performance of the royal Office, and protection of subjects.
Public necessity justifies the invasion of propriety. The partition of the
sovereignty among the Optimates not destructive of it, according to Mr. Hobbs
his own tenants. The responsa prudentum of high esteem among all Nations.
EVery man has indeed a propriety that excludes the right of every other
Subject. This is granted upon all sides, and (says he ^h^ has it only from the
sovereign power; without the protection whereof, (now I am in Page 170.) every
other man should have equal right to the same. This is not truly spoke; for the
protection of the sovereign does not make, or give right to any thing, but
enables him to use the same; the law gives the right and the sovereign protects
us in the enjoying that which the Law has given. But I wonder at his meaning
in what follows, which is, But if the right of the Sovereign also be exclud^d,
he cannot perform the Office they have put him into. That must be understood of
the right of the Sovereignty, but not of propriety: if he be not allowed the
prerogatives belonging to sovereignty, he cannot protect them; but if he be
denied the right of propriety, he cannot well destroy them; but surely may
protect them with his justice, and with his power. He expounds himself [which
is to defend them both from foreign Enemies, and from the injuries of one
another; and consequently there is no longer a Common wealth] A strange
inference, unless he have right to their Estates he cannot defend them etc.
Surely many Sovereigns have defended and do defend their subjects, and yet have
not propriety to their Estates. He who has a propriety in an estate may use it
how he will to his own advantage or content. But this Supremes cannot do with
their subjects justly; there may be a case of extremity, where Salus
Reipublicae must be suprema lex; put the case an Enemy invades the Kingdom,
the land of some particular subject lies fit to make a Fort of; the King by
force takes it for the public benefit; not out of propriety that it belongs to
himself, but that it belongs to the Commonwealth, to whose public benefit all
private interests and proprieties must submit. But I may term the right of such
accidents to be an universality rather than a propriety, the universal right of
the Commonwealth, not the particular right of one or another. That which
follows to this purpose, receives the same answer, In offices of judicature and
the like. I pass to a sixth Doctrine which, (he says) is plainly and directly
against the essence of a Commonwealth; and it is this, that the sovereign power
may be divided. What he means by division, I cannot readily apprehend; if he
means that it may not be divided into sundry persons, then he has overthrown
himself, when he constitutes other Government besides Monarchy, as Aristocracy,
and Democracy, which are in diverse persons, but united; if he means (which he
seems to do by his following discourse) two several Kings in the same kingdom,
I think it cannot subsist, because of distractions as he intimates; but the
fountain of the error, I think is not well derived from the Lawyers, who,
(says he) endeavor to make the Laws depend upon their own learning, and not
upon the legislative power. Which way this should conduce to the dependence of
the Law upon their learning. I see not; he himself has discoursed that the
responsa prudentum were always in high esteem among the Romans, as the opinion
of the Judges are amongst us; and all men have a great reverence of them in all
Nations. But* these responsa declare what is Law, and they will cease to be
prudentes, when they abuse the Law. He begins another Paragraph.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. X.
The Paragraph asserted. Not the form of Government, but the execution of good
Laws makes a Nation happy. The ^istory of the Grecians and Romans vindicated
against Mr. Hobbs. Mr. Hobbs his Precepts in his Leviathan; much more seductive
and encouraging to rebellion than the forementioned Histories. The abuse of
good things ought not to take away the use of them.
AND as false doctrine so oftentimes the example of different government in a
Neighboring Nation, disposes men to the alteration of the form already
settled. In this truly I am of his mind; for when men see a neighbor prosper in
that kind of life he leads, he is apt to pry^ into the ways by which he so
thrives, and then taking the same course hopes to find it as beneficial to
himself, as it has proved to the other. I approve the discourse throughout,
and therefore need not transcribe any more. But yet would have been glad to
have read some way, by which this evil, being known, might be hindered or
avoided, and truly I can think upon none but by making our selves more
industrious than our Neighbors, by better rewarding virtue and industry, and
punishing vice and sloth than they. There is scarce that people whose
fundamental principles are not such as may make the Kingdom happy under that
government, if they were used to the best advantage; so that it is not the form
of Government only, but the disposure in that form which felicitates a Nation,
and so the making and execution of good Laws at home will redress the
inconvenience which comes from a Neighboring Nation. He enters upon a new
Paragraph, [And as to rebellion in particular against Monarchy, one of the most
frequent causes of it, is the reading the Books of policy, and Histories of
the Ancient Greeks and Romans.] I wonder he had not put in the Old Testament
likewise; but certainly he is out in it: for these Books (he speaks of) do
teach Kings and Supremes how to govern and avoid those Rocks upon which their
predecessors have been split; they teach Subjects to avoid all rebellion, the
most happy and prosperous of which brings confusion if not destruction to that
Nation where they are, and very frequently ruin to themselves and their
Families, who are Ringleaders in such actions; But if books which encourage to
rebellion must be laid aside, then let Leviathan be buried in silence; which I
have, and shall show shortly, not by example only, but precept to justify more
rebellion than ever any Author did; I but, says he, (from which (that is these
books) young men, and all others as are unprovided of the antidote of solid
reason, receiving a strong and delightful impression of the great exploits of
war achieved by the conductors of their Armies, receive withal a pleasing Idea
of all they have done besides.] I think this may be done, and that these
excellent stories which relate the gallant and exemplary virtues of many, may,
yea must likewise with them record the vices of others yea, many times the
faults of virtuous men, without which never man lived, but our ever blessed
Savior. But what then? shall the Be lose its honey, because the Spider may
suck poison out of the same flower? shall we avoid the Sunshine because many
are scorched by it? By this means we should avoid all good things, for there
are none so good but foolish and wicked men have made ill use of them; even the
mercies of God and all his glorious attributes have by some been applied to
evil. This Argument follows not therefore, because weak and ignorant men have
ill digested these excellent meats, therefore better stomachs should not use
them; without doubt these stories have abundance in them to show virtuous men
how to lead their lives, and expose them and lay them down pro focis and aris,
which his self-seeking doctrine will not allow. And yet these had been the most
proper dictates from him, who writes Politics as conducing more to the public
good than any self-preservation which he so much labors for. But a little
after he proceeds to show their folly who make ill use of them, which I allow;
but presently again he in the bottom of that page seems to argue thus.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XI.
Truth desired in this Paragraph. Tyrants distinguished. An Usurper justly
killed by any subjects for the deliverance of his lawful Sovereign. Lawful
sovereigns not to be deposed or murdered for their ill government, but left to
the justice of God. The former conclusion asserted. A further vindication of
the Books and Histories of the Grecians and Romans.
FRom the reading (I say) of such books, men have undertaken to kill their
Kings. Surely I believe among all the declarations that such Traitors have
made, never any one made his study of such writers justify those horrid acts;
Because (says he) the Greek and Latin writers in their books and discourses
of Policy (I am now in the 171 p.) make it lawful and laudable for any man so
to do; provided before he do it, he call him Tyrant. I would have wished that
he had named his Authors, for then I could have discerned whether he had
abused them or no; to turn and examine all Authors were too tedious for me;
yet something I may say in general, that I believe no man of honor for
learning and policy, did either amongst the Greeks or Romans affirm, that if he
has called a Monarch a Tyrant, it is laudable for him to kill him; for
certainly no man can found the justification of such a Villainy upon his foolish
calling him such, but his being such. Now, as I remember, they make Tyrants of
two sorts; such as invade the kingdom and usurp it from the right owner; and
no doubt but any of those Subjects that owe obedience to their lawful King, may
vindicate him and their fellow subjects from that unjust invasion. The other
way of Tyranny is by such a man who is a lawful King, by his succession or
election according to the Laws of the Realm, but governs arbitrary by his will,
not the Law: Now because his right of title and possession, puts him above the
reach of legal (though he can never be out of the reach of private) judgment;
and seeing it is not lawful for a man to kill any one upon a private judgment,
therefore it cannot (ex abundanti) be lawful to kill him, but leave him, Deo
ultori: so that if he find such doctrine amongst the Greeks and Romans, he may
rationally judge them amiss, and it is no more reasonable for men to be barred
the great happiness of the wisdom contained in these books, because fools make
ill use of them, than to bar men a sober and healthful use of wine because
vicious men abuse it by drunkenness* He goes on [from the same books (says he)
they that live under a Monarchy conceive such an opinion, that the subjects in
a popular Commonwealth enjoy liberty; but that in a Monarchy they are all
slaves.] I wonder why he should impute this to the Greek and Latin, more than
to the Italians, Germans, or Dutch stories. Certainly most people when they
find their own condition hard, are willing to change, and think any other would
be better; and it is the same with all other Commonwealths, as well as
Monarchies; And therefore he truly added what follows [I say, that they who
live under a Monarchy conceive such an opinion; not they that live under
popular government: for they find no such matter. But as I said before why this
should be imputed to the Romans, and Grecians only; not to the Italians,
Germans, and others who live equally with them in Commonwealths, I cannot
discern; and therefore cannot choose but be offended with that which follows
most hyperbolically false.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XII.
Mr. Hobbs his impossible remedy to a suppositious disease. The learning of the
Grecians and Romans again vindicated. Mr. Hobbs his opinion of the necessity
of forbidding the use of the Greek and Roman Authors nowhere to be found but in
Julian the Apostate.
IN sum, I cannot imagine, how any thing can be more prejudicial to a
Monarchy, than the allowing of such Books to be publicly read, without
presently applying such correctives of discreet Masters, as are fit to take
away their venom. Here he sets down a monstrous disease and applies an
impossible salve: that is, that our Grammar Schools (where these books are
taught) should be supplied throughout this large kingdom with men of Mr. Hobbs
his sufficiency; (for I think none else would serve his turn) none else having
discovered this fault in these books, and yet in all the World who are
delighted with learning, these books are taught in the initiation of scholars,
both Christian and others. Only, I remember Julian the Apostate made a Law by
which he thought to have gotten as much ground upon Christianity, as by any
that he ever made, which was, that no Christian should read any humanity-books,
nor have them read to them. Mr. Hobbs should have been his Chaplain* What
follows in that Paragraph is nothing but a comparing this disease in a
commonwealth with the biting of a mad Dog in an humane body, which I willingly
enough assent unto, and so let it pass, and move to the next Pargraph which
begins thus.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XIII.
This Paragraph of Mr. Hobbs when the powers are made contra-distinct and
opposite to one another affirmed from the Primitive practices. The decrees of
the ancient Councils not passed into La^s, till they were confirmed by the
Emperor. The Authors reason of this truth superadded.
AS there have been Doctors, that hold there be three Souls in a man; so there
be also that think there be more Souls (that is more sovereigns) than one, in a
Commonwealth; and set up a supremacy against the sovereignty; Canons against
Laws; and a Ghostly Authority against the Civil. Certainly this word against,
makes this faulty, and therefore we shall find that in the primitive times
decrees of Councils themselves grew not into laws, but by the confirmation of
Emperors. But the consideration of this Paragraph I leave to the Doctors in
the Church of Rome whom it principally concerns, but not us, whose
Ecclesiastic Laws are confirmed by the Civil, and therefore need not this
dispute: And yet I can add one clause to confirm his conclusion (stronger I
think, than any he produced,) which is, that dominion is over persons not
parts; he who has dominion over the Soul has dominion over the body, which is
governed by the Soul; and he who has dominion over the body has likewise
dominion over the Soul, without which it cannot act any obedience or
disobedience. And so I let this alone for the present, and come to the next
disease, which is page (172.)

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XIV.
Mr. Hobbs his reflection upon the Government of England observed and censured;
his parallel from the diversity of Souls not enforcing. The comparison of
leavyes of money not rightly applied to the nutritive faculty. The power of
conduct not well resembled to the Motive faculty in the soul.
IN the midst of that page this disease begins thus. Sometimes also in the mere
Civil Government, there be more than one Soul; as when the power of leavying
money, (which is the Nutritive faculty) has depended upon a general assembly;
the power of conduct and command (which is* the motive faculty) on one man; and
the power of making laws, (which is the rational faculty,) on the accidental
consent not only of those two, but also of a third. There he turns his spleen
against our Government in England, without nameing it, but clearly intimating
that state and condition which is fundamental to the constitution of our
Kingdom. I cannot imagine why, unless he had a mind to provoke the then
present Usurper to be most tyrannical in his Government. For certainly this
Government as established in Magna Charta at the first, was settled with so
grave and weighty consideration, and such a serious manner of confirmation, as
never any but the Law of God delivered on Mount Sinai (with thunder, and such
astonishments) and in it self so prudent, that nothing can reasonably more
conduce to the perpetuity of a kingdom. But let us see what he says (there is
(says he) more than one Soul.) I think it would trouble his Philosophy to
answer these Arguments which are brought by those Philosophers who assert there
are more in every man, as also to prove the contrary. But I let that alone,
there is no enforcing that from this establishment; for all these several
operations (which he speaks of) do arise from the same Soul; so that the
lowest, even the giving of money to our King, is by his Authority, and that
power is ensouled (as I may speak) by him. But as he is the Soul by which his
subjects are enabled to leavy such money for his necessity and the necessities
of the kingdom; so they are the body which must act by this power, he enables
them, for without his assent they cannot leavy that money from any but their
own particular purses; this he compares to the Nutritive faculty, and indeed
not amiss; for as that faculty is dispersed throughout the whole man and each
part of him which does receive nourishment; so these are dispersed throughout
the whole kingdom, and indeed they in particular, and the whole kingdom in
general receives nutriment in being protected in prosperity and safety, which
the Monarch is enabled to do by these supplies. But yet he is mistaken in the
application, when he calls this an act of the nutritive faculty, (viz.) to
leavy money, that is afterward an act of the King, who makes use of that
assistance, to that purpose; this in the first act of bare leavying money, looks
like an act of exhausting or consumption rather than nutrition. But as wise
nature disposed those contributions, which the singular parts sometimes afford
the fainting stomach by a return to their advantage afterward so does the
wisdom of a King make those payrings from the other parts produce their
greater happiness and plenty: but still observe, this is not as if there were
many, but one Soul. All is acted by the supreme power which enables the other
to perform, what he does. From hence he passes to the King, (The power of
conduct and command is (which is the motive faculty on one man.) Why he should
call this the motive faculty I do not perceive, since that is Philosophically
seated in the sensitive or animal part; but the power of conduct or command
must certainly be in the supreme and rational part, for where that is, it
commands and governs the sensitive so that they move or acquiesce according to
its conduct. But I would he had set down what he means by this faculty and how
far he meant it, there would t^en have been something to be understood. There
is no doubt but the King has the power of conducting even in those things he
named before and in those which follow, none of which can be a ^ed without him,
and therefore ought to have a higher faculty allowed him than that of Motion.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XV.
Mr. Hobbs his reflection upon the House of Lords and Commons in Parliament.
His supposed danger for want of the consent of one or either of these refuted.
All humane constitutions subject to error. Government rightly so styled, though
without power to take away the lives or estates of Subjects. The several
Estates in Parliament termed factious by Mr. Hobbs. No government absolutely
and practically pure according to the definition of Politicians, but
denominated from the predominant part. The sovereign not the representative of
the Commonwealth, no more than the head is of a man. His instance of the Unity
in the holy Trinity impertinent. Unity in subordination.
ANd the power of making Laws (which is the rational faculty) on the
accidental consent not only of those two but also of a third. By the third he
means the house of Lords, and here he understands that these three ma^e the
rational part, which without doubt was necessarily required to the act of
conduct, as before; but he attributes nothing in particular to the Lords; let
them vindicate themselves, and the House of Commons themselves, I shall only
meddle with the inconveniences which arise out of this policy which he begins
immediately to fall upon, this endangereth the Commonwealth, sometimes for
want of consent to good Laws This danger I never found, but many times the stop
of evil Laws which have been projected by private men, or perhaps might pass
one house, and faults which have been observed by one which were not taken
notice of by the other. A multitude of Counselors gives safety to laws; a
weaker understanding many times sees that which a greater overlooked: that
which appears lovely to some, may be known to be faulty by others. But
certainly these two houses being compounded of men of all conditions who must
needs be acquainted with all the unhappinesses in the Government, cannot but be
thought most fit to have the examing and passing Laws for the Government. He
goes on, but often for want of such nourishment as is most necessary to life
and motion.] I doubt this can hardly be made out where the necessity of such
contributions shall be made appear, but at such times when his rebellious
principles have been infused, for without doubt where such necessities are the
necessities of the Kingdom, and the King lacks the supplies proper to such
motions as war defensive and offensive, the very state and condition of every
man is endangered, and his doctrine of self-preservation will compel men to it,
although they cast one eye upon the public. But such things he will say have
been done: it is true that the niggardliness of the People to such expenses
have brought the kingdom to destruction, I can call it no less; the same may
be said of some Kings whose too much frugality has made them lack both men and
hearts to serve their occasions. There is nothing humane that is not subject to
error, and a possibility of being mistaken. But certainly this as little as
any, because this assembly (as he calls them) are men selected for their
estates and prudence, and because they are prudent, it is likely they are able,
and because of their estates, it is reasonable to think that they should be
willing to give their best assistance to the public good. He goes on, for
although few perceive that such government, is not government, but division of
the Common wealth into three factions, and call it mixed Monarchy Indeed I
think that never m^n did conceive that this Government is not Government. Mr.
Hobbs does govern his servants, yet his government is limited with many more
bounds than this is, and yet that is a government; he cannot take their clothes
from them, or their Estates, much less their lives or limbs, yet he is their
Governor. And though he says only a few did perceive, yet I think until he
wrote this none did ever perceive three factions; factions do oppose one
another, they are not joined, neither do they cooperate in the same effect, as
these do in all things which are done by them. And in this business it seems
not to be a cooperation of equal shares in the work, but like an univ^rsal
cause working with particular causes. The Sun with the same light shines upon a
Rose, a Violet, and a Primrose. Yet with these particular specifical causes
produces those various effects with those several subordinate powers to his,
but they were not instituted for factions, nor are such, but subordinate to
him, and to concur with him in the legal settlement of that is good for the
public: it was therefore very ill phrased of him, to call the factions a mixed
Monarchy. For my part I am of the Opinion which I have expressed before, that
there is no Government in the World so pure, that it has no mixture in it,
either Monarchy, Aristocracy or Democracy, but the denomination in all these is
from the predominant part; yet, (says he) the truth is, that it is not one
Independent Common wealth; but three Ind^pendent factions. Again, factions;
this needs not unless he can infuse factions, which I hope, he shall never be
able to do either with this book or any other; and (says he not one
representative Person, but three. The vanity of this language I have heretofore
spoken to. In a Monarchy the Monarch cannot be called the representative
Person of the Commonwealth, no more than the head can be termed the
representative of man, he is the head of this body politic, and governs it,
but not represents it. He is so fond of that conceit (as indeed it is the
foundation of his whole polity) that the error mixeth it self in almost every
page. But let us go on with him. [In the kingdom of God there may be three
Persons Independent, without breach of unity in God that reigns.] Yes by him
there may be twenty, a hundred, or a thousand, and indeed are so many; for as
he makes a Person to be a man who represents another as Moses did God (of which
I have treated at large in my former part against him) certainly there was a
thousand such which represented him in his Kingdom in this World; and
therefore this instance is nothing to the purpose, especially concerning the
representation here treated of. Yes (says he) this is without breach of unity
in God who reigns. There can be no doubt of it, for though God be represented
by a thousand several men, his unity is the same. And I may say of a King
though he be represented in diverse Provinces by diverse Vice-royes, yet he is
the same King and the only King. But where men reign that are subject to
diversity of opinions (says he) it cannot be so. What does he mean by that? I
think that where diverse men are supremes that have diverse opinions, there will
be breach of Unity; For perfect Unity there is none such but in God, who b^ing
without composition is absolutely not one only in the concrete, as created
things are, but Unity which nothing else is, as there is no one man who is so
at unity in himself, as not to differ from himself, now judging one thing, then
another; yea at the same time, he may have combustion in himself by diversity
of Arguments which arise in his thoughts at the same time so that he cannot
imagine any perfect Unity amongst men: but yet when there is a subordination,
that reduces them to the nearest method of unity that may be; therefore where
there shall be many supremes without subordination, there can be no unity: But
where there is a subordination there we may find the greatest unity that this
subject is capable of, which will appear by my answer to what follows.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XVI.
The house of Commons not the King representative of the People. The King only
the sovereign; the Peers the Counselors of the King. Mr. Hobbs his unworthy
expression of there sovereigns censured. The odiousness of his comparison of
two men growing out of the sides of another, observed. The danger of cutting
off those sprouts, assimilated to the removal of the two houses of Parliament.
THerefore (says he) if the King bear the Person of the People, and the
general Assembly also bear the Person of the People, and another Assembly bear
the Person of a part of the People, they are not one Person and one Sovereign,
but three Persons and three Sovereigns. I answer, the King is not the
representative of the People, but their Sovereign; neither does he act any
royal thing by their Authority, but by his own right; the House of Commons are
the representative of the People, that is, the Common People, when by the
Sovereign they are called, and elected by them pro tempore, during their
sitting in Parliament: and as their beginning is by the Kings Writ, so their
determination is by his dismission. This shows that although they may represent
the People, yet he, not they, are Sovereigns. The house of Lords which he means
by those who represent a part of the People, represent no body, but their
posterity, for whom they act, otherwise they do that business the King calls
them for, that is, to advise with him in the great and difficult affairs of the
Kingdom; they are as Counselors not Sovereigns; he only Sovereign: and
neither one house nor other sits in their sphere, but when he calls them, nor
stays after his dismission; nor when they are there can act any material
matter concerning the Kingdom, (only advise and inform) but what he who is
their Supreme and Sovereign enables them to do. So then there is but one
Sovereign in England; though he most unworthily threw in such proud speeches to
make them three* He proceeds, and I with him. To what disease in the Natural
body of a man, I may exactly compare this irregularity of a Commonwealth, I
know not. But I have seen a man, that had another man growing out of his side
with an head, arms, breast and stomach of his own; If he had had another man
growing out of his other side, the comparison might then have been exact. Thus
he. I answer, there is no need of this fancy of his to compare every public
disease with a natural, but if he had studied King CHARLES the first his most
incomparable Book he would have found this composure not to have been a
disease, but a perfect constitution of a healthy body: but since he makes this
comparison, I shall tell him, that in such a man take away or cut off that
humane sprout which grows out of the principal man, even he will quickly dye. I
doubt not, but believe confidently it would be so with this polity.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XVII.
The propriety of the subject again asserted against Mr. Hobbs. His objection
of the difficulty of raising money answered. The inconvenience of investing all
propriety in the Crown. The convenience and decorum of raising money in a
parliamentary way. His late Majesty CHARLES the First, his incomparable essay
to this purpose recommended to the author of the Leviathan. Mr. Hobbs his
disaffection to the government of this Kingdom censured.
I Am now in p. the (137.) where, after he has confessed that these diseases
which have been hitherto named are of the greatest and most present danger:
(that is his phrase) although a man would think that this form of Government
that has lasted so many hundreds of years could not be in so sudden or
present danger; however he now enters upon others which, though less, are not
unfit to be looked into. He begins, [as first, the difficulty of raising of
money for the necessary uses of the Commonwealth; especially in the approach
of War,] I must confess this is of dangerous consequence. [^his difficulty
arises from the Opinion, that every subject has of a propriety in his lands
and goods exclusiv of the Sovereigns right to the use of the same.] I have
heretofore taught that men have proprieties in their estates, yet in cases of
necessity, as in War, any man's house may be made a fort, any man's land dug
to make a trench, with multitudes of the like Nature, according to the
necessities and exigencies of the Commonwealth Therefore this propriety
without necessity cannot be dangerous, nay, a man may say, that without this
propriety we should not have a legal, but arbitrary Government, and that which
he himself has supposed to be the reason why a Commonwealth is instituted
would be frustrated, which is that men may peaceably sow and reap, and enjoy
the profits of their industry; which if the supreme might lawfully take away
together with their estates for the support of his condition, it would quickly
come to pass that an Estate invested in the Crown may be the prey of other
Subjects, as it was with the Church revenue, which although in Queen ELIZABETH'S
time it was alienable to none but the Crown, yet we know that from thence it
passed to mean Tenants, until King JAMES most happily gave a stop unto it, by
enacting that there should be none afterward passed to the Crown; so that this
cannot fitly be termed a hinderance, without which a Commonwealth loses the
end for which it was instituted. But give me leave to speak to the main
proposition it self. Why should it be difficult to raise just sums for the
defense or good of the public? every man has an interest in it, and they are
reasonable creatures, which will consider both their own and the public
benefit. I, but he will say it has been so; let this be granted, it is true
that all sins and wickednesses have been too, and certainly this is a mighty
great one. But let him consider, whether this way of their consent to the
performance of this duty be not a decent way of doing it. For first, we may
consider that few Persons of great estate do know their own estate, much less a
Monarch of a great kingdom. How then can he be able to give a just esteem of
every private man's estate to proportion him justly to that service? this cannot
be done but by such Persons who are universally acquainted with the generality:
and without an equality upon some legal measure the Tax will be unjust and the
execution (no doubt worse. Secondly as to the making a Tax for such a supply
the Commonaltie are necessary, for by them the Collection will be more speedy
than by any other means, and therefore I think it a difficulty which may easily
be taken away, by letting them see, what necessity there is of such an aid, (I
mean not to meddle with these disputes,) and then no doubt but they will be so
prudent in the execution of their trust, as to give a proper assistance, or
else they are mad or worse. I will conclude this point with that passage in
those incomparable directions which that ever to be honored King CHARLES the
First gave his son in his own words (which none else can imitate nearly, much
less match) speaking of the Laws of this land which he should govern by, says,
[Which by an admirable temperance give very much to subjects industry, liberty
and happiness, and yet reserve enough to the Majesty and prerogative of any
King who ownes his People as subjects, not as slaves.] And I may say who can
add any thing to what this most incomparable King has writ down which is
matchless? Yea what he speaks afterward of the shifts Kings are put to, and
the Comparison Mr. Hobbs makes of this disease to an ague, I let pass, and do
only affirm that such discourses savor of an ill disposition to this
government, and as I can guess, can tend to no good; neither then when they
were first printed nor afterward. I mean to trouble the Reader no further with
his observations of these lesser diseases, as he terms them, in a
Commonwealth, but come close to a censure of this which I have formerly noted
in this Book.

CHAP. XXIII. SECT. XVIII.
The conclusion of all; the Authors just censure of this book of Mr. Hobbs.
FIrst I affirm, that it is not a book to be tolerated by Kings or supremes:
because according to his doctrine concerning the original of all such there is
none in the Universal World: for if it be necessary (as he says it is in the
17 Chap. where he handles the generation of Commonwealths, and in the 18 Chap.
where he sets down the institution of a Common wealth, and in the 13 Chap. This
only is the way to erect a Common wealth, which way, etc. Now if this be the
only way which have showed not only not to be practiced but not practicable,
there not only is none in the World, but there can be none hereafter, and
therefore this doctrine is not to be tolerated, either by them who think
themselves supremes, or may hereafter be such, because they neither are nor
shall be such supremes as he describes, and they (by his doctrine) ought to be.

Again it is to be abhorred by supremes, because it leaves too easy and open a
gap, yea a countenance for rebellion: for if the Law of Nature be only to take
care for a man's own particular (as he says it is) and that every man should
endeavor and ought by any means to free himself from death or wounds, or any
thing which may render his life unhappy, how easy it is for these suggestions
to be whispered in the ear, of people upon any mishap in government, without
which none can be, let the reader think. (I will not teach him.) So that by
this doctrine the deliverance from private misery may justify the execution of
a public ruin. So that whether we look upon the generation of supremes,
(concerning which there neither is nor can be any such,) or upon the
preservation thereof, there is according to his doctrine, no security in the
throne of sovereignty, but it may justly be disturbed by their subjects upon
any terrors struck in them from a jealousy that they may be deprived of their
contented being.

Now as this book is dangerous for Kings and Supremes; so it is in some
conclusions destructive to the Comfort and happy being of subjects, when he
takes away their propriety: for if they have no title to the enjoyment of their
lives and estates, but these must be at the will of the Lord only (that is of
the supreme) which he affirmed but a little before, then the very end of polity
is lost, which is that men may quietly enjoy the fruits of their own virtue and
industry, may sow and reap, work and receive the benefit of their labor
without fear of loss or injury. It is true that there is an impossibility that
there should be any such thing, but to that man who is guarded by Gods
providence, who alone can foresee and deliver a man from all danger: But yet
humane providence, with good Laws and Virtuous execution of them may protect
men in safety against all humane oppression, which in wisely settled
Commonwealths ought to be done; and although a Supreme may by force wring from
a subject what is his, yet he does it unjustly and shall be responsible for it
to his supreme, which again he has denied by saying that a Sovereign can do
nothing unjustly. So that in such a Case there is no room for any man who may
have his Estate taken away without injustice, (that is, justly without breach
of Law.) It is not fit then to be tolerated by Sovereigns, or Subjects.) I may
yet go further and affirm it not fit to be tolerated by Christians, because it
robs them of all Assurance of heaven, and all the Covenants of God by saying
that they have no assurance that their holy Books are revealed by God, which if
it were true, their confidence and trust in Gods promises are vain, and all the
Religion performed to our Blessed Savior, which only depends upon that
assurance they have of the Revelation made in that Book.

Lastly, it is not to be tolerated by those Theists who think there is a God;
because all such do think that this God has many glorious attributes; Is
infinite in Essence, infinite in all his attributes, power, wisdom, justice,
mercy; all which do propagate in men a fear and love of him, and are in
themselves so excellent, that the least of them (if any one may be said the
least) is to be valued by every knowing man beyond a world: yet his legislator,
his supreme must have power to Eclipse this glorious Sun, and to have so much
as he will, and no more be revealed of him.

Again, this glorious God is by all Theists apprehended to be the governor of
Heaven and Earth, rewarder of good men and a punisher of all such as work
wickedness, when he makes him to reward only and punish his own decrees and
acts, not those of men; And therefore I think it a Book not to be suffered
amongst Christians, and I am confident, would not be tolerated amongst such
kingdoms which do not acknowledge our Savior, but only one God.

FINIS.
To Mr. Hobs, or the Reader, or both; I dedicate this short POSTSCRIPT.
CAP. I.
A short Introduction declaring the reason of this POSTSCRIPT.
IN my Epistle before this Treatise, I have said that I heard of some
amendments Mr. Hobs would make in his Leviathan, and upon that stopped these
papers which were intended for the Press; being desirous rather that he should
do it himself with his own hand, than I; a work which would be very beneficial
to his own soul, and more satisfactory to those Readers upon whom his name had
gained an Authority; but after a tedious expectation, I found nothing
corresponding to my Expectation. Wherefore I urged this Treatise to the Press,
where I thought to have it Printed when I came to London; but I was no sooner
arrived, than a cruel Cold locked me up in my Chamber, which gave me leisure to
enquire after him whilst these Notes were Printing, and found that he had
Printed his Leviathan in Latin, which I never before had notice of; I sent for
it and viewed it, hoping that it might prove the designed retractation as St.
Aug. calls his, or at least a recognition as Bellarmine calls his of the like
nature; but truly I found little to that purpose, only the virulency of some
English Phrases, now and then more gently expressed in Latin; And at the
latter end, which was not in the Title, I found an Appendix consisting of three
Chapters, the first of which was of the Nicene Creed, the second of Heresy,
the third an Answer to some Objections against his Leviathan.

In these three I hoped to have found much matter which might show his
Ingenuity, in the true censuring his own writings; but indeed very little, what
I find I shall deliver here, especially reflecting any such thing as has
already passed my pen, for other things which will deserve whole and entire
discourses, I shall reserve to a future consideration, as God shall please to
spare me life, and my Episcopal duties afford me leisure.

CAP. II.
Of things omitted in this Discourse.
I Begin with his Chapter upon his Nicene Creed which he enters upon in his 328
page, where I omit his observation upon that Phrase (I believe in) and that
likewise which is in the bottom of the precedent, and the subsequent Page,
about the exposition of that phrase, which is not in the Creed, that is, Deu^
est, God is, whcih is not in the Creed, for the language of the Creed is (I
believe in one God the Father Almighty) in which it is not said there is a God,
but supposed, and he affirmed to be one, and he the Father Almighty, so that if
we must be forced to make one or more propositions of it, they must be these (I
believe there is one, and only one God, and that he is Father Almighty,) where
is, is a copula not a substantive as he makes it; and upon which he makes his
discourse, but I let it pass as he might well have done being nothing conducing
to his or my dispute, it is true, a tertio adjacente ad secundum valet
argumentum, and therefore when I affirm there is one God, it must be implied
there is a God, but this proposition there is one only God, supposes and
implicitly affirms it not by any express propositions.

CAP. III.
The Nature of Light examined.
I Come to page the 330. which opposes something that I have delivered, there
you shall find in the letter (a) which signifies the Opponent, a question
asked, Quid est lumen? and answering himself, lumen ut mihi videtur phantasma
est, non res existens. This proposition I have opposed in my first part, Cap.
4. Sect. 2. where I have diverse arguments for it, and the Reader may observe my
Answers to his Arguments, no one of which is touched here, but a strange new
Argument, which I now proceed to examine; whether I may term it argument or
illustration of his conclusion I care not, which is thus framed; Exempli gratia
si inter oculum and Candelam vitrum statuas, cujus superficies ex multis planis
constat, certo modo dispositis, multae tibi videbuntur c^ndelae, scimus tamen
unicam ibi esse candelam veram, and proinde caeter^s omnes mera esse
phantasmata, idola, hoc est, ut dicit sanctus Paulus nihil. For my part I
cannot observe where the force of this Argument lies, to prove that lumen, or
light, is a mere Phantasm or nothing, this light shows the Candle, or if he
will, represents it, now what represents another must be like it; but nothing
cannot be like a thing, being clean contrary, or rather privatively or
negatively opposed to it, therefore if light were nothing, it could not
represent the Candle; but perhaps the force may be couched in these words,
Multae tibi videbuntu^ Candelae, there shall many candles appear, to wit, by
the reflection of those many plains of glass, but surely this no way enforces
his conclusion, for every one of these plains (for all I know) represents the
true Candle, and are so far from being nothing, as they must therefore be
something; because they represent something; but they may by a false reflection
multiply the Candle, and make it seem many; what if it does? Does the erroneous
representing make the representor nothing? certainly no; for then every man who
tells a lie should say nothing; for that lie is a false representation; we see
that light makes us see the Candle from whence it comes; and indeed any body
else in the Rom where it is; truly, if it be not abused by some Ho^us Pocus
tricks, or such devices as those juggling glasses he mentions, but the abuse
lies in the plains in the glass, which returns the representing light wrong
ways, not in the light it self, which is retorted, he might therefore from
hence fitter call that nothing, which abuses the medium, than the light which
is abused; he proceeds in the same place with a strangely unnecessary discourse
to this purpose as it seems to me, neque tamen (says he) earum una est verior
Candela, quam reliquae quatenus apparent. I need repeat no more if there be
strength in any part of his discourse it is in this; but here is none, for
although none of these Images of the Candle, is the Candle, yet they are
things, such things as did represent the Candle, for the Candle could not be
represented to the eye, by that which is nothing, the thing that represents
another and that which is represented are two, but both of them must be things,
or neither; but now it may be replied to me that this is not Mr. Hobs his
opinion, but the Objectors, I answer with Mr. Hobs who is personated by (b) ita
est so it is, so that although (a) seemed to object this, yet Mr. Hobs assents
to it.

CAP. IV.
The Nature of Hypostasis.
ANd in the 331. he proceeds thus, Sed Patres Ecclesiae illis temporibus, tum
ante, tum post concillium Nicenum, in scriptis suis vocem Hypostasis videntur
alio modo interpretare, mysterium Trinitatis Christianis omnibus intelligibile
reddere cupientes. The meaning of this is, that the Fathers, both before and
after the Council of Nice, gave another sense of the word Hypostasis, and
(says he) They thought best to do it by the similitude of fire, light, and
heat, the fire they referred to the Father, the light to the Son, the heat to
the holy Spirit, in which similitude (says he) the congruity would perhaps be
accurate, but that fire, splendour, (here he changes the term light) heat,
neither are substances, nor were thought so by the Fathers, chiefly such as
were Aristotelians (of which kind he can produce very few Ancient) unless
(says he) Ignis ponatur pro ignito, fire be put for a fiery thing.

SECT. II.
That a Particular Fire is an Hypostasis.
I Will stop here, and make this Note that I can guess, that never man before
him said that a particular fire was not an Hypostasis, for Hypostasis being
nothing but an individual substance which then is the subject of accidents, no
man can deny that to fire, yes (says he) unless fire be put for a fiery thing,
certainly there is no man that sees or reads this word fire, but it represents
to him a fiery thing, as when he reads these words, Earth, Water, Air, they
make him think of Earthy, Watery, Airy things, there is the same reason for
fire, and what he puts down that Aristotelian Philosophers should be of his
mind, I am persuaded he can produce none that ever affirmed that a particular
fire was not an Hypostasis; but he has reason for what he speaks, and therefore
follows this discourse with (enim) homo enim, and ignem, and lumen, and ^alorem
extinguit quoties libet. The sum of this is, that because a man can at his
pleasure extinguish Fire, Heat, and Light, and that so infirm a thing as man
is, should extinguish so substantial Creatures created by an omnipotent God,
and so reduce it to nothing, We are not commanded to believe it, neither is it
credible; these are his very words as near as I can translate them, and I think
they are truly done.

SECT. III.
His Discourse Censured for changing his Terms.
NOw I can observe one thing, which is too frequent a fallacy throughout his
Book, which is a changing his Terms, which ought not to be when a man brings a
Philosophical reason for what he speaks; this appears in those main and
substantial Terms of this discourse, to wit, extinguishing fire in the first
proposition, and that enlarging which fallows extinguished, and ad nihilum
redigere, to annihilate it. Oertainly as nothing can create but God, so nothing
can annihilate but he himself, for annihilation is reducing a thing to nothing,
as Creation is a producing some creature, or bringing a thing out of nothing;
now although nothing can annihilate but God, yet not only man, but many
inferior creatures to man can extinguish creatures of his, as in particular,
water or earth can extinguish fire, and both watery and earthy bodies, this
extinguishing is putting out the Candle, a choking the Fumes, but annihilation
destroys the very matter, which no Aristo^elian will allow to be possible for
any created thing to do, and therefore he was much to blame in a deceitful
manner, to mingle Truths and Falsehoods as if they were one thing.

SECT. IV.
His Argument Confuted.
BUt now let us consider his Inference, which is, that it is not credible that
so infirm a thing as man should destroy the works of God: Alas! what a pitiful
Plea is this, if man by his own sole power should do it; this might look like
an argument, but if man does it by Divine assistance, as the first and moving
cause, why should it be hard to think so; I hope the Almighty cannot be denied
to have a power of granting such powers; or if he should, we may produce those
invincible instances which are formerly given, and thousand more to prove the
contrary, where God has given to creatures inferior to man, abilities to do
such works, as water, earth, and the like; yea, fire has such a power to dry
up water, to destroy wood, and the like. And indeed, let him but consider how
any man has a power given him of God, by which he is enabled to destroy
another man, a much more noble creature than fire, and then it need not be
thought strange that he should have the abilities to do the less; there is
enough I think spoke to this.

CAP. V.
His Answer to quid est Hypostasis examined.
I Will skip to page 339. where you shall find in the midst of that page a
question put by (A) What is it which the Graecians mean by Hypostaesis, and the
answer framed thus, Quum aliquid intueris quod vocas album, in English thus,
When you behold any thing which you call white, you impose that name to a
substance or a body subject; suppose marble, although the sharpness of your
sight cannot penetrate the substance of marble, or any other thing; all this I
let pass as a supposed Truth, and serves* but for an Introduction to what
follows; which is album igitur, a white thing, therefore is the name of a body
which is subsisting by its self, not the name of a color; he is out here very
much without doubt, it is the name both of the body and the color, a body
colored; as when we see a man in his clothes clothed; it is more and another
thing then when we see him naked; so when I see a body adorned with white, it
is more then when I see only a body which may be in any other color besides
white; He proceeds and impositum, this name is imposed for a certain
appearance, or as the Graecians speak (...) or (...), which seems to be
somewhat, but is nothing indeed.

SECT. II.
That Color is a Real thing.
SUre here again he crosses both me and himself, he crosses me in that I have
delivered in my first part of Censures upon his Leviathan, Cap. 4. Sect. 2.
himself as you may observe Sect. 3. I will begin with himself, he affirms
color to be nothing but perturbed Light, or light by reflection from some
uneven body. Now then, if this be so, then color is light, then it must be
something, not a mere phantasme, a nothing as he terms it; nay, I dare affirm,
if it be but a phantasme, yet it is something, ens intentionale, although not a
reale, an intentional, although not a real thing; for first consider, it is the
work of a noble power, the Fancy, if we take it for the operation, which is
the art of Phancying any thing, but if you take it for that eminent effect
which is wrought by that operation, and left in the memory, it must be
something, and has an abode and being there, it must needs be something
therefore, so that if we consider these colors only in the Fancy, they are
something if we consider them as he has taught us, in that being they have
without our heads, they are real things; but to write to that which most
especially reflects upon me my self, that color is nothing, I could wish the
reader so much leisure as to peruse what I have writ in my former treatise, and
he will find that Mr. Hobs has neither answered those arguments I there
produced, nor confuted any answer I gave to his arguments; I will add something
more, and consider (good Reader) if it be not rational; that which not only
works real effects, (which I have formerly showed invincibly that Colors do)
but likewise in its self suffers change must needs be something; for nothing
cannot be changed, it is a pure nonentity, and will be so always, and when it
is changed upon any supposition of such a thing, it must be changed to
something: Now colors we see changed from white, to redder or greener, and
therefore must needs be something: If he shall say, it is but a diverse
imagination, we shall clear that by the examination of his following
discourse, which is this, Quam apparitionem, which apparition without some
cause and foundation we sufficiently understand is impssible, viz. white cannot
be without some substance to subsist to the apparition which is its cause, and
as Logicians speak, its subject here is a great deal of truth in this
discourse, but I can find nothing that Proves his conclusion, which is, that
color is nothing, nay, I will retort his discourse to him and prove his
conclusion false by it, which thus I do, That which subsists to White must
subsist to something, or else that which requires or needs something to subsist
to it, must be something, for nothing is nothing, and needs nothing to subsist
to it, nor can any thing be said to subsist to nothing, for any entity added to
nothing, makes it something, which is most abhorring to nothing. Again,
whatsoever has a cause is something, but these Apparitions have a cause
according to him here and elsewhere, for as he makes refracted light in other
places to be the cause, so here he makes the subject to be the cause of them,
the major is evident, for nothing can cause nothing, for although God by his
almighty hand can annihilate any thing what he pleases, yet that annihilation
is not so properly a production of nothing, as a destruction of a Being; for
there is no existence of that nothing, either to or in another, but a taking
away of that Being which did formerly exist; so that there can be no Existence
of nothing, and therefore to say that nothing is supported or subsisted by a
Substance, seems to be a contradiction: That which follows in this Paragraph,
is nothing to his purpose, I let it pass therefore, and come to Page 340. and
skip diverse things which indeed might deserve a sharp Censure, and prosecute
only such things which oppose what I have heretofore judged mistakes in him,
and to that purpose in the formerly 340. Page, you may perceive, that the
Objector (A) puts the Question.

CHAP. V.
His Definition of Substance by Ens Examined.
QVid ergo est Substantia? what is substance? and he is answered by (B) Idem
quod Ens, the same with a thing, that is, whatsoever is truly existing,
distinct from phantasme and name; this definition or description of substance I
must blame, it being only a fuller and clearer expression of that of which I
immediately before discoursed, that all these things which we commonly call
accidents, are nothing but imaginations, or mere names put to nothing existing,
and I will oppose to this that which he delivered in the preceding page, where
he says, that the Latins call the subject of these accidents, ens, subjectum,
suppositum, substantiam, basem, and fundamentum. Let me urge hence, whatsoever
is a foundation is a foundation of something, therefore these must be something
to which substance is the foundation: consider a little (good Reader) that I
may make all things clear to the most easy capacity; can the Reader think that
that heat which scorched his or my hand is nothing? I speak not of those
pointed Attomes, of which some write that they cause heat, but this heat which
you and I feel so sensibly, can any think it is nothing? or that cold which
benums my hand now whilst I am writing, is that nothing? why should we then be
troubled with nothing? or that sharpness which enabled the knife or bullet to
pierce my flesh, is that nothing? or that they are mere names? which certainly,
as such hurt no man, or that they are mere phantasmes? can any man think that
the mere phantasme of one man can warm, cool, or hurt another? I remember, I
think, I have read in Parnelsus, That if one man's inward man be too hard for
another, he may with an engine, as he describes, draw another to him many
miles distance. I am not peremptory in the Author, having not my books about
me, but I have certainly read it, but did never hear or read that by his
fancy, a man could cool or warm another, or support such a burden as we see
Carpenters or Builders do by a Mathematical disposing of those materials which
they use: Nay, give me Leave to tell the Author of this Paradox, that no man
can think that those habits which dispose any man to a ready acting virtuously
or vitiously are nothing, or but fancies or names. Nay, I will tread one step
further, if his doctrine were true, those promised joys of Heaven, which we
hope for, and those dreaded torments of Hell, which wicked men are threatened
with by God, should be nothing but empty names or fancies, which appears a
most horrid thought to a Christian man; for these are not bodies, and therefore
by him at the best but fancies. I will here make this observation, that when
men vent extravagant opinions, and such as are not usual in Philosophy,
intending perhaps they should not proceed beyond their own condition, (which is
only Philosophy) and give plausible reasons to persuade those opinions, they
believe not, nor can foresee, what ill consequencies they may have in Divinity,
but they are like new Laws, which may seem reasonable at first, but nothing but
time and experience can assure the benefit of them.

SECT. II.
Many Errors in his citing Scripture for his Opinion.
ANd now Reader give me leave to look a little back upon what I skipt before,
which is at the top of Page 340. his Answer to that question, how is Hypostasis
taken in the new Testament? His Answer is, after the same manner as it is by
other Writers, that manner is it which we just now treated of: And then
consider what fearful consequencies will follow out of his instances; his first
is, Heb. 1. 3. Our Savior is called the Character of his person, here (says
he) the word Hypostasis (or person as we render it) that is the substance to
the Image of that substance: And then observe by this Philosophy, Christ is
nothing, being not the substance; and he adds, to make his conclusion more
apparent, he is in the same place called splendour, the splendour of the Divine
glory, (that is his Translation) and therefore he adds, sive, or which is the
same, lumen de Lucido, light out of a lucid body (so I render his words, for
Lucidum or the light body, is the subject or substance, and light is the
accident, or nothing rather which proceeds out of it; so that by this
Philosophy, the Father should be a substance, and the Son but an accident, or
nothing: Let us go on with him, Heb. 1. 11. And the first faith is called the
Hypostasis of things hoped for, that is (says he) for the Speech is
Metaphorical) Faith is the Fundament of hope: Now Reader, by his Philosophy,
Faith should be a substance, a body, (for he allows no other substance but
bodies) which without doubt is a quality inhaerent in the Soul, and by him the
things hoped for, or (to give him what scope his words can bear) the hope of
future blessings which is founded upon faith is nothing, or at the best but a
Fancy: He produces another Text, 2 Cor. 9. 4. where I do not find the word
Hypostasis, nor any thing relating to his intent: But now, that the Reader may
discern how these Texts are abused by him, I will lend such assistance to him
as my present conceit administers to my self; let him consider how in the
first to the Hebrews the 3. it is said, that the Son of God is the brightness
of his glory, here first is not any mention of Lumen de Lucido, of Light
proceeding out of a Lucid body, as he expresses it; but the splendour or most
Illustrious appearance of that unutterable Glory, which was manifested by the
Incarnation of the Son of God, and his conversation amongst us in the flesh,
which indeed clouding and vailing the extremity of that infinite glory which
was in the Deity, with his humanity, he made it more clearly and brightly
appear to us then it could have been discerned by humane eyes without it, and
in that regard he may well be said to be the brightness of his Glory, because
it made that glory which was invisible in its self, visible to us, and those
glorious Attributes with it, which were not possible for Nature to reach, or
any way comprehend to be apprehended by Faith in him, the Son; And in all this
we find neither substance, nor substantiated, which should be founded upon it;
But then to proceed to the second passage in that verse, which he made the
first, (and the express Image or Character of his person) conceive Reader if
you can, how it is possible to make an Image of substance merely substance, not
clothed with any accident, color, figure, or any such thing which is subject
to sense, for these are the only things by which we can Caracterize any thing,
and these are not in God, this Image or Character thereof must needs be some
substantial thing, and that must needs be some substantial thing, and that must
be represented to the understanding, (not the sense) which only can apprehend
substances, especially abstracted from all accidents; then consider whose
Character it must be, to wit Gods, who is infinite, immense, unimmaginable,
unintelligible, not to be represented by any thing less than himself, it must
needs therefore be another of the same, another it must be, because the
Representors and the Represented must be Two, the same it must be, because
nothing, no Art or Conceit or any thing, can imagine any thing to Characterize
God but God; here then in clear terms are two Persons and one Nature; and not
his imagination of a substance and accident, or indeed nothing.

Then we will explain his second place, Heb. 11. 1. faith is there the
Hypostasis of things hoped for, we read it substance, there will be no
difference about that, he ingeniously confesses it to be a Metaphor, and
surely so it is, and the likeness consists in this, that as a substance is it
out of which accidents are produced, which supports and maintains them; so hope
(as he expounds it) or the things hoped for, that is the blessings of God
either in this or the other world (for Gods blessings in this world may be
hoped for) arise out of Faith, in which God has founded them, and which is the
sole and only thing by which God has Covenanted to continue and preserve them
to us; thus taking it Metaphorically, as he, but then take it literally, as
the Schools distinguish subjectum quo, and subjectum quod, a subject by which
this subsists in another, and a subject which supports really the inherent
accident; so may I speak of substance, or fundamentum, the foundation of hope
without doubt is the reasonable soul of man, out of which this act or habit is
produced, and to which it does adhere or inhere; this soul is the subjectum or
fundamentum quod, but faith the substance, or fundamentum quo; by the mediation
of which, hope is there fixed and settled; for he that hopes for blessings from
God, without Gods revealed promises, which are apprehended only by faith,
trusts in his own wit, not in God: thus this Text being explained, there is no
violation offered to any Term, but each word has its proper and genuine
signification, and it lays open a clear and manifest truth, which cannot be
denied; but contrariwise by his explanation, every word is wrested out of its
proper sense and meaning; for faith which is an accident, a habit, must be a
substance, hope to exist in the Air where is no foundation, no substance to
support it.

SECT. III.
Some other things Examined.
HE comes next in that 340 Page to enquire, Quid est essentia? which is
answered, it is not distinguished from substantiae; the next quaere is, what is
substans, the same with ens, the same with a thing; that is, whatsoever is
truly existing, distinct from fancy and name: Here the Reader may discern how
violently he prosecutes the former conceit, that there is no real thing
besides substance, as if to inhere, or adhere, were not to exist, but only
subsistence were existance; but I shall prosecute this no further now, it being
a conclusion to which I do not remember that I have objected any thing
heretofore, which are the only things I intended to vindicate in this paper;
next he enters upon a long discourse how the Greeks and Latins have distorted
names as he terms it, which I omit upon the same reason before, although a
most unhappy persuasion of his; But in page 342. in his discourse of a person,
he opposes what I have delivered in my 34 Cap. against his sixteenth, which I
find much altered in his Latin Edition, and if the Reader will trouble himself
so much as to peruse that Treatise of mine, he will find that Mr. Hobs has
added nothing here that was not in the former, nor answered any thing of my
discourse, which I doubt not to affirm, does much more clearly explain the
nature of a person, then any thing he has put down for it; and I will pass the
rest of this Cap. as not opposing my former censures of him; so likewise his
second Cap. of Heresy, which was only writ to excuse himself from Heresy,
which I never charged him with as I remember, and do here so far acquit him,
that I think he never can be judged for one amongst us, nor ever will be, for
by him a man may deny any Truths if Leviathan exact it; yea, he must be of
Leviathans Religion, and then he can never be judged an Heretic, because
Leviathan must be supreme judge, but withal, I think he does deliver Heretical
Doctrine; and that that very conclusion is one, according to the Laws
established in our Nation: And I will pass to his third Cap. which is Entitled
of certain objections against Leviathan, and is entered upon Page 359.

CAP. I.
His Exordium Censured.
HE begins this third Cap. which concerns the objections against Leviathan,
with the story of these last unhappy times, where he raises the cause of the
War, only from the difference between the Episcopal men and Presbyterian: I
will not undertake to rake up that Kenuel, although perhaps I might be able to
speak something pertinent, but this I dare affirm, that although the Rebellious
party had an animosity against the Episcopal, as they had against all
Authority, until they had made themselves sole Governors: yet their chief aim
was to pluck down the Regals, and in order to that, it was necessary first to
take down Episcopy, which was a support of it; and indeed you shall find that
almost all Treasons do pretend Religion; that under the cloak of holiness, they
may cover such horrid impieties as must be acted by such parties: It is in vain
to give instances which are much too frequent: but then as he well observes, P.
359. toward the bottom, when the Episcopacy was plucked down, Nulla amplius
potestas remansit inter Anglos. There was no power left among the English of
discerning Heresy, but all Sects appeared in writing, and publishing what
divinity every one would. I believe him and the mischeife of the indulgence is
yet sensible amongst us, well upon that opportunity says he Page 360. the
Author liveing at Paris used that L^berty in writeing: But oh! how much more
honorable had it been for him to have writ against it, and to have foreseen
those unhappy events, which might have been easily discerned without the help
of his Mathematics: but I go on, and jura quidem Regalia, (says he) the
rights of Kings, he has egregiously defended both in temporal and and
spiritual matters: here I must pause, and in a little, put down somethings more
Largly delivered in the preceding Treatise; he has supervindicated the Kingly
authority in spiritual things, for he has made him above God himself; so that
if God himself command one thing in his word, and the King command another, we
must obey the King; he has done as much in temporal things; for although God
by his infinite power confirms the Laws of men, concerning meum and tuum, in
appropriation of their temporal estates; yet he gives Ahab leave rightly to
take Naboths vineyard; Nay I speak it freely, as he has exalted it in some
things too high, so in some conditions he has made it nothing, in regard that
he has made every man King of the whole world by nature, which nature cannot be
put off whilst he is a man; and therefore whatsoever any man, either by fraud
or force, can get from him, is but a just acquiring that which was his natural
right; consider then, whether this be egregie vindicare jura Regalia,
egregiously to vindicate the Regal rights, but (says (A) for all this is spoke
by the Objector) wh^l^^ he endeavored to prove this out of Scripture, he
lapsed into unheard Opinions, which by most Divines are a^cused of Heresy and
Atheism; ce^tainly the Ob^ector spoke truly, and (B) puts him to the (...)*
what ar^ those opinions says he, and so now I will apply my self to such
things as reflect upon my former Treatise, omitting such other unhandsome
expressions, which if I live, I am likely in a fuller way to treat of.

CAP. II.
In which is censured his Definition of Religion.
THat which immediately follows his making God a Body, which is abominable, but
I will not speak of it here but page 361. toward the bottom he enters upon a
third Objection, which I have censured in my former Treatise, Cap. 13. Sect. 4.
which is thus framed by (A) the Objector, Timor inquit invisibilium
potentiarum, the fear of invisible powers, whether those powers be feigned by
the man who fears, or conceived from Fables publicly permitted, is Religion;
but from them which are not publicly permitted, Superstition; quando vero,
when the powers which are feared are true, it is true Religion.

Thus far the Objection; and first I commend his Latin Edition better then the
English, for in his Latin Edition he changed this word (Fables) which is used
amongst us for a vain or foolish relation, and put in Hystories, which has a
more graceful acceptance; so that the sense is, that Religion is drawn from
Histories publicly permitted, which is a milder expression, although the best
will be bad enough, as you shall see presently.

That fear, and reverential fear of these invisible powers, is an Act of
Religion, I think no wise man will deny, but that Religion should be shallowed
up with fear, and should be nothing else (as he seems to require) is too much;
for therefore in that 6 Cap. where these words are, (as that Cap. consists of
nothing but definitions, and these definitions pointed at in the Margent) he
puts in the Margent against this (Religion) so that this was his definition of
Religion, of which it is but one single Act, there being many more of a higher
nature proceeding out of it; for Religion being as I defined it, and as it is
generally used, that part of Justice by which we give God that Honor and
Worship is due to him; certainly, faith in what he speaks, trust and hope in
what he promises, Love of those excellencies which we discern in him, are much
more requisite and due to God then any fear, but a Reverential fear which
flows out of those other; fear opposes trust, and faith, and love: and
consider again, he divides Religion only according to the diverse application of
this fear to the object; so that one way it is Religion, another Superstition,
if conceived of Histories, permitted Religion, if otherwise Superstition; when
the powers are true powers, it is true Religion; any man may draw the other
conclusion out of these premises, if the powers be false, it is false Religion.

SECT. III.
The Terms are so put as cannot agree in the Definitum, with some Scriptures
examined.
AGain, consider that he puts these Terms Powers Invisible, without any
limitation; so that the fear of Angels or Devils is Religion; for although he
seems to be against the spirituality of those dominions good or bad, (of which,
God willing, I mean to treat more fully hereafter) yet he does not deny them to
be invisible, and then the fear of them must be Religion, which indeed is only
due to God, and therefore not to be admitted in that generality; but this is
only an objection by (A) let us see what (B) answers; His answer is thus, Idem
asseritur, the same is asserted by Ecclesia^^es, The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom. I will not examine the place where it is, I remember the
sentence perfectly, but do wonder what he can collect hence for his purpose;
this fear Ecclesiastes speaks of, is the fear of the Lord, his, of invisible
Powers; there are other powers invisible besides, which are governed and
commanded by him, and therefore he deserves all awe, fear, and reverence from
us; but they, some of them, I mean the ill Angels or Devils, hatred and
contempt as is evident; so that the fear of the Lord is one thing, and the fear
of the Invisible powers is another, much more large then the former: Again,
Ecclesiastes says, That the fear of the Lord is the beg^nning of wisdom, when
without question Religious worship is that which perfects a man so far as he is
capable of perfection in this world, and is the perfection of wisdom; and
therefore out of this Text it cannot be deduced, that the fear of Invisible
powers is Religion, which is man's chief perfection: Consider good Reader the
truth of Ecclesiastes, how it consists with what I have delivered; when a man
shall be taught that there is an invisible Agent, who by his Almighty power,
and Infinite wisdom, made and still governs this Universe, and will one day
judge us men according to our works; then he trembles at the apprehension of
it, and that causes him to seek out which way he may please him, and stop the
fury of his wrath from falling upon him, and act accordingly: Thus wisdom is
begun, but afterward this same man out of these beginnings, proceeds to search
out Gods will and believe it, to trust and rely upon his promises, to be
enamoured with God, and delighted with his excellencies, with following Acts
far exceed in the worship of God* and his Honor, that first of fear only; so
that although the fear of God may introduce and begin Religion, yet unless a
man go further, it is not Religion, nor that it is can that Text prove, but he
has another Text which I wonder what he can do with it to this purpose, which
is,

SECT. IV.
How that Text the Fool has said in his Heart there is no God, can be applied
to his purpose.
THat the Fool has said in his heart there is no God; certainly if he said so
in his heart, he could not fear God, but that because he thinks there is no
God, he could not fear him; therefore should Religion consist in fear? he that
thinks there is no such thing, cannot oppose, be angry with, or hate God; does
Religion therefore consist in these? and yet there is less consequence in it,
if a man will consider his proposition to be proved hence, it is not that fear
is the Religion paid to God, but to invisible powers; many a man who did not
think there was a supreme God governing all, did think that there were
invisible powers to which they paid their Religious Duties, as most of them to
S^medei, and Heroes, and good Gen^i, and the like; so that men may have
Religion who say in their hearts there is no God; that is, such as he is
generally conceived to be, an infinitely able, and wise Creator, and Governor;
yea, some that thought there was a God who had infinitam virtutem, by which he
governed the world, yet would not allow him infinitam potentiam, to make it out
of nothing; of which nature I conceive Aristotle to be, so that although he and
others may think there is no such God as we conceive, yet they might have
Religion to such as they conceived to have some pieces of these Divine
excellencies; so that that seems to me an objection but weakly answered by him.

CAP. IV.
ANd I pass to a fourth Objection made at the bottom of the same page, which is
out of the sixteenth Cap. of the same Leviathan, when having treated of
persons, and what things may be personated, he at the last affirms, etiam Dei
very, the true God may be personated as he was first by Moses, who governed not
his people but Gods, saying, thus says the Lord; I have discoursed at large
upon this expression of his in the 30. Cap. of my first Notes upon his
Leviatha^, Sect. 11. and those which follow, it would have become him to have
given at the least some observations upon what I said, but he has not; and I
must refer an Impartial Reader to that, but I must observe that this clause is
left out in his Latin Edition, and instead thereof, put, that the true Gods
person is and has been born, for in his proper person he created the world,
this is put instead of Moses his bearing his Person; Good Reader see how he
has amended the matter, did God in Creating the World bear the Person of God?
It is a Phrase unheard of in any Divinity Writer; he that bears the person of
any man or thing, must be another from that thing which he bears, but in this
he destroys his bearing the person of God, when he affirms, he did it in his
own, in propria persona, in his own proper person; so that his alteration is to
the worse, but I return from whence I came, to Moses again, in which I referred
the Reader to my former discourse so far, that he affirms the Son to be, as it
seems, the Second Person in the Trinity after Moses, and that of the Holy
Ghost, all which I have spoke of at large, and now let us review his answer to
this Objection, it may be the Candor of his Exposition will take away the
scandal of his Assertion, and that begins in the last line of that Page, and so
follows on in the next, and is this.

SECT. II.
His Question of our Catechism Examined.
VIdetur Author hoc loco, the Author seems in this place to explain the
doctrine of Trinity, although he do not name the Trinity: I stop here, he has
outgone himself in his English Leviathan, for I did not so far dive into his
thoughts, when I spoke of Moses representing God, but one, how that could be
understood: but now it seems abominable that Moses should be placed as a person
in the Trinity; well, let us see his answer further in this place, that (says
he) he Author did labor to explain the Trinity, was pia^ vo^untas, but
erronea explicatio; it was a pious desire, but in erroneous explication; surely
it is a pious desire ^n any man, to endeavor to explain any Divine truth, out
certainly it cannot be imagined, that a man of his parts, and learning, could
be so overseen in so high ^ Point of Divinity, as to think that such a person
ought to pass for the father, but that he would steal ^ discredit of that great
and most universally received truth, by interposing such a cloud before it; for
(says he) Moses because he after some manner seems to bear the person of God,
(as do all Christian Kings) he seems to make him one person of the Trinity,
valde negligenter, this was exceeding negligently done: and pitiful repentance
for such a crime, to blaspheme God, and call man God, (for so must each person
in the Trinity be) no, it looks not like repentance, but a vain excuse, which
near upon amounts to a justification, but he proceeds, If (says he) he had
said that God in his proper person had made the world, in the person of his
Son, had redeem^d mankind* in the person of the holy Gho^t, had sanctified his
Church, he had said no more then is in the Catechism put out by the Church:
certainly he is much out in this ^a^ing, for the Catechism of the Church of
England, has no such saying, as God in propria persona, God in his proper
person did make the world, this expression propria persona is not there, nor I
think in any confession of any Christian Church, to be used for the Father; all
three are proper Persons, no one more then other, neither does the Catechism
use that very phrase Person in that whole answer, for it is thus, I believe in
God the Father, who has made me, and all the world, not that he made it in
propria persona, for it was the work of the whole Trinity, and the God, who is
the whole Trinity, is the Almighty Father which made the world, no one word
which signifies one person to be more proper then another: Secondly, in God
the Son, who has Redeemed me and all mankind; it is true, this Redemption
being a glorious effect of the Death and Sufferance of Christ, which must needs
be acted in his humanity, which was united to his Divinity, to the second
Person (...) the Trinity, has a most proper termination in the Son; so that I
do yield it must be employed that it was acted in the Son, but it is not
expressed; and therefore, although it was materially the same, yet formally it
was not, and he said more then was in the Catechism; and for the last, it is
not said in the Catechism that God in the Person of the Holy Ghost did Sanctify
his Church, but in God the Holy Ghost who sanctifies me, and all the Elect
People of God, which although God the Holy Ghost in the Catechism be the same
with the third Person, yet he is not called so there, and we may mark, that
although these three Persons are put down in the Catechism, as fountains of
those great Blessings comminicated to man; yet no where is any called proper
person of God more then the other, nor is any of those blessings appropriated
to any person exclusively, shutting out the other; so that although it is said,
God the Father, who made me, it is not said without the Son of which abundance
of Scripture affirms he made the World, and Mr. Hobs dealt unhandsomly with our
Catechism, when he forced such a sense upon it.

SECT. III.
Another Answer Censured.
BUt perhaps he has a better Exposition afterward, for when the Objector
immediately after urged that Mr. Hobs used that Language in diverse places, he
answered, That all of them might receive that Exposition; but he a little
further explains himself thus, Vel si dixisset, or (says he) if he had said
God in his proper person, had constituted himself a Church by the Ministry of
Moses, in the person of his Son had redeemed the same; in the person of the
holy Ghost, had sanctified the same, he had not erred: Thus far he, but it
seems to me strange that both these should be without Errors, for they are
extremely different; in the first God in his proper person to Create the World,
and the second in his proper person by the Administration of Moses to
constitute a Church; but that phrase of, in his proper person, is unheard of
amongst any who are not with it called Heretics; for if God the Father did any
of those great works in his proper person, then the Son did not operate in
them, which is against the whole sense of Scripture, Joh. 1. 3. All things were
made by him, and without him was nothing made that was made, Of which I have
treated at large in my former Piece with much more, which is to be seen in
every Writer upon this Subject, or else the same must be the very person of the
Father, which is horrid Divinity, or else not a proper, but an improper person
of the Deity, which is alike hateful: Then consider his next proposition, that
God in the person of the Son did redeem the same; what is that he calls the
same? surely that was the Church of the Israelites only, for Moses constituted
no other Church; then Christ Redeemed them only, when before in the former
opposition, according to our Church Catechism he Redeems Mankind, which is
much larger then the Church which Moses constituted; and then last of all, when
he says, that God in the person of the Holy Ghost did sanctify the same, it
is too narrow for his former proposition, which was, that in the Person of the
Holy Ghost, God did Sanctify the Church which is much larger then the
Synagogue which was constituted by Moses; and when he said he had not Erred, if
he had phrased it after that manner, I say it is evident he had erred, and
erred grievously in expressing himself either of these ways.

CAP. V.
Joh. 1. 1. Explained.
I Pass now to Page 364. where at the top is objected, that in his 43. Cap. he
should say, Joh. 1. 1. that the word there, and so likewise in the 14. verse,
does signify a promise, and that promise is the same with the thing promised;
that is, Jesus Christ, as it is Psalm 105. 19. and the 40. 13. and other
places; I will not dispute this further, I have writ at large concerning this
place, and do answer to him both in this objection, and to his Justification of
it in his answer, that avails him nothing toward his disgrace of the Divine
Nature of this word, if it should be allowed such a sense: for that he was the
person is evident out of his gloss, and let that person be eternally with God,
and be God as the Text speaks, that he should make all things, and the like he
must needs be that person which we conceive he ^s, and referring the Reader to
what I have formerly writ, where the genuine sense of that word is expressed; I
pass to the next objection which immediately follows, and crosses one
conclusion of mine in this Treatise, though I know not punctually where, my
papers being now with the Printer.

CAP. VI.
Whether it be Lawful for a Faithful man to deny Christ, Examined.
THe Conclusion by the Objector set down, is drawn from an answer to a
Question, What? If a faithful man should be commanded by his Prince to deny
Christ, what should he do? he says, it is lawful to obey his Superiors by the
Example of Naaman the Assyrian, who was by the Prophet bid go in Peace, which
words, says the Objector, seem to me not a permission, but a form of
Valediction: Mr. Hobs justifies the conclusion, and begins his answer fortasse,
perhaps it is so, if he had answered any thing else, either approving or
disproving his Petition, but in this place it can be understood of nothing but
a Permission: I will stop here for this present, and examine it, first what the
offense was that he seems to parallel with the denying of Christ; the Story is
Recorded in the second Book of Kings, Cap. 5. where in the 17. verse. you may
observe that Naaman professing thy Servant, will from henceforth neither offer
burnt Offerings or Sacrifice to other Gods, but unto the Lord. By burnt
Offerings and Sacrifice, we must understand all Religious worship which was due
to God, for so it was to him, but then in the 18. verse, he begins to make a
scruple, that his attendance upon his Master at his Idolatrical worship, may
seem to be a Divine worship, because it might seem to have an affinity with it,
and in this doubt he prays a pardon thus, In this thing the Lord pardon thy
Servant, that when my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship th^re,
and he lea^eth on my hand and I ^ow my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord
pardon (...) this thing: Mark you this, it was a tender nic^ty in this man, who
was but little acquainted with (...), and but newly converted to one Article of
(...) that the Lord was God; but certainly I find not so (...) in this action
as Mr. Hobs seems to do, in (...) with the denial of Christ; for first, it is
not said he did worship Rimmon, but only that he went into the house, and bowed
in the house, not to Rimmon, but if he had, I think I may boldly say, that
Idolatry, worshipping a false God, is not so bad as to deny a true one; and
therefore, if he had worshipped Rimmon it had not been so bad, as to deny Christ;
but I deny that he did worship, or in that act show so much as a practical
Idolatry; for to bow to Baal, to bow to Rimmon, is the sin of Idolatry, not to
be in the house where Baal or Rimmon was, or to bow in that house, which yet is
all that is desired by him; If Elisha had the thoughts which I have, that
valedictions may seem to imply a tacit assent of his to what he said, he going
no further in worshipping Rimmon; but he proves it farther from the practice of
the Primitive Church.

SECT. II.
The Canons of the Council of Nice Examined.
I Will set down his words, You know (says he) that there were many Christians
a little before the Nicene Synod good men, but not most valiant, who being
threatened with Deaths or Torments, renounced their Christianity, what
punishment do you think was appointed them in that general Synod at Nice? In
the 19. Canon of that Council, it is Decreed, that ^e who should do that (is
his Phrase, which is deny his Chri^tianity) without T^rments or danger, should
return to the Catechism: Here I will pause, and indeed did when I read it, for
I was well acquainted with that Council, and the story of it, but remembered no
such easy Penance, whereupon being not in my Study, I borrowed Binnius, and
there found in his two first Lections no such thing in the 19. Canon of either,
as he speaks of, or relating to it; in the 11. of both the vulgar Editions, and
the 19. of Pisanus I did; it would be tedious to transcribe the words, but what
is material will easily appear in the canvassing his discourse; consider
therefore first, that in his answer to the question, he said it was lawful to
obey his Prince, commanding to deny Christ; how can any thing in this Cannon
prove it to be such, if it were only, as he said, condemning to be amongst the
Catechismens, this supposes it a fault for which a man should be amongst the
Catechismens, this supposes it a fault for which he should be banished the
Communion, and on such terms as they were, it could not be, unless they had
thought it a heinous crime; then I observe, that in that Eleventh Canon, as the
vulgar, it is said of those which prevaricated, without necessity, or without
the taking away their goods, or danger of the life, as was done under the
Tyranny of Lucinius; here is not Mr. Hobs his case, Licinius persecuted
Christians severely, which being discerned by many a fearful Christian, they
would deny Christ before they came to suffer for him, rather than put
themselves in that hazard, just as Mr. Hobs would have men; afterward
repenting of that fault, they would seek admittance into Gods mercies
communicated in the Church; what thinks the Council? Thus, although such men
are adjudged unworthy of humanity, yet let benevolence be administered to them,
or as the other Reading, although they are unworthy of mercy, yet let them have
humanity showed them: Here you see what a severe judgment was past upon these
men for this Crime, that they are unworthy of any mercy in themselves who
should deny Christ, to flatter Princes; but let us see the humanity judged, fit
to use toward them; it is true, the Church should imitate God, who has shut
the Gates of Heaven to no penitent Soul, but because the Church cannot have the
All-seeing Eye of God to discern who is penitent, but by the outward
expressions; therefore the Council sets down what shall be thought a sufficient
evidence of it. That which he terms (redire ad Catechumen^s) to return the
Catechumens* was somewhat, but not half his work, for says that Council,
quicunque, whosoever do truly Repent, let him spend three years inter
audicul^s, amongst the hearers, which were the Catechumens; for they were
admitted to hear the Catechistical Sermons Preached before they went to
Prayers, but not to the Communion of Prayers, which kind of Penance too many
men amongst us punish themselves with; but this is not all, then let him detest
himself seven years more with all contrition, nor has the Council done yet,
let them communicate with the people two years more in Prayer; so that here are
twelve years Penance, and if in this time he relapsed, he was to begin again,
and as it is expressed in other cases, not until his death to receive the
Communion; and if he recover, to be where he was when he did receive it;
because that out of Christian piety the Eucharist was given him for his
viaticum, (as it is called) to strengthen him in his long Journey he was to go;
after all this, consider good Reader what a miserable shift Mr. Hobs was put
to, when he took this Canon for to countenance such a horrid conclusion; that
it is fit in obedience to man to deny Christ, when this Canon most sharply
punishes that horrid Sin, and he that will read but the next Canon, which is
the 12. shall find the like severity used to them, who having at first left the
Military girdle stoutly, would afterward put it on; the story was thus, the
Emperors for a reward of their gallantry would give deserving Soldiers a
girdle, and by it many privileges: But if they were Christians, and would not
renounce their Faith, this girdle was taken from them, and with it, all
privileges; diverse, after they had refu^ed it upon these accu^sed terms, being
over allured by the pleasures and ho^ours of the world, would desire it again,
and then this Council passes the like judgment upon those as the former; so
that all kinds of denying Christ was most hateful to those Fathers, and
sentenced as a most grievous sin, having a most severe penance enjoined it;
but he^^ Mr. Hobs again.

SECT. III.
Peter's Denial of Christ Examined.
IT were a Sin (says he) in an Apostle or Disciple, who had undertaken to
Preach the Gospel against Christ's Enemies, and in Peter a great fault, but of
infirmity, and easily pardoned by Chr^^^: where good Mr. Hobs was the infirmity
evident; in Peter more then any other person; sure you have no Scripture ground
for it, he was forewarned by our Savior, and so armed against it, yet (says
he) it was easily forg^^en by our Savior: Good God what easiness do we find,
it was not without Repentance, and how sharp that was, we cannot tell, the word
of God notifies that he wept bitterly; and how powerful those tears wrought
upon our Savior we know, so that it was hardly spoke of him, and more then he
could know to say it was easily; and worse in his conclusion, when he said that
horrid sin might be committed without a fault, and that it was lawful to do it;
I am sure that fevere sentence which the Council of Nice lay upon it, and the
bitter tears of St. Peter, are no arguments for it; and the whole course of
Divinity delivered by our Savior and Apostles, makes against it, and the
constant practice of holy and religious men: for our Savior, Luke 9. 23. If
any man will come after me, he must deny himself, and take up the Cross and
follow me. Mark you, it is deny himself, not Christ, it is take up his Cross,
not cast it away and reject it; his Cross, that is, all affliction which is
upon him, as in this case he must either Sin or bear it; thus it is laid upon
him; as likewise there are other cases, but this is one and a main one. Again,
Mat. 33. He who denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father who is
in Heaven. What more pertinent and close against his conclusion; and you may
perceive, that as we demean our selves toward Christ here, he will so demean
himself toward us hereafter; if we suffer for him, we shall reign with him; if
we forsake him to save this life, we shall have no share in his life or death
hereafter; and surely if a man might lawfully deny Christ, it was a strange
folly, yea madness in all those glorious Martyrs, who suffered such torments
rather then they would deny their Savior. I have spoke of this before in this
very Treatise, and I see nothing opposed to any thing there which was brought
against his or for my conclusion; this might have been therefore spared.

SECT. IV.
A Digression to Mr. Hobs.
BUt now Mr. Hobs, I again bespeak you, leave off the Justification of such
horrid Errors as this; consider, if you intend to act according to this
Doctrine, you can have no part in Christ, he will reject you at the last day;
consider again that you have taught, and by that teaching have tempted others
to be of that Error, to love and prefer this temporal life, before that
eternal: An Atheistical practice which men may easily be induced to entertain
and practice, when there is little reason produced for it; and consider with
your self, that although this is one of the greatest sins a man can commit; yet
according to that ever honored Council in the Canon cited by you, there is
room for you in the Church here, and in Heaven hereafter, if you prove
penitent; Repent therefore of this your wickedness, that God may according to
his Sacred Covenant, have Mercy upon you; Judge your self, that you be not
judged of the Lord; and make amends for this public Scandal you have given to
the Church of Christ; which I think since the first Conversion never had any so
publicly professed this Doctrine before Leviathan; do it therefore in some
public Treatise, and that in English, whereby there may be amends to those who
have been seduced by your Doctrines, and so Farewell; This is all which
concerns me in this Appendix of yours at this time, therefore I meddle with
nothing else.

AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE Of the Principal CONTENTS.
In which C. denotes the Chapter, and S. the Section
A
THe Promises to Abraham and his Seed, Cap. 22. Sect. 16. Why his Family was
obliged to obey Gods Commands? C. 22. S. 17. Whence are Actions, just or
unjust? C. 8. S. 2. -- not from Consent or Dissent, C. 8. S. 2. Mixed Actions,
what they are, C. 19. S. 6. External and Internal Acts subject to Gods command,
C. 22. S. 14. Agag spared, C. 20. S. 2. Subjects not freed from their
Allegiance, C. 5. S. 4. Of the Amazons Commonwealth, C. 16. S. 5. 7. St.
Ambroses contest with Theodosius, C. 20. S. 4. Apostles, their gift of Tongues
Miraculous, C. 22. S. 10. Their Learning Miraculous, Cap. 22. S. 11. Appetite
overrules the Will, C. 19. S. 6. Aristides Banished, C. 20. S. 5. No taking
Arms against the King, C. 16. S. 7. Assurance of Revelations, C. 22. S. 1.
What is Assurance? C. 22. S. 1. -- how many ways it may be had, C. 22. S. 1. --
that of Faith greater then of Sciences, C. 22. S. 1. -- what we have of
Christian Religion, C. 22. S. 1.
Athenians used Ostracism, C. 20. S. 5. He who Acts by another Authority, may
do injury to him by whose Authority he Acts, C. 8. S. 1.
B
The worshippers of Baal not excused by the command of the King of Israel, C.
22. S. 17. Bishops most competent Judges of Books in Religion and of Preaching,
C. 10. S. 3.
C
The Canons of the Church of England confirmed by Laws, C. 23. S. 13. When one
is said to be a Captive, C. 17. S. 2. To whom a Captive belongs, ibid. The
first cause does not necessitate, Cap. 19. Sect. 9, 10, 11, 12. The chain of
causes not to be discerned, C. 19. S. 10. The injuries done to K. Charles I.
had their rise from Mr. Hobs's doctrine, C. 14. S. 2. C. 21. Children ought to
love those that nourished them, C. 16. S. 10. Whether they can give consent in
their Infancy, C. 16. S. 1. Christianity to be introduced by reason and
sufferings, and not by force, C. 10. S. 9. Man only actively capable of
commands, C. 19. S. 9. The difference between the commands of God and of men,
C. 18. S. 11. External and Internal Acts subject to Gods command, C. 22. S. 14.
Conduct and Command how like the Motive faculty, C. 23. S. 14. Commons the
Representative of the People, C. 23. S. 16. The Division of a Commonwealth
into Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy examined, C. 13. S. 1, 2. How fathers
rather then mothers did erect them, C. 16. S. 5. Rules to govern them not
certain and demonstrative, C. 18. S. 14. Mr. Hobs's Commonwealth no where to be
found, C. 4. S. 1. -- not consistent with Reason, C. 4. S. 2. -- he first
called it a Leviathan, C. 3.
What is Dominion by Conquest? C. 16. S. 12. -- how it becomes despotical, C.
16. S. 12.
When one is said to be Conquered, C. 17. S. 1. What power the Victor has over
the Conquered, C. 16. S. 12 Covenant upon Conquest may give possession, but not
right when the cause of the War is not just, C. 17. S. 2. Conscience, what it
is? C. 23. S. 4. whatsoever is against it is sin, C. 23. S. 4. what is an
erroneous, C. 23. S. 4. how it obliges, ibid.
Whether there be a public conscience? C. 23. S. 5. how private consciences
differ from private opinions, ibid.
Controversies; the Sovereign ought to take care of deciding them, and is
accountable to God for the neglect thereof, C. 12. S. 1. Covenant not a breath,
C. 6. S. 2, 3. C. 16. S. 6. whence their Obligation, C. 6. S. 2. C. 16. S. 6.
the first obliges. C. 5. S. 1.
They may be made immediately with God, C. 5. S. 3. If made with God against
the Sovereign, they do not oblige, ibid. Not necessary that the Covenant in
government should be made ^ith all as one person, or severally with every one,
Cap. 5. Sect. 4. The Prince may Covenant in taking his Authority, and not take
it upon Covenant, C. 6. S. 1. The Sword has no power but from the Covenant, C.
6. S. 3. Creation, the description of it by Moses, not to be known but by
Revelation, C. 22. S. 1.
D
Darius, his Kingdom not every way absolute, C. 13. S. 3, 4. Denominations are
a principatiori, C. 19. S. 6. Desire, the difference betwixt it, the will and
inclination, ib. Disputes concerning Government dangerous, C. 18. S. 3.
Doctrines which are peaceable only true, C. 10. S. 7. By the negligence of
Governors and Teachers, false Doctrines are received, C. 10. S. 7. Christian
Doctrines to be introduced by reason and sufferings, and not by force, cap. 10.
sect. 9. Dominion, not the same in an instituted and acquired Kingdom, cap. 15.
sect. 5. c. 16. s. 12. c. 17. s. 1. All -- not acquired by force, cap. 16.
sect. 1. What is Paternal, cap. 15. sect. 1. Whether a Child can give consent
in his Infancy, c. 16. s. 1. What is Dominion by conquest, cap. 16. sect. 12.
What -- over the conquered, cap. 16. sect. 12. c. 17. s. 1. How it becomes
Despotical, cap. 16. sect. 12. Dominion by Conquest, vid. Conquest.
E
End, he who has right to the End, how he has right to the Means, cap. 9.
sect. 2. England; one only Sovereign in England, cap. 23. s. 16. The good
constitution of the Realm, c. 23. s. 15, 16. Especially in relation to Taxes,
cap. 23. sect. 17.
Ephori, first introduced amongst the Lacedaemonians, and why? cap. 13. sect.
6. Equity, what it is? cap. 20. sect. 3.
F
Faith resolved into Divine Revelation, cap. 22. sect. 7. Commanded by God, c.
22. s. 13, 14, 15. c. 23. s. 6. It Is wrought by ordinate means, cap. 22. sect.
15. It Is both inspired and acquired, cap. 23. sect. 6. Faith and Prophecy
different things, ibid. It comes by hearing, cap. 23. sect. 6. Its impediments,
cap. 22. sect. 14.
Father to be obeyed before the Mother, cap. 16. sect. 3. where he is unknown
to whom the Child belongs, c. 16. s. 8. greater respect due to him, then to him
who nourished the Child, cap. 16. sect. 10.
Fear, whether it induces obedience? cap. 15. sect. 2. It Is an impediment to
Faith, cap. 22. sect. 14.
Free, and Freedom, vid. Liberty.
G
Generation more excellent then Preservation, c. 16. s. 11. Glory, vainglory
an impediment to Faith, c. 22. s. 14. God only the Author of Power, c. 18. s.
7. c. 20. s. 1. not the Author of those things which are contrary to his
commands, cap. 19. sect. 11. His positive Laws to be obeyed, cap. 22. sect. 12.
where that obedience is founded, cap. 22. sect. 13.
Good; humane Laws cannot make some things good or evil, cap. 11. sect. 5.
Gospel, Its success Miraculous, cap. 22. sect. 11. Government, remisness of it
an occasion of tumults, c. 10. s. 9. The Forms thereof ought to be suited to
the disposition of the People, cap. 13. sect. 5. It Is profitable that the
people have some interest in it, cap. 13. sect. 6. Mr. Hobs's imaginary
foundation of it, cap. 14. sect. 1. Disputes about Government dangerous, cap.
18. s. 13.
Gifts are free, cap. 19. sect. 3.
H
History useful for Princes, cap. 23. sect. 10. 11. Especially the Greek and
Roman, c. 23. s. 10, 11, 12.
Mr. Hobs's Commonwealth no where to be found, c. 4. s. 1. It Is not consistent
with Reason, cap. 4. sect. 2. He first called it Leviathan, cap. 3. His
imaginary foundation of Government, c. 14. s. 1. He gave dangerous Council to
the Protector, c. 14. s. 2. -- full of contradictions, cap. 16. sect. 2.
Magnifies his own Politics, cap. 18. sect. 14. Incourageth Rebellion, cap. 20.
sect. 8. He makes the Estates in Parliament factious, c. 23. s. 15. What
assurance he has of his being born at Malmsbury, cap. 22. sect. 1. The Authors
opinion of his Book, cap. 23. sect. 18.
Honor; Titles thereof conferred by the Sovereign, cap. 12. sect. 4. Husband,
the head of the Wife, cap. 16. sect. 4. Hyperbolus banished, cap. 20. sect. 5.
I
Jepthas Vow, cap. 20. sect. 2. Jews witnesses of the old Testament, cap. 22.
sect. 2. -- their Government ceased, cap. 18. sect. 12.
Incarnation of Christ not to be known but by Revelation, cap. 22. sect. 5.
Inclination distinct from the will and desire, c. 19. s. 6. Incorporate; why
men Incorporate into bodies Politic? cap. 11. sect. 1. Infant, whether it can
give consent? cap. 16. sect. 1. Injury, What it is? cap. 8. sect. 3. How a man
may injure himself? cap. 8. sect. 3.
Injustice, what it is? ibid. A Sovereign may do it, cap. 8. sect. 4.
Innocents not justly punished, cap. 2. sect. 3. Israelites, why obeyed they
Moses? cap. 22. sect. 17. Judge. What it is properly to Judge? cap. 23. sect.
1. Not the same to be a Judge, and constitute a Judge, cap. 10. sect. 10. He is
to observe, not make a Law, cap. 18. sect. 9. Every one is Judge of good and
evil, cap. 23. sect. 5. 6.
What Judgment private persons may pass upon public actions, cap. 23. sect.
1, 2, 3.
K
Kingdom. What is an acquired Kingdom, c. 15. s. 1. Not always acquired by
force, ibid. The condition of a conquered Kingdom not the same with an
instituted, cap. 15. sect. 5.
Kings. v. Supremes, and Sovereigns. Only accountable unto God, c. 5. s. 4. c.
6. s. 1. Their account unto him great, cap. 12. s. 5. Not punishable by the
People, and why? c. 9. s. 1. Their power in matters of Religion, c. 10. s. 1.
That subject to the commands of God, ibid. No absolute obedience due to them,
cap. 18. s. 4. etc. No taking Arms against them, cap. 16. sect. 7. They not
only sin against God, cap. 20. sect. 4. Their power about Preaching and
Printing, c. 10. s. 2. They have not right to whatsoever the subject
possesses, cap. 18. s. 8. etc.
Kill. When lawful to kill, cap. 23. sect. 4.
L
Lacedaemon. Whether that state was Monarchical, cap. 13. sect. 3. 7. Laws.
Humane Laws cannot make somethings good or evil, cap. 11. sect. 5. Positive
Laws of God to be obeyed, cap. 22. sect. 12. Where that obedience is founded,
cap. 22. s. 13. How far the Civil Law and Law of Nature are the Measure of our
Actions, cap. 23. sect. 3. The Execution of good Laws make a Nation happy, cap.
23. sect. 10. Laws for private interest conduce much to the public good, cap.
23. sect. 8.
Liberty, What it is? cap. 19. sect. 1. -- from Coaction, cap. 19. sect. 1. 7.
-- from Necessity, cap. 19. sect. 1. 7. Who is properly a freeman? cap. 19.
sect. 2. Not proper only to bodies, cap. 19. sect. 2. 3. Who or what is the
subject of it? cap. 19. sect. 5. What is the Liberty of Man, cap. 19. sect. 5.
Life, None has power over his own life, cap. 20. sect. 1. Likeing or
disliking produce not difference in the things themselves, cap. 13. sect. 2.
M
Majority. He who dissents from it ought not therefore to be destroyed, cap. 7.
sect. 1. Man, Superior to Woman. cap. 16. sect. 3. The Nobler Sex, ibid.
Whether he has power to do any thing in defense of himself, cap. 18. sect. 7.
He only actively capable of Commands, cap. 19. sect. 9.
Mancipium, what it signifies, cap. 16. sect. 12. Marriage; No state without
rules about it, cap. 16. sect. 8. One born out of it is filius populi, ibid.
Means. How he has right to them who has right to the end, cap. 19. sect. 2.
Militia belongs to the Sovereign, cap. 12. sect. 2. Miracle, What it is? cap.
22. sect. 8. cap. 23. sect. 6. God the only Author of them, cap. 22. sect. 9.
Never wrought to confirm a lie, cap. 22. sect. 9. The gift of tongues
miraculous in the Apostles, c. 22. s. 11. As also their Learning, ibid. And the
success of the Gospel, ibid.
Mishpol. What it signifies, cap. 18. sect. 6. Mixed Actions what they are?
cap. 19. sect. 6. Bodies denominated from the predominant, c. 13. s. 3.
Monarchy how distinguished from Tyranny, c. 13. s. 2. None so absolute as Mr.
Hobs Phansies, cap. 13. sect. 3. 47. cap. 23. s. 15.
Money. How the levying of it is like the Nutritive faculty? cap. 23. sect. 14.
Moses. His Integrity, cap. 22. sect. 5. Why the Israelites obeyed him? cap. 22.
sect. 17.
Mother, Not to be obeyed before the Father, c. 16. s. 3. What power she has
over the Child, c. 16. s. 8. 9. Whether the Child is first in her power? c. 16.
s. 8.
Murder. A Sin against God and Man, cap. 20. sect. 4.
N
Nourish. Greater respect due to the Father then to him who nourishes the
Child, cap. 16. sect. 10. Numbers. Small numbers joined together may live
peaceably, cap. 1.
O
Oaths. Lawful to take an Oath, cap. 23. sect. 4. Obedience, better then
Sacrifice, cap. 20. sect. 2. No absolute obedience due to Kings, cap. 18. s. 4.
etc. What obedience due to the commands of God and of Men, cap. 18. sect. 11.
Ostracisme in use at Athens, cap. 20. sect. 5.
P
Parents love their Children naturally, cap. 16. sect. 9. Their power over
their Children, cap. 22. sect. 16.
Paul. His conversion, cap. 22. s. 15. Peace. Wherein it consists, cap. 10.
sect. 1. -- the fruit of Truth, cap. 10. sect. 5. Truth not always regulated by
it, cap. 10. sect. 4. 5. 6. Peaceable Doctrines only true, cap. 10. sect. 4.
Whether it be consonant to the laws of Nature, cap. 10. s. 5. People not give
Authority to the Prince, c. 2. s. 2. 3. 4. 6. c. 14. s. 2. c. 20. s. 13. c. 23.
s. 16. If they could, it were dangerous to the Prince, cap. 2. s. 5. Supreme
not their Person, c. 2. s. 2. c. 5. s. 12. All do not consent to give power to
the Supreme, cap. 4. sect. 1. cap. 16. sect. 5. -- Not the Authors of Right,
cap. 4. sect. 3. Profitable that they have some interest in Government, cap.
13. sect. 6.
Pharisees, they and the Scribes not Sovereigns, c. 18. s. 2. Power, v.
Authority. It comes from God, cap. 20. sect. 1. cap. 18. sect. 7. Not from the
People, v. People. Whether one has power to do any thing in defense of
himself, cap. 18. sect. 7.
Prayers and Tears the Christians remedy, cap. 16. s. 7. Preaching, the Kings
power about it, cap. 10. sect. 2. Preservation, what it is? cap. 16. sect. 11.
Generation more excellent then it, cap. 16. sect. 11.
Prince, v. King, Supreme, Sovereign, -- may err, c. 4. s. 2. Printing. The
Kings power about it, cap. 10. sect. 2. Promises in unlawful things oblige not,
cap. 15. sect. 3. 4. Whether upon fear oblige? cap. 15. sect. 4.
Prophecy different from faith, cap. 23. sect. 6. Propriety, what it is? cap.
11. sect. 3. How introduced, cap. 11. sect. 2. Not necessary to Peace, cap. 11.
sect. 3. It may be both in Peace and War, ibid. Not depending upon the
Sovereign Power, c. 11. s. 3. 4. Men in War have not a propriety to their
Enemies Country before it be Conquered, cap. 10. sect. 2. Whence the propriety
of the Sovereign, cap. 11. s. 4. -- Whether this conduce to public peace, c.
23. s. 8. 9. 17.
Protection of the sovereign does not give propriety, c. 23. s. 9
R
Reason sometimes disobeyed, cap. 19. sect. 6. Rebellion no small Injustice,
cap. 5. sect. 2. Rebels allways pretend Oppression, cap. 16. sect. 7.
Religion. Princes power in matters of Religion, c. 10. s. 1. The assurance of
Christian Religion, c. 22. s. 1. 2. 3. -- from the manner of Deliverance, cap.
22. sect. 2. -- the Doctrines delivered, cap. 22. sect. 3. -- the different
Style, cap. 22. sect. 4. -- the Punishment and Rewards proposed, ibid. -- the
sanctity of the persons who delivered it, c. 22. s. 5. 6. -- the sufferings of
the Saints, cap. 22. sect. 7.
Revelations. The assurance of them, cap. 22. sect. 1. what things not to be
known but by revelation, c. 22. s. 1. 2. 3.
Right. Not derived from the consent of the people, c. 4. s. 3. He who has
right to the End, how to the means, c. 9. s. 2.
Romulus preserved by Faustulus, cap. 16. sect. 10.
S
Sacrifice, obedience better then it, cap. 20. sect. 2. Samuel rejected, cap.
18. sect. 5. etc. Sanctity inspired and acquired, cap. 23. sect. 6. Sanhedrim
ceased, cap. 18. sect. 12. Saul chosen, cap. 18. sect. 5. etc. Spares Agag,
cap. 20. sect. 2.
Scribes and Pharisees not the supreme magistrates, c. 18. s. 2. Scripture, its
Authority not depending upon the Sovereign, cap. 22. sect. 17. 18. See. What
the word signifies, cap. 19. sect. 10. Servants, when one is a Servant, cap.
17. sect. 2. -- their condition that differing in peace from what they suffer
in War, according to Mr. Hobs, c. 18. s. 8.
Servitude banished from amongst Christians, cap. 18. s. 2. Sin. None
necessitated to it, cap. 19. sect. 1. 2. Small numbers joined together may live
peacably, cap. 1. Sodom, Its destruction, cap. 8. sect. 4. Sovereign, v. King,
Supreme. He is not the person of the People, c. 2. s. 2. c. 5. s. 1. 2. He may
do unjustly, cap. 8. sect. 4. His power about deciding Controversies, cap. 12.
sect. 1. Has right to the Militia, cap. 12. sect. 2. -- to chose Counselors
and Officers, ibid. Yet not always Officers, ibid. Has power to Punish and
Reward, and confer Honors, cap. 12. sect. 4. -- Not the representative of the
people, cap. 13. sect. 1. c. 14. s. 1. 2. c. 23. s. 15. 16. -- Obliged by their
own Promises, cap. 13. sect. 3. -- Why they are Chosen, cap. 15. sect. 2. His
Rights in an instituted and acquired dominion not the same, c. 15. s. 5. c. 16.
s. 12. c. 17. s. 1. No such Sovereignty by Institution as Mr. Hobs phancies, c.
18. s. 1. Whether the Sovereignty be equally absolute in an instituted and
acquired Dominion, c. 17. s. 2. Not lawful to resist them when they command
against ones own interest, c. 20. s. 7. Their commands may be opposed when
contrary to the Christian Faith, c. 22. s. 17. He cannot make Law whatsoever is
against the Law of Nature, c. 22. s. 18. How he is subject to Laws Divine, c.
23. s. 7. How subject to the Civil Laws, ibid. The partition of sovereignty not
destructive to it, c. 23. s. 9. Only one Sovereign in England, c. 23. s. 16.
Speech is free, cap. 19. sect. 4. Spirits more, cap. 19. sect. 2. Subjects not
Authors of their Governors Action, c. 2. s. 1. 7. c. 4. s. 1. c. 15. s. 1. c.
20. s. 1. They cannot be free from their allegiance, and why? c. 5. s. 4. Not
submit themselves without any contract on the Governors part, c. 5. s. 4. c.
11. s. 1. Not bound to own all the Actions of a Supreme, c. 7. s. 1. cap. 8.
sect. 1. All men born Subjects, cap. 14. sect. 1. Difference between the
Subjects of an instituted and conquered Nation, c. 18. s. 1.
Supremes. All do not consent to give power unto them, c. 4. s. 1. c. 16. s. 5.
Not Covenant with all in Government, c. 5. s. 4. Not take their Government upon
Covenant, c. 6. s. 1. The Subject not bound to own all his Actions, c. 7. s. 1.
cap. 8. sect. 1. Not lawful to resist Him in ones own defense, cap. 20. sect.
6. cap. 21.
Sword has no power but from the Covenant, c. 6. s. 3. That it can give power
is dangerous to Princes, ibid.
Thoughts are free, cap. 19. sect. 2. Not liable to humane Laws, cap. 23. sect.
5.
Truth, whether it is to be regulated by Peace? c. 10. s. 4. 5. 6. In matters
of doctrine it is only to be considered, c. 10. s. 4. Peacable Doctrines only
true, ibid. Peace and the fruit of it, cap. 10. sect. 5. No universal Truths
are new, cap. 10. sect. 7.
Tumults. Remisness of Government an occasion of them, cap. 10. sect. 9.
Tyranny. Whether it and Monarchy be the same form of Government, cap. 13. sect.
2. Tyrants of two sorts, cap. 23. sect. 11.
V
Unbelief, It Is a breach of Gods Law, c. 22. s. 16. Men justly Condemned for
it, ibid. Its Punishment, cap. 22. sect. 13.
Understanding taken two ways, c. 19. s. 5. Voluntas facere and fieri, cap. 19.
sect. 12. Vows, rash, sinful, not obliging, c. 20. sect. 2. Uriah Murdered,
cap. 20. sect. 3. 4.
W
War, what it is properly, cap. 16. sect. 4. Whence arise Civil Wars, c. 18. s.
13. 14. 15.
Water, how it is said to be free, c. 19. s. 7. Ways, how they are free, cap.
19. sect. 2. Wife subject to the Husband, cap. 16. sect. 4. Will, what is the
freedom of it, cap. 19. sect. 5. -- It Is conversant about the End and the
Means, ibid. -- Overruled by the Appetite, cap. 19. s. 6. the difference
betwixt it, desire and inclination, ibid.
Woman inferior to Man, cap. 16. s. 3. -- Not bound to prostitute their bodies,
c. 17. s. 1.

The Texts of Holy Scriptures Illustrated or Cited.
Cap. Verse. Genesis.
1. C. 2. S. 1. 3. 5. 11. 18. 11. 16. 16. 3. 4. 8. 17. 7. 8. 10. 22. 16. 18.
18. 19. 22. 17. 2^. 25. 08. 04. 21. 23. 23. 04. 22. 16. ibid. 26. 31. ibid.
Exodus
20. 19. 22. 17. 18. 04. etc. 32. 10. 11, etc. 22. 05.
Deuter.
5. 27. 18. 4. 6. 13. 23. 4. 17. 14. etc. 18. 6. 7. 18. 15. 22. 13.
Judges.
11. 30. 20. 02.
1 Samuel.
2. 27. etc. 8. 4. 8. 7. 18. 8. 11. 12. etc. 18. 5. 6. 17. 19. 20. 18. 8. 12.
3. 4. 18. 8. 14. 24. 27. 44. 20. 2. 15. 1. 9. 22. ibid.
2 Samuel.
12. 1. etc. c. 9. 10. etc. 20. 4.
1 Kings.
3. 9. 18. 9.
Psalms.
1. 2. 18. 12. 51. 22. 3. 4. 14. 20. 4. 110. 4. 23. 4. 106. 38. 20. 2. 119.
132. 18. 6.
Isaiah.
33. 9. 20. 4.
Ezekiel.
46. 18. 18. 6.
Daniel.
6. 7. 13. 15. 24. 13 3. 4
St. Matthew.
4. 3. 22. 9. 5. 21. 23. 4. 33. 34. ibid. 37. ibid. 16. 6. 16. 18. 12. 21. 2.
3. 18. 10. 23. 2. 3. 18. 11. 12. 4. 12. 16. 18. 12. 25. 14. etc. 23. 4.
St. Mark.
16. 16. 22. 13. 20. 22. 09.
St. Luke.
1. 24. 22. 2.
St. John.
3. 15. 16. 18. 22. 13. 18. 19. 22. 16. 23. 22. 13. 5. 44. 22. 16. 9. 22. 22.
14. 10. 8. 23. 4. 12. 42. 43. 22. 14.
Acts.
3. 22. 23. 22. 13. 4. 5. 18. 11. 18. 19. 10. 1. 19. 18. 11. 25. 11. 20. 6.
Romans.
1. 9. 23. 4. 3. 4. 20. 4. 27. 22. 14. 13. 3. 4. 20. 4.
1 Corinthians.
1. 30. 23. 6.
2 Corinthians.
1. 23. 23. 4.
Ephesians.
2. 8. 23. 6. 5. 22. 23. 16. 4.
Phill.
1. 8. 23. 4.
Hebr.
11. 6. 22. 13.
1 St. Peter.
2. 14. 20. 4.
St. James.
5. 12. 23. 4.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3 Line 24 read 81 l. 30 r. all authority, p. 4 l. 2 r. impossibility, l.
24 r. you will say, l. 26 r. this election, p. 5. l. 31 r. seems to me, p. 9 l
25 r. impossible, p 11 l. 2 r. fraud, p. 13 l. 5 r depose, p. 17 l 6 r. parts,
p. 19 l. 2 r. vindictive, l. 13. r. it, l. 22 r. sibi for tibi, p 41 l. r.
conceit, l. 8 r. conquered, l. 31 r. therefore, p* 49 l. 13 r. any of the
other, p. 50 l 3 r principaliori, l. 20 r. principaliori, p. 53 l 14 r. had
done it, p. 54 l. 16 r. other, p 6 l. 6 r. expressed, l. 8 r. more, l 20 r.
participate, l. 21 r. resembles, p. 67 l. 5 r. misreckon, p. 68 l. 19 r. but in
those, l* 30 r. exemplyfied, p. 69 l. 11 r. 103 p. 71 l* 17 r. dispose, p. 74
l. 14 r. to a law, p. 77 l. 7 r. gift, l. 17 r. his, l. 16 r Oeconomical, l.
23 r. creatio, l. 25 r. accident* p. 79 l. 14 r. about, p. 80 l. 8 r. conquest
of, p. 86 l 11. r. and so every man, l. 28 r. by, p. 87 l 12 r. that like
Virtue it is commended l. 14 r. and produces it to satisfy, p. 90 l. 3 for and
r. but, p. 92 l. 19 r. safety, p 94 l. 11 r. find, p. 109 l. 21 r spirits, p.
116 l. 15 r. passing, p. 133 l. 10 r. against, l. 21 r. And, p. 137 l. 12 r.
Chrysostom, p. 140 l. 15 r. although, p. 146 l. 29 r. self, p. 148 l. 36 r.
possible, p. 144. l. 31 r. proceed, for causes r. causes, p. 155 l. 23 r.
divine, l. 24 for four r. for, p. 160 l. 8 r. infallible, p. 163 l. 14 r.
custom, l. 16 for them r. them, l. 17 r. famous, p. 169. 6 r. weak, l. 13 r.
published, l. 30 for one r. no, p. 172 l. 27 r. obey it, l. 28^ r. it, p. 173
l. 7 r. authority, p. 174 l. 12 r. infidelity, p. 180 l 26 r. this, p. 184 l.
21 r. Hobbs, p 190 l. 24. r. to it, p. 203 l. 8 r. thus, p. 225 l. 28. r.
afterward, l. 25 r. (which is the motive faculty) p. 226 l. 9 r. acted, p. 227
l. 17 r. examining, p. 228 l. 32 r. independent, p. 235 l. 3 r. which I have
showed, l. 14 for it is r. is it.

In the Postscript.
p. 12 l. 10 r. other writers, l. 21 r. (so I render his words, l. 26 r. Heb.
11. 1, p. 14 l. 3. r. representor, p. 17 l. 12 r. preceding, l. 34 r. certainly
the objectors, p. 21. l. 16 r. genii, p. 24 l. 31 r. communicated, p. 26 l. 23
r. he is, p. 29 l. 13 r. Licinius, p. 29 l. 34 r. thought, l. 35 r. return to
the.


