A LETTER ABOUT Liberty and Necessity: Written to the DUKE of NEWCASTLE, By
THOMAS HOBBES of Malmesbury: With OBSERVATIONS upon it,

By a Learned Prelate of the Church of England lately deceased.

LONDON, Printed by J. Grover, for W. Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1676.

Imprimatur,

Anton. Saunders, ex Reverendissimo Archiepisc. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aedibus Lambethanis, Jan. 19. 1675/6.
Mr. HOBBES his Opinion about Liberty and Necessity, sent in a Letter to the
DUKE of NEWCASTLE.
FIrst, I conceive, that when it comes into a man's mind to do, or not to do,
some certain Action, if he have no time to deliberate the doing of it or
abstaining, necessarily follows the present Thought he had of the good or
evil Consequence thereof to himself. As, for Example, in sudden Anger, the
Action should follow the Desire of Revenge; in sudden Fear, the Thought of
Escape. Also when a man had time to deliberate, but deliberates not, because
never any thing appeared that should make him doubt of the Consequence, the
Action follows his opinion of the Goodness or Harm of it: these Actions I call
Voluntary; my Lord (if I understand him right) calls them Spontaneous. I call
them Voluntary, because those actions which follow immediately the last
Appetite are voluntary; and here where is one only Appetite, that one is the
last. Besides, I see it is reasonable to punish a rash Action, which could not
be justly done by man to man, unless the same were voluntary. For no Actions of
man can be said to be without Deliberation, though never so sudden, because it
is supposed he had time to deliberate all the precedent time of his life,
whether he should do that kind of Action or not. And hence it is, that he that
kills in a sudden passion of Anger, shall nevertheless be justly put to
death, because all the time wherein he was able to consider whether to kill
were good or evil, shall be held for one continual Deliberation, and
consequently the Killing shall proceed from Election.

Secondly, I conceive, when a man deliberates whether he shall do a thing or
not do it, that he does nothing else but consider whether it be better for him
to do it or not to do it; and to consider an Action is to imagine the
Consequences of it both good and evil. From whence it is to be inferred, That
Deliberation is nothing else but alternate Hope and Fear, or alternate
Appetite, to do or quit the Action of which he deliberateth.

Thirdly, I conceive, that in all Deliberations, that is to say, in all
alternate succession of contrary Appetites, the last is that which we call the
Will, and is immediately before the doing of the Action, or next before the
doing of it become impossible. All other Appetites to do and to quit, that come
upon a man during his Deliberations, are usually called Intentions, and
Inclinations, but not Will, there being but one Will, which also in this case
may be called the Last Will, though the Intention change often.

Fourthly, that those Actions which a man is said to do upon Deliberation, are
said to be voluntary, and done upon Choice and Election: so that voluntary
Action, and Action proceeding from Election, is the same thing: and that of
voluntary Agents, it is all one to say, he is free, and to say, he has made an
end of deliberating.

Fifthly, I conceive Liberty to be rightly defined in this manner. Liberty is
the absence of all the impediments to Action, that are not contained in the
natural and intrinsecal quality of the Agent. As, for Example, the Water is to
be seen descend freely, or to have liberty to ascend up the channel of the
River, because there is no impediment; and though the Water cannot ascend, yet
men say it never wants the liberty to ascend, but the power or faculty, because
the impediment is in the nature of the Water, and intrinsecal. So also we say,
He that is tied, wants liberty to go, because that the impediment is not in
him, but in his Bonds; whereas we say not so of him that is sick or lame,
because the impediment is in himself.

Sixthly, I conceive, that nothing takes beginning from it self, but from the
action of some other immediate Agent without it self; and that therefore when
first a man has an Appetite or Will to something, to which immediately before
he had no Appetite nor Will, the cause of his Will is not the Will it self, but
something else not in his own disposing. So that whereas it is out of
controversy, of voluntary Actions the Will is a necessary cause, and by this
which is said the Will is also caused by other things which it disposes not;
it follows, that voluntary Actions have all their necessary causes, and
therefore are necessitated.

Seventhly, I hold That to be a sufficient Cause, to which nothing is wanting
that is needful to the producing of the Effect: the same also is a necessary
Cause. For if it be possible that a sufficient Cause shall not bring forth the
Effect, then there wants somewhat which was needful to the producing of it,
and so the Cause was not sufficient: but if it be impossible that a sufficient
Cause should not produce the effect, then is a sufficient cause a necessary
cause. For it is said to produce an effect necessarily, that cannot but produce
it. Hence is manifest, that whatsoever is produced, has had a sufficient cause
to produce it, else it had not been. And therefore also Voluntary Actions are
necessitated.

Lastly, I hold that the ordinary definition of a Free Agent, namely, That a
Free Agent is that which, when all things are present which are needful to
produce the effect, can nevertheless not produce it, implies a contradiction,
and is Nonsense; being as much as to say, the Cause may be sufficient, that is,
necessary, and yet the Effect not follow. My Reasons

For the first 5 points, where it is explicated. 1. What Spontaneity is. 2.
What Deliberation is. 3. What Will, Propension, and Appetite, is. 4. What a
Free Agent is. 5. What Liberty is. There can be no other proof offered, but
every man's own Experience by reflection on himself, and remembering what he
uses to have in his mind, that is, what he himself means when he says, an
Action is Spontaneous, a man Deliberates, such is his Will, that Agent or
Action is Free. Now he that so reflecteth upon himself, cannot but be satisfied
that Deliberation is the considering of the good and evil Sequels of the Action
to come: that by Spontaneity is meant Inconsiderate Proceedings, or else
nothing is meant by it: that Will is the last act of our Deliberation: that a
Free Agent is he that can do if he will, and forbear if he will: and that
Liberty is the Absence of External Impediments. But to those that out of custom
speak not what they conceive, but what they hear; and are not able, or will not
take the pains to consider what they think, when they hear such words, no
argument can be sufficient, because Experience and Matter of Fact is not
verified by other men's Arguments, but by every man's own Sense and Memory. For
example, how can it be proved that to love a thing, and to think it good, is
all one, to a man that does not mark his own meaning by those words? Or how can
it be proved that Eternity is not Nunc stans to a man that says these words by
custom, and never considers how he can conceive it himself in his mind? Also
the 6th. point, that a man cannot imagine any thing to begin without a Cause,
can no other way be made known, but by crying how he can imagine it; but if he
try, he shall find as much reason (if there be no Cause of the thing) to
conceive it should begin at one time as an other; that is, he has equal reason
to think it should begin at all times, which is impossible; and therefore he
must think there was some special Cause why it began then, rather than sooner
or later, or else that it began never, but was Eternal.

For the 7th. point, that all Events have necessary Causes, it is there proved
in that they have sufficient Causes. Further, let us also in this place suppose
any Event never so casual, as the throwing (for example) Ambs-ace upon a Pair
of Dice, and see if it must not have been necessary before it was thrown; for
seeing it was thrown, it had a beginning, and consequently a sufficient Cause
to produce it, consisting partly in the Dice, partly in outward things, as the
posture of the parts of the Hand, the measure of Force applied by the Caster,
the posture of the parts of the Table, and the like. In sum, there was
nothing wanting which was necesarily requisite to the producing of that
particular Cast, and consequently that Cast was necessarily thrown; for if it
had not been thrown, there had wanted somewhat requisite to the throwing of it,
and so the Cause had not been sufficient. In the like manner it may be proved,
that every other Accident, how contingent soever it be, is produced
necessarily; which is that that my L. Bishop disputes against. The same also
may be proved in this manner: Let the case be put (for example) of the Weather;
it is necessary that to morrow it shall rain, or not rain; if therefore it be
not necessary it shall rain, it is necessary it shall not rain; otherwise there
is no necessity that the Proposition [It shall rain or not rain] should be
true. I know there be some that say, it may necessarily be true, that one of
the two shall come to pass, but not singly that it shall rain; which is as much
as to say, one of them is necessary, yet neither of them is necessary; and to
seem to avoid that absurdity, they make a distinction, that neither of them is
true determinate, but indeterminate: which distinction either signifies no more
but this, One of them is true but we know not which, and so the Necessity
remains though we know it not; or if the meaning of the distinction be not
that, it has no meaning, and they might as well have said, One of them is true
Tytirice, but neither of them Tupatulice.

The last thing, in which also consists the whole controversy, namely, that
there is no such thing as an Agent which when all things necessary to Action
are present, can nevertheless forbear to produce it, or (which is all one) that
there is no such thing as Freedom from Necessity, is easily inferred from that
which has been before alleged; for if it be an Agent, it can work, and if it
work, there is nothing wanting of what is requisite to produce the Action, and
consequently the Cause of the Action is sufficient, and if sufficient, then
also necessary, as has been proved before.

And thus you see how the inconveniences, which his Lordship (Bishop Bramhal)
objecteth, must follow upon the holding of Necessity, are avoided, and the
Necessity it self demonstratively proved. To which I could add, if I thought
it good Logic, the inconvenience of denying Necessity; as that it destroys
both the Decrees and the Prescience of God Almighty: for whatsoever God has
purposed to bring to pass by Man as an Instrument, or foreseeth shall come to
pass, a man, if he have Liberty, (such as his Lordship affirms) from
Necessitation, might frustrate, and make not to come to pass; and God should
either not foreknow it, and not decree it, or he should foreknow such things
should be as shall never be, and decree that which shall never come to pass.

This is all that has come into my mind touching this question since I last
considered it, and I humbly beseech your Lordship to communicate it only to my
Lord Bishop: and so praying God to prosper Your Lordship in all Your Designs, I
take leave, and am (my most Noble and most Obliging Lord)

Rouen, Aug. 20. 1645. Your most Humble Servant, THO: HOBBS.

The POSTSCRIPT.
ARguments seldom work on men of Wit and Learning, when they have once engaged
themselves in a contrary Opinion; if any thing do it, it is the showing them
the Cause of their Error, which is this. Pious men attribute to God Almighty,
for Honors sake, whatsoever they see is Honorable in the world, as Seeing,
Hearing, Willing, Knowing, Justice, Wisdom, etc. but deny him such poor things
as Eyes, Ears, Brains, and other Organs, without which we Worms neither have
nor can conceive such Faculties to be, and so far they do well. But when they
dispute of Gods Actions Philosophically, then they consider them again as if he
had such Faculties, and in that manner as we have them, this is not well; and
thence it is they fall into so many difficulties. We ought not to dispute of
God's Nature, he is no fit subject for our Philosophy. True Religion consists
in obedience to Christ's Lieutenants, and in giving God such Honor both in
Attributes and Actions, as they in their several Lieutenancies shall ordain.

OBSERVATIONS Upon A LETTER Of Mr. T. Hobbs to the Duke of NEWCASTLE, Which he
calls His Opinion about Liberty and Necessity.
THE Design of the Letter, or (as he himself speaks in one part of it) that in
which the whole Controversy consists, is, That Voluntary Agents do always act
necessarily, or (which is all one) act without liberty, that is, from
necessity. And this Opinion of his is first set down in 8 Points, and then (as
the Title of the next Part imports) so many Reasons to those Points. The first
Point is, That by Spontaneity is meant Inconsiderate Proceeding, etc. without
Deliberation.

I call this the first Point, not because I find Spontaneity described here,
but because at the entrance of his Reasons he declares that to be his design.
It Is true that he says somewhat of the Bishops Opinion concerning it, but very
doubtfully, as he had cause; for he shall not find among any that maintain the
difference between Spontaneous and Voluntary Actions, that Spontaneity consists
in Inconsiderateness or Indeliberation, as he would have it, when he says it
must mean that or nothing. Whereas indeed his Adversaries would be as well
content it should mean nothing as that. For Inconsideration is the privation
and want of considering where it should and ought to have been, ( i. e.) in
Agents of Reason and Will; for we do not say that Natural Agents, that have no
Reason and Will, do act inconsiderately. For when the Water does sponte fluere,
and the Fire calefacere, we cannot say they do it inconsiderately, or for want
of that Deliberation, of which they are not capable; for you might as well say,
they act so for want of Reason: and if want of Reason and Deliberation makes an
Action spontaneous, then all violent Actions would be spontaneous, for they
also want Reason in all natural Agents, as that the Water ascends for want of
Reason and Deliberation.

And therefore the next time Mr. Hobbs means to play the Philosopher about
Necessity and Liberty, I shall advise him to take better notice of the nature
and difference between Spontaneous and Voluntary Actions. Men call those
Voluntary Actions, as the word it self imports, that proceed from the Will, (
i.e.) voluntary Agents; and those spontaneous, that proceed from the fixed
unchangeable nature of ( i.e.) from natural Agents. If Mr. Hobbs knew not this
difference, let him learned against another time; if he did know it, it had
been the part of a good Philosopher to have took notice of it, and when he
would prove that Spontaneous and Voluntary are all one, to make instance in
such Actions as are in that more appropriate and special sense called
Spontaneous; such as I named before, the Water's flowing, and the Fire's
heating, and make it appear that they are also Voluntary, that is, do follow
the last Will of the Water and Fire, (for so, Voluntary, is defined.) Now if no
man in his right wits will either say that these are Voluntary, or gainsay
their being Spontaneous, ( i.e.) that they do sponte agere; it must of
necessity follow, first, That there is a manifest difference between those
sorts of Actions; and secondly, That it is necessary that those things which
differ, for more distinct knowledge, should have given them also different
Appellations; and thirdly, That none are of themselves more apt, though they
may sometimes be used promiscuously, than those of Voluntary and Spontaneous.

But for so much as I have already taken notice of in the first Point, whether
he be mistaken in the Bishop, or I in him, it makes not much either for or
against the principal question of Liberty; for I find no mention of Spontaneity
afterward, that there need any enquiry of the nature and definition of it.

But for voluntary Actions, because we have often use of them in the following
Discourse, it will be better worth the labor to examine what they are defined
to be.

Those Actions that follow immediately the last Appetite are Voluntary.

I should acknowledge this Definition, if the word [last] did not corrupt it,
which makes it either false or frivolous. For if he supposes it to be the last
Will before it be followed, it is false, for it becomes rather the Last by
being followed; or if that Will be supposed to be followed because it is last,
it is also false; for the Action follows the Will because it is the Will, not
because it is the last Will: for the Will is last because it is followed, not
followed because it is last. It Is not First or Last that makes a thing willed,
but because it is good, or seems so. Or if there be a sense in which it is not
false, it is yet frivolous. As if a man should say out of a deep contemplation
and observation of Nature, No man dyed ever of any Disease but the last he was
sick of. No man ever drank a whole Glass of Wine but the last when he drank it.
If the word [last] carries no force in it, either to make the Disease more
malignant, or the Wine more pleasant; such Speculations, though they have a
truth in them, will go for no better than ridiculous: so [last] which adds
nothing to the Will, might have been left out in the Definition. And yet I am
content it should stand there still, until you see more cause to remove it, as
perhaps you may when we come to the third point; for there we are promised to
hear more of the same matter, a point set apart of purpose to show the nature
of the Will and Inclinations.

Second Point is the Definition of Deliberation. Deliberation is nothing but
Alternate Hope and Fear, or Alternate Appetite to do or quit the Action.

It Is a strange impropriety of Speech, 1. to say that Deliberation, which is an
act of the Understanding, should be either Fear or Hope, which be affections;
such a confused tumbling together of the Faculties of the Soul becomes only
him, that either understands not, or desires not to be understood. But perhaps
his meaning may be, that the Understanding in Deliberation represents one-while
matter of Fear, otherwhile of Hope. This, I confess, is true, and that this
Hope or Fear does not always produce such a resolution and act of the Will,
upon which the Action follows; but yet produces a true and perfect resolution,
or act of the Will. For it is not possible for a man to have true cause and
matter of Hope represented to him, but he must will it, at least in a degree,
and so long as that Hope is not impeached by a new Deliberation. So it is alike
in Fear, that whosoever actually fears any evil, effectually wills the avoiding
of it, till something intervenes that diverts the Fear. But of this more in the
next Point.

Third Point. The Will is defined to be the last Appetite, and is immediately
before the doing of the Action. Other Appetites that come upon men in time of
Deliberation are but intentions and inclinations. The truth of these and the
like Points (says Mr. Hobbs) is to be tried by reflection upon our selves,
what we conceive when such Speeches are used: and then the Will is nothing else
but the last Appetite. Methinks Mr. Hobbs should have heard of Voluntas
ambulatoria, a Will liable to change; and therefore every Will is not the last.
For if you reflect, you shall find a man seriously to will and resolve that to
day, which the next day he wills not. When a man makes his Testament, which is
also called his last Will, and is indeed of all others the most resolved act of
his Will; yet he may change that Will, and often men do it. But then you say it
cease to be his last Will. It Is true. And therefore something was a Will for
the time, which was not the last Appetite. But it cannot now be called his
Will. True, because he has changed it, not because it is not last; for herein
(say we) consists the liberty of a voluntary Agent, that he can change his
Will, and make that not to be last which once was last, that is, he has power
over his last Will, I mean over that which for the time was the last, and was
as serious and resolved as the last.

And for those Actions which he calls only Intentions and Inclinations, I see
no reason why they should not be called Wills; seeing 1. they are acts of the
Will, for no application of the Soul to any thing, upon a reason can proceed
from the inferior Sensitive part, and therefore must either be acts of the
Will, or be nothing at all. And 2ly. by Mr. Hobbe's own rule and definition of
Will; every one of those successive Appetites are Wills, because 'till another
consequent Appetite followed, they were the last for the time, and therefore in
their courses and turns all are Wills. Indeed after they are changed and
unwilled again, I think no man desires they should be still called Wills, when
they cease to be at all.

Fourth Point. To say he is a free Agent, is all one to say, He has made an
end of Deliberation.

Here I shall call Mr. Hobbs again to his own reflection, whether a man cannot
be said to be free, before he has made an end of Deliberation, rather than
after? As when I desire to have a friend dine with me, I meaning to ask him
first whether he be engaged, or resolved for any other company, do use these
words; Sir, are you free? and if he answers me that he is free, I presently
apprehend, that he is not resolved for any particular, but is still capable of
a resolution to dine with me. Not, but that he may be said to be free too that
has made an end of Deliberation, but in another sense; that is, he is free
from all doubts that come by Deliberation. But the same may be free also before
Deliberation is ended, but it is from particular determinations and
resolutions, which is the freedom we defend, to do or not to do. And this seems
to be a greater and more proper Freedom than the other; for he that is free
from Deliberation, acts indeed freely, but it is in that one way to which he is
resolved. But he that is so free as to go any way, is more free than he that
goes but freely in one way.

Fifth Point. Liberty is the absence of all Impediments to Action, that are not
contained in the nature and intrinsecal qualities of the Agent.

If it will content Mr. Hobbs, That shall be allowed to be one sense of the
word: but if I may have leave to do but what he desires I should do, reflect, I
find another sense, and the very same which is denied by him, A Liberty from
Necessity. As when a Father recommends a Wife to his Son, the Son has, no
doubt, liberty to take that Wife in Mr. Hobbs his sense. And yet if the same
Son should desire his Father to give him his liberty, the Father would
presently apprehend, that he desired somewhat that he had not given him, that
is, leave as well to refuse her if he saw cause, as to take her; he would not
cavil with him, and say, You have the liberty in that you are tied to her: but
if he means to give him his liberty, his meaning also will be to absolve him of
the necessity to take her. By this we see, that no advantage is gotten to Mr.
Hobbs by reflection, which shows a Liberty from Necessity reflected also.

Sixth Point is an argument to prove, That all Actions are necessitated,
because they have necessary Causes.

I deny the Consequence. For when he says, That all Actions have their
necessary Causes, his meaning is (if his meaning agree with the reason he gives
of it,) That it is necessary they have Causes, because (says he) nothing can
have beginning from it^ self. Now can any one imagine, that a reflecting man
should think this a good consequence? Nothing can have beginning from it self,
and therefore every thing is necessitated: that because an Effect must
necessarily be produced by some Cause, that therefore the Cause did necessarily
produce that Effect. For, good Sir, reflect again, and bethink your self, That
as some Effects cannot be produced but by a concurrence of many Causes
together, every one of these is necessary to the producing of the Effect, and
yet not any one of these does necessitate the Effect; but rather it is
necessary that nothing should be effected, if that cause be single and alone.

Seventh Point is another argument to prove, That voluntary actions are
necessitated, because they have sufficient Causes, and all sufficient Causes
are necessary.

That all sufficient Causes are necessary, [sufficient] may have a double
meaning: either when there is sufficient virtue and aptness in the things to
produce the Effect, if they were used and employed by the Agent; or else when
the Agent also actually imployes them to that purpose 'till the work be
produced. Take [sufficient] in this latter sense, and all men will confess,
that the Effect will follow necessarily. But the Power, which the Will is said
to have over sufficient Causes, is understood of such only as are sufficient
in the first sense, ( i.e.) such as have aptness in them to produce the Effect,
when they are used; which is a sense both common and reasonable: As I have
sufficient to pay all my Debts, I have sufficient to defray the charges of a
years travel; and yet neither pay a Penny, nor stir a foot.

Eighth Point charges the Definition of a Free Agent that is given by others,
with Nonsense and Contradiction; viz. That when all things needful to produce
the Effect be present, can nevertheless not produce it.

For the Nonsense let it lie between us a while, 'till the matter be examined a
little, and then let them take it that have most right to it. If there be any
Nonsense in the Definition, it must be either in the meaning of them that use
it, or in the words they use to express their meaning. When they speak of all
things needful to produce the Effect* their meaning is well known to be of all
except the Agent's Will* or if it were not known to Mr. Hobbs, it might and
ought to have been from the very words of the Definition, which plainly suppose
the Will of the Agent to be yet undetermined. All things needful in this sense
may well be, and yet nothing produced, because the Agent has not yet resolved
to use them. But if Mr. Hobbs will make them mean what they do not, he may very
well make them speak what they should not. Now if their meaning imply no
Contradiction or Nonsense, as certainly it does not, then of necessity the
words must, or it will not be difficult on whom to bestow the Nonsense. And for
the words, (to say there be all things needful, when yet the Agent is excepted,
who is no less needful than any of the rest,) let the common language of men,
or as Mr. Hobbs is pleased to call it, let Reflection be judge. As when a man
has a good seat for a House, all materials, workmen, and money to defray the
charges, he may, and commonly does use to say, He has all things requisite and
needful to build a House, and then too when his Will is yet suspended, and
unresolved whether to use them or not. Therefore your Self, or, if you will,
Reflection being judge, you have clapped the Nonsense upon your own head.

But enough of the Points, let us see if we can mend our selves with the
Reasons of them.

REASONS.
Wipe your Eyes, I beseech you, for never were there such Reasons seen before,
such Mysteries discovered.

For the first Point, yea for five of the eight Points, the Reasons are, That
they have no Reasons. For he says they cannot be proved but by Reflection: and
in that he speaks but truth; for it is sure, no reason or proof can be made of
the signification and use of Words, which is all that the first five Points
have blessed us with. But though he said true, in saying no Reasons could be
given; yet he said not well in promising Reasons, when he puts us off with
Reflections. Of the five first points himself confesses that no Reasons can be
given; and of the two next, if he will not confess so too, he shall be
compelled. For they are Arguments, and contain in effect and substance
Syllogisms, which are incapable of Reasons; for who ever went about to give, or
could give Reason of a whole Syllogism, if the Reasons presented belong to any
part of the Syllogism, in which case only Reasons can be given? Let him but say
to which part of his Points his Reason belongs, and I will do him so much
reason as to acknowledge it. In the mean time he stands upon his good
Behavior, whether these two points shall be allowed to have any more reason
than the five former. And for the eighth and last point, which is all the hope
that is left us to be a point of reason, his Reason is; That as he said before,
so now he says again; and whatsoever Mr. Hobbs is pleased to say twice over,
you may be assured is true.

This is the sum of his Reasons, in the most sober and favorable
construction I can make of them; yet because under the title of the seventh
Reason, some new matter is alleged, that was not spoken of before, I shall say
something to that too.

He lays down a Proposition more general than the question, That all Events
never so casual have necessary Causes.

If I should grant this, yet the voluntary Agent may be free, though the work
which he produces be necessary. This I shall show in the Instances which are
brought to prove this Proposition.

The first is of the Chance of a Die. I confess, that though it be very casual
to the Caster, yet it does necessarily come to pass upon such postures and
motions of the Hand and Die, as happened to meet together at that time: yet I
say too, that as to the Caster of the Die it was not necessary, because he had
a double power over that Chance to have hindered it if he pleased; for either
he might not have thrown the Dice at all, or he might have so ordered the
motion and posture of his hand that could have caused another Chance. Yea more
(desiring to avoid controversies, as much as Mr. Hobbs does to make them) I
grant also, that there is a time when, and a respect wherein voluntary Agents
are in the same condition with natural, and do act necessarily. For not only a
natural Agent solely and singly does work his proper natural Effect
necessarily, as the Fire necessarily heats; but also when they are in
conjunction together, as it were a corporation of Causes: whether that be
casual, as the motions and posture of the hand, meeting with suitable postures
with the Die and the Table, do produce necessarily a certain chance; or whether
it be artificial, as the Medicine compounded of several Drugs do necessarily
produce a common Effect, beyond the virtue of their particular natures apart,
which belongs to them only in that conjunction and society of operation. So
likewise a voluntary Agent, constantly resolved, and actually cooperating with
other sufficient causes, does as necessarily produce the Effect, as any natural
Agent, working either alone, or in conjunction and society. So as in this case,
if Mr. Hobbs seeks for an Adversary, I assure my self he will find none; and if
he thinks he has found a Truth, it is but such as was never lost. But when we
affirm voluntary Agents to be free from necessity in acting, we look upon them
in another state and condition; for they act not like natural Agents, whose
work immediately follows and flows from their Being, but have a progressive
operation, that is before any thing: beside their Being, they deliberate,
resolve, and fall to execution, and there is a time for all these allowed. And
though when they are come to that perfect state and progress, that they have
passed the irrevocable resolved Will, they act as necessarily as natural Agents
do: yet in their imperfect state, that is, from their first Deliberation to
their last constant Resolution, they are absolutely free to do, or not to do.
In which case alone we assert the liberty of voluntary Agents, against which
nothing either is or can be proved by the instance of the chance of a Die.

2. And for the other instance of the Weather, That whatsoever comes to pass,
rain, or not rain, it comes so to pass necessarily.

I answer, first, that this is impertinent to the question, concerning the
liberty of voluntary Agents, who have no operation or concurrence to the event
of Weather.

And secondly, the reason that is used to prove that necessary, is insufficient
in many respects: as because it is necessary that one of the two must happen,
either rain or no rain, therefore that which does happen, comes to pass
necessarily. My first reason is, because the truth of a Disjunctive
Proposition, as this is, [it must rain, or not rain,] consists in disjunctione
partium, and not in disjunctis partibus; for when you resolve this Proposition
into two Categoricks, [it shall rain] for one, and [it shall not rain] for
another, which resolution the event will make, as the nature, so the truth of
the Proposition is changed. For when the Event has turned the Disjunctive
Proposition into a Categorick, as that [it rains,] it cannot partake of that
Necessity, which consisted only in the Disjunctive. And to make this plain, I
shall quit your Instance with another. Suppose I am confined to live within the
walls of London, so as it is now necessary for me either to live in Cheap Side,
or in some other part of the City; yet am I not tied, by that confinement to
London, to any one place: if I were tied and necessitated to any one place, it
must be either to that place I choose to live in, or to that I do not live in.
The latter I hope no man will imagine can be necessary, to live where I do not;
and if the former were necessary, that is, to live where I do, viz. (for
Example) in Cheap Side, then by virtue of that confinement to London, I might
be punished if I had not lived in Cheap Side; in which case a Jury out of
Bethlem would not condemn me, for that were to make it all one to be
necessitated to live in London, and to be necessitated to live in Cheap Side.
And the reason why from the necessity of the Disjunction cannot be inferred a
necessity to the parts of it separately, is clear by the Instance I have given.
The necessity that is laid upon me is to the whole latitude and compass of
London, which leaves me free to any part within that latitude. So the necessity
that it shall rain or not rain, is only to the compass and latitude that these
two make, raining or not raining; but within that latitude as to the one alone,
or to the other, there is no necessity. If you say it is necessary for me to
live in Cheap Side, because I live in no other part of the City; so that it is
necessary it should rain, because it does not hold up: I answer, that this is a
necessity of Consequence, which infers no necessity upon the Consequent, which
is the Necessity in question; that is, that my living in Cheap Side, or the
raining to morrow, which are the Consequents, did come to pass by necessary
Causes. And because I am afraid of Mr. Hobbs his bitter Sarcasm upon
Distinctions, that to say, It is necessary necessitate consequentiae, but not
consequentis, is all one to say, It is necessary Tityre, but not necessary tu
patulae; I will prevent it, by showing the difference in an instance. If Mr.
Hobbs would not have the Goose go barefoot, it is necessary he should shoo it;
this no doubt but is a necessary consequence, and yet I suppose he will not
think that the consequent is necessary: as that it is necessary he should shoo
the Goose; and, to say truth, there is no more necessity it should rain to
morrow, than there is to shoo a Goose.

3. In this instance of the Weather there is another impertinency about
Necessity: for whereas the question is, Whether all things come to pass
necessarily? that is, out of such necessary Causes, that it was not possible
they should not come to pass; the proof of this is taken from such a necessity
as belongs only to Propositions, not to Productions. Which necessity of
Propositions consists only in a necessary coherence of the parts together, so
as the Enunciation is never false: as when the Genus is predicated of the
Species, or the proper Accident of the Subject; as, Homo est Animal, and Homo
est visibilis, are Propositions necessarily true, because they are always
true, and nothing can happen that should make them false. So it is necessary,
that it should rain or not rain to morrow, that is, it is a Proposition
necessarily true, and cannot but be true; but no intimation of the Necessity in
question, which is the necessary production of these Events from necessary
Causes. For if this Necessity were employed in that Disjunction, then every
necessary Proposition should consist of a necessary Effect, predicated of
sufficient and necessary Causes, which every mean Logician knows to be false.
And therefore, to use Mr. Hobbs his own words, because he is like to be best
pleased with them, this is all one as to say, It is necessary Tityrite, Ergo it
is necessary tupatulice. After he has given his Proofs, as he thinks, in full
weight, like a free Chapman, he casts in one Argument over and above, taken
from God's Decrees and Prescience.

Because Mr. Hobbs himself does not warrant this to be good Logic, I cannot in
civility charge him for it; but if his design be in that caution [if I thought
it good Logick] to make us believe, that he made a conscience of keeping these
Rules, I am sorry for his ill-luck that he chose to do it here* for if he had
but dipped his finger blindfold upon any other part of his Discourse, he might
with more color have accused himself than in this. For I pray, against what
Rule of Logic does he trespass, that uses what arguments he pleases* But so
apt is he to mistake in reprehending others, that h^ cannot blame himself
without an error: yet for all this, though there be no want of Logic in using
this argument, yet there is not much in the argument he uses.

First in general, both for the Decree and Prescience together, they be Divine
Actions that proceed from God's Attributes; and the using of such for arguments
of truth in other things, Mr. Hobbs himself in his Postscript confesses to be
the cause of those many Errors that men fall into: yet had he not the grace to
forbear, but falls himself into the same condemnation he decreed to others, as
if he would prove his Error by his Fault. For what but a Fatal Necessity could
make him to do that which with the same breath almost he condemns? But to
particulars.

First, of the Decree, that it is frustrated by Liberty.

1. I answer, that to prove Necessity from God's Decrees* is to prove obscurum
per obscurius: for of all the points of Divinity, it is confessed by all that
write of it, That nothing is more obscure than the nature and efficacy of
Divine Decrees* That is one Elenche and Fallacy in Logic.

2. Another is, That [Decree] is an equivocal word, and admits of diverse
senses and constructions. As, for instance, God decrees to destroy some City:
that it may be either Conditional, as if it repent not; or Absolute, whether it
repent or no. 2. That Absolute may be either as to the destruction of the City
only, and not to the means by which it is to be destroyed, or to both. For
though God should decree absolutely to destroy the City, yet it is yet free
that it be done either by the mutual dissensions of the Citizens, or the
invasion of an Enemy; either of which are a sufficient, neither a necessary
means: Dissension is not necessary, because it may be by Invasion; and
Invasion is not, because it may be by Dissension. 3. It may be Absolute both to
the thing and to the means. As for the purpose, that it may be by Dissension
among the Citizens, yet that means may come to effect^ it two ways; either
upon foresight, that they would dissent of themselves, or by another Decree of
God that they should dissent. 4. God may also decree that two ways* either by
working upon the Will by a power irresistible, pe^motionem Physicam, as they
call it; or per Moralem, that is, such inducements and inclinations as will
ducere, not trahere; by either of which ways God's Decree may be accomplished.
This variety, partly in the Decrees, partly in the constructions that are made
of them, which do all imply a different respect to Liberty, does make the
Argument from general words insufficient to conclude any thing, for dolus
semper ver^atur in generalibus and aequivo^is. That Is another Fallacy in Logic.

3. Seeing Mr. Hobbs hides himself from his Adversary in this Thicket of
acceptions, it will be necessary to beat every Bush for him, and by inductions
of the several sorts of Decrees, to show that Liberty threatens no destruction
to any of them, or, to speak more aptly, needs fear none from them. For if they
be inconsistent and mutually destructive, it is rather to be said, that the
Decree of God should destroy the Liberty of man, than that the Liberty of man
should destroy the Decreee of God.

And that God's Decree has no such operations upon man's Liberty, I shall
instance in the most eminent of all his Decrees, in which all the world and
their actions are concerned; I mean that of Election and Reprobation, briefly
carrying you through the several opinions and persuasions that several men have
of them.

1. That Decree, by which men are said to be ordained to Salvation as
Believers, and to Damnation as dying in impenitence, presupposing their Faith
and Impenitence, can have no operation upon those actions that went before,
before (I mean) in consideration, though not in time.

2. That Decree which is put in such an order, as makes it antecedent to men's
actions, may preserve the liberty of their Wills diverse ways, and by name, per
congruam vocationem, that is, by fitting them with such opportune and
seasonable inducements, as will infallibly determine but not necessitate them.

3. That Decree that lies in a middle way, between the two forenamed, that in
Election goes before, in Reprobation follows the actions; acding to which
opinion, for distinction, the Reprobate are called Praesciti, because they be
looked upon as Sinners before they be reprobated; and the Elect are more
peculiarly called Praedestinati, because they are elected before, or without
consideration of being Believers. This Decree, as to the Reprobates, can have
no operation upon their actions, because it follows them. And as to the Elect,
though it goes before their faith, yet, as was said before, it leaves it free
to follow after.

If Mr. Hobbs his Decree be any of these, or some others, (for others there be)
let him wink and choose, or let him take the most rigid or peremptory of all,
that of the Calvinists, that damns men before it makes them, and saves them
before they have any thing to be saved; which Decree above all others is most
like to impose a Necessity upon humane actions; yet here the argument will fail
too.

1. Because there be a great many voluntary actions that come not under this
Decree, as having no reference to life or death, from the Decrees whereof must
that Necessity flow. As for Example, All indifferent actions, which have
nothing of Morality, of Virtue, or Vice in them, which we shall never carry to
Heaven or Hell with us. Now those Actions which work nothing toward the
accomplishing of the Decree, can receive no Necessity from it: for if there be
any Necessity from the Decree, upon humane Actions, it is because it cannot be
accomplished without them.

2. Upon the same account, not only indifferent but many moral Actions are
free from the necessity of the Decree. For Example, all the good that a
Reprobate does (for no doubt they do many things morally and substantially
good, and abstain from many Evils,) cannot be necessitated by the Decree of
Reprobation; for certainly a man may be damned without doing good. In llke
manner all the evil that the Elect does (for who is there that sins not?) is
also free from the Necessity his Decree can lay upon him, unless you will say
it is necessary for him to sin, that he may be saved; for he is under no other
Decree, but that unto life and salvation.

3. Upon the same score I add further, that the Decree lays no Necessity upon
any one action a man does; for not only Election cannot necessitate a man to
sin, and Reprobation cannot necessitate a man to do good; but also neither does
Election necessitate a man to do good, nor Reprobation evil, as to any
particular good or evil: the reason is, because their Decrees may be brought to
pass without them. As Judas, though he had not betrayed his Master, might have
been hanged for some other sin; for certainly Reprobation does not necessitate
a man to kill his Father or Mother, or to commit any other sin by name. So
likewise St. Peter might have been saved, though he had not at that time when
he did, made his confession, that Christ was the Son of God, because it had
been sufficient to accomplish the Decree of Election to have believed in Christ
at any other time: and if no individual action be necessary to the bringing of
that to pass which God has decreed, then whatsoever else may, the Decree
cannot make it necessary. Now if the Decree gives no necessity to actions
indifferent, nor to good actions on the Reprobate, nor to evil in the Elect,
no, nor to any one particular to either of them; what actions are there left,
upon which the Decree can have any such operation? Lastly, if the Decree may
pass upon men without respect to their well or ill doing, as in the last named
Opinion (which of all others is confessed most likely to necessitate) is
supposed, then it is evident there can be no Necessity to do well or ill in
reference to the Decree, which has no reference to well or ill doing. But you
will say, to do this or that is necessary, though not to the Decree it self,
yet to the execution of it. And I beseech you why so? for may not a man as
justly be hanged without merit, as be condemned to be hanged without it?
Howsoever it is ill done to lay that upon the Decree, which belongs to the
execution of it, and it is worse if it belongs to neither. But it may be Mr.
Hobbs has another kind of Decree by himself, as he has many other conceits.
If he has, it may prove to be of that nature, when he shall vouchsafe to let
us know it, that I shall deny the antecedent of his argument, That there is any
such Decree; but be it what it will, I shall the consequence, That therefore
there is no liberty in humane actions: which I wonder he should let go upon his
bare word, when he cannot but know, that thousands of Authors, which do not
agree about the nature of the Decrees, do yet all agree in denying the
consequence.

Secondly, of Prescience, and argument taken from it.

1. Though it be an improper speech to say, that God foresees any thing, which
must imply a prius and posterius in his actions, things incompatible with
Eternity, that is present to all times; yet because we cannot understand God's
actions but by taking measure by our own, and future things are not seen by us
but foreseen, I do allow Mr. Hobbs to say, That those things which are future
to us, though not to God, are yet foreseen by him, provided, that use be not
made of it, to argue from his foresight as an act that is past, upon which as a
Cause must depend an Effect that must follow after it: for God's vision does
not prevent the thing seen, but accompany it; for that is the nature of every
act, that it supposes the object in some kind of being, and so is merely
accidental to the nature of it, and can lay no necessity upon it. And though it
be hard to comprehend, how God should now be said to be present with those
things which are yet to come; and yet on the other side it is as hard to
apprehend how it can be otherwise, that God should be eternal, and yet not
present with any part of time, as well future as past. When Mr. Hobbs shall
teach us, how God can see that which is not to be seen, for that which is
future is not, and therefore is not to be seen; and to say they are to be seen
in their Causes, is liable to the same difficulties, because the particular
Causes of the thing are as well future as the thing it self: that is, if he can
show a better way than this, That those things are present to God which are
future to us, I will let go my hold. In the mean time it shall serve for my
first answer to the argument from God's Prescience, That because all vision
supposes the thing seen to be, it is accidental to it, and cannot necessitate
it.

2. Admitting foresight in God as an act past, and the thing to follow, it must
follow in the same condition it was foreseen, (granting me that which I shall
presently prove, That Cod can foresee contingent things:) That which in the
nature of it was contingent, cannot become necessary by being foreseen, for
then he should not see as they are. But you will say, If God foresees them, it
is necessary they should come to pass; I say so too, but how? in that quality
that God foresaw them, that is, contingently; for it is as necessary, that those
things that are produced of contingent Causes, should come to pass, as those
that are produced of necessary, upon supposition of God's foresight: and it is
no bull in that sense to say, That contingent things are necessary. For there
is a double Necessity, one of Illation and Discourse, an other of Production
and Operation. To affirm the latter of contingent things implies a
contradiction, but not so the former; that is, God's Prescience is a necessary
argument to prove, because he cannot be mistaken, but not a necessary Cause to
produce the Effect, of which only necessity the question is moved. This
argument therefore has a term too many; there is one Necessity in the
Premises, another in the Conclusion, Praescientia Dei necessario probat, non
necessario producit.

3. If Mr. H. shall deny that which I promised to prove, That God can foresee
contingent Events, because they have no necessary Causes; then he cannot also
foresee what shall come to pass or not come to pass, upon the performance or
not performance of a condition. But that God can foresee such things, I hope he
will not deny; yet because he is a liberal and fierce denyer, I shall put in
him mind of one Instance. God told David that the men of Keilah would deliver
him into Readiness hand, but with this tacit condition, If he stayed among them.
And for the consequence, I prove it thus: In this prediction and prevision of
what the men of Keilah would do, there was no necessary Cause, as is plain, for
that it did not bring to pass the Effect; for the men of Keilah did not, though
God foresaw it, deliver David into Readiness hand.

And if God can foresee what would have been, but what was not, why may he not
rather foresee any thing that shall be, though it may not have been, that is,
any future contingent? For if the reason why future contingents cannot be seen
or foreseen, be, that they have no necessary Causes; then conditional
previsions and predictions of such things, as for failance of the condition
come not to pass, could not be foreseen also, for that they have no necessary
Causes, as appears by the event.

These be all Mr. Hobbs his Arguments; yet because he has found another
invention, a kind of Lieutenant-Argument, to which we are ever and anon
remitted when arguments be out of the way, which he calls Reflection, and he
may take it ill if it goes away unlooked on, it will be necessary to exchange a
word or two about it also.

OF REFLECTION.
LET us see how well it deserves to stand in the Muster-roll of his Militia,
and has done such Facts for the subduing of those Monstrous Errors of our
Ignorant Forefathers, as is pretended, and for which he dresses a particular
Discourse. This you will easily perceive both by the Nature of it, and the
Effects and Atchievments of it.

1. The Nature of it is (as far as I can guess) to consider what I my self
think of that which another says and proves not: that is, I demand of him and
would know, whether that be true which he affirms, he bids me, Go look. Now is
that a way to teach me Knowledge, to send me to my self, that is, to one that
is ignorant, to inform me? And this is that Columbus of our New World of
Philosophy, Reflection. This is that which (by a Digression on purpose) is
celebrated to Posterity as an excellent new Engine, that will fetch Truth out
of the very bottom of Democritus his Pit. And yet perhaps there is more in it,
than we are at the first sight able to apprehend, especially being blinded with
our Old and Hereditary Errors.

2. Therefore he shows to the World two Noble Experiments of the virtue of it,
which he has found in himself; two such Rarities, as could never be found in
all the Books and Philosophers that ever you met with. One is, that thinking a
thing to be good, and loving it, is all one. The other, that Eternity is not
Nunc stans. These be the two rare Experiments which (like a prudent Mountebank)
he hangs out for the better reputation and vending his Reflection.

I must needs grant, that these be two admirable strange Effects of it. For in
the first, Reflection makes him see that which is not; and in the second, it
makes him not see that which is.

For First, that thinking a thing to be good, and loving it, is all one; who
ever saw such a sight before times? who can believe that any thing should make
Thinking and Loving all one? For my part I am still in as much doubt as ever I
was; for no Reflection can prevail with me before these Reasons.

1. Because they proceed from several Faculties of the Soul; one from the
Intellectual, the other from the Effective part. It is not in the power of
Reflection to persuade me that the same Water come out of two distinct
Fountains.

2. Because nothing can go before it self; and he tha^ loves any thing because
he has reason to think it good, mus^ of necessity first think it to be so.

3. If Thinking and Loving were all one, then to think a thing to be evil, and
to love it, is all one too. For if the Acts themselves be not all one, the
Object that is the Good cannot make them so. But he will say, If a man
reflects, i. e. if he mark it, he that does the one, does the other too: and
they go always together, and then why not all one?

1. I will tell you why, and I find it by Reflection too; that he that speaks
does always open his Mouth; and yet they are not all one. The Needle also and
the Thread go together, and yet not all one. They that first told us of
Hippocentaures, certain Creatures that are half Men and half Beasts, I believe
found them but by Reflection too. For the Barbarians, when they first saw Men
upon the backs of Beasts so near together, thought them to be but one Creature.
Just so, to make Loving and Thinking all one, because he sees them together, is
one of Mr. Hobbs's Hippocentaures; for he has a Herd of them in this little
Copse: As that Spontaneous and Voluntary are all one, that Deliberation and
Alternate Hope and Fear are all one, that to make an end of Deliberation and to
be Free is all one, that Sufficient and Necessary is all one, that to be
necessarily of some Cause and to be necessitated is all one. In all these to
believe them, or not to believe them, I hope will be all one too.

2. As they are not the same, though they go together; so they cannot be the
same, because they go not together. I mean necessarily. For first there may be
thinking of a thing good without loving it, a thing too too well known, that
men act contrary to their knowledge; -- Video meliora, proboque;
Deteriora sequor --
Secondly, there may be a loving of that which they do not think and judge to
be good, because Love many times embraces the good that Sensuality offers;
which is contrary to that good which serious thinking commends. And I make a
question, whether every thing that loves, can think also and judge. For I know
that an Ass loves Provender; yet I would give somewhat to know what he thinks
for all that; which I would not if they were all one. But it may be I may wrong
the poor Ass also to say he cannot think; for there be some Philosophers so
charitable to Beasts, as to say they can reason and discourse. Well, if I have
wronged the Ass I will make him amends, and say, that if he can think, he can
reflect too; and if he can do that, he may be one of our new Philosophers, that
shall find out many Truths that Aristotle never knew; and particularly, shall
see plainly that which never a Philosopher of them all did see: that to think a
thing to be good, and to love it, is all one. For that is the first benefit of
Reflection, to see that which is not.

2. The next is, not to see that which is, as that Nunc stans is nothing, or
signifies nothing, of Eternity.

If Mr. Hobbs his meaning be, that those words do not clearly and fully express
what Eternity is, it is so vulgar a Truth, as well for all things that be
Infinite, as this, and for all words that can be invented by Man, as well as
these, that he needed not the help of this rare Invention to discover it. But
if his meaning be, that by those Terms ( Nunc stans) an imperfect knowledge of
Eternity (such as Infinite things are capable of) cannot be known, namely, that
which consists in denying and removing such Qualities and Affections from it,
as belong to finite things; he is very little beholden to his Reflection if it
will not let him see so much; which is all that any man can desire or hope to
see of Infinite things.

And that so much may be seen of Eternity by Nunc stans, I shall desire him to
forbear reflecting upon himself, that is, upon one that deceives him, and
reflect upon the meaning of the Terms that use them, when Eternity is said to
be [ Nunc,] it is to remove from it praeteritum and futurum, prius and
posterius, which are parts of Time, that is finite; therefore they say that all
times are present with the Eternal at once. And it is likewise called Nunc
stans, to remove from it a Succession or Motion of part after part, which
belongs only to Time, that is finite; for that to which any thing is added
must needs be finite; though you add a thousand thousand, and and after that
ten thousand times as many more without stint, you can never make it Infinitum
or Aeternum. And therefore to remove from Eternity these finite Conceptions,
the Terms of Nunc stans are not unfitly used for that purpose: and for more
knowledge of Eternity than that, it was never in any man's purpose to use them.
If your Reflection would not let you see this, I am afraid that though it make
you quick at seeing some things, that no body else can see; yet in that
otherwhile it takes away from you the sight of that which every body sees; I am
afraid (I say) it is not good for the eyesight. I conclude therefore, (without
thinking of any other revenge for the Nonsense, and Contradiction, and the
Tityres and Tu patulaes, and such gear as Mr. Hobbs is pleased to daub all
those with that are not of his mind) with this good counsel, that he give over
his Reflection in time, lest instead of teaching him some new tricks in
Philosophy, it make him at last play at Old, blind, etc.

I should here make an end, but that I see Paper enough left, and leisure too
to answer an Objection that I may seem liable to: as, What do I sneaking into a
Private Letter, which Mr. Hobbs wrote to his Obliging Lord? Who besides is
said, not to write Philosophy for those that like it not; and therefore I ought
not to trouble him that desires not to trouble me.

To the first I answer, That though the Letter was once a Private one, yet I
saw it not till it became a Public, till they were Letters Patents for any
bodies reading. And for the other, though it be reason not to trouble them that
do not trouble us in some cases, as if Mr. Hobbs had vented his new
Speculations upon making Faces and Distortions, turning and tossing the poor
Figures up and down, and then guessing at some Reasons of them, which he
merrily calls his Optics; I say, if Mr. Hobbs had spent his Time and
Philosophy upon these only, he had only disturbed the Commonwealth of Images
and Representations, which are nothing, and therefore ought not to have been
disturbed by any in those his pleasant Speculations. But when (against mine and
every bodies Interest) he labors to introduce a Necessity into all men's
Actions, that they have no power to do more or less than they do, he takes away
the nature of Virtues and Vices, and so their relation to Reward and
Punishment; and by consequence leaves no place for Hope or Fear: which must
needs shake not only the Foundation of all Religion, but even of Human
Society. It is such a pernicious piece of Philosophy, as a Wise man would not,
and a Fool should not be suffered to vent; fitter indeed for a Beadle's, than a
Scholar's, Whip; and to him I leave him.

I, Lictor, colliga manus.

FINIS.
Books printed for Will. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.
1. THe Complete Vineyard, or an excellent way for planting of Vines in
England; and how to make Wine of their Grapes: by H. Hughs, price 2 s. 2. The
Complete Measurer, or a new exact way of Mensuration: by Thomas Hammond, price
1 s. 3. Clarks Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis, Octavo, price 2 s. 4. A Description
of Candia, with an account of the Siege and Surrender of it, Octavo, price 1 s.
5. The deaf and dumb man's Discourse: a Treatise of those born Deaf and Dumb. To
which is added the Rationality of Beasts, particularly of the Elephant, showing
the wonderful understanding of that Creature. Octavo, price 1 s. 6. The Life
of Des Carts. Octavo, price 1. s. 7. Fleckno's Epigrams of all sorts. Octavo,
price 1 s. 8. Thomas a Kempis Christian Pattern, English, Twenty fours, price 1
s. 9. Knowls Answ. to Fargeson of Justification, price 1 s. 6 d. 10. Hobb' s
Three Papers to the Royal Society, Quarto. 11. Sir H. Blunts Voyage into the
Levant, Twelves, price 1 s. 12. Hobbs' s Rosetum Geometricum, price 3 s. 13.
Greek Testament. Octavo, price 3 s. 6 d. 14. Articles of Visitation for
Norwich, price 2 d. 15 The Flower Garden, showing how all sorts of Flowers are
to be ordered, the time of Flowring, the taking them up, and of Planting them
again, etc. Being all necessary observations relating to a Flower Garden, by
the diligence and experience of W. Hughes. Twelves, price 1 s. 16. Bishop
Corbets Elegant Poems. Twelves, price 1. s. 17. The court of Curiosity; being
the most Witty and Facetious Fortune Book that was ever published in English,
with a most judicious Interpretation of all Dreams drawn from the Wisdom and
Doctrine of the Ancients; also a Treatise of Physiognomy. All written in
French, since Translated (for the excellency of it into Spanish, Italian, High
Dutch, Low Dutch, etc. now out of French) into English. The second Edition,
much improved and explained. In Twelves, price 2 s. 18. The White Devil, or,
Vittoria Corombona, A Tragedy, Acted at the Theater Royal. Quarto, price 1 s.
19. The old Troop, or, monsieur Raggou, A Comedy Acted at the Theater Royal,
Quarto, price 1 s. 20. Catalines Conspiracy, A Tragedy Acted at the Theater
Royal. Written by Ben. Johnson. Quarto, price 1 s. 21. Lux Mathematica. Quarto
price 5 s. 22. Principia and problemata aliquot Geometrica ante desperata, nunc
breviter explicata and demonstrata. Autho. Th. Hobbs. Quarto, price 2 s. 23.
The American Physician, showing all the Virtues and Uses of all Roots, Herbs,
Trees, Fruits, etc. in the English Plantation in America. By W. Hughes.
Twelves, price 1 s. 24. Shafto's great Law of Nature, of Self-preservation,
Examined and Vindicated against the Abuses in Mr. Hobbs's Leviathan. Twelves
price 1 s. 25. Calliope's Cabinet opened and reviewed. Wherein all Gentlewomen
of what Quality soever may know how to adorn themselves for Feasting, Funerals,
etc. With a Dictionary to explain all the Terms in Heraldry. By J. Salter,
price 8 d. 26. A new Collection of New Songs and Poems, written by the present
Wits of the Age. Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. 27. A Discourse of the Dukedom of
Modena, the Native Country of Her Royal Highness the Duchess of York. Quarto,
price 6. 28. Brevis Demonstratio. The Truth and Excellency of the Christian
Religion demonstrated by Reason. The second Edition, Twelves, price 10 d. 29.
The Memoirs and rare Adventures of Henrietta Sylvia Moliete, translated out of
French, Twelves, price 2 s. 30. Waltons Lives, of Dr. Donn, Sir Henry Wotton,
Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Herbert, Octavo, price 3 s. 31. The Primitive Institution,
showing the use and antiquity of Catechizing. By L. Addison, D. D. Twelves,
price 1 s. 6 d. 32. Nomenclatura, Octavo, Greek, Latin, and English, price 10
d. 33. Ogilbys Virgil, Octavo, with Cuts, price 9 s.
Books printed for Will. Crook in the Year 1675.
1. Homers Odysses translated into English by T. Hobbs of Malmsbury, with a
large Preface concerning the virtues of Heroic Poetry, price 4 s. 2. The third
Volume of Mr. Hobbs his Works in Quarto, price 10 s. 3. The Golden Rule of
Arithmetic made easy. By C. H. Octavo, price 3 d. 4. De Mirabilibus Pecci
Carmen. By T. Hobbs, price 6 d. 5. Euterpe revived, being Epigrams on the most
Eminent Persons now living, price 1 s. 7. Amorous Gallant, or Love in Fashion.
A Comedy in Heroic Verse. By J. B. Gent. price 1 s. 7. The Mock Duellist, or
the French Vallet. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal. Quarto price 1 s. 8.
The grounds of Sovereignty and Greatness. In Quarto, price 6 d. 9. Gees Steps
of Ascension unto God, or a Ladder to Heaven. Twenty fours.
Books printed for Will. Crook in the year 1676.
1. Homers Iliads translated out of Greek into English. By T. Hobbs of
Malmsbury. 2. The present State of the Jews, relating all their Customs and
Practices now in use. The second Edition. By L. Addison* D. D. Twelves. 3.
Camera Regis. A short view of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Wall,
River, Gates, Tower, Cathedral, Officers, Courts, Customs, Franchises, of that
City. Octavo. 4. A Sermon preached at the Bishop of Chichesters first
Visitation. By W. Howell, Minister at Fittleworth in Sussex. Quarto. 5. The
potable Balsam of Life described by D. P. Belon. Quarto. 6. The Historians
Guide in two parts. 1. The Chronology of the World from the Creation to this
time. 2. A Chronology of most principal Actions in England, from 1600 to 1675,
price 1 s. 7. A true Narrative of the great Solemnity of the Circumcision of
Mustapha, Prince of Turkey, and Eldest Son of the present Emperor of the Turks.
As also the Emperors eldest Daughters Marriage, as it was sent from the
Secretary of the Turkey Company into England.
FINIS.

